Most fruit full and learned Commentaries of Doctor Peter Martyr Vermil
Florentine, Professor of Deuinitie, in the University of Tygure, with a very
profitable tract of the matter and places.

Herein is also added and contained two most ample Tables, as well of the matter,
as of the words: with an Index of the places in the holy scripture.

Galath. vi, God forbid that I should rejoice but in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me, and I to the world.

Set forth and allowed, according to thorder appointed in the Queen's majesty's
injunctions.

Imprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

These Books are to be sold at his shop under the gate.

elaborate engraved border Ptolomeus
Marinus
Strabo
Polibius
Aratus
Hipparchus
Geometria
Astronomia
Arithmetica
Musica
MERCVRIVS
IB -- F


royal blazon or coat of arms DROICT ET LOYAL:

To the right honorable, my most singular good Lord and Master the Lord Robert
Duddely, Earl of Lecester, Baron of Dynghby, Knight of the honorable order of
the Garter, one of the Queen's highness most honorable privy Counsel, and Master
of her Majesty's horse.
THe old opinion (right honorable and my singular good Lord) being no less
ancient then true, which accomptes him an ill man, that is good but for him
self (as who say, from whom no goodness comes to the help of others) most
like a Drone in a Be hiue, shrouded there for his own suck, not for the
common wealth of Bees, whom therefore they suffer not among them, but kill and
cast out, as an unkind member, unnatural, and not to be endured in their
state: has been always the rappyng hammer in my head, and the spur to my
side, to knock and prick me forward (that am of my self little able to do) to
procure what I can (to my calling at least) for the profit of my universal
country men, by whom and among whom, as a member I live.

In respect whereof, among other it has pleased God, to give me leave (by your
Lordships mean, under the lisence of my most dread sovereign Lady and Prince)
to publish and set out to the glory of Gods Majesty chiefly: I have taken
upon me to plant and put forth (like such a husband, as can not endure the
plowe of my profession to stand unoccupied) this notable and right excellent
work of that famous, grave, and great learned Doctor, Master Peter Martyr
(entiteled His Commentary upon the book of Judges) being turned, at the
request of the learned, out of that tongue, wherein he wrote it, into our
English phrase, in which it is most meet for us. As who should say, what he
published into one tongue privately, he meant (as I take it) should be delivered
to all men generally (Christians or other) to whom it may do good. Whose
labor tending to such effect, cannot, but like a tree that bears many
branches, spread it self abroad, till it stretche with his fruit to many
countries, nations, and languages, out of the same spryng and stock, wherein he
first planted it to grow, and has graffed it for us, And happy that spring
(yea very happy) that caries such course of water, to furnishe so many
Conductes, for the necessity and help of so many inhabitors, as it can not but
have concourse among. And happy that servant that has so bestowed his masters
talent, as it cannot but turn again with so great an interest to the owner.
And twice happy they, that may so taste and drink of it, as the glory may be
Gods, and the comfort theirs, which being the only but and mark whereat this
Markma^ shot: what deserves such an Archer to be accounted of? I that think
my self scant meet to set out his book, do reckon my self much more unmeet
to expres his praise. As if I were either able or meet, what should I labor
to show your honor a whole man by his piece, unless (as it might he said) I
meant to show your honor the Sun by a candle. Him self therefore that has
taken this pain upon him, and best can show him self by his own shape:
shall report him self in his own labor to your honor, as he is best able.
Who as he thought it most meet for his part, to unfold the secrets of that
common wealth in the time of the Judges, for the plainer understanding of the
sense thereof, to the commodity of us, and others after us and him: So have I
thought it meet for me, and my very duty to your honor, humbly to present and
offer the same (by me now published) unto your honorable hands, as from the
Judges of Israel and him, to one a Judge and Ruler of this my native country
and people, under our supreme Judge, our most dread sovereign Lady the Queens
Majesty. Having had nothing meeter whereby to express my faithful heart, good
mind, and duty, to your honorable Lordshyp, then this the simple labor of
my plowe: the fruit whereof cannot be but yours, that are owner of me.

Humbly beseching the same to accept it in as good part, as my faithful
serviceable heart toward your honor, has and does mean it. Beseching God,
that so graciouslye has lyked to begin with your Lordship hitherto,
mercifullye continue and keep the same, to his glory, to the comfort of your
self, and hope that this your Country of Israel (whereof you are a Judge)
has conceived of you.

Your Lordships humble, faithful, and ready servant John Day.

To the noble and most worthy men the Lords, chief governors of the
School of Argentine, my good Lords, for their godlynes and wisdom much to be
reverenced, D. Peter Martyr. Vermilius Florentine, Professor of the holy
Scriptures in the School of Tigure, wishes health and felicitye from God,
through Jesus Christ our Savior.
WHen it pleased God (most worthy and honorable me^) of his mere goodness, and
not for any my virtues or merits, to call me to the obedience of his son our
Lord Jesus Christ, to exercise my self in setting forth his Gospel, in such
manner as has pleased him, I thought it my duty, as much as lay in me, to
execute my vocation and assigned burden, not only in teaching, but also in
mind, life, and manners. For thus I reasoned with my self: If unto al men,
being justified only by the mercy of the true God, through Jesus Christ our
Savior, not undoubtedly by works, but freelye receiving forgeuenes of
sins, there remains no other thing in the course of this short life, then
that having obtained the holy Ghost, and nature being somewhat relieved from
his proper corruption, they should by pure life, and holy actions lively
express God himself their regenerator, and Christ their redeemer: the same
thing without doubt is much more required of men of my profession, whom the
ecclesiastical spirit has appointed to administer lively doctrine unto other
men, that whylest they teach uprightly, by their evil deeds they deface not
the weight, and all the authority of their doctrine, which thing if they do,
they shall in the darkness of this world most brightly give light unto other,
and cause them to lift up the eyes of their minds unto God the chief
fountain, head, and beginning of al good things, and to honor him with
praises and most upright religion. Wherefore I gather, and that truly (as I am
most fully persuaded) that I my self, and the rest of the Ministers of the
doctrine of the son of God, ought above al other to live most justly. But
when I considered that the office of this virtue Justice (which shyneth among
mortal men like the bright star Lucifer) consists wholly in this, to render
to every man that which is his, I desired verily to perform the same not
maimed, nor diminished, nor shortened, but consisting of all his parts, so
much as humane weakness would suffer me. And among other excellent parts or
kinds thereof, a thankful mind, and mindful of a benefit received, is not
to be numbered among the least, whose property is not only to acknowledge
benefits received, but also earnestlye to be desirous to give thanks for
them. This thing when I weigh with my self (for I think on it oftentimes, I
will not say continually) there comes into my remembrance very many and great
benefits, which your public wealth, church and school have heretofore
bestowed upon me. And assuredly, when I reckon them, and more depely weigh
them, they appear unto me so many and so great, that I am excedingly afraid,
least I should happen to depart out of this life ungrateful, which thing
undoubtedly should be more bitter unto me, the^ death it self. Ye, when I came
out of Italy for religion sake, with most incredible humanity received me: ye
gave me the fredome of your most ample city: ye placed me in that School,
which ye not long before with great praise of wise and godly men had erected:
there ye appointed me a Professor of holy scriptures, whereas I lived a fellow
with most learned and excellent men, more then five years. All which time ye
mayntained me with a very liberal stipend. Ye, when I was called into England,
decreed that I should go thither, where certain years I was teaching the
Gospel in the University of Oxford, namelye until such time as Edward the sixth
of that name, that most woorthye King, and which can never be praised enough,
was taken away by untimely death, which brought unto all the godly, grief,
mourning, and sundry and hard vexacions. Ye exceeding lovingly receued me, when
I returned thence to Argentine, and placed me in the same room, wherein I was
with you before. Also, when the most noble Senate of Tigure called me into the
place of Pellicanus, which was there a Professor of Divinity, ye, although both
to your great grief and also to mine, did yet most louinglye let me go. The
cause of my departure I will not now speak of, because it is to all men
known well enough. Thus much only will I say, that I do both vehemently desire,
and also hope, that this stop or let may be taken away out of the field of the
Lord. These your benefits, which are of them selves ample and noble, I do
nothing increase nor amplify: But this one thing I testify, that they never
slipped out of mind, neither is it possible but that they being laid up in the
bottom of my heart, shall there abide for ever. Howbeit, because the remembrance
and thinking on the benefits which I have received of you does not satisfy me,
I have always desired to make open unto al men my good will and grateful heart
toward you, which have been so wonderful beneficial toward me, wherefore I
have very often times determined with my self, one time at the length to
declare by some signification or monument my singular affection, and ardent
love toward your public wealth, Church and School. But for as much as
touching riches of this world, I have nothing wherwithal to perform the
same, least. I should dye frustrate of my so honest and vehement a desire,
being about now to set forth a Comentary upon the holy history of the Judges:
As I have taught it in your School, I have determined to dedicate it to your
name, where as otherwise I would have offered unto you things much greater and
better, if strength and ability had answered unto my mind. Neither was I
hereunto persuaded only by the reason now alleged, namely by some manner of
means to show my good will toward you, and not to give any man occasion of
suspicion, that in changing my place I should have shaken of my endeavor and
study toward you: (which thing undoubtedly is not so: For I have not laid
aside these things, but they most firmly stick in my mind daily more and
more.) But this also did drive me to do this, for that this book was written in
your city. And therefore I thought it meet, that in the possession thereof no
man should be preferred before you. Farther, this did not a little move me, for
that the argument of this history most aptly agrees with you. For even as God
at sundry times stirred up Judges unto the Hebrews, to deliver them when they
were oppressed with the tyranny of their enemies: So were you not among the
last stirred up by his goodness and grace, to bring to light the Gospel of the
son of God, when it was held captive in darkness by the dominion and violence
of hipocrites, and when the minds of Christians as touching godlynes were
every where in a manner baren and unfruitful. Here assuredlye I could make
mention of very many your acts both godly and honorable: but I ouerpasse them,
for that you have many eloquent and notable publishers abroad of your
doings, which most abundantly and elegantly have set forth your valiantnes
of mind, your constancy in embracing and spreading abroad of the Gospel of
Christ, and your liberality in maintaining your notable, most learned and
famous School. Neither undoubtedly can the praises which they have given you
be reproved of any lie, for as much as you have with great seruentnes of
faith received the doctrine of the son of God, and ye are made unto other a
notable example of renewing of piety. And afterward when by reason of iniquity
of times things which were well ordered, seemed somewhat to slide and fall to
decay, ye having firm confidence of the aid of God, very godlys and wisely
took courage unto you, and even now in this time ye stoutly and luckely did
drive out the remnantes of the Amorrihites and Chananites out of the
inheritance of the Lord, which pertayned to your lot. Which your act has with
all the godly, gotten you great grace, praise, glory, and favor. Wherefore I,
as which vehemently desire honor, fame and dignity unto the City of Argentine,
do excedingly rejoice, for your most excellent and holy act. And I do desire
god the father of mercy, that ye being inflamed and kindled with his spirit,
may always go forward to better things. For so long as we wander here on
earth, as strangers from our country which is in heaven, the Church is not
fully perfect, neither in all parts absolute: For always something is therein
wanting, especially seeing we are fallen into the iron age of the latter time.
For was there not in the golden world of the Church many discords, troubles,
and manners not agreeable unto a Christian life? And shall not that part of the
world which is christened, be now sick of the same disco^modities and vices,
when for age it now doteth? Let us look upon the Church of the Hebrews, which
at that time was the peculiar people of God, separated from al nations.
Undoubtedly we shall there find sundry courses and alteracions of things.
Some times they slipped out of the rightway. Sometimes they repented and
lamented and amended the sins wherein they had fallen. But whilst they lay in
their sins and wickedness, they were by God corrected with grievous
afflictions, and most sharp punishments. But returning unto him, they
faithfully implored his aid: which when they had obtained, they again
prevailed against their enemies. In them (except we be utterly blind) we see
the image of the goodness of God toward the saints, and his severity upon the
wicked painted, and lively expressed as it were in a table that is most rightly
polished. Blessed is God, which defends his in most great dangers and
calamities, and faithfully keeps his safe and found: which comes of his
goodness, neither suffers he them wholye to fall from piety, or utterly to be
consumed with miseries and adversities. And we, if we note these things in
this holy historye, shall not maruayle that the people of God were often times
tossed, and even in manner oppressed with so many and grievous chances: for
whether we behold the godly, or whether we behold the ungodly, we shall
perceive that al these things were done with great fruit, and most wise
consideracion. For unto those, whom God the heavenly father has even from
without beginning chosen unto him by Jesus Christ, and our of an innumerable
number of mortal men adopted to be his children, adversities did to this end
happen, that even as gold and silver are by the power of fire purged, so their
minds should prove more pure by adversities. For by them as by lyuelye flames,
the love of our self, and of frail and transitorye things is burnt up. But
the studies of piety and innocence are wonderfully kindled and inflamed. But of
the ungodly, whom the divine providence has most justly decreed to punish with
eternal death, the consideracion is far otherwise. For adversities do not
burn away their spots and vices, but rather increase and augment them, by the
augmentacio^ of which adversities the impiety of their minds also increases,
even as we see that with one and the self same fire claye waxes hard, and wax
melts away.

Wherefore the reading of the golden history of the Judges is most profitable,
so that there want not faith in reading of them, and prayers be without ceasing
added, whereby we may pray unto God not fayntly, but fervently, to make his
words of efficacy in us by the holy Ghost. For those holy narracions are as
it were certain nourishments or stays, whereby our confidence toward the
promises of God is wonderfully confirmed, and our mind is erected to a most
firm hope of obtaining of them. For whylest we diligently consider the
wonderful notable acts which God did for the health and safety of the nation
of the Hebrews, it is incredible to be spoken, how our hearts are styrred up to
woorship and honor him sincerely and religiously. Farther, in those heroical
acts the incredible power and wisdom of the providence of God does every
where abundantly and brightly shine forth, which received with no less
pleasure the^ fruit. For by those things which are declared (except we will
wyllynglye be blind) may easily be understand, that whatsoever was done, or
succeeded luckely or vnluckely, at home or on warfare, the same is to be
attributed either to the justice, or else to the mercy of the eternal God. We
are also most plainlye taught, that God neglects not things humane. But that
he has a consideracion and regard over the godly and the ungodly, and of them
to the one he gives joy and pleasure, but the other he at the last most
greuouslye punishes. Farther, this thing is chiefly to be marked, that Jesus
Christ the son of God is not secluded from this holy history. For for as much
as he is the end of the law, and su^me of the holy scripture, as much as this
book pertains unto the law, and is a part of the holy scripture, so much
does it show and most evidently preach Christ unto the Readers. For the acts
of noble captains are here rehearsed, which (as it is written unto the
Hebrews) through faith wan kingdoms, wrought righteousness, and obtained the
promise. But that faith which is natural and sound includes Christ him self,
unto whom singularly and in a manner only it has a regard. For by him the
promises of God are made of efficacye. Wherefore whilst we behold the wonderful
acts of the Judges, we ought to have before our eyes the excellent faith which
brightly shined in them, and together with it the common deliverer of humane
kind, namely the son of God Christ Jesus, whom they beheld as their Captain
and Emperor. And that not unworthily, for he by them wrought, and by them did
set the people at liberty, in admonishing them by the voices of Angels, and
oracles of Prophets, in confirming them in dangers, and at the last not
vnconstantlye but most faythfullye performing those things which he had before
most liberally promised. Lastly, when we hear that the Hebrews, which were
the members of the same Christ, were sometime oppressed and slain of their
enemies. Let us in them acknowledge the death and torments of our head. And in
their victories and triumphs. Let us behold his resurrection, kingdom and
glory. For God has framed unto us wings of his spirit and word: but if
through our own default we become fleshy and heavy, we shall not be carried up
into heaven, but together with beasts be drawn downewarde.

I have hitherto spoken of the history, how commodious and profitable it is to
all the worshippers of god, and how aptly it pertayneth unto you (most
excellent rulers.) Wherefore it should seem that I should now somewhat speak of
the interpretacion, which I have added. But thereof I will speak nothing: for I
feel that those things which come out of my study and labor, are so sciender
and small, that I think them not worthy of commendacion.

There is one thing only which I dare boldly affirm, that I by this my
doctrine, howsoever it be, my will was to be a help to the faithful of Christ.
Neither do I deny, but that there were other much better learned then I am,
which with great praise and fruit exercised themselves in this self same
course of study: howbeit, because I excedingly allow the sentence of Basilius
(who in his.18. Epistle writes: Even as wells, the more they are drawn, the
better they are, so undoubtedly are the words of God: for the more diligently
they are handled and used, the more plentiful fruit is by them received)
therefore I took in hand to interpretate this history. And although I am not
ignorant, that you do so abound with the most learned works of other men,
that ye need not this my commentary: yet to that I answer, that to rich men
also are debtes paid, and gifts are given unto kings, who otherwise are more
rich. Who is more rich then God himself? Unto who^ nevertheless all the godly
do both give thanks, and also to their power refer thanks. Wherefore I do
not offer unto you this slight gift, because I think that ye have need
thereof, but that your benefits should not remain with me longer then is
meet, as though they were neglected. Farther, that we might be still more and
more bound together in amity. For these duties are certain common bonds,
wherewith men are pleasauntlye and profitably bound together between themselves.
I have in deed been long in your debt, yea rather I shall always be in your
debt (for I shall never be able to pay all that I owe unto you) wherefore I will
gladly be perpetually in your debt. And will with great pleasure always behold,
keep and preserve your benefits laid up with me, so that they shall never dye,
nor never at any time slyp out of my mind. So fare you well (most worthy and
noble men.) God the father of mercy increase, prosper, and for ever bless you
together with your public wealth, Church and School, in all good things,
through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

At Tigure the.22. of December. 1560.
Places of the scripture, which here and there a man shall find in these
Comme^taries expounded, or learnedly and wittely alleged: whereas the first
number signifies the chapter, the other the verse or verses of the same
chapter, as they be distinguished and set forth in the Bible printed at
Geneua, the most expedite and ready way for speedy finding of the same.
GEnesis. 1.1. In the beginning. 262. b 6.2. The sons of God saw the
daughters of men that they were fair. 15. b. and.285. 33 18 Iaacob came safe
to Sechem. 159. 47 22 Only the land of the priests bought he not. 264.
Exodus. 12.12. I will pas through the land of Egypt. 128. b 20.13 15. and.16.
Non dices falsum testimonium. 39. b Non furaberis, No^ occides. 39. b
20 16 Thou shall not bear false wytnes etc. 87. b. 22 16 and.17 If a man
entyse a maid yt is not betrothed, 284. b 33 11 Face to face. Deuter. 5.9.
Visiting the sins of the fathers upon the children. etc. 178. b. etc. 181. b
7.1.2.5. When the Lord shall give ye land into thy power. 245 24.3. and.4. The
first shall not take again a wife repudiated, after the second husbands death
or diuorsment. 250. 1. Kings. 3.16 There came.ii. harlots unto the king. 233 4.
Kings. 5.18 Herein the Lord be merciful. 50. b Ezra. 7.24 No tole, tribute,
or custom to be laid upon the priests. 264 Psalm. 2.11. Kings serve the
Lord. 54. b 15.4 He that swears to his hindera^ce, and cha^geth not. 85 b. 86
b 33.16 The king is not saved by the multitude. 91. b 50.18 If thou saw a
thief. 232 73.2 My feet were almost moved. 142. b. 14^. 170. b 78.49
Vexation by sending out of evil angels. 128. b 82.1 God stands in the
assembly of the Gods. 267. b 91.1 He that dwells under the help. 247 102.22
When the people shall be gathered together, and kings to serve the Lord. 266
111.10 Fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. 246. b Proverb. 18.23 He
that retains an aduoutrous woman, is ungodly and a fool. 249. b Esaias. 7.12 I
will not ask, nor tempt God. 131. b 66.3 He that sacrifices a sheep, is as
if he slew a dog. 206. b Jeremy. 1, 10 I have appointed thee over nations and
kyngdoms. 262. 31.31 I will make a new covenant. 74. b Ezechil. 17.13 King of
Babel had taken an oath of Zedechias. 85. b 18.20 The sun shall not bear the
iniquity of the father. 179. Daniel. 4.24 Peccata tua elcemosynis redime. 72.
Hosea. 1.2. Take thee a wife of fornications. 233. b 6.6 I desired mercy, and
not sacrifice. 194. 8.4 They have set up a king, but not by me. 256. b
Ecclesiasti. 16.14. He will make place to al mercy. 272. b Baruc. 6.3 When ye
shall se gods of gold and silver. 51. Matthew. 5.16 That they may se your good
works and glorifi. 157 b 5. and. 18 If thy hand, foot, or eye offend thee,
cut it of. 46. 5.23 If thou bring thy gift to the altar. 206. b 6.1.2.5 To be
seen of men. 153. 6.22 The light of the body is the eye. 153. 7.1 Judge not,
that ye be not judged. 277. b 9.30 See that no man know it. 10.37 He that
loves father and mother more the^ me, is not worthy of me. 265. 12.20 A bruised
reed shall he not break. 134. 14.6 But when Herod's birth day was kept, the
daughter of Herodias daunced. 287. b 15.4 Honor thy father and mother. 189. b
16.18 Upon this rock I will build my church. etc. and will give the keys.
149. 17.20 Faith as much as a grain of musterd seed. 130. 17.21 This kind
goes not out but by prayer and fasting. 276. 19.28 Ye shall sytte upon twelve
seats. 175. 21.31 Publicans and harlotes shall go before you into the kingdom
of heaven. 232. b 23.24 Strain at a gnat, and swalow a camel. 201. b 25.41 Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. 208. b
26.4.5 The syxt hour. 166. Mark. 10.4. Moses suffered to write a bil of
diuorcement. 233. b 15.25. The third hour. 166. Luke. 18.13.14 Publican
prayed, and departed justified. 207. b 22.38 Behold here are two swerdes. 259.
b 22.35 When I sent you without bag or scrip, did ye at any time want any
thing? 260. 24.39 Feel and see, for a spirit has not flesh. 209. John. 6.15
They would come. etc to make him a king. 147. 8.44 The devil when he speaks a
lie, he speaks of his own. 167 9.31 God hears no sinners. 78. and. 207.
18.11 Put up thy sword into thy sheath. 260. b 20.26 The doors being shut. 211.
b 21.15. etc. Feed my lambs. 149. Acts. 7.^0 An angel of the Lord in a
flame. 120. 10.25 Cornelius met Peter, and fell down at his feet. 69. b. 13.
(...). 41. b 21.25 Paul was purified. 51. b. 15.29 That ye abstain from things
offered to Idols. 229.233. b. Romans. 3.8 Why do we not evil that good may come
thereof. 39. and. 253. 6.23 The wages of syn is death. 272. b 9.3 I would wysh
my self separated from Christ, for my brethren. 253. b 11.29 Gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. 188. b 12.19 Vengeance is mine. 236.
13.1 Let eueri soul be subject. 262 b 13.1 Powers ar ordained of God 260. b. 1. Corinthians. 2.15 He that is spiritual, discerns all things. 262. 6.1 Dare any
of you, having a cause against an other. 256. b 6.13. and. 14 The body is not
for fornication. 229. b 7.5 Defraud not one another, except it be for a time.
94. 7.11 If the woman depart. let her remain unmarried, or let her be
reconciled. 222. b 7.14 Else were your children unclean, but now ar they holy.
182 7.15 If the unfaithful depart. 86 7.37 He does well. etc. that will keep
his virgin. 46. 8.4 We know that an Idol is nothing in the world. 69. b 10.24
Non quae sua sunt quaere^tes Such as seek not their own. 38. b 10.27. If any
that is an infidel bid you. etc. 44. b. 45. b 11.5. Every woman that prays
or prophecieth barcheaded. 93 13.2. If I had al faith. 130 13.12. We shall see
him face to face. 121. 14.34. Let your women keep silence. etc. 93 15.44. It
is raised a spiritual body. 211 Galath. 1.8. Though we or an angel from heaven.
etc. 262 1.15. etc. When it pleased God to reveal his son in me. etc. I
communicated not with flesh and blood. etc. 265 3.19. It was ordained by
angels in the hand. etc. 120 Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine. etc. but
speak in psalms etc. and songs. 103 Philip. 4.8. Whatsoever things are
honest. 250 Collossi. 3.16. Let the word of Christ abound in you. etc. in
psalms. etc. 103 1. These. 5.22. Ab omni specie ma la abstinete. Refrain from
al appearance of ill. 18. b 1. Timo. 2.1. Supplications, prayers, intercessions,
and geuynge of thanks. 44 2.11. I permit not a woman to teach. etc. 93 3.3.
No striker. 146. b 4.8. Bodily exercise profits little, but. etc. 140. 279
Titus. 1.7. No striker. 146. b 2.3. Women should be teachers of honest things.
etc. 93 Hebru. 7.2. Abraham paid tenthes. etc. 261 13.4. Hooremongers and
adulterers God will judge. 254. b 13.16. To do good, and to distribute. etc.
251. b Jacob. 1.13. God tempts no man 79. b 2.10. Who so keeps the whole
law. etc. 53 1. Peter. 4.17. Judgment begin at the house of God. 234. b
Apocal. 19.10. and. 22.8. and. 9. I fell down to woorshpp before the feet.
etc. 69. b
The common places contained in this book.
OF prediction or treason. 36. b Of Mass. 41 Of tears. 62 Of Sacrifice. 63. b
Of Idolatrye. 68 Of a league. 73. b Of truth and of a lie. 87 Of dissimulacion.
89. b Whether it be lawful to lie to preserve the life of our neighbors. 90
Whether it be lawful for subjects to rise against their princes. 90 Whether
it be lawful for the godly to have peace with the ungodly. 99 Of music and
songs. 102 Of visions, or in what sort and how much God may be known of men.
118 Of miracles. 126 Of Dreams. 134. b Of the affections of envy and
emulacion. 141. b Of mercy. 142 Of a good intent. 132 Of Matrimonye, and having
of Concubines. 153. b Of ambition. 157. b Of murder of Parents or kinsfolks,
called paracidium. 158 Of a fable and apollogy. 159 Of wine and dronkennes.
161. b Of murder. 165. b How sin depends of God. 166. b Whether we ca^
resist the grace of God, or no. 167. b How God says that he will not give
that which he will give and contrarily. 174. b Of bastards and children
unlawfully borne. 177. b Whether the son shall bear the iniquity of the
father. 178. b Of things which were taken by the right of works. 186 Of
prescription. 188 Of custom. 189 Of the vow of Iiphtah 192 Of sedicion. 197 Of
the vow of the Nazarits. 201 Of Sacrifice. 206 Of the vision of Angels. 208
Whether it be lawful for children to mary without the consent of their
parents. 214 Of plays. 218 Of hooredome and fornication. 129 Of the head of
the church. 241 Of Securitye. 246. b Of the reconciliation of the husband and
the wife, after that adultry has been committed. 247 Of a Magistrate. 255 Of
merits. 272 Of fasting. 274 Of Rapte. 283 Of daunses. 286
FINIS.
Faults escaped in the printing, desiring thee gentle Reader to correct the
same in thy book, before thou beginnest to read this work, which shall help
thee much in the understanding of those places. The order of which correction
here under thou may see. The letters a. and. b. which stand by the numbers,
signify the sides of every leaf, a. signifieng the first side, and b. the
second side.
Leaf. Line. Faults. Corrected. 2. a 3 judged and judged 3. b 50 he Greek
the Greek 4. a 20 not revenge revenge 7. a 6 holy hylly 10. a 23 region
religion 11. a 9 contamined contaminated 11. a 20 This is my This is in my 22.
a 48 to vnprofita. not unprofitable 25. a 24 word words 25. b 20 wayling
waiting 31. b 5 their matters their own mat. 31. b 8 grievous suffer grievous 31.
b 30 least left 32. a 34 the well valle the valleys 35. a 2 help for the help
from the 38. b 38 deceived received 39. a 22 cease not to cease to be 40. a
13 signs sins 43. b 28 salvation salutacion 47. b 47 stranger stronger 48. a
1 that none that to none 49. a 1 obey admoni. obey their admo. 52. b 25
contemn continue 53. a 10 workers works 57. a 39 misery mystery 60. a 18 by
color by no color 61. a 18 weyed weeded 62. a 9 offer offered 62. a 29
sacrifice sacrificer 62. b 33 nation motion 63. b 20 set sets 63. b 48 says
faith 64. a 1 participacion particion 65. b 36 saw same 68. b 21 there they
73. b 7 angry angry anger, anger 77. b 14 doubt double 81. b 18 is maruayle is
no maruayle 84. b 16 nothing one thing 86. b 50 other understand oath
understand 87. a 49 not, any not, least any 92. b 27 and do desperate and
desperate 96. b 1 by an ordinarye by no ordinary 100. a 22 decreased digressed
100. a 23 the knight the Kenite 100. b 49 Levites Kenites 106. a 17 xl. C. men.
xl. M. men 111. b 25 decrees.23. q. 5. cha dixerit aliquis. decrees, causa. 23.
q. 5. dicat aliquis. and.28. d. 1 120. a 53 word world 122. b 1^ little title
124. a 17 inuiolated violated 132. a 42 13500. men 135000. men 134. b 1
Recubites Recutites 144. a 32 mention mantion 192. b 51 driven drawn 201. b 4
ear hear 203. b 52 preserve observe 223. a 15 doubting doubling 227. a 20
ententes euentes 228. b 14 pronounces provinces 230. a 32 Sickness Sadness 247.
a 16 Cain Cham 269. b 14 leuened leuelled 285. a 14 communicate excommunicate

The commentary of Master Peter Martyr upon the Book of Judges.
THere be some which divide the holy scriptures into four parts, Of the
division of the holy Scriptures.
and ascribe some books as well of the old testament as of the new, to laws,
some to histories, some to prophecies, and other some again to wisdom. But it
is not meet so to deuyde the books of the holy scripture one from an other,
because that in the books of Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, and D^uteromie, in
which they appoint laws to be contained, are found almost as many histories
as laws. Besides that in the books which they assign to prophets, laws of
living vprightlye are oftentimes written and clearly expounded. Neither can we
properly separate the books of Solomon and other of ye kind (which they will
have proper to wisdom) from laws and prophecies. For there are in them
sentences here and there written, which serving for the instruction of life,
have also without controversy the nature of laws. Furthermore for ye that in
the^ are very many secrets opened unto the church by the inspiration of the
spirit of god, they pour undoubtedly into the attentife hearers, oracles of
things to come. It may easily he granted, that all these things which they
make mention of, are found in the holy books: I mean the precepts of living,
notable hystories, prophecies of things to come, and also most wise sentences
and sayings: but in such sort, that in manner in every book they are set forth
unto us dispersedly, neither yet would I that these holy books should be
divided one from an other by these ends and limittes.

I would rather think as the learned sort do also judge, that whatsoever
things are contained in the holy Scriptures should be referred unto two
principal heads, the law I mean and the gospel. There be two principal
points whereunto all the whole scriptures are referred.
For every where are declared unto us either the precepts of god of upright
living, or when we are reproved to have strayed from the^ by reason of weakness
or else of malice, ye gospel is laid forth before us, wherein by Christ that
thing wherein we have offended is pardoned, and the strength and power of the
holy ghost promised us, to reform us again to the image of god, which we had
lost. These two things may we behold in all the books of Moses, in the
histories, Prophets, and books appointed to wisdom, and that not only in
the old Testamente, but also in the new, and they are not separated one from
an other by books and leaves, but by that manner which is now declared. What
things are entreated of in this book of Judges.
And this is sufficient as touching the general matter of the holy scriptures.
But now we must peculiarly speak of this book, that we may understand what
things they be which are entreated of in the same. And to the end we may the
more plainly understand this, it is needful to call to memory those things
which were spoken of in the former books.

In Genesis is set forth the creation of the world, then how of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob and his twelve children was engendered the people of god and how
they were brought into Egypt to drive away their famine.

Exodus teaches the great increase, and incredible multiplication of the
Israelites, the manner also and form whereby they were of god by Moses
delivered from bondage and set at liberty, and how they were excelle^tly adorned
with laws, judgments and ceremonies, which things are also comprehended in
the books of Leuiticus. What is contained in ye books which go before the
judges.
The book of Numbers contains very many passages of the Hebrews, and
diverse placings and orderings of their tents in the desert places, and also
certain vsages of those rules which were prescribed before of god in the laws.
And lastly of al in Deuteronomy. When Moses should depart out of this life, he
like a most faithful minister of god, and most learned preacher, repeteth
unto the people almost the whole law. After whose death Joshua captain of the
Hebrews led the people beyond Iordane, and possessed some part of the
promised land of Chanaan, and divided it as god had commanded to his whole
nation by tribes. When he was dead god governed the Hebrews by certain
excellent me^ which were called Judges, of which Judges this book which we
have taken in hand to enterpreate has his name and title.

Why this is called the book of the judges.
But for the better understanding of the title thereof we must know that this
word Shaphat in the Jews tongue signifies sometime to execute the law, and to
judge the causes between the^ which are at controversy, which office yet is
not proper to those Judges, of which we now entreat. For there were Levites
appointed which sat and gave judgment at the gates of every city, and above
all judgments sat Senadrim which were an assembly of 70. elders.

Senadrim.
Furthermore ye word signifies to revenge and to set at liberty, which these
excellent me^ performed, whose noble acts ar declared in this volume. They by
their authority, through their might and counsel, delivered the Israelites
when they were oppressed of strangers, and kept them in the observing of the
law and true worshipping of God. And that their office may the better be
perceived, we will briefly expound the face and estate of that public weal.
God himself was the true and proper king of that nation, Of the common wealth
and estate of the Jews.
for he only had the principal power there, but not as he had over other
nations, but so, that he by his beck, oracle, and certain commandment,
governed the estate of the Israelites, which he promised to do in the.18. chap.
of Exodus. Whereas he said that that people should be his chief kingdom. But
because he would also use the ministry of men, he provided al things necessary
for the Hebrews, first by Moses and then by Joshua as long as they lived. They
exercised the office of princes or captains, which men being dead god would
have the best and most excellent men to have the rule over the^ (for such men
were picked out to be of the senate, whose excellent conditions are set forth
as well in Exodus as in Deuteronomy: for the laws of God would not suffer
every one to be called to that office. That is when ye best men are governors
over the commonweal
) If thou shall therefore consider these men then shall thou see the form of
that government which is called Aristocratia. But because that it was not
lawful to attempt great matters without the peoples consent, we may therefore
justly think that it was also a common wealth which endured to the time of
Saul and David the first kings. That estate therefore in respect of god was a
kingdom, but in respect of the Senate and those chief men it was
Aristocratia. Because in electing of the^ they had no regard to their riches
but to their virtue and godliness, and for yt the weightiest matters were
referred to the people, therefore we may say it was a common wealth. Wherefore it
manifestly appears yt the administration of matters of the Israelits was very
well te^pered of three kinds of governments. What was the cause of the raising
up of Judges.
And because, whereas many govern the common wealth, it is needful when
dangerous times do happen, for the better success and expedition of things
to be done, one must be appointed which may have both ye chief rule and also
ye chief authority: for ye which cause ye Romans created often times both
Empe^ors and also Dictators. So god when ye Israelites were most grievously
oppressed of their enemies, judged it mete to deliver them and bring the^ to
liberty, he evermore stirred up some one man by his spirit, whom he endued
with noble virtues, strength of body, warlike art and other gifts mete for
that purpose which should be brought to pass, by whose industry and good
success the people might be delivered from tyrants.

Between forrayne nations and the Israelits in this similitude, The difference
between the judges and princes of the heathen.
this difference is to be marked. Emperors and Dictators were appointed and
chosen of men. But the judges of the Hebrews were not declared by the voices of
me^, The judges were neither properly lords nor kings.
but by ye ordinance and inspiratio^ of god. They could not be properly called
capitaynes or kings or else lords, Posterity or succession was here of no
force, neither was there a regard to one particular tribe or family, neither
was there required the election of man or the common assent of ye people. In
humane public weals these use to take place, but God in this his public
weal preferred whom he pleased to be judge in ye government of things. Besides
that, they which are chosen by the common voice of me^ must first be endued with
excellent strength and virtues, but god made those who^ he decreed to be Judges
and setters at liberty of ye Israelites, notable and most excellent upon the
sudden, though they were never so much rude and unmeet of nature. And that
this is true, witnesses the 2. chapter of this book where it is thus written,
God raised them up Judges, which delivered them out of the hands of their
oppressors. etc. And thereunto is added when the Lord had raised them up a
judge, he was with the judge, and delivered Israel all the days of his life.
Moreover these men in time of their authority were not in deed Lords over the
Israelites, but only wrought with authority, admonition, counsel and
exercising warlyke trauayles. This is made plain by that that Gedeon as it is
written in the.8. chap: when he had gotten the victory over the Madianites,
when it was offered him to be king over Israel he refused it. For the people
said unto him: Reygne thou over us and thy son. By the which words they did
not give the kingdom only unto him, but also to his posteritye. But he would
none of it, yea he answered them thus. I will not reign over you, God shall
reygne over you. And it is written in ye first book of Samuel that God said
unto the Prophet, They have not cast thee away but me, The papists do
impudentlye claim unto the^ selves the title of spiritual honor.
that I should not reygne over them. It appears therefore manifestly yt these
Judges were neither kings nor yet Lords of the Israelites. I would to god
that this kind of authority were diligently marked in the popysh Church,
where wicked men do so impudently usurp unto themselves spiritual promotion,
seeing that Christ himself as he is the true priest, so also is he our only
priest, for he only pacifyeth the father toward us and they which are
gouernoures of the Church here on earth are to be counted only as his
ministers. Wherefore they can not claim unto themselves that title, but they
must cast away Christ and do him iniurye.

Neither is this to be passed over, that the Judges which were ordained of
god did always deliver Israel from the miserye wherewith they were oppressed:
but the kings, into whom ye common wealth did afterward as it were
degenerate, did not always deliver the people out of bondage, which was
committed unto them, The estate of the Hebrews was better under the Judges than
under the kings.
yea they oftentimes destroyed them and compelled them at the length to
slavery. Wherefore it is to be judged yt the estate of the Hebrews was far
better under the judges than under the Kings: not ye God governed not that
people in time of the kings, but because his administration showed forth it
self more in ye time of ye judges. And in deed ye people was never led away
into captivity under ye judges, although they were often times oppressed by
outward tyrants which they deserved by their wickedness. Almost all the judges
were good and holy men.
That age therefore might be called as it were a golden age. Let us mark also
that there were very few good and godly kings, but almost all the Judges were
good and godly. For although as they were men so sometimes they fell, yet we
must believe that they returned again into the right way and repented, for they
are not condemned at any time by any testimony or Judgment of the scripture as
far as I can perceive. How notably Syrach judged of them he plainly declares
in his book of wisdom the 46. chap. But we leauyng his testimony aside, let us
see what the Epistle to the Hebrews in the xi. chap. does ascribe unto them,
where as it is thus said. The time will be to short for me to tell of Gedeon, of
Barach, Sampson, and of Iephthe etc. All these certainly were judges, and they
are mentioned of there together with other holy men, which were notable and of an
excellent and wonderful faith.

Thou will ask peradventure, If god looked so well to his people as long as the
judges were over them, Why the Israelites were so oftentimes oppressed of their
enemies in the time of the judges.
how came it to pass then, that they were so often brought into bondage by
their enemies? For because God handled with them faithfully and by a covenant.

The league that was made is written in the 30. and 31. chap. of Deuteronomy: where
god promised the Hebrews that all things should prosper with them so long as
they kept his laws and worshipping of him. But if they should fall from him to
Idols, and cast away the laws of their god, then should they be delivered into
the hands of their enemies, but in such sort, that if they repented and would
desire aid of their god, he would streightwaies be present with them, to
deliver them from all the evils wherewith they should be oppressed. But we shall
not need to stand long now about this matter, because it he proceeding forward
of the history, we shall manifestly perceive, that the Israelits did oftentimes
offend. And god chastened them as his children with just punishments. But when
they turned and cried unto him, he had compassion of them, and delivered them
by judges out of their miseries. This remains also for us to declare, yt for
as much as Christ is called the end and perfection of all the holy books, how
these acts also of the judges may and ought to be referred unto him, and how
they prophecy him unto us, as the other holy books do. To answer to this I
will take that which Origin writes in his first Homely upon this book. All the
works of god by themselves are great: After what sort the holy histories do
co^teine and teach Christ
but when they are conferred together, some of them may be called small, and
other some great. If god his leadyng of the children of Israel out of Egipte
and through the wilderness should be beholden by themselves, they are surely
great works: but if they be afterward conferred with this, that God loved the
world so, that he gave his only begotten son for it, then shall this be a
great work, and the others small. But because in the greater things the less
are comprehended (for that they are parts of the^) as the number of two is
contained in three, and three in four. So these pryuate deliueries of the people
which happened under the Judges, for as much as they are comprehended in that
principal redemption, which is given unto ma^kynd by Christ, it must needs be
that they should express unto us ye same, for that they were certain assured
parts and figurative shadows, and had the same author namely Christ him
self. For he which before delivered the Hebrews by judges, did afterward
redeem al men by him self. And even as the miseries of this life, the spoiling
I say of goods, banishments, wou^des and torments are very grievous to the flesh
when they are pondred by themselves: so when they are conferred with the anger of
god and everlasting death, into yt which we incur by reason of our sins,
they may most rightly be esteemed small things, for that these are most
grievous. Wherefore when we consider how the Jews were delivered from outward
miseries: Let us call to remembrance, those most great evils, from which
Christ of his singular goodness has delivered us. And when as the children of
Israel do oftentimes escape by judges out of their afflictions, they do as it
were point with their finger Christ unto us, raised up from the dead, they show
unto us also ye last resurrection of the saints, wherein they shall be altogether
delivered from al afflictions and infirmities. Wherefore as well this book as
also other holy histories, do with much profit admonish the readers of Christ and
his members.

And because I think I have spoken enough already of the matter and subject of
this book. I will now go to declare the form of the writing thereof. What kind
of writing is observed in this book.

The definition of an history.


It consists altogether of an historical kind of writing, as may easily
appear to all the readers. An historye is (as Quintilianus writes in the
second book, and 4. chap: of his Institutions) a setting forth of a thing done.
From which Augustine differs not much, who writes on the second chap: of
Gen: upon the letter. An history is when a thing done either by god or by man
is set forth, and in this diffinitio^ he co^prehe^deth as well profane
histories as holy. But our book does chiefly for the most part set forth those
things which were done by god. But because al setting forth of things done are
not of one kind, when as some ar called chronicles, and other some named
histories, we must se in which of these two, this our declaration must be
placed, and that can we not well do except we separate these ye one from ye
other. Cicero in his 2. book de Oratore, touching these, writes after this
sort. The difference between an history and a chronicle.
The gretians at ye first wrote eue^ as our Cato, Pictor and Piso did: for an
history was nothing else but a collecting together of things done yearly, which
things that they might ye better be kept in memory ye chief bishop from the
beginning of matters of Rome even to Publius Mutius ye chief bishop wrote al
things that were done every year and brought the^ into a common place, and set
the^ out on a table in his house yt the people also might freely have knowledge
of the^, and they be they which are now called the great yearly Chronicles.
This form of writing many have followed, which have without any deckings or
ornaments left behind them only the momuments of times, men, places and of
things done. Therefore as Pherceydes, Hellanicus, Acusilaus and very many other
we amongst ye grecia^s, so is our Cato, Pictor, and Piso, who cared not for the
eloque^t kind of writing, and while that me^ might understand what they spoke,
they counted shortness to be the only praise of speaking etc.

He adds afterward, The nature of things desires the order of times, it
requires also the description of countries, because in weighty matters and
worthy of memory, first counsels are looked for, then the acts, and afterward
the ends. And as touching counsels is signified what the author allows. And
in things done is declared not only what is done or spoken, but also how etc.
By these things we may gather what is the nature of yearly chronicles, and also
what of an history: and me thinks that these our narrations are rather to be
counted histories tha^ yearly chronicles, for because not only things done are
set forth, The narratio^s of this book are histories and not yearly chronicles.

The opinion of Aulus Geilius as touching yearly chronicles and an History.


but also ye causes, counsels and manners are declared. Also orations,
admonitions, and reprouings, are sometimes added not without some ornaments:
All which things pertayn rather to an history tha^ to bare yearly chronicles.
But now yt we have heard Cicero his opinion, let us also hear what Aulus
Gellius writes in ye.5. chap. of his 5. book, which writes this: Some do
think that an history differs from a chronicle in this, yt when both of the^
are a declaration of things done, yet an history is properly of those things at
ye doings whereof he yt wrote the^ has been present. etc. He followed not this
distinction, and not without cause, which nevertheless Seruius Gra^maticus
embrased, and Isidorus in his first book of Etymologies followed hi^, which is
marvel because he is not only against Cicero, which says yt an history is a
gathering together of things done yearly, but also against Vergil whose verse
in ye first of the Eneydos is. And now have we laysure to hear the yearly
chronicles of our labors. Where he declares, that yearly Chronicles pertayne
also unto things at the doyngs whereof we our selves were present. But now
again to Gellius. He shows that there were other which thought histories to
be either an exposition, or else a demonstration of things done. But yearly
chronicles were, when things done in many years were compiled together,
observing the order of every year. etc. According to which sentence, this our
book cannot be called a yearly chronicle, for that in the narrations thereof,
it oftentimes notes not the years wherein things were done. Moreover the same
author I mean Gellius adds Sempronius Asellios mind therein, but this was
the difference between those which would leave behind them yearly
chronicles, and those which enterprised to write of things done by the
Romans. The yearly chronicles did declare that only which was done and in
what year it was done, but that was not sufficient for an history to declare
what was done, but it must also show, by what counsel, and after what sort
they were done. And a little after the same Aselio writes in the same book:
for neither can the books of the yearly chronicles any thing stir up the
readers to be more quick to defend the common wealth, nor yet more slow to
commit things unadvisedly. Furthermore because that by the knowledge of this
book men are admonished and stirred up to the true worshippyng of god to
repent, to put their trust in god, and to practice all duties of life
cherefully. It conteyneth an history and not yearly Chronicles. Peradventure I
have expounded these things with to many words, but yet as I suppose with
some fruicte.

The number of the years that the history of the judges conteyneth.
But the space of the time which is comprehended in these declarations (if we
may believe Augustine in his xviii. book de ciuitate dei, and 22. chap.) is
329. years, which he gathers thus. When Rome was builded, the Hebrews had
been in the land of Chanaan. 718. years, of which (as he says) 27. perteyned
unto Joshua, 329. to the Judges, and 362. are referred unto the kings. For
Ezechias the king lived in the time of Romulus.

God is the author of histories.
An history is not to be counted a thing of man's invention when as god him self
was the author thereof, which would have the elders to expound to their children
and their posterity those things which he had done for Israel in Egipte, in
the sea, and in the wilderness. And he commanded also (as it is written in
Exodus) that the war which was had against Amalech, and the victory which the
Hebrews got of him, Histories were before Moses time.
should be put in writing, yea and this kind of writing began before Moses,
for he makes mention both of the book of the battails of the Lord as also of
the book of the just men. I will not speak of the Prophets which with their
prophecies oftentimes mixed histories. I pass over David, who adourned here
and there the psalms which he song with histories. I skip over our
Evangelists and the Acts which Luke wrote, in which are written most
profitable histories in the new Testament. If god be the author of these books
as we must needs believe, the^ god must be counted the author of histories,
which is not a thing for him unseemly, for an history is a noble thing (as
Cicero writes in his 2. The praise of an history.
book de Oratore, it is a witness of times, ye light of truth, ye life of memory
the maystres of life, the messenger of antiquity. etc. These praises certainly
are great, and they agree not with every kind of histories, but with those
only, in which those rules are observed, What are requisite to a true history.

The Latin Historiographers are more faithful than the Grecians.


which ye same author has set forth in that place namely, that it set forth no
lies, or be afraid to tell the truth, that there be no suspicion of favor or
flattery.

Which order although the Latin Historiographers have more faithfully
accomplished than the Grecians (for Quintilianus says in his iiii. chap. of
his second book that the greek Historiographers used as much license in writing
almost as the Poets did) yet Augustine in his.131. epistle to Memorius the
Bishop, when he among other liberal disciplines attributes much to histories
writing of the truth thereof, says, that he cannot see, how those histories
which are written of men, can well follow the truth: for that the writers are
compelled to give credit unto men, and oftentimes to gather together the brute
of the vulgar people, The holy histories are most true.
which writers nevertheless are yet excused, if they keep liberty and write
nothing disceitfull, but there can be nothing at al more true than the
histories revealed and written by the inspiration of god as our histories are.

Besides the truth, whose knowledge without controversy is most excellent, The
commodity of an historye.
by the reading of histories, we get also other commodities, and those very
excellent. By them we attain to matter, and most abundant plenty of most
profitable arguments. For (as Quintilianus writes in the.iiii. chap. of
his.12. book) Examples and histories are judgments and testimonies. The use
of examples is double.
And the profit of the examples is at the least way two fold. One is, that we
should imitate, use, allow, and commend those things which we are taught to be
done of holy me^. We understand by the divine historye that Abraham was a
holy man and dearly beloved of god, and also one that kept very good
hospitality. Whereby we learn that hospitality is a noble virtue, and very
dear unto God, and again we are taught to avoid those things, which we see
these godly men to have avoided. For when we consider how David would not
kill Saul his deadly enemy, having twice liberty to do it, we gather that it
is not to be permitted that private men although it lay in their power
should (...) revenge their private injuries. The other use of examples is that
of these things which are there declared perticularly, when we shall perceive
that they be al like, we may of them gather generally and universally some one
profitable sentence.

By the history of the Sodomites we note how grievously, god punished most
horrible fleshly filthiness, and that the tribe of Benjamin for the same cause
was almost clean put out, and Ruben the first begotten son of Jacob for incest
was put besides his place and dignity, David for committing aduoutry, incurred
horrible punishments, and Ammon and Absolon for committing incest came to a
most wicked end, and Troy (as the heathen testifye) was utterly overthrown for
aduoutry sake. Of these things therefore in such sort considered which happened
perticularly, we plainly say that all these wandering and unlawful lusts of
men are most grievously punished of god. To which proposition if we shall add
this sentence that now also throughout all Christendom such free and wa^dring
filthy lust reign every where, we may strongly conclude, that for this
horrible wickedness there hangs upon this our world most sharp punishments.

Yet in this kind of arguments that vice is most diligently to be taken head
of, Of examples we reason what vices are to be eschewed.
which creapeth upon one before he beware thereof. And ye comes two manner of
ways. First that we take not upon us to follow those doings of the saints
which they sometimes committed unadvisedly. For eue^ as men, they fell
sometimes, and that most filthily. Wherefore ye things done by the^, which we do
set forth as examples to be followed of us, must with great judgment be
examined. Augustine.
Augustine writes of this thing in his 2. book against the 2. epi. of
Gaude^tius after this sort. We must not always imitate or allow whatsoever
good men have done, but we must add thereunto ye judgment of ye scriptures,
and mark whither they allow these deeds. This father does very well admonish us
here, yt although they were holy me^, and pleased god very many ways, The
fallings of the saints are not to be followed.
and the holy scriptures witnessed excellently well of them, yet are not all
their actions to be judged absolute and without fault. For every man both is a
liar and oftentimes sins. For who would follow Dauyd his horrible
aduoutrye and betraying of faithful Soldiers, or the forswearyng of Peter or
his wicked dissimulation? surely none which has but even a cromme of
godliness. Moreover it sometimes happens that that work which is done well
and rightly by some excellent person, is forbidden of other men, because God
which has given a law to men, is not so bound unto the same, that he may
not lose some from that common bond, when it seems good unto him. It is not
lawful for any man to steal, God will some times have certain things done
of godly men which be not lawful for others to do.
and yet the Hebrews when they were led out of Egypt were permitted yea and
commanded of god, to carry away the Egyptians goods which they had borrowed
of them even against their wills and without their knowledge. What shall we do
then? Thus truly, we must well and diligently co^ferre those things which are
expounded in the holy histories, with the general rules of the commandments
of God wherewith when we do perceive that they do agree, The doings of saints
must be weighed by the rules of gods Law.
let us boldly use them. But if they disagree from the^, let us reckon them
either for certain fallinges or singular prerogatives of some, and keep our
selves back from following of them. And these prouisoes being added, great
profit shall come by reading of histories and especially divine histories. And
that did Chrysostom very well understand when as in the preface of his
exposition upon the Epistle to Philemon, Chrysostom.
he wished that all those things had been written for us, which the Apostles
spoke and did, when they sat down, what they did eat, or what they did write
and other things of this kind. And the same Chrysostom writes in his 57.
Homily upon Genesis, that histories were given us by the holy ghost to the
entente we should follow them. Augustine.
Also Augustine, in his second book and 28. chap. De doctrina Christiana,
teaches that many darcke and hard things may some times only be opened by
the knowledge of an history. Moreover who soever much exercises him self in
redyng over of histories, he does not without fruit reuolue with him self the
doings and examples of our times. There was upon a time a certain man evil
favored enoughe, Note a pleasant history.
who nevertheless was marvelous desirous of beautiful children: and yet he
married a foul wife, wherefore he was mocked of every body. This man went into
the City. where he bought most fair images, which he set in his chamber, and
gave his wife charge that for a certain space she should every day most
earnestly look upon those images. She obeyed her husbands commandment, and
by that means brought him forth most beautiful children. So will it also come
to pass with us, which though we by reason of natural sin grafted in us
are defourmed and loathsome, and are continually provoked as well by the devil
as by wicked men to unlawful things, yet if we will attentively and
diligently gather together the examples of the saints, trimly painted forth
in the divine histories, and if we reuolue the same in our mind, we shall
forthwith show forth most excellent works and acceptable to God. And now that
I have entreated enough (as I suppose) of the matter and form of writing of
this book, the next is to speak some what of the efficient cause.

What is the efficient cause of this book.
If we would search to know the man, by whom God would have these things
written, that can we not understand by the holy Scriptures. The Hebrews
affirm that Samuel put these things in writing: but they speak that without
testimony of the Scriptures. Other also think that every Judge wrote such
things as were done in his own time, which monument of theirs being in sundry
pampheletes Samuel afterward compiled into one certain body or volume. Again
there be some which ascribe all this to Esdras or to Ezechias the king, which
Ezechias the book of Proverbs mencioneth to have gathered together some of
the sentences (or as some call them) the parable of Solomon but I think it is
not mete for me to stand about this matter, for there is no cause why we
should curiously search out those things which God will not reveal in his
oracles wherefore I will return to declare the principal efficient cause of
this book. The spirit of God is properly the aucthour of this Book.
We must ascribe al what soever it is to the spirit of God. For Paul writing
to Timothe says that the scriptures were revealed by god, and there is no
doubt but he spoke then of the books of the old Testament. But thou will
ask who shall persuade us that the holy books were revealed unto men by the
holy ghost? The spirit of God testifies unto the faithful that the holy
Scriptures came from God.
Even the same spirit which has provided to have these things written, does
make us assuredly to believe that they are not the inventions of men. For nether
can the holy life of the teachers nor yet miracles be sufficient to persuade us
of this. It is the spirit, the spirit I say of god which testifies unto our
spirit of this thing.

The most dangerous error of the Antichrists must diligently be taken head
of, which dare affirm, It is not the Church which gives authority to the
Scriptures.
that it is the Church which brings authority to the holy Scriptures, when
as it is clean contrary. For what soever authority or estimation comes unto
the Church, that all whole comes of the word of God. It is horrible to be
heard, that the holy oracles and words of god should get their credit by men
which are otherwise liars. But these things they feign to the intent that seeing
they are manifestlye found often times to have decreed and ratified in the
Sacraments and doctrines far otherwise than the holy scriptures will bear.
Which thing they would defend yt they may do it, because the Church which
does bring authority and credit to the word of God, may alter things in the
holy Scriptures, as pleased it. Wherefore we must resist them by all means
possible in this thing which they take upon them to do. We may not suffer our
selves to be brought to this point, to think that the Scriptures have had
their credit and authority by the Church. And yet do I not write these
things as though I would despise or contemn the dignity of the Church,
unto the which, There be three offices of the Church touching the word of God.

The Church as a witness keeps the holy Books.


I do attribute three offices and them most excellent as touching the word of
GOD. The first of them is, that I do confess that the Church as a witness
has kept the holy books. But thereby it can not be proved, yt it is lawful for
it to pervert or alter any thing in the holy books. Experience teaches us
that public and private wrytinges are committed to scriueners (which are
commonly called notaryes) to be laid up and diligently kept of the^. And yet
there is none that is in his right wits which will say that he may alter any
thing in them, or will believe that their authority is of greater force, than
their wills were which desired to have the same written. The word of God
revealed and written.
Neither shall it be here unprofitable to observe the difference between the
word of god as it was revealed at the beginning to the Prophets and saints
and as it was afterward preached or written. For we do easily acknowledge
between these, that there is only difference of time, and not of the
authority or efficacy.

For we confess that the word unwritten was more ancient, than that which
was afterward appointed to letters, and we grant that either co^ferred
together was given to the Church, but in such sort, that the Church (as we
have said) can not by any means wrest or change it. The office of the Church
is to publishe and preach the word of God.
And this undoubtedly is the second office of the Church, to preach and publish
the words committed unto it by God. In which thing it is like a common crier,
who although he do publishe the decrees of princes and magistrates, yet he is
not above the decrees or equal unto them in authority. But his whole office is
faithfully to pronounce all things as he has received them of the princes and
magistrates. And if he should otherwise do, he should be counted altogether for
a traitor. Wherefore the ministers of the Church ought to care and study for
nothing so much as to be found faithful. We acknowledge also the last office
of the Church to be, The Church discerns the holy books from counterfaite
and such as are Apochriphas.
yt seeing it is endued with the spirit of God, it must therefore discern the
sincere and uncorrupted books of holy Scriptures from the counterfaite and
Apocriphas, which is not yet to be in authority above the word as many do
foolishely dream. For there are very many which can discern the true and
propre writings of Plato and Aristotle from other falsely put to them, and yet
in comparison of judgment they are neither of greater lernyng nor yet of
equal, with Plato or Aristotle. And every one of us ca^ easily know God from
the devil, and yet are we not to be counted equal with God, and much less can
we thinck that we do excel him. So the Church ought not because of this to
prefer faith or authority thereof before the Scriptures.

Augustine.
But they say, Augustine says, I would not believe the Gospel except the
authority of the Church did move me thereunto. But in that place is read (to
move together) for in very deed, Faith is not poured in by the minister but by
God.
it is the spirit of God, which pours faith into the hearers of his word.
And because the ministers of the Church are his instruments, they are rather
to be said to move with, than absolutely to move. The same Augustine writes in
his 28. book and second chap. against Faustus, that the Maniches ought so to
believe that the first chap. of Matthew was written by Matthew, even as they did
believe that the Epistle which they called Fundamentum, was written by Maniche,
because undoubtedly they were so kept by their elders, and from hand to hand
delivered unto them. This is it therefore that the Church moves withal to
believe the Gospel, because faithfully it keeps the holy scriptures, preaches
them, and discerns them from strange Scriptures. The same father manifestly
witnesses in his 6. book of his confessions the 4. and 5. chap. that God him
self in very deed did give authority to the holy scriptures. Tertullianus
Irenaeus
But Tertullianus and Irenaeus having to do against heretics did therefore send
the^ to the Apostolical Churches, because they did not admit the whole
scriptures: Wherefore they would that they should take their judgment of those
Churches which were certainly known to be Apostolical. For it was meet that
those Churches should continuallye remain both witnesses and also keapers of
the holy scriptures: and yet therefore they did not decree that the authority
of the Church should be preferred before the scriptures.

What is to be thought of a certain rule of the Logiciens.
But the adversaries say, that they are led by the sentence, which is commonly
used among Logiciens: Every thing is such a thing by reason of an other,
Wherefore that other shall more be counted such. Wherefore they reason after
this manner: If by the Church the Scripture has his authority, it must needs
be that the Church much more has that authority. But they remember not that
this sentence put by the Logiciens takes place only in final causes, and is
of no strength in efficient causes. For although our inferior world be made
warm by the sun and the stars, yet does it not thereby follow that they
are far more warmer. And again when immoderate men by wine are made droncke,
we can not thereby conclude the wine to be more dronken than they. Yea the
Logiciens teach this, that this their sentence is then strong and of efficacy
in efficient causes, when such efficient causes are brought forth which are
whole and perfect, and not which are perciall and maimed, which rule is not
observed of our adversaries in this argument. For the Church is not the whole
and perfect efficient cause of that faith and authority which the holy
Scriptures have with the faithful. For if it were so, then were it very easy
to persuade the Ethnickes and Turks of the holy Scriptures, and to bring the
Jews to receive the new Testament, and how true this is, the thing it self
witnesses. And I think. I have spoken enough of the efficient cause of this
book and of the holy Scriptures.

Of the end of this book.
And now lastly order seems to require, ye seeing we have spoken of the matter,
form and efficient cause of the holy books, we should also entreat somewhat
to what end they were written. Wherein I think it not nedeful to keep the
reader long, for that before when I entreated many things of an historye, I
have expounded also the profit and commodities which come thereof, which no
doubt of it, belong unto the end: but now presently I will say thus much
compendiously, that all these things are mentioned by the holy ghost, that we
should behave our selves vprigthly both in prosperity and also adversity.

For we learn by the examples of holy men, when we are afflicted with sundry
troubles and miseries, steadfastly to hold our faith, to put our hope in God,
to call upon him only, and therewithal to repent us of our sins which
things if we do, he will no less be present to help us, than we know yt he
oftentimes delivered the people of the Jews. And this Paul declared, when he
said to the Romans, whatsoever things are written, they are written for our
learning, that we thorough patience and consolation of the Scriptures might
have hope. Moreover we are instructed, in prosperous things to keep the fear
of god, lest we fall into grievous sins, by which means we might be made
guilty both of punishment in this life, and also of everlasting damnation.
Finally we may most manifestly gather the end of reading of these books out
of the Apostles doctrine, which he delivered to Timothe, writing after this
sort in his second Epistle and third chap. All Scripture given by inspiration
of God is profitable to doctrine, to reproving, to correction and to
instruction which is in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect and
prepared to al good works.

And now that as I suppose I have spoken enough of the end and other causes of
this book, I will come nygher to the exposition of the same, and first I will
declare whether this book according to the sentence of the Hebrews be the
second book of the first Prophets, whose conjunction is so great with the
history of Joshua that a man would easily say that they be both one. Whether
the book of Joshua ought to be reckened with the book of Judges.
And peradventure there be some which suppose that Joshua should be reckened
with the judges: to whom I will not subscribe. For judges were raised up of
god, when the people were oppressed with outward enemies, but when Joshua was
proclaimed prince, all the affairs of the Israelites were in good prosperity.
For Sihon and Og most mighty kings were overcome, and that office was
committed to Joshua, whereby Moses being dead he might lead the people over
Iordane and take possession of the land of Chanaan, and divide the promised
land by lottes unto the children of Israel, and besides that the people did
set their hands to a decree which they had made of Joshua, that he which
obeyed not his voice should be killed, as we read it written in the first chap.
of his book. But there is no mention made of such things as concerning the
Judges. And yet both the books are so like and of such affinity, that many
things are repeated in this our book especially in the beginning, which no
doubt were done when Joshua was yet living.

There rests now to admonish the reader somewhat of the parts of this book.
The parts of the book of Judges.
There are as many principal members in it as there were Judges to Samuels
time. For yt in every one of them still rises unto us a new historye. But the
first of all was Othoniel, of whom we will speak in the third chap. So that
all those things which are written unto that place do contain the things
done from the death of Joshua unto Othoniel. And certainly because the Jews, as
long as Joshua lived, worshipped god a right, and kept the law as much as the
weakness of man could do: god still wrought with them according to his
covenant, and gave the^ a great victory over their enemies, so that every
tribe overcame his enemies for the most part which were yet adioynying to their
borders. And then when the Israelites obteynyng the victory did transgress
the commandments of their god, and did not clean destroy the nations which
they had overcome as god had commanded them, yea they made them tributaries
unto them, god therefore grievously admonished them by his messanger, because
they had not only saved their enemies, but also had most filthyly honored
their gods. So that god was not without a cause angry with them, and delivered
them into the hands of outward tyrannes. But when they were sorye for it and
called upon their god, he had compassion of them, and raised them up Judges, by
whom they might be delivered, and when they were delivered, they fell again to
Idolatry and they were afflicted again, and they repented, whereby in course
their deliueries and oppressions are set forth. But their first oppression
worthy of memory was under Chusan Resanthaim, from the which Othoniel the first
of all the judges revenged them, of whom we will speak in his place. But now we
will put here underneath the words of the holy history.

The first Chapter.
1 IT came to pass after the death of Joshua, that the children of Israel asked
the Lord, saying: Who shall go up for us against the Chananites to fight first
against them?

2 And the Lord said Judah shall go up, behold I have delivered the land into
his hands.


IT seemed good unto the children of Israel to take war in hand, for as it is
written in the xiii. chap. of Joshua, they had not yet at this time conquered
all the promised land, so that in every tribes lotte there were enemies
remaining. And when they saw there was no remedy but that they must drive them
out by force, they doubted not whether they should make war against them,
but their doubt was which tribe should fight before all the other. The
Israelites ask counsel of God.
The matter seemed to be of such great importance, that they asked counsel of
god, which was the chief governor of their publicque weal. Joshua that worthy
captain was no more a live at whose beck and pleasure they hanged. The
Israelites affairs had evil success when they were done without God his
counsel.
Neither yet had they forgotten how evil success they had, when not long
before they took weighty affairs in hand, without asking counsel of God. For
in their setting forth to battaill against the city of Hai, they sped very
vnluckely in the battle, because they went to warrefare without oracle, as it
is written in the vii. of Joshua. It is also written in the same book in the ix.
chap. that the Gabaonites were received into league without the oracle of god,
and it is also written in the book of Numbers that the Israelites were slain
by the Amorrhites, when they fought contrary to gods will. This peoples
judgment therefore is worthy to be praised, for it is excellently well done, in
most weighty affairs to ask counsel of God first of all. And that must be
done conveniently, and holyly, otherwise it profits not. For the Israelites
when they should make war against the tribe of Benjamin, although they asked
counsel of God, yet were they twice put to flight and slain, and cowardly
turned their backs to their enemies, because they behaved not them selves
well in asking counsel of god. Wherefore they asked counsel of God.
And it is to be believed that the Hebrews after the death of Joshua considered
this with them selves, that their hong a great matter in those first wars
which should be enterprised after the death of Joshua because if they happened
to be overcome of those nations in one battaill or two, then would those
nations think with them selves, that the good luck of the Israelites were
changed with the death of their captain. By which opinion they would easily
have been boldened and their affairs should have had better success daily. But
on the contrary if it happened that the Israelites got the upper hand in the
first battailles, they saw that the power and audacitie of the nations would
every day diminishe, and being made feable and faynter they should the
easelyer be overcome. God was also asked counsel of in the time of Joshua.
They did not therefore without cause ask counsel of God in so great a matter:
which also to do the commandment of the law did urge them, which is written
in the book of Numbers. Neither must it be now thought, yt they so required the
oracle, as though they did not the same when Joshua was living, for they
required also answers of God very often when he was a live, but after his
death it is said that they enquired for this thing chiefly and principally,
namely which tribe should go up to battle before all ye other in all their
causes. And this is the signification of the hebrew word Lanu that is, for us.
And this word to go up is mentioned, because they saw that they should first
vanquishe the hyly places.

Against Chanaan. This is sometimes a general name, What ye people of Canaa^ were
and contains al these nations, which God had decreed to destroy out of
Palestine, whereby all ye land was afterward called Channan. And sometimes it
signifies particularly some one nation of that people. And that lay chiefly
about Tire and Sidon. Which the Euangelical history proves when it calls the
woman a Chananite which offered her self to the son of God, when he was going
to Tire and Sidon. And of that nation peradventure, because it was mightier
than the other, were the rest called Chananites. And I will not ouerskip this by
the way, that ye people which is singularly called Chanaan, when they were
driven out of their coasts by the Israelites, they departed to Aphrica, where
they remained safe, even to the time of Augustine. Augustine.
So that ye father writes in his book of the exposition which he begone upon
the epistle to the Romans thus: Our rusticals being demanded what they were,
they answered in the Afric tongue, Chananites. And their language is very nigh
to the Hebrewe tongue, The Africans ar Chananites
as the same Augustine writes in his book of questions upon the Judges
the.16. question. For by Baal in the Afric tongue they seem to say Lord,
whereby by Baal Samen is understood as though they would say, Lord of heaven:
because these tongues differ not much one from an other. Hierome also agrees
therwt, Hierome.
writing upon Esaias the prophet, when he enterpreteth these words: Behold a
virgin shall conceive, in the Afric tongue (says he) which is said to have had
his offspring of the Hebrews. Virgil.
A virgin is properly called Almah. Also Virgil when he called Dido an
Aphrician and a Sidonian and the inhabitants of Carthage Tirianes has most
manifestly confirmed that Dido and her people came of the Chananites. Wherefore
it is no marvel if they almost kept in remembrance the Chananishe tongue. But
these things I have spoken by the way. But now Chanaan signifies no one
special nation, but is a common word for all those nations which the Israelites
should overthrow. For the tribe of Judah which is said to have gone up first of
al to the war, For what thing the Israelites asked council of God.
had in his lot the Iebusites, and not the Chananites. Moreover I admonish the
Reader yt the Hebrews asked not counsel of God for their Captain, neither
desired they to know what man should be made chief ruler over the Israelites
going to battle against the Chananites, but which tribe should begin the
battle first. Othoniel ye first Judge should be of the tribe of Judah. But we
entreat not of him now presently.

And because it is said that the children of Israel asked counsel of the
Lord, How many ways yt elders asked council of God.
some will ask after what sort the Jews accustomed to ask any thing of him
at that time. It may be answered, that there were three accustomed and ordinarye
ways which are rehearsed in the.28. chap. of the first book of Samuel namely
by dreams, by Vrim and Thu^mim, and lastly by prophets when there were any to be
had, and therefore Saul complained in ye book, that God had answered him by
none of these ways, when he would have asked counsel of him of the success of
ye most dangerous battle. I find also other ways in the scriptures of
asking counsel of god, but they were extraordinary ways. One is by reuelacion
of angels, or of god him self, expressing him self under some form. An other
way was, when some holy men by ye moving of god did appoint to themselves
certain tokens of things to come, which did signify before, whether they
happened this way or that, what should be looked for.

So Abraham his servant decreed with himself that she should be his Lords
wife, which only amongst many maidens coming to the well, offered drink of
her own mind to him and to his Camels. Ionathas also the son of Saul had
then the victory promised him, when the Philistianes should say, Come up
hither to us, and contrarilye, if they should bid him tarry till they came
down thither. I have called these extraordinarye ways because they were not
commonly used, neither are they often red in the Scriptures. Lottes also are of
this kind. There is mention made of them in the first book of Samuel, when
Saul should be declared King, all the tribes standing there before the Lord,
Benjamin was caught, which R. Selomo expounding ascribes the same place to
Lottes, and says that the names of every tribe were first written in scrolles,
and hurled into a certain pot, out of the which they were afterward drawn
by the hand of the Prophet. This is his judgment. Although. R. D. Kimhi
thinks ye that judgment was given by Vrim and Thumim. But howsoever it was
it skilleth not much, for no man ought to doubt but that there were lots used
at that time. For Solomon says, that lots were cast into a pet and governed
by god. Yea and the promised land of Chanaan was no otherwise divided unto the
people tha^ by lots. But by what means, in what places, or after what sort
they were had, it is no place here to declare. It were to long to tell what
Vrim and Thumim properly were. R. D. Kimhi speaks aboundauntly of that matter
in the book, which we now have in hands, when he expounds the history of
the concubine revenged against the Gabaonites, And I will set forth an other
time in a more fytte place what it should seem to be. The manner to ask
counsel of Gods hand was before the law given.
Neither did this custom for asking council of God florysh only in the time
of Moses law, but also in the patriarchs time. For we learn in the book of
Genesis that Rebecka desired an oracle. The heathen also asked council either
of their Prophets or else of their southsayers. The heathen had their oracles
and diuinations.
Balak king of the Moabites called unto him Balaam. They had moreover Sibelles
and Delphos, Apollo and Jupiter Amno^, and were ever to much given to
diuinations, but such as were corrupted and false. Only amongst the Hebrews
whereof we are certain the manner of oracles was pure: Because God was known
only in Judea, as David has song.

Why Joshua divided the land not yet possessed.
Moreover it is demanded why Joshua divided ye land to the.xii. tribes at ye
commandment of God when as he had not at that time conquered ye same? I
answer he did it that he might leave a testimonial, how certain they ought
to be of those things which God had promised them, namely that they might be as
certain of the possession of that land which was promised them, as if they
had it already in their hands. It would seem to have been folyshly done, if the
obtaining of that land should have been hoped for either by chance, or by
man's strength, Caesar.
or else by warlyke power. For the which cause Caesar in his Comment. does not
unworthily laugh and wonder at the madness of the Pompeians, which when they
had not yet fought, would yet bargayne among themselves in their tents
concerning the division of priesthoodes, dignities, patrimonies and Cesars
goods. But this distribution of the Hebrews, which was ordained by the
commandment of god, could not be frustrate. And moreover the Israelites, when
that partitio^ was made by Joshua, had obtained already many victories, and had
possession of a great deal of ye land. Besides these things this ordinance was
very profitable for this purpose, to take away from the tribes controversies
for ye limits of their land. Yea and they made war in better order, after that
every tribe knew who were their enemies that they should fight against. And
finally when as profit and rewards for labors are set forth, they do not a
little stir up men, stoutly to venture upon any danger and labor. By the same
counsel undoubtedly has Christ our savior the son of god, given us
already eternal life, although we have it presently but only begone. For we
must labor and wrestle very much before we come thither, although the fight be
not uncertain to them which put their trust in God.

There are three causes alleged, Why God destroyed not by and by all the
Chananites.
why God would not by and by destroy all the Israelites enemies out of the
land of Chanaan. The first is, because the Jews at the beginning were not so
many in number, as could inhabit all the land, So that by that means if all
the Chananites should have been destroyed, most part of the land should have
lain waste. Whereby many and sundry wild beasts (wherewith the regions in the
East abound) would maruelouslye have increased, destroyed the possessions, and
brought no small damage and destruction to the Hebrews. This reason is
alleged of God him self in Exodus. An other cause was that the Hebrews might
thoroughly learn to fight, and to be expert in wars against their enemies,
and they could not do that neither in Egypt, nor yet in the wyldernes. The
third cause was, that they might therefore fear God more and more, for they
understanding that they obtained victories and possession of the land as long
as they observed their religion, and contrarywyse, how they were oppressed with
most grievous misfortunes, troubles and miseries, when they forsook the
obedience and woorshipping of God, they might at the least by this means be
styrred up not to faint from their fathers laws and most holy ordinances of
God. I would to God the same causes, especially the two latter which are
described in the third chapter of this book might teach us, why God will have
them which are his to be subject in this life to so grievous and so many
temptacions, namely that by fyghtyng and wrastlyng we might be exercised with
fruit and profytte, calling upon God continually.

But why God chose the tribe of Judah, The praise of the tribe of Judah.
to begin the battle first against the enemies, many reasons may be
alleged. First, that tribe was very populous, of great force, valiant of
courage, warlyke, and very expert therein. Which nevertheless I speak not, as
though the election of God were moved by these gifts: yea rather in that
point the clean contrary is to be affirmed, namely that this trybe was
therefore valiant and warlyke, because God himself had destinied it to
exercise those offices. Neither is it to be doubted, The election of god
tarieth not for our gifts and virtues.
but that both valiauntnes and warlyke strength are his gifts. But that reason
which I have declared is thus to be understand, that these excellent gifts
which were freely given of God to the tribe of Judah, made it apt to begin the
battle first against the enemies. Neither had it this kind of office
committed unto it only at this present, but also afterward when they should
make war against yt Beniamites, God being asked counsel of, decreed that
marchyng forward to battle should be by the tribe of Judah, to give to it
that it might be as it were a chief captain to all the other Israelites. In
the book of Numbers for pytching the Camps, it had the chief place. Also the
kinglye power was attributed unto it by the oracle of Jacob. And as the
Hebrews write, it was the first of all the rest that passed over the red sea.
But for this it is worthy to bear away the garland, because of that tribe
Messiah should be given not only to the Jews, but also to all the world.
Neither happened these privileges and dignities to Judah by order of birth. For
it was reckoned the fourth among the sons of Jacob. Ruben in deed was first
borne, but because of his vile incest, whereby he abstayned not even from his
fathers bed, he was thrown down from his proper dignity, and in his stead as
concerning the kingdom Judah was substituted. But the dignity of birthright
was given to Joseph. Wherein Judah excelled the tribe of Ephraim.
Wherefore his first tribe called Ephraim was not only valiant and mighty, but
also was exalted to the kingdom of ten trybes: which kingdom nevertheless was
both unconstant, and also abode not always in that famyly. But the
principallity of Judah is everlasting, because it was not taken away from it
even to Christ's time, and he coming of that family, raygneth and shall raygne
for ever. All which things Jacob him self confirmed with his noble prophecye,
wherein he fore said to his children what things should happen to them in
the latter times. Wherefore it is not to be marvelled, if his Prophecies be in
some part fulfilled now. For the spirit of god does ever well agree with it
self, as it which brings those things to pass, which are agreeable to his
prophecyes.

How far the oracle given to the Israelites pertains unto us.
And that which is said here to be answered to the Israelites let us think also
to be answered unto us, that if we will be sure to obtain the victory against
the enemies of man's salvation, we must have him to be the captain of our
battle, which by the holy Prophecye of Jacob is called ye Lion of ye tribe of
Judah. If by his conductyng and name we will fight against the devil, the
flesh, the world, death and hell, our victory shall not then in any point be
doubtful but most certain. And yet would I not have the reader to think,
because I have put this allegorye in, yt therefore I will use many allegoryes in
this historye, for I will use them rarely and very seldom, Allegoryes are not
always to he disco^me^ded
not yt I would have their pleasantnes and elegancye be utterly despised. (The
old fathers certainly delited very much in them, I will not say to much. Yea
and we find them sometimes applied in the holy Scriptures. For Christ in the
gospel compared himself allegorically both to Solomon and to Jonas, and also
to the serpent which Moses at the commandment of God hong up in the
wilderness. I will not speak of Paul who writing to the Galathians,, made
Isaac and Ismaell the sons of Abraham two peoples, and pronounced Sara and
Agar to be two Testamentes, applying the Hebrews to the Mount Sina and the
Christian Church to the City of Jerusalem) but even as Allegoryes are not
utterly to be despised, Allegories must not be rashly used.
so are they not to much rashly to be used. For although it be free for every
man in this kind of interpretation, to devise what things he list, so yt he
straye not from the rules of faith and holy Scriptures, yet have we not thereby
any strong or certain arguments for the confyrmation of the doctrine of
faith. Therefore there is small profit by the labor taken in them.
Nevertheless I except those which are put in the holy Scriptures, Whither
firm arguments may be brought from Allegories.
for they are to be counted the words of the holy ghost. Wherefore their
authority is great both in proving and alleging of testimonies. But the
other, wherein the wits of men have dalied, although with Godlynes, and in a
right understanding, because they are the inventions of men, their co^clusions
and arguments are very weak. For men being the authors of them might both be
deceived, and also deceive. But this Allegorye by me brought forth, namely
that the answer of God for the appoynting of the tribe of Judah to be
captain of the wars does no less belong to us than to the Hebrews, has no
small certaynty and scarcely pertayneth to allegoryes. For whatsoever they were
that defended the people of God in the old time, Christ was their head and
captain. Wherefore whatsoever they did in defendyng of his members, they did it
as his ministers and vicars. Whereby he which religiously reuolueth their acts
in his mind, and then putting them aside, does behold the head and chief
captain, How those things agree with Christ which seem to be spoken of David
and Solomon.
by whose conducting they obtained the victoryes. He I say does not straye
from the mark, which the holy ghost had in the holy books. After this manner
those things which are red in the holy Scriptures, both of Solomon and also of
David and seem to be spoken of them in respect of the historye, are not
allegorically applied by the Apostles in the new Testamente to Christ seeing yt
the holy ghost spoke them purposedly of him. Wherefore I have not absurdely
said, that the oracle given to the Israelites should be thought to be
spoken unto us.

Behold I have given the land into his hands. God shows forth in this place
his liberal and bou^tefull goodness. He does not only give answer to yt which he
was demanded, but also adds thereunto a most notable promise. He first
appoints the tribe by name, which he will have to make war first before the
other tribes against the Chananites. Then he promised to give them the land of
the Chananites which he did to their great commoditye, for he made the Jews
more cherefull to fight, in that he said that he would help them. Moreover,
he would not have the possession of those regions ascribed unto their own
strength or power, but unto him self. Ye shall not take it (says he) but I
have delivered the land into their hands. And he uses a verb of the
preterperfect tense, whereby the certainty of his sayings should be expressed.

Of this place we may iustlye gather, We must ask counsel of God when we take
any things or affairs in hand.
that in business which we take in hand what so ever they be, God must always
be asked counsel of. And this may be proved not only by this example, but
also by infinite other which the treasures of the holy scriptures minister
unto us, to which comes a most strong reason. What so ever is not of faith
(says Paul) is sin, whereby it follows, that no man should attempt any
thing without faith. And that is no faith which leans not to the word of
God. For as the same Apostle has taught, From whence the word of God is to
be sought.
faith comes of hearing, and hearing comes by the word of God, which word
we cannot have by any other accustomed rule and ordinary way, than out of Gods
oracles which have been set forth unto us in the holy scriptures.

And it were good to mark the difference which is found between the asking
counsel of God in the old time and ours at this present. How we and the
elders do diversely ask counsel of God.
They were very much careful for the success of things, and they almost
desired always to know when they took wars in hand, or attempted any
other thing, whether they should speed well or il in them. And that was not
hard for them to do, for they had an oracle prepared of God for them for that
purpose. And God had promised that he would answer them out of the mercy seat,
what soever they should demand or ask of him. But we, if we should ask
counsel of the holy scriptures for the success and end of our enterprises and
purposes, concerning earthly infelicities and misfortunes, we should seem, and
that not unworthily, to play the fools. For there is no place there at all,
which answers any thing for our singular and private things. But that
only remains for us to enquire for, whether that which we begin or go
about, be allowed to be just, holy, and acceptable to God by the testimonies of
the holy scriptures.

But why the Jews had proper and certain oracles given them for their
matters, and we have nothing answered us particularly. Why we have not oracles
as the Jews had
I think there be no other cause, but because unto that people a certain
assured public wealth was due by the immutable counsel of God, which should
endure to the time of Christ, and therefore there were prepared for it certain
extraordinarye aids above the power of nature, whereby it should be kept and
defended by God. But unto us there is no such promise made of any certain seat
or public wealth, seeing that our church is dispersed throughout the whole
world, whereunto is no certain seat or place promised, and therefore it
needed not, that concerning human things our public wealths should be
particularly governed by certain oracles and answers for temporal things.
Besides this, the volumes of the holy scriptures are more aboundaunt in our
time, than they were at that time with the Hebrews when these things were
done which we now expound. They had but the law only, we have received now
the books of the Prophets and of wise men, unto which are added also all the
writings of the new Testament. And seeing that those writings are so many and
so excellent, it is no maruayle if we are not every day enstructed of god by
new oracles and answers. Neither ought we to think because of that, that God
sets less by us than he did by the Hebrews. I will not speak how his
spirit is given to us through Christ more abundantly and more openly, than it
was in the old time to the Jews. Finally, our public weals, dominions and
kingdoms at endewed with many more arts which serve for peace and war, than
the people of the Hebrews were. How we ought to behave our selves in asking
counsel of God.
Wherefore it is no marvel if we being heaped up with so many other gifts, be
destitute of singular oracles. It shall be our part therefore above al things,
when we have any affairs to take in hand, diligently to consider the word of
God, wherein is opened unto us his commandment or will, and afterward to
embrace the same with a firm and steadfast faith, whereby we may be
vehementlye kyndled to call upon our heavenly father, by the which we may be
able to fulfill that which he has commanded, and to obtayn that which he has
promised.

3. And Judah said unto his brother Simeon: Go up with me into my lot, that we
may fight against the Chananites, and I will also go with thee into thy lot. And
Simeon went with him.


The tribe of Judah does associate to it self the Simeonites to make war
against the Chananites, which most euidentlye testifies that the answer of God
did not speak of any one singular man, but of the whole tribe of Judah. For
neither Othoniel, Why Simeon is taken into fellowship with Judah.
nor yet Caleb had any brother which was called Simeon, and therefore there is
no mention made of them by Gods oracle, but it comprehends the whole tribe of
Judah. But the cause why Simeon is called of Judah to be as a companion of his
war, and that they two aided one an other is, because the possession of the
tribe of Simeon was mingled and scattered among the fields and countries
belonging to the tribe of Judah. Neighbourhed therefore made them to defend
and succor one the other. And this conjunction of these two tribes is most
manifestly gathered out of the.xv. chapter of the book of Joshua. It is not
against faith to use the aid of men.
Let us learn hereby, that it is not against the true faith for us to use
usual aids and man's strength, when occasion serves, to obtain the easelyer
those things which God of his goodness has liberally promised unto us. God had
promised unto the tribe of Judah, that he would give the land of Chanaan into
their hands, which although they of Judah faythfullye believed, yet were they
not afeard to call unto them the Symeonites which were their neighbors, that
they might be aided of them in their fight. For by that means they thought
they should be the stronger to overcome their enemies. Christ has no otherwise
confuted the devil, which counseled him to cast him self down head long, under
the pretense of Gods promise, wherein he said, that he had now committed his
health to the Angels, which sentence he put forth out of the holy scriptures.
But the son of God answered, that God must not be tempted, but he must rather
use stairs which were made for that purpose, to serve to come down by.
Moreover, al they are counted to tempt God, which trusting to gods promises do
neglect humane help, which are already or may be easelye prepared and gotten.
David in the latter book of Samuel sets him self forth unto us as an
example, who being wonderfullye adourned with the promises of God, used for all
that in the insurrection of Absalon, not only to fly away, but also the
diligence of Chusay the Arachite and of the Priests. Yea and Paul the Apostle
as it is written in the Acts of the Apostels, although his only confidence
was in Christ, yet he appealed unto Caesar, and made a discension between the
Pharisees and Saduces, and testified that he was a Citizen of Rome. It is
evident therefore by these manifest examples, that we must use the help of
nature and wisdom to obtain those things, which God has promised to give
us. Young men are to be exhorted to good studies
Wherefore the young men of our time are diligently to be admonished to labor
to attain unto languages, good arts and sciences, and that with great study.
Which they may (when opportunity serves) use in preaching and defending the
Gospel. For although God have promised that the preaching of his word shall be
fruitful through the benefit of his spirit: yet must every man instruct him
self in his vocation according to his hability. Neither ought men to brag
out of season (as phanatical men are accustomed to do) God according to his
promise will be with us when we shall speak. He has promised in deed, and will
surely perform, when time will not serve, or that a man can not either think
or meditate what to speak. But if liberty be given, and leisure granted to
find, dispose, and wisely to devise those things which we should speak, then
can we not be excused, but that we tempt God, when as we neglect to do these
things. Yea rather let us pluck all things unto us, what so ever they be, so
farrefoorth as godlynes permits, and occasion offers it self, to help
our labor to obtain those things which are already promised us.

Furthermore, Princes and public weals may make leagues sometimes
this conjunction of Judah with Simeon does admonish the readers, that it is
lawful in those wars which are taken in hand justly to make a league, whereby
Princes or public weals may be joined together to defend honest things,
The godly ought not to join them selves with the ungodly.
as Judah now joined fellowshyp with the Symeonites to fight against the
Chananites. But this must be taken heed of, that such conjunction and league
be joined together without fault, neither ought the godly to join them selves
in league with the ungodly. For the scripture reproves Iosaphat, who
otherwise was a godly king, for making league with wicked Achab, and other
kings are often times reprehended by the Prophets, for joining them selves in
league either with the Egiptians, or else with the Assirians. But surely this
Simeon was of the same region that Judah was, and both their endeauours tended
to this end, religiously to fulfill the will of God. I know there be some
which by the example of Asa king of Judah being well praised, defend such
leagues made with Infidels. For he being greuouslye oppressed of Basa king of
the ten Tribes, as it is written in the first book of the Kings, sent unto
Benadab king of Siria (as appears in the.xvi. chapter) a certain sum of
gold and silver, and he made a covenant with him of that condition that he
should invade the king of Israel, whereby he might be delivered from his
oppression. But they which affirm those things, should consider with them
selves two things. First, that the kingdom of the ten Tribes had now fallen
from God, and from woorshypping of him. Wherefore if an ungodly king was
styrred up against it, the same is not for all that to be conferred with those,
which confessing them selves to be Christians, do incense Tyrannes which are of
a strange religion against other Christians. Besides that, this deed of Asa
king of Judah is mentioned in the holy scriptures. But we cannot find that it
was allowed to be well done. Yea if we look upon the latter book of
Chronicles the syxtene chapter, we shall see that that king was most grievously
rebuked of God by the Prophet for such a wicked deed. For it is thus written:
At that time came Hanani the Sear to Asa king of Judah, and said unto him:
because thou haste trusted in the king of Siria, and not rather put thy trust
in the Lord thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Siria escaped out
of thine hand. Had not the Ethiopes and they of Ludim an exceadyng strong
host with many Chariotes and horsemen? And yet because thou dyddest put thy
trust in the Lord, he delivered them into thine hand. For the Lord and his
eyes behold all the earth, to strengthen them that are of perfect heart toward
him. But thou herein have done foolyshly, and therefore from hence forth thou
shall have wars. etc. For I showed before that we might without danger
discommende this example which they bring of this king, when as God does so
sharpelye chasten him by his Prophet. But we will entreat of this more largely
afterward.

4 And Judah went up, and the Lord delivered the Chananites and Pherezites
into their hands and they smote them in Bezek to the number of ten thousand
men.


The victory which the two tribes obtained over the Chananites is described,
and according to the manner of the holy Scripture, the same is set forth and
comprehended in few words, afterward the manner how the thing was done is
more amplye expounded. Now briefly is declared that they of Judah obtained the
victory and slew ten thousand of their enemies.

Why such as are overcome are said to be delivered of God into the hands of
their ouercommers.
And the Lord delivered the Chananites. The holy Scripture observes his old
order, to say that they which are overcome in battle are delivered into
their enemies hands by God, and speaks thus to adminishe us, that victory is
not the work of our own strength, but of the goodness and counsel of God.
Wherefore soldiers and emperors when they have the upper hand in battles,
they must bridle them selves from boasting and gloryeng, which Jeremy also
faithfully gives counsel to do. For he says, let not him that is mighty
glory in his own strength. Nebuchadnezar king of the Babilonians folishely
despising this, was so vexed and tossed with madness, that he was almost
changed into a dumb beast. Wherefore the administration of the kingdom was
taken away from him, and he lived in great misery of long time, who out of
doubt had not fallen into so great misfortune, if (as it was mete) he had
confessed that what soever he had gotten was given him by the providence and
counsel of God. But as Daniel mencioneth, he being puffed up with the
nobleness and dignity of his acts, most presumptuously and proudly bragged
of them: for he said, that in the strength and might of his own arm, he had
established the kingdom of Babylon.

In the books of the Ethnikes thou shalt very seldom or peradventure never
find any such kind of speech. For men which are destitute of faith, do not
ascribe those good things unto god, which they think they have attained unto
by any labor or industry. Yea and they ascribed the chances of war not to
come by the favor of God, but by strength and pollicye, and sometimes by
fortune. Wherefore Cicero in his book of divination affirms that the victory
of the Decianes which they got by vowing of them selves to the people of
Rome, Cicero. How Cicero interprets the vowing of the Decianes.
was an excellent and polliticque devise of war. So far is he from
attributing it to the providence of the gods. They knew (says he) that ye
strength and force of the Romayne people was such that if they saw their
captains either to be in extreme dangers, or else to be slain, or to be taken
of their enemies, that they would by no means suffer such dishonor, and
thincking with the^ selves by that means to stay the flight, they thrust them
selves into the thickest of their enemies, setting before them the show of
their vow and religion. So that by that means the hearts of the soldiers in
manner discouraged might be called again more fiersly to fight with their
enemies.

But we are taught by the holy Scriptures, that when we either see or hear of
any that are conquerours, or else are slain in battles, we must by and by
ascribe unto God all that which is, or has been done, who (after the most
accustomed phrase of the holy Scriptures) is said to deliver them which are
overcome into the hands of their enemies. God without any injury delivers
some in to the hands of their enemies. The Chananites were defiled with most
detestable wicked deeds.


When it is said that any are delivered of God into the hands of their enemies
we must think that that is done without any iniurye. And as touching this
place we know that those nations of the Chananites were full of most heinous
wickedness, and for that cause, god punished them most justly. Which cause is
confirmed by that which we read in the book of Genesis, where God brings a
reason, why he held the posterity of Abraham so long time in Egypt, namely
because the sins of ye Chananites were not yet full. God punishes the
ungodly with two kinds of punishments.
And this is not to be forgotten, that God uses according to his justice to
deliver sinners to be punished two manner of ways, or to two sorts of
enemies. For sometimes he does this in giving them over to be vexed with lusts
and filthy affections as to certain furyes of hell. Augustine. God punishes
sins with sins.
And that is it which Augustine oftentimes says yt sins are punished with
sins. So Pharao his unfaithfulness and cruelty was punished by hardening and
stubbornness of heart. And Idolaters as Paul teaches to the Romans: were
given over of god to their own filthy lust, so that they most vylie contamined
the^ selves with most horrible sins. But because this kind of punishment is
not seen nor felt of mad men, as it is mete, god therefore delivers the
ungodly, into the hands of strange enemies, to be vexed, and at the length
utterly to be destroyed. And that this order was observed with the Chananites,
the Scripture manifestly teaches, for they were not only addicted to Idols,
but as it is written in the xviii. and xx. chap. of Leuit: They miserably
defiled them selves with incestes and most filthy lusts. They were first
therefore delivered of God into a reprobate sense, and then were they delivered
to their enemies the Hebrews, of who^ they were spoiled both of their life, and
also of their most rich kingdom.

God delivered them into their hands. That is, into their power. This is not
only an Hebrew phrase, but also a latin: for we say, This is my hand, that
is, it lies in my power.

And they smote them in Bezek to the number of ten thousand men. To smite is
here, to kill. And seeing that the host of the Chananites was great and there
were now slain of it but only ten thousand men, we must think that the
rest fled away, in which flight as afterward shall be declared Adonibezek was
taken. But where as these two words Chananites and Pherezites are joined
together in this place. They are thus to be taken, that if thou understand the
Chananites after the common signification, wherein were comprehended those 7. or
9. nations, then this name Pherezites should be added because of
interpretation, that by it might be expounded that which before was not
expressed in the word Chananites. But if by this word Chananites we shall
understand any one especial or peculiar people of those nations, then must we
say that that host was gathered of both the peoples, of the Chananites I say
and the Pherezites.

5 And they found Adonibezek in Bezek, and they fought against him and slew
the Chananites and Pherezites.

6 And Adonibezek fled, and they followed after him and caught him and cut of
the thombes of his hands and of his feet.

7 And Adonibezek said: 70 kings having the thombes of their hands and feet
cut of, gathered their meat under my table: As I have done, so God has done to
me again: and they brought him to Jerusalem, and there he died, etc.


After mention made of the victory it is here more expressed by parts, for
the place of the battle is expressed namely Bezek: Bezek.
but where this Bezek should lie it is not very certain. For there was a
certain Bezek which was a city belonging to the tribe of Manasses which was
situate 17. mile from Sichem as ye go to Bethsan. Jerome.
And Jerome testifies that in his time there were two Towns which were called
by this name. And it is not very likely that Judah and Symeon would pass with
their host to the tribe of Manasses, when their purpose was only to rid the
Chananites out of their own lottes. Unless peradventure, that king which was
called Adonibezek although his kingdom were in the tribe of Manasse claymed
and usurped by violent tyranny many places in the inheritance of Judah and
Simeon. This king had prepared an host to go against Judah and Simeon, and to
let them from recovering of their own. Which thing being known, Judah and
Symeon made toward him, that he should not enter into their borders. Wherefore
it chanced yt they fought with him not far from his kingly city Bezek, or
else it is to be thought that this Bezek was a certain city either in the tribe
of Judah or else of Simeon, whereof is no mention made in any other place.

Malchisedech Adonisedech.
This king was called Adoni-bezek which is a compounde name, wherein ye leter
Iod is placed between two words as Malchi-sedech, Adoni-sedech, eue^ as R.
Selomo testifies. This king seems to have fled, for that he saw his host
both slain to the number of ten thousand men, and to turn their backs and
fly, he would therefore save him self by flight, but he was brought back
again by the Israelites and suffered most grievous punishment, as he had
justly deserved. Bohan. Behonoth.
For they cut of the thombes both of his hands and of his feet. This word
Bohan signifies in the Hebrew a thombe, and it is in the feminine gender,
wherefore it is said in the plural number Behonoth. Although R. David Kimhi do
interpret that word into fyngers, and the Chaldey paraphrast does interpret
it anckles.

And Adoni-bezek said: 70 kings. This tyranne acknowledges the judgment of
God, but whether he spoke this of true faith or pure repentance, it can not be
known by the words of our history. But it is most lykely, because he called
not upon God, implored not his mercy, neither showed any tokens of true
conversion, The law of re^dring like for like.
that rather anguish did extorte from him this his true saying, than the godly
feling of the mind. We gather hereby that the law of rendering like for like
seems even to the wicked by the light of nature, just and right, which at the
length will they or nill they are compelled to acknowledge the judgments of
God. For they have certain principles of that which is right and honest written
in their hearts, although they express, not the same in deeds. But even as
Paul has written to the Romans they hold the truth of God after a certain
sort captive in unrighteousness, and when they knew the righteousness of
God, neither was it hidden from them, that they which do such things are
worthy of death, yet for all that they not only do them, but also they consent
to them which do them.

As I have done, so God has done to me again. Because he spoke of gods
judgments, therefore in naming of god he used not this word Jehovah but
Elohim. The name Jehovah and the name Elohim.
By which word the scripture uses rather to set forth the might and justice
of god, than his mercy. This most cruel tyranne confesses, that he had most
cruelly cut of the feet of 70. kings, and brought them to that point, ye
they were feign to gather their meat under his table. It is not to be laughed
or hissed at as a lie, because in that province being not very large were 70.
kings. Every city in the old time had their king.
For it may be that at that time that custom was in use, that every city had
his king. Neither ought the government of a king to be separated from other
forms of gouernmentes by largeness or breadth of borders, but in what society
or multitude of men soever it be, Definition of a king. Iustine.
where as any one man is lawfully made governor, so that he depend not of any
other superior power, the same man may by good right be called king, yea and
as Justinius writes, every king before Ninus time was content with the bounds
and limits of his own city. And such a custom if I should speak the troth
I can not but greatly commend. It is not profitable to have large kingdoms.


For what shall it profit kings most amplye to dilate the territory of their
empire, when as afterward they are overwhelmed with over much weight thereof,
neither are they able to govern it by reason and counsel. But what should man
do? The Monarchs in these days are so set on fire with such great ambition,
that they have not a respect how many they are able to govern, but only have
a regard to this, how many they may reign over. Neither does this disease
(which is the more to be lamented) reign only in worldly princes, The
Bishops seek to have large diocesses
but it is also most filthyly spread abroad in the Church where Bishops
covet by all means to have most large diocesses, of which (although they
never look to them) they may receive most plentiful fruits.

But now I return to the matter and ask the cause why the Israelites did cut
of the thombes of the hands and feet of Adonibezek. Wherefore Adonibezeb was
so maimed of the Hebrews.
R. Leui answers to this interrogation, and says that it was therefore done,
that the cruel Tirant might be made altogether unapt to do any thing, and
especially to make war. For they which are so inaymed are neither able to
draw sword, neither to take or overcome any man in battaille. Moreover by
this so sharp punishment other princes which were yet remaining might easily
be made affeard to lift any weapon against the Israelites. These things are
somewhat lykely, but the words of the same tyranne teach us that we must
consider some deeper cause, namely that it was so done by the providence of
god, that cruel and bloody princes should not at the length escape the
judgment of God, yea rather they should have experience on them selves of that
which they had committed against others. And in that thing because it is good
sometimes to be taught by the example of wicked men, God would now also
admonish us by this Adonibezek. He teaches us that we should not much stay
in inferior causes which are next unto us, We must not stay in the inferior
causes but rather consider the highest causes.
but rather by these examples straight ways to lift up the eyes of the mind
to consider the wonderful and most high justice of the decrees of God. The
self same most cruel tyranne does not ascribe unto the Israelites that they
had feabled him by cutting of his hands and feet, but by and by says. As I
have done to other, so God has done to me again. Which same thing also Christ
has taught us, for this also was his sentence, With what measure ye meat,
with the same shall other meat unto you.

Of this law of rendering like for like, let the cruel tyrannes of our time be
affeard, which never make an end of killing, tearing, and burning of holy and
innocent me^, as though wisdom never admonished them: By what soever a man
sins, by the same also is he punished. Neither have they at any time heard
Habakuc the holy prophet cryeng thus. Why tyrannes do so cruelly rage?
Because thou have spoiled many nations, others also shall spoil thee. Those
be bloody tyrannes, when they do so extremely rage, being altogether unmindful
of humane chances, never thincking how the same things may happen unto them
selves, wherewith they do so cruelly afflicte others. For if they would remember
this, they would use them selves more mekely not only toward innocent men, but
also eue^ to them which are guilty and justly condemned by them. Let us learn
in all things which shall happen, what soever they be, to consider as well the
judgments of god as also his goodness, and thereby we shall get good matter
either of repentance, or else of thanks giving.

But there is a doubt, why the Israelites killed not this king by and by, Why
Adonibezek was not by and by slain of the Jews.
and why they brought him to Jerusalem, there to die miserably? I answer, to
testify unto all men, that he being wounded was not gloriously killed in the
battaille, for his horrible tyranny deserved not so famous an end of this life.
Neither is it to be meruealed that when he came to Jerusalem he was not helped
by the diligence and remedies of Physicians: for the Jews did it not of
cruelty, but because they were affeard to violate the commandment of god, who
commanded that all their enemies the Chananites should be slain every one,
amongst whom this Adonibezek deserved not one death but a thousand: besides
that, it was done that his most shameful end might be an example to al me^. He
worthily therefore being maimed and despised, departed this life in a most
famous city. But it seems to be demanded, for what cause when he had so
vilye maimed 70. kings he would also have them under his table to gather their
meat there? He did it surely to the setting forth of his victories, and also
when he should eat meat, he would not only refreshe his body with meat and
drink, but he would also rejoice his haulty and proud mind after a certain
horrible sort, he thought to him self that he had the fruition of no vulgar
pleasure, when as in his daily banckets he renewed after a sort by that
terrible sight the victoryes which he had hitherto gotten. Sapor King of the
Persians.
We read of the like example of one Sapor king of the Persians, who when he had
taken in war Valerian the Emperor of the Romans and father of Galien he
bound him with an Iron chain and drew him with him, and set his feet upon his
back, as often as he would get up upon his horse. Tamerlanes also king of the
Scythians, Tamerlanes.
carried about with him a tyranne of the Turckes taken by him and enclosed in an
Iron cage. Tirannes are infected with boasting and cruelty.
By these and such like examples we se that the minds of cruel tyrannes are
wonderfully sick of the diseases of vain glory and cruelty.

And hereby we gather that to much cruelty does greatly displease god: and
thereof I think it came to pass that as well by gods laws as by ma^s (I
speak but of those which are counted just and honest) certain punishme^tes
were prescribed for crimes according to the grieuousnesse of the^, whereby
judges had ye less liberty given them to exercise tyranny. Punishments are
rather to be diminished tha^ augmented.
Yea and the lawyers added this rule, that punishments should rather be
diminished by judges tha^ augmented: which is for all yt to be understand, as
much as the nature of the fault and commodity of the publicque wealth
suffers, which I therefore speak, because some times those conditions which
commonly they call circu^staunces, make the crime so terrible and horrible, yt
the judges must needs there augment the punishments which have been prescribed
by the laws, and that to the intent to fear away others from so grievous
mischievous deeds, and so David when Natha^ the prophet declared unto him an
execrable and horrible thing, he decreed a more grievous punishment against him
that was guilty, than the law had ordained for common thieues and stealers of
cattle. Three kinds of death in the law of God.
I have therefore made mencio^ of these, because there were in ye law three
kinds of death appointed for evil doers, I mean, hanging, stoning, and
burning, unto which some Hebrews add the fourth, namely the punishment of the
sword: but because there is no mention made thereof in the law (as far as I
know) I have therefore left it out. We read that Adonias, Ioab and Agab king of
Amalech and many other were thrust thorough with swords, But we find it not
prescribed by any law or precept that the guilty should be put to death by
the sword. Seeing I say the matter is so, The Hebrews used an extraordinary
punishment in their tents.
we se that the children of Israel used now in their tents a certain
extraordinary kind of punishment against the king Adonibezek. And I believe
they did it not without the instinction of god. For god would punish the cruelty
of this tyranne with an exquisite punishment, which was nevertheless of rendering
like for like, which kind of wicked doing to the intent we may the caselyer
avoid, it shall not be grievous unto us to speak somewhat of it.

From whence this word cruelty is derived.
This word cruelty is derived either of this latin word Cruor, which signifies
blood, wherein cruel me^ like wild beasts do delight, either of Crudae earnes
which signifies raw flesh, which fierce and barbarous people sometimes do
eat, and may be defined to be a vicious habit whereby we are inclined to
sharp and hard things above reason. The definition of crueltye.
And sometimes it happens ye cruelty is counted for a pleasure, with which
wicked affection or habit how tyra^nes have sometimes ben infected, it is
manifestly to be seen by many examples. This holy history sets now before
our eyes this Adonibezek, and the eua^gelicall history makes me^cio^ of
Herod. The Ethnike poets have made report of the cruelty of Atreus and
Thyestes: and the most horrible wicked act of Xerxes king of the Persians is
set forth by Seneca in his third book de ira, and.xvii. The cruelty of Xerxes.
chap. which Xerxes when a certain man named Pithius, who had well deserved at
his hands, came unto him and desired him to spare him one of his five sons
which he had, and he bad him as though he would grant him his request, to
chose him whom he lysted to abide at home from battle. And he did as he was
bidden. But this most cruel tyranne commanded that the young man whom he had
chosen should be drawn one side of him one way, and an other the other way,
so that at the length he was torn a sunder, of the which one part he
commanded to be fastened in one corner of the way, by the which the soldiers
should go, and the other in an other corner, saying that after this sort he
purged his host. But not long after he was with much dishonor overcome and
beaten of the Grecians, and constrained to fly through heaps and dead
carcases of his own men. Silla.
Silla banished an infinite number of Citizens of Rome, but at the length he
was most horribly eaten up of Life. Even after the like sort dyed that most
cruel Herod, as it is manifestly declared by Josephus. Unto this most wicked
vice, cleme^cy is directly contrary, which as a wonderful virtue does
maruailously well agree with princes, and is a singular orname^t of Christian men.
Augustine in his book of.83. Augustine. What clemencye is. Certain foolish
mercy.
Quest. in ye Quest. 31. defines it thus. It is an habit whereby men styrred
up to hatred against any man, are through goodness kept back. This virtue is a
mean between cruelty and foolish mercy. I call it foolish mercy, by which our
mind is so moved with other men's miseries, that it declineth from sound
counsel and just reason. And we are overcome with this affection for this
cause, by reason we would never suffer such things wherewith we see others
afflicted justly and worthily, and because we our selves abhor from such
things, we therefore leave of from punishing ye guilty. Mercy is a profitable
affection
Mercy in deed is an affection profitably planted in our hearts of God, whereby
we are styrred up to help and defend others. But we must take heed, that by
it we be not made so soft and effeminate, whereby we should commit any thing
against the commandments and will of God. Preposterous mercy is condemned in
holy letters.
The holy scriptures reprehend Achab king of Samaria, because he spared Benadad
king of Siria. Of whom he said: if he be on live, he is my brother. They
condemn Saul also by the voice of Samuel the prophet, because he saved Agag
king of Amaleck o^ live. And even as it was said unto an other by the messenger
of God: Whether syns are to be pardoned. Seneca.
Thy soul shall be for his soul, so Saul being a little before placed by God in
the kingdom, was deprived thereof. What shall we do then? Shall we not forgive
sins? Seneca in his second book of clemency and.6. chap. writes: Pardon
(says he) is a remission of punishment due, by which he is forgeuen which
ought to have been punished. Wherefore he thincketh it is not a wise man's part
to give pardon, because a wise man will never commit any thing which ought not
to be done, or leave any thing undone which ought to be done. This reason of
his seems to be very good and effectual enough. But least we should be
deceived thereby, we must here set a profitable distinction of persons, that is
of God, of princes, God may forgive sins.
and of private men. No man ought to doubt, but that god may forgive whom he
will, when as he is not bound to any other man's laws. Wherefore in forgeuyng he
is not said to remit that which he ought to have punished. Besides this, he
has not so forgeuen men their faults, A Magistrate ought not to suffer
faults unpunished.
but that he has punished them in his only begotten son Christ. But we must
otherwise think of the Magistrate, to who^ it is not lawful to forgive the
punishments of sins, because he is commanded to give judgment by the
laws. To whom nevertheless it is granted either to release or to aggrauate
the punishments according to the wayght and quantity of the crimes. Wherefore
when he that is guilty is not without hope of ame^dement, neither has geuously
offended, the magistrate is contented with an easier punishment, and sometimes he
adds some reprofe or some sharper admoniti^. Wherefore let him never leave
sins unpunished, and the same man in punishing is not cruel, yea he rather
corrects, ame^deth, and heals. Which work is both just and also most
mild, so far is it that it should be ascribed to fiercenes or cruelty. Seneca.
Many executions ar a dishonor to the magistrate. How private men should
forgive injuries.
I will also add this by the way which is written of the same Seneca, that to
have many executions is no less dishonor to the Magistrates, than many corpse
are to the Physicians. But now concerning private men, me thinks it must be
answered thus: It is their duty to forgive injuries don to them selves, neither
can Seneca his saying take place in them, namely that a wise man will leave
nothing undone that ought to be done, because reuengement is forbidden them by
the law of almighty God. And they are commanded after a sort to punish such
as sin against them, in admonishing (I mean) and reproving them. And they
are wylled to be content with that punishment when those which have offended
them are amended and made whole. But co^trarily if they perceive that they be
stubborn, they by the commandment of God ought to complain to the church, by
whom at the last they are excluded, unless they will be obedient to it. And
when they are excluded out of the church, they may also be accused to the
Magistrate. In which thing yet is nothing committed against clemency, because
this is the mind and purpose of them which accuse, namely utterly to take
away evil according to Gods commandment by all means possible. And these
things are now sufficient concerning cruelty and also clemency.

They which work of faith obtain the promises.
Because Judah and Simeon obtained the victory according to the promyses of the
oracle, it shall be our part diligently to consider and mark, that they which
work with faith by the word of God do without doubt obtain his promises. For
God has not left those destitute of his aid, which have endeavored them
selves to go forward faithfully in their vocation. The promises of God surely
are constant, and although heaven and earth should at any time vary or be
changed, yet shall they always be firm. And therefore when as man is
pronounced to be a liar, God contrary wise must be confessed and celebrated as
most true. Neither is there any thing found so hard or difficult, but that by
faith it may be performed. Wherefore it is very well written in the.xi. chap.
to the Hebrews, that the saints by faith have overcome kingdoms, and
obtained the victory. That sentence certainly has a principal respect unto
these histories of the Judges. This ought to be so manifest and plain unto us,
that for the obtaynyng of the promises of God, We attayn not to the promises of
God by merits.
we ought to attribute nothing to our own works and merits. Yea, let us
rather be assured, that what so ever happens unto us, that the same comes
only of the goodness of God, which promised the same. Our endeavor also and
labor are required thereunto by the scriptures, as we see here also to be done,
where the victory is given to Judah and Simeon when they fought, and not when
they ceased. Not because God could not have given them the victory over their
enemies, although they had done nothing, as sometimes he did: but he has
decreed, to bring us by the cross and labors after his accustomed manner, to
the rewards which he freely promised. Neither yet for all that, that our
studies and labors are required as causes to obtain the promyses, when as God
does give unto us freely, and of his own mere liberality those things which he
has promised us. This is principallye true in those promises, which do wholly
pass man's capacity, as are eternal life, and regeneration. For they being the
chief and last ends of our vocations, do far and much pass the dignitye
and price of our works, Promises of the Gospel and of the law.
though they be most perfect. And there is a certain profitable and necessary
distinction, which is not to be forgotten, namelye that some promyses are of
the law, and other some of the Gospel. And this is the nature of promises of
ye Gospel to be offered utterly freely to men. But to promises of the law some
work is ever anexed. And ye is required to be most perfect and absolute in all
points. Which because we can not perform, (...) altogether fall down under our
burden, neither can we attain to these pro^^ses of the law in respect they
are of the law. Promises of the law are not vain.
Thou will say the^ that this kin^ of promises of the law is vain? Not so, how
is it ye they be not given in va^ if none can attain unto the^? They are to
this end set forth, ye me^ utterly leau^ the confidence of works, should hope
to obtain the^ by faith in Christ: Which when it is done, they are changed
from promises of the law into promises of (...) Gospel. And although they be
freely granted, In euangelical promises although they be freely given yet must
we work as though they were legal.
yet in atteining unto the^ we (...) our endeavor and study no less than if
they were promises of the law. But yet (...) touching those good things which
endure but for a time and pass not man strength and labor and the rewards of
them are temporal it is not to be deny but yt our works are much auayleable.
For it is said that they are oftentim^ gotten by them. Although also in
obtaining them ye favor of god is nedeful th^^ unto, which is aboundauntly
bestowed on the^ which work by ye word of God by faith. Which thing is
manifestly seen of ye readers of this history: for it decireth that god
granted ye victory to a few Jews being strangers and you^ soldiers,
against strong and warlike men, many more in number than they, of monstrous
stature, and inhabiting most strong fenced cities and castles.

8 And the children of Judah fought against Jerusalem and took it and smote it
with the edge of the sword and set the city on fire.

9 Afterward the children of Judah descended to fight against the Chananites,
that dwelte in the mountain, and in the south and in the low country.

10 And Judah went against the Chananites, that dwelt in Hebro^ (and the name
of Hebron before was Kiriath Arba) and they smote Sesay Ahimman and Thalmay.

11 And from thence they went to the inhabiters of Debir (and the name of Debir
before was Kiriath Sepher.)


The things which are now red unto the xvii. A brief rehearsal of things in
the book of Joshua
verse are most part transferred hither out of the book of Joshua the.xv. chap,
and are now declared by a certain brief rehearsal of things, and it is done
to this end, that we might understand that ye tribe of Judah had obtained
Jerusalem when Joshua was yet living so that it was the easier for him to lead
away Adonibezek captive thither. And these be the things which are repeated in
this place out of the book of Joshua. The conquering of Jerusalem, Hebron, and
Debir, the matrimony also between Achsa and Othoniel and ye departure of the
Kenites from the city of Palms. That al these things (I say) are now declared
by a certain repetition, it is thereby manifest, because it is written in the
book of Joshua, that the king of Jerusalem was taken, and we read in the end of
the xv. chap. that the same city of Jerusalem came into the hands of the
people of God, and that the children of Judah dwelt in it with the Iebusites.
Besides that these things which are now rehearsed of Hebron are contained in
the.x.xi. and about the end of the xiiii. chap. in the book of Joshua. And ye
historye of Achse and Othoniell is red in the xv. chap. of the same book. How
far this parenthesis extends.
This repetition therefore or parentheses extends to these words: And Judah
wet with his brother Simeon, etc. In which place ye author returns to make
mention of the acts which the tribes of Judah and Simeon joined together did
at this time perform. Which thing also by this appears the more manifest,
because strayghtway is declared how Gasa was taken, which city is said in the
xi and xiii. chap. of Joshua to have yet remained in ye hands of the enemies,
The per^erfect tence is expounded by the preterplusperfecte tence.
and is numbered among those cities which were not conquered under Joshua.
Wherefore the words of the preterperfect tense which are red in this repetition
are to be interpreted in that time past, which we call the preterplus perfect
tense, that the order of the historye might be made more plain and manifest.

They smote them with the mouth of the sword. This is a Metaphor in this manner
of speech, very often times used in ye holy scriptures, wherein by ye mouth of
the sword we ought to understand the edge thereof, because it seems to devour
and consume those things which are smytten, in manner like a mouth. And where it
is said that They set the city of fire, we must understand it by this figure
Hypallege, when the thing is clean contrary, for fire is thrown into the
city, and not the city into the fire. Neither ought this to be understand thus,
as though they had then burned the whole city. For it is written in the book
of Joshua, and afterward it shall be expounded in this book, that that city was
after that inhabited by the tribe of Judah and Benjamin, and also the
Iebusites, yea and the castle thereof which was very well fensed was not
delivered up to the Israelites, The city of Jerusalem was taken when Joshua was
yet a live.
till in David his time, as it is declared in the latter book of Samuel.
Neither ought that to move you because it appears not in the book of Joshua
that the city of Jerusalem was taken. For although this be not plainly and
manifestly spoken, yet may it be understand by those things which are there
entreated of, namely that the king of Jerusalem was taken, and that Judah
dwelled in that city, neither could he yet cast out the Iebusites from them. Al
these things I say are signs that the city was taken at that time, although
it was not yet possessed fully and in all parts.

It seems also somewhat obscure, that it is written that Judah descended,
when he should go fight against the Chananites, who dwelled on ye mountains.
When as we accustom in going to mountains to ascend, and not to descend. But
we must understand that those countries were full of mountains. Wherefore when
the host removed from one mountain to an other, it must needs descend first
into the valley, from whence it might afterward ascend upon an other mountain.
Thou wylt peradventure ask whether Judah at that time conquered the plain or
the valley which was between? No verily. He assaulted them in deed, but he
could not overcome them. For we shall hear in this chap. that those which were
not overcome of Judah in the valley, had iron Chariotes, so that by that means
they were not overcome.

And Judah went against the Chananites, that dwelt in Hebron. These thnges are
now therefore repeated, that we should understand that it was not of necessity
that the city Hebron should be taken of Judah then when the Israelites were in
this journey on warfare, which they took in hand after the death of Joshua,
namelye at that time, wherein the public wealth was governed by elders
without any certain Judge, Joshua being yet alive.

Why Hebron was called the city Arba.
And the name of Hebron before time was called Kiriath-Arba, and they smote
Sesay, Ahimman, and Thalmay. The reason of the name of this city is not of
every man taken a like. The cause of the diversity is this word Arba which in
his usual and proper signification signifeth the number which the Latins call
Quatuor, It is not certain that Adam and his wife were buried in Hebron.
and the Grecians (...) which is four. Now some suppose the number of four to
be referred to the four couple of men with their wives, which they say were
buried in that city. Yet the holy scriptures make mention but of three: for in
the book of Genesis and.23. chap. we read that Abraham and Sara were buried
there, and also in the.35. and.49. chap. of the same book we read of Isaac and
Rebeckaes burial there. And lastly in the.50. chap. we find that Jacob was
carried thither, and he him self before that had there buried his wife Lea. But
concerning Adam and Eve his wife, who^ they have added unto these, we can find
nothing thereof in the holy scriptures. For that which they allege out of
the.14. chap. of Joshua makes nothing to the purpose, for yt the word Adam in
that place is not the name of the first man. Wherefore they can gather nothing
out of that place, but that Arba was a certain great man among the Anakims.
These are the words there: Ha Adam Hagadol be Anakim Hui, that is: he was a
great man among ye Enakims. But our interpretour translateth it thus: Ada^ was
counted the great among the Enakims. Whereby it appears yt he thought that
Adam was a proper name. But he was two ways deceived: first he did not mark
that the article Ha is joined to the word Adam, which is never joined with
proper names. Wherefore it must needs be a common name, which must be referred
to that word Arba, for that name was put a little before. The other error is
because we read no where that the first man was reckoned amongst the Enakims,
that is to say Giauntes.

The opinion of others is that Hebron was called the City Arba, because it was
inhabited of.4. Giauntes, namely Sesay, Ahimman, and Thalmay unto which three
brethren they add Annak their Parent. But the opinion of these men is easily
confuted, because that in the.14. chap. of Joshua toward the end, it is by
manifest words declared that this word Arba is the proper name of a Giaunt.
Wherefore it is manifest enough that this word must not be referred to the
number of four. And by that means not only this latter sentence, but the
first also is confuted, which would have this name Arba to have a respect to
the four couple of men with their wives, buried in the old time in that City.
And undoubtedly for the same cause also, the opinion of others is not to be
allowed, which do think that the City was so called, because although it were
but one City, yet it consisted of four Cities, and that this word Arba is all
one with this greek word (...) which is four Cities. Wherefore I judge it
best to thyncke that it was so named of the buylder thereof named Arba, Arba
had three children.
who how he came by that surname it is uncertain. Only this we may gather
out of the scriptures, that what so ever he was, he had three children which
are called in this place and also in the book of Joshua, Sehai, Ahimman and
Thalmay. And it is very lykely that they were dead long time before Joshua. And
when they were now dead, then was there mention made of them, because their
families which seem to have been of a wonderful huge stature were destroyed by
Caleb and Othoniel. And this is the reason why I suppose that these three
brethren lived not in Caleb and Othoniels time, because this City as it is
written in the book of Numbers, was a most ancient city, and was buylt.vii.
years before zoham that is, Thamin the kingly City of the Egiptians. And in
zoham did Moses and Aaron work the wonders before Pharao. And if so be it
was the kingly and noble city then, it must needs be built long time before.
Wherefore if Hebron were built before it, and had the name thereof of Arba, how
could his children be on live at this time? It cannot be so. Besides this,
Abraham had a lodging in this City, and bought there a double cave. And from
that time to Joshua his time were almost.400. years. It is not therefore very
likely, that the sons of him which builded so ancient a city should live till
Joshua his time, unless any man will feign that the same city was built long time
before, and called by an other name, and then in process of time casting away
the first name, it should be named by this most strong and mighty Giaunt. But
whether it be thus or no, neither skilleth it much, neither seems it curiously
to be sought for.

But this might somewhat move some, because Arba, whereof we now speak, is
called in the.15. chap. of Joshua, the father of Enak. For if he had.3. sons
which were named as well here as in the same book of Joshua, it will then he
doubtful who that same Enak was. What Hanack signifies.
In which thing (saving the judgment of a better learned) I would think might
be answered, that it was not a proper name but a common, whereby at that time
men of huge stature, but such as were noble and excellently adourned, were
called. For this word Enak in hebrewe is to gird or to compass, and is chiefly
referred to chains which are worn about the neck for comelynes sake. And
thereof is this name Enak derived, and in the plural number has both the
masculine and feminine form, and it signifies a chain, and is transferred to
noble and worthy men, whom thou may call chained. Wherefore Sesay, Ahimman and
Thalmay may be called the sons of Arba, who was not called the father of them
only, but also the father of Enak, because every one of his sons was noble,
Why giauntes were called Enakim
and wore a chain, or was a Giaunt, for Giauntes also were called Enakim,
either because they wore chains, or else because they were of a notable stature
of body, for it may be that that word was applied to all kind of ornaments. Of
them is mention also made in the book of Numbers.13. chapter.

By how many names giau^tes are called in the holy scriptures
Seeing we are now by chance in hand with giauntes, and that there is often
mention made of them in the holy Scriptures, it shall not be unprofitable,
somewhat to speak of them. First we must know that they are called by
diverse names in the holy Scriptures as Enakim, Eimim, Zemasmim, Nefalim,
Rephaim. Why they were called Enakim manifestly appears by those things which
we have spoken before. And they were called Eimim, of the terror which they
drove into others by their look, They were called Zemasmim, of mischief,
because they trusting to their own power and might, were dispisers of laws,
justice, and honesty, and ever went about wicked acts. For Zemah in Hebrew
signifies mischief. They were also named Rephaim. Because they made men which
met them to be after a sort amassed, for that word signifies sometimes the
dead. Lastly they were called Nefalim as oppressors, because they assailed al
men tyrannously, of this word Nafal which is to fall or subuerte. Some think
that they are sometimes called Geborim: but because we use to refer ye word
to power, and properly strong men are called Geborim, therefore I would not put
it among these.

When glau^tes began. Augustine.
Furthermore if thou will demand when giauntes began to be, if we may
follow Augustine de ciuitate Dei, the.xvi. book and xxiii. chapter. We must say
that they began before the floude. And therefore we believe him, because he
has proved it by the testimonye of the holy Scriptures: for it is written in
the vi of Genesis that giauntes were at that time on the earth: whose kind
although it was kept after the floude, yet as he believes they were not in so
great number. Whether Giauntes were begotten of me^
Besides this it may be doubted concerning their procreation and parents: for
there are some which think that they were not begotten of men, but that
Angels or devils were their parents. And this sentence they say is confirmed
by that which is written in the book of Genesis. The sons of God seeing the
daughters of men that they were fair, they took them to wives, and of them
were borne most mighty men or giauntes. Concerning this fall of the Angels
many of the old writers agree that it was because they used company with women,
and among other is Lactantius in his second book and xv Chapter. For his
opinion was (as it is there written) that God feared least Satan to whom he
had granted the government of the world should utterly have destroyed
mankind, Lactantius.
and therefore he gave unto it Angels for tutors by whose industrye and care it
might be defended. But they being provoked as well by the wiliness of Satan,
as also allured by the beauty of fair women, committed filthiness with them.
Wherefore they were thrown down from their dignity and made soldiers of the
devil. This was Lactantius opinion, but yet he says not, that Giauntes were
borne of those copulations of Angels with women but earthly devils which abide
on the earth to our great hurt. Eusebius of Cesaria
Eusebius of Cesaria in his.v book de preparatione euangelica, does nothing in
a manner disagree from them. For he also says that Angels which fell, begat of
women whom they filthilye loved those devils, which afterward troubled the
world many ways, and to the^ he refers al these which the Poets and
historiographers have written to have been Gods, and have either in Meter or in
Prose made mention of their battles discordes, lusts, and sundry and
grievous tumultes, Augustine.
But Augustine in his xv book de ciuitate Dei. xxiii. Chap. thinks that this
opinion of these old men can not be gathered out of that place of Genesis. Men
of the stock of Seth were called the sons of God.
For he says that those which are there called ye sons of god, were in very
deed men, namely coming of ye stock of Seth. For when they worshipped god
truly and sincerely, and called upon him holily and purely, being adorned with
his favor and grace, they are called by ye scriptures ye sons of God. What
was the fall of the sons of God.
But when at ye length they began to burn in filthy lust with those women
which came of the stock of Cain, and by that means fell into fellowship with
the ungodly, taking them to their wives and cleaving also to superstitions and
wicked worshippings, they were changed from ye sons of God not only into
men, but also into flesh. And this will I say by the way, Aquila.
Aquila translating these words out of Hebrew, They were not (says he) ye
sons of God, but the sons of Gods: for this cause so called (as I suppose)
because their progenitors were holy men, Simmachus.
but their children miserably fell from god and godliness by inordinate love of
women. And Symmachus translateth it, The sons of the mighty. But now to
Augustine again, he constantly affirms that there can be nothing gathered
out of that place of Genesis concerning the carnal copulation of Angels with
women, but thinks rather, that far contrary may be proved by the words of
God written in the same place. For when the scripture had there said, that
there were Giaunts on the earth, and that the sons of God (as it is said)
were gone out of the right way, and Giaunts were brought forth, there is added:
And god said, my spirit shall not abide in man for ever, because he is flesh.
By this sentence he declares, that those which so sinned were called men, and
not only as they were by nature, but also they were called flesh, whereunto by
their filthy lust, they did to much cleave. But they which be of ye contrary
opinion do think that they do bring a strong witness of Enoch which was the
vii. from Adam, of whom Judas makes mention in his canonical Epistle. Enochs
book Augustine.
For in the book which is entitled to be Enochs book it is written that
giauntes had their of springs of Angels and not of me^. But Augustine answers
unto this, and says that that book is altogether Apocripha, and therefore
such fables as are rehearsed in it, are not to be believed. It is not to be
doubted he says but that Enoch wrote some godly things, when as Judas the
Apostle manifestly testifies the same: But it is not necessary that we should
believe that all things which are written in that Apocriphal book should be
of his writing, Forasmuch as they have no sure authority. Neither, although
Judas brought thence some one certain sentence, is it supposed that therefore
he by his authority has allowed the whole book: Unless thou will say that
Paul allowed all the things which were written by Epimenides, Aratus and
Menander because he brought one or two verses out of the^. Jerome.
Which thing Jerome in his exposition upon the first chap. of the Epistle to
Titus declares to be a very absurd thing and worthily to be laughed at. And
now as concerning Enoch, it seems marvelous, how he being but the vii. from
Adam could write of those things of the altercation between Michael and the
devil, for the body of Moses, when as if there were any such thing (as there is
no doubt but there were) they must needs have come to pass a thousand and
almost.500. years after. Unless we will say yt those things were revealed at
that time by some notable strength of prophecy.

Neither is it to be forgotten, that those which do think that giauntes had
Angels to their parents and not men, do therefore seem to suppose so, The
reason of them which thought giau^ts were not borne of men.
because they think it is not possible, ye huge giauntes can be borne of me^
of usual bigness and stature. Wherefore some of the^ have gone so far, yt
they have affirmed that the first man was a giaunt, and yt Noah also and his
children were Giaunts because they believed not that ye kind of me^ could be
either before or after ye flood, except their first progenitors had been such,
if it were thought they should be borne of men. But Augustine proves that to
be false and says, Augustine. A woman giau^t
that a little before the overthrow made by ye Goths, there was a woman at Rome
of a giauntes stature, who^ very many out of diverse countries came to see.
Which woman's parents nevertheless exceded not ye common accustomed stature of
other men. The natural cause of ye great stature of gia^ts
But as touching the cause of this huge bigness of giau^tes, if we should look
upon nature the^ can we bring no other reason, but a strong natural heat, and
also a moisture which abundauntly and largely ministers matter, for ye heat
does extend ye same not only into length, but also it pours out and
spreads it both to breadth and also to thickness. Giaunts therefore began
before the flood, they were also before the acco^panieng of the sons of god
with the daughters of men, and after that also continued their generation. Men
therefore begat them, and had a natural cause such as we have said. There were
also some without doubt after the flood, for there is mention made of them in
the book of Number. Deuteronomy. Joshua, How huge the giauntes were
Judges. Samuel, Paralip, and other holy books. Concerning their bigness and
stature we may partly guess and partly we have it expressedly described. The
conjectures are because Goliath had a cote of male weing v.m. sicles, and a
spear like a weauers beam, and the Iron or top of his spear weighed 600.
sicles. We conjecture also that Og king of Basan was of a wonderful bigness
and that by his bed, which being of Iron contained 9. cubits in length. And
the Israelites compared with Enachim seemed as grassehopers. These he signs
whereby we may judge how big these men were. But the bigness of Goliath is
described properly and distinctly in the book of Samu. For it is said that he
was 6. cubits and a hand breadth high. A cubite with the Grecians and Latins.
And a cubite with the Grecians is two feet, but with the Latins a foot and
a half. Some allege the cause of this difference to be, because the measure
may be extended from the elbow to the hand, being some times closed, and
sometimes open or stretched forth. And thus much as concerning the stature of
giauntes, so far as may be gathered by the holy Scriptures. But we read among
the Ethnickes far more wonderful things, The Ethnikes opinion of gianntes.
Philostratus. The common stature of men in our time. The measure of a foot.
and such which seem to some incredible. Philostratus writes in his book of
noble men, that he saw the carkase of a certain giaunt which was 30. cubits
long, and an other 22. cubits long, and certain other also 12. But the common
stature of men in our time passes littell above.5. feet. And the measure of a
foot agrees both with the Grecians and with the Latins, for they both give
to every foot 4. hand breadthes: and every hand breadth contains the breadth
of 4. fingers, that is, the length of the little finger. But if the last
fingers, the thombe I say and the little finger should be stretched abroad,
then every foot contains but two hand bredthes. I think it not amiss also
to declare here what Augustine writes in the.15. Augustine.
book de ciuit. Dei. 9. chap. where he reproves those which obstinatly
contend that there were never any men of so wonderful huge a stature, and
testifies yt he him self saw upon the coaste of Vtica a tooth so great, that
being divided, it might easily be judged to be an hundred fold bigger in form
and quantity the^ usual teth in our time are, Vergil.
he also declares in the same place, that there were in oldetyme very many
such bodies of men, by the verses of Vergil which are written in the 7. book
of Aenedos, where he shows how Turnus took up so great a stone from the
ground and threw at Eneas that 12. such men as the earth brings forth now of
days could scarsely lift, which place he took out of the 6. book of Iliades
of Homere. We may add also unto these, the verses which the same Vergil has
written in ye first of the Georgikes, he shall wonder at the great bones dug
out of the graves. Moreover Augustine brings Pliny the second, who affirms
in his 7. Pliny
book, that nature the longer it proceeds in her course, the lesser bodies
does it bring forth daily. Cipriane. Whether the bodies of men have decreased
from the flood to our time.
And he makes mention also of Homere which made complainte sometimes in his
verses. To whom I might add the testimony of Cipriane against Demetrian. But
if I should be asked the question, whether I thought that the bodies of men
which were brought forth after the flood are less than those which were
before the flood, I would peradventure grant unto it: Aulus Gellius
but that they have always decreased from the flood even to our time, I would
not easily consent to that, and especially because of Aulus Gellius words
which he wrote in the third book, where he says, that the measure of the
growth of man's body is 7. feet, which seems also to be the measure at this
day in me^ of the bigger sort. But lest I should dissemble any thing, we read
in the Apochriphas of Esdras the 4. book about the end of the.5. chap. that
our bodies are lesser now, and shall be every day less, because nature is
always made more weak. And the same does Cipriane (as I have a little before
said) seem to affirm. But why I would not so easily assent thereunto, this is
the cause, for that I can se almost nothing altered in our time from the
measure which Gellius defines. Pliny.
But now to Pliny again who says in his 7. book, that in Crete, when a
certain mountain was rent by an earth quake, a dead body was found standing
which was 46. cubits long, which some believed to be Orions body, other some
Othus. It is also left in writing that the body of Orestes being dug up by
the commandment of an oracle, was 7. cubits long. But that which Berosus
affirms, Berosus.
that Adam and Seth his son were giauntes, and Noah also with his children,
as it is put without testimony of holy scriptures, so may it also be rejected.

Now it seems good to declare, Why GOD would have so huge giauntes some
times.
for what cause god would have some men sometimes to be borne with so huge
bodies. It was done for this cause Augustine thincketh in his book before
alleged 23. chap. to leave a testimony unto us, that nether the beauty of the
body, neither the bigness of stature, nor strength of the flesh are to be
accounted among the chief good things, when as they are no less commune to
the godly sometimes than they are to the ungodly. They surely which are
desirous of godliness will judge that spiritual good things are far to be
preferred before them, Form and stature avail nothing to salvation.
partly because they are an help unto us to salvation, and partly because
they make us more noble in deed than others. And that giauntes had no help by
their huge stature to salvation, he confirms it by that which Baruch the
Prophet has written in the.3. chap. There are giauntes from the beginning of
the world, famous men, expert in wars: those has not the Lord chosen,
neither has he given them the way of knowledge, but they have perished because
they had not wisdom. Giauntes took not godly causes in hand to defend.
Also if a man shall read over the holy scriptures, he shall never almost find
that they took in hand any good or godly cause, which they would defend, and
for the which they would fight: yea he shall rather se that by their
perverseness and pride, they have always ben against God. So did Og king of
Basan behave him self, so also did Goliath and his brethren. All these were
most deadly enemies to the people whom God loved and had chosen from the rest
to be peculiar to him self. Giau^tes were overcome in battle of weak persons
There is an other thing also besides, which may much confirm our faith, for
the holy scriptures do always declare how such monstrous giau^tes were
filthyly overcome in battle, and that by feable men and very inexpert in
warlike affairs, namely by David being yet but a shepherd, and the people of
Israel which were the^ but young beginners in matters of war, whereby the
spirit of god does admonish us to be of a constaunte and valiaunte courage
when for godliness sake we must fight against such monsters. We must have no
regard there to our own strength, seeing that the holy oracles do so often
declare, that it is god which delivers such beasts into their hands whom
he defends. Which things seeing they are so, this without doubt comes to
pass, that we should by no means be affeard of tyrannes, which are almost
always against God, and trust to their own great might, when they defend
ungodly parts, and think that they can rob and spoil as they list them
selves the flock of Christ which is feable and weak: seeing the might of gods
word and power of his spirit will make us mighty and invincible against them
though we be never so low and weak of nature. Moreover if we should follow
humane reason, being compared with the^, we should easily seem either worms
or grasshoppers: but being hedged and fensed with the might of god, we shall not
only be superiors, but also, (to speak as Paul speaks to the Romans) we
shall overcome also. For Christ will aid us, who binds the strong armed man,
and takes away the most rich spoils which he had gathered, he has luckly
wrastled with the devil and his members, and we by him shall have good success
in our wars, and shall obtain a far more noble victory than that which
the Poets have feigned that their gods obtained of the Ciclops Titans, Why
Giaunts have resisted God.
and other giauntes, which were (as they fable) destroyed by the lightnings of
Jupiter at Phlegra. It is a plain token why gyau^tes in the old time and
mighty princes now of days do with the wise men of this world resist god: surely
because they cleave and trust to much to their own strength, whereunto they
overmuch sticki^g, God accomplisheth his things by humble persons and not by
giauntes.
there is no mischief which they dare not enterprise, there is nothing which
they think is not lawful for the^ to do. But god vouchesafeth not by such men
to accomplish those things which he has decreed to bring to pass, but to
set forth his might and power far abroad he uses rather to accomplish such
things as he has decreed to do by David and any abject persons.

Whether Og were the last of all the giaunts.
Of this thing I would think that I had spoken enoughe, but that there is a
certain place remaining to be expounded: namely how it should be written in
Deuteronomy. that there was no more of the giauntes remaining but only Og king of
Basan. I am not ignorante what R. Salomo fableth, but his exposition is so
childishe, and so worthy to be laughed at, yt I am ashamed to rehearse it. I
judge therefore that it was not spoken absolutely and simply, that there were no
more remaining but he, as though there were no more giauntes in all the world
but he: but it is meant that he only was remaining in those places namely
beyond Iordane. The Moabites also drove Giauntes out of their coasts.
Moreover we must understand that not only the Israelites destroyed the
giauntes out of those regions but also the Moabites as it is written in the
second chap. of Deuteronomy. drove them out of their coasts, which must also be
thought to have been brought to pass by them thorough the favor of God: for it
is in the same place written that god gave unto the Moabites those regions to
inhabit. Now will I return to the words of the holy hystory.

And from thence they went to the mountains of Debir, and the name of Debir
before was Kiriath Sepher. Why this city is called the city of Letters.
It is commonly translated the city of letters, and therefore would they have
this city so called, because the first letters were found there, or else because
learning or good studies flourished in that City, as they do at this day in
universities, where good sciences are openly taught. Some think that lawyers
lived there, which kept the records of judgments. There be some also which
write that there was a notable library there. R. D. Kimhi affirms that Debir
in the Persian language signifies a letter, but ye word Sephir in Hebrew
signifies not properly a letter or a figure but rather a little book or scrolle
written upon. The Hebrews do make mention that Othoniel did in this place
expound certain rules of the law, which before that time were almost blotted
out, and of that deed was the city so afterward named, but this ca^ scarce be
probable, because it seems that that city had that name before the
Israelites possessed it. We must know moreover that this city also was taken
when Joshua was a live, which is showed in his own book.

And that by no means can be feigned to be said there by preventing or (as they
say) by anticipatio^. For it is written in the.11. chap. And Joshua came at ye
time and destroyed the Enakims from the mountains, namely Hebron, Debir and
all the mountains of Judah. If these things should have been mentioned in ye
place, as things which should come to pass sone after the death of Joshua,
then had it not ben well spoken, to have said, And Joshua came at that time. And
this I think the reader shall plainly see proved, if he will not think it
paynfull, diligently to read over the 10, and 15. chap. of Joshua.

12 And Caleb said: He that smyteth Kiriath Sepher and takes it, to him will I
give Hacsah my daughter to wife.

13 And Othoniel the son of Kenatz Chalebs yo^ger brother took it: and he
gave him Hacsah his daughter to wife.


Here is wont to be demanded, how these cities Hebron and Debir should be
written in the book of Joshua to have been taken of Joshua, when as it is here
put that Chaleb conquered them, Chaleb desired to have these regions assigned
him for his inheritance.
whereunto I answer that all that war was governed by the conduicte of
Joshua, who was the chief and principal governor of the whole host, but the
principal setting forward against Hebron and other places adjoining thereunto
was committed unto Chaleb the chief of the tribe of Judah, and that not without
a cause. For he, as it is written in the xiiii. chap. of Joshua, desired to have
that part assigned peculiarly unto him for his inheritance: which requests
he easily obtained. For he required the same, trusting to God his promises:
Chaleb was a faithful espy.
for when he was sent with other spies to view the land of Chanaan, he
faithfully made relation of the things as they were in deed, and not
unfaithfully as his fellows did. Neither was he an author of the peoples
sedition as the other were, yea he rather encouraged the peoples minds, and
diminished those things which his fellows had amplified concerning the fence
of the cities, of the giau^tes also, and of the strength of the Chananites. For
he regarded not ma^s strength, but with a singular faith, most constantly
remembered the power, the goodness and promises of god. Wherefore god being
angry with the rest, destroyed them in the wilderness, so that they came not
to the promised land. But he promised Chaleb for his faithfulness this
inheritance, which when he afterward demanded, he put Joshua in remembrance
of the thing before done, and of the promises of God. God promised Chaleb the
la^d whereon he should tread.
And the place where the promise is contained is in the 14. chap. of Number. there
God promised him that land whereon his foot should tread, which words the
Jews think thus to be expounded. The rest of the spies being amassed for
fear of the giauntes, and putting small confidence in god durst not enter into
the city of Hebron, which Chaleb him self searched with a valiant courage.
The promise therefore of this possession was made unto him in the second year
after the delivery out of Egypt. Chaleb surely declared a valiant and noble
heart, when as he did not only require the possession of these places, but he
enterprised also to conquer the^ for all that they were fenced and inhabited
with most strong giau^tes. Wherefore we must believe, that he took in hand such
and so great an enterprise not by his own power but by gods promises.

And here arises no small doubt, how Chaleb being of the tribe of Judah,
Hebron was one of the Cities of refuge.
could obtain ye city of Hebron which by lotte belonged to the Levites. For
god had commanded that certain cities as well beyond Iordane as on this side,
should be had for refuge sake, The cities of refuge belo^ged to the Levites
that thither might fly as many as had slain any man by chance, and not of
pretensed purpose. And the possession of those cities which were therefore
appointed belonged to the Levites. Wherefore it was not lawful that Hebron
should be given to Chaleb, The Levites had the city of Hebron, but Chaleb had
the ground and Lordship.
seeing it was numbered among the cities of refuge. These things are true, but
we must understand in the mean time, that the Levites might possess but their
cities only, and the suburbs adjoining to the walls of them. But as for the
ground or dominion which they call at this day Lordship, it was not granted
them to have. Chaleb therefore desired to possess the ground, but as for the
city which he had in his hands, he let to the Levites as the law
commanded. It is most certain that there is mention of the city Hebron in the
book of Genesis when as it is there written, that Abraham lived in the grove of
oaks of Mamere, and the same had (if we may believe Jerome) a precious
turpentine tree, which grew there from the beginning of the world, and
continued till the time of Constantine the great. It is said to be 12000. paces
distaunte from Jerusalem. David reigned in it some while, before he was
anointed king over all Israel. Neither have we any thing to do to write now of
the auncientnesse thereof, seeing I have somewhat spoken of it before.

And Chaleb said: he that smites. This whole history is declared in the 15.
chap. of the book of Joshua, word for word, whereby it appears that yt is most
certain which I before admonished you of, The conqueryng of Debit was hard.
namely that all these things are now mentioned by a certain repeticio^. The
conquering of Debir seems to have been paynefull and dangerous, and
meruelously much desired of Chaleb, when as he offreth so ample and noble a
gift to the conqueror thereof: namely his own daughter to wife, being him
self the prince of the most noble tribe of Judah.

And Othoniel the son of Kenaz Chalebs younger brother took it. It is
certain that Othoniel obtained the victory: but whether be were Chalebs
brother, or his brothers son or some other kin to him it cannot be gathered
by these words. But how they were kin it were good to know, partly for ye
knowledge of the history and partly to understand whether the matrimony which
followed between Othoniel and Achsah were lawful. In the first book of
Paralip. Hefron was called also Iephuna.
and second chap. the father of Chaleb is called Hesron, which man was the
third from Judah: for Judah had Pharez by Thamra his sons wife: and Phares
begat Hefron, which was called by an other name Iephuna, for which cause Chaleb
is very often written the son of Iephuna. R. Salomoh.
Of which thing I can not tell what fond inue^tion R. Salo. writes, namely
that he was so called, because he disagreed from the mind and counsel of the
other spies. Panah signifies in Hebrew to depart or to decline, wherefore he
thincketh that this surname was given to Chaleb for the cause now alleged.
Neither makes that any thing against it (as he says) that he is called the
son of Iephuna, How the Hebrews use this word Son, sometimes.
when as in the holy scriptures it is a common use, yt this phrase, the son
of death and the son of perdition, are all one with these, he is worthy of
death, and a man lost. And by the same kind of speech (says he) ye son of
declination and turning away is all one in this place, as if he had been called
declining and turning away from the counsel and wicked will of the rest of the
spies. I will not deny peradventure but that this opinion of R. S. is pretty,
Many of the Hebrews had two names. What Othoniel was.
but yet I think it makes nothing to ye purpose. For other seem to speak
more simply which say that Hesron was also called Iephuna. Wherefore Chaleb was
sometimes called the son of Iephuna and sometimes the son of Hesron,
neither is it a rare thing or unheard of in ye holy scripture, that some one
man should be called by two names. Now we se what Chaleb was, namely the
fourth from Judah the son of Jacob: wherefore we must speak somewhat of
Othoniel. He is here written to be the son of Kenaz, and so is he likewise in
the book of Joshua, Othoniel was also called Ia^hes.
and also in the first book of Paralip. and iiii. chap. where he is called
Iambes also, and renowned to have been noble and very excellent, his mother
called him Iambez, because she bare him with most bitter pain, for so does
that name signify in Hebrew: which the father as an unlucky name changed,
and in stead of Iambez named his son Othoniel. We read that the same happened
unto Benjamin, who^ the mother as she was dyeng, named Benoni, which name
because it was not very pleasant nor luckye, Jacob turned and would have him
called Benjamin for Benoni. Neither was Othoniel notable only in strength and
feats of war, but he was very godly and religious, for in the book of
Paralip, and in the place now alleged his prayers are described, wherewith he
most faithfully called upon God. Three excellent conditions in Othoniel.
Wherefore the scripture testifies that his prayer was heard, the Hebrews have
added thereunto yt he was excellently well learned in the law of the Lord. And
these three virtues in one man are most rare, namely to be a good warrior, to
be religious, and learned.

But now seeing his fathers name was Kenaz, What kin Chaleb and Othoniel were
together.
and Chaleb had Hesron or Iephuna to his father, how near of kyn were they
then? Some hold opinion that Kenaz, when Hesron or Iephuna was dead, married
his wife, who had not only her with him, but also kept her son namely
Chaleb, being but a little one, who^ she had by her first husband, then they say
he had Othoniel by her, whereby they conclude that Othoniel and Chaleb came
both of one mother, but not of one father. Wherefore Othoniel was by nature the
son of Kenaz, but Chaleb was called also the son of Kenaz, because he and
Othoniel were brought up together with Kenaz. R. D. confuteth this opinion, R.
D. ^imhi.
because it is never red in the holy scriptures that any Israelite took his
surname of his mother, and much less of his Stepfather: The surnames among the
Israelites were taken of the fathers.
For every one in that public wealth took always their surnames of their
fathers, as the Gersonites, Merarites, and Levites. And by the book of
Paralip. he says may be known that that manner was so still kept and observed.
This reason if it be true in deed, as it seems to be probable refelleth a
certain opinion of others, which say that Chaleb had a brother, a great deal
elder tha^ him self, who was called Kenaz, with whom Chaleb was brought up
like a son together with Othoniel Kenaz son. Wherefore they seming after a
sort to be both of one age, and being nourished up together, were easelye
counted brethren, namely the sons of Kenaz, where as in deed Chaleb was Kenaz
brother. Wherefore it came to pass that they were both of them called the sons
of Kenaz. This I say does R. D. Kimhi judge absurd: for if no man could
attain to any kind of surname by the mother or stepfather, then undoubtedly
could he not have it by the brother. But the same R. D. Kimhi thinks that
they were brethren every way, because they had both one father and one mother.
And therefore both of them are called the sons of Kenaz, but not by their
next Parents, but by the name of the family, seeing that both brethren were
borne of one and the self family, what shall we then do? The Hebrews and our
me^ differ among themselves of the kindred of Othoniel and Chaleb.
We are not helped by the history which we have in hand, and we cannot dissolve
the question by the places conferred every way together. Yea and the Jews
agree not in it among them selves, neither do they only vary one from an
other, but our writers also write nothing like one to an other of it. Lyranus
does utterly deny that they were brethren, which nevertheless Paulus Burgensis
affirms, yea and that more is, Lyranus agrees not with him self, for as in
the interpreting of the book of Joshua he denies that they were brethren, so
afterward upon the first book of Paral. in the second and fourth chap. he
grants they were brethren. But when I more diligently weigh the reason why in
the book of Joshua he contendeth that they were not brethren, I gather it to be
this, because he thought yt if they had been joined together with so near a
bond of kindred, yt there could have been no marriage, whereby Othoniel should have
had to wife Hachsah his brothers daughter, seeing yt it was forbidden by ye law
(namely ye.18. and.20. chap of Leuit.) yt no man should mary his aunt. Wherefore
he thinks it must needs follow, yt the niepce by the brother is prohibited,
because that we are joined with the same degree of kindred to the aunt, by which
ye uncle is joined to ye niepce by the brother. But if Hachsah and Othoniel were
brothers children, then shall this absurdity be wholly avoided: for marriage
between these was never forbidden by Gods laws. But Burgensis a man otherwise
very well learned, contendeth yt they were utterly brethren, and says yt the
uncle might by Gods law mary his niepce by ye brother, and that the Jews the^
selves which otherwise are most diligent obseruers of outward laws do keep
this custom at this day. He says moreover, yt it comes to pass oftentimes,
as concerning marriages, yt in degrees either of consanguinity or affinity, there
is found the like distau^ce between persons, of ye which nevertheless the one is
forbidden, and the other granted. And often times the prerogative of the men
and baser condition of the wives alters the thing. For in matrimony man is
the head of the woman, as Paul has said in the first to the Corinth. In
marriages the first order of kindred may not be perverted.
Wherefore there must always be a regard had, that in marriage the order of
kindred be kept, least the order which was before should be perverted. For it
is meet that marriages should observe and not violate honesty of order among
men. Which honesty should he violated if every man might take to wife his Aunt,
his uncles wife, or mothers sister. For because that women joined unto us by
this degree of kynred are to be reverenced as mothers. But if they be made
wives then by the law of matrimony, they are made subjects, and ar bound to
honor, to obey and reverence their husbands, whom otherwise they ought to have
had in place of children. Which seems nothing else, than to commit things
repugnaunt to nature. But if it be contraryly done, then is there no perverting
of order incurred. For he which is an uncle either by fathers side or mothers
side should be honored and reverenced like a father, when he takes to wife
his niepce, the husband is made her head, and shall be honored and obeyed of her
no less than if he were her uncle, either by the fathers side or mothers side,
neither comes there any perturbation of order by conjunction of matrimony.
These things Burgensis alleges. Wherefore this place does not only admonish,
but in a manner also co^pel us, somewhat to entreat of degrees prohibited in
contracts of matrimony. Yet will I leave at liberty whether Chaleb and Othoniel
were brethren, or whether they were joined with any other affinity together.
This is most certain if Othoniel were ye son of Chaleb his brother, the
marriage then was very lawful. But the state of the question is, whether it were
lawful for Othoniel by the common law to marye his brothers daughter.

In the law are not rehearsed all the degrees in which maryages ar prohibited.
This seems first to be agreed upon, that in the.18. and.20. chap of Leuit.
are not rehearsed al persons or degrees, in which marriages are prohibited: for
there is no mention made of Graundmother, when as nevertheless al men will
confess it to be most filthy, if any man should take to wife his
Graundmother, which is far above him in his years. The wife also of the
Graundfather is not me^cioned of: and though the wife of the uncle by the
fathers side be spoken of, yet is there nothing spoken of the wife of the uncle
by the mothers side. Yea, and that we more maruayle at, there is no prohibition
for the father to marye his daughter, when as al men confess that these
marriages are most incest. Wherefore it is to be thought, that in that place are
set forth by the holy ghost certain degrees prohibited, and those not many,
but yet such, that by them as by certain exquisite and manifest rules we may
judge of the like. Wherefore we must think that those things which are spoken
of the mother, are also commanded of the Graundfather or Graundmother or wife
of the Grandfather, seeing that al these are to be reckoned for Parents. Those
things also which are spoken of the wife of the uncle by the fathers side, do
manyfestly declare, what is to be done with the wife of the uncle by the
mothers side. For as much as these aliaunces or degrees are of one space or
distaunce one from an other. Wherefore I am of this opinion, that I think the
prohibitions mentioned in the law, are therefore set forth that by them we
might evidently understand, what is meet to do in the like degrees. I grant
nevertheless, concerning Paulus Burgensis reason, that they do much more
violate the law which do concract matrimonies with persons forbidden, Who syn
more greuouslye against the degrees prohibited.

It is uncertain whether the Jews do abide in ye right obseruyng of their
law.


and therwithal perverting also the order of kinreds. For it seems to me that
he does far more vilye which marries his Graundmother, than he which
marryeth his niexce by the brother, although I think that both these
matrimonies are not lawful.

What the Hebrews do in our time I pass not much to know: yea I much doubt of
that which Paulus Burgensis takes unto him as a thing sure and manifest,
namely that the Jews are at this day most diligent in observing of their
outward laws. For me thinks that I should do well in not giving to them
more dignity or religion than to Christians. Wherefore as it is manifest enough
that we have for men's traditions very much straied from the right observation
of the comaundementes of God, and also from the right knowledge of the
scriptures: so is it also lykely that the same has happened unto the Jews,
especially in this our age. Wherefore I am not injurious against them, when as I
will not give more to them, than to our selves. The Jews have added mani other
degres to the degrees expressed of god
Nevertheless I will not omit that the Rabines have added to their prohibited
degrees in the law many more as well in ascending as descending, which I see the
most learned man Paulus Fagius has declared in his annotacions upon Leuit.
nether can I be persuaded that they were added by them for any other cause, but
only because they thought that those degrees were comprehended in the degrees
expressed by God. What we must have a respect unto, in judging of degres.
Wherefore to give judgment of any lawful marriages, that shall not be
sufficient in my judgment, if the degree wherein they are contracted, shall not
be prohibited by manifest and proper words in the law, neither the order of
kindred perverted, for it may be that the like degree, and of the same
distaunce be forbidden by authority of the law. The scripture declares not by
manifest words the peruertyng of order, which is to be taken heed of in
marriages.
Nether does the scripture as far as I can see, allege in any place ye reason
concerning perverting of order, although (as I have before said) I do not
utterly abject that reason. Some man peradventure will say: what matter is it
for us of this age, either to know or else to observe those precepts which are
contained in the.18. and.20. chap. of Leuit. seeing that we after the coming of
Christ are no more bound to the civil laws of the Jews? I confess that the
Christians are not bound to the civil precepts of the law: but yet I ascribe
those precepts which are there given for marriages not to civil laws, but
rather to moral. And I think that I may bring a reason out of the same place
to confirm my sentence. For God, when he gave those laws, added these words
thereunto: The Chananites ar reproved because they had defiled the^ selves with
incest
Take heed therefore, that ye defile not your selves with whordomes and such
incestes, as the Gentiles have done, whom I have driven out of those regions
which I have now given unto you, for for because those nations have been
polluted with so grievous wicked acts I have therefore so destroyed them, and
will do yt like unto you, except ye shall diligently avoid those things, which
I command you as touching these evils. I think no man will doubt but that the
Chananites which received not the law by Moses, neither were Citizens of the
public wealth of the Israelites, could not by that law be condemned, because
they obeyed not the laws of the Hebrews. They were subject only to the law,
which is called moral. Wherefore seeing God for that cause reproves them,
because they were defiled with such fylthy lusts and incestes, and affirms
that for the same cause he deprived them both of their land and life: it is
manifest that these laws must be joined not to civil precepts but to moral,
which al men are bound to observe.

Nevertheless this seems at the first sight to be against this sentence,
Abraham and Amram seem to have married prohibited wives.
because Abraham (a man otherwise most holy) is thought to have married his
Brothers daughter namely Sara. Amram also had Iochabed his aunt to wife, of
whom he begat Moses, Aaron, and Mary. And it seems that so godly and holy me^
would not have done this, if the moral law (as we have said) had been against
it. The law of nature was darkened by sin.
To this we answer, first yt the law of nature was much blotted by corruption
and wickedness, which overwhelmed al mankind sone after sin, and for ye cause
they which contracted such matrimonies, thought peradventure that the same were
lawful, and therefore although they cannot altogether be excused by that
ignorance, yet it is to be thought that they committed less sin, than those
which durst do such things after the law was given. I add moreover, that
among the fathers certain things are now and then spoken of, It is not
certain whether Abraham and Amram married prohibited wives.
which other men must not take example of, when as they are sometimes to be
interpreted as prerogatives or certain priueleges given to the^. But how soever
it be, we may not (as I think) much labor to excuse ye fathers in althings.
Although I know there be which do say yt Sara was not the daughter of Abraham's
brother, but some other way of and therefore she might be called his sister after
the ancient manner of speaking, as though she were of some kindred unto him, but
yet not so nere kyn, but that they might mary together. And in like manner they
say of the kindred of Amram and Iochabed. But I will omit these things, seeing
that the whole matter may be made plain by these two kind of answers before
alleged.

It might also be demanded, if the precepts of Matrimonye be moral, and
pertain to the law of Nature, why God would also constitute them in his
laws? The ten commandments were blotted in the hearts of men before the law.
Because the light of nature was come to that point that it was not sufficient,
the brightness of it was daily more and more blotted in the hearts of men:
which thing does manyfestlye appear not only in these, but also in the ten
commandments, where it is commanded that men should abstain from theft and
murder, and yet we read in hystories that robbyng on the sea, and also on the
land got such dominion, Plato.
that they were counted full of honor and dignity. Plato in his fyft book of
laws thought, that concerning procreation of children we should abstain from
Mothers, Graundmothers, and the degrees above them. Again from Daughters,
Niepces, and degrees beneath them. But as for other persons he made free.
Jerome.
Hierome testifies in his second book against Iouiniane, that the Scotts in
his time had no certain marriages, but they accompanied with their women as
they lusted them selves, even such as came first to hand. He says moreover,
that the Medes, Indians, Ethiopes, and Persians confusedly contracted
Matrimonies with their mothers, sisters, daughters, and Niepces: which seems
nevertheless to disagree with that which Heroditus writes of the Persians.
For Cambyses (as he testifies) desired to marye his sister, for the which
thing he asked counsel of his Lawyers and wise men, and demanded of them
whether that matrimony were lawful or no. To whom they answered, that they in
deed had no law, by the which it might be lawful for the Brother to mary the
Sister, but yet they had an other law among them, whereby it was lawful for the
king of the Persians to do what so ever him self lusted. Surely they answered
well in their first part of their answer, but in the latter part they most
filthily flattered the tyranne. Howbeit the things which are written by this
Historiographer (although sometimes he write fables) and those things which
Jerome writes, vary not. Because the vulgar people being now corrupted with
fylthy and wicked custom, contracted such matrimonies, the wyser sort
nevertheless, in whom the law of nature did shine, understood that the same
were not lawful, although being blinded with covetousness they abstained not
from them. Whom Paul to the Romans has grievously reprehended, saying: which
men, though they know the righheousnes of God, Incestuous persons have
afterward abhorred those who^ they have poluted.
not only do such things, but also have pleasure in them that do them. And
these matrimonies by their own nature are so well known to be unlawful, that
they drive an exceading great horror into them which do hear that such
things have been done: yea and they them selves which have committed the same,
when their lust assuaged, seemed to abhor those whom they have polluted.
Cynara and Myrrha.
The Poets make mention of Cynara and Myrrha his daughter, how after the
father understood that he had accompanied with his daughter, yea, even unawares
so hated her, that he persecuted her all that ever he might. Ammo^ began so to
hate his sister Thamra whom he had defiled, Incest almost have ever had
horrible ends. Ptholomey.
that he commanded her to be violentlye thrust out of his sight. Thou shall
also never almost find if thou look in histories, that incestuous marriages
or carnal copulations came to good end. Ptholomey king of Egypt took to wife
by fraud and guile his sister Euridices, Anthonius Carocalla. Nero.
which the Historiographers and especially Iustine have manifestly set forth
to have had ill success. Anthonius Caracalla who married his stepmother, and
Nero which committed filthy fornication with his mother, came not only to a
most unhappy end, but according to their deserts they were wonderfully hated
of the people, and were openly called Monsters of humane nature. Wherefore we
grant both, that these commandments which do prohibit those sins
pertayne to the law of nature, and were for just cause renewed by God in his
moral laws.

It may also be manifestly enough declared by an other reason, Roman laws
forbad ye marriage of the brothers daughter.
ye incestuous marriages were forbidden by the light of nature, seeing that they
were earnestly forbidden by the Roman laws, which were counted among the
excellentest and honestest laws, and these by name, whereby any man should
marrye his niepce by the brother. Although Claudius Caesar when he would marry
his brothers daughter Agrippina, caused the first law to be abrogated, and to
be decreed that every man might have his brothers daughter to wife. But there
was never a one at Rome except it were one or two which would follow his
example. And ye Romans observed the first law which was most honest. The
Roman laws in prohibiting marriages had certain laws not mentioned by God.
Nevertheless we must understand, ye diverse persons were prohibited by the
laws of the Romans, of whom the law of god has made no mention, and yet
their prohibition was not without a reason. Wherefore the Citizens of Rome were
bound to observe the^, although by the light of nature they could see no cause
why they should so do, which laws were wont to be called a peculiar kind of
laws, because it seems to be private for certain places. I will make the
thing more plain by examples. The tutor might not marry his pupil.
The Romans would not as it is written in Codice that matrimonies should be
contracted between the tutor and pupil committed to his charge. Because they
saw that this would easily come thereby, that that tutor which had consumed his
pupils goods, least he should be compelled after his tutorship to render
account of those goods, might solicit the maiden to marriage, which being
obtained, he should be free from giving account of her goods. This surely was a
good law, but yet it was not perfectly observed. Cicero otherwise a grave man,
Cicero.
was evil spoken of for the same cause: for being far in other men's debt,
when he had forsaken his wife Terence, he married his pupil, of whose goods and
affairs he had charge over as a tutor.

The Romans deceeed also, A prisident might not marry a wife of his province.
that no president of any province should take to wife either to himself or to
any of his, any out of the same province wherein he governed. For they knew
right well, that it might so happen, that the Praetor Proconsul, or President in
a province cleaving to his families and kynsfolke coming to him by his wife,
might make new tumultes, and at length be alienated from the public wealth.
They saw also a great danger to hang thereon, least he should not be just and
severe in giving judgment, because he would gratify his kinsfolk more than
others. Lastly marriages should not have remained at liberty in provinces,
because Magistrates might in a manner compel the^ of the province to contracte
matrimonies either with themselves, Felix had a Jew to his wife.
or with their friends. We see also this most honest law violated. For Faelix
which governed Iewrye under Nero, as it is written in the xxiiii. chap. of the
acts of the Apostles, had Drusilla a Jew to wife. But what need I rehearse
that these laws of a small weight were not observed, when as that people had
shaken of, even those laws which we called moral and are known by ye law of
nature? Cicero. The monstrug lust of Sassia.
Cicero declares in his oration for Cluentius, ye one Sassia a most wicked
woman, was so provoked with filthy lust, yt she instigated her son in law
Aurius Melinus, to who^ she had before married her daughter, to repudiate his
wife, whereby he should marry her self in stead of her daughter: which thing at
ye length she got him to do. And when ye deed was counted full of dishonesty,
yet was it not punished by the laws, neither do we read that ye matrimonye,
which Cicero co^tendeth to be co^tracted by no good grounds, by no authors,
and altogether vnluckely, was dissolved by ye power and commandment of ye
magistrates. Wherefore hereof comes a good reason also, why god would again
inculcate by a law those things which by ye light of nature were judged
honest. For ye bonds, bars, and windows of nature, were broken by ye
impotent lust of me^, therefore it was necessary they should be bound with an
other bond For the Israelites were no more shamefast in keeping of natural
honestye, than were the Romans. Neither is this to be left out, ye god had
certain proper things in his law, which may be called peculiar things: for
all men were not bound unto the^ by ye law of nature, but the Hebrews only.
For he would not have them to contracte matrimony with the Chananites,
Hamorrites, Iebusites, etc. And other people seem not to have been bound to ye
law, neither should we at this day (if there were such nations still,
Matrimonyes ought not to be contracted in contrary religion Augustine.
) be let, but that we might join our selves in matrimony with them.
Although the cause of ye law, ought at this day to be holden: which cause is,
ye matrimonies should not be contracted with them which be of a contrary
religion. For it is not convenient that the Godly should be joined with the
ungodly. I know that Augustine writes concerning unlawful marriages to
Pollentius in the second book and of the Sermon of the Lord upon the
Mountain, yt there is not a place in the new Testament, wherein by express
words, matrimonies with infidels are prohibited. But of this matter I will not
write much at this present, seeing that I have largely entreated of it in the
Epistle to the Corinthians. This will I say more over, that a good man ought
in contracting of matrimonyes, to follow chiefly that which is honest, and not
lightly to depart from commendable orders and usual customs which are not
against ye word of god. And if there happen peradventure any doubt, let him not
think it much to ask counsel of his magistrate, otherwise he shall rashly put
both himself, his wife and his children to danger. For if he be married in any
of the degrees prohibited by the peculiar law, he shall not then be counted a
husband, but a whoremonger, and his wife a harlot, and their children
bastardes. Howbeit the magistrate, although concerning matrimony he may
forbid certain other contractes besides those which God has forbidden, yet
can he not, neither ought he to remit any of those which God has commanded,
and which he has prohibited by his law, yea he must most diligently see that
he burden not the people to much, The pope has grievously sinned concerning
these laws.
or without an earnest cause, as we see the Pope has done, who has two ways
sinned in this thing: first in that he durst usurp the office of making of
laws in a common wealth, which undoubtedly pertains not unto him, Secondly
because in his laws he followed not the word of god, but with out reason
forbad first al degrees even to the seventh, which when he saw afterward was
not observed, and al was full of confusion, he cut of his prohibitions to the
fourth degree. In which thing he is yet constant and hardened, if there come no
money in, but if money be offered (whereof he must have much brought him to fyl
his filthy cofers) he sets at liberty as pleases him, both his own laws
and the word of god.

This we must also know, that God had in his laws an other decree which may
lawfully be called peculiar, because it extends no way to other nations,
neither ought it to be in force at all times. And that was, that when any
husband deceased without children, the brother which remained on live, or some
other next of kynne, should mary the first man's wife left, so that the first
child which should be begotten of that marriage should be counted the son of
him that was dead, and should fully succeed him as touching his inheritance.
For God would not in that public wealth, that men should altogether be
extinguished, and he provided that the same distinction of lands should be
kept as much as might be. And seeing the same is not used in our public
wealths, neither has God commanded that it should, it therefore pertayneth
nothing unto us. Wherefore we must keep our selves under the general and
common law, She that is left of ye kinnesman ought to he married.
namely that no man presume to mary the wife of his brother being dead although
he dyed without children.

Let us also know that in the beginning, when only the family of Adam lived
on the earth, brethren were not forbidden as they were afterward For brethren
were driven of necessity to mary their sisters. But afterward when men were
increased in number, shame showed it self forth, and they began by the
instinction of God, or by nature, either to abstayn from prohibited persons, or
at the least to know that such conjunctions were full of ignominye. But what
time they began first to abstain, it appears not by the history. The Gods of
the H^^^^ ^^ried ^h^^^ Systers.
Peradventure the Heathen Poets have declared that necessity of the elders
which compelled the famyly of the first Parents to constrayne the brother to
mary the Sister, when as they fable that their Gods had their Systers to wives:
for the chief of them, namelye Jupiter had Juno, which in Virgil speaks thus
of her self: But I which walk the Queen of the Gods both sister and wife to
Jupiter.

And although the word of God, Causes (...) many deg^^es in marriages a^
forbidden. Augustine.
and instincte of nature were sufficient by them selves to make us to abstain
from the foresaid coninunctions, yet are there many good causes of prohibition
alleged by diverse writers. Augustine in his.xv. book De ciuitate dei and.xvi.
chap. writes that the same abstinence was very profitable to dilate more
amplye the bonds of humane fellowshyp. For if marriages should be included
within the walls of one family, the^ should there come no kynreds with others.
Furthermore, it is not meet, that one and the self man should occupye the
persons of diverse kynredes, namelye that one man should be both uncle and
husband of one woman, and the same woman to be both Aunt and wife of one man.
Which reason Cicero also has touched in his fyft book Definibus, and also
Plutarch in his.108. problem. And they being both Ethnickes could not have
seen this but being illustrate by the light of nature. This also is the third
reason, because these persons, from whom we should abstain, do dwell together
often times in one house. Wherefore if there should be many married folks
together, they would not use them selves so grauelye and severely as
domestical shamefastnes requires. Plutarch. The causes of strife between
kinsfolk ought to be cut of.
Plutarch in the place before said, has set forth two other reasons, besides
those which we have declared: One is, because between kynsfolkes, discordes are
to be feared. For they would soon complain that the right of kynred should be
taken away: which saying I do understand thus, if either she or he which
should ouerskyp the nearer degree, and marry with the degree farther of, she
which were nearer would think that she had injury done unto her, as though in
ouerskipping her, he would put her to shame: as it is a common use in wylles
and Testamentes, where they which are nyghest of kynne may not nor ought not
to be forgotten of him which makes the will. And in the law for raising up
seed to the brother already deceased, the first place must be given to the
nyghest of kynne, who if he refused to use his right, was made ashamed, as
that law does more amplye declare the same. Wherefore seeing discordes between
al men are to be abhorred, Women for that they are weak ought not to have
their patrimonies diminished but increased.
much more are they utterly to be detested between kynsfolkes. Plutarch also
brings an other reason, because women are weak, and therefore they have
need of many and sundry patrones, wherefore when they are married to strange
men, if they should be evil handled by their husbands, as often times they
are, they have al their kynsfolkes easily for Patrones: but if they be wives to
their own kynsfolkes, and happen to be evil entreated of them, they should then
have very few to defend their cause. For other kynsfolkes would not be so
ready, for their sakes to fall out with their own kynne, which they would not
be grieved to do with strangers.

But now that I am in hand with Plutarch, I remember that which he has
written in the syxt problem, Of the matrimoni of brethren and Systers
children. Plutarch.
and I think it is (...) unprofitable to declare it, although it seem to
disagree from that which Augustine writes in his.xv. book De ciuitate
dei.xvi. chapter of the matrimony of Brothers and Systers children. For he
affirms there, that before his time, the same was lawful, although those
kinds of maryages seemed very rare, because men after a sort eschewed to
contracte with persons so nigh: but he says that ye license was afterward
taken away. Which I surely can not perceive in ye Roman laws, which were
publicly received and allowed: which yet were used thorough out Aphrica.
Wherefore it may seem obscure to some of what laws Augustine speaks, whereby
he says that in his time those kinds of matrimonyes were prohibited. But we
must understand, that in his time the law of Theodosius the elder was of force,
who was the first among the Emperoures that I know of, which prohibited
matrimonye of this degree. Which also Aurelius Victor and Paulus Diaconus do
testifye. And that is found at this day written in the book called Codex
Theodosianus, concerning incestuous marriages, by these words. Let this
sentence remain concerning them, whosoever from henceforth shall defyle
himself with the marriage of his cousin German, or of his sisters daughter, or
of his brothers daughter, or of his wives daughter, lastly of al whose marriage
is forbidden and condemned. But that law is not in these days found in ye
Digestes, neither in the book of the Code, nor in the Authentikes. Which
nevertheless Clother the king followed, as it is red in the laws of the
Almaines, entitled of unlawful marriages, yea and it is confirmed by the
ecclesiastical Canons and decrees in Gracian. 35. Question the second and
third, also by the counsel of Agathen in the 61. Canon. And Gregorye the first
in the same place is found to be of the same opinion in the chap. Quaedam ex
Romana, etc. This answers to the sixth interrogation of Augustine Bishop of
Cantorbury, and affyrmeth that those which be joined by the degree of cousin
Germans, ought to abstain from contracting of matrimony one with an other.
Yea and long before Gregorye his time, Ambrose has in his 66. Epistle ad
Paternum, condemned the marriage of brethrens children, and he testifies that
it was forbidden by the law of Theodosius which I have also brought. And if I
should use conjecture, I think Theodosius did it by the persuasion of Ambrose,
who had a singular respect to public honesty. Neither was that law so
severe at that time, but that sometimes it might be released as he declares in
that Epistle to Paternus. In that Ambrose affyrmeth there that such marriages
were prohibited by Gods law, It can be made probable to none, which shall
attentively consider the words of the law of god, and doings of the fathers.
How the Romans have behaved themselves, toward their cousins, as concerning
matrimonyes in the old time, this I have observed Ligustine says in the 2.
book and 5. decade of Liuy, that his father gave him his Uncles daughter to
wife. Cicero also writes in his oration for Cluentius, that Cluentia had
lawfully married her cousin German M. Aurius. And M. Anthonius the Philosopher
took to wife Faustina his cousin German, as Julius Capitolinus testifies.
And before Rome was builded the marriages of Turnus and Lauinia were in hand,
which came of two sisters. Howbeit Plutarch writes in the place above
mentioned, that at the first when Rome was builte, it was forbidden by a law,
that they which were nighe of kin should not marrye together. But yet he
writes that the law for brethren and sisters children, was upon this
occasion released, because a certain man being both honest, and also well
beloved of the people of Rome, when he was greuouslye oppressed with pouertye
took to wife his sisters daughter which was rich, and welthye, for the which
cause he was accused of inceste. But the matter being decided, he was quyted by
the judgment of the people of Rome: for he was greatly favored in the city.
Then after that, it was decreed by the consent of the people of Rome that from
thence forth it should be lawful for brethren and sisters children to marry
together. These things I thought good to declare of this kind of matrimonye
both out of Gods laws, and the old and new laws of the Romans, and also out
of the fathers and ecclesiastical Canons. Whereunto I will add that there be
very many Cities professing the gospel which do not admit the marriages of
brethren and sisters children, as Surike, Berna, Basile, Schapusin, Sangallum,
Biema, etc. In the kingdom also of England when I was there, that degree was
excluded from matrimony. Wherefore in places where the magistrate forbyddeth
these marriages the faithful ought for those causes which I have before
declared to abstain from them.

But now I will go to the present matter, If Othoniel as I have before said
were cousin unto Achsa, he might mary her by the law of God: but if he were
her uncle, it was not lawful by the common law. But he married her. Wherefore
we must needs say one of these two things: either that it was a fault, for
the fathers as we have before said were not always free from sin: or else
that god would have this done by a privilege or certain prerogative, which we
may not for all that take example by. Neither is this to be forgotten, that
after the accustomed manner of Scriptures, Kinsfolks in scriptures are called
brethren
they which were any way of kin together were called brethren, as Loath is
called the brother of Abraham, and the kinsfolks of Jesus Christ the son of
God are called in the history of the gospel his brethren. So may it also be in
this place that Othoniel may be called the brother of Chaleb, when as he was
but only some other way of kin unto him. And the interpretours do use this
exposition often times, which I would not disallow, but yt I se this particle
in the text, The younger, which is not wont to be added, but when sisters and
brethren in deed are compared together. But now will I go to other things
which are to be considered in this history.

Chaleb had promised him which should co^quere the city of Debir, Whether
Chalebs promise were a rash promise.
his daughter to wife. What if any wicked person had performed that, should he
by the virtue of the promise have been made ye son in law of Chaleb? surely it
seems not. For what other thing had this ben, than to betraye his daughter?
Therefore it may appear that he promised rashly. For a wise man ought to
foresee those things which might happen. How be it we must consider that
there were not at that time such wicked and flagitious men among the
Israelites, for as long as those elders lived, which governed the publicque
wealth together with Joshua, as it shall be declared in this hystory, the people
feared god. Wherefore it follows, that they used to put those to death by the
law which were guilty of very grievous crimes. Therefore there was no danger
lest any such man should conquer the city, to whom for that act Hacsah should
be given to wife of duetye. But if there remained certain small and common
faults in him which had conquered it, the same might be recompensed by his
other virtues. For there is is none so absolute and perfect, but that some
times he may fall. Moreover there were some hope of amendment of life. And the
conqueror might be so nighe of kynne, as peradventure this Othoniel was, that
he could not mary the daughter of Chaleb. Wherefore it seems that at the least
in that part it was a rash promise. But I do not think it can be accused of
rashenesse, A constant rule of all humane promises.
for as much as all promises ought among the godly so far forth to be of
force, as they do agree with the word of god, which thing if Iepthe had
diligently considered, he would never have suffered him self to have committed
so unworthy things against his daughter. This condition surely in all
couenaunts and promises ought to be counted for a most constant rule.

We gather also hereby, that it is lawful to go about a wife by just ways and
means, as we se Othoniel now to have done: and as also holy David did, A man
by just means may go about a wife.
who did not only kill Goliath the giau^t, but also he gave Saul an hundredth
forekynnes of the Philistianes, for the obteyning of Michol to wife. We are
hereby taught also, that wise parents ought to seek them a son in law, not
by riches not by power or nobility, but by virtue. Now of days they do not so,
How a son in a law should be sought.
and therefore the miserable daughters are very often times betrayed by their
parents, and very many marriages have unhappy success. Wherefore I can not
discommend the saying of Themistocles, The saying of Themistocles.
who being demanded why he had preferred a poor man to be his son in law
before a rich and wealthy man, he answered: that he had rather have a son
in law which wanted money, tha^ to have money wanting a man.

It is lawful to set rewards for good deeds
We learn moreover by this history, that it is lawful for princes to stir up
men courageously to enterprise honest acts, and which they ought otherwise of
duty to have done, to set forth unto them some rewards. For we see that
Chaleb did so now, and also Saul, when he promised his daughter to him which
could kill Goliath, and we remember Christ has promised them an hundredth fold
in this life, Good and honest actions are of them selves to be sought for.
which for his sake should leave father and mother, children and brothers.
Wherefore we must know that good and honest actions, are by them selves
sufficient to be sought for, for as much as in this world nothing can happen
more sweater, tha^ to obey god, and with a good conscience to be joined unto
him, in living uprightly according to his commandments. Wherefore admit we
should obtain no other thing, yet a sufficient reward and gain should be
rendered unto us, Why God set forth rewards and gifts.
if we may have a quiet and pacified conscience, and be inwardly filled with
spiritual joy, but god (such is his goodness) would moreover set forth unto
us gifts and rewards. For he sees the disposition and nature of a man to be
feable and flow to all things that be good, healthful and honest: he would
therefore stir up the same by promising manifold and sundry rewards, which
kind of remedy we had not neded, if we had continued perfect and absolute, as
we were created. Who I pray you, needs with reward to be stirred up to drink
when he is thursty, or to eat when he is hu^gry? surely no body. Wherefore
neither need men, if they hungered and thrusted for righteousness, (as they
ought to do) a reward to stir them up to it. A mother also uses not to be
intised with rewards to give suck, to feed, and care for her own child, that
it perish not. Promises and threatenings are added in ye law to the
commandments.
Wherefore the promises of god are therefore necessary unto men, because they by
reason of sin have waxed cold from a vehement affection and zeal toward
godly and holy works, we be altogether dull and sluggishe to the offices of
godliness and righteousness: wherefore God of his ge^tlenesse would add
spurs of promises: which appears most manifestly in the law, where almost
for every commandment are both threatninges and also promises added. Wherefore
seeing holy men have done this oftentimes, seeing also the law of God has done
so, and the same is found in the new testament, we may conclude without doubt
that it is lawful. For then is that which we do, to be allowed, when it
agrees with the example of god him self, and rule of the scriptures, or else
with the excellent acts of holy men.

Whether it be lawful to do good for rewards sake.
But now must we se, whether he which does good works, and performs ye
which he is bound to do by the law of God, ought to be moved with hope of
the reward, or whether rather he should only have a regard to goodness,
righteousness and gods pleasure? To answer to this question, I think that
this must be the first ground, that a man is not only appointed to some
certain end, when as god does nothing rashly or by chance, but also he is
appointed to many ends, which nevertheless are so joined together, yt they do
mutually serve and help one an other by a certain order. How man is appointed
to an end.
First we are created to set forth the glory of God: then that by the sight and
perfect knowledge of God we should come to be happy: and that whilst we live
here, we should live together among our selves in an acceptable fellowship to
God. Soldiers do therefore bear weapons and make wars, to defend honest
and just causes, and that in that sort by which God in his laws has
commanded to be defended, which men moreover ought so to be encouraged to
bring this thing to pass, that though there were no other reward or gift
coming unto them, yet ought they to enterprise it. Moreover men use to fight
to defend their country, wives, children, kinsfolks, and friends. And if so
be that they besides these look for just stipe^des, whereby they may honestly
norishe both the^ selves and theirs, no man will count that for a vice in
them. For what things we may avoid wicked acts.
For the Apostle has said in the first Epistle to the Cor. Who goes on
warfarre at his own cost? But now to descend to things more particular, when
any man tempereth him self from any grievous wicked act, he ought to do ye
first to the intent he may obey the commandments of God, as it is mete. Then
that thereby he may escape either eternal or civil punishementes. Moreover that
he may not offend the minds of the brethren, and pluck them back from a holy
conversation and pure life, by his wicked example, and finally that by his
wickedness he provoke not the wrath of God, either against him self or his
familye, or against the people. Wherefore it is manifest, that the end of our
actions is not simple, but sundry and manifold.

And this being thus finished and concluded, we must diligently take heed,
Which end is to be preferred before the rest.
that when many ends are set before us, we may prefer that before the rest,
which by good right excels the rest. For if it should be otherwise done,
and if those things which are hindermost and of smaller value should be
preferred before the better, we should be justly condemned for peruertyng the
order of things. Wherefore we must take heed, that we direct not God him self
or the worshipping of him, either to our own commodity, or else to any other
ends. For the^ should that surely happen unto us which Augustine does so sore
detest, Augustine.
yt we should have the fruition of those things which we only ought to use, and
contrariwise we should use those things which we should have the fruition of,
than which perverseness in humane actions no worse thing ca^ be thought. What
is the chief peruersenes of humane actions.
Wherefore when it is demanded, whether it be lawful in well doing to have a
respect to the gain or reward. We can not well deny but yt it is lawful: for
as much as god him self has promised a reward to them which live godly:
neither did God that for any other cause tha^ by his gifts and allurements to
stir up men to just, good, godly and holy works. Neither is the reward
only to be desired, neither ye chief parts must be ascribed unto it
But although we do not unjustly in having a regard unto the reward offered us
by God, when we are occupied in good works: yet this is diligently to be taken
head of, that we be not moved only because of the reward which is offered us.
Neither is this sufficient, for if a man would say that he would in doing good
both obtain the reward set forth, and by the same work obey God, he must
take heed, that he attribute not the chiefest parts to the gift or reward,
because always (as I have already said) that among the ends each of them as
he is more excellent by nature, so ought it to be preferred in the first place.
And in this there needs a singular diligence: because it oftentimes happens,
that we deceive our selves, falsely supposing that nothing is more excellent or
dearer to our minds than god, from whom nevertheless we are by little and
little withdrawn and plucked back by reason of to much desire and delight of
reward or gift. Wherefore it afterward happens, If we prefer other things
before god we incur into grievous punishementes.
that we come to great miseries thereby: For when god perceaueth yt we more
esteem those things, which ought to be of less estimation with us, he
withdraws them away, lest they should more and more pluck us away from him.
Which thing happened many times to the Israelites, from whom God sometimes
took away riches, liberty, and the promised land, to call them again to him
self, whom they less esteemed than their riches, possessions, and also Idols.
Wherefore those things being marked and observed which I have rehearsed, I
doubt not but that it is lawful for godly men after the sincere and earnest
desire of God to do good for reward and gift.

Neither am I ignorant that Bernarde writes in his little book of loving of
God, that charity by it self can not be empty, although it behold no reward.
Bernarde.
etc. By which words he puts us in mind of two things: both that ye works
of charity in them selves have so much delectatio^, pleasure and commodity,
as may be sufficient for them which live well, although of that their well
doing they should have no other reward given them of God. And that we in
loving of God should look for no other reward, but this, that he according to
his goodness will not suffer, but faithfully to render those things which are
to be re^dred unto us. And therefore no man ought chiefly to be moved with the
desire of the reward. A comparison of the love of the children and of the wife.
And he adds, that he does far prefer the love of the wife toward her
husband before the love and obeysaunce wherewith the children love the father.
For as much as the sons do so love their father, because they hope they
shall be enriched of him by his inheritance: wherefore their love (as he
thincketh) is not so pure. But the wife if she be such a one as she ought to
be, she wishes good to her husband for his own cause and his own sake,
although she hops or looks to obtain no good at his hand. Many have
thought that the sentence of this father ought to be allowed, and have gone
about to make plain the same by a certain distinction not so circumspectly
inverted by them in my opinion: for they affirm that we may measure God or his
nature by our worthynes, or that we may behold him, according as our
perfection and uprightness is. Moreover they say that we must do what soever
we do, for his sake in the first consideration, and not in respect that he is
our chief goodness and felicity. And this they think that Bernarde meant by
the words now alleged. For they bring these words which he writes in another
place, We must worship god also in that he is our felicity and blessedness.
namely that he suspected all that love wherewith we love any thing besides God.
But these men do not mark that by this distinction, which is found out rather
by the judgment of men, tha^ by the verity of the Scriptures, that they are
against the sentence of God. For he said unto Abraham as it is written in Genesis
I am thy reward and that very ample: walk thou therefore before me, and be
perfect, undoubtedly by these words God offreth him self unto us, not
imagined by him self, or plucked away from our commodities, but in respect
that he is our reward.

Moreover, as I said now at the first, god would not adioyne promises, gifts
and rewards to his commandments, in vain or without effect, but advisedly
and most wisely. Did he that I pray thee that we should close our eyes and
ouerskip them? To look for a reward set forth unto us by God is not only of
such as are imperfect.
I think not. Neither can thou say that they serve for the ruder sort, and
such as be not yet absolute and perfect: for I will demand straight way of
thee, whether Abraham, Moses, David, the Prophets and Apostles were not so
perfect, as either the nature of men in this life can be, or is required of us?
If thou will say they were imperfect, then can not I tell what excellencye or
perfection of men thou faynest to thy self. Paul certainly sets forth him
self unto ythers as a perfect man, in such sort, as a man may in this life be
perfect, when he wrote be ye perfect as I am perfect. I speak not how the
Scripture yea god him self pronounces Moses to be most meek, he commends
David also that he was made according to his will and heart. Wherefore if thou will grant that these were notable excellent and perfect men (as men may be in
this world) neither can thou deny the promises and rewards offered to them of
god. This without doubt follows that men of the excellenter sort may in
well living and doing lift up their eyes to the reward.

Augustine.
And I think Augustine has trimely made manifest this thing where as he says
in his book of confessions, he loves thee not (speaking to God) which loves
any thing besides thee, We may love gain and rewards for gods sake.
which he loves not for thy sake. By these words is gathered, that we may love
gain and rewards for gods sake: for it is lawful to embrace the mean ends
for the last and chief goodness. Neither are we forbidden but that we may
sometimes wish for meat, drink, and cloth, and such things as are needful
for this life, yea and Christ has commanded by express words that we should
ask them, and he has promised them to those which seek for the kingdom of
God: for he has said, first seek the kingdom of God and these things shall be
ministered unto you. Wherefore it is true, that these may be so hoped for,
regarded and received of God as gifts and rewards, and not as the principal
things. For they also are to be referred to a farther end, according to Paul's
most wholesome admonition, who has written: whether we eat, or whether we
drink, or whether we do any other thing, let us do it to the glory of God. And
finally seeing God him self, his glory, What is the foundation of earthly
promises.
benevolence and favor are the root and foundation of other promises, and of
every reward, so often as we shall behold these other things, for as much as
they are comprehended in those former things, we must never suffer to have one
separated from an other, but in the latter continually look upon those which
are first. Whereby as Augustine has given us counsel, we shall love nothing
besides God which for his sake we should not love. And thus much of this said
question, In latter promises the first are continually to be beholden.
now we will return to the history. For as much as it is now manifest that it
was lawful for Chaleb to set forth a reward to all them, which should
conquer the city of Debir, to encourage them to perform that, which they
ought otherwise of duty to have done: it was counted no sin in Othoniel (of
whom we now entreat) courageously to fight for the obtaining of a wife,
which he knew otherwise to be acceptable to God.

14 And it came to pass, as he went, she moved him, to ask of her father a
field and she lighted of her Ass, and Chaleb said unto her: What will thou?

15 And she answered him, give me a blessing, for thou have given me a dry
land, give me also springes of water. And Chaleb gave her springes both above
and beneath.


In the xv. chap. of Joshua, where all these things of Achsah and Othoniel are
rehearsed in manner, by so many words, David kimhi
only three differences are perceived in the word. One is, that which is here
Techitioth and Alioth, is there Techitith and Alith. Moreover there it is said
Tinna and here is Hicah. Lastly there is Scadah and here is Haschadah. R.D.
Kimhi has noted these things. For ye interpretors of ye Hebrews are most
precise, yea in observing the very pricks, I would they were as quick in
sight and dilligent in rendering reasons of annotatio^s. Hachsah persuaded and
provoked her husband, to ask the field of Chaleb her father, which I therefore
tell you, because the Latin translation is corrupted. For it has that the
husband persuaded the wife to ask the field of Chaleb. The policy of Achsah.
Furthermore by this we may consider the sharpness of the wit of a woman.
She therefore moves her husband, to ask the field, because she was persuaded
with her self, that her father would not deny him that which he should ask.
(She thought moreover that if her husband obtained the field, she should easily
by her self afterward obtain the waters, whereas if she should have asked them
both at one time (namely the field and the waters) it might peradventure be
hard to obtain both together. But if the field were first given to her
husband, her father might be counted very hard, if he should deny his daughter
the waters, she requiring the^ of him. And in asking she wisely watched a fit
time, namely when she should be brought to her husband: for then parents are
wont to show the^ selves more gentle toward their children, when they se yt
they shall be by and by taken from the^. Wherefore though they were at other
times hard, the^ yet they somewhat relent. In this reason of the petition I have
followed Leui the son of Gerson, Leui the son of Gherson.
who expounds that Hachsah would therefore have her husband to ask ye ground
first yt she might the better afterward desire the waters. But R. D. Kimhi. in
interpreting of ye book of Joshua, says, yt he, namely Othoniel would not ask
it, D. Kimhi.
wherefore the woman her self was constrained by her self to ask her father.
And this seems to be ye meaning of this interpretor, Chaleb had before given
unto his daughter ye field, as la^d for her dowry, ye soil whereof was dry and
barre^, wherefore ye witty mayde^ took occasion to ask, yt it might be fertile
thoroughe water. But howsoever it be, it skilleth not much, let us only
delige^tly mark this, yt Chaleb was liberal and honorable. For that he
granted his daughter both the waters above, and the waters beneath.

She lighted of her Ass. She lighted, to declare her due obeysaunce toward
her father, and to make her peticion the more acceptable, and she so lighted
that she kneled on the ground with her knees, as the Hebrew word signifies.
For the Hebrews use that word, Sanach, when they will signify a stake or
wedge or any such thing to be driven. To be short, she asked upon her knees
those things which she desired. Rebecka also, as it is written in the book
of Genesis when she saw Isaak to whom she was brought for to be his wife, she
lighted of her camele whereon she sat. Neither let us marvel that Achsah being
the daughter of a prince rode on an Ass: Asses are very used in Siria.
seeing that in Siria Asses are very much used: for this kind of beast, which
is of his own nature cold, is more used in hotter countries, than in regions
toward the north. And as we shall hear in this historye, fifty sons of a
certain judge road upon fiftye Asses. Mephiboseth also the nephew of Saul the
king, and Balaam the Prophet used this kind of beast. Rivers and fountaynes
of waters are much set by in Siria Why GOD brought his people to dry regions.
Neither is it in vain that this request for waters is so diligently described
in this place: for as much as Siria has ground fertile enoughe, but that it
wa^teth water here and there. Wherefore it comes to pass that rivers and
fountaynes of waters are much esteemed in those places. And God of purpose
brought his people to these so dry regions, neither would he have them dwell
in watery places, that they wayling for water might continually depend upon
him, and thereby might have the better occasion, to pray the oftener to the
heavenly father, and the more seruently to observe his commandments. Neither
has God him self left this his counsel vnme^cioned of in the holy scriptures.

The Hebrewe mayde^s which had dowerye lands, might marye out of their own
tribe
Such things as Chaleb gives his daughter, belong (as some think) either to
the dowery or to the augmentatio^ thereof, which might be done by the civil
law of that nation. For it was not forbidden, ye wives might not give ground,
and lands to their husbands in the name of a dowery, so that they married in
their own tribe and family, as now Achsah was given to Othoniel, who
assuredly was of the same tribe and family that she was of. But if she had
married in an other tribe, it had not ben lawful for her to give ground and
lands to her husband by the name of a dowery. For God had commanded, and that
diligently and precisely, that ground and lands in especial coming by
inheritance should not be alienated from their families for marriages sake. And
the daughters of Zalphead gave an occasion of this law making, as it is
written in the book of Number. the 27. and 36. chap. For those maidens, having no
brethren, obtained of God by Moses, that they might not be put beside their
Fathers inheritance, but that in the deuisio^ of the land of Chanaan those
lands might be assigned unto them, which should have been given either to
their father or to their brethren. But this was expressedly commanded them
that they should not mary out of their own tribe and family.

Whether husbands in the old time received doweryes of their wives.
But whether husbands received doweryes of their wives before the law, it is
uncertain. The servant of Abraham rather gave gifts to Rebecka tha^ received,
for as much as he brought with him golden and silver vessels in the name of
Abraham and Isaak to be given to his wife. But there is no mention made of the
maidens dowery. Jacob also served for his wives, so far was he from receauyng
any thing of the^ in the name of a dowery Seche^ also the son of Hemorh
inordinately loving Dina the daughter of Jacob, with whom he had committed
fornication, said unto the sons of Jacob: Increase her dowery as ye list, I
will refuse no condition, so that I may have your sister to wife. How be it I
can not tell, how ye custom of the ancient fathers in not taking but giving
doweries to wives which they should mary, ought to be co^me^ded, yet I thought
good to rehearse those things which I have read of this matter by ye way. And
to begin with Magadorus (as it is in Plaucus) in his comedy Aulularia when he
should take to wife the daughter of a poor man, Magadorus of Plautus.
being also without dowery, commends his counsel by these words. If (says
he) other men would do after my example, the City would then be in better
concord, and envy should not be so ryfe among us, as it is. They, namely the
wives will fear us the more, and we shall keep them with much less cost, etc.
When I consider these things, they seem to be very wisely spoken. For now and
then it happens, that one city is after a sort divided into two parts, when
as the daughters of poor men are without hope, to mary with them that be more
rich, either because of the smalenesse of their dowery, or else because they be
altogether without dowery. For they obtain that never but by a certain hap,
or else very rarely. Wherefore the richer and mightier sort are much envied and
grievously hated of the poorer sort. Besides that, wives that have good
doweries do not fear their husbands, yea they contemn and despise them,
countyng them as unworthy to be matched with them in marriage. Lastly their
ornaments and lusts can not be satisfied but with extreme charges Plutarch
says in the Apothegmata of Licurgus, Plutarch.
when he was demanded, why he had commanded by a law that virgins should
mary without dowery, he answered, to the intent some should not be left
unmarried for poverty sake, or other some should be to much labored for, and
esteemed because of their riches, but that every man diligently considering the
manners of the maidens, might chose him a wife by her virtue. He shows also
in the 30. problem, The law of Decemuiri.
that a bride brought to the bridegromes house only a distaffe and a spindle.
The December viri of Rome decreed also by the laws of Solon, that a woman should
be without a dowery, and should bring from her fathers house only three
garments and also certain vessels of small price, because they would declare
that the fellowshyp of marriage is not confirmed by money, but by the love of
children. These certainly agree very trim with that which is written of Paul
and Vulpia^ in the Pandectes of gift between the husband and the wife. It is
written also of the Egiptians, The custom of ye Egiptia^s.
that if they received dowery of their wives, they should be then counted, as
their wives bondemen. Which custom did manifestly teach, that it seems
both full of ignominy, and also unprofitable, to seek a dowery for wives, when
as nothing is more noble than liberty, and nature has ordained that the
husband should rule the wife. The manner of ye Spaniardes
And it is written that the Spaniardes had a custom that the wives should
bring to their husbands a distaffe with flax on it, in stead of a dowery. I
could make mention of a great many besides, to show, that all the men in the
old time allowed not, that husbands should have doweryes given them when they
married their wives. But certainly the laws of God make mention very oftentimes
of a dowery. And I am assured that it was used somewhere before the law. In
Exodus, he which had defiled a virgin, was bound to mary her, so that her
father were content: which if he were not, then was he compelled to give her a
dowery, as the law says the dowery of virgins is. Furthermore in the first
book of kings.ix. chap. Pharao gave for a dowery unto Solomon which had
married his daughter Gazar, a city which he had taken from the Chananites.
Besides this the Roman laws, which otherwise are most full of equity of all
other laws, do make much mention of doweryes, and have many whole titles, in
which this thing only is entreated of.

But now seeing we are come thus far, The definition of a dowery.
it were good to defyne what a dowry is, that thereby we may the eassyer know,
how much of godly men is to be attributed unto it in contracting of
matrimonyes. A dowery is a right to use things, which are given to the husband
by his wife, or by others in her name, to sustain the burdens of matrimonye.
And although a dowery be properly said a right of vsyng, yet notwithstanding
those things which are given unto the man, are oftentimes called by this word
dowery. But the end is chiefly to be marked in this definition, namely to
sustain the burdens of matrimonye. It seems also that seeing the husband
bestows very much in noryshyng his wife, and honestly mayntaining her,
justice and equity require that somewhat be recompensed unto him again. An
error concerning dowry
Wherefore for as much as a dowery has this foundation of justice, there is no
doubt but that it is a thing lawful. But in it is an error not to be suffered,
because some are not ashamed to say, that by a dowery concord between man and
wife is the easelier obtained. Frendshyppe grounded on profit and pleasure is
weak.
This both reason and experience teaches to be most false. Who is ignorant,
that that kind of amity which has a respect only to profit, and which is
founded only upon pleasure, is very frail and transitory? Moreover experience
teaches, that marriages so contracted that no other thing be considered but
only beautye of the wife, and the dowery, have very ill success. Wherefore
those are reprehe^ded by the common proverb, Against to great dowryes and
such as be against all virtue and honesty.
Qui vxores oculis and digitis ducunt, such as marry wives with their eyes and
fingers: that is which are moved only with beauty and money. Wherefore just
laws ought not to take away dowryes, but severely to forbid, that they be not
to much increased, or that they be not contrary to virtue and honestye.
Therefore the Roman laws commanded those doweryes to be cut of, which were
greater than the ability of the geuer could bear, as it is written in the
Digestes of the law of doweryes. And contrariwise we must take heed, that the
parents or tutors being overcome with covetousness give not less than
honesty requires, as it is written in the title de dote inofficiosa. And
because doweryes are given to sustain the burdens of matrimony, those can not
be excused, which when they have received them of their wives, are not affeard
afterward to use their wives unworthily. They be besides that unjust because
they violate the law of God, by which they ought to love their wives as them
selves and their own body, when as they will not conveniently help them with
their own goods. Yea there be some, which if they were not let by
publicque laws would consume, sell and utterly alienate their wives doweryes.
And yt that should not happen, laws, chiefly the Roman laws have diligently
provided for: for they decree that the dominion of the dowery should remain
with the wives although the husbands had ye fruit and use thereof as long as ye
marriage should last. But what, I pray you, shall I say of the^, which do suffer
so grievous and intolerable burdens of matrimony to be daily augmented, in to
much cokering and flattering of their wives? Surely they sin most grievously,
for as much as now neither their own patrimony, neither their wives doweries
ca^ be sufficient, they will so abound every way in ornaments and
sumptuousness. How beit godly husbands and holy wives ought to appoint all
things moderatly. But why thinck we have ye laws ordained so many things, and
by so many ways concerning doweries? Why the dowry ought to remain for the
wives.
Because they would keep ye citizens without hurt or damage, when they marry and
are joined together in matrimony. For it is expedient for the publicque wealth,
yt if the husband do dye, ye dowery may remain whole unto ye wife, wherwt if
she will she may mary again. Or if ye wife dye before, yt the dowry may serve to
nourishe, apparel and bring up the children gotten by matrimony.

But thou will ask, wherefore are doweries said to be given by this title to
sustain the burdens of matrimony? A dowery is not the price of matrimony.
Least the same dowery should be counted a price, as though wives and marriages
were things to be sold. For which self cause in the digestes, gifts between
the husband and the wife are prohibited, namely, that in matrimonyes already
contracted, gifts between the husband and wife should not be received.
Furthermore when as diuorcements were given by that civil law, if gifts
between man and wife had been lawful, marriages should most easily have been
dissolved. (...).
For if one of the married would not give unto the other as much as he would
demand, he should by and by have been repudiated. The men in deed might give
certain gifts unto their wives before the marriages, which were called
ioyntures, as some certain recompencinges of the dowery. But when they were
once married together, the Roman laws permitted not that they should give
gifts one to an other. Of which thing Plutarch also has made mention, out of
whom nevertheless is brought an other reason, tha^ ye which I showed to be
taken of ye laws. These be ye words in the 35. and, 36. precept of matrimony:
Certain bodies are said to consist of severed things, as an host, and an navy,
other bodies of things joined together, as a house and a ship: other some are
united and congeled together as al living creatures are. Wherefore matrimony
which consists of living creatures is united and settled together. But ye
matrimony which consists either for dowry sake, or for children longs to
bodies joined together. And ye which consists for pleasure and carnal
copulation, may be numbered among the severed bodies. For there man and wife may
be said to dwell together, but not to live together. And as in liui^g creatures
the temperatures of humors run through out all the parts: so marriage must
mingle bodies, money, friends and kinsfolks together. And ye maker of ye Roman
laws forbad persons coupled in matrimonye to take or to give gifts one to an
other, not to the intent they should not be partakers of any one thing, but
that they should think all things to be common, etc. Certain maidens had
dowryes out of the treasorye.
But these things are to be understand of free gifts and not of doweryes,
which otherwise were both lawful and also much used in the Roman public
wealth. For the daughters of Scipio, Curious and Cincinnatus had dowryes out of
the treasorye, because of the poverty of their parents, to the intent they
should not be married without doweries.

Yea and ye general council holden at Orleaunce (as it is rehearsed in
the.30. The general council holden at Orleaunce.
Questi. 5. chap. Nullum sine) decreed yt no matrimony should be contracted
without a dowery. Let the dowery (says it) be according to the ability,
neither let any person presume to marry but publicly. It is false that
matrimony can not be co^tracted without a dowrye.
This Canon I gladly allow in yt it condemns secret marriages: but in that it
decrees ye matrimonies can not be contracted without a dowery, for as much as
it is not confirmed by the testimony of the word of God, I can not admit it.
For there are and have been very many which have married wives clean without
any dowery, yea and those me^ of so great honestye and authority, yt it should
seem very rash to condemn their fact, seeing the holy scriptures are not
against it: neither do I judge that matrimony should by any means be denied to
those women which are without dowery, if they have need of matrimonye. Paul
furthermore testifyeth, ye matrimonye shadoweth the conjunction of Christ with
the church: wherefore if we should look upon the truth, the church had nothing
which it could offer unto Christ in the name of a dowry, yea rather (as
Ezechiel teaches) God found it rolled in blood and mire. The fathers in the
old testament seem to have had wives sometimes without dowries. Wherefore it
seems to be decreed, ye men may and yt it is lawful to receive doweryes when
they are given, and that the same custom is honest, so that ye just mean be
not exceded, and he which marieth be not allured to matrimony by ye name of the
dowery as the principal cause. The manners and godliness of the wife ought
chiefly to be regarded, neither ought any man by and by to persuade himself. If
I shall marry a wife without a dowery, I shall therefore have her the better and
the quieter, Jerome. The wife of Law.
seeing (as Jerome declares in his first book against Iouinian) Cato Censorius
had Actoria Paula to wife, who was borne of a base kindred, who was poor also
and without a dowerye, and yet for all that show as a dronckard, weak, and
proud unto the same Cato.

16 And the children of Keni Moses father in law, went up out of the city
of the Palm trees with the children of Judah, into the wilderness of Judah,
that lies in the south of Arad: and went and dwelt among the people.


In the conquering the city of Hebron and Debir there is mention made also of
the children of Moses father in law: they were Ethniks in deed by kind, Of
the Kenites
but they were joined with the Israelites in will and faith, from who^ also in ye
first offspring of kindred they were not strangers: for as much as they came of
Madian the son of Abraham by his wife Keturah. And the same Kenites
constantly abode with the Hebrews till their captiuitye into Babylon, for as
much as the Rechabites came of the Kenites, as it is written in the book of
Paralipomenon. But why they were called Kenites it is uncertain. But some
think yt it came of this, because the son of Iethro, namely Hobab, the
brother of Moses wife, was called Kin by an other name. He therefore in the
beginning with his familye dwelled together with the Beniamites in the fields
of Jericho, when the Israelites passing over Iordane under Joshua possessed the
city of Jericho. But after when they saw that the tribe of Judah possessed the
cities of Hebron and Debir, they went unto the^, and dwelt more co^modiously in
ye plain of Harad, although they had no certain houses, but lived continually
as it were in tents.

The city of Palms.
Although some suspecte the city of Palms to have been Engaddi, yet most part
of the expositours interpret it to be Jericho, with whom Josephus de Antiquit.
Hebr. agrees, and also Paraphrastes Caldaicus, yea and the book of Deuteronomy in
the xxxiiii. chap. testifyeth the same. For as much as that city had a notable
grove of Palms of a hundred furlongs, Strabo.
which thing Strabo also testifyeth. And yet we may not think that ye Kenites
reedifyed the city of Jericho: for it was accursed by the commandment of
Joshua, who amongst other things published this (as it is to be believed) in
the name of God, namely that he which should attempt to repair it, should
wrappe himself under the curse which came to pass in very deed: For in the
time of Ahab the wicked king, one Aiel builte it up again, but to his own
great hurt. Fo his two sons Abiram and Segub perished when ye city was in
repayring, as it is written in ye first book of kings.xvi. chap. But the
country or ground thereof belonged by division unto the tribe of Benjamin. The
field of Jericho belo^ged to the tribe of Benjamin.
And these Kenites as it seems had pitched tents there, either for warfare,
or else for keeping of sheep, in which they lived for a time either about ye
cicie or else between ye decayed places of ye city. And there was a regard had
unto the^ in distributing of ye land, and in assigning of fields (as Josephus
also testifies) according to ye promise made unto the^ by Moses, which is
written in the x. chap. of Number. And it is thought to be very lykely yt their
lot was in the tribe of Judah which being not yet possessed by the children of
Israel, they dwelled (as it is said) in the land with the Beniamites in the
field of Jericho. This exposition seems full and manifest enough.

Kimhi
But Kimhi follows an other opinion, and thinks that the children of
Israel, when they after they had conquered Hebron and Debir in the time of
Joshua, had determined utterly to destroy the city of Jericho, understanding
that the Kenites dwelte there like strangers as I think (because they came of
the stock of Madian) before they overthrew all the city, they called them away,
that they might not perish with the other Chananites. The same courtesy did
Saul show unto them, when he should make war against Amelek, as it is
written in the first book of Samuel xv. chap. For he commanded the Kenites to
depart, least they should be destroyed with Amelek: and he showed a cause,
namely because they were good and gentle unto the Israelites coming up out of
Egypt. Kimhi adds moreover, that Amelek and the Kenites were of a far
contrary affection toward the Israelites. For the Kenites loved the^
wonderful well. But Amelek hated the^ deadly. Wherefore eue^ as god had bound
himself by an oath, ye war should be continually made against Amelek: so
would he have ye Kenites reco^penced always with benifites. This
interpretation should be very likely, if this departing of ye Kenites from
Jericho, were not put by our history after Hebron and Debir were conquered. But
Jericho was conquered of Joshua first of all after he had passed over Iordane:
and certainly before he had gotten Hebron and Debir Besides this our historye
entreats either of the Kenites which remained in Madian, or else of those
which had joined themselves in fellowship with ye people of Israel. It seems
yt this can not be spoken of the first, when as Jericho is not in Madian, yea
it is far distant from thence, but if we shall understand this to be spoken of
those which came with Israel, how should it be understand yt they dwelt in
Jericho, before Joshua took it? Moreover it is not found in ye text of the
history, yt they were called forth as Kimhi writes: but it is plainly written
yt they went from thence to Judah. Wherefore I can better agree with Josephus,
Josephus. Why ye Kenites departed from Jericho.
who writes ye they therefore departed from thence, because in ye division of
the land, and distributing of fields (as I have before said) their
inheritance fell about the tribe of Judah wherefore they got the^ unto it when
Hebron and Debir were conquered. But why from the time they came over Iordane
even to this time they dwelt rather about Jericho tha^ in any other place,
seeing the scripture speaks not of it, I am content to lack the knowledge
thereof.

But because this Kenite (as many Hebrews confess) was the father in law of
Moses, which thing also Jerome confyrmeth in his book of traditions or Hebrew
questions upon the first book of Samuel and upon Paralip. we must therefore
call to memory Iethro, of whom is mention made more largely in the book of
Exodus. That Iethro was he to who^ Moses came when he fled out of Egypt, What
this word Cohen signifies.
who was also either prince or priest of Madian. For ye Hebrew word Cohen
signifies both, and therefore the holy historyes writes of ye sons of David
yt they were Cohenim yt is princes, and highly exalted amongst magistrates:
ii. Sam viii. Aben-Esra
for so were kings wont to exalte their children. Although Aben-Esra affirms
Moses father in law to have been priest of Madian. And says yt he ministered
not to Idols, but to the true god: for the pure worshipping of god was not so
peculiar to the people of Israel, but yt there were godly men in other places,
which worshipped god sincerely. There is no doubt but ye Melchisedech was such
a one, who^ the scripture calls the priest of the high god. Moses defended
the daughters of this Iethro from the shepherdes at the well, by which means he
was made his son in law. And afterward when he fed his sheep not far from
the mount Sina he was called of god, to deliver the people of Israel from the
Egiptian bondage. Wherefore he asked leave of him to depart and went his way to
Egypt, and from thence after wonder full works of god, he led the people into
the deserte, and fought against Amelek in whose land Kenite the Madianite
dwelt. And when Moses had obtained the victory, Iethro, who was not with
Amelek in the war, came unto Moses his son in law, and rejoiced at his
happy success in the battle, he did sacrifice, and communicated together
with his son in law, and the rest of the Israelites in giving thanks to
god. He gave also unto Moses wholesome counsel, not to weary himself in
hearing al causes: But rather that he should have men chosen out, which might
both hear and also determine common and light causes, and such as were harder,
to be referred only to him: and he for ye most hard matters to ask counsel of
god, and look what god had answered and commanded, the same to be decreed for
the people. When Iethro or Kenite had done these with Moses in the wilderness
after the war of Amelek before the law was given, he returned into his own
country as it is written in the xviii. Chap. of Exodus.

But concerning his return into his own country, there are two opinions, Of
the return of Moses father in law into his country.
both of the Hebrews and our men. Some say that he returned to dispose and set
an order in his domestical things, and to make preparation for his family to
journey with the Israelites. Which things being al finished almost in one
years space, he returned to his son in law, and went together with him and
the Israelites to the land of Chanaan. And so they say, although it be said in
the historye that he departed before, yet it is truly put in the book of Number.
that Moses spoke with him, in the second year from the departure out of
Egypt, when the tabernacle was then finished, and orders appointed, whereby the
Hebrews should go forward. For he destred him, not to depart from him, but to
be as it were an eye to the Israelits in this their journey into strange
countries, for that he knew all the places of ye desert very well, because he
was borne in the country adjoining unto it. Not because the pyllers and
clouds led not the Israelites safely and soundly, but because this man was
very cunning in pitching and camping an host. Moses would therefore (as they
say) have him to instruct the troops of Soldiers which should go forth,
and to provide that they going forward, should abide joined together, and
should keep the just manner of warlyke order. Whereunto this also was a
help, for that by reason of his knowledge of the countries he could easily
admonyshe the Israelites of the nature of those places, and how far distante
and nyghe they were together. Howbeit other say, that Iethro so returned to his
house, after he had rejoiced with Moses that he returned not unto him again:
for as it is to be believed, he was very aged, and therefore he spent the rest
of his age with his neighbors and familye in Madian, exercisyng his office
either of a prince or else of a priest. Nevertheless they think yt he left a
son with Moses, called Hobab, to the entente he might be thoroughly
enstructed by Moses his kinnesman, and by Aaron, and other excellent men of
the Hebrews, in Godliness and knowledge of worshipping of God. Therefore they
will have this man to be he, who^ Moses spoke unto in the.x. of Number. and made
ouersear for pitching of the camps. Besides yt they say yt this man's sons
and familye were now at this present called Kenites. And I my self, to say what
I think true, do much agree with this latter sentence.

For Balaam the Prophet in the.24. chap. of Number. prophesied peculiarly of the
Kenites, Balaam the Prophet.
that they should have their habitations in the most fenced places, and yt they
should there abide, til they were led away captives by the Assirians, and he
joins them (as it appears manifestly in that place) with Amelek: for (as I
said before) they inhabited al one land with the Amelekites. Wherefore it is
gathered that Iethro so departed from Moses into Madian, to dwell there
continually. And so it might be that Balaam the Prophet joined the Kenites with
the Amelekites, of which Kenites nevertheless part were with the Israelites,
for as much as Iethro (as it is said) left his son with them.

Besides this in the.x. chap. of Number. Hobab was desired of Moses, to come and
go with the Israelites, whether they went: who refused to go any farther,
because he was minded to return home into his country. For he was left there
of his father to be better instructed in the worshippyng of God, and he abode
with the Israelites till they were ready to depart thence, And then he thought
to have returned into his country: but being desired of Moses, he consented
at length to journey forth with ye Israelits. But these things could not have
been so, if we should think ye Hobab had been Iethro, which after he had
divided and set his things in order should have returned again to Moses, with
ye mind and purpose to have gone forward with ye Israelits. For what neded
Moses to have entreated him to do that, for which cause he came from his own
house to do? Or why should he have changed his purpose to return into his
own countreye, which he had before utterly forsaken? Lastly why should he
afterward have denied to go, which he had before decreed with himself to do?
I know in deed there be some but not many which affirm, that Iethro was that
Hobab with whom Moses spoke in the book of Number. which thing let the^ affirm
for me, howbeit I thought good to declare what I judged most likely.

And that the familye of the Kenites dwelled long among the Amelekites or very
nyghe adioynyng unto them, the first book of Samuel testifyeth, where it is
written that Saul called forth the Kenites, least he should have destroyed
them together with the Amelekites. Wherefore it seems that part of the
Kenites dwelled with the Amelekites, and part with the Israelits, of which
both of the^ were always most friendly to ye Hebrews. And god declares yt he
had excelle^tly adorned the^ in their public wealth, and that with three
principal gifts. For they excelled in the study and knowledge of the law.
Three things God seems to have given to the Kenites.
They were also notable in obtaining of a great victory. Lastly they lived
virtuously and godly. And concerning the study of the law, wherein they
floorished, the first book of Paralipomenon Iambes, that is, of Othoniel, and
they are said to have been Scribes: whereby it appears that the tradition of
the Hebrews is not to be despised, that in the doctrine of the law, they were
the disciples of Othoniel: for they are reckoned in his family. And it is a very
common thing, to count disciples in the place of children. Jerome.
Jerome also in his questions upon Paral. allows this opinion, which (as it
is said) seems to agree with the scriptures. Neither do I think that for
any other cause there is mention made of them in this place among the acts of
Othoniel, Why mention is made here of the Kenites.
but only because they lived together always with his family most lovingly.
They are also counted with the tribe of Judah, although they were not of the
stock of the Israelites. Wherefore they amongst other were a figure of the
calling of the Gentiles. The other notable ornament of theirs in that public
wealth was that Iahel, the wife of Aber the Kenite slew Sisara the captain of
war of Iabin king of Chanaan, and God would by the hand of a woman of this
familye grant great health to the Israelites. Lastly that they were well
manered, and obseruers of their fathers Ionadab the son of Rechab has
declared. They drunk no wine, which at that time was the manner of the
Nazarites, Praise of the Rechabites.
and notably despising earthly things they dwelled not in houses, but lived in
tents, and exercised the art of a shepherd which is most simple. For which
thing they are very much commended of Jeremy the Prophet, and adourned with a
most ample promise above the Jews, because they had given more service and
obedience unto him namelye Rechab their parent, than the Hebrews had done unto
God himself, which nevertheless did continually boast in that father and holy
progenitors. Wherefore we know that to be most true which Paul has taught to
the Romans, that they in deed had Abraham to their father, which followed the
steps of his faith, they were not Jews by nature, but by will and faith were
made Proselites, and in godlynes and holiness far passed very many of those
which were by nature Jews.

We gather moreover hereby, It is very profitable for men to join them selves
to good and godly persons.
that it much avails us to join our selves with good men, and with the
fellowshyp of the godly. The Kenites which were the posterity of Hobab, if they
would have rested (as the most part of men do) in their own country, and in
the place where they were borne, they had fallen at length into the ignorance
of God and of his laws, whereby they should easily have been like unto their
neighbor Amalek. But because they despising their own things, and kyndled
with the faith of the promise of God, joined themselves unto the Israelites,
What are the most honest causes of peregrination.
therefore God gave them such good success in their things. We ought to
remember with our selves the most honest cause of the peregrination of these
men. For all good men travail not into strange countries for one purpose.
There be very many, which do therefore often times leave their country, because
they may not worship God there after the sincere and lawful manner of
worshipping, yea they are grievously troubled there, if they endeavor them
selves thereunto. So Abraham was called out of his land and from his kynred,
least he should still have gone forward with his elders to contaminate him
self with idolatry. So Christ also said, if they shall persecute us in one
city, let us fly unto an other. But there be other, which though they be not
let at home from the true godlynes, yet for all that they will go see those
places, where they think they may yet get more profyt, Plato his pergrination
is praised.
and be more certainlye enstructed in things divine and necessary for
salvation. For which cause Plato is commended, because he came to the
Egiptians, and went to a part of Italy, that is great Grease: he went also unto
diverse nations, as though he should follow wisdom flieng from him. So in like
wise Saba the queen is commended in the holy scriptures, which travailed from
so far countries to hear Solomon: after this manner the Kenites (of whom we
entreat) followed the people of Israel: for although at home they knew and
worshipped one God, whose Priest their father also was, yet nevertheless they
desired to be still more instructed, and more absolutelye to receive the laws,
institutions and worshipping of God.

They are also very much worthy of praise, which do for this cause only
travail into other countries to profyt others, and to help and deliver them
from the miseries wherewyth they be oppressed. After which sort the Poets
have said that Hercules wandered through the world, Hercules.
by his might to destroy wicked and hurtful men, which miserably afflicted
mankind. Neither did the Apostels travail throughout the whole world for any
other cause, than to deliver men out of the mouth of the devil, and by the
preaching of the Gospel to loose them from their chains of errors. Christ
also for this self same cause would trauail and journey among men, that by his
doctrine and death he might deliver mankind from eternal destruction. Wherefore
the Kenites may be numbered with these: for they also adjoined them selves
companions with the Israelites, to help the^ through the deserte. For (as it
is said) they having good knowledge of those places, might stand the Jews in
great steed. These counsels are plainlye judged good and honest, for whose
causes peregrinations which are taken without co^pulsion, are honest and praise
worthy.

There may be other reasons also of peregrination, which as they be not
always to be refused, yet are they nothing to be compared with these, either
in praise, or else in worthynes. Wherefore let godly men take heed when they
journey into far countries, that they apply them selves as much as is
possible unto these causes and reasons now mentioned. And as God has not
defrauded these Kenites of the fruit which they looked for, but made them
partakers and that plentifully of those good things which he had prepared for
his people, so seeing also he is now the same God which he was then, we must
believe, that he will not suffer him self to depart from his accustomed manner
and perpetual goodness, so that we observe the good and just causes and reasons
of peregrination.

Seneca What is chiefly to be observed in peregrination.
But in that thing we have need of great warenesse and diligence, namely that
chiefly (as Seneca has well admonished in his.105. epistle to Lucillas) we
depart from our selves, that is that we lay away our wicked affections,
because the changing of places do little profit, if we carry about together with
us the same affections, which we had before. Yea and ye chiefly helps to the
renewing of godlynes, that we be made other from our selves. For what had the
good laws, honest manners, and chaste religion which the Jews professed,
profited the Kenites, if they would have brought their own things with them,
and continued in the same wherein they were conuersaunt before? Wherefore they
which do travail into other countries for study and godlynes sake, ought not
to have this purpose before them, to behold the Cities, buildinges, rivers,
fields, vineyards woods, plays and qualities of men: For all these things
although they somewhat delight the beholders, as children which with pleasure do
maruayl at every new and strange thing, yet they do nothing, or very little
help. The chief cause ought to be, yt they only study above al other things
to be made better, as touching godliness and doctrine. For if they shall despise
this, they shall be said to wander, rather tha^ justly to journey. Let them not
therefore retain with them any longer those euyls which are to be avoided, yet
let them above all things journey from the ignorance of God, from the
unskillfulness of the holy Scriptures, from corrupt affections, and from wicked
and pernicious examples. This is the just cause of peregrinatio^, which the
Kenites by their deed do declare unto us. If the Lacedaemonians had had a regard
to this, they would not by their laws have prohibited peregrinations: But I
suppose that they regarded this, The Lacedaemonians prohibeted peregrinations.
which they marked so to come to pass for the most part, that the citizens in
travailing into strange countries, learned of the strangers whom they went to
see, not their virtues and wisdom, but rather their vices and errors, and
afterward being infected with many euyls, they returned into their country,
where they destroyed their Citizens by a certain pestiferous contagiousnes.
Which thing surely no man doubts but that it is a grievous evil and
discommodity to a public wealth. Why peregrinations do profyt.
And yet we may not therefore decree that al peregrinatio^s are hurtful. For
there can be found no City, no people, nor no public wealth in the world,
which has not many things imperfect in manners and laws, which may be amended
and corrected by the sight and knowledge of others. Licurgu^.
Lycurgus certainly which made that law, profited much in travailing into
strange countries. Yea and the Decemuiri of the Romans went them selves into
Graecia, Decemuiri of the Romans.
to the end they would know the laws of that people, and by that means they
wonderfully provided for their public wealth. And thus much for
peregrination.

And now let us finish this history, judging that the children of Kenite were
of that stock which were begotten of Hobab in ye wilderness among the children
of Israel: And that Hobab was the son of Moses father in law, and his wives
brother german. Neither ought this to move us because it is said in the.x.
Aben-Esra.
of Number. Chothen because as Aben-Esra there testifies, that word signifies
not only a father in law, but also the brother of the wife, and some have
translated the same word there not for a father in law, but a kynsman. But
these Kenites departed out of the field of Jericho, that they might obtain
possession with the tribe of Judah. And therefore they are said to have dwelled
with the people. For first they followed them in iourneyeng with them, and now
by the same right they are said to have dwelled with them. And they ascended,
The situation Jericho.
because Jericho was situate in a valley, and between it an Jerusalem was a
deserte longing to Judah, which as it is very lykely had in it woody places,
and mete for pasture. And that it was so, it is easelye gathered out of the
Gospel of Luke, where Christ put forth a parable, namely that a man descended
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell into the hands of thieves. And certainly if
he descended, it is manifest yt these ascended, when they followed the tribe of
Judah going toward Jerusalem. And because the place was full of wooddes, it was
an easy matter (especially in the time of Christ when the common wealth of the
Hebrews was very much out of frame) for it to be full of thieves. There
certainly (as far as can be perceived) the Kenites received their lot. And I
think I have spoken enough as touching this hystory.

17. And Judah went with Symeon his brother, and smote the Chananites dwelling
in Zephat, and utterly destroyed it, and called the name of the City Horma.

18. And Judah took Hazza and the borders thereof, and Ascalon with the borders
thereof, and Aekron with the borders thereof.


Now we are come to that place where the long parenthesis (which I before
admonished you of) ends. And whatsoever follows after these words: The
children of Judah fighting against Jerusalem took it. Here the aforesaid
parenthesis ends.
etc. to this place, are declared by a parenthesis. For all those things
happened not after the death of Joshua, but when he was yet living. And now the
history retourneth to that setting forward to battle which they of Judah and
the Symeonites took in hand, styrred up by the oracle of God. And therefore it
is written: And Judah went with Symeon his brother, and smore the Chananites
dwelling in Zephat, and utterly destroyed it, and called the name of the City
Horma. The vow of Cherem that is of the curse.
The Hebrews did not utterly throw down nor destroy certain cities which they
possessed, but dwelled in them. Howbeit some they cursed and clean defaced. And
their vow was called in Hebrew, Cherem, of the thing that was promised,
derived from this word Charam, which is to waste, to destroy, to kill, to
deface, and to give under curse. The Grecians called that word (...): They
called (...) also, (...), and (...) as things consecrated and put apart. And
it may be that so they called them, because they were hanged up in temples, and
were separated from the use of men, neither was it lawful to remove them out
of that place. Yea and men somtymes were called by that name. Paul also used
that word many times, for he says to the Galathians: Let him be accursed
whosoever shall preach any other Gospel. And to the Romans he wished him self
to be made a curse for the brethren. And to the first of the Corinthians he
says: he ye loves not ye lord Jesus, let him be accursed, Maranatha, where he
takes this word (...) for this word Cherem, that is, a thing separated and
seioyned utterly from man's occupying or use, so that it was wicked either to
touch it, or to put it to any use. Wherefore we have a testimonye in the book
of Joshua, Why the city of Jericho was made a curse.
the.6. chap. of the city ^^^^cho. And it seemed to have been so accursed
because it was after a sort the (...) fruits of the Cities that were taken.
For after they were passed over Iordane, it was the first of all the cities that
was conquered, and that by no man's help, for that the walls thereof fell down
of their own accord, and through the woorking of God. And therefore it was
mete that the spoils thereof should altogether be consecrated unto God..
Whether the destruction of cities pertayne to the worshipping of God.
But that seems to be utterly far from the worshipping of God to destroy
both cities and men, and these seem to have a show of cruelty, rather than of
religion. To that I answer, that the destruction of towns in deed of their own
nature, belong neither to religion nor yet to godlynes, but so far forth as
they are referred to the glory of God. And that may happen two manner of ways.
As when that destruction is counted as a certain monument of the severity and
justice of God against those nations which he for their wickedness would have
destroyed, or as a certain testimony of Gods goodness and mercy toward the
Israelites, whom in that expedition he mercyfully helped. Therefore the
overthrowing of the city, houses, men, and beasts, did show the justice and
severity of God. And the consecration declared the goodness, help and mercy
showed to that people. Moreover God would by that means prove the obedience of
his people in abstaining from the spoils which were consecrated unto God. God
by these curses proved his people.
For we know that soldiers when they have gotten the victory, are hardlye
restrained from the pray. But they which obeyed not the curse published, were
most grievously punished: which the holy history of Joshua declares to have
happened unto Acham, because he usurped unto him self some of the spoils of
Jericho. We know also that Saul for this cause was deprived of his kingdom,
because he had reserved Agag the king, and certain oxen and fat cattle of the
pray which were bound before to the vow of the curse.

The form of the curse.
Of the form and end of the curse we have spoken enough. For the form is the
destruction of cities, men and beasts, and the consecration of gold, silver,
iron, brass, precious stones, and costly things, which were appointed only to
the use of the tabernacle. But the end was that they might be monuments of Gods
goodness and justice, The end of the same.
and also an exercise and trial of the Israelites. Now rests somewhat to
speak of the matter and efficient cause thereof.

The matter was, what soever was found on live in those cities, for all that
ought to be killed, The matter of the same.
and the buildinges and other garnishinges of the city ought to be clean
destroyed: but as for the ornaments and riches, they were (as it is said)
consecrated unto the worshipping of God. But there is to be marked, that none
were vowed unto so horrible a destruction, but such as were already declared and
known to be enemies of God: for it is not lawful to kill Innocents. Wherefore
they sinned most grieuouslye which so vowed Paul's death, that they would
neither eat nor drink till they had killed him. And at this day they behave
them selves more than wickedly, Iephre.
which say that they have vowed them selves most cruelly to kill all the
Professors of the gospel. Yea, and Iephte without doubt was deceived,
Agamemnon.
which because of his kind of vowyng thought that his daughter should either
be slain, or else compelled to perpetual virginity. Agamemnon also is to be
condemned, which (as Cicero declares in his book of offices) vowed unto Diana
the fairest woman that should be borne in his kingdom. And to perform this
foolish vow, he sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia. The efficient cause of a
curse
But the efficient cause of the vow Cherem, sometimes is God, as it is written
in the.vii. and.x. chap. of Deuteronomy. For there it is commanded that places
dedicated to Idols, aulters, images, groves, and monumentes should be utterly
destroyed, and that was a perpetual curse in the land of Chanaan, and to be
always observed. Sometimes the Prince made such a vow, as we read of Joshua,
and sometimes the people, as we find in the.21. chap. of Number. The prophets also
sometimes did this, and so Samuel commanded Saul, clean to destroi al things
belonging to ye Amelekites

The name of this city, whereof we now entreat, was afterward called Horma,
for it was not so called before, and it was so called of the word Cherem. For
such a name were they wont to give unto such places as were wasted and
destroyed by a curse. In the book of Number. 21. chapter a certain portion of
the Chananites, which the Israelites possessed by violence, was by reason of
such a vow called Horma.

But some peradventure will ask, These destructions of Cities are not against
charity. Augustine.
whether these destructions of towns were against charity? To whom I answer no.
Because such enemies were chosen to be utterly destroyed of the Jews by the
judgment of God, and not by the lust of men. But as touching the love or
hatred of enemies, we must understand that Augustine has written toward the
end of the first book upon the sermon of the Lord on the mountain, that he
does ascend one step of righteousness, which loves his neighbor, although
he yet hate his enemy. But then shall he perform benevolence and gentleness at
the commandment of him which came to fulfill the law, and not to break it,
when he shall stretch it even to the love of the enemy. For that degree, though
it be somewhat, yet it is so small, that it may be common also with Publicanes.
Neither that which is said in the law: Thou shall hate thine enemy, It is not
lawful for the imperfect to hate their enemies.
is to be taken as a commandment unto the just man, but as a permission to
the weak. Thus much he writes, with whom (if I should speak as I think) I
do not agree, but am certainly persuaded, that to hate our enemies is not
permitted of God, no not to the imperfect. For it is an everlasting precept,
that we should love our neighbor as our selves. Who is our neighbor.
And he is our neighbor whom we help by any occasion, as Christ has
declared in the parable of the Jews and of the Samaritan. They were compared
as enemies one to an other, wherefore the condition of enmitye when it
happens, can not let, but yt such as are enemies one to an other be yet
neighbors. Moreover for as much as we se ye David and other prophets did
oftentimes curse their enemies, by what means can we call the^ weak, who^ God
gave liberty to hate their enemies. For they were holy men and very perfect.
Augustine,
Neither does that seem to make much to the purpose, which the same Augustine
says, namely that the sayings of these holy men were no vows and desires,
but rather forespeakinges and prophecies of them, who living under the old
testament did oftentimes prophecye the chance of things to come. For the
Apostels ar also found in the new testament not only to have spoken words of
cursings (as Paul when he says: I would to god they were cut of which do
trouble you) but also to have most grievously punished some. For as much (as it
is written in ye acts of the Apostels) the same Paul deprived Elimas the
Magicien of his sight, and Peter slew Ananias and Saphira. Wherefore we must
rather say that these great me^ did not such things of an hatred granted to
imperfect men, but yt they were driven thereunto by some other manner of means.
Mark the distinction.
And therefore me thinks we must make this distinction, that they sometimes had
to do for their own causes, and sometimes for gods cause. When they had to do
for their matters, al their doings were ordered with al modestye and gentleness. As
we se David to have done, who many times spared Saul his deadly enemy. Moses
also and other holy men did constantly and valiauntly very often grievous
things. But when the matters of God were in hand, the same me^ behaved them
selves severely and nobly. And if they should have done that in their own
causes, they might have seemed to wrest the swerd out of the hand of God and of
the Magistrate, which they do which revenge their own injuries.

This is also to be added, that men which are appointed to take in hand and to
defend Gods cause, What is chieflye to be taken heed of when Gods matters are
in hand.
although they may then do things sharply and seuerlye, yet they must
precisely and diligently take heed, that under that pretense, they cocker not
their own affections. The Apostels when they desired Christ to send fire from
heaven upon the Samaritanes (as they knew was done in the old time, at the
prayers of Helias) were rebuked of the Lord, because they knew not of whose
spirit they were, which without doubt was a most apt answer. For they whom God
sends to execute these offices, ought not now to be counted private or
simple men, Whether it be lawful to pray against tyrans and to curse them
Augustine.
but such as were prepared and enstructed of him, to be in his steed upon the
earth. But whether it be lawful for private men to pray against ungodly and
cruel Tyrannes, by whom the true worshipping of God is hindered, and to curse
them, Augustine answers, that it is always lawful for godly men to pray
unto God against the kingdom of sin. And that may be clean taken away,
when the ungodly forsake their wickedness, for whose unfeigned repentance we
must always pray unto God. But if they seem past all hope, it is lawful to
pray that their sins may sometimes at the length come to an end: namely
that when they are taken away, they might cease both to hinder the
woorshipping of God, and also to trouble the Saints. For as much as it is not
expedient that their sin should escape unpunished, for when it is least
without punishment, it is mere injustice. But when the punishment of God is
adjoined unto it, then there is in him less deformitye. Wherefore God is of the
same Augustine called very well not a cruel tormentor, Augustine.
but a just correctour. Moreover, because holy men are very familiar with God,
and therefore when by some heavenly revelation, Saints sometimes rejoice and
also are sorry for the destruction of the wicked.
they are acertained of his will, because they exceedingly love him, they cannot
but allow his sentence, yea they faithfullye pray that the same may be
accomplished. Although (in that they be men) they be both sorry, and also take
it grievously to have their neighbors so vexed. After which sort Samuel
mourned for Saul the king, whom be knew nevertheless to be rejected of god.
Jeremy also wept for the captivity which was at hand, and Christ wept for the
City of Jerusalem which should be destroyed. For they which be me^ in deed, God
requires not the not feeling of the Stoikes.
can not chose but be sorry for their neighbors and their own flesh when it is
afflicted. Neither does God require of us that Stoike lack of compassion. But
as touching this matter, if the Reaver desire to know more, let him look upon
my Commentaries to the Corrinthians. But as touching this present purpose, that
is to say, that the people of Israel in destroying and cursing of these
peoples, followed not their own hatred, but the instinction of God, for they
were his Lieuetenauntes, and might be called his woorkemen, when as they
destroyed those whom god himself had declared to be enemies, and commanded
that they should be destroyed by them.

And Judah took Hazzam, and the borders thereof. These words do al so confirm
yt those things which are now declared, were don after ye death of Joshua, when ye
public wealth of the Israelites was governed by elders. For when in the book
of Joshua the.xiii. chap. those Cities were reckoned which were least
unconquered after Iosuas death, these cities Haza, Ascalon, and Accaron are
expressed by name. But there is a doubt, after what sort these Cities were
said to have pertained to the Philistians in the time of Samuel, when Saul did
then reign. Yea and the same is written in the third chap. of this book.
There are some which affirm that these Cities were not now altogether taken,
but so possessed, that the Israelites obtained some part of the land which
belonged unto them, which seems not very lykely unto me, seeing that the
historye says that not only every one of these Cities were taken, but that
also the ends and borders of them came into the power of Judah. Wherefore I
would rather judge that their opinion is best, which affirm that Judah did now
in deed possess these Cities, as it is written, but afterward when the
Israelites sinned, they were again driven out of them by the Philistians, who
won them again to their own use, and so did win them, that they counted
them as most principal dominions, for they did set over each of them certain
noble governors. Neither ought that much to move us, because the history does
only name Judah now, and speaks nothing of Symeon. For that might be,
because the lot of both these tribes was joined together, and they had made a
covenant to fight together: therefore when we hear the name of the one, we must
therewith also under stand the name of the other. And the name of Symeon is
rather unspoken of, because God himself in his oracle gave Judah the
principality in this expedition.

19 And the Lord was with Judah, and he possessed the mountain: for he could
not drive out the inhabitauntes of the valley, because they had iron Chariotes.


He possessed the mountain. The figure zeugma.
It is written in Hebrewe Veioresch Hahar, which if it were properly translated
is, he drove away the mountain, which without doubt is a figurative phrase, for
the figure (...) is added, by which figure, one and the self word serves for
two members, because that word Ioschebe which is inhabitours, ought to be
repeated: that even as it is said that Judah could not drive out the
inhabitours of the valley, so also must be understand that the inhabitours of
the mountain were expelled by him, so that this word Hahar is the genitive
case, as is this word Haamak, that is, of the valley. The conquering of both
these was paynfull, because Cities founded upon mountains are by nature of the
place well fenced, and they which dwelled in the (...) valleys, were very expert
in a kind of fence, I mean iron chariotes. But least peradventure we should
think that the inhabitors of the mountains were driven out of their place of
Judah by the strength of men there is set before. And the Lord was with Judah.
As though it had been said, because they fought by the favor of God, therefore
the hilly places were conquered. Wherefore if God had aided them of Judah with
the like favor in their battayl in the valley, they should also have overcome
those which inhabited the valley. There seems also a cause to be given because
they had iron chariotes.

He that shall read the Iliades of Homer, shall easily perceive that the men in
the old time used chariotes in battails, and also the same may be gathered both
out of the most ancient histories, and also out of the latter writers, Quintus
Curtius.
and amongst other Quintus Curtius writing the life of Alexander does plainly
make mention of such chariots in the battle fought against Darius. But I
think no writer writes more plainly of them than does Liuie. Titus Liuius.
For he in that battle wherein Antiochus was overcome of the Romans, which is
in the.4. decade, and seventh book, thus describes the chariotes which he
calls hooked. He says that they were fenced chiefly after this manner. The
description of hooked chariotes.
The points about the draught tree standing out from the yoke, had as it were
horns, wherewith whatsoever they met they might thruste it through: and two
hooks hoong out at each end of the cart, the one even with the carte, the
other fastened downewarde to the earth, the former served to cut asunder what
so ever came on the side of it, the other was made to crushe them which fell
down, or went under. There were also two sundry hooks fastened after the same
sort to the exetrees of both the wheles. etc. The use therefore of these
chariotes endured til the time that Antiochus was overcome. Howbeit we never
read that the Romans used them. And that they were horrible to behold, and
hard to be conquered, may manifestly be gathered by the book of Joshua: For
there in the.vii. chap. when the tribe of Joseph complained because it was so
many in number, and had obtained so narrow a lot, Joshua commanded them, that
if they had not room inoughe, they should go and dwell or else conquer the
places of their enemies adjoining unto them. They excused them selves, that
they could not do that, because their neighbors had iron chariotes. But to
repeat more auncienter things, Pharao (as it is written in the book of
Exodus) when he persecuted the Israelites which fled, is said to have had
chariotes, and with the same he took upon him to enter into the sea. But they
being overthrown by the power of God, he was punished for breaking his
fidelity.

Iron chariotes cannot resist god
But this is diligently to be considered of us, whether either iron chariotes,
or hooked carts can withstand the power and promise of God, which if we shall
deny (as in very deed we must deny) why ar they then put here as the cause that
the victory was not obtained? Mark the distinction.
Whereunto I answer, that in this place is set forth unto us the nighest
cause, namely that which was seen. And certainly it was a cause, if we should
look only upon man's strength. For the Chananites being so armed and appointed
could not be overcome of the Israelites, which were weaker than they, Why god
granted not the hole victory unto Judah.
and not so well armed and fenced. But if the power and might of God be
considered, the same could not be let either by chariots and weapons or else
by power of soldiers. Why did not God therefore which had given part of the
victory, grant the whole also? Kimhi answers that God did it to prove the
Israelites thereby. For if they should have been constrained (as in deed they
were) to dwell for a while with these nations, then experience should have tried
how much they would set by their God, namelye whether they would persevere in
the lawful woorshypping of him, or whether they would enclyne to their own
mad customs and woorshipping of Idols. This in deed is a true cause, and
is set forth also in the third chapter of this book, and toward the end
likewise of the second. There is also an other cause added, namely to teach
them the art and faculty of fyghting: for they which lived before their time,
had no skyll of these things. And it is written in Exodus that it was done
that wild beasts should not to much abound, which must needs have
followed, if the land should have been brought into a wyldernes, before the
Hebrews could have filled it all. And of these causes I have made mention
before.

But the Paraphrastes Chaldaicus brings an other cause besides these, and
says that the children of Israel had sinned: Wherefore he thincketh it was
done, that God iustlye and woorthylye withdrewe his aid and gave not unto them
when they fought, the whole and full victory. And that, though the scripture
do not now express it, may evidently be gathered by other places. For we are
very often taught by the holy scriptures that idolatry and sins were just
causes why the Israelites sometimes went without the victory promised unto
them. And though there had been no other sin, we might allege this, that
their faith and prayers were sometimes somewhat more slack than they ought to
have been. When faith and prayers wax fainte, then the victory is taken away.
Which manyfestly appears in that war which the Hebrews made in the
wilderness against Amelecke for the enemy overcame, when Moses began to
be faynte in prayer. And again, the victory was restored unto the people of
God, when the faith and prayer of Moses was more earnest and vehement. Sin
therefore is not only ye cause of death, but it brings also al infirmities,
weakness and miseries. Contrarily faith is the cause of all strength, might,
and victories. Wherefore it is very well written in the xi. Chapter to the
Hebrews, that the Saints through faith have won kingdoms. Which may and
ought to be referred to the spiritual victory. Wherefore John does faithfully
admonyshe us, when he says. This is the victory which overcomes the world,
even our faith.

By these may be gathered that God leaves those destitute of his aid, God
forsakes the^ that forsake him.
which do forsake him. And that may easily be declared by our first Father
Adam. Who, as he was created of God, before sin, he had that power of
strength and will, that he might if he had would have resisted sin. Adam was
not altogether forsaken of God after his sin.
But when he filthely fell from God, God also forsook him, but not utterly,
howbeit he forsook him so that he lost many of his gifts, and much favor.
For God would not have taken so many good things away from him, but that he
first had alienated himself from God through sin. After the same sort
happens it to those which are now borne a new, who although they have not
yet recovered a perfect free will, nevertheless for so much as they are
somewhat restored, and may now work together with God, if they shall despise
the gifts which they have in them, and will not use them as it is meet they
should, God will justly forsake them, seeing they shrynke first away from
him. As we may see in the parable of the Lord, wherein it is written, That
the master going into a far country distributed money unto his servants,
to be increased by their industrye and labor, which thing as many of the
servants as did, they were both commended of their master when he returned,
and also nobelly rewarded. But he which despised the commandment of his
Lord, was grievously reproved, and grievously punished, for the money committed
unto him.

But if we shall speak of the first generation, Concerning eternal
reprobation, the reprobate are forsaken of God before they forsake him.
whereby we are borne the children of wrath, and we all are of that mass,
which lies under the curse, from which God by his election delivers whom he
will: and whom he will not, he forsakes according to his own will and purpose,
which is always just, though it be hidden from us. Seeing that that is not
brought to pass by works foresene, neither that we have done any good or evil
before we were borne, it is manifest, that certain, I mean reprobates, are
forsaken of God as touching his election, before that they forsake him by their
propre will, for so much as they had not it from the beginning. But we at this
present, speak not of this matter, neither will descend into this question.
But that which we have now affirmed Augustine has set forth in the.14. chap.
of his Soliloquii animae ad deum. Augustine.
Thou Lord (says he) do not forsake me, unless I first forsake thee. And in
his book de natura et gratia against the Pelagians in the.27. and.28. chap. he
elegantlye expounds after what sort God is forsaken of men before he
forsakes them. By pride god is forsaken before he forsakes.
Among other vices (says he) pride which is borne in us, is the head of al
evils. Which pride uses then to show forth it self, when we are doing
well, and when we are in the chief course of the victory. There the vain heart
of man is puffed up, so that every man thinks him self not to be as other
men are. This is for the most part, the first departure from God, whereby he
again wythdraweth him self from us. And even as we do not depart from him
by steps, but in heart and affection, so is he separated from us, not
concerning place, (for, for as much as he is infinite he occupies all
things) but he wythdraweth from us his favor, gifts, grace, and help. God
uses also to punyshe the elect to their salvation.


And when he is so departed, they which are forsaken, undoubtedly fall and come
to great misery: which falls yet and miseries (as he is good) he uses as
remedies toward his elect, yt they may learn that in the same mysery which
before they had forgotten, namely, that their strength was supported by God,
and that it was his mere gift, in that before they did any thing that was
good, or attained to any prosperous things: that being so admonished, they
might return into the way, and with most faithful prayers to emplore of
him help, aid, and strength, as they which had now proved, by their own
ill, that they had all these things of him when they stood. And after this
sort is that interpreted, which the Apostle writes to the Phil. With fear
and trembling, work your salvation. For it is God which works in you both
to will and also to perform, according to his good pleasure. Wherefore fear
and tremblyng ought always to be driven into us, least when things go well
land prosperous with us we wax proud, and whilst we profit in our
renouation and instauration. Then must we always with fear and trembling
mark that it is God which works in us both to will and to perform. We must
not live in securitye
Neither did the Apostle say, live rightly and holily with securitye: For he
which is secure from himself, estemeth things so, as though they depended of
himself, which is not to be suffered, when as it is God himself which works
in us both to will and to perform.

But peradventure thou will ask, seeing God from the beginning noblye promised
unto Judah, that he would deliver the land into his hands, and has not now
granted the perfect victory, Augustine. Whether the will of god may be
changed.
whether he have changed his sentence? Hear what Augustine writes of the
will of God in his.22 book De ciuitate Dei and first chap. The will of God
(says he) is not changed, but we are changed. But he seems after a sort to
be changed, when where as before he was gentle unto us, he now appears
angry: and contrarilye where as before he showed himself to be angry, he now in
a manner gently offers himself unto us. Wherefore when we our selves are
changed we do find him after a sort, to be changed in those things which we
suffer. Even as the sun seems to be changed, when we our selves are half
blind, or that our eyes be grieved by some disease. For he which before was
pleasant, merry, and sweet, begins now to be troublesome and hurtful, not
as touching his own nature (which always abides one, and is unchangeable)
but by reason of our disease and vice, whereunto we are newly fallen. What were
the causes of the imperfect victory of them of Judah.
Wherefore let us more plainly gather ye causes of ye imperfect victory. The
nighest cause and ye true cause was, because ye Chananites had Iron chariots:
for taking away Gods help, the Hebrews were not like unto the^, being so well
fenced and appointed. And god (as Ionathas ye Chaldeian testifyeth) withdrewe
his favor and aid, because they had sinned. Wherefore a just punishment
followed them, yt they went without the victory. But God which is always very
merciful to his elect, uses this punishment to the commoditye of the
Israelites: namely first to teach them the art of warfare: then ye his aid,
being withdrawn, they might feel their own weakness, and might see with what
manner of enemies they should have to do. Besides this yt the earth might not
be wasted of wild beasts, and brought into a wilderness. Finally, thereby to
try the^.

What temptation is.
Temptation is nothing else, but to take proof or trial of any thing. Wherefore
the end of temptation is ryghtly called knowledge: as they which will pass over
a water, The end of temptation.
do try out the shallowe places, to know the depth of the water: wounds
also are tried of Surgeons, to feel the depenesse of the^. In tempting therefore
knowledge is sought. But God needs not that new and fresh knowledge, for such
is his nature, that he knows al things most perfectly. But when he tempts,
he only does it, to lead me^ to the knowledge of those things which they ought
to know. To what end holy men are tempted.
Wherefore when he sometimes tempts good and holy me^, he brings into light
and makes open the faith, obedience, strength and godliness, which before lay
hid in their hearts, that they which see the same things, might glorify God
the author of them. And that they which are so tempted, when they have gotten
the victory, may give him thanks, and desire of him, that even as he has done
now, so he would vouchsafe to help the^ continually in te^tations Moreover
thereby, they do conceive a greater hope, ye god will be with the^ to help them
in time to come, when as they see yt he has so lovingly granted unto them the
same help now. Wherefore the end of these temptations is, not that God should
know those things, whereof he was before ignorant, but that thereby his gifts,
favor and grace might not be hidden. But because sometimes it happens, that
in temptations, even the elect are overcome, god grau^teth them after their
fall, to rise up again from sin a great deal more modest than they were
before, which the holy scriptures testify to have been done in Peter and
David. The end theyfore of such temptations, is, yt we knowing our own
weakness, might lay down our Peacockes tail, and have a regard to God him
self, as to the fountain of all good things. But the reprobate do fall in
temptations, For what cause ye reprobate are tempted.
and that always from one evil to a worse, that their iniquitye,
unrighteousness and wickedness might be manifested, which before lay hyd in
their hearts, and whilst they lay hyd, they might easily appear unto men,
good men. But God will have those things brought to light, that his
judgments and condemnation upon them may appear, as in very deed they are
most just. And certainly after this manner were the Israelites tempted in the
desert, as many as were reprobate.

If temptations turn to good for the godly, why do they pray against them,
Whether we may pray against temptations.
when as they pray in the Lords prayer, Lead us not into temptation? Whereunto
I answer, that we may not pray against ye first kind of temptation, wherein we
get the victory, except peradventure for as much as we are full of imfyrmitye
whilst in that battle we overcome the enemy, we also our selves are in some
part wounded. For godly men desire that all fallynges, though they be never so
little, may be driven from them. Temptations wherein we, overcome are not of
them selves to be prayed against
Howbeit we may not pray to be rid of these battayles altogether, wherein we
overcome: Yea holy men have sometimes desired to have the same granted unto
them. For David said: Prove me God, burn my raynes and my heart, James also
says that such temptations pertayne to our felicitye when he writes. Blessed
is the man which suffers temptation, etc. So far is it absent, that it
should seem to be prayed against. What kind of temptation we must pray against.
But those are to be prayed against wherein godly men slip and are overcome,
although at length they turn to them to good: because that in every falling,
both God is offended and also his law violated, which we must by all means
abhor and deteste. For although we persuade our selves, that thereby some good
things will come: yet must we always remember, that the same happens not by
ye deserte of sin, but by the goodness of god. And it is a constant rule
that sins are not to be wyshed for, though we might get never so much good
thereby. The third kind of temptation whereby men fall into destruction, What
the godly must wait for when they are tempted with aduersitye.
must altogether be prayed against, although they which be godly in deed, and
the elect of god, are not affeard of ye kind of temptation, For as much as
they stand not in doubt of their salvation. But the godly must always look for
this, when they are afflicted by the goodness of god, that it would please him
to mitigate the temptations, and give the^ strength to bear them, for as much
as he has promised by his Apostle so to do. For it is written to the
Corinthians: God is faithful, which will not suffer you to be tempted above
your power, but will with the temptation make a way out, But whether god does
stir up men to sins by temptation, shall be afterward declared. But now to
the history.

20 And they gave Hebron unto Chaleb, as Moses said: and he expelled thence
the three sons of Enak.

21 And the children of Benjamin did not cast out the Iebusites that
inhabited Jerusalem: Wherefore the Iebusites dwelled with the children of
Benjamin in Jerusalem, unto this day.


This sentence is therefore repeated, because now the wars of the tribe of
Judah are declared, of which wars, Chaleb without doubt was the captain.
Wherefore here is declared what he obtained. Namely those things which God
would have done (as he had spoken by Moses) as it is written in ye first
chap. of Deuteronomy. and.xiii. chap. of Number. and xiiii. and xxv. chap. of Iosuah. But
that which is written after it how that the children of Benjamin did not cast
out the Iebusites that inhabited Jerusalem, but dwelled together with them,
perteyneth to those things, which the other tribes had to do with the
Chananites, and it begins with Benjamin for this cause, because that tribe
was next to Judah, yea and that which is now written of Benjamin, The city of
Jerusalem was common to Benjamin and Judah
is declared of the tribe of Judah in the book of Iosuah toward the end of
the xv. chap. And I think that that was therefore done, because the city of
Jerusalem was in the limite of both the tribes, and was inhabited together both
of them of Judah, and also of the Beniamites. Yea and some affirm that ye part
of the city where the temple stood belonged to the tribe of Benjamin, and to
that purpose do they wrest that, which Jacob the Patriarch said on his death
bed, when he blessed his son Benjamin: Benjamin is a rauenyng wolf, early
taking his pray, in the morning, and dividing the spoils at even: thynkyng
this oracle to belong to the morning and euenyng sacrifices of the Temple. But
how truly they so do, I will not now reason. But yet they are not so far
out of the way, as Augustine, which drew the saying of the Patriarche to
Paul the Apostle, because he was of the tribe of Benjamin.

A feigned tale of the Hebrews.
I am not ignorant, how the Hebrews write, that the Iebusites were not cast out
for this cause, because that Judas and Benjamin would keep the covenant, which
(as it is written in the xxi. chapter of Gen.) was made between Abraham and
Abimilech King of the Gerarites, where the most holy Patriarche swear, that he
would not molest neither the same Abimilech, neither his children, nor yet his
childrens children, wherefore seeing he and his posteritye inhabited Jerusalem,
and his childrens children lived even to this time, they say it was not
lawful for the Hebrews, for because of their oath given, to cast them out.
But afterward under David, the time of the couenaunte was out, because then
were the childrens children of Abimilech worn out. And for that cause David
did cast out the Iebusites out of the city of Jerusalem, as it is written in
the latter book of Samuel the v. chapter. But these are but fables, yea if we
look in the foresaid book of Samuel we shall find, that the strong fenced
Castle of that city was the cause that the Iebusites were not cast out
before.

For David to ye end be would obtain ye castle, promised a noble reward to him
that could conquer it, namely that he would make him Captain of the whole
host of Israel: Two causes why the Iebusites were not expelled out of
Jerusalem.
which office Ioab obtained, because he first of all Conquered the Castle.
There were two causes why they of Judah and ye Beniamites did not cast out
the Iebusites out of the city. One was because they obeyed not the word of
God as they should have done: wherefore they are much to be blamed. The other
cause was, because by the providence of God, and his most wise dispensation,
the whole victory of these nations was reserved for David and Solomon. For so
God abuses the sins of men, that they hinder not but set forward his
Counselles, specially for the aduauncyng of his elect.

But to return to the Hebrews how should they know that the posteritye of
Abimilech dwelled in Jerusalem. The Scripture testifyeth no such thing.
Neither can they tell whether Abimilech and his stock belonged to the
Iebusites. Wherefore let us leave their feigned opinion unto themselves,
Jerusalem was in the old time called Iebus.
and let us follow this sentence now alleged, as the truer. But this is not
to be ouerskipped, that Jerusalem was sometimes called Iebus. For as much as
the.xix. chapter of this book testifyeth the same, and also the first book of
Paralipomenon in the xi. chap. The sum is, the Iebusites possessed the
castle, which being well fensed, and for as much as God had justly with drawn
his help for the Hebrews, they could not be driven out of it, but Benjamin
and the tribe of Judah obtained the City in the mean time. Why Saul and David
triumphed in Jerusalem.
Unto which city Saul and David went after they had gotten the victory
against the Philistians, and David himself brought thither the head of Goliath
whom he had slain. Peradventure that city seemed mete for that triumph,
because it was common to the tribe of Judah and Benjamin, unto which tribes
David and Saul belonged. For as David was of the tribe of Judah, so was Saul a
Beniamite.

And the Iebusites dwelled in Jerusalem, unto this day. That is even to the
time of Samuel who is thought to have written this book. For afterward came
David, when he ruled over all Israel and expelled the Iebusites from thence, as
it is said.

22 In like manner they that were of the house of Joseph went up to Bethel, and
the Lord was with them.

23 And the house of Joseph caused Bethel to be searched (which before time
was called Luz.)

24 And ye spies saw a man come out of the city, and they said unto him: show
us, we pray thee, the way into the city, and we will show thee mercy.

25 And when he had showed the^ the way into the city: they smote it with the
edge of the sword. But let the man and all his household go free.

26 And the man went into the land of the Hethites, and built a city, and
called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this day.


After the tribes of Judah and Benjamin is also declared in a certain order
what the other tribes did. The house of Joseph co^prehendeth with it Ephraim
and Manasses. First therefore is declared what those tribes joined together did,
afterward shall be showed of each of their doings perticularly. This is chiefly
set first, that God was with them, to make us to understand that this
enterprise had good success, because God wrought with them. The name of the
city (but afterward) was called Bethel, that is, the house of God, because
Jacob when he had there seen God and his angels ascending and descending upon
a ladder (as it is written in the 28. chap. of Gen:) so named it. Luz is not
Jerusalem.
But in the old time it was called Luz, which word signifies in Hebrewe a
Walnutte, or an Almond or else a Filberd Nut, because peradventure that place
was set with Wallnut trees, Filberd trees, Almond trees, and the like kind of
trees. They are very much deceived, which thought this city to have been
Jerusalem, for Jerusalem was taken long before, neither was it ever called Luz
or Bethel. And besides that this city pertayned to the house of Joseph, A
forged tale of the Jews.
but Jerusalem longed to the lot of Benjamin and Judah. But that which the
Hebrews trifle concerning the gate of this city, is not worthy to be
rehearsed. For what is more childishe than to say, that the way of entrau^ce
into the city was thorough a cave, at the mouth whereof was a nut tree, a tree
I say great and hollow, whereby they went down into the cave which would enter
into the city, and for that cause it was called Luz. They should have spoken
somewhat more likely, if they had said, there had been a gate in some secret
part or side of the walls, the coming whereunto should have been by certain
turnings, and circuites so that strangers should not easly have found out the
way unto the same. David Kimhi
D. Kimhi writes that there were many gardynes there.

If I should speak my fantasy herin, I think that the spies of the
Israelites did not ask him which came out of ye city for the door or gate
thereof, but which was the weaker part of the city or less fenced, that thereby
they might the easier take it. The third espiall mentioned in the scripture
Now is rehearsed in the scripture the third espiall. For the first is written
in the 13. chap. of the book of Number: And other happened under Iosuah, when
those two searched the city of Jericho, whom Rahab the harlot kept with great
fidelity, and this is the third which we have now in hand. Although I am not
ignorant how Joseph in the book of Gen: laid to his brethrens charge that they
were espies. What in ye office of spies.
But the office or work of spies is (as Chrysostom says expounding those
words of Paul in the second chap: of the Epistle to the Galathians, yt there
were false brethren entered to espy out our liberty) to know the doings of
the adversaries, that they and theirs may have the easier entrance to conquer
or repulse them. The end of espiall.
Now we understand that it is an action, and we se to what end it is ordained.
Moreover it comes from enemies and from the mind of an aduersarye, but it is
done privily and craftily. As it is lawful to fight with enemies by violence
and weapons, when war is justly taken in hand: so is it just and lawful to
use the art and subtelty of especials.

Jerome. Espyall is a thing i^differe^t.
Wherefore Jerome upon the 27. chap. of Ezechiel says, that espiall, is an
indifferent thing, namely which a man may use both well and evil. Moses and
Joshua used it well, and also the house of Joseph. If so be that the war be
unjust, the espiall also serving thereunto must needs be unjust. Wherefore the
brethren of Joseph, when he said unto them, by the health of Pharao, ye be
spies, did put that away from them as an injury or a rebuke. The punishment of
spies.
But the punishment of spies is, if they be taken, all one with the punishment,
wherewith enemies are punished when they fall into the hands of their enemies.
For it skilleth not whether a man fight with weapons, or by subtilty and craft.
Wherefore they must be of a valiant courage, Spies must be valiant. Josephus.
which for the common profit adventure their life in playeng the spies. For it
is not every ma^s office to be a good spy. Josephus writes that the spies
which were sent by Joshua, were Geometricians, because they ought well and
clearly to know the situation of the land of Chanaan. And Homer made Ulysses
and Dyomedes spies, Homerus.
which otherwise were noble men. Paul the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Galath. The place before mentioned the second chap. excellently referred the
work of espiall to cententions of Religion, where he writes that there were
(...), that is, that there were certain incommers being false brethren, which
(...), that is, came in. (...), that is to espy out our liberty as though he
should say, they subtilely sought and searched out our opinion, to resist it,
and made search with great diligence whether they that were with us kept
vncircumcisio^, and that was to espy out the liberty of the Church, namely
that by it, they might overthrow Christians.

And the spies saw a man come out of the city. For what cause he went forth
the history declares not: but there may be many causes ymagined, either for
that he went to seek somewhat to serve him for his household, or else because he
would fly out of the city being besieged, or finally, that he also might spy
out what was done by his adversaries.

And they said unto him: show us, we pray thee, the way into the city. They
speak fair unto ye man, and they pray him, ye matter is not done by violence,
but they go about by friendly words to allure him to betray the City.

Whether the spies of ye Chananites could promise safely?
And we will show thee mercy. Seeing ye spies had not the chief government in
the publicque: wealth, how durst they promise safety unto this man, especially
if they had no peculiar commandment to do it. Thou will say peradventure,
they did trust that the Senate of the publicque wealth and Captains of the
war would ratifye that which they had promised. But the superior power can
not confirm that which is done by the subjects, unless it be also lawful
for the same power both to promysse and also to perform that which they did.
And God had prohibited by express words that the Chananites and those
proscripte people should have their lives granted the^. Peradventure they had
before their eyes yt example of Rahab the harlot, whose life in the time of
Joshua was not only spared, but also she was received with all that belonged
unto her, and had in honor of the Hebrews. And thereby they judged that it was
in their power, The laws made by god against the Chananites might be mitigated.
to promise mercy and safety unto this man. And as touching the commandment
of God they thought gods laws not to be so rigorous, but they might be
mitigated with some equity, as they remembered was done with the Gabaonites,
who were never the less Heuites or Hemorrites. Thou will say peradventure:
They were so saved, that they were brought into bondage. Bondage is a ciuille
death.
And necessity of bondage is a certain kind of civil death: wherefore in that
the life of the body was granted them, the commandment of the Lord seems
not to be violated, for they were killed after a sort. The question is not
dissolved by this reason. For God prescribed by law that the Chananites should
be put to death, he referred not that to a civil death, but to a natural
death: for otherwise Saul might have excused him self, because he killed not
Agag the king of Amalek with an outward death. For he might have said that he
had already killed him ciuilly.

But because we are fallen into talk of the Gabaonites, Of the Gabaonites.
I think it good to say thus much of them. God ratified the oath performed to
the Gabaonites.
First that God did ratifye that oath which the Israelites performed unto
them, for as much as he aided the host of the Hebrews in deliueryng their
city from the other Chananites. But if so be that they had violated the curse,
which was set forth of God, he would not then have done it. For, because of
the sin of Achan, who had by stealth saved somewhat of that which was cursed
in Jericho, he did not help his people, but suffered them fowly to be slain,
when they fought against the city Hay. Besides this it is written in the
latter book of Samuel that God plagued the Israelites three years continually
with most grievous famine, because the Gabaonites were contrary to the oath
slain and of Saul miserably dispersed. Wherefore (according to their request)
they had seven of Saul's posterity delivered them to be hanged. These are most
certain signs that God ratified the covenant which was made with the
Gabaonites, although the Hebrews did grievously sin because they asked not
counsel of God. Augustine says upon the x. chap. of the Judges, Augustine,
when he interprets that place where it is written, that God promised Joshua
that he would be with him in the defense of the city Gabaon. For he said, be
not affeard: for I will deliver them (namely the Chananites which besieged
that city) into thine hands, if this league (says he) now made with the
Gabaonites had displeased God, then would he have commanded Joshua, not to take
in hand that expedition, but rather to have broken the covenant made with that
nation. But contrarily he encouraged him, and of his own accord, not called
upon, promised to aid him in the fight, as it may appear by the history.

But why he did allow the league so made, Why God allowed ye league made with
the Gabaonites.
there may be two reasons given for it. One (which is there mentioned) because
they had bound it with an oath. And if the Israelites should have violated
that, their neighbors would have counted them as irreligious and ungodly, and
their God should have been mocked and contemned. Wherefore lest the name of God
and the fame of the Israelites should have been evil spoken of, it was
ratified, although it was unwisely and without praise performed. The other
cause is, The Gabaonites were turned to the true God.
because the Gabaonites did now believe in the true God, and were ready to
embrase his religion and worshipping. Which may easily be gathered by two
arguments. For they said (as it is written in the ix. chap. of the book of
Joshua) that they came in the name of the Lord being therefore moved thereunto,
because they had heard what things God had done for that peoples sake both in
Egypt, and also in the deserte, and likewise about Iordane. This is a toke^,
that they now believed the God of the Israelites. Moreover the same appears in
that they were appointed by the Hebrews to carry and to prepare wood and also to
draw water for the sacrifices which were done unto the true God. Therefore they
were made laborers and servants of the tabernacle, and of the tribe of Leui,
whereof they were called Nathinites.

Nathinites.
And that ye laws which were made of God against the seven nations which
inhabited the land of Chanaan were by this equity to be interpreted and
mitigated that if they returned to ye true God, and would make peace with the
Jews, they should not be destroyed, it manifestly appears by that which is
written in the xi, chap: of the book of Joshua, namely how those nations were
therefore destroyed, because none of them (the Gabaonites only excepted) made
peace with the Israelites. For God, to the end he would extinguish them, had
hardened their hearts, and therefore they most obstinatly fought against the
Israelites.

Why god hardened the hearts of the Chananites.
But the cause why God so hardened their hearts was, because their sins were
full. Wherefore they believed not as did the Gabaonites, neither adjoined they
the^ selves unto the Israelites. And for that cause they continually resistyng
them, fought so vnluckely, that at length they were clean destroyed. But if so
be that they had made peace with the Jews, and not despised their godliness
and religion, they should have had the same given them which the Gabaonites
had.

But in that they did not so, their former sins were the hinderaunce thereof,
for God for those sins took away his spirit and grace from their hearts,
that at the last they might suffer most just punishment for their wickedness.
This is the equity and mitigations of those laws against the Chananites.

Why the Gabaonites were brought into bondage.
But there arises a doubt, why the punishment of bondage was imposed to the
Gabaonites, if they now became so good and faithful. Whereunto is answered,
that they therefore fell into bondage, because they used fraud and guile.

For God would for this cause have them so punished, lest he should seem to
allow disceate and evil arts.

Whether the Luzite repented Jerome.
Now rests to enquire what this betrayer of Luz did, whether he believed and
embrased the true worshippyng of God. Out of the holy scriptures we can gather
nothing of this thing. Peradventure it may seem to some, that he abode still in
his ungodliness, because he went away from thence, neither abode he with the
Jews. But this is but a weak reason. For Iethro also departed from Moses,
who^ he came to se in the desert, although (as I think) he left his son
with Moses. Neither would Christ have all those continually with him whom he
healed, and which believed in him: yea he said to one of the^, who would have
dwelled with him, return to thine own and show unto them what has happened
unto the. etc.

Of Prodition or treason.
THis place admonishes us somewhat to entreat of Prodition or treason, and it
is demanded, whether it be at any time lawful: or whether it be always
forbidden? Jerome
Jerome de optimo genere interpreta^di to Pammachius says, that princes in
deed do admit treason, but they condemn the traitors, Antigonus.
whereunto agrees the saying of Antigonus the king, which is, I love traitors
so long as they are in betrayeng, but when they have betrayed I hate the^.
Plutarch rehearses the same of Rhimotalcus king of the Thracians, Plutarche.
who fell from Anthony to Augustus, and after his victory, boasted of the same
among his cups, Augustus.
and that so insolently and above measure, that Augustus turnyng him to his
friend, said this sentence of him, I allow the treason, but I praise not the
traitor. Which sentence though it seems allowable and just at the first
sight, yet ought it not to be counted either true or wise. For if wise men will
allow and praise any action, they must also praise and allow the author
thereof. Neither does any man that lawfully unto others, which he would not
suffer himself. And there is no man which would be content to be betrayed
himself or any of his. Lasthenes.
Furthermore one Lasthenes when he had betrayed his country Olinthus to the
Macedonians, and thought that for the same he should have been highly honored of
them, it happened far otherwise unto him. For he was called of the soldiers
a traitor every where through out the camp. Wherefore he grievously complained
of the same matter to Phillip the king, who made him answer. Philip of
Macedonia.
That his Macedonians were very rude and rusticall people which knew not how to
call things by any other name, than by their own and propre name. They call
(says he) a boat, a boat. This was as if he should have answered, Seeing you art
such a one, thou ought not to be called by any other name. Asconius
Paedianus.
Asconius Paedianus in secundam verrinam says, that to betray is worse then to
besiege. For the enemies (says he) besiege, and it ought not to be counted a
vice in them. But they betray which would seem friends, and ought to be such
in deed toward us. And therefore when they depart from their office of
friendship, Jerome. Theodosius ye Emperor.
they sin far more grievously than do the other. Jerome also in the place
before alleged De optimo genere interpretandi ad Pammachiu^, shows how
Theodosius the Emperor put to death Hesychius the consul, because he opened
the letters of the patriarche Gamaliel, neither was that any marvel, because
with the Romans it was death, to open the secrets of any man, as it is
written in ye digestes De re militari, in the law Omne, and in the third law
and in the Codice de co^merciis and mercaturis And in the digestes. Ad lege^
Iuliani maiestatis in the law 1. 2. 3. he ye gives over munitions committed to
his charge, falls into the danger of treason.

The example also of Camillus is worthy to be noted, Camillus.
who commanded the scholemaister of the children of the Phaliscians to be with
stripes brought home of his disciples into his country, because he would have
betrayed them. The Physician of Pirrhus.
The Phisitio^ likewise of Pirrhus, which promised unto the Romans that for
their sakes he would kill his king, was by them detected unto the king, that he
might the dilige^tlier beware of him. Whereby peace followed between Pirrhus and
the Romans. Esaias in the xvi. chap: does therefore vehemently rebuke the
Moabites, because they had so cruelly entreated the Israelites when they were
oppressed of their enemies, and admonishes them, not to betray the Jews
flyeng unto the^ in their time for succor. And Paul writes in the latter
Epistle to Tymothe, that in the latter times there should be men corrupted with
most grievous and mischievous deeds, among which he reckeneth traitors also.
Bisides this the citizens are sworn unto the Magistrates, to defend the city
or publicque wealth when need shall require. And though they were not sworn,
The members of al living things do enda^ger the^ selves for the nobler parts.
yet the natural and common law requires the same of them: which thing the
members of all living things do testify, which do willingly and most readily
endanger them selves for the body, and for the nobler parts thereof, I mean
the head or heart. Which self thing the citizens are by the laws of nature
bound to do for their country, if it be in danger. Wherefore if they should
betray it, they can not be excused, but that they sin most grievously.

But it were good before we go any farther, to define what proditio^ is. What
is to betraye.
To betray seems in Latin (as much as needs to this present purpose) to
signify three things, namely to bewraye, to deceive and deliver up. Prodition
therefore is an actio^, whereby by guile, bewrayeng or delivering up, our
neighbors or their goods are hurt, and that especially of those, which ought
rather to defend the same.

But there be many kinds of prodition. For they do betraye, Many kinds of
prodition. Augustine.
which do by subtle guile detecte the faults of their brethren Augustine.
confirms this kind of proditio^ in his 2. question first, chap. Si
peccauerit, where he says reprehend thy brother secretly, of whose sin you
have private knowledge: for if you shall do it before al men, you shall not then
be a corrector of sin, but a betrayer. Also he which circumue^teth an other,
and brings him into danger, he betrayeth him. Wherefore Jerome (as it is
written 24. question the 3. chap. Transferunt: Jerome.
) says that the same belongs principally unto false Prophets and evil
Pastors, which by their evil doctrine and examples destroy the sheep of
Christ committed to their charge, whom they ought to defend. They are numbered
amongst them, which deliver castles and munitio^s unto their enemies. Whereof
it is written at large, 22. question the.5. chap. De forma. They are also
counted betrayers, which do detecte and open secrets committed unto the^,
especially such as are of great weight, and bring in danger the life,
estimation or goods of their brethren. And this kind is noted in the title.
Chrysostom.
De paenitentia, distinct. 6. chap. Sacerdotes. Finally Chrysostom upon
Matthew the.25. homely, as is alleged in the decrees 11. question the third,
and chap. Nolite timere. Not only they are said to betraye the truth, which
in the place of it speak a lie, but they also which do not freely profess the
same. Wherefore there are reckoned many ways or kinds of prodition. But we
will not speak of them all now presently: but only will touch those kinds
which make for our purpose.

One man some times is both a betrayer and a spy.
Howbeit I think it good, this to be added, that some judge that prodition and
espiall do not much differ one from another, and that it may sometimes come to
pass, that one man may be both a betrayer and a spy. For if any Citizen be
corrupted with money by the enemies, the same is both a betrayer of his
country, and is also in the mean time a domestical spy. But this seems not
to be wisely spoken, because the nature of these things (as it appears by
their definitions) does very much differ, although sometimes they cleave both
in one man, so yt the same man, may be both a betrayer and a spy. Even as
music and Grammar differ much one from an other, and yet it oftentimes
happens ye one man is both a Gra^marian and a Musician. Nevertheless ye
difference (which I have before mentioned) is for ye most part observed,
although not always, namely yt espial comes of enemies, and prodition of
them which be amongst us, whom we trust as friends.

Whether prodition be at any time lawful. Augustine.
But to the end we may the playnlyer know, concerning prodition, whether it be
at any time lawful? I think it best to call to memory those words which
Augustine writes against the letters of Petilianus ye second book and 10.
chap: We may not (says he) hear the complaynts of such as suffer, but seek
out the mind of them which are the doers. This the man of God wrote against
the Donatistes, which accused our men, as betrayers and persecutors. And to
them he answers ye Paul also delivered up some to Satan, whose salvation
nevertheless seemed to be committed to his charge: but for all that, because he
did it of a good mind, namely to teach them not to blaspheme, and that their
spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord, he could not be accused either
of treason, or else of deliueryng up, because (as it is before said). The
complaints of them which suffer are not to be heard, What proditio^ is good.
but we must seek out the mind of the doers. Wherefore when war or controversy
shall happen between any, of which the one part is known to have a just and
good cause, if the other part which defends the worser cause, and therefore
does unjustly, will by no means be brought to any good and reasonable
conditions, surely good men which peradventure are found on the same side,
ought in such sort to help and to defend the other part as they may advance
justice. And if it be need, they ought to fall from the unjust to just men.
Neither can their prodition be condemned justly as ill, although before they
were never so much friends and very nighe unto those, which work unjustly.

What cause ye Israelites had against ye Chananites. Epiphanius:
Now must we speak somewhat of the Israelites cause against the Chananites
which may be considered of us two manner of ways, namely either by common
law and ordinary law of nature, or else by faith, and by the word of GOD.
Concerning the natural or common law Epiphanius writes that the land of
Palestine pertayned in very deed to the children of Sem, by occasion whereof
Melchisedek reigned there, which was either Sem him self, or else one of his
children. But the Chananites which came of Cham, passing over the bounds of
Egypt and Africa, which were appointed unto them, did cast out of Palestine
the sons of Sem. And therefore the Hebrews, which were the posterity of
Sem, when they required to be restored to their Fathers lands, seemed to do it
justly, and rightfully. Wherefore (as he says) GOD did both restore unto the
Israelites the countries which belonged unto their ancestors, and also
punished the Chananites for their wickedness, and this he did all with one and
the self same work. Howbeit I can not easily agree to Epiphanius opinion, for
there was past prescription of very long time, for at the least there were five
hundredth years. Wherefore it could not be said that the Chananites possessed
that land unjustly. If we should go by this reason now in our time, then
should there be none in a manner counted a lawful prince and just possessor,
when as their auncestor came to the possession of those provinces and kingdoms
by violence, driuyng out botht the kings and the inhabitors that were in them
before. Wherefore the Israelites seemed not to have any just causes by man's law,
by which they might make claim unto the land of Palestine as to their own,
neither alleged they at any time any such reason. And yet for all that they had
good right thereunto for as much as god testified as well by words as by
wonderful works, that it was his will that the Hebrews should have the
possession of those regions, to whom (as David has well said) both the earth
and the fullness thereof belongs. Neither could the Chananites murmr
against the judgment of God, for as much as they were justly cut of from their
right, for their sundry and manifold wicked Acts. Wherefore none could in this
cause justly defend the Chananites if they will cleave to the true God, and
believe his words. Whereby it follows that this Luzite which betrayed his
citizens did it either of faith, as did Rahab in Jericho, or else by some humane
bargayne. For the kepers or spies said unto him, We will show thee mercy. If
he were stricken with fear, how could that (as they say) happen unto a
constant man (for he was after a sort a prisoner, and was fallen into the
hands of his enemies) then was he brought to it by humane conuention, and then
did he fowly, for it is not lawful for any man, to make any fylthy couenauntes
against his country. Neither can he be excused because of fear, It is not
lawful for any man to make any fylthy couena^tes against his country.
for nothing is to be done against justice and conscience, although what
fear so ever he should be stryken with, but if he were stirred up unto it by
faith, and for that he saw his citezens obstinately to resist the word of
God and his works, then he did well, neither can his treason be either
disallowed or else condemned. For no laws, no vows, no couenau^tes or
bonds, though they be never so strayte, Fear must not cause us to do any
thing against justice.
can bynd any man to fight against or to resist the word of God: which word
all men must earnestly labor to have done and fulfilled. For this sentence
abides and shall perpetually abide: That we must obey God more than men.
Neither can any man (as Christ says) serve two masters, specially if they
command contrary things. It is lawful for the magistrate privily to send
inquisitors.
Moreover the Magistrate is to be aided in rooting out of vice and
naughtynesse, and to him without doubt is lawful privily to send men, to make
enquiry, and to deiecte wicked Acts, that the offenders may be punished, and
(as God has commanded) that evil may be taken away from the world. Yea
and it is also lawful for him to offer rewards to men confederated together
for some ill purpose, It is lawful for them to offer rewards to conspirators
to open their conspiracye. Augustine
to allure them to open and detecte the conspiracye, because that assuredly
pertayneth to treason. Howbeit heresy is never either to be dissembled, or to
be praised, or any wicked Act to be committed that lawful kind of treason
should have good success. Wherefore Augustine in his latter book of
Retractions testifies, that he wrote his book de Mendatio chiefly for this
cause, because some, to the end they would detecte the Priscillianistes,
feigned them selves to be followers of the same heresye, for that the same
Priscillianistes when they were accused, Of the Priscillianistes.
affirmed with great stoutness, that they were far from any such
doctrine. But for all that afterward they disclosed them selves unto those,
whom (being deceived by their dissimulation) they thought they might well have
trusted. But Augustine in the same book De mendatio, teaches that by this
dissimulation of the Catholics, very many evils and dangers chanced. For
there they commend Priscillianus, they unjustly praise his book which is
entitled Libra, they allowed the heresy, pronouncing many things which could
not be spoken without blasphemy. Moreover yt which they did was dangerous: for
if they which after this sort disse^bling were of any authority or
estimation, the heretics might by their commendation be confirmed in their
opinion, and those specially with whom they did so dissemble. For those
peradventure were Priscillianistes before (although not very firm and
constant) which after they heard their heresy to be praised of a grave man, did
then stick more and more in their error. Furthermore in thus dissembling, and
being conuersaunte with the Priscillianistes, the dissembler also might easily
fall into danger, that he him self at length might become of a Catholic, a
Priscillianiste. And finally the heretics them selves by the dissimulation of
our men, might easily gather, that they did very well, in hyding, dissemblyng
and denyeng their doings. But that betrayeng is sometimes lawful in a just
cause, and such a cause as is without the dangers above mentioned, not only
the reasons which we have before alleged do declare, but we may also prove it
by very many examples written here and there in the scriptures. The Gabaonites.
Rahab.
The Gabaonites betrayed the rest of the Chananites, when they fell from them
to the Hebrews. Rahab also betrayed her publicque wealth or king, in receauyng,
hydyng, and sendyng away them which were deadly enemies unto it: who is said
nevertheless in the Epistle to the Hebrews to have done those things by faith.
Iahel.
Iahel also the wife of Aher the Kenite betrayed Sisara, for she by a marvelous
craft slew him whom she had called into her and closely hidden: as it shall be
afterward declared in his place in this hystory of the Judges. Ionathas.
Yea and Ionathas the son of Saul betrayed unto David the will and counsels of
his father, as it is written in the first book of Samuel. Husay the Arachite.
Besides all these Husay the Arachite betrayed Absolon the son of David, when
he withstandyng the counsel of Achitophel did thrust in his own counsel
which was far worse, and showed all things unto David. I might bring in a
great many more examples. But I think these are sufficient for the ware reader.

Certain cautions are to be added to lawful prodition. The first caution.
Now rests only to declare certain cautions or prouisoes, wherewith lawful
treason is to be decked and adorned, and not to be condemned. The first is,
that he which betrayeth be by a certain faith assured that the cause is just
which he aduaunceth: which can not be done, except that he have sure proof
of the goodness thereof by the word of God. Neither do I at this present argue,
whether the same word be revealed unto him in heart, The second caution.
or whether it be opened unto him in the holy scriptures. Then must he take heed, that being now well assured of the righteousness and honesty, whereunto
he is inclined, he be only provoked thereunto with the love thereof, and not with
the hope of reward or gain, or for fear of any misfortune, which he
desires to escape, or to satisfy his hatred and enemities deceived. The third
caution.
For so should he seek his own, and not justice, neither the obedience of his
faith, and of the will of God. Furthermore it is very necessary that a man be
not driven to that but then when all other kind of remedies want. For Rahab
so did: for except she had then so kept the Hebrew spies, they had been by man's
reason undone, neither was there then any other way to save them. And
certainly it oftentimes chances, that all other ways and means being tried,
the worse part will not be brought to soberness, so that there is no other
remedy, but only by prodition. And I would therefore have these cautions
diligently observed, because that men are to much prone to proditions, and
that such as are both filthy and wicked. Wherefore we must take heed that by the
example of good men they flatter not the^ selves as though they were innocent.
The fourth caution.
Moreover Paul has admonished us not only to avoid that which is evil it
self, but also ye show thereof. Howbeit we must understand this doctrine of his
in such sort as we may accomplish it. For it is lawful sometimes to commit
a thing which is evil to see to, but not evil in very deed: whilst yet
there is hope that the thing may be straight way made plain, so that ye which
at the first sight seemed evil, may manifestly be known to be good. So the
Apostle him self circumcised Timothe, and shaued his head, which of them
selves and in very deed were not evil, although they seemed to have had a
certain show of evil unto certain of the Ethnickes which were converted, and
were not yet well stre^gthned. The fifth caution.
Finally perjury or lyeng are not to be mingled with those proditions which may
be allowable. For as much as it is manifest by the Apostolical rule, ye evils
are not to be committed, whereby good things may follow. I know there be some
which go about to defend those kind of lies which are called officious or
honest. Honest and officious lies are not to be allowed. Augustine.
But Augustine does not allow that. Whose reasons they which are desirous to
know, let the^ read his book Ad Consentiu^. I assuredly agree unto his opinion.
For though there were no other reason, yet me thincketh this were sufficient,
because the liar brings himself out of credit, whereby nothing yt he
afterward speaks ca^ scarcely be believed, for they which hear it will suspect
it always as a lie. And besides this yt scripture does every where detest
lies. And we are commanded (as Peter says) to speak as it were the words of
god. And these words are pure, neither must we grant yt there is any lie
found in the^, as Augustine has very well written unto Jerome. What is to be
answered concerning ye lies of the saints.
And though we read yt the saints did sometimes lie, yet we must either not
excuse the^, seeing they were me^, or else we must think yt it was done by the
will of god. For then ye actio^, which of his own nature, appears to be
vicious, ceasseth (...) to be sin, when it is manifest yt god has commanded
the same. And after this sort Abraham is excused, in that he would have killed
his son. The Israelites also are defended, which when they departed, took
away with them, those things which they had borrowed of the Egyptia^s.

These cautio^s at this present offer the^ selves unto me, He answers to the
reasons put in the be-beginning.
whereby may be adorned this kind of proditio^, which may be allowed or
defended, which otherwise is a thing to be cursed and detested, as it is
manifest yt the prodition of Judah was. Neither ca^ the reasons which I have
alleged in ye beginning, any thing hinder but yt some prodition may be
approved. We declared first by ye authority of Jerome, To the first.
Antigonus, augustus, and Philip of Macedonia ye traitors have been accustomed
to be evil spoken of. I answer yt therefore yt happened, because proditio^s for
ye most part lack these cautio^s before declared. For they which are traitors
have not for the most part a respect to yt which is just and honest, neither
are they sure of ye will of god, neither have they any sure proof yt the cause
is right which they follow, but are only brought to betray for hatred, and for
their own commodity, and for fear and wicked affectes. And they might also
oftentimes have defended justice by other ways and means. Besides this they
are not afeard therein to make lies, and to commit manifest sins. Furthermore
I repete yt again which I said before, yt it was evil said of the^ in
pronou^cing yt they loved yt treason, and hated ye traitors: seeing either
seems either equally to be allowed, or else equally to be condemned. And to be
brief, ye testimonies which were brought ca^ only take place in naughty and
damnable treaso^s. And to such as consider of the^ selves, yt they would not
the^ selves nor theirs to be betrayed, and therefore will not yt any kind of
prodition should be counted good, we must answer as S. Augustine says. That
the complayntes of such as suffer are not to be heard, but we must seek out the
mind of the doers.

Secondly we declared by the oppinion of Appianus, To the second.
that prodition was far worser than besiegyng, because this namely besiegyng
is done by enemies, but the other by friends. We will easily grant to that:
for if a naughtye and unjust prodition be conferred also with an unjust
besiegyng, As some besieging is just, so also is some prodition good
than shall prodition be judged far worser, for as much as it comes from
friends, of whom we look neither to be hurt, nor yet to receive any damage.
But even as some besiegyng is found just, what inconvenience shall it be then,
or not agreeyng with the truth, if some prodition also be found just? The
comparison therefore of Appianus, is so to be understand, that either of the
things compared together be evil. For as the Gra^marians say, the comparatiue
degree always r^quireth the positive degree, wherein the comparison is made.
And in that Theodosius the Emperor (as Jerome testifies) did put to death a
betrayer, it is no marvel, when as the Roman laws so ordained in the
digestes, and in the Codice as it is before showed and they determine so of ye
prodition, whereby places of mu^nitio^ are delivered up to the enemies, Evil
proditio^ is to be counted among most grievous crimes.
and likewise for treason. And assuredly that prodition which is evil, ought
to be counted for a most grievous crime. For if thereby come any loss of name
or fame, then is it against the commandment of god, which commands. Thou
shall not bear false witness. But if it bring loss of good and possessions,
then is ye commandment broken which is ordained against theft. Finally if it
be ye cause of loss of body and life, it violateth ye precept, wherein god has
commanded, Thou shall not kill. And there is no doubt, but yt of proditions
such murders oftentimes happen: for the inhabiters of cities which are
betrayed, are wont to be slain of their enemies. Naughty proditions are justly
punyshed with death.
Wherefore when yt war is unjust, the wicked betrayer is guilty of the murder
which thereof follows. And therefore if laws or princes have ordained death
for this wicked crime, I think it is not unjustly done: but ye lets not,
but that there may be good proditions found. Who doubts but that thieues
should be hanged, when as nevertheless it ^s lawful in just war to take
spoils from the enemies.

To the third.
The Romans (as it was afterward declared) took ve^geau^ce of ye scholemaster
of the children of the Phaliscia^s, and they detected unto Pirrhus his
phisitio^ which would have betrayed him. These things are true in deed, but I
may easly answer yt the Romans had here a regard to two things. First yt
these (namely the scholemaster and the Phisitia^) had not in yt which they did,
a regard to justice, but were only stirred up thereunto by covetousness or
hatred. Wherefore they seemed to have deserved not a reward but a punishment.
Furthermore yt Romans had a wonderful great desire of glory, which they called
valia^tnesse of mind. And being stirred up with yt, they thought yt victory in
a manner unworthy, which they got not by force, but after this sort, which
seemed to be very cowardly. And it is possible, that they thought to win those
against whom they warred, and rather by benefits, or at the lest way no less
by benefits than by force.

To the fourth. The Edomites and Moabites did unjustly betraye the Jews.
Isai (as it was said) admonished ye Moabites in ye name of God, yt they should
not betray them which did fly unto them, because they seemed to do that of
envy and malice, and not that they were desirous to set forward the will of
God. For God had not commanded the Moabites to afflicte the Israelites.
Wherefore when the Hebrews were betrayed of the Moabites or of the Edomites,
that could not be done but of cruelty, for as much as the laws of
neighbourhed and kynred were violated. And that Paul spoke unto Timothe of a
wicked prodition, it is more manifest, than I shall need now to declare.

To the fyft.
Lastly were objected oaths and laws of nature wherwt citizens are bound to
defend their country. Of which I answer, yt all these are so far forth to
be observed, as long as the oaths and promises be not against the word of god
and good laws. Which thing if it be afterward known, the^ are they of no
force, yea they are the^ utterly void. To these I add, yt it manifestly
appears by ye cautions now alleged, yt we must neither for swear nor lie,
whereby a laudable and good proditio^ should succeed. Wherefore they which swear
unto their magistrates, The prodition of the Counsel holden at Constantia.
and promise to defend the city, ca^ not be excused, when their mind is to
betraye and to deceive. This have the Antichrists done in ye counsel holden at
Constantia. For yt they might the^ eassier allure thither John Husse, and
Jerome of Praga, they promised him safety by public faith. And therefore they
can not defend their prodition (admit it were nothing else) as just and
honest. But they were without doubt treacherers and wicked betrayers in
swearyng and promysing that by their letters which they would not perform.

But now we must return to the history. How the Luzite might be suffered of
the Israelits to go in safety.
It is not certain (as it is said) whether this Luzite had faith, or whether he
were an infidel. If he had faith, his prodition is to be commended, otherwise it
is to be discommended. But if he believed not, neither cleaued unto the true
God, why did the Israelites let him go? Forsooth because he of his own will went
into banishment. Neither seemed this to be against the counsel of God. For God
would therefore have those people cut of, least they dwelling together with
the Hebrews should have given them an occasion of falling and offense.
Wherefore when they departed, and chose wylful banishment, that came to pass,
which God would have to be done. But thou will say: By this means might al
those nations have been sent away, Why the Chana^it s departed not, and give
place to the Israelites.
neither ought they to have been slain as god had commanded. What might have been done I need not to answer, for as much as that is demanded which could
not be done. For so many and so great were the sins of those nations, that
they utterly deserved death. Wherefore god taking away his spirit from them,
did so harden their hearts, that they endeavored not them selves to depart, but
rather to resist the Israelites as much as in them lay. They made many
battles therefore, in which as god had ordained, and as they had deserved,
they came to utter destruction, although a very few of them were saved in
departing, or else in embracing the true religion.

And they smote the cyty with the edge of the swoorde. This is not to be
ascribed to cruelty, but rather to obedience and religion toward the true god:
for so was it his will to be done, and so had he commanded.

But they let the man and his household go free. How they could discern this
man's family from the rest it is not written. But it is most lykely that either
he entered with the Israelites into the city, or else he showed unto them his
house, by some token, whereby they might leave it safe and untouched according
to their purpose. Rahab certainly in Jericho hong a purple cord in the window
of her house, to avoid the misery and sacking of the soldiers.

And the man went into the land of the Hithites, Kimhi writes that these
Hithites were none of those seven nations, which were commanded to be
destroyed in the land of Chanaan. But he declares not what these Hithites were.
And these are the names of those nations, which should have been destroyed of
the Israelites. The Chananites, the Iebusites, Hemorrhites, Gergesites,
Pheresites, Hithites, and Hiuites. These are the nations which god commanded
to be weeded out of the land promised unto the Israelites. But this is to be
noted by the way, that there is a difference between these words Kethim and
Chethim, for that which is written by Kaph signifies, as they interpret, the
Italians, or such as dwell in Islands, or the Macedonians: and that word is
found in Esaias, Jeremy, and in the book of Number: where the prophecies of Balaam
are mentioned. But that word which is written with this letter Cheth,
signifies either one of the seven nations of the country of the Chananites,
or else those to whom it is said that this Luzite went.

And he built a City, and called the name of it Luz. The manner of banished me^
in buildyng or adourning of citi^s.
So men that were driven out of their country were wont to do, that being moved
with the love of their country, to call the places which they did build, either
by the name of their country which they left, or else to build them as near as
they could in form like the other. So it is said that Aeneas did in Italy
buyld Troy, and the city of the Pisites was in the same country built by the
Graecians. Like wise the Israelites leaving the land of Palestine, decked up a
city granted unto them in Egypt, like unto Jerusalem, building a temple there,
ordaining also Priests and sacrifices, as they had before in Jerusalem. In
which doing they sinned most haynously, although nevertheless they were moved
thereunto by the love of their country which they had forsaken.

Unto this day. The time of Samuel is by those words noted, who is thought to
be the writer of this history. And by this sentence the Hebrews do gather, that
that City and the name thereof, endured to the time of Samuel.

27 But Manasses did not expel Beth-Sean, with her towns, and Thaanach with
her towns, the Inhabiters of Dor with her towns, the inhabiters of Iibleam
with her towns, nether the inhabiters of Megiddo with her towns. And the
Chananites began to dwell in the land.

28 And it came to pass, that as soon as Israel was waxed mighto, they put the
Chananites to tributes, and expelled them not.

29 In like manner Ephraim expelled not the Chananites that dwelt in Gazer, and
therefore the Chananites dwelt still in Gazer among them.

30 Neither did Zebulon expel the inhabiters of Kitron, neither the inhabiters
of Nahalol, wherefore the Chananites dwelt among them, and became tributaries
unto them.

31 Aser also did not cast out the inhabiters of Acho, and the inhabiters of
Zidon, and of Achlab, Achzib, Helbab, Aphik, and Rehob.

32 And the Aserites dwelt among the Chananites the inhabiters of the land: for
they did not drive them out.

33 Neither did Nephtalim drive out the inhabiters of Beth-Semes, nor the
inhabiters of Bethanath: but dwelt amongst the Chananites the inhabiters of
the land: and the inhabiters of Beth-Semes, and Beth-Anath became tributaries
unto them.


The sins of the Israelites.
In this place the holy history sets forth the sin of the Israelites, in
that they did not cast out and destroy those peoples, as God had commanded
them, but made them tributaries unto them. Before the other tribes Manasses is
reckoned: and the names of his Cities, which are here mentioned, ar rehearsed
in the book of Iosuah, the, 17. chap. where almost these self same words ar
rehearsed, namely how Manasses although he did not conquer them, did for all
that make them tributaries unto him. But that is not so to be understand, as
though this sin were then committed: for as long as Iosuah lived, the people
did not so openly fall, yea rather the people did their duty diligently all
Iosuas time, and all the time of the Elders, which had seen Moses, and had
lived together with Joshua, as we shall hear straight way in this book: but
these things are spoken in that place by (...) that is, by anticipation.

And the hebrewe phrase is to be noted, namelye: And Benethiah, that is, her
daughters. For it signifies little suburbs, towns and villages, which when
they are compared with greater cities, do seem to be daughters of those Cities.
The same kind of speaking is used also in other languages. Cities called
Matrices and (...). Scithopolis.
For we call often times the principal Cities Matrices, that is, chief Cities,
and the Grecians call them (...) and (...). Beth-San was a City in the tribe of
Manasses, which was afterward called Scythopolis, of which city both Ptholomey
and also Jerome have made mention. Thaanach is reckoned to be.x. miles distant
from Cesaria, in the way to Ptolemais.

But the Chananites began to dwell in the land. This hebrewe word Joel, which
the latin interpretour translateth presumpsit, and we have turned it caepit,
that is, began, signifies also to will, to be at rest, and to swear. The
sense seems to be this, that the Chananites, seeing they were not rooted out,
would have gladlye been content to have tarried in those places, where before
they dwelled, and that peradventure with a bond and an oath, but in such sort
that they would have given a certain tribute unto the Israelites, which now
had prevailed. But they of Manasses, because they could not cast these out,
were punished for their small faith. For if they had perfectly believed, even as
God was with them in the conquering of Luz and other Cities, so would he also
have aided them, in casting them out: but because their faith was so
diminished, God withdrew his aid from them, but in the mean time he referred
this punishment (as I have before said) to profitable ends, and meet for his
providence. And they although they could not upon the sudden expel their
enemies, yet ought they not to cease of from making war against them, neither
was it lawful for them to make any covenant or league with them.

And it appears that they required tribute of these nations, and bargained
with them without any lawful cause: for thus speaks the scripture. And it
came to pass that as soon as Israel waxed mighty, they put the Chananites to
tribute. Wherefore they prevailed against them, and they were stronger than
those nations: and therefore they can not be excused, in that they most
filthilye made couenauntes with them. For they seemed to be entised thereunto
by covetousness of money and servitude of those nations.

And in expellyng did not expel them. What the doubling of a word signifies
w^^h the Hebrews.
This doubling of words in the hebrew expresses a perfect and absolute
action, and this signifies as much as if it should have been said: And they
bruised them, and some of them they expelled, but they did not utterly destroy
them, as God had commanded. But what can we answer of Solomon, Solomon also
brought these nations under tribute.
which (in the first book of kings the.9. chap. and in the.8. chap. of
Paralip.) is written to have brought under tribute the rest of the Amorrites,
Hethites. etc. I believe verily that the rest of those nations embraced the
religion of the true God. For David, who was otherwise a most noble king and
valiant Captain, and who possessed his kingdom perfectly, suffered them not
to worship ydols in his dominions. And if Solomon did afterward lay a greater
burden on them, than he did on the Israelites, he can not lawfully be
blamed: for he did so also with the Gabaonites. For it is meet that the
Israelites should be handled more gentlye of their King, than strangers.
Neither should Solomon be excused, if he did that for to much greedye desire
of money, or if he did bargain with them for money, that they keeping still
their idolatrous and false worshipping, might live unpunished in his kingdom.

Ephraim also expelled not the Chananites. It is not declared that this tribe
did put their enemies to tribute: which I think nevertheless they did, when as
it was declared before that Manasses did so, and we shall hear straight way
that the tribe of Zebulon did the same. For it is not very lykelye that those
Ephraites were better than their fellows. As touching the city Gazer, Jerome
says that it was.4. miles distant from Nicopolis, which is Emaus: and is
called by an other name Gazer. Kitron also in the tribe of Zebulon and Nahalol
were compelled to pay tribute, that they might have Chananites to be their
citizens. The city Acho was afterward called Ptolemais. Ptolemais. Dispa.
Achzib also was called afterward Dispa, being.ix. miles distant from Acho in
the way toward Tire. Likewise the tribe of Nephtalim brought the Chananites
under tribute.

Of Mass.
Because in these places there is often mention made of this hebrew word
Mass, which signifies tribute, of which word is derived Mishah, Whence the
word Mass is thought to be derived.
which of some is taken for tribute, which was wont to be paid of every
person: And some of the Popes hirelinges thyncke that their Mass had his name
from thence, therefore peradventure it shall not be unprofitable somewhat to
write of it. That word is red in Deuteronomy. the.16. chap. when God commanded that
seven weeks should be reckoned after Easter, and then should be kept the
feast of Pentecoste. Thou shall appear (says he) before the Lord, and shall
give Missah Nethobath Iedecha, that is, a free oblation of thine own hand. And
that oblation was so called as an yearly tribute, which nevertheless was
willing and without constraint. Howbeit, other (and peradventure more truly) do
interpretate that word to signify sufficient, namely that there should be given
as much as should be enough and sufficient: for in the.15. chap. of that book,
where the Lord commanded the Israelites to open their hands unto the poor,
and to lend him that which might be sufficient, that hebrew word Dai the
Chaldey Paraphrast enterpreth Misshah. In which place I take it that there is a
regard to be had as well of the pouertye of the poor, as of the abilitye of the
geuer. For that was commanded to be osberued in voluntary oblations, namely
that so much should be given, as the ability of the geuers could bear, and as
much as seemed mete for the worshipping of God. From hence do these our
Papists think their Mass to be derived, as though it were a tribute, and a
willing oblation, which might be offered every where unto God in the church,
for the quick and the dead. But I think not so. Certain Hebrew words are
observed in the latin church The hebrew words came not unto the latin church
but by the Greek church.
I know right well, that the church has borrowed certain words of the hebrews,
as Satan, Osianna, Zebaoth, Halleluia, Pasah, or Pascha, and such other mo.
But we must mark, that those words came not unto the Latin Church, but by
the Greek Church: for as much as those words are found in the new
Testament, as it is written first in Greek, and also in the translation of the
old Testament, as it was turned by the.lxx. Wherefore we have no hebrew
words derived to our Church, which the Greek Church had not first. But if
we shall diligently peruse over the books of the Greek father, we shall never
find this word Missa which is Mass, used of the^. Wherefore I thynk that this
word of Missa is not derived from the Hebrews.

(...).
The Greek church called the holy supper (...), which work signifies a
common and public work. Neither is that word proper to holy things: yea it
is also applied unto profane actions which are public. And who knows not
that the administration of the supper of the Lord is a thing pertaynyng to
Christian people? For as many as be present, ought to be partakers thereof, and
to communicate together. An argument against private masses.
And least I should ouerskyp this, the etimologie of this word brings no
small argument against private Masses. Bisides this that word pertains not
only, to the Lords supper, but also it is attributed to other holy functions,
wherefore it is written in the acts of the Apostels the.13. chap. (...), whcyh
some have turned, whilst they did sacrifice, when as rather they should have
said, whilst they served or wrought publicly, namely in a holy thing which
they did without doubt in preaching of the Gospel. Names of the holly supper
among the Latynes.
This holy function namely the Lords supper had other names among the Latins.
For it was sometimes called the Communion, sometimes the supper of the Lord,
other sometimes the Sacrament of the body of Christ, or the breaking of bread.
And our fathers have often times called it as the Greek fathers did, dreadful
mysteries and (...). How the fathers called the supper a sacrifice.
I will not speak of, how they used to call it often times by the name of a
sacrifice, not therefore (as our adversaries do foolishlye imagine) because that
there the body and blood of Christ is offered unto God for a sacrifice for the
quick and the dead. Although the fathers abhorred not from that kind of
speech, whereby they said that the body and blood of Christ was offered unto
God. But what they understood by those words, if they be diligently red, they
do manifestly expound, namelye that then were thanks given unto

The most ancient fathers used not ye maine of Mass. Augustine.
By those names did the most ancient fathers call the Lords supper. But they
made never mention of the Mass. For it thou shall read Ireneus, Tertulilan,
Ciprian, Hilary, and their like, thou shall never find that word in them in
that signification. Augustine makes mention twice of it, namely in her sermon
de tempore. 237. where he makes mention of the Mass of those that were to be
instructed before baptism. In that place he exhoreth men to forgive injuries
one to another. For (says he) we must come to the Mass of those that are to
be instructed where we shall pray: forgive us our trespasses, as we also
forgive our trespassers. And be writes also in the sermon de tempore.91. these
words: In the history which is to be red at Masses. Some are in doubt
whether those sermons were of Augustines writing or no, When the name of Mass
began to be used.
but to me they seem to be the style and sentences of Augustine. And as I
conjecture, I think that this name Mass began almost to be used at that time:
howbeit but seldom, and not often. For if it had been then a word in much
use, Augustine in especial who framed his writing unto the vulgar people,
would oftener have made mention of it.

They allege Ignatius in his Epistle ad Smyrnenses. Ignatius An argument
against private Masses.
But that place makes very much against the Massemongers: for as much as there
Ignatius ordained that Masses should in no wise be had, unless the Bishop
were present, with such great wariness did antiquity abhor private
co^munions. For he would have al men to be present at yt doing of it, and
specially the Bishops. These things have I said, as grautning unto the
adversaries, that it was the very book of Ignatius, The epistles of Ignatius
are Apocriphas.
and that it contains in it the word Mass, which yet we are not compelled to
grant: For it is Apocripha, yea, and that as their own Gratian testifies.
Moreover those Epistles were written in Greek, and therefore I am assured,
that be which turend it into latin, did put this word Mass for (...). For thus
it is written in Greek, (...): and straight way after that, (...). etc. This is
the Greek sentence of Ignatius, wherein as appears there is no mention made
of this word Mass.

Leo also is cited in his.9. Epistle to Dioscurus, Leo. And argument against
private Masses.
where I confess that that father made mention of Mass, but yet in such
sort, that in the same place he is wonderfullye against private Masses. For
he was demanded, seeing that the temple was not so large, that it could not
contain the whole people, which came while holy things were administered, what
the rest of the multitude should do which remained without and could not be
present. Leo answered, that when that part of the people is gone forth which
was before present at the holy celebration, the residue might succeed and
repeat again those holy things. If so be that private masses had been then
in use, what needed of that matter to have asked counsel of Leo the bishop of
Rome? Surely this question is a manifest token that Mass was not used to be
had but once.

They were wont also to bring Johannes Cassianus, Johannes Casianus.
who lived in the time of Honorius, and was driven out of the Church of
Jerusalem by heretics, from whence he came to Massilia, and was a Monk by
profession. For he makes mention of Mass in his.3. book.7. and 8. chap. but
he wresteth the signification of that word far otherwise than to the holy
Communion. For by Mass he understands perfection, finishing, and
absolution. Wherefore he says: praestolatur congregationis missam. Let him
tarry the end or fulness of the congregation. That is, that the multitude and
congregation may be absolved and fulfyled. And by and by after, Contenti
somno, quia missa vigiliarum vsque ad lucem conceditur, That is, being content
with the sleep which is permitted them from the end of the vigiles unto day
light: whereby this word Missa he understands that time of the watch wherein
the vigiles were ended. For then was it lawful for the Monks to sleep until
day light. Neither must I ouership, that there is mention most manifestly made
of Masses in the exposition of the.xi. chap. of the Proverbs of Solomon, which
exposition is ascribed to Jerome. The exposition of ye Proverbs is falsely
ascribed to Jerome.
But that book without co^trouersy is none of Ieromes writing. For Gregory is
there alleged, who lived long after Augustine and Jerome. Bruno Amerbachius in
his epistle which he set before the book, says that he saw in an old book,
that that interpretation was entitled to Beda. Many abuses in the church in
the time of Beda.
And if it were so, then it is no marvel, if he made mention of Masses, for
then in the time of Beda the priest, many abuses had crept into the church. I
do therefore admonish you of that, because in that place that cou^terfait Jerome
affirms that the souies of such as are dead, are by the celebrations of
Masses delivered out of Purgatory. Jerome was not so wont to speak

From whence this word Mass comes.
Now rests to declare from whence the name of Mass, which undoubtedly is a
latin word, seems to be derived. The old fathers, if a man will diligentlys
mark their writings, did put this word remissa, which is forgeuenes, for this
word remissio, Tertullian.
which is also forgeuenes. Tertullianus in his.4. book agaynsts Marcion,
the.249. side. We have spoken (says he) de remissa peccatorum, that is of the
remission of sins. Ciprian.
Ciprian de bono patientiae, says: Qui remissam peccatorum erat daturus
lauatro regenerationis tingi non est dedignatus. He which came to give
remission of sins, disdained not to be washed with the lauacre of
regeneration. The same man writes in the.14. epistle of his.13. book. Qui
blasphemat spiritum sanctum remissam peccatorum non habet, that is, he which
blasphemeth the holy Ghost, has not remission of sins. Wherefore seeing in
steed of remissio they have said remissa, they may be counted also instead of
missio to have used this word missa. Therefore that which was done in the Church
post missionem Cathecumenorum, Cathecumenites,
that is after the sending away of the Cathecumenites, they called Missa, that
is Mass. (...) (to declare that also by the way) is to teach and to enstruct,
especially by voice, and not by writing: whereof they were called (...) which
were not yet washed with the lauacre of regeneration, but were instructed of
their faith. Tertullian called them Audientes or Auditores, that is, hearers.
But Augustine called them Competentes, that is desirers, or requesters (that is
of baptism.) For before they should be baptized at Easter, they signified
their names.40. days before, in which space they were instructed, and not only
their faith, but also their life and manners were examined of the Pastors of the
church. The Cathecumenites and not co^municantes were sent out by the Deacon.
Cyrillus. Gregory.
But in the holy assembling when the holy scriptures were red, and the sermon
done, the Deacon cried: Exeunto Catechumeni, that is: let the Cathecumenites go
forth, and the Grecians said (...), that is, holy things for holy ones: as it
is gathered out of the service book of the elders. Also out of Cyrillus upon
John the.xii. book and.l. chap: yea in Gregory's time (as he testifies him
self in his second book and.23. chap. of his dialogues) it was said: if any
man communicate not, let him give place. And that manner may appear to be very
like unto a certain custom of the Ethnikes: For in a certain usage of their
service of God (as Festus declares) the Sargeant said: Festus. A manner of the
Ethnikes in a certain service of theirs. Apuleius.
Exesto hostis victus, mulier, virgo, that is, let the overcome enemy, the
woman and the maid go forth, for in that kind of service it was forbidden
that those kind of persons should be present. And Apuleius in his.2. book
says, that the Priest did use when he offered sacrifices, to say thus: (...),
that is, who shall abide here? To whom was answered: (...), As though it should
have been said: honest and good men, when as they which were polluted and
unworthy were gone. So was it done in our church: (...).
for after that saying aforesaid of the Deacon, (...), fallers away, and such
as were put to repentance went their way. Of these orders Dionisius made
mention. They were called (...), which were vexed with evil spirits.
Peradventure they were excommunicated, for those at that time, I mean in the
primative church, were delivered up to Satan.

Missa as it were Missio. Ambrose.
Therefore (as it now appears, by that which we have said) the Latin church
called the celebration of the sacrament of the holy supper Missam, as it were
missionem, that is, a sending away. For Ambrosius also said in a certain place,
missas facere. And surely this sentence seems much more probable unto me,
than does theirs which think that name to be derived of this hebrew word
Mass. But now that we have entreated of the name of Mass, Parts of the Mass.
we will also set forth the parts thereof, as they were had among the elders.
The Grecians seem to have begone their (...), that is, the exercise of the
Lords supper at (...), (...).
(...), that is, Lord have mercy upon us, As though before al they would
implore forgeuenes of their sins. Which phrase the latin church has borrowed
of the, which some attribute to Gregory. But whylest the people gathered
together, and before they were assembled, they song a piece of some Psalm,
Introitus.
or some part of the scripture, and that song they called Introitus, that is an
entrance, because that at that time the people might enter in. And they make
Celestine author of that. After (...), the people being in a manner glad, for
the obtaining of pardon for their sins, to give thanks unto God, Gloria in
excel^s Collectes.
did sing this hymn Gloria in altissimis, that is: Glory to God on high, which
they will have to be the invention of Telesphorus. Then had they Collectes,
which are ascribed unto Gelasius. Moreover, certain lessons were rehearsed out
of the holy scriptures, either out of the old testament, or else out of the
Acts, or Epistles of the Apostles. The Epistle.
Which lessons being done, there was to be rehearsed some part of the
Evangelical hystory. But when the Readers had red unto the church the first
lessons, the deacon stood up in a high place, or pulpit, namely to be seen,
and to be understand of al men, The Gospel. The graduale. Halleluiah.
where he distinctly pronounced that which was to be read out of the Gospel.
But whylest he went and ascended up the stayres, the people used to sing some
verses of Psalms, which commonly they called Graduales, that is, stayre
songs. They added also unto them, Halleluiah, that is, praise the Lord, as it
were clapping of hands with a joyous cry, for the glad tidinges of the gospel.
This hebrewe word Halleluiah, seems to be taken out of the Church of
Jerusalem: whereof there is mention made also in the Apocalipse, and in the
title of certain Psalms, When the Deacon had red the Gospel, the Bishop, A
Sermon.
or the Pastor of the Church added thereunto an interpretation and
exhortation: wherein vices were reproved, and deliberation taken of such as were
to be excommunicated. Which things being thus finished, The Papists have
transposed the sendyng away of the people.
the Cathecumenites and others which would not communicatr, were sent away.
But in our time, because there are found very seldom any Cathecumenites, and
they which do not communicate do stand myngled with the rest, yea almost none
communicate except it be the Sacrificer alone. The Papists have differred that
Missio, that is, that sendyng away, to the end of their abominations. For
then they use to say with a loud voice, Ite, Missa est, That is: Go your way,
Ite Missa est.
now is the departure.

But in the old time, those things being finished, The Symbol of the faith.
which we have rehearsed, they which abode to be partakers of the holy
Supper, did sing the Simbole of the faith, that they might diligently instruct
one an other in the principal heads of religion, wherein they consented. For
in Symboles is comprehended the fumme of faith, which comprehension or sum,
The Symbol is called the tradition of the Church. Tertulian. The counsel of
Nice.
if a man will diligently read the old Fathers, he shall find to be called
Traditio Ecclesiae, that is the tradition of the Church, which is both taken
out of the holy Scriptures, and also necessary to be believed for salvation.
And sometimes Tertullian brings it against the heretics which denied the
holy Scriptures. The Synod holden at Nicena made a full and perfect Symbol,
but not the first, for as much as there were certain Symboles before, as we
may know even of Tertullian him self. Then while they soong the Creed or
Symbol, such as were present offered of their goods such things as they
thought good. Three uses of oblation.
The offering served for three manner of uses, for part of it was spent on
certain moderate banquets, which the Christians did at that time very
religiouslye celebrate among them selves, and they were commonly called (...),
Charitable banquetes.
that is charitable banquets. Part of that which remained was distributed unto
the poor. And finally some of the bread and wine was laid up for the use of
the holy Supper. And that this oblation of things was then added, Offertory.
Collectes.
two things do testefye. First certain verses which were soong by the
people, whilst the offering was in doing, which was therefore called of the^
Offertorium, that is an offering. The same is also known by those collectes
which are read in that part of the Mass. Yea, and Justinius the most ancient
Martyr has made mention of the same oblation in his Apology or defense, and
Ciprian also, and some of the old Fathers. Sursum corda.
After these things, when they came to administer the holy Supper, they said
Sursum corda, that is: Lift up your hearts, as the Ethnickes used to cry in
their holy things, Hoc age.
Hoc age, that is, do this. And surely the Christians said so very aptlye, and
in convenient time, thereby to admonish them selves, to think at that time
upon no carnal nor earthly thing, but wholly to lift up their minds unto
heaven, where Christ is to be sought, and not in earth, as though he were
included in the bread or wine. After that they gave thanks, when they said:
Gratias agimus tibi. From whence is had the name (...). Proper words of the
Supper The Lords Prayer. Sanc^us. Prefaces. Canon
We give thanks O Lord holy father, almightye, and everlasting God, through
Christ our Lord. etc. These things are most ancient, and are found very
often in old ecclesiastical writers. Yea and that mystery of the body and
blood of Christ was called (...), that is, giving of thanks, because all the
accomplishing thereof depends up on thanks giving. And when the people had
said: Through our Lord Christ, he went to the proper words of the Supper.
Which being rehearsed, there was said the Lords prayer. But Xystus before the
rehersall of it, would have the people to sing Sanctus Sanctus. etc. that is,
holy, holy. etc. And that there might be better occasion given to come to that
song, certain prefaces were put before. And to those they peeced their Canon,
which one Scolasticus (as Gregory mencioneth in his Register) made: which in
deed the same Gregory allows not, because he would put in things of his
own, and neglected the Lords prayer. The kiss of peace, is said to be the
invention of Leo the second. Kiss of peace.
Which seems not so to me, for as much as that manner was in the Church,
even in the time of the Apostels, that Christians should entertayne one
another with the kiss of peace. Yea and Paul in his Epistles has made
mention of that kind of salvation. Agnus dei.
And Iustine also the martyr in his second Apology has mentioned of this
kiss. The song of Agnus dei, that is the Lamb of God, Distribution of the
sacrament.
is said to have been brought in by one Innocentius. And when all these
things were finished, they came to the distribution of the Sacrament. Which
whilst it was in doing, or when it was finished, they song a song of thanks
giving, Post communion Prayers at the end.
which they called Post Communionem, that is, an after Communion. And all these
things being finished and ended, the Minister sent away the people, blessing
them with a lucky blessing.

All these things, although they led away the Christian people from that
first simplicity of vsyng the Lords Supper, very many things being added as
it seemed good unto sundry men: nevertheless after a sort they might be
borne withal, neither can they justly be accused either of superstition, or
else of Idolatry. Rites were not like in all churches. The church of Millayne.
Howbeit they were not a like in all Churches, neither were they observed after
one manner. For yet in the Church of Millaine it is otherwise used after the
institution of Ambrose. But afterward the Romane^ Antichrists corrupted all
things, as I shall declare in an other place.

And that by the old institution were observed those things which I have
mentioned, Tertulian.
I could easily prove by most ancient writers. Tertullian in his Apologye
says: we assemble and gather together, that we praying might embrace one
another, as though we would make a rushing into God with our prayers. This
violence is acceptable unto God. We pray also for Emperors, and for their
ministers and powers, for the state of the world, for the quietness of things,
and the tariyng of the end. These things declare the su^me of the collects. And
for the rehearsing of the Scriptures, he adds: we assemble together to the
rehearsal of the holy scriptures, if the quality of the present time does
compel us, either to foresee any thing, or diligently to acknowledge any
faults, we do assuredly feed our faith with holy words, we erecte our hope,
we fyxe our confidence, and yet we continually repeat discipline, by
inculcating the precepts of God. There are also exhortations, castigations, and
sharp judgments of God, for there was judgment with great weight. etc.
These are the things which were done in the holy assembly. Whereunto those
things are also to be added, which the same author says in an other place,
namelye that the Lords Supper was wont to be received at the hands of the
chief Ministers. etc. We may by these words perceive the principal parts of
the Mass which we have made mention of.

Iustine the Martyr in his second Apology makes mention that the Christians
assembled together on the Sunday, Iustine martyr
but he writes nothing of other feast days. There he says was rehearsed the
holy scriptures, whereunto the Bishop did afterward adioyne his exhortation.
Which being finished (says he) we rise and pray. He adds afterward: The
bread and drink is brought to the bishop, over which he gives thanks as
earnestly as he can: to whom all men answer, Amen. These two words declare that
they were not carelessly to be passed over. First thanks were not given rashlye,
but with as much earnest as might be, that is, with a singular affection.
Moreover, it is manifest that all these things were spoken with a loud voice,
seeing all the people answered, Amen. Afterward (says he) is distributed the
Lords supper, then is the common giving of thanks, and the offering of alms.

Dionisius in Hierarchia Ecclesiastica makes mention almost of these same
things, namely of the reading of the scriptures, singing of Psalms, Communion,
Dionisius.
and other things, which were to long now to rehearse. But (which is much to
be maruailed of) he makes no mention of the offering of the body of Christ.
The works of Dionisius are not his which was the Areo-Pagite.
Yet we must not think that he was that Areopagite, of whom the Acts of the
Apostles have mentioned. But whatsoever he was, it is not to be doubted, as
far as I can judge, but that he was an old writer. But why I can not think
that he was an Areopagite, these are the reasons that lead me thereunto.
First, because the kind of writing which he uses, especially of the names of
God, and de Hierarchia celesti, contains in it rather the doctrine of vain
Philosophye, than the pure doctrine of Christian religion, and utterly wants
edefiyng: moreover those books ar in a manner void of testimonies of the holy
scriptures. Monks were not in the church in the Apostles time.
Furthermore in his Hierarchia Ecclesiastica he makes Monks as a myddle
order between a Clarke and the Lay men. When as in the Apostles time, that
kind of life was not yet in the Church. Besides this, the auncienter Fathers
never made mention of those books: which is a good argument, that those
wrytinges were none of that Martyrs doing. Gregory the Roman was the first of
all writers that made any mention of him, who in one of his Homelies mencioneth
of his writings. But let us leave him and come to Augustine. Augustine.


That father in his.59. epistle to Paulinus, when he dissolueth the.v.
question, expounds the.4. words which are written in the.1. epistle to Timo.
the.2. A place to Timothe expounded. 1, Tim: 2.
chap. And these are the words: (...), and (...). And he affirms (...), to
go before the celebration of the sacrament: but (...) he makes prayers, which
are said in the administration of the sacrament, where after a sort we vow our
selves unto Christ, and he thincketh (...) to be peticions and requests, with
which the Minister of the Church prays for good things unto the people
standing by. And finally (...) he affirms to be the common giving of thanks.
I could to these bring a great many more monuments of old writers, but that I
think these are sufficient at this present.

But now to return to the name of Missa, Note an other kind of mission
I see there have been some which have thought it to have been derived of the
word Missio, that is sending, because those things which were offered of the
faithful, were said to be sent, and they thyncke that this hebrewe word
Missath gave the occasion to that name, because in Penticoste the Jews used to
send gifts. But why I do not thyncks the name of Missa to be derived of the
hebrewe word, I have before declared. And now I add this, that if Missa
were so named of the oblation of things, which were given of the godly, then do
the Papists abuse that name, who have no regard at al to the alms of godly
men, but only to the oblation of the body and blood of Christ, which they
commonly boast, and that impudently, that they do offer it unto God the
father for the quick and the dead. But of these things I think I have spoken
enough and enough.

34 And the Amorrites drove the children of Dan unto the mou^tain, for they
suffered them not to come down into the valley.

35 And the Amorrites began to dwell in the mount Heresch in Aialem, and in
Saalbim: and the hand of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tributaries.

36 And the coast of the Amorrites was from the going up of the Scorpions, and
from Petra and upward.


They of the tribe of Dan distrusting the mercy and favor of God, were driven
by the Chananites or Amorhites, into the hilly places, where they were scarce
able to abide. For their enemies began to usurp the mountain of Heresch,
which was appointed to their lot: but the house of Joseph aided them, and so
prevailed, that they made the Amorhites tributaries. The borders of the
Amorrites were very large
And how far the borders of the Amorhites extended, is brieflye touched. For
they reached unto the going up of Scorpions, which is a place in the South
borders of the tribe of Judah, not far from the dead sea, almost even to
Petra, which city is the Metropolitan or chief city of Arabia, Petra. Strabo.
from which it is called Arabia Petrea. Strabo describes it, that it was
situated in a plain ground, compassed in with high rocks, from the bottomes
whereof flowed most plentiful fountaynes, when as the whole region which
lies by it, was altogether dry and a deserte.

Whether it be lawful for Christians to dwell with infidels.
But seeing the Israelites fell, because they dwelled together with ungodly
nations, and did rather exact tributes of them, than utterly wede them out,
according to the commandment of God. I think it good to entreat whether it
be lawful for godly men to be conversant and to dwell together with the
ungodly. Reasons which prove that. The first reason


And assuredly there are many reasons, whereby that may seem to be lawful.
First, because Christ despised not the feasts af Publicanes, Phariseis, and
Sinners. Paul to the Corinthians the first epistle, gives not liberty to a
faithful wife, to depart from an infidele, so that he be content to live and
dwell together Corinthians to avoid whooremongers, rauenours, evil speakers,
and such like: but not al (says he) for so must you go out of the world, but
if any be called a brother. etc. Wherefore we are not forbidden to avoid the
fellowship of all the ungodly. Besides these Abraham was called out of Chaldey,
and commanded to dwell as a stranger among nations, which were far from
true religion. Wherefore he dwelt in Chanaan and Egypt, which places were
altogether given to idolatry. Yea, and Lot separated him self from the
fellowshyppe and familye of his Abraham, and went and dwelt in Sodom. Naaman
also the Sirian returned to his idolatries. Christ also retained not with him
al those whom he Nouatians had in the city of Constantinople, and at this day
the Jews have every where leave to dwell among the Christians.

This question surely as it is weighty, so has it also very many doubts. A
distinction.
Wherefore we must first make a distinction, what may be lawful to Magistrates,
and what to private men. An other distinction.
Then must we understand that the conversation with infidels has two
considerations: one is, whereby men are driven by compulsion to Idolatrous and
vnpure worshipping of God, and an other, whereby they remain at liberty. Then
we must mark, The third distinction.
yt they which live together with the ungodly as touching religion, are
sometime learned and strong, and sometimes they are both weak and also
unlearned. Wherefore I think it good to be judged as touching private men, that
if they be learned, The learned and strong may be conuersaunt with Infidels.
and have with their learning adjoined constancy, so that they be not
compelled to communicate with ungodly rites, may lawfully have to do and be
conuersaunt with men that are infidels, provided that there be certain
cautions added.

The first caution is, that they do it with this mind, The first Caution.
to teach those which are without godliness, and to bring them to the sincere
and pure religion. And therefore whilst they are conuersaunt among the^, they
ought not to cease: but ought always to go about that purpose, for which they
dwell in those places. And that their instruction and doctrine may be fruitful,
they must take diligent head, that they be courteyse, gentle and bounteous
toward those, whom they think to join unto Christ. For unless they be fully
persuaded, that they which do admonyshe them and instruct them do love them,
and have them in price, the thing, which they have taken in hand shall have but
evil success.

Furthermore they must take heed, that they live holily, justly and honestly,
The second Caution.
for if the infidels should be offended with their manners, their ministerye
would utterly be unprofitable: for as much as it nothing avails to build with
one hand and to destroy the same with the other hand.

Moreover this most of al is to be seen unto, The third Caution.
yt under the pretense of gentleness or friendship they myngle not themselves
with ungodly vsages no though they were persuaded, that they could that way
allure the^ the easlier unto Christ. For the rule of the Apostle must abide
unshaken, which is that evil things are not to be committed, whereby good
things may happen.

They must beware also, yt in being conuersaunt with the^, The fourth Caution.
they seek not their own cause or commodity. For some there are found, which
although they make a pretense that they are desirous to have the Gospel spread
abroad. Yet nevertheless in very deed follow and seek for their own
pleasures, and gain or advantage. Wherefore if there be no hope (which
nevertheless can seldom justly happen) of the health of such infidels, we
must no longer have to do with them, but so much as either our necessity or
theirs requires: that is, if peradventure they should be very sore sick, and
could not be helped no other way but by our help: or if we our selves should
not be able to get things necessary for our living any other where but among
them. It shall be lawful also to be conuersaunte with them, as much as
natural and civil necessityes require, as if they were our princes, fathers,
wives or masters and such like. Now rests to co^fyrme this sentence, Proves
out of the holy scriptures. Math. 9.
either by testimonies of ye holy scriptures or else by examples. Christ
assuredly did so, who for this cause was co^uersant with publicanes, sinners,
pharisees, and scribes to instruct the^ of salvation, and to convert the^ from
sins to virtues, and godliness, Wherefore Jerome on ye 9. chap. of Matthew
has this saying: Ierom^.
Christ in deed went to the feasts of sinners, but to that end yt he might
have occasion to teach the^ and to recompense their biddings with spiritual
meats: neither are there any other things in the rehearsal thereof spoken, but
such as Christ himself spoke or did, and what was the power of his doctrine,
etc. This same manner did the Prophets in the old time use, when they were
conuersaunt with an Idolatrous people And in like sort did the Apostles, when
they were sent by Christ, to go abroad among the Ethnikes. Neither did Paul
disdain when he came to Athens, to vewe the temples of the Idols, and there
curiously and subtly to look upon ye titles and inscriptions of the altares,
whereby he learned that inscription Ignoto Deo, that is, To the unknown god,
and thereof he took matter to make an excellent Sermon there, that he might
after a sort reprove the men of Athens out of there own proper tables. I
think these things are sufficient to confyrme the sentence before alleged.
How we may be conuersaunt with excommunicates.
But before I go from this matter, I thought it good to admonyshe you of
this, that the same cautions being added, it is lawful for godly me^ to be
conuersaunt with such as are excommunicate, namely to bring them into the way,
so that they communicate not with them in their fault, or have to do with them
for affection sake. The weak and unlearned ought not to have to do with
infidelles.


But let us go forward, and declare what is to be judged of the weak and
unlearned men. They, although they are not compelled to pollute themselves with
Idolatrous customs, yet ought they not to dwell together with Infidels. For
being unlearned, they have no pretense of teaching. For if they should go about
to enstruct others, The ignorance of Christians as touching faith is to be
reproved.
they should by their unskillfulness easly cause ye true doctrine of Christ to
be had in derision. And surely the ignorance of such men is earnestly to be
reproved: forasmuch as among Christians, there is none so very an Idiot
found, but that he is bound to be able to render a reason of his faith and in
a sort able to enstructe strangers. And certaynely all men moughte quickly
do that, if they would suffer themselves to be instructed even meanly in the
Cathechisme. Nevertheless such as are infected with this ignorance ought to
separate themselves from having familiar fellowship with Infidelles as much as
need of the body and inevitable necessities will suffer.

But what shall we say of Scholemaisters? they are oftentimes enemies to
pietye which yet are appointed to teach good arts and Philosophye. We may not
have to do with ungodly scholemaisters.
I say that it is dangerous to use them, for as much as they do instille
oftentimes perverse things into the minds of the hearers, and when as the
Scholars are wont to have a marvelous opinion of a learned Scholemaster it
easily afterward commenth to pass, Godly scholemaisters do easily advance
religion.
that they begin to reverence them, and that exceedingly. Wherefore when they
see that they are eloquente and very well learned both in the liberal arts,
and also in Philosophy, they can scarce persuade them selves, that those
Scholemasters can err or myserablye be deceived in the true religion. Origene.
For on the contrary part we see that Origene the Adamantiue, being besides
the religion of Christ, wherein he was instructed, wonderfully endued also with
good arts and Philosophy, did in teaching disciplines of the Ethnikes bring
very many of his hearers to Christ. Augustine.
We know also that Augustine, when he willingly gave ear unto Ambrose for his
eloquence sake, was turned from a Manichite to a Catholyke. So, yea and that
more easlye (for as much as we are more prone to evil then to good) it may
oftentimes happen that they which are weak and unlearned in religion, may as
touching ungodliness very much increase under ungodly Scholemaisters. And
undoubtedly by this means fell Iulianus the Apostata from Christ, in taking
Libanius, Iamblicus, and Maximus to be his Scholemaisters. Wherefore for as much
as such Scholemaisters can not be had without great danger, my judgment is
that we should altogether leave them.

Thou will say peradventure yt Paul the Apostle in his first Epistle to ye Cor.
has not written these cautions or exceptions of the weak and unlearned ones,
when as he plainly writes: If any that is an infidel shall call you, and ye will
go, etc. By these words he seems to testifye, yt all that is referred to our
will. Whereunto I answer, yt the Apostle did not permit yt to be free to every
will, but to a will yt is ryghtly and well instructed. For if a man should go to
these feasts, to be drunk to pamper his belly or gorge, or to solace himself
with filthy talk without doubt he can not be excused with the permissio^ of Paul,
but is earnestly to be reproved, for his dishonest will and wicked purpose.
Likewise if a man being co^uersau^t with infidels should doubt of his own
constancy, and should see yt he could nothing profit them, among who^ he
dwells, undoubtedly ye man can not go thither with a sound conscience, or an
vpryght will. And if he should go, he should not direct yt which he does, to
to glory of god (as he is commanded.) Furthermore although Paul has not in
the same place by express words put this caution alleged, yet it follows
not thereby, that the same is not to be added: forasmuch as it is both by firm
reason manifest, and also proved by other places of ye holy scripture, yt that
is in no case lawful. And yt self same Apostle says in the same Epistle the
vi. chap. that he does well, which surely purposes in his heart, yt he will keep
his virgin: Howbeit he adds this condition, so yt he have no need, and that
he has power over his own will. For if he should otherwise appoint the^ his
daughter would, or had need, then undoubtedly he should not do well. To the
goodness of an action it is not sufficient that it be not of his own nature
evil.
Whereby it appears yt to the goodness and uprightness of ye work, it is
not sufficient to see that ye work it self of his nature be not evil, or
repugnant to ye word of god. But more over this is required, yt we attempt the
same with an vprighte, perfect and whole mind. Wherefore every one yt is
unlearned and weak, ought to separate himself from the fellowship or
familiarity of yt unfaithful, as much as natural and civil necessity
suffers. For seeing yt he perceaueth that thereby will come some danger to his
soul, he can not with a good mind and sound counsel be conuersaunt with the^.
Howbeit he may do such duties unto them as are commanded in the law of God,
least he be made guiltye of ye sentence of Paul, where he says: whosoever has
not a care of his, and especially of his household, he has denied the faith,
and is worse than an Infidel. Yea and the same Apostle has commanded, that
servants of necessitye should obey their Masters.

Now rests to show reasons and testimonies of the holy scriptures,
Testimonies of the holy scriptures for ye sentence alleged.
for ye dysalowing of this conversation. First our Savior feared not to say in
Matthew the 5. and 18. chap. If thy hand, foot or eye be an offense, or let unto
thee, cut him of, and cast him from thee, And these (as the wyser interpreters
do declare) spoke he not of the members of the body, but referred the^ unto
those, which are our familiars, and most nygh of kynred unto us. They al are to
be separated from our company, although they seem profitable and commodious,
when they either separate us from God, which is the everlasting salvation, or
do put lets and hyndera^ces, whereby we are called from him. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom in a manner entreating the self same argument says in the 56.
Homely upon John: If we cut of a rotten membre from the body, least it should
corrupt the other parts of the body, which undoubtedly we do not, because we
despise that member. For who at any time hated his own flesh? How much more
should we do the same in those which are wickedly joined unto us, not that we
should despise them, but that we should provide that our salvation be not there
indaungered, where we see yt we can nothing at al profit them. Wherefore in
this case, it is much unprofitable to desire, or to seek for familiarity or
concord. To this also does ye law of Christ tend which he gave in the 18. of
Matthew, yt they which are in a manner past hope of salvation, and will not hear
their brethren justly admonishing the^, yea and also despise ye voice of the
church correcting them, let them be counted as Ethnikes and publicanes. Which
thing Paul also has taught, who in the first of the Corrinthians the v. chap.
commanded the incestuous person to be excommunicated, that a little leven
should not pollute the whole dough of the saints.

Moreover the same Apostle taught, and yt in the same Epistle the 15. chap. out
of a verse of Menander yt Poet, ye evil co^munications corrupt good manners. And
thereby he showed, yt the right faith of ye resurrection, was grievously weakened
among ye Corinthians, which were newly come unto Christ, and yt for that cause
because they had lightly given credit unto ye arguments and profane reasons
of Philosophers or rather heretics. It is not possible to be thought, how ye
bewitching of wicked words corrupts the tender faith of the weak ones.
Wherefore profitably and conveniently were the Corrinthians admonished, and with
the^ all such as are weak ar exhorted, The counsels of Physicians to avoid
contagiousnesse.
to abstain from ye fellowship of infidels. The physicians also do counsel,
yt when a contagious disease shall infect either a familye or the next family
unto it, yt such as yet are of perfect health go not unto them which are
sick. For yt in the bodies and temperatures of men there is a certain
agreement, whereby an affection easly issues from those which are sick to the^
which are whole and sound, (...)
the poison whereof, though it be not byandby felt, of those which take not head
unto themselves, yet for all yt within a little while after it deadly corrupts.
Wherefore seeing we are bidden so diligently to beware of the diseases of the
body, much more ought we to provide against the vices of the mind that we
no way provoke them unto us.

Our nature is on every side subject to corruption.
Furthermore our nature is so framed, by reason of our natural or original
sin, yt we are on every side subject to corruption, as both ye holy
scriptures, and also very many experiences do daily teach us, so that it is not
to be doubted, but yt we should easly suck in the poison of other men's sins,
if we should not with great diligence avoid them. And those sins as they do
without any labor cleave unto us before we beware, so being once conceived,
they can not be plucked from us but with great pains. Chrysostom.
Wherefore Chrysostom in his 56. Homely upon John which I a little before
brought, seems wisely to say: If we could make the^ the better, and not hurt
our selves (he entreats in ye place of infidells and ungodly ones) we should
do all things: but when we can do them no good, because they are past
amendment, and that we may grievously hurt our selves, then are they utterly to
be cut of. And to confyrme his sentence more strongly he brings in that which
Paul writes in the first Epistle to the Corinth. the.5 chap. which is, Take
away evil from among you. Which words of the Apostle can not be understand of
sin, forasmuch as the Greek word is (...), that is evil. By which kind
of speech a wicked man is signified. Wherefore I shall nothing err, if I a
little bend the words of the Apostle to the commodity of the weak ones,
saying: Take away your selves from among the evil ones. For if ye, being weak
and unskillful, shall company with them, ye must needs both see and hear very
many things against godliness and the religion which ye profess. And because
ye are not able neither to confute, nor to reprove them, ye shall seem to be
called as witnesses of blasphemies and reproach of the truth. And peradventure
there should remain a styng in your minds, wherewith your conscience should
be vexed longer than ye think for. Let us harken unto the wise man, who has
well and faithfully admonished, That he which touches pytche shall be fyled with
it, and yt he which has fellowship with a proud man, will prove like unto him.
The vices of other men are like unto pitch.
Take upon thee no greater burden, than thou art able to bear, and join not
thy self unto a mightier tha^ thou thy self art. Ecclesiasticus the.13. chap.
These things do two ways serve for this present matter. First in that the
vices of other men are lykened unto pytche, which sticks wonderful fast to
the fyngers of them which touch it, We must have a regard to our own strength.
and also to garments. Secondly are we faithfully admonyshed to have a regard
to our own strength.

Examples of ye holy scriptures
Let the examples of ye holy scriptures in any wise teach us. The Israelits were
70. years captives in Babylon, and were so infected with ye conversation of
unfaithful nations, yt afterward when they had leave given the^ first of Cirus
and the^ of Darius ye most noble kings to return home, very many of the^ would
not return, but being overcome with ye commodity of houses, fields and
marchandises, they remained still among ye Chaldians, Medes, and Persians: So
cold became they in ye love of godliness and study of religion. Exodus. ^2.
They were reproved in deed by Esdras, Nehemias, and Zachary, but they were
little ye better thereby. And how much ye Hebrews were corrupted by their long
conversation with ye Egyptians, the things which were by and by done in ye
wilderness, do plainly testify. For although they had yet before their eyes
ye singular benefits of God toward them, yet they fell from him to Idolatry,
and because in Egypt they had seen an ox supersticiously worshipped, Numeri.
2^.
they therefore instigated Aaron, to make them a calfe to worship. Which being
given the^ with great rejoicing they began to cry. These are thy gods O
Israel, which brought the out of Egypt. Besides this, they iorneyng, thorough
the wilderness, when they came to the borders of the Moabites, and were
conuersaunt with that nation more familiarly than was mete, they were brought
to this point, that they did not only commit filthy whoredom with the
shameless women of the Moabites, but also they offered sacrifice unto the most
filthy idol namely Baal-Peor and suffered them selves to be admitted to his
most vnpure sacrifices. Peter the chief Apostle, Matthew. 26.
when he had entered into the ungodly hawle of the chief Priest, and had there
ben conuersaunt with the maidens and ungodly servants, forswore his master
Jesus Christ our savior. For the which fault afterward, when he departed, he
wept most bitterly. Isay. 6.
Isay when he saw God sit in the temple like a judge, and angels standing
about him, which most purely celebrated praises unto him, although he seemed
not to himself to be guilty of his own fault, yet he cried out: Woe unto me
because I dwell in the middost of a people, yt have unclean lips. For ye man
of God felt, that he had gotten no small infection, by reason he had dwelled
so long with an unclean people.

Alexander that Macedonian, Alexander of Macedonia.
which by strength and most noble victoryes had subdued under him the most part
of the earth, was so weakened and effeminated by the manners of the Persians,
that those whom he ought to have drawn to his own manners and qualities, he
himself took their garments, weakness, hawtenesse and pride, so far was he
from bringyng them to the institutions of the Macedonians. Wherefore he ra^ into
great hatred of his soldiers. Neither is this to be passed over, that long
conversation of the godly with infidels (except there appear some fruit of
their conversion, and that the same be by all means sought for) does breed a
let or hinderau^ce to their salvation. For when they perceive that our men do
live so familiarly with them, they think that the superstitions and
idolatries, wherewith they are infected are not so evil, and so much to be
detested. And peraduentur they are brought to this point, that in perseueryng
in them, they distrust not but that they may attain to salvation. For unless
it were so, they could not persuade them selves, that our men would dissemble
it. Besides those things, there are very many of our men, which by the example
of this mingled conversation do think that they also may do the same, which
they se others to do. Whereby by the deed or example of certain, evil should
spread abroad more amply, and our faith and godliness should be had in
derision of the Ethnikes and Papists. And that oftentimes comes to pass,
which we know to have happened in the time of Paul (as it is written in the
first Epistle to the Corinthians) that they which otherwise were faithful, by
this conversation do communicate with wicked and polluted rites. For by
overmuch familiarity with the Infidels, is by littell and littell made a step
to follow their superstition and Idolatry. Wherefore not without a cause did
the Apostle cry: Fly from Idolatry. I will not speak also, how that it is
not possible, but that, where our men which are weak and without learning and
knowledge, are conversant with infidels, sometimes there may happen some talk
of religion, wherein although they slip not, yet when they can not overthrow
the Sophistical and crafty arguments of their adversaries, brawling and strife
sometimes arises and from yt they fall into hatred, cursing and reproaches,
which have no edificatio^, but rather hinder it, so far is it of to get a
step to set forward. To this serves ye which Paul has written in the
second Epistle to ye Corinthians: draw not ye yoke with unbelievers. For what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? What participatio^ has
light with darckenesse? or what concord between Christ and Belial? what part
has the faithful with the unfaithful? or what agrees the temple of God with
Idols? These things are so manifest, that they need not the light of
interpretation: neither ought they to be understand only for contracting of
matrimonyes, when as they extend far and over all, and pertayne also unto all
kind of conversation with the ungodly, which we have with them for our own
cause. I know that the shadows of the old law are now by ye benefit of
Christ removed from us. Howbeit, it is not to be doubted but yt those things
abide, of which the people of God was by them at that time admonished.

What was meante by the hemmes of the Hebrews.
Wherefore I demand, what God meant, when he commanded the Jews, to sow
hemmes to their garments which they ware? Undoubtedly this he me^t, that they
being taught by that sign, might understand yt they were severed from the
Ethnikes, and that it was not lawful for them to join them selves with them,
but as much as necessity should compel. God oftentimes forbad them that they
should not return into Egypt, and that they should not seek aid of strange
nations. For he would have cut of from his people all occasions of
superstitions and Idolatry, yea and the place, which we are now in hand with,
testifies that the Israelites grievously sinned, because they had brought
these Idolatrous nations under tribute, and had made a league with them, and
dwelled together in the same cities and fields with them. And assuredly to
what evil it turned them unto, the history it self declares: for they
brought not the Chananites to the true worshippyng of God, but they them selves
rather forsakyng their God, became like Idolaters.

I speak not, how that the conversation between the Hebrews and Samaritanes
was so odious even to the time of Christ, that the woman of Samaria (of whom
John mencioneth) said unto Christ, John. 4.
that the Jews were not wont to be familiar with the Samaritanes. Moreover it
is not mete for Christians, to take away from them selves the boldness and
liberty, freely to speak of Christ. Which they must needs do, if they dwell
among infidels. For if they dwelling with infidels should familiarly have free
talk of Christ, either should they be laughed to scorn, or else they should
not be suffered. Undoubtedly the holy fathers in the old time, were both grieved
and also mourned, when by any necessity they were compelled to dwell from the
people of God. David thereof is witness, who sighed when he was by reason of
the unjust violence of Saul constrained to live in deserte places. And it
appears in the Psalms, how grievously he complained and lamented that he was
forced to dwell among strangers, and such as were far from god. Daniel and
his fellows might have had the fruition of the kings table, and of most
delicate meats, and yet they abiected those commodities and pleasures, lest
they should defyle the^ selves with the delicate meats of the Ethnikes, and
with the unclean bankettes of the unbelievers. Moses also (as it is written in
the xi. to the Hebrews) when he might have been counted the son of the
daughter of Pharao, and thereby have attained to great honor, he contemned all
this, and went unto his brethren, which were oppressed with miserable
servitude, in making brick and tyles. They which follow not these examples,
do manifestly declare, that they have small mind of the glory of God, and
that they will not redeem the same with their own loss or bindera^ce, though
it were never so small or littel. Do we (says Paul to the Corrnth. 1.) provoke
God? Are we stronger than he? Wherefore they which are weak and unlearned, It
is not lawful to dwell with infidelles when we are compelled to communicate
with their ungodly rites.
whilst they take upon them to dwell among infidels, they do without doubt
tempte god, and in a manner provoke him, as though they would be stronger tha^
he. I could gather a great many more reasons for this sentence: but these
which I have brought, shall be sufficient at this time.

Now let us come to those, which do so dwell among infidels that they are
compelled to be present at their unlawful rites, whether those be learned or
unlearned, whether they be strong or weak, what they be, in this case, it
makes no matter: For I comprehend them altogether. I say that none of them,
such an habitation or conjunction is to be suffered: but either they must fly
from thence, or rather suffer death, than to commit Idolatry. Paul said (as I
have before declared) Fly from Idolatry. The law and Prophets, the old and
new Testament are full of ordinances, commandments, laws, admonitions,
rebukes, whereby strange worshipping is forbidden. Daniel. 3.
Daniels fellows chose rather to be cast into the furnace, than they would
worship the image set up by a most mighty king. Machabea the mother with her
children would rather dye, Machab. 7.
than she would against the laws of God eat swynes flesh. I could reckon an
infinite number of Martyrs, which most constantly suffered death, rather than
they would forsake their godliness, which they had professed, having this
saying always before their eyes, fear not them which can kill the body etc.
Paul in his first Epistle to the Corinthians affirms the same, because we are
the temple of God, the members of Christ, and partakers of the table of the
Lord, which table can have nothing common with the table of devils.

All these things are to be applied unto our times, when in the time of
Papistrie godly men, if they dwell with the ungodly are compelled to be at
their Masses and most filthy services: which of all things is not lawful unto
them. But some take these probations by me now alleged to be understand of
sacrifices done to Idols, and not of the superstitions, which are now used in
the time of Papistry. An outward work can not be counted for ye worshipping
of God, except it be grounded by his word.
But they ought to remember that no outward work is to be had for the true
worshipping of God, unless it be appointed by the word of God: which if it
be not, it can be nothing else but an invention of man. For we can not without
faith worship God: and faith can have no place, where ye word of God is
withdrawn. Wherefore in humane actions, how goodly in show so ever they be,
unless god by his word do allow them, they can be no worshipping of him.
Surely if we would honor men, we are wont chiefly to mark, A similitude.
in what things those men do delight in: and when we have found that out, we
think we have bestowed our labor well, when we have showed unto them those
things wherein they were wont to rejoice and delight. Why then do we not after
ye same sort with God, to serve him with that kind of worshipping which he
has allowed by his oracles? Let us hear him in Esaias, how that in the
oblations, sacrifices, incenses, and offringes which were brought into the
temple without faith, he was rather weryed than reioysed in them. He abhors
and detesteth these kinds of sacrifices as the Prophets have taught us. If
these things are spoken of those sacrifices which they by the word of God
used, and that for that cause only, because they were offered without faith:
what think we is to be judged of the inue^tions of men, and feigned
worshippinges, which being void of ye word of God ca^ not be done with faith?
There is no true god which delights in feigned worshyppynges.
we may verily say that they pertayne unto Idolatry. And that may be manifestly
gathered hereby, because there is no true God which will be worshipped with
these things. Wherefore it follows that the ungodly whilst they adioyne such
rites unto their holy services, they do not worship the true God, but him whom
they have feigned with them selves to delight in these things. And for as much
as in the whole nature of things there is no such, they worship the Idol of
their own mind, and therefore justly and worthily they may be called Idolaters.

But they say that those things which are said and done in the Mass, We must
have no regard to the beginning of Ceremonies but whether they agree with the
word of God.
had their beginning by the institution of Christ, although they were
afterward vitiated thoroughe men's defaulte. That helps them nothing, for as
much as in these things we may not have a regard or consideration to their
beginning but to their nature and form. And we must diligently mark whether
they agree with the word of God. The brazen Serpent by the commandment of
God had his beginning, it was also endewed with miracles, The brase^ Serpent.
for the Israelites were by looking upon it delivered from their venomous
biting. The same Serpent nevertheless, when the Jews worshipped him, and
offered incense unto it, the godly men detested it. So that the most holy king
Ezechias brake him in pieces, and therwithall utterly put away the worshipping
thereof. We must not therefore have a regard to the original of a thing, What
the Hebrews meante when they made the^ selves the golden calfe.
but we must look how it is used, whether it agree with the first institution.
The Hebrews when they compelled Aaron, to make them a calfe to worship, had not
that mind to fall from the true GOD, when as they confessed that he brought
the^ out of Egypt. This was only their intent, to worship him under some sign
or visible form, and they chose that form whereby they had seen the Egiptians
express their God by. The manner of of ye Ethnikes in their Idolatry.
So the Ethnikes testified that they worshipped one God, as the chief author of
all things, which they fashioned unto them selves by diverse and manifold
shapes. For by Pallas they say was signified his wisdom: by Mars his power
and might. By Jupiter his justice and goodness. Wherefore rites and ceremonies
are not to be esteemed by the counsel and will of men. No otherwise must we
think to have happened of Jeroboam the son of Nabat. The counsel of Jeroboam.
For he would not (as he pretended) pluck away the people from worshipping of
the true God, but because he was affeard of his kingdom, and saw that it
might easily happen, that if his men should often go unto the temple of
Jerusalem, they would fall from him, and return unto the family of David. He
said therefore, that to worship the true God, they neded neither the temple of
Jerusalem, nor yet the arc of the covenant. For that God Jehovah, as he was
signified unto the Jews by the wodden arc and temple of Salomo^, so also
might he be expressed unto ye Israelites by signs of golden calves, so that
that worshipping which they should perform at Jerusalem, they might
commodiously celebrate unto Jehovah in Bethel and in Dan. This man therefore
went about no other thing but made an outward work, which he obtruded as a
worshipping of GOD, and that utterly without his word, which wanting, all yt
was done was mere superstition and Idolatry. Tyrannes therefore and princes,
when they compel men to polluted rites, although they say they do them for a
good intent (as they term it) and how soever they pretend some certain
beginning of au^cie^ty, are not yet to be heard. Paul does in this manner
admonish the Ephesians. Communicate not with their unfruitful works, but
reprove them. He called them their works, because they could not be called the
works of God, What is to be done when superstitions are obtruded unto us.
for so much as they very much disagreed from his word. But, what is then to
be done, when they are obtruded unto us? Surely we ought to reprove them, and
with great liberty (when need requires) reprehend them. But that is dangerous
(say they:) we shall lose our goods and dignities: we shall be put to death. I
grant that, but none of us has upon this condition received the religion of
Christ, that his life, goods and dignities, should remain safe unto him
self. Yea Christ has by express word testified unto every one of us.
Except ye renounce all that ye have, and take up your cross, and follow me,
ye can not be my disciples: and unless you lose your souls ye can not
possess them. After this sort must we frame our selves.

The aunswers of Ciprian.
Ciprian (as Augustine declares) when he was led to execution, the president
being desirous that he might escape, said unto him. Now I give thee space to
deliberate, to chose which thou will, whether thou will thus miserably be
slain, or obey, and so let go free. The man of God answered, In a thing so
holy, deliberation has no place. They which are not affected with this mind,
but are wonderful careful, Their punishments which co^taminate the^ selves
with superstitions.
lest their life or goods should perish, those men do easily pollute them
selves with Masses and vnpure superstitions, and for the same cause do suffer
most grievous punishementes. First truly their conscience miserably afflicts
them. Secondly the light of the truth which before was kindled in their
minds, is by little and little extinguished. Thirdly very oftentimes they
exceadyngly delight them selves in that dissimulation, so far of are they, to
repent them of it. Yea and they go about to persuade the same unto others, and
those which will not obeie admonitions, they begin to hate, and lastly as
much as lies in them, they stir up against them, the anger, force and might
of Tyrannes and worldly princes. Such a most unhappy end of many of them have I
my self seen.

And in this their dissimulation; thus they use to defend them selves: Outward
works are certain shows of confession.
we do not this (say they) from our heart: we so behave our selves only in
body and outward gesture. But why do no they consider, outward actions to be
a certain show of confession: and even as in the profession of faith and
Religion the tongue ought not to disagree from the heart, so also what soever
is outwardly done in deuyne ceremonies, ought with the same profession to
agree. Add also thereunto this saying of Paul, with the heart we believe unto
righteousness, with the mouth is confession made to salvation. It is no true
faith which bursteth not out into Act.
Christ likewise said: Who soever shall be ashamed of me before men, I will
also be ashamed of him before my Father. Furthermore I would have those men to
understand, that that is not pure and true faith, which bursteth not forth
into actions agreeable unto it. Moreover our savior (who most earnestly sought
the glory of his Father) when he had purged the Temple from Marchantes, said:
The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. But these our men show forth no
followyng of that godliness and faith, which they crake to be closed in their
heart.

Neither do they remember, An inward and outward worshipping.
that even as the inward worshyppyng of God is found to be it, whereby we
judge of him truly and honorably: so also the outward worshyppyng is,
Idolatry is of two sorts.
whereby we worship him ryghtly and as he has appointed. And that Idolatrye
likewise is of two sorts, for one is, whereby we feign unto our selves in our
heart by evil doctrines such a GOD as we list our selves. An other is,
whereby we transfer the outward worshyppyng not only to creatures and
Idols, but we vitiate the same also with our own inventions and lies.

We retain (say they) in our heart the right opinion. Grant it be so, but ye
abandone your bodies to Idols and to the devil. And Paul affirms, that your
body is the member of Christ, why do ye then take it and give it to an
harlotte? But Paul (say they) wrote that of fornication. I know that. But the
Prophets in the mean time teach us that Idolatrye is the greatest
fornication of all. For Jeremy, Ezechiell, Idolatrye is the greatest of all
fornicatio^s.
and other holy Prophets fo inueyghe against the Jews and their Church, that
they say the same Church is like unto an harlotte which under every green
tree has abandoned her self to Idols and profane worshippynges. Moreover
how vain the excuse of these men is, the oracle of GOD plainly declares,
whereby GOD answered thus unto Elias the Prophet. I have left me 7000. men,
which have not bowed their knees before Baal: he says not which think
ryghtlye in their heart, and which in their mind believe vpryghtly, but on the
contrary sets forth a sign of outward worshyppyng, namely of bowyng the
knee. God has created the whole man and will have him whole
And he which created the whole man is not content with the half of him,
neither will he have his creature parted with the devil. To me (says God) to
me only I say shall every knee bow. Furthermore if this their reason had been
of any value, the Corinthians might also by it have excused their doing. For
they might have said unto Paul, what, art thou so vehement against us? We our
selves know also, that an Idol is nothing, and we keep the right opinion in
our heart, Let God be content with that. Other men's faults are not laid to
our charge but that we communicate with them.
Yt is lawful for us in the mean time with the body and outward presence to
serve our own commodity.

Furthermore they say: These things we do nothing at all vitiate, yea we
would have them incorrupt and perfect. Wherefore what sin soever is here
committed, it ought not to be ascribed unto us. Whereunto I answer. That that
is true in deed, that an other man's sin is imputed to no man, but yet whilst
ye are present at profane rites, that is blamed in you, and justly imputed
unto you, in that you communicate with an other man's ungodliness. The Apostle
in his first Epistle to the Corinthians said: do ye not know that they
which do eat of the sacrifice, are made also partakers of the Temple? What
say I than? That the Image is any thing? or that it which is offered unto
Images is any thing? Nay. But this I say: that the things which the Gentiles
offer, they offer unto deuilles. But I would not that you should be partakers
of deuilles, ye can not drink of the Cup of the Lord, and of the Cup of the
deuilles, ye can not be partakers of the Lords table, and of the table of
deuilles. etc. Wherefore, though the corruption of the Sacrifices is not to be
imputed to the communicantes, yet for all that the communicatyng it self, from
which they ought to have kept them selves, makes them blameworthy. And
unless the thing were so, why would not the holy Martyrs communicate with the
rites of the Ethnikes? why did Paul so reprove the Corinthians? But here they
return again to this, to say, That the Mass is not to be compared with the
Idolatrye of the Ethnikes. For (say they) though it somewhat straye from the
institution of Christ, The Mass has nothing common with the institution of
the Lord.
yet ought it not to be counted a profane and an Idolatrous thing. But I
affirm it to be so much perverted, that almost it nothing at all agrees with
the institution of Christ, yea it is most utterly contrary unto it. Which is
very easy for me to declare.

First the Supper of the Lord, as it was instituted by Christ, was a common
or public work: A contrarietye between the supper of the Lord and the Mass.
but now comes forth the sacrificer adorned with monstrous garments, and
does all things alone, the rest stand by and only see and hear. Wherefore if
Paul did justly and worthily rebuke the Corinthians, which tarried not one for
an other, and said that they could not eat ye Lords Supper: how can they
worthily call the Papisticall Mass, by the name of the Supper of the Lord,
whereas only one sacrificer eats and drinks? Undoubtedly by no means.
Wherefore let them rather call it by any other name, than the Supper of the
Lord.

Furthermore they say, that they do there offer the son of GOD unto the
eternal Father. And that is by express words denied in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. For it teaches that all things were fynished by the only one
oblation of Christ. Which being perfect, we may not renew the same again.
They will offer up Christ every day. The word of GOD affirms, that it was
to be offered but once. I confess in deed, that the Fathers (as I have before
said) did sometimes in such sort speak as though the body and blood of
Christ were either offered or sacrificed in the celebration of the Sacraments.
How in the supper the body and blood of Christ is offered unto God.
But they very oftentimes interpreted them selves, that those oblations or
Sacrifices, were only thanks geuyng, or a memory and figure of that oblation
and sacrifice, which Christ dyeng upon the cross made.

They affirm also, that the bread and wine, are changed into the substance
of the body and blood of Christ, when as the holy Scripture does teach us
far otherwise. Moreover they lyftyng up the bread and wine, do set forth to
the people creatures to be worshypped in stead of GOD. For what is more
filthy, than religiously to worship a piece of bread, and a Cup of wine? It
is true in deed, that they are made partakers of the body and blood of the
Lord, namely in heart and mind, which eat and drink the signs of thanks
geuyng, with sincere faith, and as the Lord has instituted. But if a man do
only behold and worship them, then are they nothing unto him, but a piece
of bread and a Cup of wine.

Moreover the ministers of the Church, when as their duty is to go about all
that in them lies to lift up the minds of the people unto heaven, that they
might not seek Christ in the world, nor look for any carnal or earthly thing
in the supper of the Lord, they miserably hold the people geuyng head to the
visible signs. The Apostle in the first Epistle to the Corinthians commanded
that they should not use a strange tongue in holy assemblyes, because every
one must answer Amen. And because above all things the edifieng of the
hearers is to be sought for. But in the Mass all things are done in the
Latin tongue. And those words which should be to the great comfort of the
standers by, when as to them the participation of the body and blood of the
Lord is promised, those words do they speak softely, yea they mumble them up
so darkelye, that though a man understand the Latin, yet can he not
understand those words. They do for this cause so softely mumble them up, as
though the members of Christ were not worthy to hear them: The Greek Church.
when as nevertheless the Lord him self spoke them openly, and the Greek
Church, even to this day pronounces them with a most loud voice. Yea and
in the old time, it was a custom used (as Ambrose and Augustine among other
do testifye) that at those words the people answered Amen. But as I think,
Ambrose. Augustine.
these men do therefore mumble up those words, because they are affeard lest
their lies should be found out. For there they say, Take ye and eat: and
also, The Papists in the Mass make many Lies.
As often as ye shall do these things, ye shall do them in remembrance of me.
When as nevertheless they have appointed to eat and drink it alone. And
undoubtedly very many other things speak they secretly and openly in the
Mass, as though many did communicate or should communicate, when as the
sacrificer alone does it in deed. A lie is ever fylthy, but then most filthy of
all, when it is admitted in holy things, and before the Lord.

But what shall we say of their applications? They affirm that they can as
they lust them selves apply the sacrifices which they make unto the quick
and the dead. Every man is justified by his own faith and lives and dies in
his own righteousness.
But the Scripture teaches that every man is justified by his own faith, and
that all men shall either dye or live in their own righteousness or
unrighteousness: but they say otherwise, for they can as they say, help
both the quick and the dead by their Masses. If they would attribute that
unto prayers, namely that they taught that by prayers they might help the
necessityes of others, it might be borne with all. By prayers we he^pe other.
But when they affirm, that the work it self, namely of the Mass, has in
it so much power and virtue, that it can help all kind of men, that may by
no means be suffered. Besides this Masses are very oftentimes celebrated in the
honor of certain Saints: which undoubtedly is most far from the truth:
for as much as Christ has for this purpose instituted his Supper, that it
should be a memory of his death, and not of other Saynctes. I will not speak
how that it is most commonly seen, that there is nothing found certain of
those Saints whom they there worship: The lives of many saints are
Apochripha and full of Fables.
the lives of them are Apochripha, and very often also full of fables, and
Poets faynenyngs. There are also in it, certain, yea very many strange
rites, signs to be laughed at, gestures in a manner foolyshe, and garments
not used: the significations of which things are utterly unknown, not only
of them which stand by, but even the sacrificers them selves, Significatio^s
of Ceremonies in the Mass are not known
if they should be demanded what they meant, they could not answer.
Wherefore either they answer nothing, or if they go about to say any thing,
they bring forth not one thing, but things most disagreyng: whereby thou
may easily gather that there is no truth in their words. Wherefore faith
can have no place in these things which they do in their Mass, when as it
only there has place, where the word of God offreth it self unto us.

And that they can not defend them selves from the detestable sin of
Idolatry, the images do testifye, Images are worshipped in the mass.
unto the which they turnyng them selves do celebrate their most vnpure
services. For they can not be content in the Masses to look upon them, but
they cense them, and kneel before them, and finally they do unto them all
kind of worshippyng, which is to be done only to God. And because (as I have
before mentioned) they dare affirm that the Mass has affinity (I can not
tell what) with the institution of Christ: it shall not be from the purpose,
Sacrifices of the Ethnikes are more agreeable with sacrifices appointed by God,
tha^ is ye Mass with the holy supper
and it is easy to be done, to declare, that (if we mark the tokens) the old
Ethnikes may with much more likelyhode excuse and defend their sacrifices, than
these can defend the Masses. For the sacrifices of the gentiles did not differ
from the manner of sacrificyng which the fathers had before the law, and
which God allowed in his law, when as these men in their Mass differ from
that supper which Christ prescribed, and as the Eua^gelistes and the Apostle
Paul have delivered. There on every side was invocation of God, a temple, an
alter, Sacrifices, Priests, Killing, sheding of Blood, Salt, Wine, Oil,
Meal, a holy banquet, religious garments, washynges, fumigations, continual
fire, singing, oracles and such like, which would be to long to rehearse. Let
the Popish sacrificers show as many things, if they can, in their Mass,
which do agree with those things which Christ did in the supper. But if so
be they can not, let them then think that their Mass does no more agree with
the godly celebration of the holy Supper, than do the rites of the Idolatrers
agree with the legal sacrifices. Wherefore let them cease of so to kiss their
littel daughter, and to preach that it ought to be counted the institution of
Christ and of the Apostles. I will not speak of the yearly Obites, and
Funerals of the dead which are oftentimes used there, of which things the
Lord has nothing commanded. By it they stablishe Purgatory, whereof the holy
scriptures write nothing. That furthermore is most far from piety, because
in their Mass they pour out prayers unto saints, which are already
departed out of this life. In hearing of Masses the anger of God is not
pacified, but provoked.
Finally all the things which they there do, they make a market of them,
sell, bargayne and set them out to most filthy gain. Wherefore we must
diligently take heed, that whilst we desire to worship GOD and to have him
merciful unto us, we do not in hearing of Masses exceadyngly provoke his anger
against us.

What is to be answered to the example of Naaman the Siria^
These superstitious men go forward, and by the example of Naaman the Sirian
will prove that it is permitted them, to be present at the most fylthy Masses.
Naaman prayed Elizeus the Prophet, that if he bowed his knee in ye temple of
the Idol Rimnon, when the king, which leaned his hand on his shoulder, should
so do, he would implore for him mercy and forgiveness of GOD. To whom Elizeus
answered only, go in peace. These our men ought to consider with the^ selves
whether they only have seen and read this divine history. I think not: For
the holy Martyrs in the old Church were studious day and night in the holy
Scriptures. Wherefore this history of Naaman was not hidden from them. And what
cause was there then, that they would not follow such an example, and that
with the loss of their life? These ancient noble men and pillars of our faith
saw that, which our adversaries reckon not with them selves, namely that that
Naaman which is set before us, was newly converted unto the true God, and was
yet a weak soldier, who was not also yet ready, to deny both his own and
him self for Gods cause, but desired after a sort to keep his old place and
dignity with his king. The which thing to attain unto, he saw that it
might easily come to pass that he should fall into ye sin, which he declared
unto the holy Prophet. Naaman the Syrian knew that his deed was culpable and
naught.
And when he knew right well that the same agreed not with true godliness, he
required the prayers and intercession of the man of GOD, whereby he falling of
weakness, his fault might be forgeuen him. Otherwise there is none which
needs to ask pardon for that which he thinks is lawful for him to do. We
make intercessions for sins, and not for things permitted us. Wherefore this
place makes much against our adversaries, and that that is sin which they
most earnestly go about to excuse, is manyfestly proved by this historye. I
would to God they would diligently mark in that action, that which their
Naaman self: And if they should fall (as this man feared that he should
fall) they would not cloak it with a vain defense, but would emplore the
mercy of God, and prayers of holy men, that that may gentlye be forgeuen
them, Elizeus gave not Naama^ liberty to go unto Idols.
which they naughtely have committed. Neither did Elizeus (as they persuade
themselves) give Naaman the Sirian liberty to go unto Idols, he said only:
Go in peace. Which was also an accustomed kind of salutation at ye time.
Neither may we gather any other thing out of these words, then yt the Prophet
promised to do that which he was requested to do. Namely, to pray unto God for
ye salvation of ye man. First to strengthen him yt he should not fall. Secondly
that if he sinned, his fault might be forgeuen him.

They use to obiecte also certain words out of the Epistle of Ieremye the
Prophet, which are written about the end of a little book entitled of Baruch.
An answer to a place of Baruch
And these are the words. In Babylon ye shall see Gods of gold and Silver
borne upon men's shoulders, to cast out a fearfulness before the Heathen:
Take heed ye follow not the Gentiles, when ye see the multitude of people
worshipping behind and before. But say in your hearts. O Lord it is thou
that ought only to be worshipped. etc. By these words do our Nicodemites
think it to be sufficient, that they which are present at Idolatrous
worshippings, do say in their hearts: O Lord it is thou that ought only to
be worshipped. But they should more attentyuely consider, that the Prophet (if
he were a Prophet which spoke these words: which I therefore speak, because
the little book of Baruch is Apochriphus, The book of Baruch is Apochriphus.
and is not found in the Hebrewe) gave not the Jews liberty to go into the
Temples of the Idols, and to be there present at profane and Idolatrous
rites, and there to speak with the true God in themselves in their heart only.
But he speaks of those Images which were carried about the city: for that was
the manner among the Babilonians as the history of Daniell testifyeth, Images
among the Babilonians were crried about the city.
which makes mention that an image set up by Nabuchadnezar was openly carried
about, with great pomp, and with Musical instruments and sundry songs. At
the hearing whereof, al men were commanded to worship the Image which they
beheld, which the fellows of Daniel would not do. Of those images I say, it is
written in ye Epistle and ye Godly are faithfully admonished that they should
not, as the Ethnykes did, who were behind and before the^, reverence or
worship those images. Yea rather in detesting their wicked worshipping they
should say, or at the least way in their heart: O Lord it is thou only that
ought to be worshipped. These metings coming by chance through the city
could not be avoided, the Godly therefore were to be admonished, how in such
metinges they should behave them selves.

But with great importunitye, as they be shameless, Why Daniell was not cast
i^ to the furnace with his fellows.
they yet go farther and demand, how chance Daniell was not cast into the
burning furnace with his fellows, when as the punishment was a like appointed
unto the^, which would not worship ye image of Nabuchadnezar? Wherefore these
me^ feign with themselves, that Daniell did make as though he worshipped it,
and for that cause the Chaldeians meddled not with him. And they say also, that
they may lawfullye do that which they think this holy Prophet of God did. They
consider not that they openly fall into a false kind of reason, which commonly
is called Non causa vt causa, which is, when that which is not a cause, is put
for a cause. Paralogismos.
For there might be very many other causes, why Daniell was not then punyshed.
Peradventure he met not ye image which was carried about, or if at any time he
met it, the Chaldeians marked not what he did. Or being found faultye in it
and marked, he was not accused, because the King loved him excedinglye. But we
must not believe, Daniel dissimuled not the worshipping of the image.
that the man of god for fear of punishment or death, would dissemble the
worshippyng of the image against the law and piety: when as it is afterward
declared how for piety sake he was cast to ye Lions. Wherefore forasmuch as
there might be diverse causes that he was not delivered to be burnt in the
fire with his fellows, Why do these men the^ snatch unto the^ only one cause,
and yt such a cause, as was unworthy and full of reproach to such a holy man,
and specially seeing in the holy scriptures, there is not so much as a suspicion
of so detestable an act any way given us?

Of Paul who took on him a vow and cleansed himself after the manner of the
Jews.
They seem to themselves to speak much to the purpose, and trimlye to defend
their doing, when as they bring that which is written in the Acts of the
Apostles the xxi. Chapter where it is declared that Paul, by the Counsel of
the Elders of the Church of Jerusalem took upon him a vow and four other
men with him, and purifyed themselves after the manner of the Jews. If the
Apostle of God, say they, would use the ceremonies of the law already
abolyshed, we may also be suffered sometimes to admit and to be present at
rites and ceremonies so long time received. The su^me of the Preaching of Paul.
But yt this may the playnlyer be understand, we must know, that this was
the sum of the Preaching of Paul. We think that a man is justified by faith
without works. As many as are under the law, the same are under the curse. The
just man shall live by his faith. How far legal ceremonies were granted or
condemned in the primative church.
Wherefore the Apostle in that first time of the Preaching of the Gospel did
not condemn the ceremonies and observations of the law toward the Hebrews,
unless they were retained with that faith and mind as though justification
should come by them. And this his sentence has he most manyfestly set forth
in his Epistle to the Galathians, where he says: ye which are circumcised,
have fallen both from Christ and from grace. For Christ is made of none effect
unto you, if ye should be justified by the law. As though he would say.
These things of Moses do not alienate you from Christ, except ye exercise
them with this mind and purpose, that thereby ye might be justified, Take away
this opinion and the Apostle commended good works, and as for civil and
accustomed institutions, so that they were just and not Idolatrous, he suffered
still in their own place, neither did he let but that the legal ceremonies
might be still used. Wherefore he writes. In the Lord there is neither Jew
nor Greek, nor servant, nor free man. And that circumcision also and cuttyng
of the foreskynne, are nothing, but only the obseruyng of the commandments
of God and a new creature. Again he that is circumcised let him not desire to
have his foreskynne which is cut of: if thou be called when thy foreskin is cut
of, be not then circumcised. Let every man abide in that wherein he is called.

Indifferent things may sometimes be kept and sometimes left.
And that such things as were civil and indifferent, might sometimes be
observed, and sometimes left out, as served for edification, the same Apostle
declares by that which he speaks of himself. I am made all things to all
men, to win very many: to the Jews I am made a Jew, and to those which are
without a law, I am as without a law. Neither did he no less confyrme his
sentence by examples, than by doctrine. For when he was required, that he
would as the manner was circumcise Timothe, he granted unto it. But when they
would have compelled him for the overthrowing of the Christian liberty, to
circumcise Titus likewise, he declared that he would not give place not for an
hour: because says he false brethren are therefore entered in among us to
search out our liberty. He observed therefore the Mosaicall ceremonies, when
the same might be done without any ill purpose and hurt of the church. And by
this means be avoided the offense of the Jews, The ceremonies of the law are
not to be compared with the inventions of men.
least they should be alienated from the Christian religion which they had
received. Neither ought the Nicodemites to confer the ceremonies of the old
law, with the inventions of men. For they were brought in by the word of God,
but these were thrust into the Church by the pollicye of the devil and of
deceatfull men. They were not forbidden by and by after the Ascension of Christ
into heaven, but might be so long observed, How long the old ceremonies were
lawful in the church.
as the temple and public wealth of Israel remained, and until the Gospel
of the Son of God were revealed and Preached, and until the Church were well
augmented both of the Jews and also of the Gentilles.

Neither was it mete (as Augustine Godly and learnedlye writes unto Jerome
that those ceremonies, Augustine.
of the ancient Sinagoge should strayghtwaye without honor be rejected. But
Idolatrous and superstitious things always were, are, and shall be
prohibited. Wherefore for a time it was lawful to observe them, so that by them
were not sought the true righteousness. Wherefore Paul the Apostle, though
thou should look upon the actions themselves, which by the law he observed
can not be justly reprehended, and much less can he be blamed if thou
consider his mind, purpose, and (as they term it) his intent. But to the
supporters of the Mass both these things want. First they defend a thing,
which is contrary to the word of God, They which by dissimilatio^ do go unto
ye mass seek not God but their own.
and (as I have declared) is wonderfully against it. Moreover in that their
dissimulation, they study only for themselves, namely to keep still their
riches, degree, place, dignitye, and estimation, when as Paul for this cause
only sometimes observed the legal ceremonies, least the Jews should fall from
Christ and that he might the better and easiyer allure them to the Gospel.

They obiecte also, that by their dissimulation they would avoid offenses.
Whether we should go to messes to avoid offense.
For say they: If we should be utterly against Masses, we should be counted
wicked and ungodly men, and we should be a great offense to our country. I
believe in deed, that these men do avoid offenses, but yet offenses of the
world: they will not give an offense, but it is unto myghtie men, tirannes, and
Antichrists, namely least they should provoke their weapons, anger and
madness against them. But these are not those offenses which Christ taught to
be avoided, when he said of ye Scribes and Pharisees. Let them alone, they are
blind and leaders of the blind. What offenses therefore are to be avoided? What
offenses ar to be avoided
Those namely which hinder the spreading abroad of the Gospel of the son of
God, and which keep back men from coming to the pure doctrine, and which do
call back men already believing from Christian religion which they have
received. Now let the^ consider I pray you, whether by their dissimulation,
they do not offend the superstious and Idolatrers? Undoubtedly yes. For those
namely the superstitious and Idolatrers say with themselves: The ungodly by
that dissimulation are more confyrmed.
See those men which know the truth of the Gospel, and have embraced it, do
come also unto our Masses. Surely if they were so ungodly, as they are said to
be, these men also would abhor them. Wherefore being confirmed by these men's
example, they oftentimes are settled to persevere in their purpose. The weak
ones by ye dissimulation go back from their purpose lately received.
Yea and the weaker brethren newly converted unto the Gospel, when they
perceive these learneder sort, and as it were the ringleaders to dissemble,
they dare also do the like, and they suspecte that they were deceived: and they
which ought to have gone farther in religion, do then go backward.

But we must (say they) bear with the weak ones, and sometimes to frame our
selves unto them. For we have very many, which are not yet persuaded yt the
Mass is an evil thing: and if they should perceive that we came not unto it,
they would not hear of other chief points of religion. Wherefore we must
bear somewhat with their weakness, as Paul faithfully has counsayled in his
Epistle to the Romans. We grant that we must somewhat bear with such as be
so weak, Somewhat is to be borne with the weak ones only in things
indifferent.
but with Paul we may not suffer that to be done but in things indifferent.
But things which by themselves are evil, and by God forbidden we may for no
man's favor counsel to be done. For this is a most firm and sure rule (as I
have often before said) yt no man is permitted to commit evil things, yt thereby
good things might ensue. Yea we must not always bear with the weak ones in
those indifferent things, The imbecillitie of the weak ones is not to be
mainteyned.
but til such time as they be better and perfectlier taught. But when they once
understand yt thing, and do for all yt still stick, their weakness is not to
be norished. Moreover we must not so much bear with the^ that by our example,
we should hurt other members of Christ, and that many.

Whether we should dissemble for the preservation of the churches.
Again they object unto us: If we should do so, as ye would have us to do,
either we must fly, or else we shall straight way be put to death. Which thing
if it should happen, our churches should be utterly forsaken, and there should
be no more there to teach us. Whereunto I answer, every one of us sees that
also. And yt more is, it is not hidden from God him self, whose commandment
nevertheless we must obey. Let us commit the end unto him, to whom the church
belongs: Let us not doubt but that he will lovingly, and that in time provide
for his spouse. Christ said unto Peter when he called him, and he tarried, and
demanded what should become of John: If I will that he tarry till I come, what
is yt to thee? Follow thou me. We are taught therefore to follow the word of
god, whether so ever it call us, and let us commit to the caller the care of
other things, which seem to hinder us. Doctrine which is sealed with flight and
with death edifieth.
Furthermore this is not to be ouerpassed, that that doctrine oftentimes is of
more value and more edifieth which is sealed by flight and by death, then that
which is set forth only by words. Let us not be affeard though one of us fall
or fly. But let us hope that god in his place will raise up very many more. But
if we contemn and long dissemble the light of the truth, and flambe of
charity which is kindled in the hearts of men, will by little and little be
extinguished.

They bring examples of the Prophets, of Zachary, of John Baptiste, and of Mary
the Virgin, Whether in the corrupted church of the Jews it were lawful to
communicate with the legal rites.
and of Joseph, who in those corrupt and defiled times went unto the common
services, and to the temple of ye Jews. And therefore they think they may also
be permitted to do in like sort. But they ought to consider with themselves,
that at that time there were many pernicious doctrines and evil opinions among
the Scribes and Phariseyes. But yet the manner of sacrificyng was not changed,
for the same beasts and oblations were still offered which the law had
commanded: the same days and ceremonies were observed. Wherefore holy me^
might use the^, for as much as they had the word of god joined with the^. But
as for the corrupt doctrines, opinions and manners of certain priests, bishops
and Scribes, were no let unto holy men, especially seeing they were pure and
far from them, and in all things: both judged and also lived according to
the word of god. And the corruptions of doctrine, and vices when opportunitye
served, they reprehended and sharply reproved. This does Augustine testifye as
it is written in the.xxiii. Augustine.
Question the fourth Chap. Recedite, and in certain other Chapters, also which
are there written. Let the papists do so in these days with us, let them so
setforth the Lords Supper and other rites as they are appointed by the word
of god, and we will not refuse to use them, so that they compel us not to the
confession of wicked opinions, and preach not heresies unto us, but deliver
unto us the pure and incorrupt word of God. If they them selves think
evil, and if they live fylthilye, we will be sorye for them, we will
admonyshe, rebuke, and accuse them, and put them if we may from the holy
administration, when as they are paste amendment, although we abstain not
from the Sacraments.

That undoubtedly ye Lord meant when he said: The Scribes and Phariseis sit on
the chair of Moses, and what they say, do ye: but what they do, do ye not.
It was lawful therefore for the blessed Virgin, after she was delivered of our
savior, to offer a pair of turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, The Virgin mari
might after her delyueri offer the oblations required by the law.
because it was so commanded in the law. Wherefore let them show unto us that
their Mass by them corrupted is commanded by the word of God, and not
forbidden, and then will we nothing contend with them in that matter.

Last of al, when they are confuted in these objections, they come to this
point, to say: Although it be sin to be present at Mass, yet it is but a
light sin, and not to be so severely reproved by us. But when they thus say,
why do they not remember, that al sins have their weight, not by the nature
of the workers, From whens^ sins have their weighte.
which are prohibited, but by the word of God, and the law whereby they were
forbidden? Here hence do sins get al their heaviness and weight. Whereunto
James the Apostle seems to have had a respect, when as he says in his
second chapter. He which observes the whole law, and offends in one of
them, A place of James expounded.
is made guilty of them all. Neither do I speak so, as though I would have
all sins by all means alyke, which thing Augustine in his. 29. Sins are not
equal.

Augustine. How philosophers prove ye virtues are knit together.


Epistle to Jerome aptlye and manifestlye denies. He confesses in deed that
the Philosophers went about to prove it, when they affirm that al virtues are
so knyt together, that he which has one virtue, has al, and he which wants
one, does want them all. For as much as prudence is not fearful, neither
intemperate, nor yet unjust. Wherefore it has all the other virtues with it.
And again Justice, Strength, Temperance and the other virtues, are not without
wisdom, and therefore they are al had being knit together. These things (says
he) agree not with the holy scriptures. For there it is written: In many
things we al offend. And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us. Wherefore seeing we sin in many things, we can not
in synning have virtue which is opposite unto sin which we commit. Often
times he which slideth in one is constante in an other.
And nevertheless it often chances that he which falls in one thing,
may be constant in other things. Peradventure he which is angrye, or eats
or dryncketh excessiuelye, renders for all that to every man his own, and is
ready in Gods cause valiantlye to lose his life, and therefore though he be
somewhat angry or intemperate, he may for all that be called just, liberal and
strong. A similitude of the Stoikes.
Moreover the same father confuteth the similitude of the Stoikes, wherein they
say, that he is as well drowned in water, over whose head the water is but an
hand breadth, as he which has the water ten or twentye cubits over his head.
This similitude (says he) is not aptly brought. Wherefore we must bring in
an other more fyt to the purpose, namely a similitude of light and darkness.
Undoubtedly the more a man departs from darkness, and comes nearer to the
light, he begins then somewhat to see. Wherefore it comes to pass, that
although he be covered with darkness, yet for all that after a sort, he is
somewhat partaker of the light. But he which is desirous to know more of this
thing, let him read over that.29. Epistle. And these things have I to this
end brought, to confirm that all sins are not equal, as the Stoikes judged.

Let us return therefore to the place of James, which I before brought. The
observation of the law is not to be received with an exception.
He which offends in one, is therefore made guyltye of all, because the
observing of the law, is not to be received with an exception, so that we
should choose unto us any certain part of it to keep, and lay away and
neglect an other part for a time as we will and list our selves. God has joined
together the commandments of the law. And it is not our part to seperat them
as we list. Seeing the co^mandeme^tes of the law are joined together, it is not
our part to separate the^.
We must look upon the authority of the lawgeuer, which ought to be of force
as well in one commandment as in all. This interpretation James him self
seems to confirm, when he says: He which said: Thou shall not commit
adulterye, The same says: Thou shall not kyl: as though he would say: God is
as much resisted in breaking one of these commandments as in an other. But
it may be proved also by an other reason, that he which synneth in one, is
guilty of al. For if as we should be driven by temptation, lust or occasion,
whereby we should be styrred to any certain transgression of the law, so if by
the same or like violence we were driven into any other transgression, we
should as well break the one as the other. Augustine also teaches in the
place now alleged, that the sentence of James is for an other cause true,
because sin which is committed is undoubtedly contrary unto charity, wherein
the observation of the whole law depends. In su^me, to this end have I
rehearsed al these things, to declare that sins which are committed, are not
for that cause to be diminished or extenuated, because they are counted light,
for so much as the transgressions of the law are not to be waighed only by the
weight and woorthines of their actions, but rather by the strength of Gods
word, and authority of the law of God, who has forbidden to sin.

The right observing of ye sacraments perteyne unto the first table.
But least in this thing I should seem to rough, I am content that they have
some consideration, even of the act wherein the sin is committed. And surely,
as touching that, I cannot see how to sin against the sacraments can be
judged a light fault, when as that kind of sin pertains to the first
table, wherein undoubtedly the worshipping of God is set forth. Which
worshipping alone kept whole and sound, other things are easily corrected. And
on the contrary, that being corrupted and defiled, all other things
whatsoever we do, become most unthankful unto God. Furthermore they think
that the fault, whereof we entreat, may therefore be extenuated, because they
affirm that they slide not of mind and purpose, but only by constraint. Whom
if thou should demand, what manner of compulsory that is which they
pretend? They cannot undoubtedly give any other answer, but because they would
not incur the loss of their goods, Aristotell. Shipmen suffer wise with their
wills, and not by co^straint
their fame and their life. But these things make not but that the action is
voluntarye. For as Aristotle has taught in his Ethikes, when as shipmen in
danger do hurl their goods in to the sea, to avoid the danger of
shipwreck, they are said commonly to be compelled, when as in deed they
willingly throw them in. For they take deliberation, and with knowledge they
determine rather to lose their goods than their life. And as they in that
work do wisely, so do our men for the love of life and body, and covetousness
of the goods of this world, unwisely choose the loss of eternal life, when
as with a wicked dissimulation they go unto detestable Masses. Wherefore the
excuse which they bring, cannot be received as just. The Corrinthians also
might by this reason when they were reproved of Paul, have defended them
selves. If we go unto the feasts dedicated to idols, we go not thither of our
own affection, as though we would allow such sacrifices, but by just reasons we
are compelled to go thither: For if we should fly from such feasts, we should
be counted seditious, evil Citizens and without humanity: we should lose
pleasant amities, and most profitable defenses, and also peradventure our
riches and country. If they had said these things to Paul, would he have
heard them? No truly. For he was not ignorant, but that they might have said
so, and yet for all that (as it is written in his Epistle) he vehementlye and
most sharpelye reproved them. Aaron also might according to these men's opinion
justly and rightly have defended himself in that he made a Calfe unto the
Israelites. For he might have said, I did it not from the heart, but I was
compelled so to do: because the people, except I had obeyed them, would have
stoned me. In deed so be answered: but Moses which knew right well that that
necessitye or compulsion was not just, but came of a naughty condition or
ground, which neither Justice would suffer to be received, Mass is a certain
to^e^ whereby the ^^ythful at (...) ^en from ye superstitious
nor God would by any means admyt, therefore did Moses I say sharply reprove
him.

They ought also to be most assured of this, that the Mass is a pledge, an
earnest penny, a token and sign, whereby Papists know theirs from others. For
whether a man give alms or no: whether he pray or not pray, whether he live
chastely or vnpurely, and such like things they neglect, they only have a
regard to this, whither he come to Mass: which if they perceive that he do,
by and by they count him for one of their own. And again to detest the Mass,
Mass is a certain profession of popery.
and not to hear it, they take it for a most certain sign of falling away
from Antichrist. Wherefore we may commonly call Mass a public profession of
Popery. With what color therefore, or with what countenance can they
extenuate so great a crime? They are grievous evils (say they) which hang over
us: and we put our selves in most great dangers, unless we communicate with
the Papists in hearing of Masses, I confess that: but let them remember that
God also foresaw al these things, and declared that they should come to pass,
who for all that will not suffer, that his laws should be changed. Wherefore
as touching these chances, let us cast our care upon him which has commanded
these things, and is not ignorant that these evils are joined with the
observing of his commandments. Persecutions abrogate not ye laws of God. We
may not part our selves between God and the devil.
The nature therefore and strength of troubles and dangers is not such, to be
able to abrogate the laws of God. They abide, yea and for ever shall abide, and
therefore let us not desire to have them broken by our dangers or miseries.
And men are healthfully and rightlye counseled, not to part them selves
between God and the devil, to deliver unto God their affection or heart, and
grant unto the devil their body and outward parts.

For so much as by the parts of the distinction before put, Of princes and
maiestrats how they ought to behave them selves with infydels.

A distinction of powers.


we have sufficientlye spoken of private men as touching their dwelling
together with Infidels, now rests to declare of Princes or Magistrates. And
they are either principal, as they which depend of no other, neither have any
power above them, or else they are inferior powers, which lawfully as of right
are subject unto Superiors, either because they are their Deputies or
Ministers, that is, Officiales or Vicars, as they are commonly called. Let us
first therefore speak of such as be absolute and mere higher powers, asking
whether they in their dominions may suffer the faithful to be conversant with
Infidels? I think it be lawful, It is lawful for princes to suffer ye
couersation of ye faithful with the unfaithful with certain cautions.
so that there be certain conditions or cautions put. For when the Roman Empire
received the Christian religion, every one which were under that Empire believed
not by and by in Christ, who were for all that suffered both to live, and also
peaceably to dwell there. Yea in the time of Ambrosius, Symmachus who was
without Christ, was not ashamed to require of the Emperors that the rites of
the Ethnikes might be restored, which he obtained not. And now when as
kingdoms and dominions have admitted the preaching of the Gospel, there are
many still suffered, which are wonderfully affected toward the Pope and his
wyckednes. Which cannot without great perturbation of things be separated from
them which are of the Gospel. Wherefore Princes are compelled to suffer such
conuersations, neither is that to be ascribed a fault in them, The first
caution.
so that they depart not from these just cautions. The first of those cautions
is, that they constrayne the faithful to no ungodly woorshippinges: for then
should they not execute the offices of the Ministers of God, but rather of the
devil and of Antichrist, by good works they should not be a terror unto the
wicked, neither should they advance Solomon guilty, not that he compelled the
Jews to worship Idols, but for because to his wives and Concubines which were
strangers, he permitted temples in Iewry, wherein they might worship Astartes
and Chamos and other strange Gods. Solomon was for his sin punished by the
law of the like called Lex talionis.
But that God was grievously angry with him, the holy historye declares. He
was iustlye punished by the law of the like. That as he had divided the holy
worshipping in granting part of it to God, and part unto Idols: so was his
kingdom divided, and part of it was granted to his son, and part was given
unto Jeroboam the Son of Nebath. But his fault spread abroad into his
posterity. For Achas, Manasses, and many other ungodly kings had wicked and
detestable woorshippinges at Jerusalem. Wherefore they were by the Prophets
grieuouslye and sharpelye reproved. The magistrate ought to revenge idolatrye.
And undoubtedly a Magistrate cannot but be blamed, when he nourishes
idolatry, when as he bears the sword to revenge wicked acts. Wherefore he
must either think that idolatry is no wicked act, or that it is by the
Magistrate and other to be aduenged. Augustine.
Augustine often times excellentlye well entreats of this place of David: Be
wise now therefore O ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the earth,
serve the Lord in fear. etc. He says also, it is mete that kings serve the
Lord. Neither entreated David of them, in that respect that they are men: for
so are they with other bound to observe common laws. How and in what sort
Kings ought to serve God.
Wherefore for so much as they are kings, they are admonished, namely to use
the power and sword given them by God, to defend the verity of the true faith,
and to put down the ungodly, that the catholic truth and church of the son
of God, as far as their dominions extend be not assaulted. Wherefore it is not
lawful for Princes to grant unto the ungodly vnpure worshippinges, yea it is
their part, chiefly to urge sound doctrine, ceremonies and rites, which agree
with the word of God.

We may not urge to keep the external rites alyke every where.
And yet for all that (to speak a word or two of that by the way) I do not
think that we should to much contend, that rites and ceremonies may be al
alike, and observed every where, after one manner. But this is to be provided
for, that they be not against the word of God, yea rather let them draw unto
it as much as may be, and as far as they are able, let them set forth
edification, and a decent order. For otherwise it skilleth not whether we
receauethe sacrament of the Lords Supper, standing, or sitting, or kneeling,
so that the institution of the Lord be kept, and occasion of superstition be
cut of. Neither is it any matter when the brethren communicate, Diversity of
ceremonies is profitable.
whither some one place of the holy scriptures be red, or Psalms and
thankesgeuings be song of the people. Yea I think that this variety in rites
much profits to bring in a true opinion of ceremonies, namely that al men may
understand, that those ceremonies which are not set forth in the holy
scriptures, Augustine.
are not necessary unto salvation, but may be changed for edification sake as
time shall serve. And Augustine to Ianuarius and to Cassulanus was also of this
opinion.

They must be compelled at the last to the sou^de and pure outward
worshippinges of God.
And finallye, when they are well instructed and taught, they must compel them
to sound and pure woorshyppings, which are prescribed by the holy scriptures.
For the Magistrate may not suffer his Citizens to live without exercises of
godliness. For the end of ciuyll rule, is that the Citizens should live both
virtuously and happily. And who sees not but that godliness and the worshipping
of God is the chief of all virtues?

Whether a prince ought at the length to compel his subjects to the right use
of the sacraments.
But peradventure some will say: If a Prince should compel those unto the
right use of the sacraments, which are not yet persuaded of the truth, he
should drive them hedlong into sin: so far is it of from setting forward
their salvation. For there they should do against their conscience: and what so
ever they so do (even as the Apostle witnesses) is sin. Wherefore I thyncke
it good to make a distinction between that which is of or by it self, and
that which is at adventure and by hap, or (as they are wont to speak in
Schools) that which comes per accidens, that is by chance. The Magistrate
in this thing which we have now in hand, sets forth to his subjects that
thing which is of it self right, good and just, but in that, sin thereby
comes that happens nothing at al by his default, but rather by those men's
incredulitye or misbeliefe, whereof he is not to be accused, when as he has
diligently labored to have his Citizens well instructed. Neither the Papists,
which at this day are suffered of Christian Magistrates are ignorant that we
ought to have in use the Sacraments instituted by the Lord. Wherefore they
cannot iustlye complain of their Magistrates, if they will have them
vprightlye, and in due order ministered unto them.

Moreover they which object these things unto us, must diligently mark this,
that by the same way we may cavil against God. For he has set forth
unto men his law which is most perfect to be kept of them. Shall we say
unto him, we are weak and of a corrupt and vicious nature, neither can we
perform thy commandments, as thou commaundest: wherefore whether we do
against that which thou have commanded, or whether we endeavor our selves to
perform that which thou have bydden, we shall ever sin, because we shall
fainte, neither can we obey as we should do. Wherefore what soever we do we
shall not avoid sin?

If any manne brawlinglye should speak these things against God, might
not he by good right answer? They be just and right which I have set
forth unto you to be observed. But in that ye are feable and weak, it ought
not to be counted a fault in me. For I have excellentlye helped your
weakness, which for your sakes have given my Son unto the death. If ye shall
believe only in him, what so ever ye shall not accomplish in perfourming my
precepts, it shall not be imputed to you to everlasting death.

So also may a good Prince answer: I require of you those things which are
written in the word of God, and which are decent and do edefye. Wherefore if
your opinion or conscience be against it, that is not to be ascribed unto
me, which have diligently labored that ye might not be ignorant of the truth
and miserably perish. For I have diligently seen unto, that ye should be taught
and instructed in the truth, and so will I still go forward in exhorting,
admonishing and commanding you: but read ye the holy Scriptures, hear your
Teachers, and pray unto God to open the eyes of your mind. These things if
the Prince shall say unto those men which do so cauil against him, I do not
see by what right, or by what means he can be reprehended.

And I think this is not to be omitted that Augustine said, Augustine changed
his sentence for compellinge of heretics.
that he was once of that opinion, that nothing should be done by violence
against heretics, but only they should be instructed by admonitions and
doctrine. But he confesses that he was admonished by certain Bishops of
more experience, which showed him of certain Cities, which before were in a
manner utterly destroyed by the error of the Donatistes, and were by violence
and laws of the Emperors compelled to come unto the Catholyque Church,
which Cities being thus at the length syncerely couerted unto the truth,
rendered thanks unto GOD, neither would they, if by any means they might
have returned again to so pernicious opinions. Wherefore a godly Prince shall
nothing hurt such men, yea he shall proffyt them much, if after he have
instructed them, he compel them to receive the Sacraments duelye, as they be
delivered by the word of God.

But this is to be understand as touching his own Citizens, his native
country men and Denizens, which enjoy the right of the City or province.
Otherwise I do not think that he ought to use any violence toward strangers
that pass to and fro, and which do occupye the trade of Marchaundize, either
inward or outward. Although also as touching those men, I think that he
must diligently beware that they infect not the people with wicked doctrine. An
example of the Israelites which is to be observed.
Wherefore I suppose that the steps of the Israelites are to be followed, who
made none a Jew or a Proselite, neither endewed any with the right of their
people, except first he circumcised himself, received the law of Moses, and
communicated with their sacrifices. And seeing that that was so diligently
observed of them, there is no cause, why our Princes ought not to do the like,
namely to suffer none to be of their City, or as one of them, or a stranger to
be made free, but first they should constrayne him to services and ceremonies
agreing with the word of God.

What is to be said of magistrates which are subject to a superior power A
distinction.
But now let us go on and speak of those Magistrates or Lordts which are
subject to a superior power. These seem after this manner to be divided, some
to have jurisdiction either proper, or by heritage, or else committed unto them
by Emperors, Kings, and public wealths. Or else they are without
jurisdiction and are counted noble only for nobilitye of blood, or for riches
heaped together.

And assuredly for so much as those latter sorts differ nothing almost from
private men, in mine opinion we must so judge of them, as before I have
taught of private men. But the first which are Rulers of Provinces, Cities and
places, either by inheritance, or by office committed unto them, they ought
not otherwise to do in the thing whereof we now entreat, than we have before
prescribed for those which are mere and full Magistrates. For by the
commandment of the superior Princes, it is not lawful for them to compel
the Subjects whom they govern, unto ungodly religion, neither to permyt the
same to those Infidels which inhabit in their dominions. But if thou will say,
we must obey the higher power: I grant that, but vsque ad aras, that is, An
answer of the Lacedaemonians.
as far as religion suffers. When they which overcame the Lacedaemonians
commanded such things as were against their laws and institutions, they
said: We would rather dye, yea, than ye should command us things harder
than death. Wherefore such kind of Magistrates must in all other things be
subject to the superior power: but in those things which are against the
word of God, they must not in any sort follow their affection.

An example of ye Machabites.
The Machabites when the Jews then lived under the Macedonians, Antiochus,
Demetrius, and Alexander, who wythdrewe the Jews from the true woorshypping of
God, would not be obedient unto them. And when that that house of priesthood
was chiefest next to the kings house, least the sincere and ancient religion
should be destroyed, it fell from these kings.

The books of the Machabits conteyne not so do arguments whereby the doctrine of
the faithful ca^ be proved
Neither in alleging these things count I not the books of the Machabites to
be such, from whence I would judge any strong arguments of doctrine may be
taken, but that I count that storye true, as a storye which is not only
contained in these books, but also has been written of other authors.

An example of Ezechias.
I will add also the act of Ezechias the king, who as it is written in the
second book of Kings the.xviii. Chapter, was bound to the king of the
Assirians. For as it is mentioned in the same book the.xvi. chapter, Achas had
yielded him self unto the king of the Assirians, to whom he did not only
pay tribute, but to please him with all, he changed the woorshyppyng of the
true God. For he going to Damascus to meet the king, commanded an altar to
be made at Jerusalem, according to the example which he had there seen, and
followed the religion and woorshyppynge of the Sirians. But Ezechias his Son
being very godly, perceauing that those things which his Father had done
were against the word of God, utterly fell from the king of the Assirians, who
then ruled over him as a superior power. But first he assayed to pacifye him
with gifts and money: but when he saw that would take no place, We must
beware as much as is possible of sedicions.
he defended both his people and him self against him with all his power. We
must take heed nevertheless that in those things we beware of seditions, as
much as may be, and we must most diligently provide, that such Magistrates
under pretense of religion seek not their own.

These things if they observe, and resist their superior Magistrates, only
for godliness sake, let them not suspect, that they commit any unjust thing.
Moreover the holy Scriptures command, that every soul should be subject to
the higher powers. But that must be understand as much as shall be lawful by
the word of God. For in the same scriptures it is written: That a Magistrate
is a fear not to good woorkers, but to evil. Wherefore if the inferiors do
not set forward evil works but good, they do not then resist their powers.
Will thou not fear the power, says the apostle? do good and for that thou
shall be praised. Wherefore if they defend godlynes, they shall deserve rather
praise than blame. But if thou do evil, fear the power: for he bears not
the sweard in vain: for he is the minister of God, and a revenger to anger
against him which does evil. Al these sentences do confirm the courages of
the inferior powers, that they should be nothing afearde of the superior
power, when they in defending of religion obey it not.

But thou will say: by what law do inferior Princes resist either the
Emperor or Kings, or else public wealths, when as they defend the sincere
religion and true faith? I answer by the law of the Emperor, or by the law
of the King, or by the law of the public wealth. For they are chosen of
Emperors, Kings, and public wealths, as helpers to rule, whereby Justice
may more and more florishe. And therefore were they ordained according to the
office committed unto them, rightly, justly, and godly to govern the publyke
wealth. Wherefore they do according to their duty, when in cause of religion
they resist the higher power. Neither can that superior power justly complain,
if in that case the inferior power fall from it.

The Emperor testifies in the Code, Justinian.
that his mind is not that any of his decrees should take place in
judgments against right, but that they ought to be made void and of no
force, if that peradventure they be known to declyne from Justice. Wherefore
Traian is not unworthily commended, A goodly sentence of Traian.
which when he delivered the sweard and the gyrdle unto the Lieuetenant of the
Pretorshyppe, said: If I rule iustlye, use it on my side: but if I rule
unjustly, use it against me.

Gregory a Bishop of Rome can not be excused, An error of Gregory Bishop of
Rome.
which knowing that the law made by Mauritius was unjust (for he had decreed
that no man being occupied with busynes of the public wealth, or appointed
for warrefare should be made a Clarke or a Monk) wrote in deed to the
Emperor, that when he had seen his law, he was wonderfullye affrayde, and
therefore desired him, either to remytte somewhat of the rigor thereof, or else
utterly to alter it. How beit he added, that he would (now that he had
done his duty in admonishing him) because of that obedience and service which
he ought unto him) publyshe the law at Rome as he was commanded.
Undoubtedly this act of Gregory cannot but be reproved, because he ought not
to have obeyed the superior power in that thing, which he judged to be unjust
or wicked. When we do after this sort write of these things, we do nothing at
all open a way unto seditions, but only this is our care, that those things
which belong to God may be given, yea rather restored unto God, and those
things which pertain unto Caesar, may be rendered to Caesar. If the higher
power would require, either goods or things of this world, for the use of
the public wealth, my counsel is that they should be given, but not when those
things are required to be subverted and destroyed, which belong to the
woorshipping of God. And undoubtedly by this means we may easelye excuse just
Naboth, Naboth is excused.
which would not grant unto his King his vyneyarde. For he did not that of
covetousness or of pride, but because he saw thereby the law of God to be
violated, whereby it was ordained, that lands and possessions among the people
of Israel should remain distributed by just division. This law of god the king
went about to violate, and to the performaunce thereof he sought the consent
of that man, which he with a good conscience could not perform.

Whether ye inferior powers ought in those cases to forsake their offices.
Some think that when superior powers go about to drive the inferior powers
to wicked things, it were good and meet, that they which exercise the
inferior office should resign and depart from their office. But I think not
so, for this were to fall from his vocation, which ought not to be done,
especially, when as we see that we must give over to the ungodly, which either
resyst or oppress the kingdom of God. I judge therefore that they ought to
continue, until they be by force cast out by the superior powers, that they
may in keeping their office valiauntly defend the glory of God. But (alas) we
see very many Dukes, Earls and Princes which if the King or Emperor would
take away from the^ their dominions, they would not leave a stone unmoved, to
defend and keep their own. There would they with all their force resist the
higher powers for this cause and under this title, because they would unjustly
deprive them of their things. But when the kingdom of god, godliness, and pure
religion are assailed of them, and these inferior powers are required as
Ministers to be at hand, and to help to overthrow them, they dare not speak
or resistany thing at all. Wherefore we can think nothing else, but that they
have little regard of the kingdom of Christ, and of true godlynes.

Answears to ye arguments put in ye beginning. To the first.

Christ did well in being conversant with the ungodly.


Now rests to answer to those arguments, which were put forth in the
beginning by which seemed to be proved, that conversation together with
Infidels is lawful. Christ was alleged who was conuersaunt with Phariseys,
Sinners, and Publicanes. But he was not only strong and wise, but also the
chief of all wise and strong men, and he could so profit the evil, that the
malice of others could nothing at al hurt him. Wherefore they which are
constant and learned, may lawfully (as we have taught) be conuersaunt with
Infidels, to the end thereby to profyt them to salvation.

Secondly was brought forth a place of Paul, who prohibited, that a faithful
husband or wife should not depart from an Infidel, To the second. How far
the unfaithful man or wife ought to be borne with all.
so that he or she were content to dwell together. We declared also that
natural and ciuyl necessities, especially such as are instituted of god should
be observed. And yet for all that, that which is there said by the Apostle,
must not be understand so symply as it is pretended: because if an unfaithful
housband should entise his wife being a Christian unto ungodliness, or would
not cease to blaspheme Christ, such a matrimonye ought not to continue.

To the third. Why Paul commanded not the infidelles but evil brethren to be
avoided.
Thirdly there was declared a sentence of the same Apostle to the Corrinthians,
which is that all covetous persons, evil speakers, drunkardes, and
whoremongers are not to be avoided, for otherwise we must go out of the
world, but he said that those only were to be eschewed which were counted
brethren. As touching this purpose of Paul, we must diligently mark, first
that he saw right well, that the necessities of life could not suffer, that
all those which believed not at that time in Christ, should be avoided: for the
greatest part of men at the beginning were far from Christ, neither could
the infideles have been made better, if our men had separated themselves
altogether from them.

But by the sentence of Paul the corrupt brethren were driven both to grief
and shame, whilst they saw that for their sins they were eschewed of those,
to whom before they had been familiar and dear, and were joined unto them as
members of one body. Furthermore when this discipline floryshed, the Church
was not evil spoken of for the sins of the brethren, which would otherwise
have happened, if they had wincked at wicked acts. To the fourth.
Therefore these sentences are nothing against those things, which we before
determined. And much less that which was alleged of Abraham how he iourneyed
as a stranger among Ethnikes and Idolatrers. The peregrination of Abraham
among yt Ethnikes is defended.
First because he did it by the calling of God. Secondly because he was of so
great constancye and wisdom that he could be conuersaunte with the ungodly
without any hurt to himself, and to their great profit. For whether so
ever he went, he carried about with him the name of God and the worshipping of
him. To the fyfth. Of Loath.
We may answer the same also of Loath: If he went unto the five cities with a
good mind, namely to teach the Sodomites godliness and the right way. But
if he went thither being moved only with the commodity of the place, he did
not well. And assuredly his going thither had but ill success. For he was
led away captyue, and Abraham was feign to redeem him. And when afterward
those places were by the power of God burnte, he was compelled whether he would
or no, to remove from thence. I need not to speak much at this present of
Naaman the Sirian, for I have before entreated inoughe of him. Moreover I
think it be manifest enough what was the cause, why some of them that were
healed by Christ were sent back to their own, namelye to Preach and
faithfully to declare unto them, what had happened unto themselves.

Now rests somewhat to speak peculiarly of Jews and Heretics. Of the Jews.
For these kind of men are suffered almost in all cities, provinces and
kingdoms to dwell together with Christians. Why the Jews should be suffered.
Augustine.
Augustine among other brings forth certain reasons. He in his.iiii.
and.xviii. books de ciuitate Dei, and also upon the.lviii. Psalm, and in
other places, writes, that they ought therefore to be suffered, because they
before other kind of men had the promise of salvation, neither are they paste
all hope, when as daily some of them, although but a few, return unto
Christ. Blindness (says Paul to the Romans) fell partly on Israel: as
though he would say, not on al. Moreover the same Apostle adds, when the
fullness of the Gentiles is entered, then all Israel shall be saved. And least
thou should peradventure think, that these words are to be understand
allegorically, Paul writes them as a miserye, and to confyrme his sentence he
brings the Prophecye of Esaias the Prophet: namely that iniquity shall be then
taken away from Jacob.

Furthermore they are now called enemies unto God, for our sakes: but called
friends, because of their fathers. The same Augustine in his Questions upon the
Gospel, the second book and xxxiii. Question (if that these books be of
Augustine his writing) when he interprets the parable of the prodigal son,
he says that that son signifies the Gentiles. For it is written, that he
departed into a far country, because the Ethnikes were so far departed
from God, that they openly worshipped Idols, and with open profession.

But the elder son, by whom was shadowed the people of the Hebrews, went
not so far. And although he were not in his Fathers house, which is the
Church, he dwelled for all that in the field. For the Jews are exercised in
the holy Scriptures which they do not ryghtlye understand, nor yet with that
spiritual sense wherein the Church of Christ takes them, but in an earthlye
and carnal sense. Wherefore they are not vnaptelye said to be in the field.
This Elder son enters not at the beginning into the house of his Father, but
in the latter days he shall also be called and come.

The same Father also brings for this sentence that which is written in the
58. Psalm, as he reads it, Do not kill them least they forget thy law, but in
thy power disperse them. The Son of God (says he) prays unto the father,
that that nation might not be destroyed, but might wander every where
throughout the world.

Other provinces when they were overcome of the Romans, followed the laws and
rites of the Romans, The Jews received not the laws and customs of the
Romans.
so that at the length they were made Romans: but the Jews, although they
were overcome by the Romans yet would they never follow their laws, rites
and ceremonies, they yet observe their own as much as they may, and being
dispersed they wander abroad. Neither have they utterly forgotten the law of
GOD: not that they Godly apply themselves to observe it, but only read it,
and keep certain signs and institutions whereby they are discerned from other
Nations. Moreover it seems that God has put a sign upon them as he did
upon Caine, because he had killed his brother Abell, namely that every man
should not kill them.

The dispersing of the Jews is profitable to Christians.
Neither is this their dispersion through out the world unprofitable to the
Christians, because (as it is written to the Romans) they are showed unto us
as broken bows. And for so much as we were grafted in their place, when as we
Against those which burn the Bibles in Hebrewe
they believe not, yet they confess that those writings are most true. They
are in heart deadly enemies against us, but by these books which they have and
reverence, they are a testimonye to our religion. Wherefore I can not enough
marvel at those, which do so much hate the Jews tongue, and Bibles in
Hebrewe, Augustine.
that they desire to have them destroyed and burnte, when as Augustine de
doctrina Christiana thinks that if we chance somtymes to doubt of the Greek
or Latin translation, we must fly unto the truth of the Hebrew, And Jerome in
many places writes the same.

Whether the Hebrews have corrupted the books of holy scriptures. Jerome.
But they say that the holy books were vitiated and corrupted, by the Hebrews.
To this Jerome upon Esaye the.vi. Chapter toward the end answers thus.
Either they did this before the coming of Christ and Preaching of the
Apostles, or else afterward. If a man will say that it was done of them
before, then seeing Christ and his Apostles reprehended the most grievous wicked
acts of the Jews. I marvel why they would speak nothing of that sacrilege,
and so detestable a wicked act. Undoubtedly they would have reproved them for
viciating and corrupting the Scriptures. But if thou will contend yt there were
afterward faults brought in by them, then will I say yt they ought chiefly to
have corrupted those places which do testifye of Christ and his religion, and
which were alleged by the Lord himself, and of the Apostles in the new
Testament. But they remain vncorrupt, and the same sentence remains still in
the Hebrew Bibles which they put. For they were not so careful for ye words.
Wherefore it is not likely that they as touching other places have corrupted the
holy scriptures. Yea if a man diligently read over their books, he shall
find in them a great many more testimonies and those more plain and manifest,
than our common traslatio^ has. Do not they read in the second Psalm: Kiss
ye the son, which ours have translated, Take ye hold of discipline? Which
words undoubtedly are referred unto Christ. But I mean not at this present
to bring all such testimonies. It is sufficient if with Jerome I prove that ye
books of holy Scriptures are not corrupted by the Hebrews, neither assuredly if
they would they should have missed of their purpose. For there are found many
most ancient and handwritten books, which have been of a long time most
diligently kept by Christians, which came never in their hands to corrupt.

But let us return to treat of that commoditye which Augustine has
declared. The Hebrews and their books ar most plain witnesses of our faith.
which with their books maintain our sentence eue^ against their will.
Wherefore although the Hebrews be blinded in heart, and are against us as much as
they may, yet are they with their books most plain witnesses of our faith.
And undoubtedly of al testimonies, yt testimony is most of value, God will have
a church even by the testimonies of his adversaries.
which is witnessed by our enemies. And god has wonderfully provided for this
kind of testimonies for his church, For we have not only the books of the
Hebrews witnessing with us, but also Verses of the Sibillas, which were borne
in sundry countries. Neither is it to be supposed that our elders feigned those
Verses of themselves. Verses of the Sibillas.
For in the time of Lactantius, Eusebius of Cesaria, and Augustine, which
alleged those Verses, the books of the Sibillas were rife in every man's hand.
Wherefore if our elders should have adjoined unto them any counterfayte Verses,
the Ethnykes which were then many in number, and were full of eloquence, and
deadly enemies to our religion, would have reproved them as vain and liars.
What then remains, but that god would wonderfully defend his church even by
the testimonies of our adversaries? Therefore ye Jews are now suffered among
Christians, partly for the promise sake, which they have that salvation should
be given to their kindred: partly because of the commodities, which I have now
rehearsed out of Augustine. Wherefore they are not only suffered but also they
have Sinagoges, wherein they openly read the books of the holy scriptures, and
also call upon the god of their fathers. In which thing nevertheless the
diligence of ye Magistrates and bishops is much to be required, who ought to
provide that they do there no other thing, and by all means to beware that in
their common prayers, exhortations, and Sermons, they curse not nor blaspheme
Christ our God. If the Magistrates and bishops have not a care over these
things, they can not but be most justly accused. The Turks ought not to have
any Sinagoges granted them.
But it is not lawful to grant unto the Turks any holy assemblies for that
they have not a peculiar promise of their salvation, neither would they there
read either the old Testament or the new, but only their most detestable book
called Alcoran.

Furthermore the Jews must be forbidden that they exercise not false
bargayning and Vsurye among Christians, The Jews must be prohibited from false
bargaining and usury.
thereby to vex and afflict the poor Christians before our face, which can not
be done but with great horror. But our princes exact of them a very great
tribute and receive at their hands a great pray by their hands by usury and
false bargayning. So far are they of from prohibityng them from these evil
arts. Furthermore (which is more hurtful) they provide not to have them
taught, when as they ought to compel them, to come often to the holy Sermons
of the Christians: Princes ought to care that the Jews may be taught
otherwise, whilst they are so neglected and unlooked unto, they wax every day
worse and worse, and more stubborn. So that either very little fruit or else
almost none at al, can now be looked for by their dwelling among Christians.

It is also diligently to be seen unto, that they corrupt not our men, in
seducing them to their Iewishe religion. The heresy of the Marranes.
By reason this thing has been neglected, the heresy of the Marranes has
much increased and that chiefly in Spain. Moreover it is mete, that they may
by some apparail or certain sign be known from Christians, least a man
unawares should be as familiarly conuersaunt with the^ as with Christians. And
as touching this kind of infidelles these things are sufficient.

What heresye is.
Now must we speak of heretics. The word (...), is derived of this verb
(...), which is to elect or choose, For those kind of men chose unto
themselves some certain opinions, which are against the holy Scriptures, and
do stubbornly defend the same. The causes of heresye.
And the causes of this their choice, for the most part are either because they
are ignorant of the holy Scriptures, or else if they know them they despise
them, and being driven by some covetousness they apply themselves to the
invention of some errors. Wherefore Augustine in his book de vtilitate credendi
writes. Augustine.
An heretic is he which for the love of gain or rule, either brings up, or
else follows new opinions. The definition therefore of heresy is a choice and
stubborn defending of opinions, The definition of heresye.
which are against the holy Scriptures, either by reason of ignorance or else
contempt of them, to the end the easlier to obtain their own pleasures and
commodities. The choice and stubburne defending is in this definition in stead
of the form. But the opinions disagreing with the holy scriptures serve for
the matter. Pride and covetousness make heresy. And the obteining of
dignities, gain and pleasures are appointed as ends of this so great a
mischief. By this definition it is manifest enough (as I think) who be
heretics, I mind not at this present to speak of the kinds and sorts of
heresies. I shall as I trust have better occasion, and a place more mete to
speak thereof. This will I say briefly, as touching this question, we must have
none otherwise to do with heretics, than with infidels and Jews. And I
suppose that these things are sufficient as touching this question, which has
been hitherto discussed, I would God so perfectly, as with many words.
Wherefore I will return unto the historye.

The second Chapter.
1 ANd the Angel of the Lord ascended from Gilgal to Bochim and said: I made
you to go out of Egipte, and have brought you unto the Land which I swear
unto your Fathers: And I said, I will not break mine appoyntmente that I made
with you.


TWo things have hitherto been set forth unto us. First the noble victories
which the Israelits obtained as long as they obeyed the word of God. Secondly
the transgression, whereby contrary to ye commandments of God, they both
saved and also made tributaries unto themselves those nations, whom they ought
utterly to have destroyed. But now is set forth unto us, how God of his
goodness by his Legate reprehended the Israelites for the wicked act which
they had committed, and that not without fruit. For when they heard the word
of God, they repented.

First the messenger of God makes mention of the benefits which god had
bestowed on his people. The principal points of the Sermon.
Secondly he vpbraydeth the^ of their wicked acts, wherewith they being ingrate
requited so great gifts. Lastely are set forth the threatninges and
punishementes wherewith God would punish them except they repented.

But before we come to entreat of the oration of this legate, it were good to
declare what he was. The Hebrew word Melach, It is doubtful what this Legate
was.
and also the Greek word (...), are doubtful, and sometimes they signify a
nature without a body, I mean spirits the ministres of God, and other
sometimes they signify a messanger, what soever he be. There are examples of
these in many places of the scriptures, which should be superfluous now to
declare. Some supposed yt some certain spirit was sent from God, which
appeared unto the people in a visible form, and reproved them as he was
commanded: And they persuade them selves that he was first seen in Gilgal, and
there commanded the people, to ascend from thence to a place, which was
afterward called Bochim of weapyng. The Hebrew word Melach is not against this
interpretation: and that makes with it also, because he speaks as God. The
angel speaks in the person of God.
I have made you (says he) to ascend out of Egypt. With which self same
kind of speech the Angel in Genesis spoke to Abraham, and in Exodus to
Moses. Where it is also written, that God put his name in him. But it seemed
unto the ancient fathers, That angel which spoke unto ye fathers is thought
to have been christ
that that angel which in the old Testament appeared and spoke in the name
of God, was Christ the son of God. For it is written in John, No man has
seen God at any time: the son which in the bosom of the father he has
declared him. These words declare unto us that what soever things are said to
have been spoken by God in the old Testament, the same were made open by
Christ. But other suppose that this messanger or legate was a minister of the
Church, yt is either a Priest or a Prophet, whose office was, to reprehend the
sins of the people. Among the Hebrew Rabines, Leui the son of Gerson.
Leui the son of Gerson does therefore think this to be very likely, because
it is not convenient, that an angel should openly speak to so great a
multitude. But his reason is very weak. for seeing God when he gave the law
spoke in the mount Sina to the whole multitude of the Hebrews, what should let,
but that he could teach an angel to do the same? But this is of some what
more strength, because it is declared in the history, that this messanger
ascended from Gilgal to Bochim. For if he were an angel, it seems that it
should rather have been said, that he descended from heaven, and not ascended
from Gilgal to Bochim. And surely it appears a feigned thing, yt they feign
that he first appeared in Gilgal, and then called the people together to
Bochim. For he might have in Gilgal expressed unto the people those things
which he afterward declared in Bochim. Wherefore the Hebrews affirm that this
Prophet or Priest received in Gilgal the spirit and inspiration of God,
wherewith he was stirred up and appointed to the assembly of the people, which
then for certain causes were assembled in Bochim, Praises of Phineas the priest
there to express the commandments of God to the people, yea they say that
that Prophet was Phineas the Priest the nephew of Aaron, I mean the son of
Eleazar for he was a very severe man, and most zealous of godliness and
righteousness. In the book of Numb: it is mentioned how he slew Zamri a
prince of the family of Simeon namely for this, because he committed open
fornication with a Madianitishe harlot. And the father of ye harlot was a
prince among the Madianites. And God manifestly allowed the zeal of Phineas.
For he promised him the priesthode of his nation, with an everlasting
covenant: and ceased from destroyeng the people, being mitigated with his
noble act. Phineas therefore was not only godly, but also of a stout and
valiaunte courage. He feared not for gods cause to enter into grievous hatreds,
and to put himself to present danger. Wherefore David in the 106. Psalm
rehearsing this history commends him after this sort: Phineas stood up and
revenged, and the plague ceased, and it was counted unto him for
righteousness from generation to generation for ever. Wherefore that act
which by his own nature might have seemed cruel and horrible, did not only
please God, and was of him allowed for a just act: but he also delivered the
people from a most grievous plague, wherewith they were then vexed. The count
of the years if they be rightly counted is not against this opinion now
alleged. Yea and it is found in this self same book, that he was on live, when
war was made against the tribe of Benjamin to revenge the wicked act
perpetrated in Gabaa. R. Salomoh.
Rabbi Salomoh also declares, that the book which is entitled Sedar Olam,
testifies the same. Kimhi.
Likewise David Kimhi and the old Hebrews seem to incline to this opinion. But
what soever he was, I think it skilleth not much. This ought to be most
certain and sure, that the things declared by him were the words of God.

Where Gilgal lies.
Gilgal, is a city lyeng in the plain of Iordane, not far from the city of
Jericho. And it had that name hereof, because there Iosuah by the commandment
of the Lord provided that the people of Israel, which had wandered
uncircumcised thoroughe the wilderness, celebrated a sole^pne circumcision.
And when they had so done, God answered, yt he had removed from the^ the
reproach of Egypt. For Gal signifies in Hebrew to turn away and to remove.
Moreover in that place, but not at that time, but long before, was ye
tabernacle, and the Arc of the covenant. Namely in the time of Iosuah when
the people passed over Iordane. And by that means that place was counted
religious. Wherefore Saul the first king of the Hebrews was anointed in Gilgal.
But Bochim was so called of the^ which wept as we shall straight way hear.
And it is called so now by the figure Prolepsis, because it was not yet named
by that name. And as it appears by ye history they going from Gilgal ascended
to Bochim. Furthermore we must note that the legate speaks not in his own
name, but in the name of God and yet he uses not those kind of phrases which
the other Prophets did, namely Thus says the Lord. etc. The word of the Lord
came unto me. etc. And in rehearsing the benefits bestowed on the people.
First of all he makes mention of the delyuery of their fathers out of Egypt,
because that had newly happened unto the Hebrews. The benefits of God are like
words which testify of his nature and goodness.
And God, to the end the knowledge of him should not be blotted out, uses to
put men in mind of those benefits that he has bestowed on the^, and will
have the^ to be as certain words, expressing his nature and goodness unto us.
And he always begins his rehearsal at things that are latest done, and of
them he claymeth unto him self titles or names attributed unto him, God takes
surnames by his benefits.
by which he would be both called upon and also known, for at the beginning
God was called upon by that that he created heaven and earth, and afterward by
that that he was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. After that as a
deliverer out of Egypt. Then as a deliverer out of the captivity of Babylon.

God begins the rehearsal of benefits last given.
But lastly as the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. But now of the benefit
lately bestowed on them, he calls him self the delyuerer out of Egypt.
Afterward he adioyneth an other benefit. And I have brought you into the land
which I swear unto your fathers. It was not sufficient yt they were delivered
out of Egypt, but they had ample and noble places assigned unto them. Thirdly
he says, This have I given you. That I would have my covenant made with you to
have continued for ever, if it might have been by your obedience But ye have
not suffered it. These benefits which in this place are rehearsed are plain
and manifest enough. Two principal things to be considered in the covenant.
But as touching the last, namely of the covenant, two things are to be
considered in it, First which is also the chief of all good things, is the
redemption which should be made by Christ. Neither could this be hindered by
any sins of me^. For God is faithful (as Paul testifies to ye Romans)
neither departs he from his truth, for our evil deserts. The second is, the
success of outward good things and civil ornaments. Which kind of
couenaunte or promise, because it was conditionally it might therefore
sometimes be altered, and undoubtedly of this does our preacher at this present
speak. And what conditions God required of the Israelites, here he declares
in this sermon.

2 And ye also shall make no couenaunte with the inhabiters of this land, but
shall break down their altares: Nevertheless ye have not obeyed my voice, why
have ye this done?

3 Wherefore I have also determined, I will not cast them out before your face,
but they shall be as pricks in your sides, and their Gods shall be a snare unto
you.


God by covenant had prescribed two things in especial, What god prescribed
the Israelites in the covenant.
first that they should make no league with the Chananites: secondly that they
should pluck down their altares and temples. These are every where written in
the law especially in Exodus the 13. and 20. In the book of Numb: 33. In Deuteronomy.
7.

Now after these conditions required of God is set forth the transgression of
the Israelites. But ye (says he) have not hearkened unto my voice. The Jews
were not yet fallen so far that they committed Idolatry, they are only
reproved for violating the covenant, because they had saved the Idols and
altares of the Chananites. The wonderful goodness of God surely is showed by
these words: Why have ye this done? A vehemente manner of amplifieng of sin.
He demau^deth the cause as being ready to hear their excuse, if they could
bring any that were just and lawful. And by this means also the grieuousnesse
of the sin is amplified, as being so grievous yt it could by color be
defended. And undoubtedly thus it is. God is not afeard in judgment to
conte^d with sinners.
Gods cause against us is so good, that he is not affeard in Judgment to
reason with sinners, as the Prophets Esaias and Micheas have plainly taught.
The preacher goes forward, and shows what punishment they should have for
this fault.

For so much as ye have not stand by your covenant, I will also go from my
promises. I will not expel the Chananites out of this region as I had
promised: and if so be that I do not expel them, ye are so weak and feeble
that by your own power, ye can not cast them out. They shall remain therefore
as ye would have it, but yet to your great disco^modity. For they shall be as
pricks in your sides, namely as thorns, where with ye shall be oftentimes
sharply pricked. The Hebrew word is Letsdim. And in deed Tsad signifies a
side. Although some think that word to be derived of this verb Tsud, which
is to hunte or to fish and because the hooks of fishermen are very sharp,
therefore the word is by a certain Metaphore transferred to signify thorns.
And after the same sort we might say they signified nets, using the same
Metaphore which we may derive of hunters. But the first reason of the
interpretation, to signifye sides, I sets both simple and also more allowed by
the commentaryes of the Hebrews.

And their Idols shall be a snare unto you. Namely wherewith ye shall be taken,
and when ye shall be given to their Idolatry, ye shall be punished with most
grievous punishementes and discommodities. Augustine in his 13. Augustine.
question upon this book has noted, that God threatens after his accustomed
manner, yt at the length it shall come to pass, that he will punish sins by
sins. For ye Israelites in not obeyeng the commandment of God committed
sin: and he again threatens that Idols shall be a stumblyng block unto
them, namely that they should worship them, wherefore afterward they should be
grievously punished. By which words he declares that the first transgression
should be punished and chastised with the wicked crime of Idolatry, as Paul
testifies to the Romans, that the Idolatry of the Ethnikes was punished with
most filthy lusts. But ye punishment of the Israelites (as it is here set
forth) has with out doubt a great emphasys. For what can there happen more
grievous, than to be among thorns, and continuallye to fall among them?
Undoubtedly hereof follow wounds almost thoroughe out all the parts of the
body, and new pains, and those vehement succeed one an other. And as thorns
if they stick in the flesh do sharply prick, so to dwell among enemies, and
to have them joined together with us, can not be but very full of troubles.

The punishment which God here threateneth, is no new punishment, for all
that is here written, was forespoken in the book of Joshua the 23. chap. Namely
that it should come to pass, that if they obeyed not the precepts of the law
of God, God would not then perform to destroy those nations before them: yea,
he says, they shall be unto you a snare, a stumblyng stock, a whip for your
sides, and thorns to your eyes, until ye be destroyed out of this good land,
which the Lord your God has given you, etc.

For the Israelites had afterward experience of these miseryes, because they
were oftentimes brought into bondage by their enemies among whom they dwelled,
and with whom they had ungodly joined them selves. And finally for yt they
would not cease of from Idolatry, they were cast out to the Assirians and
Babilonians. This chidyng of God contains just causes, wherefore the
Israelites were destitute of his help for a time. Causes why god forsook the
Israelites for a time.
And the end of the whole sermon is, that the people might be stirred up to
repentance, and that most aptely. For among those things which do vehemently
amplify sin and do set it plainly before our eyes, A vehemente amplyfieng of
sin.
is the greatness of ye benefits of god, which ought to stir us up to ye
observing of the law. Afterward is set forth ye grieuousnesse of the
punishments, because the weight of the sins committed, does evidently declare
ye burtheu of the^. Wherefore these two things are worthily alleged in the
sermon, to the end the Hebrews might feel the enormity of the wicked act
which they had committed, whereas otherwise they would have thought it but a
light fault.

Two Antitheses to be considered in this oration.
Furthermore we must consider in this oration the contrary positions
artificially joined together to augment the vehemence. For to that benefit,
wherein God had brought them out of Egypt this is laid against, that they drove
not the Chananites from the country given unto them. And to this benefit,
that God had given them an abundant and fertile country, this is contrary,
that the people suffered Idolatry to be no less used there than it was before.
And this was to render evil for good. Wherefore God would not suffer that to be
left unpunished, but caused it to happen otherwise unto them than they thought.
For the nations which they for their commodity had saved, did them great
hurt, so yt they are compared to thorns. And the Gods of those nations, which
they had not abolished turned to a snare and grievous stumbling block to the
Hebrews.

Whether the people were by this oration stirred up to faith.
But this sermon may seem imperfect enoughe, for so much as faith is not set
forth in it, whereunto the mind of the hearers should be erected: only the
sin is declared, and the punishment wherewith they should be punished is
expressed. And these things, except faith be mixed with the^ breed rather
desperation tha^ salvation: so far of is it yt they should bring a just
remedy. To this I answer, that that part which seems to want, is
elegantly contained in the sermon now alleged, so that it be somewhat more
diligently considered. For when the benefits bestowed on them by God are
expressed, they make us assured of the goodness and mercy of God, which
benefits also remain still for the Israelites if they will repent. For god
is not changed, but is perpetually of the self same nature and will. And
unless he be resisted by sins he is toward men very favorable and loving.
Furthermore faith is stirred up in the hearers, when it is showed unto them,
that god would that his covenant made with them should abide for ever.
Wherefore it is manifest that this was his will, that the impediment of sins
being by full repentance taken away, his covenant which he had made might be
of force for ever. Wherefore there is no cause why we should complain that
faith is left out, when as both the promises and the covenant are mentioned,
which can not be conceived and established but only by faith.

There yet remains a doubt whether God require the self same thing of
Christians, which he would have to be done of the Hebrews, Wether it be
required of us that we should break Idols
namely that they should by violence take away and break in pieces the Idols
and superstitions both of the infidelles, and also of heretics. If this should
be demanded as touchying Princes and Magistrates, it is without controversy
that they ought to purge their dominions from such evils, and to that end have
they received of God the sword and power. But they which are private persons
ought to abstain from violence, for so much as to them is not committed the
sword and power to constrayne. Of this thing Augustine in the.x. tome and 6.
Augustine.
sermon after this manner answers, that the Christians ought so to do as God
commanded the Hebrews in the 7. of Deuteronomy: where he expressedly commanded that
these things ought then to be done of the Jews, when the land was in their
own power. Wherefore Christians ought also to do the same, but yet in those
lands, cities and houses which they possess, namely they must there
overthrow Idols and superstitious altars. Howbeit it is not lawful for them
to break into other men's houses lands and Towns, and with violence to break
and overthrow Idols and altares. This (says he) is not to heal the sin
of Idolatrye, which lies chiefly in the heart, it ought chiefly be weyed out
of the hearts of our neighbors, by the word and doctrine, which being done,
as many as we shall win unto Christ, will help us to take away outward
Images, when as they are persuaded by the word of GOD, and that by our
diligence, they have first shaken away the same things out of their own
hearts. Co^silium Eliberinum.
And according to this meaning the Counsel holden at Eliberium did decree in
the 60. Canon.

By these things we must note, that this is the will of GOD, that we should
abstain from traffickes, We must have no felloweshyp with the ungodly.
matrimonyes and fellowshippes with infidels and heretics, as by the law it
was forbidden, that the Jews should make no league with the Chananites, but
this would I have so to be understand, as I have before and that largely
declared. Moreover we are plainly taught, that the commandments of GOD are
simply to be obeyed, The commau^deme^ts of god are not to be mitigated by man
his inventions.
so that we may not go about either to mollefye or to mitigate them by man's
inventions. Seeing that GOD punished the Hebrews and that grievously, which
peradventure thought that they had sufficiently fulfilled his precepte, when
they had made the Chananites tributaries. But as touching their Idols and
superstitions he required nothing else of the Israelites, but that they would
not worship them. Wherefore such interpretations are to be taken head of,
which do either utterly take away the word of GOD, or at the least do make it
to be of small force. This did the son of GOD sharply reprove, when he said
that the Phariseys by their doctrine and humane inventions did wrest the law of
God, as though it had been made of ware, to their filthy lusts and wicked
desires. This sermon is taken out of the holy scriptures
We must also mark that this whole sermon is taken out of the holy Scriptures:
for there is nothing contained in it, which is not found in the books of Numb:
Deuteronomy: and Iosuah. Whereby we gather, that preaching is then of efficacy, when
it is drawn out of the word of GOD, and not of the invention of man. Sinners
ar punished by the same things whereby they have tra^sgressed.
Neither is it to be passed over, that it is a common thing with the Justice of
God to punish sinners by the same things whereby they transgress. As now it
is declared that ye Israelites should incur most great damages, as well by
the nations, as also by the Idols, which they contrary to the commandment
of GOD had saved. Furthermore let us learn hereby, every man for his own
part to bear continual hatred to the wicked affections of the flesh. For we
ought never to come into favor again with them, We must make no league with
wicked affections.
or to make peace or a league with the^: for so much as God has appointed,
that we should continually make war against his enemies.

What is the office of Princes against heretics and Papists.
Finally let Christian Princes be taught, how they ought to behave them selves
against Papists and heretics, namely diligently to persecute, correct, and
amend the errors in them, and at the length to compel them to return into
the right way: otherwise in permittyng them to take deeper root, and to live
at will and idly, they noryshe thorns for them selves, and do willyngly
draw unto them blocks, to stumble at.

4 And when the Angel of the Lord spoke these words unto all the children
of Israel, the people lifted up their voice and wept.

5 And they called the name of that place Bochim, and offered Sacrifices there
unto the Lord.


The fruit of the sermon, which was preached is by certain outward signs
expressed unto us, which were in a manner apt witnesses of repentance, and of
a converted mind. Three apt witnesses of repentance.
Three things therefore are mentioned. First when the people had heard this
sermon they lifted up their voice whereby as it is to be believed, they confessed
their sins, and implored the mercy of God. Secondly it is added that tears
were joined with the voices: and lastly that they offered Sacrifices unto God.
What they said when they lifted up their voice, the scripture does not
express, but I have expounded what is most likely that they said, and therefore
I will stand no longer about that thing: but I will somewhat tarry in those
things, which the history has mentioned of, what things they are, namely as
touching tears and Sacrifices. Wherein we must know that true and lawful
repentance consists chiefly of two principal points, Two principal points
of repe^tau^ce, which do spryng out of faith.
namely of a sorrow conceived for the wicked Acts committed, and of a sure
confidence to obtain pardon by Christ. Neither ought we to be ignoraunte,
that these two things do burgen out of faith, as out of their propre and
natural root. And faith, when it brings forth such fruits, is occupied
about two things. First it assenteth unto the law of GOD, and to the
threatenings there set forth, and confesses them to be true, whereby we being
assured of the will of GOD, which we understand to be by our sins violated,
and nothing doubtyng of the threatenings adjoined, we can not but be grievously
sorry. Secondly faith embraseth the promise of forgiveness of punishementes by
Christ. And whilst it is occupied about these two things, so many outward
signs also do follow. Two outward signs follow true repe^tau^ce
For of sorrow come syghinges and tears, which have adjoined unto the^
confession of the sins committed, which is sometimes expressed, and
sometimes close. And where there is conceived an assurance of forgiveness,
there follow Sacrifices. And because faith is the mother of these things, and
it is conceived by the word of GOD, therefore the historye declares that the
Israelites did at the length weep and do Sacrifice after that they had heard
the sermon. The word of god stirs up repentance.
For (as Paul says) faith comes of hearing, and hearing by the word of
GOD. Wherefore weepyng and sighing followed faith by which weepyng the sorrow
then conceived in the heart manifestlye appeared, which affection of the
mind it is manifest to have come by reason of the evil which then did
oppress them: What is the grief and sorrow of repentance
and that evil was the anger of GOD, wherewith they felt them selves to be
oppressed, and whereunto they knew by the sermon preached that they were
guilty. Neither is this to be passed over, that the weepyng of those repenting
people was no common or easy weepyng, for so much as of the efficacy and
abundance thereof, the place was called Bochim. Which word signifies in the
Hebrew tongue, men weepyng.

The Ethnikes do not allow tears.
The tears, which the Ethnike wise men, do either reprove, or contempne as
coming from a soft and womanlyke heart, God, when they burst forth of true
repentance, does exceadingly allow them, and counts them as most
acceptable: Seneca writes in his 64. Epistle to Lucillus, Seneca.
that sometimes we may let tears come from us, but we must not weep. He would
not therefore have weepyng to have the rain: howbeit somewhat he permitted it,
because by the violence of nature they are expressed, and they burste forth
even of them which will not, and do restrain them, as the same author
testifies in his ^00. Epistle. But we ought not to consider what they would,
but what is allowed of our heavenly Father. God accepts the tears of such as
are repentaunt.
And he wonderful louyngly accepts a contrite and humble heart, and the
tears of such as are repentaunt. Then it is said that they offer Sacrifices,
which were certain tokens of faith conceived of the forgiveness of sins by
Christ. For whilst the Sacrifices were a kyllyng, it was set forth, that
sin in a sort was transferred into them. What the killyng of sacrifices
signified.
For the Sacrifice bare the punishment, which the transgressour ought to have
had. Neither is it to be doubted, but that those Sacrifices whilst they were
sacrificed, did shadow the death of Christ. Wherefore those ceremonies did
testifye that the Elders, did constantlye believe, that by the oblation and
death of Christ all their sins were taken away, and already forgeuen them.
Neither undoubtedly can true repentance be found wantyng such a faith. Take
away faith and repentance is desperation.
For take away this faith, and it may rather be called desperation, than
repentance. Furthermore in these Sacrifices were thanks given unto God,
which would so by Christ be reconciled unto men.

Some man will say, what shall we do therefore when we repent? we may in deed
have tears as witnesses of our inward sorrow: but there remain no
Sacrifices in our time, That which ye old fathers did by the blood of beasts,
the same do we in the supper of the Lord.
whereby we should testifye the faith of the forgiveness of sins by Christ.
To this I answer. That which they did then by the blood of beasts, and
death of cattle, we do also now in celebratyng the Supper of the Lord. For
there we keep in memory the death of Christ by outward signs, as he him
self has instituted: and thereof it came that the old Fathers did so often
call the administration of that Sacrament, a sacrifice.

Not because (as the Papists falsely believe) the Sacrifice offreth Christ
unto God the father, Why the Papists called ye supper of the Lord a sacrifice
but because the memory of him being once offered is called to remembrance.
Moreover we must take heed that we persuade not our selves, that God is
pacified, either by tears, or by Sacrifices, or by the receauyng of the
Sacraments which are but outward things. God is not pacified by outward
things of them selves.
For by one only Sacrifice, by the death I say of Christ, God is made
merciful unto us: the fruit, of whose death every man applies unto him self
by faith. And of that faith we have those outward things as witnesses and
signs. Wherefore if at any time we shall hear either the Fathers or the
Scriptures them selves to say that by tears sins are wyped away, or that
by Sacrifices, or Sacraments GOD is made merciful unto men, so ought we to
understand their speeches that we refer the Sacrifices, and Sacraments both
to Christ him self, The properties of things are oftentimes attributed to the
signs of the same things
and also to faith in him, for so much as all those are signs of him. Neither
let us think that this is a new, or an unaccustomed thing, that the
properties, operations, and efficacy of things should be transferred to the
signs, which by the institution of God do note and signife unto us the same
things. But these things left a side let us speak somewhat particularlye
both of tears and syghing, and also of Sacrifice.

Of Tears.
Tears are counted as certain things added and joined to repentance, Tears
are adjoined both to repentance and also to prayers
and also to prayers. For not only the repentaunte, when they with a grievous
sorrow deteste their sins, do use to weep: but also as many as do earnestly
and vehemently contend to obtain any thing. Howbeit the tokens of true
repentance are not always measured by tears. Weepyng is not always a toke^
of true repentance.

Tears do not always declare yt the prayers are of efficacy. 2. Sam. 12.


For we read both in the book of Genesis, and also in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, that Esau also wept. Tears also do not always declare, that the
prayers are of efficacye to obtain that which is desired. For David after his
aduoutry fasted and wept whilst he earnestly prayed that life might be spared
unto his son which was borne unto him by Bethsabe: which thing
nevertheless he could not obtain, but that tears in those examples had no
good success, there were diverse causes thereof. For Esau as we shall straight
way declare, mourned not of faith: And David obtained not that which he
desired, because GOD had ordained to give him that, which was much better and
more noble than that which he required. In deed the son which was conceived
by aduoutry remained not a live. But of the same mother he afterward had
Solomon, who succeeded the Father in a peaceable and most ample kingdom after
his death, yea and he being yet living. But contrarywyse let us mark how in
Peter tears were tokens of very true repentance. And also in that woman,
which (as the Evangelists declare) with her tears washed the feet of the
Lord.

And as touching prayers Ezechias was heard, when with weepyng he prayed, and
the death which was threatened him was differred to an other time. Josias also
was heard, who prayed unto GOD with many tears. The 126. Psalm speaks thus
of the fruit of prayer, which has sighyng and tears adjoined with it: They
went and wept, castyng their seeds, but doubtelesse they shall come, and with
joy shall bring with the^ their sheaues. And they which sow in tears, shall
reap in joy. It is also written in the 7. Psalm: The Lord has heard the
voice of my weepyng. And in the 56. Psalm: The tears of the Saints are in a
manner put before GOD in a bottle or pot, and faithfully sealed in his book.
David also in his 95 Psalm stirs us up by these words: Let us weep before
the Lord which made us, etc. But much more are we instigated unto it by the
example of Christ, who (as it is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews) with a
loud cry, and with tears prayed for us. Paul also in the 20. of the Acts
says, that he had long served the Lord with an humble heart and with
tears.

What tears are not allowed of God.
Nevertheless God allows not those tears, which are by a certain natural
nation powered out without any affection of the mind: as it commonly happens
unto those, whose eyes are stricken with any stroke, or to those which run
either on foot or on horseback, and which with over much drink become
drunk: for these are natural accidences, neither pertayne they any thing to
godliness. But affections after which tears do follow are these: heaviness
of the mind, After what affections tears do follow.
which other call sorrow, also gladness: and that by contrary reasons. For
of sorrow spryngeth cold, whereby as the whole body is constrained together,
so also are the humors of the head, whereby it comes to pass that weapyng by
violence bursteth forth. But contrarywyse in gladness the pypes, pores, and
ways about the eyes are loosed, whereby there is made a way open unto tears.
And undoubtedly of those two affections we have a testimony in the book of
Esdras. For there it is written, that when the temple was built, the people
wept, but not all for one cause. Part of the^ very sorry that the new buylding
differed much in dignity and ornaments from the first. But contrariwise
other reioysed, that the house of GOD, which had layen so long prostrate, was
raised up again. And it is manifest in the holy hystorye, that Joseph when he
saw his brother Benjamin whom he loved, wept for over much joy. Anger has
sorrow and pleasure mingled together.
Furthermore there are other affections mixed of sorrow and joy, which make
us to weep: as is a vehement anger, which has by reason of contempt sorrow
myngled with it and also some joy and pleasure, whilst it goes about
reuengement as though it were present. Mercy also shakes out tears, for that
we are troubled and are sorry for other men's evils, and are desirous to profit
the afflicted. For a vehement desire also casts out tears. Wherefore the men
of God, when in prayeng they earnestly desire to obtain any thing, easily
burst forth into tears.

But what the matter of such an humor is, The Physical matter of tears.
we leave to the consideration of natural Philosophers: for they do not well
agree among them selves as touching it. Some think that they do come by
reason of the gaul being troubled, unto which opinion agrees the first book
de mirabilibus sacrae Scripturae, Augustine.
the x. chap: which book is entitled to be Augustines writing. Other suppose
them to be a certain kind of sweat, which Plutarche affirms, Plutarche.
but some do think, that even as from milk is separated whay, so also a
watrish humor is separated from blood, whereof the greater part turns into
urine, and that which remains is thrust forth into tears. Lastly Seneca in
his 100. Seneca.
Epistle to Lucillus thincketh that with the stroke of grief and sorrow the
whole body is almost shaken, and therwithall the eyes, out of which eyes, the
humor lyeng nighe unto them is expressed. But howsoever this matter be, it
littell pertayneth unto us. Wherefore let us come to the causes, for which it
besemeth a godly man to weep.

Augustine in his 4. Augustine. Causes why we should weep.
sermon of the first Sunday in Lent writes yt there be two causes in true
repentance that bring forth weepyng: one is, for because we have thoroughe
negligence omitted many things which we ought to have done, And by over much
boldness committed many things which we ought not to have done. Sins of
co^mittyng and omittyng.
These are commonly called sins of commyttyng and omyttyng, and in the same
place he interprets this sentence. (Bring forth worthy fruictes of
repentance) after this manner, that we should weep for the sins already
committed, and we should take heed that we do not the same again. Chrysostom
also upon the Epistle to the Collossians, Chrysostom.
the 12 Homely co^playneth that the Christians abused tears, and when as
otherwise tears are good creatures of God, The abuse of tears.
they diffame them in adioynyng them to those things which deserve not
weepyng. Sins only (says he) are to be weeped for, not only our own
sins, but other men's also. Which Paul performed in very deed, who in the 2.
to the Corinthians: said that he was affeard, not to come unto them, but so
that he was dejected and compelled to weep for very many which had fallen and
not repented. Our own sins and other men's also are to be wept for.
Yea and he exhorted the same Corinthians, to weep for other men's sins,
when in his first Epistle he said, ye are puffed up, and ye have not mourned,
namely for a grievous crime of an incestuous man. And David in his 119 Psalm
writes, Mine eyes have brought forth rivers of waters, because they have not
kept thy law. That most holy Prophet wept, because of the publicque
transgressions of the law, and when he saw the same transgressions every
where perpetrated, he abundantly poured out tears.

And Ezechiell in the 8. chap: Godly men do easelyer weep than laughe.
commended certain which wept for the wicked Acts of other men. And hereof
it comes that when holy men see horrible spectacles of sins oftentimes to
happen, they easelyer burste forth into tears than into laughter. For so
Christ used, whom we read to have oftentimes wept, but never to have laughed.
Which self same thing also we must do at this day, when as so great, and
evil an harvest of sins does on every side offer it self unto us.

Lastly we must know, that all kind of mournyng is not allowed of god. That
weeping is not allowed which comes only of the feelyng of the punishments.
For some there are, which (as I have before said) are moved only with ye
feeling of the punishme^tes, neither are they moved any further. To be sorry in
deed for cause of pains and punishementes, is a certain degree of true
repentance: and for that end, GOD does both punyshe and also threaten men
whilst they live here. Howebeit this sorrow is not sufficient, neither is it
by it self allowed of god: for it spryngeth of self love, and is in a manner a
thing unprofitable unless it go further: Wherefore the Lord says in Zachary
the 7. chap: that the Hebrews had fasted for them selves, and not for his
glory: so these weep for them selves and mourn, not because they have
violated the commandments of GOD. Furthermore thou may see other some
somewhat worse than these, which being moved with the sorrow of troubles do
weep, Their tears are condemned which when they weape speak evil of God.
and among their tears do speak evil of GOD himself, being angry with his
Justice, as though he were to severe, and a harder Lord than he ought to be,
and such mournyng belongs not to repentance, but rather to desperation. An
example thereof we have in the book of Numb. the 14. chap. Where the people
when they heard the bitter relation of the spies, fell to weepyng, and spoke
evil both against Moses and against God, and determined to return into Egypt.

What mourning pleases God most.
The third kind of mournyng, is very acceptable unto god, and that is when we
are grievously sorye, for that we have violated his law, and because we se a
great number of others to resist his most holy will. To this kind of
Lamentations did Joel and other holy Prophets stir up the people of the
Hebrews. Christ also persuadeth us unto them, when he says, that they are
blessed which mourn, because consolation is laid up for them. The Church
likewise uses sometimes to stir up the people to these kind of mournyngs,
when as at sometimes it set forth publicque repentance, which although it
ought continually to cleave in the hearts of Christians, Repentance is
sometimes openly to be renewed,
yet by reason of publicque calamityes, and a certain sluggishenesse grafted
in us, is sometime to be renewed by the diligence of the Pastors. Wherefore god
in the old law once in a year, in the 7. month I say, instituted a fast,
whereby that day the people of Israel might for the sins which they had
committed, afflicte them selves before god. And to the end it might the
oftener be done, he daily sent his Prophets to rebuke the people, as we see
in this historye he did, when he commanded this sermon which we now expound
to be made unto the people.

Of Sacrifice.
Our actions are either volu^tary, or natural
NOw rises somewhat to speak of Sacrifice. The definition whereof when we
search out, first we find it to be a certain action; and that voluntary:
which I therefore say, because there are found some actions which they call
natural: but those for so much as they depend not of humane election, they
can not therefore be called voluntary. Furthermore Sacrifice ought to be
referred unto religion: Some actions are religious and are separated from
political and oeconomicall actions.
which I do for this cause add, to remove and separate it from oeconomicall
and civil works. For domestical works, are profitable to govern a family,
and civil works serve for the administration of a publicque wealth. But
sacrifice is a religious action, because it pertayneth to the worshipping of
god and was by him instituted, that we should offer our things unto him, and
that to this end, that he might be honored, and thereby (as Augustine says
in his 10. Augustine.
book de ciuitate Dei the 7. chap:) to cleave unto him with an holy societye.
And hereby may we see in what sort a Sacrifice (if we speak of it as it is
properly) differs from a Sacrament, The difference between a sacrifice and a
Sacrament.
which is also a voluntarye and religious work, and also instituted by God,
that by it the promises and good gifts of God should be sealed and exhibited,
because there we offer nothing unto God, but he offers signs, and amplifieth
his gifts unto us, when as those things which are offered, ar received with a
sound says.

The definition of a Sacrifice.
But that the thing may be made more plain, let us in a sum gather the
definition of a sacrifice. And that is thus: A sacrifice is a voluntary and
religious action, instituted of God, to offer unto him our things, unto his
glory, and that thereby we may with a strayghter bond be coupled unto him in
holy societye.

To this definition of sacrifices, must be added a participation. A division of
sacrifices.
Certain sacrifices ar propitiatory, and others ar of thanks geuyng. By the
first kind God is made merciful unto us, by the power and just merit
thereof. Sacrifice propitiatory is only one.
But of this sort we have but only one, for as much as only by the death of
Christ the eternal father is reconciled unto us, and by the merit of this one
only oblation the sins of the elect are forgeuen. But in the other kind of
sacrifice we give thanks unto God, we celebrate his name, and to our power we
obey his will. Again, A sacrifice has an outward part and an inward part.
we must know that this kind of sacrifice consists of two parts, whereof
the one is an inward part, namely whereby we freely and without compulsion
refer unto God our own will and our selves wholly, and all that we have
received, and we make them subject unto him, and consecrate them unto his name.
The other is an outward part, whereby by some gift, and that visible and
sensible, we do as it were by some token and sign, testify what we have in our
heart, and we offer unto him somewhat of those things, which he himself has
given unto us. So they in the old time offered first fruits, tenthes, and
sacrifices. In which things they did not only shadow Christ, The outward
sacrifice with out ye inward pleases not god.
the most acceptable sacrifice unto God, but they testified also, what love
they them selves bare unto God. By these things it appears, that the outward
oblation or sacrifice is nothing acceptable unto God, except it have the inward
part annexed with it, which may testefy it to be in us in very deed, for
because they which do make any such oblation do most filthyly lie unto God. For
to testifye that which is not so, pertayneth to deceit, and seeing that a lie
is vituperable in all things, and every where, much more pernicious and
detestable is it, if it be used before God. Why ye sacrifices of the Jews were
some times unacceptable unto God
Hereof it came that god often times said by his Prophets, that the sacrifices
of the Jews were not acceptable unto him, and chiefly for this cause, namely
because they dissembled to honor him with lyps and outward signs, when as
they were far from him in heart. He requires therefore the inward part by it
self, but as for the outward part, he has no otherwise commanded, but so
that it be offered with the inward part joined together with it: otherwise if
it be naked and alone, it is both unacceptable, and also highly displeases him.

If thou will ask, what be those outward works, The outward sacrifices of the
Hebrews.
whereby we may testify the inward sacrifice? I could rehearse a great many, the
killing of beasts, the oblations of first fruits and tenthes, which the
fathers had, whilst they were under the law. To them are added outward words,
wherein we give thanks unto god, we celebrate his praises, and we make our
prayers. To these must be added duties of charity toward our neighbors,
Outward kind of sacrifices common to us and to the fathers.
mortification of the affections of the flesh, and obedience unto the
commandments of god. All these latter kind of sacrifices are as well common
unto us, as to the fathers. These things we give unto god, to bear witness of
our faith, and obeysaunce toward him. And seeing that it is not to be doubted
of those first, which were offered in the time of the law, but that they were in
their time sacrifices, least there should be any ambiguitye had of the other
which we mentioned in the latter place, whether they ought to be counted in
the place of sacrifices, we will confirm it by testimonies of the scriptures.
It is written in the.50. psalm: Offer unto god the sacrifice of praise. And in
the.51. psalm: A sacrifice unto god is a troubled and a broken heart. etc. In
the.12. to the Romans: I desire you for the mercy of god, that ye would set
forth your bodies a lively sacrifice, holy. etc. Micheas says in the.vi.
chap. I will tell thee O man, what god requires of thee: Do judgment, love
mercy, walk reverently and modestly before God. Isay also, and the rest of the
Prophets have in many places confirmed this sentence.

Neither is it to be passed over, An order or certain degres among outward
sacrifices
that among these outward things which are offered as sacrifices unto god,
there are certain degrees and an order appointed. For god himself testifies,
that he far above the other prefers mercy and charity toward our
neighbors. Wherefore in Matthew the.9. is this place brought out of the Prophet
Hosea: I will mercy and not sacrifice. Moreover, it is written in the.1. of
Samuel: Obedience is better than sacrifices. These words teach us, that among
outward oblations, the kylling of beasts, and tenthes, and fruits in the old
time held the last place. But the principal part was given to the obedience
which was showed unto the word of God, to charity toward our brethren, to
thanks giving and to prayers.

The end of sacrifices.
Neither is the end of sacrifices lightly to be passed over, but with diligence
to be considered, especially as Augustine has expressed it, namely that we
might with an holy fellowship cleave unto God. For without it our works
though they be never so excellent, Why the death of Christ so much pleased God.
can be no sacrifices. Yea and the death it self of Christ which was the chief
and only sacrifice pleased god for this cause especially, because Christ to no
other end offered himself, but to fulfill the will of his father, and to obey
him as it was meet. But to these things which I have said I will add an
other thing which Augustine writes in his Epistle ad Deo gratias the 3.
Augustine. Two things ar required in every secrifice.
question. Namely that in every sacrifice god requires two certain things.
First that our oblations be made unto the true god: from which intent for as
much as Idolatrers do wander fro, whatsoever they do in their rites, turns to
their own destruction: The other thing is, that the manner of the oblations
consist of the doctrine of the holy scriptures, and come not of our own
inventions and fayninges.

Whither the self same thing may be both a sacrament and a sacrifice.
Here arises a doubt, because we have put a difference between a sacrament and
a sacrifice: and yet if the elders in their oblations and sacrifices had the
self same thing, that we have when we celebrate the supper of the Lord, which
no man doubts but to be a sacrament: How shall that be true that we said
before that there is a difference between a sacrifice and a sacrament, seeing
that of necessity the sacrifices of the Elders must also be Sacraments? To this
I answer that the reasons of these things ar diverse, and yet that lets not
but that one thing may be both a Sacrament and a Sacrifice. For no man doubts
but that philosophy and strength of the body are diverse things, which
nevertheless may be seen both in one man: So also it happens here, that one
thing may be both a sacrifice and a sacrament, The supper of the lord is both a
sacrament and a sacrifice.
although the reason of a sacrament and a sacrifice be diverse. When the supper
of the Lord is celebrated, in that the body and blood of Christ are by faith
and spirit given unto us to be received, and the promise of that conjunction
which we have with Christ, is sealed, so that we are the members of his body,
in this respect I say, it is a sacrament, and also so called, because in that
action god gives his gifts unto us. But in that by the same action we do
celebrate the memory of the death of Christ, we render thanks unto him for the
gifts which we have received, we consecrate and offer our selves unto god, it
is, The kylling of sacrifices were both sacraments and also sacrifices.
and may be called a just sacrifice, whereby we give most acceptable oblations
unto god himself. This self same thing may we se in the killing of the
sacrifices which were in the old time done before god: for they were both
sacraments, where in Christ was given to the men in the old time to be received
of them by faith, and by which they communicated before the Lord in eating and
drinking together. Al these things I say pertained to the reason of a
sacrament. And yet the same were also sacrifices, when as there they did both
consecrate theirs and them selves unto god.

But to return to the history, when as very many kind of sacrifices were
commanded in the law, namely for sins and for faults, peaceofferings also
and burntofferings, it is uncertain which of these the Israelites used at this
present: for the history declares it not. But by as much as may be
coniectured by those things which are spoken, he should not err in my
judgment, which should affirm that they sacrificed for sin. For to this
end pertains both the sermon that was preached, and also the weeping of the
people, namelye to have forgeuenes of their sins, and to return again into
favor with god.

But some peradventure will maruayle, why they durst sacrifice there where the
tabernacle of God was not fixed, when as in Deuter. it was most manifestly
forbidden by a law, that the people should not Sacrifice in any other place.
Whether it were lawful to sacrifice there where the tabernacle of God was not.
But as touching that law we must understand, that it was not of efficacye till
such time as the Arc and Tabernacle of the Lord had a fixed and firm place.
Which came not to pass before Solomon had built the most noble Temple at
Jerusalem. Wherefore before that time, we read that they sacrificed in
wandering and uncertain places, namely whersoeuer any occasion of religion was
given. Furthermore they which think that this man of God which preached this
sermon was Phineas, do say that it is not to be maruailed, that sacrifices were
offered here at Bochim as the history teaches. For it might easily be that the
self same man which preached the sermon, offered sacrifice in the name of the
whole people for sin, for that he exercised the office of priesthood. For he
succeeded Eleazer his parent, according to the promise of God.

And by these things which have been entreated of in this place, What things
ought to be observed in an holy assembly.
we may gather what things ought chiefly to be observed in an holy assembly.
The word of god before al things must be preached unto the people, thereby to
allure the hearers to repentance, namely to acknowledge the sins which they
have committed, and to repent them thereof. Then must they proceed to the
administration of the Sacraments, where the faithful may be made more assured
that their sins ar by Christ forgeuen them, they may also give thanks unto
God, and with many and sundry praises celebrate and call upon him.

6 And when Joshua had sent the people away, the children of Israel went every
man into his inheritance, to possess the land.

7 And the people served the Lord all the days of Iosuah, and all the days of
the Elders, that outliued Joshua, which had seen all the great works of the
Lord, that he did for Israel.


This narration is therefore put in, to declare how long the Israelites kept
the sincere and true woorshipping of God. And it is said, that when they were
come into the land of Chanaan, they did their duty well as long as Joshua lived,
and as long as the Elders were remaining, which had seen the wonderful works of
God, which he had wrought for the Israelites sake. And undoubtedly it had been
unaptly if this history should have declared the transgression of the Children
of Israel, and should not have noted the time wherein it happened. Aptlye
therefore is the death of Joshua and the Elders which lived in his time, repeated
in this place, and afterward is mentioned that an other age of men succeeded,
which knew not God, neither had they seen his works. Wherefore the Israelites
easily fell from the lawful worshipping of God.

We gather by this place that the repentance of the Hebrews before declared
(which happened after the death of Joshua, The profit of the repentance before
mentioned of ye people.
when the public wealth was governed by a Senate, and the enemies were by many
battles destroyed, and compelled to pay tribute unto the Israelites which
had conquered them) brydled and restrained the people a long time, from falling
into more grievous sins. They had sinned in deed, as we have now heard, in
sparing the Chananites, and not abolishing their wicked idolatry. But afterward
when they had desired and obtained pardon of so great a crime, they abstained a
long time from the woorshipping of Idols, and the repentance now mentioned
brought forth his fruit.

Some peradventure will maruayle, how chance, Why the Isralites after their
repentance ^o not break the league ma^e with the Chananites.
that they still kept the league which was wickedlye made with the Chananites,
and overthrew not their detestable worshippinges, Temples and Idols.
Undoubtedly if their repentance had been true and perfect, they ought
faithfully to have amended that wherein they sinned: for among other things
those ar counted the just fruits of repentance. I have nothing else to answer
here, but that I think they did not this, because they wanted force, God
forgeueth sins but he does not by and by restore the good things taken away.
luckelye to fight against those nations. For God, to punish the transgression
and violating of his law, had now withdrawn their strength and audacity. And
although they repented, yet he did not by and by restore unto them their old
strengthes. For he uses in deed straightwaye to receive repentaunt sinners
into favor, but he does not by and by restore those things which he by his
just judgment has for sins taken away. This may we easily see in the fall
of our first Parents. For the evils thereby coming unto mankind, were not
taken away of God. Yea and those commodities and most quiet state, which they
had in Paradise, men never afterward recovered, although God has reconciled
unto himself those that believe in Christ. For David had word brought him by
Nathan the prophet, that his sin was forgeuen him, yet he could not escape,
but that his son which was borne unto him, perished, and he himself fell into
grievous miseries. So God woorketh sometimes, partly to keep discipline, and
partly to make manifest unto men, how much he detesteth sins. Again more and
more to stir up repentance, and that an earnest repentance of wicked acts
committed in such as are renewed. But let us return unto the history, wherein
certain things, which happened under Joshua are more fully repeated.

Now (says he) He had let the people go, and every man went into his
inheritance, Joshua sent away the people twice from him.
to possess the land. The Israelites were twice thus sent away by Joshua. First
when the land of Chanaan was divided by lottes. For at that time every Tribe
went to possess those places which fell unto them by lot. Joshua also sent away
the people when he should dye. For he had called together unto him the whole
multitude of the Israelites, by his last sermon to admonish and exhort them.
Which he preached in such sort, as it is described in his book the.24. chap.
And as it is most likely, we ought to understand that sending away in this
place, to be the same which was done last. Seeing that it is written in the
place now alleged, that when the people had heard the words of Joshua, and
renewed the couenante of god, they were sent away, and every one went to his
own possession. After that is mentioned the death of Iosuah even with as many
words, as it is now repeated.

Joshua when he should dye executed the office of a good prince.
Here let us note, that Joshua being almost at the point of death executes the
office of a good Prince, in exhorting ye people openly, and that with many
words, not to depart from the sincere religion. In which thing he with a godly
and holy study imitated Moses, whom he succeeded, who (as we read toward the
end of Deuteronomy.) behaved himself after the saw sort. Jacob also the most holy
Patriarche, even now ready to dye, called unto him al his children, and
seriously, and with great holiness preached unto them. And that Princes and
Kings should co^modiously do the same, it is prescribed unto them in Deuter.
that they should be most studious in the law of God. For by that means were
they made apt to admonish the people, and to exhort them faithfully to observe
the commandments of the Lord. The Israelites when they were sent away by
Joshua, ar said to have gone to possess the land, because as yet there remained
very many places for every Tribe not yet conquered. Of which places when Joshua
was dead, and in the time of the Elders they obtained certain, when as they got
the victories in battles, as we have heard from the beginning. After which
victories the first transgression followed, unto which succeeded the repentance
before mentioned. But they abstained from idolatry as long as Joshua lived, and
all the time of the Elders, which were equal with him, and ouerlyued him, who
also had seen the wonderful works of the Lord. For at that time sound
doctrine, and the word of the Lord testified by notable victories, were of
great force.

That good Magistrate by whom the public wealth was then governed, had had
experience of the wonderful power of the word of God, and therefore he
continually labored openly to inculcate and urge it unto the people of Israel,
which thing could not want just fruit. Experience declares, People frame them
selves to the example of their princes
that almost in every age, the people frame them selves to the example of their
Magistrates. For if the Princes be zealous both of religion and godliness, their
subjects also will embrace godliness and religion. But co^trarywise if Princes
live ungodly and dissolutely, the people will likewise despise religion and live
filthily. Moreover, let the Magistrate as long as he is in authority, chiefly
have a care to this, that the holy ministry be perfect, and that it teach and
administer sound doctrine, and pure rites, and that he suffer not supersticious
or wicked opinions to be thrust into the church. But even as he provides that
other Artificers abuse not their sciences: so let him diligently beware yt the
Ministers of the church do not either corrupt the godly rites, or falsify ye
holy doctrine. We see that sometimes it happens, that the ministry in the
Church is very laudable and pure. But if an ungodly, and wicked Magistrate
obtain the chief rule of things, It profits much to ye Ecclesiastical
ministry to have the magistrate a helper.
that holy ministry is easily despised of the people, Wherefore it is made of
less efficacy, than it would have been if it might have had the Magistrate a
furtherer of it. Wherefore we must with most fervent prayers desire, that seeing
the church has now by the benefit of God in many places recovered godly
doctrine and sincere Ministers, that it would please God to give unto it
Magistrates which may be most zealous of godliness and religion.

If a man should ask whether the people may be good and godly, although the
Magistrate and Minister of the Church be corrupt. I answer, that sometime they
may be, as touching some: as we see to happen in the Papacy, where some godly
and holy men are every where found, which nevertheless live under wicked,
corrupt, and ungodly ciuyl Magistrates and Ministers of the church. Howbeit
public exercises of sound religion and godlynes, can not universally be had
without them.

8 And Joshua the Son of Nun, the servant of the Lord, dyed, when he was an
hundred and ten years old.

9 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance, in Thimnath-Heres in
mount Ephraim, on the North side of the hyl Gaas.

10 And even so also all that generation were put unto their fathers and there
arose an other generation after them, which neither knew the Lord, nor yet the
work which he had done for Israel.


Joshua lived not so long time as did Moses, Joshua lived not so long as Moses.
whom he by the commandment of the Lord succeeded, for Moses was an.120.
years old when he dyed. But the same things which we read in this place
concerning the death and burial of Joshua, are by as many words expressed in
his own book the.24. chap. The place where they buried him namely in mount
Ephraim was his own possession. For of that Tribe came Joshua. The Elders had
sepulchers in their own possessions.
And the Elders provided to have Funeralles and Sepulchers in their own
possessions. For which cause it is written in the book of Joshua toward the
end, that the bones of Joseph, which the Israelites brought with them out of
Egypt, were buried in Sichem, in that field I say, which Jacob had assigned
as proper unto Joseph. And it follows: Eleazer also the son of Aaron dyed,
whom they buried in a hill that pertayned to Phinehes his son, which hill was
given him in mount Ephraim. But as touching the name of the City, in that it
is here called Thimnath-Haeres, R. Selomoh. Why ye figure of the sun was set
upon the sepulcher of Joshua.
Rabi Selomoh toward the end of the book of Joshua writes that Thimnath is as
much as Temunath, which is an Image. And for so much as Chaeres signifies the
Sun, it declares that the Children of Israel placed the Image of the Sun
upon the Sepulcher of Joshua, that it might remain as a monument of the
miracle by him wrought. For he commanded the Sun and the Moon to stand
still, until he had finished the battle. That therefore so noble a work might
not be had in oblivion, he supposes that his tomb was adourned with those
tokens. That this word Chaeres signifies the Sun, Esaias the.19. chap. and
Job the.9. do testifye. Howbeit, this is to be considered in the book of
Joshua, that the name of this place does vary. For in the book of Joshua it is
written Timuna Serech, D. Kimhi.
which yet R. D. Kimhi thinks to be al one, the letters being somewhat
transposed, which is a familiar and a thing much used in the hebrewe tongue, as
they that are learned in the same well know.

It is lawful to set forth the benefits of god by certain tokens and
outward signs.
Neither was it absurdly or wickedly done of the Israelites so to adourne the
tomb of Joshua. For it is meet that the benefits of God be set forth by
tokens and certain monumentes. They had not at that time the abundance and
use of books, which we have. And therefore they used certain outward Symboles
and tokens to help and to renew their memory. Jacob erected a stone in the
place where he had seen God. Moses did set up twelve pyllers there, where he
made a league between God and the people. The same was done also, when the
people were passed over Iordane: for they gathered twelve stones out of the
channel of the river, which should be a token to their posteritye, that God had
by a great miracle dried up the waters of Jordan, when they passed over it. For
by reason of our natural ingratitude we do easily forgette the benifites of
god, wherefore if the figure of the sun were set upon the tomb of Joshua to
testifye the miracle, wherein god at the prayers of Iosuah had commanded it to
stand that thereby the hebrews might by his conduicte and leading obtain a
perfect and noble victory, this I say seems not to be done either ungodly or
absurdely for ye Image of the Sun was not therefore put there, to be
worshipped, neither were there any holly assemblyes in that place, A godly
magistrate wonderfully profits the safety of the people.
wherein yt was. Hereby it appears how a good and godly magistrate may
wonderfully profit the health of the people. For the Israelites departed not
from the worshipping of god, so long as Joshua and the wise and godly senators
lived. Aptly therefore is it written in ye Proverbs the.29. chap: When the
ungodly bear rule, the people mourn. And in the same book.20. chap: a wise
king destroys the wicked, And in the 29. a just king sets up the land.
Reason also shows that it is so, for the people do therefore endeavor them
selves to please their princes, to find the more favor at their hands: and
therefore they frame them selves to their manners and fashions. And also because
the people is by laws and decrees compelled to obey the will and sentence of
the princes.

They which dye ar said to be adjoined unto the fathers.
They were put unto their fathers. It is a kind of speech much used in the
scriptures, that they which do dye, ar said to be adjoined to their fathers.
For as touching the body they are buried with them, and as concerning ye soul
they are adjoined unto them. For if they have lived godly, they live with their
holy elders, but if ungodly, they are tormented with their wicked progenitors,
if they have had any such.

How some are said not to know the lord
And there arose an other generation after them, which knew not the lord. Not
undoubtedly that any of them were so rude, that altogether they knew not god.
For the constante administration of the world and the undisturbed order of
things do testify and cry that there is a god. But this knowledge, whereof the
history now speaks, is understand to be that which has annexed with it
allowing, Augustine.
faith and obedience. And they are thus said to be ignorant of god, because
they obeyed him not, they did not put their hope and confidence in him, nether
were they zelouse to worship him purelye and sincerely. Augustine in his
questions upon this book the 15. question affirms that it is plainly
expressed in what sort the Israelites knew not god, namely in those excellent
and wonderful works, by which their elders came unto the knowledge of the
lord. We read also of Pharao, yt he (as it is written in Exodus) answered unto
Moses, that he knew not the God of the Hebrews and the Lord, either because
he was not minded to hearken unto his commandments, or else, though after a
sort he knew him, yet he knew not by certain proof that he was the God of
the Hebrews.

11 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord, and served
Baalim.

12 And they forsook the Lord, the God of their Fathers, which brought them
out of the land of Egypt: and followed strange Gods, even the Gods of the
nations that were round about them, and bowed them selves unto them. Wherefore
they angered the Lord.

13 They forsook, I say, the Lord, and served Baal and Astharoth.


Under those ungodly Princes which succeeded the good, the people grievously
fell. Not because that they before had not also transgressed: for that (as we
have showed) they grievously sinned in sparing of the Chananites, but now they
began to contaminate and defile them selves with the superstitions and idolatry
of those Nations.

R. Leui demands in this place, how it could be, that none of those should
be on live, which had seen the works of God which he had done for Israel,
when as from their coming out of Egypt to this present time there were but 67.
years passed. He answers, that there might easily be some found, which had
seen those works: yea all men confess that Phinches lived at that time, but
there were but few such, and there were not many wise men, and which could
rightly and with authority instruct the young of those things, All ye
Israelites became not idolatrers.
which they had seen. And it might be that the scripture spoke not these
words of al ye people, but only of the new Magistrates which succeeded.
Neither ought we hereby to understand that all the Israelites were become
Idolatrers, but the most part of them, and which was more heinous, they openly
professed wicked worshippinges, when as nevertheless some, although but few,
and peradventure secretly, claue unto the true God.

Neither may we gather hereby, Miracles are not sufficient to persuade
godliness.
that miracles of them selves have the power to be sufficient, either to bring
in, or to retain godlynes. For Chore, Dathan, and Abiram, Zimri, Achan, and
the ten spies were without dout at the doing of the miracles which were done as
well in Egypt as in the wilderness: and yet nevertheless they fell from God,
and defiled them selves with most grievous wicked acts. Moreover they which
when Moses was absent, woorshypped the golden Calfe, and were consecrated to
Baal-Peor the God of the Moabites, they I say undoubtedly beheld the wonders,
whereby God defended the people from their enemies, and helped them in diverse
necessities, and yet for all that they became Idolatrers, and committed wicked
worshippings. Even so came it to pass of the Scribes and Phariseys: for the
history of the gospel declares that they saw the wonderful works of Christ,
They which saw not ye miracles in the old time, are not therefore excused from
infidelity.
and yet they wonderfullye contemned and maliciouslye despised him. Wherefore
we must think that this is not now rehearsed of our history as a lawful excuse
of the transgressio^ which afterward happened. For if by that means the act of
the Hebrews could be defended, then might the superstitious and Idolatrers of
our time defend their cause: for they might say, miracles have now ceased, and
those things which Christ or his Apostels did, are not in our time seen.

But we in this sort answer to them which do thus excuse their infidelitye,
The miracles which were don in the old time profit us also.
namely that the miracles of Christ and the Apostles which were done once,
ought also to suffice us: for for our sakes were they put in writing, that we
readyng them, might receive fruit by them, being assured that they were
ministered, not only to them which lived at that time, but also unto us.

So might it be answered to the Hebrews, of whom we now entreat: what
though ye have not seen the miracles which were done in the time of your
Fathers? Have not Moses and Joshua faithfullye written all those things which
God has done for your nations sake? Yea, and your Fathers which were present
and saw them, have truly declared them unto you, when ye were yet little ones.
The scripture therefore does not so speak at this present, to excuse that new
generation. But to declare what pretense they made, when they departed from the
woorshipping of the God of their Fathers, and what occasion they took, and
also to set forth that they were of a corrupt and naughtye nature, which when
their good Masters and Magistrates were dead, became unmindful of all true
godlynes. For it is very likely, that they as they were impudent so also openly
they boasted abroad those or such like words. We are in doubt neither do we
easily believe that the Lord did so many miracles as our Fathers have both
written and also showed us. Who can tell whether they were so or no? we
undoubtedly know not whether the Lord or any other God has for our
salvation sake caused such or so great things to be done. And so they leaving
faith and forsaking the true God did evil in the sight of the Lord. How
things in the scripture ar called good or evil in the sight of the lord
By this hebrewe phrase it is declared that God was maruellouslye offended with
this their transgression. As contrariwise they are called good things in the
sight of the Lord which do excedingly please him. This is the common and
received exposition.

Howbeit if we more narrowly mark this kind of speech, we shall easylye
perceive that it declares some other thing unto us. Namely that those things
which the Jews did, were allowed by man's judgment, and peradventure had a
goodly show, but yet in Gods judgment, they were most detestable. And without
doubt that people sinned a great deal more haynouslye in this last
transgression, than they did in the first. For there they only omitted the
overthrowing of images and aultares, but here they woorship strange Gods.
Neither durst they do this only, but they forsook also the worshipping of the
true God. Wherein undoubtedly they were to be counted much more corrupt than
were the Samaritanes. For they although they woorshipped their Idols, yet
therwithall they joined the worshipping of the true God as it is declared in
the second book of Kings. And in how evil part God takes it thus to be
rejected, he has expressed by Jeremy the Prophet in the.2. chapter: Where he
commanded the Hebrews to go and look upon other Nations, An amplifieng of
the idolatrye of ye Hebrews
and see whether they have so inconstantly changed the Gods of their Fathers.
Which Nations if they were known constantlye to have retained their old
woorshippings although they were ungodly, Israel might thereby learn not to
abject their old rites and customs of their Fathers. This wicked act moreover
was for this cause much more detestable, because they had newly received the
benefit of their delivery out of Egypt, and had also made a covenant with god,
first by Moses, and afterward by Joshua, when he was even at the point of death.
Furthermore because they began to worship the gods of those nations, which they
had now either driven out of the land of Chanaan, or else made tributaries
unto them selves. What a devilish madness was this to count those gods for true
gods, which could not undoubtedly against the Lord, help even those which
woorshypped them.

An outward sign of worshipping.
And in this hebrew word Veiischtechou is properly noted, that they threw them
selves to the ground, and prostrated them selves before those idols: by which
outward sign is declared the adoration. For as the body prostrateth it self,
so also the soul is declared to be subject unto the Idol. And this word
Bealim is expressed in the plural number. But the Hebrews sometimes take it
for the syngular number. And although by the strength of the word it
should be translated Lords, yet we must in many places turn it Lord. For
this word Baal signifies a Lord, a Husband, a Patron, and such like.
What Baal and Bealim signifi. Astharoth.
This word Astharoth is likewise spoken in the plural number. And the Idol
is so called, because it stood to be woorshipped in form of a Sheep, for a
Sheep in hebrew is called Aschtor. And as it appears by the first book of
Kings, it was an Idol of the Zidonians, Jupiter Ammo^ was expressed by the
figure of a Ram. Augustine.
whereunto Solomon by the instigation of his wives builded sometimes a Chapel.
But what God the Ethnikes woorshypped in the form of a Sheep, I do not very
well know. How be it this I am sure of, that Jupiter Ammon was figured like a
Ram. And Augustine who being of Africa, had the Affricke speech perfectly,
which (as we have taught in an other place) differs not much from the hebrew
tongue, Virgil. What Baal and Astharoth were with the Affricians.
for they of Affricke are Phenitians, for they came from Tire and Sydon.
Wherefore Virgil called Dido a Sidonian. Augustine (I say) writes that the
Affricians called Jupiter by the name of Baal, as the Lord of all. And by this
name Astharoth are signified Iunos, because that Asther in that tongue
signifies Juno. But why that word was spoken in the plural number, he
thincketh it was therefore done, because there were very many images of that
Goddess. And I will add, because those gods had obtained sundry properties
and reasons, as well by their offices appointed unto them, as by the places
where they woorshypped. For Jupiter was called Ammon, Stator, Pheretrius, and
Hospitalis, Juno also was called Lucina, Argiua, Samia. etc.

I think we may gather by this history, Religion needs continually to be
purged.
that the nature of man is so frail and weak, that it can not long abide in
the sincere and pure woorshipping of God. Whereby it comes, that religion has
continually need of repairing and purging. For the Israelites, as soon as
their good Prince and godly Magistrate was dead, fell straight way from true
godlynes. Moreover, the same oftentimes happened under their kings: yea and in
our Church it happens after the same sort. For we have seen, and we have
with great grief had experience, that the Apostles being taken away, yea, and
when they were yet living, there sprang forth many and sundry errors. Which
undoubtedly is no marvel, when as Christ has foretold us, that after the
good seed was sown, straight way the envious man came, which sowed tares
therwithall.

Of Idolatry.
But because we have now heard of the transgression of the Hebrews how they
polluted them selves with Idolatry, I think it good to speak a few words of
this detestable sin.

The word is a greek word, and is compounded of (...) and (...) and it is
nothing else but the worshipping of Idols. The Etimologye of Idolatry.

What an Idol is


And (...) is derived of this word (...), which signifies a form, or as you
would say a shape. But an Idol is (as we now speak of it) every form
or shape which men have invented unto them selves to signifye or express
God. And as there are found many and sundry matters of these fourmes, so also
are there diverse kinds of Idols. Wherefore whether they be stones, wood, or
metals, A division of Idols by matters.
by which God is outwardly expressed there to be worshipped, these are gross
and most manifest Idols. There may be also a spiritual matter: which then
happens, when those forms and images are nothing else but the conceauinges of
the heart and mind, which men make for them selves to represent God, An Idol
visible and invisible.
not as the Scripture declares him, but rashly, and according to their own
fantasy. Wherefore according to the conditions of the matter an Idol is divided
into two kinds, Two parts of religious worshipping.
ye one is outward and visible, which runs into the senses of man, and the
other is inward, that is, wrought in the inward parts of the mind. There are
also two parts of religious woorshipping. The one is inward, Of what things
inward woorshipping consists.
wherein we believe in God himself, we put our confidence in him, we give
him thanks, we submyt our selves and ours unto him, and religiouslye by
prayers call upon him. Of these actions undoubtedly the inward adoration
consists.

Of what things outward worshipping consists.
But the other part has outward notes, whereby we express our heart, in
prostrating the body, in bowing the knee, in uncovering the head, in speaking
and in exercising rites and ceremonies instituted by God. And this is an
outward woorshipping or adoration. Outward signs of adoration are also given
unto Princes
But we must note that such outward signs of bowing the body or knees, and
such other like are also given unto creatures, to Princes I say and Kings
which do in earth represent unto men the authority of God, and are his Vicars
in the administration of things. And without doubt they are then to be
esteemed nothing else, but certain sure testimonies, by which as many as are
Subjects, do truly and from the heart confess, that they in the name of God
will be subject and obey such powers, as much as shall be by godlynes and the
word of God lawful.

But we must there take heed, least in our inward judgment we attribute more
unto them than is meet, What we must beware of when we give unto Princes
signs of adoration.
or look for greater things at their hands than their power and might is
able to perform. Otherwise we should not avoid idolatrye. Wherefore if a man
in bowing him self to his Prince, would testifye that his Prince could not
err, and that it were lawful for him to do any thing, and as he lust him
self to command whatsoever pleased him, that man vodoubtedly should be
counted an Idolatrer, and should commit the same both inwardly and outwardlye.
The Papists commit Idolatrye toward their Pope.
And whether the hirelinges of the Pope use this, we may hereby easily gather,
because they do so throw them selves down at his feet, that there testify
that they will be subject unto him as to the only Vicar of Christ in earth, as
to the universal Bishop of the Church, as to him which cannot err in
decreing doctrine of faith, and finally, to whom only it is lawful to
discern as he list him self of religion and Christian discipline. Wherefore
let this be every where a sure and firm rule, Note a certain sure rule.
that these outward submissions of the body do then pertayne unto Idolatry,
when as they are testimonies of the mind, attributing more unto a creature than
is mete, or which are only proper unto God. For they are not referred unto God
him self, or to the obedience of his commandments, but to vain forms and
shows, which we have feigned unto our selves, and conceived in our mind.

Hereby may we also gather, that the inuocations of Saints which the Papists
use, Inuocatio^s of the dead pertayne to idolatry.
are Idolatrous. For they give unto saints that which longs only unto God,
namelye that they being absent should hear our prayers, or that they can be
present at one time, either every where, or else in many places, thereby to
succor those which call upon their names in diverse parts of the world.
Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus durst not affirm that, Augustine. A
creature can not be in many places at one time.
no not even of the soul of Christ, namely that at one time it might be in
many places Wherefore that which Christ said unto the thief: This day shall
thou be with me in Paradise, he expounds the same to be understand as
touching his divine nature, for that the body of Christ should the same day
be laid in the sepulcher, and his soul should be in hell. Basilius. Didimus.
Neither could that soul be both in Paradise and in hell at one time Basilius
also de spiritu sancto, and also Didimus would not grant this unto the Angels,
that they can at one time be in diverse places, affirming that that soly is to
be granted unto the only nature of God. But they which do call upon saints,
they believe that they do hear them, and that they are present with them,
which without doubt is to attribute more unto them than the strength and order
of a nature created can suffer.

But here they trifle and say, that they do not think so, but that God him
self which hears their prayers does open unto the Saints, what is required
of them. But thus I answer, that they deceive both them selves, and also
others. For they know not whether God will show unto the Saints their vows
or prayers. Wherefore the prayers which they pour out cannot lean unto faith,
which ought to be certain and without doubt.

They bring also a feigned lie of the glass (as they say) of the divine
essense, wherein the Saints behold all things. A feigned lie of the papists
of a glass of the divine essence.
But this their fayning has no foundation in the holy Scriptures. Furthermore,
seeing they will needs have it so, admit it were as they feign it to be. Yet
should they be compelled to grant that that their glass has not a
natural representyng but a voluntarye, so that there the Saints can see that
only which GOD will have seen: Otherwise without any exception the Saints
might there see all things: which is both false, and also most manifestlye
resists the holy Scriptures. Because, of that day (says the Lord) neither
do the Aungelles know, which yet do see the face of the Father. Moreover
the Papists do not after this manner call upon Saints: for if they did
they should say thus, Cause O God that this or that Saint may know those
things which I desire of him, and that he may be with me, and grant me
that which I desire. But they do clean contrarilye, O Saint Peter (say
they) Saint Paul pray for me, bring this or that to pass for me. Wherefore
they think that the saints do altogether hear and understand their voices,
which thing if they thought not, then were their doings utterly folyshe.

They declare also by their titles and additions which they ascribe unto ye
blessed virgin, to the cross, and other creatures, The Papists attribute
more unto creatures than is convenient.
how far more worthy they esteem and judge of them, than their nature can
suffer. Neither are they affeard (as I have before declared, when I entreated
of the heresies of the Papists) to light up lyghtes, Wax tapers and Lamps
unto creatures, to cense them, and to do other things, which the Ethnikes, An
alter is not to be erected but only unto God.
and also the Jews in the old law were wont to give unto God only. What more?
Do they not build alters unto Images of Saints? But unto whom alters are
builte, the same are confyrmed by a sure testimonye to be powers of God, or
else Gods. Augustine in his x. Tome and.vi. Sermon writes thus: An alter is,
Augustine.
which testifyeth yt to be counted for God to whom it is erected. For they,
namely the Ethnikes, what GOD they have, and yt they take that Image for a god
the alter does testify. What should the alter do there if they counted not yt
for a god? Let no man say unto me: It is not ye power of god, it is not god.
But I have already said: I would to god they knew this so well as all we know
it. But what they count it, or what they make of it, that alter testifyeth.

But say the adversaries: we therefore do these things, Of miracles which are
done at the alters of saints.
because we have by experience proved yt they please god: for as much as he
there works miracles. I know in deed that god has sometimes wrought miracles
by saints, and such as were dead. God has some times wrought miracles by
dead bodies and corpses of dead saints.
For the bones of Elizeus by the touch of them restoreh one being dead to
life. And the same Elizeus used the cloak of Elias to divide the waters of the
rivers, that he might make the more expedition on his journey. But god does
therefore work these things sometimes, that the doctrine of the Prophets
and the Apostles which was the very word of god might be confyrmed. And yet
the Scripture declares not that there was any invocation made either unto
Elias or Elizeus when those miracles were done. But for as much as the
Papists by these their inuocations seek not the confyrmation of the doctrine
of the Gospel, Miracles which are done at the inuocations of the dead are to
be referred unto Satan.
but rather are diligente about this, to establyshe superstitions, those
miracles which they boaste of, are to be referred rather unto the devil than
to God. For Satan seeks for nothing so much, as to lead men away from the
sincere worshippyng of GOD. This undoubtedly was assayed by the enchaunters of
Pharao, and that such things should sometime happen unto us by Antichriste,
Why God suffers such miracles to be wrought by the devil.
Paul has faithfully admonished the Thessalonians. But thou will say that
the devil can not do these things unless God will and permit. I grant
that. And why it is his will so, there are two causes set forth in the
Scriptures.

Of the which the one is gathered out of Deutr. namely because he would tempt
us, whereby might evidently appear how much we esteem his word, and whether we
will suffer our selves to be plucked from him by such illusions: the second
cause is to punyshe the unbelievers. For so does Paul teach us to the
Thessalonians because (says he) they have not received the love of the truth
therefore they are delivered to be deluded with inchantementes and deuelishe
miracles.

But there are two places in the Scriptures which are diligently to be
weighed and considered, that the doctrine now in hand may be the more
confyrmed. The first is written in the Acts of the Apostles the tenth
Chapter. Of Cornelius the Centurion, Cornelius cast himself down at the feet
of Peter.
to whom when Peter came he cast himself at his feet. But Peter would not
suffer that, yea he reprehended him, and answered in this manner. Do not so,
rise up, for I also am a man. We read also in the Apocalipse, John fell down at
the feet of the Angel.
that John fell down before the Angel, but he admonished him that he should
not so do: I am (says he) thy fellow servant. These two places may thus
be understand, that Peter and the Angel condemned these acts, as in a
manner Idolatrous, as though the Centurion and John should attribute any
divine nature, Neither Cornelius nor John would worship creatures.
the one to Peter, the other to the Angel, and should have given unto them
more honor than was conueniente for creatures. But it seems that this can
not be easelye thought of either of these. The Scripture testifyeth that the
Centurion feared and worshipped God. How should we therefore believe that he
could be led, to believe that Peter was God or at the least to attribute
divine honors unto a creature? And it is not very likely that John which was
either an Apostle or else a notable divine (as some call him) could not
discern an Angel from God. If so be that neither of these would worship a
creature in stead of the Creator, this remains, that it is not lawful to
give unto creatures this kind of outward reverence. Wherefore we shall seem not
to have said well before, in saying that these things may be given unto
Princes and Kings. To this I answer, there must be a difference observed
between a civil and a worldelye honor and a divine and religious
woorshipping, as we have before expounded. The Centurio^ and John sinned in
excess but they can not be accused of Idolatrye.
Furthermore we must know that these two men, Cornelius I say and John
intended not by this their worshipping to transfer the honor of God unto
creatures. Howbeit it may easily be, that they fell to an unmeasurable sign
of reverence, and so in that excess they somewhat committed sin.

But as touching Kings and Princes, we are in much less danger of falling,
than toward Angels or ministers of Christ. For these because they exercise the
spiritual office, the honor which is given unto the^ draws nighe to a
religious adoration. Wherefore in those places either the bowing of the knee or
of the body are not by themselves condemned. But in as much as they are given
for Religion sake. Moderate honors therefore may be given especially when
they are given for Religion sake. And thus much at this present as concerning
this thing. But let us remember that which I have also before admonyshed, that
this also belongs to Idolatrye, when we woorship the true God by other ways
and rytes, They which worship God otherwise tha^ he has instituted, are
Idolatrers.
than he has willed us, and prescribed unto us. If we shall do otherwise, we
shall woorship an Idol according to that second form before described, in
fayning to our selves in our mind or heart any God, which delights in a
woorshippyng invented by men: and there is none such. Wherefore we shall not
honor and worship the true God, but an Idol which we have conceived in our
mind.

And undoubtedly so ought we to understand Paul, when he says to the
Corrinthians in the first Epistle: we know that an Idol is nothing in the
world. Paul teaches not that an Idol is nothing as touching the shape and
outward form. For no man doubts but that those Idols have place either in
the outward matter or else in our hearts. By an Idol there fore he
understood not the sign it self, but the thing whereunto it is referred. And
he meant that the thing it self which is signified by Idols, is nothing, for
as much as there is no where a God which may be represented, or else deliteth in
such Images.

14 And the wrath of the Lord waxed hot against Israel, and he delivered
them into the hands of raueners, that spoiled them and sold them into the
hands of their enemies round about them: Neither had they any power any longer
to stand before their enemies.

15 Whether so ever they went, the hand of the Lord was against them with evil
luck, even as the Lord promised them, and even as the Lord swear unto them.
And he punyshed them sore.


The punishment imposed by God for Idolatry is now set forth to be diligently
considered by us. There are two things, which are declared.

First is described that the anger of God was kindled against the Israelites.
How we should understand god to be angry and to repent.
Secondly how he punished the guiltye. God therefore because of so grievous a
wicked crime of the Hebrews waxed hot against them: which is not so to be
understand, as though God had any affections, for that pertains only unto
men. But according to the common and received exposition of these places, we
feel that god is like unto men that are angry, after which self same reason it
is written that he sometime repents. Wherefore, God either to repent or to be
angry, is nothing else, but that he does those things, which men repenting and
men angrye use to do. For the one do either alter or else overthrow that which
before they had done: and the other take vengeance of injuries done unto the^.
Ambrose in his book of Noe and the Arc, the fourth Chapter, Ambrose.
speaks otherwise of the anger of God. For neither does God (says he) think
as men do, as though some contrary sentence should come unto him, neither is he
angrye, as though he were mutable, but therefore these things are believed, to
express the bitterness of our sins, which has deserved the wrath of God,
and to declare that the fault has so much and so far increased, that even
God also (which naturally is not moved either by anger, or hatred, or any
passion) seems to be provoked unto wrath, etc. And aptely is there mention
made of the anger, before the punishment is rehearsed. For me^ use first to be
angry, before they revenge: What anger is.
Neither is anger any other thing else (if we may believe Aristotell in his
Rhetorikes) but a desire of reuengement because of contentempte. For they which
perceive themselves to be despised and contemned, do straightway think, how
they may be revenged, and they diligently meditate how by some punishment they
may requite the iniurye or despite done unto them.

Two kinds of punyshments are mentioned in this place, Two kynds of
punishments.
the taking away of goods and servitude: of the which the one is grieuouser
than the other. For it is far more grievous to be brought into bondage, than to
be spoiled of goods. But God uses so to do to punyshe by certain degrees,
those which have deserved evil. For he does not by and by punyshe most
grievously. And as touching the words we must note that Schis and Schisch
signifye one thing, for Shin and Samech have great affinity the one with the
other, which D. Kimhi has also noted in this place. Moreover where it is said,
whether soever they went out, the same interpreter adds, to fight: And in
deed it is very lykely, although I am not ignoraunte that that sentence may be
more largely taken, namely to understand that whatsoever they took in hand
to do, or to what things so ever they applied themselves unto, all those
things happened vnluckely unto them.

By this place is gathered, that no man's goods are taken away, neither are
any brought into bondage, except God himself both will and also bring to
pass the same. For it is said here that he gave them into the hands of
raueners, and sold them into the hands of their enemies round about them.
David in his.xliiii. Psalm grievously complayneth of this plague, and says
that God had sold his without any price: Augustine.
which place Augustine considering, he says that at the first sight it
seems absurd, that any should be sold, when no price is given. But thus he
answers, as touching the enemies, which sold the Israelites, there was a
price given by the buyers. But as touching God, which was the principal cause
of the selling, he took no price. For what could those Idolatrous, violent,
and ravenous men, unto whom ye Jews were delivered to be sold, give unto him?
Undoubtedly they neither bought nor deserved those commodities with any reward.
Or else we may think, that the price of the Hebrewe bondmen, was so small and
vile, that it was counted for nothing, The wicked sell themselves to sins
without any price.
and so by this figure of speech they were said to be sold without any price.
Wherefore Esaye in his.lii. Chapter, writes: Ye are sold for naught.

And this phrase serves very well for those, which do bind themselves to
sins and wickedness, when as thereby, they shall get no commodity at all.
And how hard this bondage was which the Hebrews served when they were so sold
by their enemies, it is manifestly expressed in Deuteronomye, for there it is
said: Thou shall serve thine enemy, whom the Lord shall send upon thee, in
Hunger, in thurst, and in nakedness, and also in all penurye, and he shall put
an iron yoke upon thy neck, till he shall destroy thee. Moreover by these
examples we are also taught, what Christians every where deserve for their
daily transgressions and innumerable superstitions and also Idolatrous
woorshippynges. Neither is it to be doubted but that a heap of euelles are at
hand except Christ by faith deliver us from those curses of the law.

The hand of ye Lord is always present in all our actions.
Whether soever they went, the hand of the Lord was against the^ with evil
luck. In all our actions the hand of the Lord is continually present, for
without his might and power, we can not so much as move our selves.
Wherefore both good successes and evil are to be ascribed unto him.

Neither had they any power any longer to stand before their enemies. And no
marvel, for by reason their goods were spoiled, and their number diminished,
because of those which were brought into bondage they were so impaired and
weakened, that they could by no means match with their adversaries.
Undoubtedly, if we diligently consider the histories from that time, wherein
superstition began to reygne in ye church, we shall find that our princes have
had either no good success at al, or else very smalin their expeditio^s against
ye enemies of ye faith. The cause of the unlucky battles against the Turks.
We have fought and ye oftentimes against ye Turks and Sarazens, but for the
most part vnluckely: Neither do the governors both of the publicque wealth
and also of the Church feel that the hand of the Lord is against them with
evil luck, and that that is the cause why they can not stand before their
enemies.

Again let us note, that the Scripture does here most manifestly testifye,
that God him self delivered the Israelites into the hands of rauenors, and
sold them into bondage, for that that things were done by his motion. And
this does Ezechiel the Prophet euidentlye show, where he describes, how
Nabuchad-nezar standing in the end of two ways, and in a manner determining to
direct his host one way, was of God changed, and after a sort forced to
turn his army against Jerusalem. And yet must we not understand these things
so, How god may be said to work evil works in the wicked.
as though we should think that God does instille a new malice into ye
hearts of the wicked. For they need it not. For of what sort soever they be,
they are framed of malice and sins, but GOD, seeing he is a strength and
workyng of most efficacy, drives them as he does all other things to be moved
and to work. Wherefore they which are altogether corrupt, and void, and
destitute of the grace and favor of God, can do nothing but only work evil.
But God, God uses the sins of the wicked.
by whose motion they are stirred up to work, directs their evil doings,
cruelties, spoylinges, lusts and tyrannies, to what end so ever it shall seem
good to his justice and most high providence. Moreover let us here consider,
It is most unhappy to have God angrye.
how miserable and wretched a thing it is for a man to have God angry. Wherefore
let us most diligently take heed, that in all our affairs that we take in
hand, we first of all reconcile him unto us, by an upright faith in Christ:
for he being angry and against us, nothing can prosperously go forward.

These things did the Lord as he had spoken and sworn. Threatninges are set
forth here and there in the law of GOD and especially in Deuteronomy. But we never
read (that I can tell of) that an oath was in that place joined with the
threatnyngs. Howbeit we must believe, Whether an oath be joined to the
threatninges put in the scriptures.
that God when he made laws did somtymes also add to an oath. For the
Scripture in this place testifies unto us that he swear, which is sufficient,
though it be not found in any other place. Moreover let us call to memory,
that the latter causes, The second causes are not to be so much considered as
the first cause.
which commonly are called the second causes are much to be considered in the
success of things, as well prosperous as unfortunate: but yet we must much
more have a regard unto the first and chief cause, namely unto God him self.
So that then when things prosper not with us, we must be angry with our
selves, because we are alienated from God. And that this is true, this place
manifestly proves. For the Israelites were the same men which they were
before, and their enemies also the same men which they were before. Wherefore
if the Jews had had God now as favorable unto them as they had before,
undoubtedly they should have obtained the self same victoryes. Therefore they
ought to ascribe all that vnluckynesse unto them selves. For unless god had
been angry with them, for the Idolatry which they had committed, they should
with as good luck have over comed their enemies now as they did before.
Therefore the Prophets when they lamented for the miseries of their people,
testified that justice, honor, and also goodness are to be ascribed unto GOD,
but confusion and ignominye unto them selves.

16 Nevertheless the Lord raised up judges, which delivered the^ out of the
hands of their oppressors.

17 And yet for all that they would not harcken unto their judges but went a
whoryng after strange Gods, and bowed them selves unto them. They turned
quickly out of the way, which their Fathers walked in, obeying the
commandments of the Lord, But they did not so.


Now is briefly declared unto ye readers, what conditions and alteratio^s ye
Israelites had in all ye time, which was between ye pains and punishme^tes now
described, wherewith they were for their Idolatry punished, and ye first king,
whom they chose unto the^ selves, rejecting Samuel. When they were grievously
oppressed, they sighed and groned, and repenting the^ selves, turned unto god,
and desired aid of him. And God as he is gentle and merciful, despised not
their mournings and inuocations but sent them some one judge, by whose leadyng
and conduicte they were delivered from their oppressors. But they when they
were delivered, and set at liberty, they lived at pleasure and fell again
into their old wickedness. Wherefore God according to his justice punished
them again, and they again when they were grievously oppressed, groned, and
continually prayed unto god, which yet again by an other judge delivered them
from misery and calamity.

The whole time of the judges is divided into three differences.
Wherefore the whole time of the judges may be aptely distributed into three
differences. First he Hebrews were justly punished for their sins and
wickedness. Secondly they being oppressed, wept, prayed, and implored help at
gods hand. Lastly god by some judge delivered them. Moreover this is to be
marked, The people lived better under the judges than they did when they were
dead.
that the Jews, although they did not wholly obey the judges, yet for all
that they lived somewhat better as long as those judges remained on live.

Wherefore as touching outward things that publicque wealth had somewhat better
success under judges, and the people might as long as they lived, be at rest
from oppressions, and live at liberty. But they were no sooner dead, but they
returned to their old fashions. Which thing evidently declares, how they did
in vain before pretend, that they had not seen the works, which god had done
in delivering their elders out of Egypt. As though they should have said, if
so be that we were sure of those so noble works, we would not now have
forsaken the ceremonies of our fathers and chosen new rites. These alterations
and chaungynges (I say) manifestly testifye that that pretense was vain. For
every age saw the wonderful works of god, when as oftentimes he did by
judges set at liberty the people being oppressed. And yet though they had seen
these things they could not keep them selves, but that when their judge was
dead they fell again into the same wicked crimes.

The fruicte of ye punishme^tes which GOD imposed.
This is also to be noted, that it is here written that god used to be moved at
the sighyng and tears of the Israelites. For this was the fruit of the pains
and punishments, namely that they might repent, and being admonished by
miseries might understand whether they should fly unto. And god in hearing of
the^ when they cried, had only a respect unto his promises, goodness and
name. Furthermore let those which delyghte in oppressyng and doing injury to
the poor, note here that the time will come at the length, that god will take
in hand the causes of the afflicted. For although they be evil, and have
worthily fallen into calamities and miseries: yet because he has promised that
he will revenge the violence and cruelty done against the poor, therefore he
will one day deliver and revenge them, even for this cause, namely, because he
neither can nor will fail his office and promise. God has also sometimes
compassion of evil men when they are oppressed.
And in delyuering those which were evil from present miseryes, he grants
unto them occasion and time of repenting that except they truly and unfeignedly
repent, they may be altogether in excusable. Moreover this goodness of God,
which he uses also toward the evil, bears most manifest witness of the
most perfect faith and truth of god. For although men do filthyly fall from
that covenant which they have made with god, yet he forgets not his
goodness and promises.

18 And when the Lord raised up unto the^ Judges, the Lord was with the Judge,
and delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, all the days of the
Judge. For the Lord repented at their sorrowinges which they had, by reason
of them, that oppressed and vexed them.


The judges were before of the common sort and vulgar estate.
Still is declared after what sort God behaved himself toward the Israelits in
the time of the Judges. Neither does this speech, when he says. And God raised
up Judges, want an emphasis. For it is expressed that they were before of the
common sort and vulgar state but god so changed them by his spirit, that he
inspired them with courageous hearts, strength, and most wise Counsels. This
undoubtedly was that stirring up, which is now declared. For God uses, when he
appoynteth any man to any office, to give him strength and ability to perform
the same. Which thing we read did come to pass in Saul and also in David, and
before them in Moses, who being before shepheardes and horsekepers, when they
came to bear rule, did by the power of the spirit of GOD work marvelous
things, and proved noble men. For GOD (as the scripture now speaks) raised
them up. And not content with this, but he fully persuaded them, and with
inward feelyng made them assured, that they were now elected by God, to
deliver the Israelites and to set them at liberty. And without doubt unless
they had been fully persuaded of this, it had not ben lawful for them to have
fought against their Lords, or to rebelle: for so much as it is not the office
of private men to fight with his enemies. Wherefore Cato, An example of Cato.
whose civil justice is meruelously commended, gave his son charge, yt when
he was dismissed from war, and no more bound by an oath of war, he should
not fight against the enemies of the publicque wealth. Knowing this right well,
that it is lawful for no man, to draw weapon against any, except it be by
publicque authority, I have now expounded what this means that God raised up
Iugdes: Now let us see for what cause God did the same.

Because (says the historye) he repented. God is not reconciled unto us by
the outward works which we do.
What is the received exposition of these kinds of speech we have before
declared. But now we must mark what this means which follows: At their
sorowinges. We may not think that God was reconciled or made favorable unto
them by the strength and dignitye of the work. For that do men obtain only
by faith in our mediator Jesus Christ, to which faith in these and such like
kind of speeches we must continually have a respect unto, thereby to look upon
the root from whence ye fruits of true repentance, and also sighinges and
tears are derived. Neither do we for all that deny, God rewards good works.
but that good works springyng from faith are so acceptable unto GOD, that he
rewards them with excellent gifts, as well outward, as also spiritual,
which comes of his goodness. So said Daniel unto the king of Babylon: By
alms redeem thy sins. That is, drive away the pains and punishementes,
wherewith otherwise thou shall be punished.

But if thou shall demand what is to be thought, Of moral works done
without faith.
of those civil and moral good works, which are done without faith. I
answer, that for so much as they proceed from a viciate and corrupt nature,
they are therefore sins. And for that cause they deserve dampnation and hell
fire. Howbeit God, to the end that the order and just disposition of things in
the world might be kept, and to defend assemblyes of humane kind,
fellowshippes and publicque wealths, causes that such actions have many
rewards, not for the worthynes and dignity of those actions, but by reason of
a certain connection, wherewith god would these things to be knitte together.
Wherefore it comes to pass, that when as hypocrites do work outward works,
sometimes goodly to the show, thereby they obtain notable praise. And they
which are rulers as long as they honestly behave them selves, in doing
justice, either in warlike affairs, or else in honest conversation (as the
Romans in the old time did) may obtain a most large Empire. For so would
god have discipline kept, the world and publicque wealths preserved. God did
therefore repent at the sorrowyngs of the Israelites, because thorough the
faith, from whence sorrowinges and groninges proceeded, he was made merciful
and favorable unto them.

But peradventure some man will doubt, whether god, when he repented, God does
not so repent that he is changed
were in any point changed? All the godly confess in a manner with one mouth,
that god can by no means be changed, for as much as that is a certain sign
both of imperfection and also of inconstancy. But this variety which here
happens is not to be ascribed unto god, but unto us. Of this thing I have
spoken some what before, but this seems to be added at this present. If a man
will say, that god without controversy ceased to favor the Chananites against
ye Israelites, whom he had before so strengthened, that he would have them to
oppress the Jews: and again afterward to help the Hebrews, whom before he
seemed that his will was to have them oppressed by the Chananites. No man can
deny, but that these things have variety. How can we therefore defend the will
of god from changing? Variety is the effects, and not in God.
I answer, that by the 28. chap: of Jeremy, it manifestly appears, ye there
is a diversity in the effects, when as for all ye god in very deed,
continually retayneth the self same will. For it is thus written there in his
name: When as I shall speak against a kingdom or nation, to destroy, root
out, and over throw it, if they shall repent, I will also repent. And
contrariwise when as I shall speak good of a kingdom or nation, to build and
to plant, and that nation or kingdom shall do evil in my sight, I will then
also repent me of the good, that I had decreed to bestow on them. These
words declare, that god in these kinds of threatninges and promises is
therefore not changed, because he speaks not absolutely and simply, but upon
condition. But the accomplishing or making void of the conditions, is to be
considered toward us. And therefore the change is not to be attributed unto
him, but unto us. But if thou shall ask me, whether god does before know and
decree, what shall come to pass as touching these conditions? I will grant
that he does. For he even from without beginning does not only know of things
that shall come to pass, but also has decreed what shallbe. But because the
hid priuitye of his will as touching these things, is not opened unto us in
the holy Scriptures, therefore ought we to follow that rule, which (as we have
declared) is pronounced by Jeremy. This rule did the Ninevites and also
Ezechias the king consider and behold being, not yet set forth. God when he
threateneth things which come not pass, lies not.
For although destruction was threatened them in the name of god, yet for all
that by repentance and prayers they escaped it. Neither is there any cause why
we should suspect that god does lie in any thing, when he so threatens or
promises any things, which afterward come not to pass. For as touching
Ezechias, he could no way escape death, if we should look upon the natural
causes, which are commonly called the second causes. Wherefore the sentence
being pronounced according to those causes, he could not be accused of a lie.
And the Ninevites, if god had done unto them, as their sins deserved, they
should utterly have perished. And god commanded Jonas to preach according to
their merits. Furthermore a lie can not be so taken, in an oration which has
a supposition or condition joined with it, as it may be in absolute and simple
sentences, when as the success depends of the keeping or violatyng of the
condition. More over in these words of the history is expressed the cause why
the Israelites sorowed and sighed, namely because they were oppressed and
afflicted, and that with those kinds of calamityes which are before
mentioned, namely because they were spoiled, sold, and losyng their liberty and
goods, they were no longer able to stand before their enemies.

19 Yet for all that as soon as the Judge was dead, they turned and did worse
than their fathers, in following strange gods, and in serving them and bowing
them selves unto them, and ceased not from the Acts of them, and from their
hard way.


When the Hebrews in the time of the Judge that was raised up had a restyng
time, and came to a tolerable estate, that judge being dead, they fell again
worse than they did before, and committed much more grievous things than did
their elders. Whereby is found true, that which we before have said, namely
that the infirmitye of our nature is so great, that we can not long abide in
pure religion and sincere worshipping of God. And in that it is said that they
which came after were a great deal worse than their fathers, is declared that
GOD not without reason and just cause was the more provoked unto anger so that
whereas he had long time spared their elders, now at the last he would not
forgive those that came after. And this is it which is often said, How the
iniquities of the fathers are visited in the children and childre^s children.
that he does visit the iniquities of the fathers upon the children even to
the third and fourth generation, which is not so to be understand, as though
he should punish the posterity more than they have deserved. But because God,
as he has spared the fathers, would so also have forgeuen the children,
unless they had so much followed the iniquities of their fathers, that also
they went farther in those mischievous Acts, then did their fathers. God is
patient, and before the pours out his wrath and punishementes, he uses to
tarry for the third or fourth generation. But how these of whom we entreat
were more corrupt than their fathers, the history manifestly declares: for
they committed more wicked Acts than did their fathers, And of all those,
which their fathers perpetrated, they forsook none, or left none undone.

But of this kind of speech, wherein it is said: It is not in man's power to
avoid sin.
Neither ceased they from their endeavors, we may not conclude that it lies in
our strength and power to avoid sins, or to wrappe our selves out of them.
Wherefore they greatly err, which of the precepts of the law of GOD do gather
the strength and power of our free will. For by the commandments the
Scripture testifyeth, what things they he which are required of men. The
power of free will is not to be gathered of the commandments.
But the same Scripture manifestlye in an other place admonishes, that it
lies not in our power to fulfill them. As Paul also writes in his latter
Epistle to Timothe: that there are in a great house not only vessels of
gold and silver, but also vessels of wood and vessels of claye. And he
which shall purge him self from them, shall be a vessel sanctified to honor,
profitable to the Lord and prepared to all good works. Neither for all that
can we thereby conclude, that it is in our own strength, to purge our selves
from sins, although the same be required at our hands, for as much as that
is to be looked for only of God. Wherefore the same Apostle in the same
Epistle, when he had admonished the Minister of the Church so be gentle, ready
to teach, pacient to suffer euilles, It is GOD which gives repentance and
amendment.
but so for all that to confute them which resist, adds. If peradventure
God shall give them repentance to the knowledge of his truth. By these words
we are taught, that repentance from sins, which is commanded comes not
of our selves, but is louyngly and gently given of God.

The way of sinners is rightlye and worthily called hard, The way of sinners
is hard
and it is a metaphor elegantly taken of roughe and stonye places, for stones
and rocks for that they have thick and unequal parts, they hurt, prick
and rent the tender flesh of their feet which travail upon them. So are
the manners of the wicked, they wound their consciences, and at the last
bring them into extreme miseries, which happens not without the great
goodness of God for ye god at the length by that means calls unto him very
many sinners. And the saw has Hoseas the Prophet very well described in his
ii. chap: when he says: And she said, I will go after my lovers which have
given me gold, silver, wool, flax, etc. But I will hedge in thy ways with
thorns, and will take away my gold, my silver, my wool and my flax. And she
shall say: I will return unto my first husband, for then was it better with
me, than it is now.

20 Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was kyndled against Israel, and he said:
Because this people has transgressed mine appointment, which I commanded
their Fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice.

21 I also will hence forth not cast out before them one man of the nations
which Joshua left when he dyed.

22 That thoroughe them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way
of the Lord, and walk therein, as their Fathers did, or not.

23 And so the Lord left those nations, and drove them not out immediately,
neither delivered them into the hands of Joshua.


The cause being before declared, namely the contempt, whereby the Israelites
contempned GOD, now is set forth the effect thereof which is the kindlyng of
the wrath of GOD. For this word Chara in the Hebrew tongue, is to wax hot,
or to be kyndeled with anger. Whereby the property and nature of angry is
properly and elegantely expressed. For if angry should be defyned according to
the matter thereof, it is a certain inflammation of blood about the heart.
What is the matter of a^ger
Neither do I speak it as though that can be applied unto GOD, who utterly is
without heat and blood. But all these things (as I have already oftentimes
said) are by a certain translation applied unto him.

Of a League.
But because God complayneth for that the league was broken, which he had made
with them, I think it good somewhat to speak briefly of a league which is
in Latin called Faedus. And that word is derived of the verb Ferio, which
is to stay because that the ambassadors of each party killed a hog: from
which Etimologye peradventure the Hebrew word Berith, differs not much,
with which outward sign also they wished by prayer the destruction to that
part which should violate the league, as we may gather out of Lyui the first
book Ab vrbe condita. Three kinds of leagues.
And as the same author writteth in his iiii. book de bello Macedonico, there
are three kinds of leagues. The first kind is, when

A league is that bond between men, whereby enterchaungeably they testifye both
by words and signs, What a league is.
that they are bound to perform certain things, so that they handle together
with good faith. And if that it be a bond, and pertayneth to relation, it is
grounded upon humane actions, and is referred to those things which the
parties confederated ought to perform the one to the other. It is expressed by
words, Leagues are expressed both by words and signs.
and for the most part signs are added. God when after the flood he made a
league with mankind, he did not only declare the form of the obligation by
words, but also he put the raynebowe in the clouds as a witness. And in the
league which he made with Abraham he put the sign of circumcision.
Furthermore in that which was made by Moses at the mount Sinay, there were
twelve pillars erected, and the people was sprinkled with blood. Joshua also
when he should dye, erected up a very great stone, thereby to seal the league
renewed between the people and God.

What things are promised in the league of god made with men.
And what the promises were which should be kept of each parties the Scripture
oftentimes teaches. For God promised, that he would be the god of his people,
namely which would be with them to help them, to deliver them, and by all
means as touching all kind of good things to adorn them. Christ is the
mediator in making the league.
The people again promised that they would count the Lord Jehovah for their
God in believing, worshipping, and obeyng him. And Christ was in the league as
the mediator between each party. This is the exposition and nature of the
league made between god and men. How a league is divided into a new league and
an old.


A league is divided into the new league and the old, which division is not
of a general thing into special things, but of the subject into accidences,
for so much as in either league the thing it self and substance was utterly
one and the self same and only certain qualities did vary. For the old
league was made with one only nation of the Jews, and had certain additions,
the possession (I say) of the land of Chanaan, the kingdom of the Jews, and
the priesthode of Aaron, and also the promise of the Messiah, according to the
nativity of the flesh, and the ministry of his own person. Moreover it had
very many signs of ceremonies and sacrifices very mete for that age. There were
also in it mysteries of salvation, and promises of eternal life although
far more obscure, than they were afterward given unto us. And contrariwise
in the new league, there are proprietyes in a manner contrary. For it
pertayneth not to any one certain nation, but to all nations, how far soever
the world extend. Neither is there any peculiar civil administration
adjoined unto it. Furthermore there are but very few ceremonies and outward
signs (and they very plain and simple) added unto it. And lastely all things
are contained more openly, plainly and manifestly in the new testament, than
they are in the old. The thing and substance of the old league and new is
all one.
By these qualities does the new league and the old differ one from an other,
howbeit the thing it self and the substance abides one and the same. For as
the Lord would then be the God of the Hebrews, so now has he decreed to be the
god of the Christians. And that also which they at that time promised, namely
yt they would believe in the true god, and obey and worship him as he has
prescribed, we also ought to perform: Christ comes between both parties as a
mediator, and forgiveness of sins, and also eternal life is by him
promised. And the laws of manners remain the same now which then were.

Paul in the xi. chap: to the Romans has very well declared that the league of
the elders and ours is all one, when he compares the Church with the tree,
which has Christ as the root. Then he adds that from such a tree certain
branches were cut of, namely the Hebrews which believed not. And we which were
ge^tils were planted in their place: that is put in the same league wherein they
were comprehended. The same tree he affirms to remain, into which some are
by faith grafted in, and from the which other some because of incredulity are
cut of. Wherefore each league contains both the law and the gospel. In either
of ye testame^tes are the self same sacraments.
And there are in either of the Testamentes the self same Sacraments as it is
declared in the first Epistle to the Cor. the x. chap: For the fathers were al
under the cloud, and were baptized in the sea, and did eat the same spiritual
meat, and drank of the spiritual rock followyng them, and the rock was
Christ. Farther we grant, that as touching outward signs, there is some
variety in their Sacraments and ours, which yet as concerning the things
signified by the Sacraments is found to be nothing at al. Otherwise the
argument of Paul should not have persuaded the Corin. that they should be
subject unto the same punishments that the Hebrews were. For they might have
said, that they had far better sacraments tha^ had the Hebrews, and therefore
they need not so much to be affeard lest they should suffer the like: for as
much as the excellency of the sacraments may avoid those misfortunes, from
which the Hebrews could not be delivered by the sacraments of the law.
Wherefore the Apostle took away from them this shift, and makes our
sacraments and theirs equal and a like as touching the things. He writes
also to the Romans the first chap: of the gospel, that it was in the old time
promised by the Prophets in the holy scriptures. And in the third chap: he
speaks after this sort: but now is the righteousness of god made manifest,
being testified by the law and the Prophets.

Neither can thou say unto me, that these in deed were promised in the holy
Scriptures of the old Testament, but not that they were performed unto the men
which lived at that time. Because the Apostle does most warely answer to
this objection, when he says that every law does speak to those men which
do live under it. And it is not to be doubted, but that the fathers were
justified after the same sort that we are now at this present. The fathers
were justified only by faith, as we are.
For they were no less justified only by faith in Christ, than we. Wherefore
it is written in the book of Genesis of Abraham, that he believed, and it was
counted unto him for righteousness. John also testifies that Christ said of
Abraham that he had seen his day, and therefore reioysed. The Epistle to the
Hebrews the xiii. chap: affirms that Christ was yesterdaye, and to day, and
remains for ever. Wherefore even as we are said now to be saved, not by
works, but by the true mercy of GOD by faith in Christ, so was it with the
fathers at that time: For they were justified by no merits, but only by faith
in Christ. Furthermore what obedience soever the fathers had toward the
commandments of God, and also faith in the promises, they were not derived
from their own strength and power, but (even as it also happens unto us)
they came unto them by the grace of God and Christ.

A place of Ieremi and of the epistle to the Hebrews is expounded.
It is true in deed that Jeremy in the 31. chap: writes, as it is also alleged
to the Hebrews the viii. chap. that there must be another league made in the
name of GOD, not as it was made in the old time with the fathers. And among
other things he says, that GOD would give his laws in the hearts and
bowelles of men, so that none should need any more to teach his neighbor,
because all, from the least to the greatest should have the knowledge of GOD.
And farther it is said in the person of God, I will be merciful unto their
sins, and will no more remember their iniquities, etc. As touching these
words both of Ieremye, and also of the Epistle to the Hebrews, we must
understand, that those words prove not that there is any difference between
the testamentes as touching the thing and substance it self, but as
concerning the propertyes and qualities, as we have before said. Neither must
we think that the old fathers which in obeyeng the commandments of God,
and in right faith worshypped him purely, could perform these things of
their own strength or natural power. For unless they had had the laws and
promises of God written in their hearts and minds by the holy Ghost, and also
a will by the grace of God ready to obey his commandment they had never ben
able to have performed such things. They wanted not therefore the light of God
which shined before them to cause the^ to believe. Yea and their sins were
forgeuen them by Christ. Wherefore they also had the fruition of those things,
which God promised to give in the new league. The difference was only in
this thing as touching largeness and perspicuitye for at that time those
gifts were distributed to very few, The error of them which in the old league
acknowledge only temporal things.
but now they are every where communicated to the gentiles. They were somewhat
dark at that age, but to us they are made evident and clear, so that we have
no more need of the old discipline. Hereby it manifestly appears, how they
err from the truth, which will have the old league to have had promises only
for possessing of the land of Chanaan and for worldly felicity. And that the
people of the Hebrews were bound only to an outward observation of certain
rites and works, and not to show forth good and right motions of the mind
toward God. The Prophets declare not the thing after that sort, yea rather
they deny that GOD any thing estemeth outward works without inward
godliness. And they every where cry out, that ceremonies without faith, and
void of the fear of GOD are a most grievous burden and so troublesome that
GOD can not suffer them. Yea and the law it self makes mention expressedly
of the circumcision of the heart: and GOD every where requires, that we
should hear his voice, which undoubtedly is nothing else, God would not
fully those chynges that are changed.
than by faith to have to do with him. Wherefore faith of the promises and
commandments of GOD, ought always to be counted as the root and
foundation, which always abides, when as outward Sacrifices and visible
rites should at the length be changed. Wherefore it is very manifest, that god
would not have them for their own sakes. Howbeit they endured so long as men
were endewed with a childish spirit (as Paul speaks to the Galathians)
whilst they lived yet under tutors, and differed yet very little from
servant. But when they received a more full growe^ spirit, then were the
sacraments and childyshe rites (as Augustine says) taken away. It is
manifest therefore that the difference between the two leagues is not to be
taken of the thing or substance, but of the qualityes and proprieties.

Let them therefore cease so much to err, which think that god in the old law
promised only earthly things, as though at that time he provided only for the
bodies and not for the souls, as do Shepeheardes, Plowmen, and Swyneherdes,
which have a care only for the bodies and carkases of their Sheep, Swine and
Oxen, neither labor they for any other thing, but to make those beasts
strong and fat. We must not so imagine of God, who so made a league with the
Elders, that he promised them the chief felicity, God promised the old
fathers the chiefest felicity.
which cheiflye pertayneth unto the soul. Wherefore it is written in the 144
Psalm. Blessed are the people which have the Lord for their God. In
Deutronomye also God took upon him to bring to pass, that they should walk in
his commandments. But what more? Our savior, out of ye words of the old
league has most aptely taught the resurrection of the dead. For when the Lord
said that he was the God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and they were then dead,
Christ inferred that they were not dead but that they still lived, and that
their bodies should be received, namely in the blessed resurrection. Hitherto
pertayneth that that God affirmed to Abraham, that he himself would be his
reward, which thing plainly teaches us, The end of political government.
that in that couenaunte were not promised only carnal and earthly good
things. Undoubtedly it were a great shame even for Kings and Princes, which
being compared with GOD are but flesh and blood, if they should be counted
to govern the publicque wealths, only as touching the bodies of the
subjects: for as much as they profess that therefore they provide for their
Citizens outward commodityes, quietness and peace namely that they might live
happily and vertuouslye. Wherefore if Princes seek for goods of the mind for
their Citizens, The worshipping of god consists not only in outward. rites.
is it not meet that God himself provided far more noble things for the
publicque wealth of the Israelites which he faithfully governed. Furthermore
I do not speak, how foolyshe it is to believe that the old fathers by the
league bound themselves only to outward rites and visible ceremonies, whereby
to worship God: when as even the Ethnikes were not ignorant, yea they have
most manifestly testified, Plautus.
that the worshipping of God consists not in those things. For Plautus in
Rudente writes thus: They think that they please God with gifts and
sacrifices: but they lose both their labor and cost. I will not declare
those things which Plato in his Alchibiade has written as concerning this
thing. Plato.
Yea (as I have now before taught) the law it self and the Prophets declare
that the thing was far otherwise.

But now at the length to return to the words of the historye, God
complayneth that the Hebrews had broken their covenant which he had made with
their fathers. For they were departed from the true faith and inward godliness
Neither ceased they only dulye and rightly to sacrifice unto the true God, but
they most filthily turned aside to strange Gods and worshipping of Idols. And
for these things was God angry with them, and especially for this, The rote of
falling from god.
because they harkened not unto his voice. This undoubtedly was the root and
the first beginning of falling, namely not to believe in god. The elders made a
league with god for their posterity.


Let us here also note that the Fathers made a league with GOD not only for
themselves, but also for their posterity. As God again for his part promised
them, that he would be the GOD not only of them, but also of their sede and
posterity. The elders made a league with God for their posteritye It was
lawful to circumcise ye little ones in the old time, and it is lawful at this
day to baptize them.
Wherefore it was lawful for them to circumcise their children, being yet
infantes. And in like manner it is lawful for us to baptize our little ones
being yet infantes, for as much as they also are comprehended in the league.
For they which have now the thing it self, there is nothing can let, but that
they may receive the sign. It is manifestlye written in the.xxix. Chapter of
Deutronomye that the league was made not only with them which were present, but
also with them which were absent, and not yet borne.

But some doubt, whyther the posterity may be bound by their Elders. We
answer, Whether they which come after may be bound by their elders.
we must look whyther the things which were promised by our Elders were
just and honest. Then must we consider whyther those promyses pertayne to
civil things, or to Godliness. When they are made for civil matters, the
bond is sure, because it is not lawful for the posteritye to infrindge the
contractes of their Elders, as are byinges, sellinges, bargaynes and such like,
provided that they contain nothing, that is filthy, dishonest and unjust. But
if the couenauntes and obligations belong to godliness or to true faith, the
obligation is then strong, for that we are all bound to true godliness and a
perfect faith, although there were no league thereunto. But if the Elders have
bound themselves and their posteritye to filthy and ungodly things, it is no
bond. But for God to abase himself to make a league with men, it comes of
his mere benevolence and mercy, whereby we might be more and more stirred up to
perform those things which we ought otherwise to do of duty.

I also will not cast them out. When he says, that he will not hence forth
cast out any one of those Nations, which remained in the Land of Chanaan
after the time of the death of Joshua, he declares the punishemente, wherewith
he would now punyshe the Hebrews. And this must we understand condicionally,
that is, except they repented: or because God was so offended by reason of
their Idolatrye, that he would not so soon cast forth those Nations, as he
would otherwise have done, if they had faithfully continued in their office.
And the very words of the historye do strayghtwaies express this latter
interpretation. But because a man might doubt why he expelled not the
Chananites, Why all the Chananites were not expelled in the time of Joshua.
while Joshua was yet alive (who vprightlye behaved himself toward God) in
this place he answers unto it and says that he had therefore suffered
those Nations to remain, that by them he might prove the Israelites, whyther
they would woorship him purely and sincerely as their Fathers had done under
Joshua or not. For as much as I have at large before spoken of this kind of
temptation, I will now speak thereof no more. This only I shall admonyshe
you, that where as there is mention made in this place of the Fathers, the same
is to be understand only of those which were good and godly: otherwise even
in the time of Moses there wanted no ungodly ones and rebels, which fell
from the true God. Furthermore we must considre that these things were spoken,
when the Hebrews after the death of the Judges tell to ungodliness. For the
things which are here mentioned of the fallinges and conuersions of the
Hebrews which followed one after an other, are spoken generally and
summarilie. Otherwise God (as we shall hear) expelled some of the enemies out
of the land of Chanaan under every Judge. Wherefore in that now he being
angrye says that he will not cast forth the rest of the Nations, we must
understand it, that he will not so quickly do it, and unless they turn
again unto the right way. After which manner Ieremye has taught us that the
threatenings of God are to be understand.

The third Chapter.
THese are the Nations, which the Lord left, that he might prove Israel by
them even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Chanaan.

2 Only for the learning of the generation of the children of Israel that he
also might teach them war, in as much as they which were before them knew
nothing thereof.


THis is a very common and received exposition of this place, that God in
leaving diverse Nations in the land which was promised to the Israelites, did
it not only to try the Israelites, but also because he would have them
exercised in warlike arts, least they should become slothful. For if the
enemies should straightway at the beginning have been expelled, that people
would easily have been lost with idleness and sloth. Which interpretation if
we allow, thereby will plainly follow, that just wars are altogether
lawful. War is a thing lawful.
For if GOD would teach the Israelites the art of warrefare, then judged he
not that art unlawful. And to this purpose serves that which David said:
Blessed be god which teaches my hands to war, and my fyngers to battle.
But this question, whyther it be lawful to make just wars, is not now to
be entreated of: for as much as it is most evident, and that by the holy
Scriptures, that it is lawful. And we shall have occasion in an other place,
to speak at large of that matter. Wherefore I will declare what the Hebrewe
expositours judge of this place. R. Salamon, R. David Kimhi, and also R. Leui
ben Gerson write, that God, when he had tempted the Hebrews and detected their
ungodliness and Idolatrye, withdrewe from them their strength and aid. Whereby
when they attempted to make wars by their own power and to fight by their
own strength they learned what it was to make war. When God fought for the
Israelits, they knew not what it was to make war.
Whereas before when God himself fought for them, they were ignorant of it.
For he endued them with strength, he drove a fear into their enemies,
dissolved their strength, and gave the Hebrews a prosperous success in their
enterprises. One did then pursue a thousand, and two ten thousand. It is
therefore aptlye said that the Israelites, when he had not yet broken the
league, and god fought for them, were ignoraunte of warlyke feats. How our
first parents after sin knew both good and evil.
Even as the first parents of mankind when they had eaten of the forbidden
tree, began to know both good and evil. For before when they were nourished
with the grace of GOD, they were touched with the feeling of no evil. And we
commonly say of children, when their parents are taken from them, that they
shall now feel what it is to get their own living, which before they had not
learned, when they had their parents living. Christ also used the same kind
of speech, when he said unto the Apostles: When I sent you without bag or
scrippe, undoubtedly you wanted nothing. But now because I shall be taken from
you, let him which has no sweard, bye him one: for hereafter the times shall
be hard and paynefull unto you, so that ye shall prove and have experience of
those things which hitherto ye have not felt. And this is the meaning at this
present, that the Hebrews were brought of necessitye now at the length to
know and feel, God commanded nothing in the law for the learning of the art
of warfare.
what it was to make war with enemies stronger than themselves. They had not
experience of that, before GOD taught them it in taking away their strength
and aid. Neither is it found in the whole law that he ordained any thing for
the learning of the art of warrefare. In Deutronomye the xx. Chapter: he made
certain laws for making of war, but they pertayne nothing to the attayning
of knowledge in the art of warrefare. And I, in my judgment, do allow the
interpretation of the Hebrews, rather than that which was first assigned.

3 Of those whom he left, there were five Lords of the Philistians and all the
Chananites, and Sidonites, and the Heuites that dwelled in Mount Libanon, even
from Mount Baal Hermon unto the entrance of Hamath.

4 Those (I say) remained to prove Israel by, and to wete whether they would
obey the precepts of the Lord, which he commanded their fathers by the hand
of Moses.

5 The children of Israel therefore dwelt among the Chananites, Hethites,
Amorites, Pherezites, Heuites, and Iebusites.


That which is in the Hebrewe Sirni, Jerome sometimes translateth rulers, and
sometimes Lords. And we may call them Princes, or Presidentes, or else
Governors. Satrapes.
Those words the Grecians call, (...) But yet they are derived of the
Persians, yea and the Latins sometimes used the^. Terence in his comedy
Heautontim: Terence.
writes. If Satrapes (yt is a Lord) be a lover, he shall not be able to abide
the charge. David Kimhi.
David Kimhi thinks these words in the text, Five lords of the Philistians,
to be a figurative kind of speech, yt by the five Lords, The names of the
Lordships of Palestine.
we might understand those five places, which they were lords over, that is
five Lordships of the Philistians. And those places be named in the book of
Joshua the 13 chap. Gaza, Asdod, Ascalon, Ackron and Geth. Of every one of these
cities they took unto the^ the name of the lordship. And undoubtedly there is
manifest mention made of them in the first book of Samuel, for of each of the^
there were gifts gathered wherewith the arc of the covenant was adorned to be
sent again to the Israelites.

Howbeit this may seem to be strange how these cities should now be said not to
be conquered by the Israelits. When as in this book the first chap. Gaza,
Ascalon, and Aekron are declared to be won in that battle, which was made
by the tribes of Judah and Simeon. Whereunto we answer, yt in deed those
cities were taken at ye time, when as for all that they were not fully
conquered by the leading and conduct of Joshua, as it is written in his book.
Howbeit at this time. as the history now testifyeth, they were not in the power
of the Jews. For by reason of the sins of the Hebrews, the strength of the
Philistians was confyrmed, and other nations of ye land of Chanaan waxed every
day stronger and stronger, but the Israelites on the contrary side were
feabled. Wherefore it was an easy matter for these places to fall again into
the power of the Philistians. For they were very skilful in feats of war,
and they had iron and hooked Chariottes. Neither did God fight for the
Israelites. Wherefore they might without any great travail (by reason of the
sins of the Jews) recover again the places which they had lost.

In that it is written And all the Chananites we must not understand it
absolutely and simply, but only of those which inhabited ye places here
mentioned. Farther we must note, that in the book of Joshua there were also
Chananites and Zidonites rehearsed which were not at that time destroyed. And
as touching the Mount Libanon, The Mount Libanon.
some write, yt it was so called of frankencense which the Grecians call (...).
Yea and the Hebrews call frankencense Libona. And Mount Hermon (as the book of
Deuteronomy. teaches) was called of the Amorrites, Naschir, and of the Sirians
Scherion. Whereof peradventure the province of Siria had his name.

6 And they took the Daughters of them to be their wives, and gave their own
daughters to their sons: and served their Gods.

7 Wherefore the children of Israel did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and
forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim, and groves.


The Israelites sinned three times against God. First, because (as it is
already Chananites, Three sins of the Hebrews.
and contrary to the commandment of God made those nations tributaries unto
them. Secondly because they contracted matrimonies with that people. And Esdras
the last chap. we read of a grievous complaynt because the Jews in their
captiustye in Babylon had taken strangers to wives. And Esdras there decreed
that such wives should be put away, God forbyddeth unlike maryages.
and that those matrimonies should be counted void, which were contracted
between persons prohibited by God. And why God would not have matrimonies so
contracted, this reason is chiefly alleged, because by such unlike matrimonies
the worshipping of God is wonderfully empaired. For godly husbands or wives
are by the ungodly parties oftentimes alienated from the true god. Neither does
the Scripture only teach us this, but also experience both in the old time,
and also in our time testifies it. For as much as Solomon (as it is written in
the first book of the kings the.xi. chap.) was both corrupted, and also
builded Temples for Idols, by the entisement of strange women, whom he most
inordinatelye loved, and more than was convenient. Wherefore he miserably
incurred the wrath of god. The Jews also (as our historye now declares) had
experience of the same. And we in our time see great hinderaunce to come unto
the beleuers, because very many of them contract matrimony with Papists. The
third sin

Further it is added: And they woorshipped trees or groves. This word Aschera
with the Hebrews is a tree, and being in the plural number Ascheroth as it is
in this place, it signifies trees, and of some it is translated groves. For it
is a most common manner among the Idolatrers, Gods were worshipped in groves.
to woorship their gods in groves. In Oken groves they sacrificed unto
Jupiter, and the Oak of Dodome, was in the old time most famous, by reason of
the answers which it gave. In woods of bay trees was Apollo woorshipped. Daphne
also is notable where the Temple of Apollo was built. Minerua also was wont to
have a temple among Olive trees. And lastly we may mark both in the Poets,
and also in histories, that shadowy woods, most large rivers, and mountains of
exceeding great height were counted of the men in the old time places most apt
for sacrifices to be done unto Idols. Because such places drive into men no
small admiration. Wherefore they thought that such notable places had the power
of god present. Yea, and Abraham also, Isaac and Jacob, and the old Fathers,
From whence the manner of sacrificing in hy^ mou^tains came
offered sacrifices unto the true god upon the high mountains, which custom
was till such time used as god by a law ordained that they should not do
sacrifice every where, but in that place only which he himself had chosen.

8 Therefore the Lord was angry with Israel, and sold them into the hands of
Chusan Riseathaim King of Aram-Naharaim: and the children of Israel served
Chusan Riseathaim eight years.


Now is particularly mentioned the punishment wherewith god being angry punished
the Hebrews. For when they so fell from him, that they forgot him, he delivered
them to Chusan King of Mesopotamia. And this is the first bondage that the
children of Israel were in. And that which the Grecians call (...), Mesopotamia.
the Hebrews name Aram-naharaim. Nahar signifies with them a River. It is
therefore put in the dual number, because that part Siria, or Aram is enclosed
with two rivers Euphrates (I say) and Tigris. Of ye surname of Chusan.
Wherefore as touching the signification of the word the Grecians have followed
the Hebrews. But why Chusan was called Riseathaim, it is dark. Although D.
Kimhi thinks that ye surname was given him of some certain place, as we se to
chance to Princes of our time, which receive their surname of yt places, from
whence their Elders had their beginning. But other some think that this king
was therefore so called, because he was very wicked and ungodly. For with the
Hebrews Resehaha signifies wickedness and ungodliness. Wherefore they will have it
to be as much as if one should say, Chusan of ungodliness, or ungodly Chusan. It
is the dual number, to declare that he was corrupted not with any simple
wickedness or ungodliness, but with a doubt, that is with a principal and
absolute wyckednes or ungodliness. And there were some of the Hebrews which went
about to express the double ungodliness of the kings of Mesopotamia. For they
say that Balaam was hired from thence to curse the Israelites. Farther, and
this (say they) was the other wickedness, wherewith this Chusan oppressed the
Jews, which by no right pertained to his dominion or Lordship. But these ought
rather to be called diuinations and conjectures, than just interpretations.

They served him eight years. Undoubtedly a very long time, which I suppose
was so much the painfuller unto them, Why the Chaldeans and Sirians went about
to govern the Jews.
because from their coming out of Egypt hitherto, they had served none. But
under what pretense this King subdued unto him the Hebrews it is not declared.
Peradventure he thought that the Jews were a part of his people sent abroad to
inhabit. For Abraham was called out of Chaldea, and came first into
Mesopotamia. From whence by the commandment of God he went into the land of
Chanaan. Furthermore in that place Jacobs children were borne, which were the
Princes of the twelve Tribes. This peradventure were the titles, whereby the
Chaldeans and Sirians endeavored them selves often times to be Lords over the
Hebrews, which thing yet they did unjustly. For there were no people sent from
the Chaldeans or from the Sirians by the common will and consent of the Princes
and Magistrates, which should go and inhabit in some place of the land of
Chanaan, Wherefore they did wrongfullye oppress the Jews and were styrred up
thereunto by covetousness and ambition to enlarge their dominions. This is also
uncertain whether this Chusan did together with the Jews oppress the
Chananites. And it may be, that he was not troublesome to the Chananites as to
his friends, but only afflicted the Hebrews. Neither were it absurd to
think, that this king was called by the Chananites to oppress the Hebrews
their common enemies.

9 And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord: and the Lord styrred up a
Savior to the children of Israel, and saved them, one Othoniel the son of
Chenez, Calebs younger son.

10 And the spirit of the Lord was upon him, and he judged Israel, and he went
out to war, and the Lord delivered Chusan Riseathaim king of Aram into his
hand: and his hand prevailed against Chusan Riseathaun.

11 And the land had rest.40. years: And Othoniel the Son of Chenez dyed.


Israel cried unto the Lord, because they were evil vexed, and most grievously
oppressed of the Sirians. They acknowledged now after their great hurt that
strange Gods profited them nothing, yea rather they brought upon them the
miseries wherewith they were urged. When they understood that man's help was on
every side cut of, they converting them selves unto the true God, called upon
him. This is the fruit of miseries as touching the elect, or rather the fruit
of the goodness of God, which by troubles calls again unto him, those which
are his. Of Othoniel we have spoken enough before. Now he is called a Savior,
because he brought health unto the Israelites as ye other Judges did, Othoniel
was called a savior and a redemer.
which were also called Saviors, he was a shadow of Christ. But the Chaldey
paraphrast calls him Porken, that is a Redemer. Which surname also rightly
agrees with Othoniel: because before it is said that God sold the Israelites:
and when bondmen are sold, they have need of one to redeem them.

For as much as before it was said ye God raised up Judges, After what manner
God raised up Judges.
now is declared the manner and form how he raised them up. For it is written:
And the spirit of the Lord was upon him. For by the holy ghost were not only
given unto him strength, political wisdom and warlyke arts, but also he was
made the more certain of his calling. The Chaldey paraphrast understands by
the Spirit of God the power of prophecy. David Kimhi.
But David Kimhi interprets it the gift of force and strength. But I think
that either interpretacion is to be allowed. For besides the strength and power
which was given the Judges, they had also the judgment and feeling of the will
of God, which pertained unto prophecy.

He judged Israel. That is, he set them at liberty and was their Governor as
touching civil things, and restored the pure worshipping of God. In that it is
above written that God sold Israel to the king of Mesopotamia. And now again
it is declared yt he delivered the same king unto Othoniel, we may gather yt
victories ar given at ye pleasure of God, which also we have often noted before.

R. Leui ben gerson thinks that in that supputation of.40. R. Leui ben
gerischon.
years wherein the Jews lived peaceably under Othoniel were comprehended also
the eight years of servitude which went before. But of this thing we will
speak abundantly in the history of Iiphtah. God is also to be called upon of
sinners.
This place teaches that men must call upon God, though they have sinned:
which I therefore thought good to note, because sins use much to fear away
men from the invocation of the name of God for this is the nature of sins to
alienate us from God, unto whom we yet by prayers come again. Wherefore seeing
these things are contrary, namely to be alienated from God, and to come unto
him, it is wonder how they can be applied to one, and the self same man.
Augustine.
And this makes with it also which is written in the gospel: God hears not
sinners. Although Augustine write of that sentence, that it is found in deed in
the holy scriptures, but it was spoken by him which was borne blind, when his
heart was not yet illustrate. Wherefore he judges that that sentence is not to
be taken as a firm and certain rule. A distinction of sinners.
But I would rather make a distinction between sinners, for there are some,
which when they cry unto the Lord, do repent, and from their hearts are sorry,
for the evils which they have committed. But there are other which continue still
in their mind and purpose to sin, and have a very great delight therein.
Farther I am not afeard to affirm, that god hears those sinners which being
repentant cry unto him with faith: where as those are repulsed which being
hardened in their sins and wanting faith do call upon god. Wherefore it
appears that those sinners which come to god, and those that depart from god
are not sinners of one sort, because they which after they have sinned call upon
god by faith, and repent them of their sins, are divided from those which
stubbornly without repentance persevere in their sins. For they although by
words they cry unto god, yet in heart and mind they are far from him, so
far are they for to be joined unto him, or to come unto him by faith and
prayers.

Whether God be the cause of sin.
But in these things which are said, there arises a question which is not to
be left unspoken of. For it is written that god sold the Israelites to the king
of Mesopotamia. Wherefore it seems that he help a wicked man, and aided him to
satisfy his tyranny and ambition. For he had neither a just cause, nor yet an
honest title, to claim unto him the dominion of the Hebrews. What shall we
say therefore? Shall we affirm that God is the cause of this sin? There
happens in this book and in other places of the holy Scriptures such kind
of speech, and that often times very plain, and therefore it seems good to
be expounded once for all.

Whether by ye word permissio^ this question may be dissolved.
Some, yea and that with no evil mind labor to excuse God, and say that he
does not these evil things, but only permits them, And they think that in
doubtful places, that interpretation is to be applied, which altogether wants
fault and danger of ungodliness. Undoubtedly this their saying were to be It is
proved by good reasons that besides permission god works somewhat when sins
ar committed.
namely that God does stir up wicked men to their wicked acts, that he
seduceth, delyuereth, commands, hardens, and deceaueth them, and brings
to pass those sins which are grievous. Such kinds of speech do manifestly
teach us, that God after a sort woorketh evil things, not only in
permitting, but also in doing in us. Without doubt al we are said both to have
our being, and also our moving in him: For he is in such sort the first cause
of all things, that without him we can do nothing. For how should we move our
selves, unless by his power we were both moved and also Matthew: for two
Sparowes (says the Lord) are sold for a farthing, and yet one of them falls
not to the ground without the will of the father. And God does not idlelye
behold those things which are done o^ men, but works together with them
Esaias. 5.
but willinglye. Wherefore a will without doubt is contained in that permission.

But now must we show, that God, when sins are committed, does not ydely
look on, yea he woorketh somewhat there. For Esaias in the.v. chap. says, that
God would give a token, and with his hissing call a nation from the utmost
parts of the earth, which should overthrow the kingdom of the Hebrews, as
their sins had deserved. By which it manifestly appears, that God stirs
up Tyrannes and outward nations to these unjust wars. Esaias. 10.
Also in the.x. chap. the same Prophet pronounces that king to be wicked,
which in that expedition was in the hand of God as a saw, a staff, and an axe.
There is no man ignorant but that al these things do so work and move, that
they be first moved. Yea and that proud king is therefore reprehended, because
he so exalted himself as though he were God, who had by him brought such and so
great things to pass. Gen: 45.
Joseph also in the book of Genesis said unto his brethren which had by a
wicked co^spiracy sold him: It was not you but god that sent me into Egypt. In
the first book of the kings also, 1. kings. 22.
and the.xxii. chap: Satan, who was ready to deceive Achab, was commanded by
God to do it, and to prevail. Which words declare that God himself
commands and also stirs up to deceive. Further it is written in the
Proverbs the.xxi. chap. Proverbs. 21.
The heart of the king is in the hand of God, he shall incline it whether soever
he will. The scripture says also of Pharao, Exodus 9.10.11 Romans 9.
kings seem free from humayne laws, but God boweth them whether he will,
(which place Paul alleges) that his heart was hardened by God. Neither makes
this any thing against it, Pharao was hardened both of god and of him self.
if thou shall say that it is written in the.viii. chap. of Exodus, that Pharao
hardened himself, for as much as both sayings are true. For God does no
violence to the will of man, seeing that nothing is more contrary unto it than
to make it to do any thing unwillingly, or by compulsion. Howbeit it is
changed and bowed of God so softly and pleasantly, that it willinglye and
without violence inclines to whatsoever pleases God. Augustine.
And it often times happens (as Augustine in diverse places has taught) that
God punishes former sins by latter sins. And the holy scriptures before
Augustines time testified the same, and especially Paul, in his Epistle to
the Roma. the first chap. Wherefore God has in his hand the affections of our
heart, which he loses or restrains as shall seem good to his most wise
providence, and turns them whithersoeuer it shall please him. And so great is
his power, God works more as touching sins than is expressed by the word
permission. 2 Thessalonians 2.
yt we must believe that he works much more, than may be expressed by the
word of permission. For Paul feared not thus to write unto the Thessalonians:
because they have not received the love of the truth, therefore shall God send on
them an error, so that they shall believe lies, and al they shall be judged which
have not believed the truth, but allowed unrighteousness. These words manifestly
testifye, yt God did cast error upon them, to punish their former sin,
namelye upon those which despised the truth offered them. David also seems to
tend to this, when in the.2. book of Samuel the.16. chap. he said of Simeck:
Suffer him, 2. Sam: 16.
for God has commanded him to curse me. Also in the same book the.12. chap.
God by Nathan the Prophet says of David which had grievously fallen: 2. Sam:
12.
behold I will stir up evil against thee, and will take thy wives, and give
them unto thy neighbor, who shall sleep with them: this did thou secretly,
but I will do this thing openly, in the eyes of the Sun and of all Israel.

If the matter be so (thou will say) they which sin shall easily be excused:
The sins of men are not excused by the working of god
for they may sone say, yt they were by God moved and stirred up to sin. Not so.
For me^ are not so delivered by God unto sins, as though they were them selves
pure and innocent. For they which are so stirred up to naughtines, have worthily
deserved the same. And the same men are not driven against their will, but they
wonderfully delight themselves in those transgressions and sins. Wherefore
their excuse is foolish, or rather none.

But this seems to be against the things before said, Whither God do together
both hate and will sins.
because in the Psalms it is written that God is such a one, as wills no
iniquity, and hates sins. And undoubtedly he is so in deed: For unless he
hated sins, why should he punish them? for things that are allowed, are not
wont to be punished. Farther, he has most severely prohibited them by his
laws. But as touching this, A distinction of ye will of God.
thus must we decree of the will of god, that it is in nature and very deed one,
which yet may be divided for diverse and sundry respects. For as it is set
forth in the scriptures and the law, he condemns sins, he prohibiteth
them, and threatens most grievous punishments unto them. Howbeit because he
directs the same sins whithersoeuer he will, and uses them to his counsels
and decrees, neither when he may, lets them, it is therefore said that after
a sort he wylleth them. Neither is it meet to deny that such sundry respects
are in the will of god. For god would before al beginninges, have his son
sacrificed unto him for a most sweet sacrifice: who yet himself said in the
law: Thou shall not kill, and thou shall not shed innocent blood. God also
forbad, that any should be deceived, who for all that would have Achab to be
deceived of Satan, Christ was killed by the will of God.
as we have a little before mentioned. And least any man should doubt that
Christ was put to death by the will of God, we may se in the acts of the
Apostles that it is most manifestly said that the Jews did those things which
God by his counsel had before ordained.

What then? Shall we say that god is the cause of sin? Not so, God if we
speak properli is not the cause of sin.
for if we will speak properly: and that it may the more manifestly appear, we
must mark, that one self act as it is derived from us, is very sin: but
in respect that it comes from God, it is both good, just, and holy. For
punishment is by God imposed to wicked men. And to punish sins, no man is
ignorant but that it partayneth to justice. Wherefore God in withdrawing his
grace from the ungodly, and ministering some occasions, which might move to good
things, if they happened to right and just minds, and which he knows the
wicked will turn to evil, may after a sort, although not properly, be said to
be the cause of sin. And undoubtedly that act, A ^^militude.
in that it passes through us, is sin, but not as it comes from God. For
in that it comes from God, it is most perfect justice. It happens sometimes,
that the self same wine being poured into a corrupt vessel, is lost, and made
paid: which wine as it was brought by the husbandma^ and put into the vessel
is both sweet and good. Neither is it hard to understand how one and the self
same act may as touching one, be vicious: and in respect of an other, just. For
when a murderer and hangman do kill a man, the act as touching the matter or
subject, without doubt is al one, namelye the death of a man. And yet the
murderer does it most unjustly, and the hangman by law and justice. Job also
did well understand that when he said: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken
away as it has pleased him, so is it done. He did not by those words praise
the Chaldians, Sabines, and the Devil, which were vessels of iniquity, and most
vicious: but he with great godliness allowed those evils, as they were governed
and ruled by the providence of God, namely for this cause, because they pleased
God. It is also written in the.2. book of Samuel the.24. chap. of David, who
unadvisedly would have the people numbered, and how God was angry with Israel,
and therefore he styrred up David to do that. And in the book of Paral. it is
written that Satan was the doer of it. For God does those things which he will
have done by Angels, as well good as evil. Wherefore that numbering of the people
as it proceeded of David or the Devil, was in deed vicious; but in that it came
from God, who intended to punish the Israelites, it pertayned excedingly to the
setting forth of his justice.

Howbeit James says, that God tempts none to evil, but every one of us is
allured by our own concupiscence. Augustine. Whyther God tempt or no.
Augustine writing of this thing in his book de consensa Euangelistarum, says
that there are two kinds of temptacion, the one of trial, the other of
deceit. And in deed as touching trial he denies not but that God tempts,
for that the scriptures do confess it. But with that kind of temptation which
deceaueth, whereof James wrote, he says that God tempts no man. But the
scriptures teach not so, as we have declared a little before of David, and
before him of Achab. Yea, and in Ezechiel the.14. chap. god says that he had
deceived the Prophet. And the same Augustine writes not after the same manner
in other places, as it manifestly appears in his books de Praedest.
Sanctorum de Cerrept. and Gratia ad Valent. and in his.5. book and.3. chap.
contra Iulianum. Wherefore the true interpretation of this place is, that every
man is therefore tempted of his own concupiscence, because al men have their
natural disease, which is corruption, and vicious lusts, which are together
borne with them, and do also grow and increase in them. Wherefore God
instylleth no malice of his, for we have enough at home. Therefore he cannot
be accused, for as much as the beginning of ungodliness and wickedness comes
not from him, God when he will brings to light our frowaconesse of mind.
but lies hid in us. He ought not therefore to be counted to give the cause
and fault, who yet when it seems good unto him, will for just causes have our
lusts and wickedness brought to light, and rule and govern our wicked acts,
thereby more and more to illustrate his justice and glory, and to advance the
salvation of the godly. Wherefore his singular goodness and providence is very
much to be praised, which can so justly and wisely use so wicked means.

Whence the variety of pronenesse to sin comes.
But if a man will ask, how it happens, that some are more prone to sins
than others, if (as it is said) malice and wyckednes ar rooted into us al from
our birth, neither is it need that any new or latter malice should be instilled
in us from God. And seeing that we are al brought forth of one and the self same
lump, and that lump likewise is altogether viciated, it should seem that
all also ought to be of a like disposition and inclination to wickedness. But
this is diligently to be weighed, that besides this disposition there happen
natural malices, manners, customs, wicked qualities, fellowshippes,
temperatures of bodies, sundry parents, diverse countries, and manifold causes,
whereby some are made more or less prone unto sins, which pronenesse of ours
God according to his justice, goodness, and wisdom uses and stirs it up,
governs and rules it. And this is not to be forgotten, that none of us have
so in our selves the beginninges of good acts, which truly please God, as we
even from the very birth have within us the beginninges of sins. For they are
inspired in us by the holy ghost, and we continuallye receive them of God,
neither burst they forth out of the corrupt beginninges of our nature.

Now rests to see from whence after the sin of Adam, that frowardnes and
corruption came, Whether the first corruption after the sin of Adam were
derived from god or no.
and whither it were derived from God to punish the wicked act which was
committed. I answer, that we may not so think: for man was for the fault
which he had committed allenated from god, wherefore he justly withrew from him
his gifts, favor and grace. And our nature being left unto it self, falls
and declineth to worse and worse, yea it comes to nothing, from whence it
was brought forth at the beginning. Wherefore we must seek for no other
efficie^t cause of that corruption.
Wherefore by that wythdrawing of gifts and grace, and departure from God,
which is the fountain of al good things, nature is by it self thrown headlong
into vice and corruption. But now let us return to the history.

12 Again the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the Lord. And the
Lord strengthened Eglon king of Moab, against Israel: because that they had
done evil in the sight of the Lord.

13 And this (Eglon) gathered unto him the Children of Ammon and Amalek, and
went and smote Israel: and they possessed the city of Palm trees.

14 And the children of Israel served Eglon king of Moab.18. years


The history declares first the sin which the Israelites committed: then it
shows the punishment wherewith for the same they were punished. As soon as
their good Prince was dead, the people fell again to their old wyckednes,
neither did they only commit those sins which before they had committed, but
to them they added some sins more grievous. The last fallinges were for the
most part more grievous than the first. Servitude is against the nature of man.
For the last falinges were for the most part greuouser than they which were
past: for at the least they added this, in that they more and more became
ingrate for the benefits past, when they again fell from God, with whom they
were before reconciled into favor. Their punishment was bondage, wherein they
were bound and served the Moabites. Without doubt a grievous kind of
punishment: because it is marueylouslye against the state and nature of man.
For all men by nature ar borne free. And bondage, as even the Lawyers also do
confess, Servitude was brought in by cause of sin.
was brought in by a common law among men agreing to natural reason. But it may
more truly be said yt it was brought in because of sin. Enemies when they were
overcome in war, were sometimes saved, and compelled to serve them which
overcame them: and there can be no just wars taken in hand, unless it be to
revenge some facinorous act. Wherefore we said well, that servitude was derived
of sin: and is therefore a grievous punishment, because it is against the
nature of man. Certain subiections are natural.
I grant in deed that this is natural, for the children to be obedient unto
the parents, the subject unto the Magistrates, the unlearned and unskillful
unto the wiser, and the weak ones must apply themselves to the mightier. But
this kind of obedience and service, namely toward them which are favorable
unto us, and seek for our profyt, is voluntary. Wherefore it very much
differs from the servitude, whereof we now entreat. For that voluntarye kind
of obedience might have been used when men were in perfect state: but this
which was brought in for sin could not be there. And bondmen are compelled
to serve not such as are their friends, but strangers and enemies, and that
in things unprofitable unto them, Which is the more grievous bondage.
yea and often times things hurtful and dishonest.

Servitude also is then far more grievous, when people are subject unto those
enemies which once were overcome by them, and whom before they ruled. These
euyls happened unto the Israelites. The Moabits were enemies to the Jews from
the beginning.
For the Moabites were enemies unto the Hebrews, even from the beginning, and
they hired Balaam to curse them, and in the wilderness they abandoned their
women unto them, for the which the people was afterward grievously plagued.
Farther, the Jews overcame the Moabites by war, and punished them sore, as
we read in the book of Numbers. Besides that, the Moabites were a filthy and
an infamed people: for their father was Moab, the son of Loath, who begat him
by incest. Nether would God suffer, that they should be admitted into his
church. For these causes therefore, was this bondage most hard, and especially
unto the Hebrews, which were already before by god set at liberty both from
the Egiptians and also from the Sirians, and by wonderful works from them
redeemed.

God strengthened Aeglon, namely in giving him courage and strength, making him
prompt, and styrring him up also by some certain occasions. And adjoined unto
him Ammon and Amalek. This may be understand two ways, either that Eglon
adjoined unto him self such confederates, or that god caused this league to be
made between these nations. And undoubtedly both significations are true: for
that which they did, they could not have executed without the will and aid of
god.

Let us note in this place, that the ungodly, which otherwise agree not very
well among them selves, The ungodly do easilye conspire against the people of
god.
do easily conspire against the people of god. Wherefore these three nations
being joined together, did easily overcome the Israelites, which were forsaken
of god. And they possessed the city of Palm trees, which is Jericho, as it
appears in Deuteronomy. and as it is before declared. But in that it is said that
they took possession of it, it signifies that they did not spoil it, and
leave it void: for they claimed it unto them selves, making the lands and
possessions thereof proper unto them selves. Neither is it vnlykelye, but that
they put in it a garrison of soldiors, for to oppress the Hebrews more
grievously. And yet I do not think, that they restored again the city unto
them, for that came to pass afterward in the time of Achab, as it is declared
in the book of Kings.

Why god punishes his people by ungodly ones.
But this peradventure may seem marvelous unto some, that god used to punish
his people by other nations far worse than they were: for as much as the
Ammonites, Amalekites, and Moabites were Idolatrers, and nations that were
overwhelmed in all kind of wickedness. To this I will answer, that it was the
providence of god, which (as I have before declared) does in ye sort punish
syns with sins, and in such manner chasten the ungodly, by others that are
ungodly. Whi god sooner punishes his own than he does strangers.
Farther, by it he declares, that these things though they be evil, yet they
can not escape, but that some way they shall serve his will. But whi he differs
to punysh nations, which otherwise are wicked, and his own he straight ways
punishes, this is the cause: because they pertaining to god, do sin against
his law which they know. Wherefore there is no cause why the Turks and Papists
though they sometimes prevail against us, to punish our sins, should flatter
them selves thereby, God will not easeli suffer his word being known and
received to be despised.
as though they were much better than we are, or as though their supersticions
were better than our religion. For if the Moabites, Chananites, and Assirians
were not counted better than the Jews, whom they overcame: no more shall the
Turks or Papists obtain the same, though sometimes by the will of God they
afflict the Gospellers. Wherefore god does quickly punish his, for his word
sake, which is among them published: he will not easily suffer, that his word
being received and known should be despised and escape unpunished. There were
undoubtedly very many liars and false men at Jerusalem, and yet god suffered
them, where as he straight way destroyed Ananias and Saphira. For he would
adorn and set forth ye gospel and holy ministry. And now that the Ethnikes do
see, how severely God punishes us, they may easelye conjecture what hangs
over their heads, according to the saying of Christ: If this be done in the
grene tree, what shall be done in the dry tree. And if by reason of their
blindness they understand not this, we ought diligently to remember it to our
great consolation. We read in Ieremye the.xlix. Chapter that the people of God
drank of the cup of the Lord, which seemed not so much to deserve it: Wherefore
the Edomites ought much more to look, to be one day punished with punishments
appointed for them. In Ezechiel also the.ix. Chap. god exhorts nations
against the Hebrews, to kill and spare none, but first they should begin at his
sanctuary. Peter also in his.i. Epistle the.4. chap. The time is (says he)
that judgment must begin at the house of God. But why he says that now is
the time, I think this is the cause, because he saw that all those things
which the Prophets had forespoken of the chastising of the people of Israel
before other nations, should chieflye of al take place among the Christians.
For those things which happened unto the Jews in a figure or shadow, do
chiefly belong unto us. Wherefore Christ being made manifest, and his faith
being spread abroad throughout the world, Peter thought that it should be
very soon accomplished, that judgment should begin at the Christians which
are the house of God.

Furthermore there are in the fellowship of the people of god always some holy
men still found, which when sharp affliction comes are proved, and as gold
in fire are made more bright, which the heavenly father will chieflye and
spedely to be done. The elect also, which have fallen, being admonished by
chastisementes and adversities, do use to return again into the right way.
And that the same may come to pass, God, who loves them excedingly, does of
his loving care provide. But such as are incurable, his will is that they
should quickly be broken, least they might longer than is mete, hurt and with
their contagiousnesse destroy other. These undoubtedly are the causes, why God
does sooner correct his own than strangers. It is not to be attributed to
hatred but to most fervent love. For the divine oracles declare under the
person of God. Whom I love I correct and chastise. Also a good householder not
regarding strangers, begins severe discipline at his own, when they sin.

The Israelites served the King of Moab.xviii. years. This with out doubt was
a long time of bondage. And not without desert, because ye Hebrews had
augmented their sin, either in yt they committed things more grievous, or else
because when they were reprehended and delivered, they fell again to their old
wickedness. This latter servitude was twice so long as was that wherein they
served the king of Mesopotamia.

15 And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord: and the Lord stirred them
up a Savior Ehud the son of Gera, the son of Iemini, a man having an
impedimente in his right hand, and by him the children of Israel sent a
present unto Eglon the King of Moab.


The kindness and mercy of God is far greater than the kindness and mercy
of men. For if any through their own default fall into any miseryes, The
kindness of God is far greater tha^ the mercy of men.
men for the most part have no compassion on them. Which manifestly appears
in ye Roman laws, in the Digestes de deposito vel contra. In the law, bona
fides, it is ordained that a pledge should not be restored, but should be
given to the treasorye, when he which owed the pledge does so offend, that he
deserves banishemente, because that he suffered it thorough his own default,
and therefore is it meet that he should be punyshed with pouertye. A woman
also, if she commit aduoutrye, did not only loose her dowery, but also she
ca^ claim none of her husbands goods, because through her own default she
falls into that misery: which is also written in Decretalibus, title de
consuetudine, chap. Ex part. But god is so merciful and long suffering that he
says in Jeremy: I will do that, which none of you will do. No husband would
receive again a wife which he has repudiated, especially for adultery sake.
But I, so that thou will return, will take thee again, although thou have
most filthilye played the harlot with thy lovers. This goodness of god ought
we also to follow not only to have compassion on those, It is not lawful by
violence to deliver those which are already fallen into the power of the
Magistrate.
which without their own fault are thrust into miseries but of those also which
for their faults are chastised. Wherefore we ought to be gentle toward them,
but yet so far as good laws will suffer: which I therefore add, lest hereupon
any should think that such as are condemned to death or are captives for
wicked acts which they have committed might be delivered against the will of
the Magistrates. Christ commanded, that we should forgive the repentant
sinner, not once nor seven times, but seventy times seven times: this does he
himself toward his people: they fall in deed oftentimes, and most filthily
sin, and yet when they return the heavenly Father both receaueth and also
delivers them.

He raised them up a Judge, Ehud the son of Gera. The common translation has
Aioth. Why the Latin and Greek translation have corrupted propre names.
But that is marvel, for both in the Greek and also the Latin translation,
very many propre names are corrupted. As Isaac, Ezechiell, Ezechias,
Nabuchodonosor, etc, for both those Nations abhorring from hard kind of
speaking have leuifyed and mitigated the Hebrew words after the form of
their own speech. And this man of whom we entreat, came (as the holy history
declares) of the tribe of Benjamin. For the familye of Iemini, whereof he was
borne, belonged unto the tribe of Benjamin.

Having an impediment in his right hand. The common Latin edition has turned
it Ambidextrum, that is, one which uses both hands a like, which
interpretation the Hebrewe phrase suffers not, which is thus: Ater iad
lamino, Why some are lefthanded.
that is, shut or taken in his right hand. And in the Latin also we say
claudum, quasi clausum, that is, lame. And there are two causes alleged, why
some are lefthanded. For either it comes of custom from their childhode, or
else by some impediment in the right part. But I would think that ye custom
of using the left hand from a child comes of some impediment, because
peradventure some pores of ye body are shut or stopped, by which ye spirits
which are instruments of moving, can not easlye have their course to the
sinowes and to the brawnes of the right hand. Otherwise children should of
their own accord be prone to use the right hand, for as much as in creatures,
by order of nature, ye right part is much stronger tha^ ye left. Neither do Iat
this present speak of those which do of purpose practice to use the left hand,
that thereby when need requires they may have both hands ready. For that
serves little to our matter, for the history by express words declares
that this Ehud had an impedimente in his right hand. Yet let us remember, yt
god for the executing of noble deeds and enterprises for the most part choseth
the weak and unapt ones, as the first epistle to the Corin. testifies:
Brethren, see to your calling: how yt not many noble men, not many wise men,
not many mighty men, are chosen, but God has chosen the folishe things of the
world, to put to shame the wise, and he has chosen the weak things, to
overthrow things yt are mighty, and also vile things, and things of no
reputation has God chose^ to confound things of reputation, yt no flesh should
be glorified in his sight, etc. For as much as the glory of God should easlye
be darkened by the power and wisdom of men. Wherefore yt that glory might
excel, he has elected the folyshenesse of preaching, he has also chosen unto
himself rude Apostles, and weak and feable men, by whom he might show forth
his wonderful works. Howbeit because that which was now done by Ehud seems
to be done by craft, subtilitye and guile, it is declared what occasion God
gave of this noble deed.

And by him the children of Israel sent a present unto Eglon. God would
therefore have this messanger chose^, that he might the easlier come to the
presence of the King. And I suppose that the present which they sent unto Eglon
was not the ordinary tribute which they paid, but some honorable gift, there by
to make the King more favorable toward the^, or else to obtain somewhat at
his hands. For tribute is called by an other word of the Hebrews than by this
word Minchah. For that word is derived of this verb Nachah, Minchah.
which is to bring, or to offer. Wherefore Minchah signified not only an
oblation, which was appointed for sacrifices, but also a present, and gift
presented unto noble men. And for that cause in the book of Genesis, those
things which Jacob as a gift sent unto his brother Esau, before he came unto
him, are called by ye same name. And when Ehud saw, that he was called to a
weighty and perilous enterprise, although he nothing doubted of the success
thereof, yet he diligently weighed with himself the dangers to the end he
might the more prudently avoid them. The calling of GOD causes us to have a
sure confidence, but yet it nothing lets, but that we may meditate how we
may warely, and wisely execute it. Ehud therefore reuoluing with himself the
things that were to be done, caused that thing to be made for him, which the
holy historye by these words declares.

16 And Ehud made him a sword with two edges, of a cubite length, and he girded
it under his raymente, upon his right thigh.

17 He presented the present unto Eglon King of Moab. And Eglon was a very
fat man.

18 And when he had presented the present, he sent away the people that bare
the present.

19 But he himself returned again from the quarry of stones that was in
Gilgal, and said: I have a secret errand unto thee O King: who answered: Keep
silence. And all they that stood near went forth.


Ehud made him a two edged sword, which having a most sharp edge on both
sides, might both easlye pearse and cut, and also quickly strike through
the body. He caused it also to be made but a Cubite in length that he might
the easlier hide it. What is the stature of Pigmeians.
Neither is this word Gamar any other thing with the Hebrews than Amah.
Wherefore the Pigmeians in Ezechiell the.xxvii. Chapter are called Gamerim,
and therefore so called, because they are but a Cubite in stature. And such a
short sword the Latins call Sica that is, a scayne. He hid it under his
garments: for if he had worn his sword openly, either he should have been
compelled to lay away his sword, or else he should have had no access
unto the King. For Tirannes will not easily admit armed men privately to
talk with them. Furthermore if it had been marked that at his departure when
he had killed the King, he carried not his sword with him as he brought it,
his enterprise would easelye have been suspected. He gyrded the short sword
upon his right thye, that he might handsomely take it with his left hand,
which only he was able to use.

Eglon was a very gross man It is no strange thing that Princes are troubled
with overmuch fatness. For they live delicately, they eat and drink
aboundauntly, and very little exercise their mind and body. Agag the King of
Amalek, is in the first book of Samuel described to have been such an
other.

And he sent the people away, namely those which brought the gift And
returned from the place of graven Images which were by Gilgall. Those men which
Ehud sent away, were either fellows of the message or they which bare the gift
that should be offered unto the king. By good advise he sent those away from
him, because he would talk with the king alone and without any arbiterers. And
he saw that when he had finished his purpose he should by flying away a great
deal better save himself being alone, tha^ he should do if he had many joined
with him, Conspiracies communicated to many have seldom good success.
because then he should not have been careful only how to save himself, but
also how to save others. Farther conspiracies when they are communicated to
many, have very seldom good success. Peradventure also he would endaunger
but himself only, and not bring others into danger with him. Wherefore he
sent them away that if any danger should peradventure happen, they might be
in safetye. And the place fro whence he returned is called Pesilim of this
verb Pasall, which is to cut or grave, because peradventure there were in that
place either a quarrey of stones, or else some Idols of late set up by Eglon.
For Gilgal was among the Jews counted a religious place.

For the arc of the covenant remained there a while, and we read that the
Israelites after they were passed over Iordane rested first in that place, and
celebrated a general circumcision there. Wherefore it might easlye come to pass
ye Eglon in contempt of the Hebrews, had there placed images and idols.

Ehud when he had there sent away his fellows, returned again alone unto the
king, to whom he said, I have a secret business to tell thee O King. As
touching the propre signification of his talk, he told the truth as it was.
For Dabar signifies with the Hebrews not only a word, but also a thing and
business. But because Eglon was thereby deceived, and he spoke these things
to deceive, he made a lie also. The King when he heard this answered, Hold thy
peace. Beckening unto him to tell it him secretly and not to speak it before
all them which stood then by.

20 And Ehud came unto him, and he sat in a summer parler alone, and Ehud said:
I have a message unto thee from God. And he arose out of his seat.

21 Then Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the sword from his right side,
and thrust it into his bellye.

22 And the haft went after the blade, and the fat closed the hafte, so yt he
could not draw the sword out of his belly, and the dirte came out.


As soon as they understood the will of the King they went all forth, and
Ehud was left alone with the King. And he satte in a cold parler, that is, as
they translate it, in a summer parler. The Hebrew interpreters do say that that
place was therefore the colder, because it had very many windows, so that the
air did the eassier come into it. When Ehud said: I have a message unto the
from God, he said not a message from Jehovah but from Elohim which is a
general name and is also attributed unto idols, he lies again although he
depart not from the signification of the words. He deceived the king, and that
he might the better beguile him he spoke after this sort. Eglon when mention
was made of the word of God, he rose up and honored it. And as it is to be
thought, the manner was so at that time in those regions. And in our days we
see oftentimes, that very many Princes which otherwise are far from
religion, yet to feign themselves most religious, will uncover their head at the
name of God and of Christ, and come to holy services showing great reverence
unto such rites rather of hipocrisye, thereby to deceive the common people and
where as they are ungodly they would be counted very Godly. This did Eglon
as far as I suppose: although I know that the Hebrew Rabines have far
otherwise feigned. For they say that because of this honor which he gave unto
the name of God, it came afterward to pass, A lie of (...) bin^.
that the daughter of Eglon Ruth I say, was converted to the Iewishe religion,
and was the great grandmother of David. That is altogether a feigned thing,
because it has no testimony out of the holy Scriptures. And yet I speak not
this, God bes^oweth benefi^ s upon men for kep^^g outw^rd ^^^^pline.
as though I knew not that God gives unto men abundant benefits for
obseruyng of outward discipline. Farther I mark yt Ehud got three co^modityes
by ye things which he thus did. First, as a Prophet he spoke unto the king
standing, whereas otherwise he ought to have spoken with him either prostrate or
else knelyng. Secondly the king might easelyer be stricken to death standing
than syttyng. Lastly whilst he was rising he could not so well mark Ehud
plucking out his short sword. And the stricken was so vehement that not only
the sword, but also the haft persed into the body of the king. Yea and the
whole skayn was so closed in with fat or grease that he was not able to pluck
it out. And the king was killed with the self same stroke. It is added also
that dyrte came from him, which things is wont to happen to those which dye
violently.

23 And Ehud got him out thorough the porche, and shut the doors of the parler
about him, and locked them.

24 When he was gone out, his servants came, and looked and behold the doors
of the parler were locked. Then they said: Surely he covers his feet in his
summer chamber.

25 And they tarried till they were ashamed, and behold he opened not the
doors of the parler. Wherefore they took a kay and opened the^. And behold
their Lord was fallen down dead on the earth.


Ehud when he went forth plucked the doors after him and locked them: for
there is a certain kind of locks made in such sort, yt without a kay, of a man
pluck the doors after him, they will straightway lock. Augustine.
And Augustine writing of this place, says that they are in Affrike every
where called Verudata. The servant of Egl n when Ehud was come forth,
suspected no evil, because as it is most lykely, he never changed his
countenance when he went forth but went his way fair and softly as though he
had committed no wicked act. And they thought that the king had shut Thedores,
because peradventure he would ease him self. And that is meant by the Hebrew
phrase wherein they say. He peradventure covers his feet. For in that work
men used to cover their feet with garments like a tabernacle or tente. And
whilst the servants of Eglon tarried and waited, Ehud had good leisure to
fly. But at the length when they were ashamed, they took a kay and opened the
doors. They use in courts to have many kayes of the kings chamber, which
the chamberlaynes diligently keep: and that is it which is here said that
they took a kaye. But when they saw their king so vily and miserably slain,
we must believe that they were amassed, so that they could not well tell what was
to be done. The thing was so strange which had happened. Peradventure also
they a while mourned and lamented or else provided to save them selves by
flight, because they had not well kept the king.

26 And Ehud escaped whilst they tarried, and was passed over the quarrey of
stones (or place of graven images) and escaped into Seirath.

27 And when he was come to his, he blewe a trompet in mount Ephraim. And the
children of Israel went down with him from the hill and he went before them.

28 And he said unto them: Follow me, for the Lord has delivered your enemies
the Moabites into your hands: and they descended after him and took the
passages of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not a man to pass over.


This place Seirath, which is here mentioned, is not the mount Seir in Idumea,
but is a place not far from mount Ephraim, as the words which follow do
manifestly declare. And Ehud being of a noble courage when he had slain the
tyranne, left not his matters half done and half undone, as did Brutus and
Cassius long sins when they had slain Caesar, with a trumpet he called together
the Ephraites, which were men very expert in wars, and those by his
authority he exhorted to battle, making them assured ye God had granted him
the victory. They therefore stopped ye passages of Iordane, that ye Moabites,
which were in the kingdom of ye Israelites, and had gotten part of it as it is
already declared, should not fly away. And lest others of the country of Moab
should pass over the river, to succor their own men, which were among the
Hebrews.

29 And they slew of the Moabites the same time, about a ten thousand men
which were all fat, and all strong men, and there escaped not a man.

30 So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel: and the land had
rest lxxx. years.


When they had stopped the passages of ye river of Iordane, they slew x.
thousand Moabites, which at ye time dwelt in ye dominions of the Hebrews. And
they which were slain were no common men, but in our history, are called
Fattemen, not that they were fat in body but in richesse. For they were rich
and very strong. For by their might and warlike power the Israelites were
brought into bondage. Wherefore it is very aptly a little afterward said, that ye
Hebrews when they had gotten this victory, were in quiet a very long time
after: for the Moabites were so consumed and worn away, by reason their notable
and excellent captains were lost, Augustine. What peace of the Romans was
longer the^ other.
that they were not able to renew war again. And therefore it is said, That
Moab was subdued under the hand of Israel. Augustine diligently considering,
that the la^d was at rest lxxx. years, has learnedly noted, yt the Romans
had never peace above the space of xl. years, which they had in ye time of
Numa Pompilius. For ye king setting aside the study of making war, applied
himself wholly to institute ceremonies. Wherefore thereby he concludes yt the
affairs of the Israelites were longer in quiet, tha^ were ye affairs of ye
Romans. Howbeit the Hebrews think, that in that su^me of lxxx. years are
comprehended those xviii years, wherein the Hebrews served the king of Moab,
that the supputation of the time might agree more justly.

There are two things which are to be marked in this place. First ye Ehud was
of a valiant, strong, and noble courage, whereunto was adjoined a singular
prudence. And of those gifts, faith was the principal fou^datio^, for unless
he had effectually believed god when he called him and also his promise he would
never have put his life and goods into so great ieopardies. The second thing
is, yt all things had therefore happy success, because god never fails
those, which obey him, followyng their vocation, whereby they feel that by him
they are called to accomplish any thing.

But now that we have briefly touched ye history, there are three places or
questions offered unto us which may not by any means be left vnspoke^ of. For
for as much as Ehud (as we have heard) used guile, and ye evil guile, made also
a lie, and drew his sword against his prince, me thinks it is worthy to be
declared, whether it be lawful for Christian and godly me^ to use guile.
Secondly whether it be lawful to lie, lastly, whether ye subjects may invade
their prince for any cause.

Of Guile.
NOw let us speak of the first. That which the Latins call Dolus (that is
guile) the Grecians call (...), so that their word and the Latins, is almost
all one. But the Hebrews call it Mirmah or Rimiah. Then we must know this, that
guile is there used, where any thing lies secret which is hidden, Plautus.
lest the guile should appear or easily be seen. Wherefore Plautus said, Guiles
unless they be covered by craft, they are no guiles. Thus much as touching the
name. Now let us come to the definition.

In the digestes de dolo malo lege. 1. The definition of guile. Seruius.
Seruius an interpreter of the law has thus defined evil guile, namely to be
a subtle invention or devise for to deceive another by, when as one thing is
done and an other thing dissembled. Wheresoever therefore is guile, there is
deceate by some dissimulation. Labeo.
It is true in deed yt Labeo an interpretor of the law reproved the definition
which Seruius brought and that by two arguments. Whereof the one is, that some
may be beguiled without dissimulation or evil guile. Wherefore the difinition
is more strayte and narrow than that which is defined, which all men count
to be an error. The other argument is, because some sometimes by dissimulation
do save and defend their own, or else other men's things, and yet thereby
they beguyle no man, neither do they hurt any man. Wherefore the definition is
applied unto other things besides that which is defined: An other definition
of guile. Vlpianu^.
which thing also is reproved as a fault. Wherefore he thus defines it:
Noughty guile, is all craft, disceate and subtility invented to beguile,
delude, and deceive an other. Vlpianus in the same place allows the opinion
of Labeo. Saving the authority of such a man I would say that Labeo did not
well in removing dissimulation from the definition of deceate. And as touching
the first argument which he has, I deny, namely that men may be beguiled
without dissimulation, because unless they should be together without sense,
they would not easily, be brought to receive and to take that which they
manifestly see will be hurtefull unto them. Wherefore it is necessary, that there
be some show and color added, which can by no means be done without
dissimulation. Then, where as he says that there are very many, which by
dissimulation may defend either their own things or else things of other
men's: I grant that, but yet I affirm that the same is guile, although it be
good guile, as afterward we shall more manifestly show. Wherefore as touching the
definition of guile, it seems that fayning or dissimulation is always to be
added. And for that cause the definition of Seruius pleases me better, which
definition for all that I my self would rather apply unto guile in general,
tha^ unto evil guile as he did. Being by this means peradventure moved,
because he understood by deceate that deceate which should be hurtefull.

Cicero in his first book of offices affirms that dissimulation or fayning,
Cicero.
pertayne chiefly unto the nature of guile. For he writes that Aquilius his
familiar friend being demanded what guile was, he answered, where one thing is
done and an other thing dissembled. To this sentence Augustine assenteth,
Augustine.
who (in his 7. treatise upon John expoundyng these words which Christ
pronounced of Nathaniel, Behold a true Israelite in who^ is no guile) says:
The^ it is guile, when one thing is done and an other thing feigned, etc. And to
speak this by the way, by this place is easily gathered, Augustine pre^ched
unto the people in ^^ti^e.
that Augustine preached his Sermons unto ye people in Latin, because ye
Affricians used the Roman tongue, although it were not pure, but in some
words corrupt. For there Augustine admonished the people, that Dolus which is
guile, signified not Dolor that is pain as many corruptly spoke, saying Dolus
illu^ torquet, that is as they meant. He is troubled with pain, when as in
that place they should have said Dolor and not Dolus: to take away therefore
the ambiguitie of the word, he says, that Dolus which is guile, signifies
fayning and dissimulation. And in the same place, to express what fayning
beguilyng signifies, he adds, Guile comes of doubleness of heart.
that it comes of doubleness of the heart. He allegeth the 12. Psalm,
where when mention is made of guilefull men, David says that they speak in
heart and in hearts, that is, as he interprets, in one part of their heart
they do se the truth, and perceive how the thing is: and in the other part they
go about dissimulation and disceate. But in those (says he) is no guile, which
when they se themselves to be sinners, do also count the^ selves for such,
nether do they disse^ble or boast of righteousness, as did ye Pharisey, when
he prayed by ye publican, and as other hipocrites also do. Nathaniel had no
guile in him, but not universally, because every man is a liar: and as Paul
writes, there dwells no good thing in our flesh, for as much as it is
altogether guilefull and disceatfull. It could be only said of Christ in
universal, that he wanted guile. But yet they are blessed (as David says) to
whom the Lord has not imputed sin, and in whose spirit there is no guile.
For in as much as they are regenerate especially as touching the spirit that
which they do they do it uprightly and simply: and such a one Christ affirms
Nathaniell to have been.

Augustine.
The same Augustine in the 10 Tome and his book of 50. Homelies the first
Homely, expounds this, which is written in the 33. Psalm of David what man
is he, which would live, and loves to se good days? Refrain thy tongue from
evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile, then (says he) it is guile,
when nothing is close and secret in the heart, and an other thing is expressed,
either in word or deed, Flatterers.
as flatterers use to do, which co^me^d some contrary to ye which they think,
thereby either to eat their meat and drink their drink, or else to get some
other benefit at their hands. And yt which he speaks of flatterers, may also
be understand of enemies and backbyters. But yt it is convenient yt men should
do yt which they do uprightly and simply, ^omere.
ye very Ethnikes saw. Wherefore Achilles in Homere says, that he does no less
tha^ death, hate those me^, which speak otherwise than they think. Wherefore
we think yt it is not ill to affirm a subtle invention to deceive a man,
when as one thing is done and an other thing dissembled is set for the general
word in the definition of guile.

Good guile and evil guile.
But after this definition we must add a distinction. For some guile is good
and other some is evil, we call ye good, which is not hurtful: and when as it
hurts none, but sometimes profits. But evil guile is hurtful, and ever
hurts somebody. These me^bres may easily be made plain by examples. Nurces
do continually use good guile toward their little ones, thereby to please and
still the^: for with them they disse^ble and feign very many things.
Phisitia^s also do after ye same sort deceive them yt are sick, because they
would heal them. Yea and Chrysostom in his first book de Sacerdotio, writes,
yt a certain Phisitia^ so beguiled one yt was sick of an agew, yt in drinking
water, he thought he drunk wine. And the same Chrysostom in the same place
affirms, Chrysostom.
yt he himself used a good guile, to beguile Basilius to take upon him a
bishopric, when yt he in no case was minded that way. David by this kind of
guile, escaped the hands of the king of the Philistia^s. For he feigned himself
to be a fool, so yt the king judged him unworthy to be punished. But of evil
guile there are very many examples in ye holy scriptures amongst which this
act of Ehud which we now interpret, is one. And yt is an other also which ye
Hebrews did, when they went forth of Egypt, who desired to borow both of their
neighbors and also of their friends precious garments, golden and silver
vessels, and yet they minded utterly to rob the^ of the^. To this kind also
belongs, that which Chusai the Arachite did in deceauing Absolon. This act
also may be counted among them, which Simeo^ and Leui perpetrated against Emor
and the Sichemites. I could bring a great many mo examples, if I would
nedelesse stand long about a thing that is manifest.

Of ye first kind of guile, which is called good and vnhurtful, no man will
co^te^d, but yt it is lawful to use it. But of ye other kind there is a doubt.
Whereof if I should be demanded, Evil guile is not prohibited to be used against
enemies
I would think this answer should be made. That we may not use evil guile with
our friends, but against our enemies it is not prohibited, because it is as it
were armor. Wherefore if it be lawful to make wars against the^ justly with
armor, guiles also are to be admitted according to the saying of the Poet:
Whether it be guile or power, who can require in an enemy?

Howbeit this is to be observed, Who be the true enemies.
that we speak only of those enemies which either God him self, or the
publicque wealth, or a just Magistrate declares to be enemies, and not those
which every private man hates. Farther I doubt not, but that seeing it is
lawful to repel violence by violence, when there is no other way to escape,
it is also lawful to use guiles against guiles. For he which repelleth
violence by violence, as the laws do permit, the same man is not to be
counted a private man, for as much as he is armed by the Magistrate. Wherefore
it is manifest that he does not against the law, but with the law. So he that
is suddenly oppressed, may lawfully escape by evil guile if he can. Moreover
the Scriptures teach that this kind of guile is just. Jerome.
For Jerome says, and it is written in the decrees.22. question 2. chap:
Vtilem. That Iehu did very well dissemble with the Priests of Baal, because he
could not have killed them all, if he had begone to put some of them to death.
Wherefore to gather them all together, he feigned himself to be much more
studious to worship Baal than was Achab, and by that mean he slew every one
of them.

But this is to be taken heed of, that they which are so destroyed by guile,
An act of the king of Denmark..
be very worthy of punishment, and as they are commonly called, notorious
offenders, and such as can not be punished by an ordinary way. For which
cause the king of De^marke of some is co^me^ded, which by guile destroyed most
pernicious thieues, which he could not take. For he feigned a war, and made a
proclamation that as many as would come should receive wages of him, and
promised unto the thieues pardon for their wicked acts which they had
hitherto committed. But I (as I shall afterward declare) do not so fully allow
such examples.

Augustine (as it is found in the 14. question the 5. chap: Dixit, Augustine.
and it is a place in his questions upon Exodus) shows that the Israelites
deceived ye Egyptians, when they borrowed of the^ golden and silver vessels, and
yet it was not to be counted a fault in the^, when as for all ye no man
doubted, but yt they did it by evil guile. The same 23. question.2. Dominus
which is taken out of his questions upon ye book of Joshua, rehearses ye place,
wherein it is said ye God commanded the Hebrews, to fight against the city of
Hay by wiles, which without doubt belong to guile. Jerome upon the 17. chap: of
Ezechiel, brings this sentence as a worldly sentence: Jerome.
namely, Whether it be guile or power, who can require in an enemy?

Howbeit he assenteth unto it, although he denies yt it can take place where
an oath is made. But I will strayt way expound that. Ambrose in the 14.
Ambrose.
question the 4. permits guile, or gainefull fraud against enemies, and
after this manner he interprets a place of Deuteronomy. where God gave the Jews
liberty to put their money to usury to strangers, namely, yt where the war
is just, there also may usury take place. For the goods of the enemies ar ours,
and they may lawfully be taken away from them. And it skill not, whither it be
done either by violence or by guile. There are which allege that which is
written in the latter Epistle to ye Corinthians the xii. chap: When I was
crafty, I took you by guile. But yt makes nothing to the purpose, when as it
is most manifest yt he spoke it in mockage. For he feigned, as though he had
received money of the Corinthians by other me^, which by himself he refused to
receive, which thing he strait way puts away. But those examples which we
brought first, do manifestly prove that it is lawful to use guile, yea and
evil guile against enemies, namely in keeping close our Counsels and doings,
and vsyng coulorable works and words. The civil laws permite guile against
enemies.
Nether do ye civil laws otherwise teach. In ye Code de co^merciis et
mercatoribus Lege. Non solu^. The emperor decreed not only ye no gold should be
carried unto ye barbarous nations yt were enemies of ye pub. wealth, but also yt
by subtle guile or policy ye gold which they had, should be taken from the^.
Also in ye digestes de captiuis postliminio reuersis. Lege. Nihil interest, it
is decreed, ye captives how soever they returned into their country again,
should recover again their own goods, and old state, whether they were sent
home again, or whether they escaped by violence, or by guile. Although
afterward in Lege postliminio Paragrapho captiuis, yt be restrained, if yt they
return with a mind to tarry at home. For if they should either promise or swear
unto their enemies to return, they should not enjoy ye right of returni^g.
Attilius Regulus.
Wherefore Attilius Regulus enjoyed not ye benefit, because he was sent to Rome
to persuade ye senate for ye cha^gi^g of captives. Wherefore for as much as he
promised and was minded to return, he might not by ye laws use evil guile.

A division of an other.
By this also appears yt to be true, which a little before was said, namely yt
we may not use evil guile against our enemy, if there be an oath made. And yt
this may the playnlyer be understand, we must divide an oath as ye lawyers do,
so yt one kind of oath is called an approving or an affirming of a thing, and
an other a promising of a thing, or as they speak, ye one affectiue, and ye
other promissory. For when we swear, either we do affirm or else deny some
thing to be or to have been, which we ought never to do with evil guile, if we
add thereunto an oath. Or else we promise to perform something, and for as much
as faith is to be kept eue^ with our enemy, ye same faith also is not to be
broken with evil guile. Wherefore if those things which we have sworn unto
our enemy to keep and observe, are temporal goods, as are money, honors, and
life of the body, for these things the name of God is not to be profaned.
Wherefore David in his.15. Psalm. says: He yt swears to do evil, and changes
not. In Hebrew it is thus written Nischoah Leharah Velo Iamid, Kimhi.
which place I know Kimhi expounds of those, which vow unto God certain
hard and sharp things, which serve to ye subduyng of the flesh, neither do
there change ye which they have promised. But ye sentence me thinks seems
more simple, if it have a larger sense, namely of an oath hurtful unto us,
which a good and godly man will not abrogate or change. Jerome.
Jerome also upon Ezechiell the 17. chap. is of this opinion. For there ye Lord
says yt he was very angry against Zedechias, because he had broken ye oath
which he had made unto Nebuchad-nezar king of Babylon. For although the Jews
counted him as an enemy, yet as Jerome teaches, he was now as a friend, when
he had by an oath promised his faith unto Zedechias. For ye belongs unto
friends one to be faithful unto the other. Ambrose.
Wherefore evil guile ought there to take no place. And Augustine in ye 33.
question ye 1. chap: Noli existimare, writing unto Bonifacius admonishes him
to keep faith with his enemy also. Augustine.
Ambrose also in ye 28. question ye 4. chap. Innoce^s, admonishes the same,
and has ye same sentence in his book de officiis, where he brings the
example of Joshua toward the Gabaonites, who although he might have made the
oath void and of no force, yet by ye consent of God he caused it to be kept
and ratified. Neither suffered be the Gabaonites to be slain, who^ for all yt
he punished because of ye guile which they used. An oath for an unjust thing is
to be broken.
But if ye oath be given for an unjust or ungodly thing, it is utterly to be
made frustrate, because an oath ought not to be a bond of iniquity. Neither is
it of necessity, yt a man to be absolved of these kinds oaths should come
before some judge. Which I therefore speak, because ye Pope claims this right
unto himself, namely to release a bond in such kind of oaths, and as they
commonly say, to dispense with them, as it appears in the 15. question the 6.
The Pope dissolved both lawful and unlawful
where Nicholaus absolueth one Treuerensis. And his pride and arroga^cy has so
far now at the length extended his right or power, that he absolueth not
only unlawful oaths, but he abrogateth also just and lawful oaths when it
seems good unto himself. So Zacharias losed the french men of an oath,
wherein they were bound unto their king, and he put the king from his kingdom,
and substituted Peppine in his place. But that is not to be meruayled at, when
as it is a common saying in the court of Rome at this day: A proverb of the
court of Rome.
Non est regum and magnatu^, sed mercatorum stare iuramentis, that is: It is
not mete for kings and noble men, but for merchantes to keep their oaths.

Wherefore if there be an oath made, guile is not to be used unless peradventure
the one party to whom the oath is made, shall go from the conditions and
couenauntes, for then the common saying must take place, he that breaks
faith, Jerome.
let faith also be broken unto him. Wherefore Jerome ad Nepotianu^ commends
this saying of Domitius ye Orator unto Phillip, when thou countest not me for a
senator, I also will not count thee for a Consul. But hereof we have testimonies
also in the holy scriptures: for Paul in ye first to the Corinth: the.7. chap:
writes, as touching faith given in matrimony, If ye unfaithful depart let him
depart. A brother or a sister is not in subjection unto such, but God has
called us in peace. And those things which are alleged of an oath, I
understand also to be of the same efficacy in promises and covenants. In which
promises and covenants I affirm, ye godly and just men ought both to use
plain and simple words, and also faithfully to fulfill them. Sophistical
reasons of the Thracians.
Wherefore ye Thrasians are justly and worthily condemned who after ye truce was
made for 30. days, robbed and spoiled by night, excusing their act, for yt
their truce was made for ye day and not for ye night. Neither did ye legate of
ye Romans uprightly, yea he Sophostically dealt with Antiochus, The guile of
the Legate of the Romans against Anthiochus.
who when he had decreed yt the one half of the ships should be given unto the
Romans and the other half to ye king, commanded them al to be divided and
cut in sonder in very deed. But he did it that the king should be utterly
destitute of a warrelike Navy. Wherefore what soever a godly man shall promise,
he ought before deeply to weygh with him self, whether he be able to stand
by his words and promises. Wherefore Jerome has written unto Celautia: Jerome.
things which thou shall say, think thou swearest them.

As touching the end of the question, yt the thing may be the more manifest,
there remain certain doubts to be examined. First if a man promise unto any man
armor and help and that for the space of three or four years: and in the
mean time ye same man becomes a traitor to his country, and makes war
against it, whether in this case he ought to perform his faith, or else by
evil guile to break it? I answer, yt neither in this case, nor in the like,
is faith to be kept: because, When an oath is made of a lawful oath an
unlawful oath is not to be kept.
as it is manifest, a mischievous act hapeneth in ye mean time which with a
safe conscience we may not help. Neither in very deed is either evil guile or
else perjury here committed. For he which has sworn is not changed, but he to
whom the oath was made. For oaths can pluck away or diminishe nothing of
those bonds which went before. An oath dissolueth not former bonds.
Wherefore for as much as every man is bound unto the word of god and to ye
health of his country, before he swereth any thing, ye which is afterward
sworn must be understand, so yt the first bonds be kept unbroken. The same
also must take place in vows which are vowed. For although a man vow sole
life, for so much as he before was bound unto ye word of God, wherein it is
said, yt it is better to mary tha^ to burn, and they which ca^ not keep the^
selves chaste let the^ mary: No oath or vow takes away the bond unto the
commandments of God.
he does not by reason of the vow which followed take away the first bond.
Wherefore if he can not keep him self chaste, or if he burn, he ought by the
commandment of God to mary: neither can any oath or vow that is made, take
away the power and strength of the commandment of God.

There arises also an other doubt, of those princes, which have given their
public faith or safeconduict unto heretics for to come unto Counsels or to
communications, whether they ought to stand by their promise, Whether faith is
to be kept with heretics
or violating their oath to keep still the heretics and to punish them. I
answer, that they ought to keep whole and pure the promise made unto them.

But say they, we will easly grant yt it is then sin, when we give promise
of a naughty thing. But if after we have promised, we keep and stand to our
promises, we fall into an other grievous sin. For we execute not the office
committed unto us, neither do we obey God. For it is our part according as God
has commanded, to punish and to correct Heretics, that they wast not the
Church, and go forward to defend their pestiferous doctrine among the godly.
Neither does any man doubt but that Magistrates ought to defend the Churches.
Wherefore it seems that Heretics are not to be let goo, when we have them
once in our hands. I answer, that this in deed is the office of kings, to
punish and to correct heretics, but yet then when they have them in their
power. But if they give them a saueconduct to come unto them, They which by a
saueconduct come unto kings and princes, are not in their power. Of Iehu.
then can they not say that they have them in their power. For they came under
a promise and an oath to go and come harmeles, otherwise they would not have
come. Wherefore if there be a promise made, it is not lawful to break it. And
this is the cause, why I before said, yt I ca^ not easly allow ye act of the
king of Denmark. Neither also would I judge Iehu to be without sin, when he
promised yt he would worship Baal, thereby to get all Baalites together: except
peradventure he manifestly knew, that he was by God stirred up to do it. But of
this thing we will entreat in an other place. Let them therefore, which defend
the Counsel of Constantia, cease to lay for their pretense, that John Husse
with a safe conscience could not be let go, because it is a heinous sin in
all princes, if they suffer heretics to wandre at liberty: for because that
which they say is so farforth true, as they shall be in their power. But when
they come by a saueconducte given them, then are they at liberty, neither are
they said to be in the power of the princes, which call them.

Whether faith is to be kept with thieues.
Other are in doubt, whether it be lawful to use evil guile against thieues,
so that if a man fall into their hands, and by an oath be made unto them, is
suffered to go home upon this condition, there to gather money to redeem
himself, whether (I say) he ought to return unto the^ with the money, or
without it, if he ca^ not get it, as he hoped to have done, especially if in a
manner he were assured, either to live in perpetual servitude, or else to be put
to a most cruel death. I answer, that in my judgment he ought to return
unto them, for as much as in this case there is no danger, but as touching
goods of this world, of money (I say) liberty, and life of the body, which are
not so much to be esteemed, that for their sakes an oath, or the name of GOD
should be violated. And the verse of David before brought serves aptly for
this purpose. And this sentence is so firm and true that even an Ethnike,
Attilius Regulus.
Marcus Attilius Regulus I say, knew it. For he returned to Carthago, where he
knew certainly, that either he should be in perpetual servitude, or else lose
his life, and that most cruelly. Neither can thou answer me, that he did
foolishly therein: because the Romayne laws (as we have before said) de
captiuis, and postliminio reuersis, in lege postliminiu^ Paragrapho Captiuus,
do ordeyne and holyly decree that he should not be counted to enjoy the
benefit of the law postliminius, which had promised to return again. Farther
the nature of man persuadeth the self same thing, for it is civil and
delights in society.

Wherefore next to God and godliness toward him, there is nothing which ought
more to esteem, then faith, which wonderfully helps humane fellowship. For
without it, it is not possible for men to live together. Farther who will not
say, that the money, liberty, and life of one man is rather to be lost, then
the money, libertyes, and lives of innumerable men? For if couenantes and
promyses be not kept with those thieues, henceforth they will give credet to no
man that they shall take, they would send home none to their own house to
fetch their ransom, but as many as they take, either they will kill them, or
else keep them with them in miserable and perpetual bondage.

Lastly, this I think good to admonish you of, that in oaths let signs of
universality trouble no man. As, if a man promise and swear unto his friend
that he will be an helper unto him in all things, or if a man promise and
swear unto a Scoole or unto the Church, that he will do and observe all
things which it shall decree. How it is lawful to swear certain things
universally.
For all such kind of speeches (as it appears by that which we have said)
are to be understand, so that the obedience of the word of God be kept. And
undoubtedly, although that clause be by the nature of another understand
always to be added, yet for all yt it is the duty of godly me^ to express it,
when they are received into any university, College, office, corporatio^, or
fellowship, and according to the custom are compelled to swear for to observe
statutes, laws and decrees. It is the sure way (I say) by express words to
testify, yt they will observe all those things, unless they shall find yt any of
ye same ar against ye word of god. And as touching this matter I think I have
spoken sufficient now. Our Ehud used evil guile. I grant: but yet against his
enemy. Neither does the scripture make mention of any oath that was made
between him and Eglon ye king. And though there had been an oath, yet he had been
quitte of it, for as much as ye stirring up of god, whereby god opened unto him
his will, had abrogated it.

Of Truth and of a Lie.
NOw rests to entreat of the second question, namely. Of Truth.
Whether it be lawful for a good and godly man to lie. But first before I
entreat of a lie. I think it good somewhat to speak of truth, which
undoubtedly is an excellent virtue.

Truth (as says Tullius de Inuentione) is, whereby things which are, Tullius.
which have been, and which shall be are spoken unaltered. Wherein we first note,
that it consists in words: for (says he) they are spoken, not yt I am
ignorant, yt both dumb men, and also other me^ speak sometime by signs,
Augustine.
but because (as says Augustine in his first book de doctrina Christiana)
words among other signs are ye principal and most plain. Farther we are
hereby taught, that truth is not only to be considered as touching one
difference of time, but as concerning three differences, for he says, both
those things which are, and which have been, and which shall be. These things
undoubtedly are then spoken truly, when they are set forth unaltered, that is,
even as they are, and by speaking made neither more ample nor less than they
are. Augustine.
This self same thing almost has Augustine said in his book de vera
Religione chap: 36. where he writes, that the truth is, whereby ye which is,
is signified. Truth is a virtue.
And it is a virtue because by it men are made prone and ready to speak that
which is true. The general word of it is equality, The general of virtue is
equality.
whereunto is joined in stead of difference, this voice, namely, of words, to
the things which are signified. And as it is well known of all men, all
virtues leuel unto the midst, and fly from extremities. Two faults in
speeches.
Wherefore in kind of speches thou shall find two faults namely if thou shall
speak more than the thing is, or else less than the thing is. Neither is
virtue content with the midst only: for we must add also circumstances,
which use continually to follow it. Wherefore the truth is not always to be
spoken to every man, neither at all times, nor yet of every thing, and yet we
must not lie: but it is wisdom sometimes to keep close those things which we
will not for just occasion have known. He which should vaunt abroad every where
and unto all me^ the gifts of God given him, he should be counted foolish and
unwise: as contrary, he which should boast of a crime, What truth requires.
wherinto by humane weakness he has fallen, should rightly, and worthily be
reproved. Truth therefore requires this, that those things which we have within
us as touching our sense or will, be signified of us as it is, prude^tly and
rarely. Farther the virtue, whereof we speak, has chiefly simplicity joined
unto it, and it is very much contrary unto doubleness. Besides this it is a
part of justice. For it re^dreth unto things their words and to a neighbor
the truth which of duty longs unto him, without which truth humane
fellowship can not consiste. For if a man should continually suspect him self
to be deceived by any man, he would never believe him in any thing. Aristotle.
When an Irony is lawful.
Whereby amongst men al trades and societies perish. Aristotle in his Ethikes
affirms that truth declineth sometimes to defection: especially when any man
speaks of himself. For ye wisdom requires, that a man boast not of
himself. Wherefore Paul in his second Epistle to the Corinthians the 12: chap.
writes: If I will boast of my self, I shall not be unwise: but I will not,
any man should think of me, more than he sees in me, or that he hears of
me. By these words, he reproves those as foolish and unwise which do boast
and glory even of those good things which they have. And he says that he will
abstain from it. He which speaks less of himself than it is, lies not.
Neither (says he) do I require, yt any man should think more of me, tha^ he
either sees in me or hears of me. Neither is he which speaks less of him
self than it is, straightway to be accused as a liar. For yt which is more
co^prehe^deth and contains in it self yt which is less. For whosoever has
fifty, he may say truly yt he has twenty, although he speaks not all that
he has. Howbeit the same man, We may not lie for humilicyes sake.
if he should affirm that he had but only.xx. or else should deny that he had
any thing, without doubt he should lie: which is not to be committed, either
for modesty sake, or else (as they say) because of humility.

And as for testimonies of the holy scriptures which do stir us up to speak
ye truth, I could undoubtedly bring a great many: but a few shall suffice. It is
written in ye x. commandments: Thou shall not bear false witness, which
commandment is not only to be observed in judgment, but in all things which
in our talk we testify to be either true or false. Farther, God is set before
us of us to be followed, whom the scriptures every where pronounce to be true.
Wherefore we also ought to be most fervent lovers of the truth. And for that
cause in Exodus the 18. chap: Iethro counseled Moises, yt he should make rulers
over ye people, such men as feared god, strong men, lovers of the truth, and
which hated covetousness. David says also: Behold thou have loved truth, and
therefore thou have made me to understand wisdom in the inward and secret
parts of my mind. These words sufficiently declare, yt we are for ye cause
taught of god both by inward inspiracio^, and also by outward doctrine:
because he is a lover of the truth, neither does he easily suffer, yt his
children should either err, or be deceived by lies. In Zachary the viii.
chap. it is written: Speak ye the truth every man to his neighbor, which
self same sentence Paul uses to the Ephesians and he commands the same
unto the Collos. But to ye Corinth. the latter Epistle he says of himself and
of the other Apostles, yt they ca^ have nothing against ye truth. Yea and the
Scribes and Phariseys being joined with the Herodians, after this sort
flattered Christ, whom they went about to entrappe in his speech. Master, we
know yt thou acceptest no persons, yea thou teach ye way of god in truth.
Hereby they declared yt it is a singular virtue for a noble and notable man, to
prefer the truth before all things. But let these testimonies of the holy
scriptures be sufficient at this time. Now rests to entreat of a lie. Of a
lie. Augustine.
Augustine (who wrote of it to Cose^tius) affirms a lie to be a false
signification of a word. And undoubtedly all those things which before are
declared of truth, we may by the contrarity affirm of this vice. And chiefly
it is contrary to yt that Marcus Tullius affirmed of truth, namely that to be
truth, whereby things which are, which have been, and which shall be, are spoken
unaltered. And a lie is yt, whereby is ye signified which is not: for Augustine
co^trarywise spoke of ye truth. This vice is so hurtful, yt it makes a man
which is infected with it, In equally is the general word of a lie.
to rejoice and to be glad in false things. The general word of truth was
equality, and of the vice ye general word shall be inequality. And as ye
virtue was very nigh joined with simplicity: so belongs a lie to doublenes.
Truth is a part of justice. But a lie is a part of injustice. By truth humane
fellowship is kept, but by a lie it is hurt and overthrown. Augustine.
But to return to Augustine who writes, yt he is said to lie, which with a will
to deceive speaks yt which is false, and that to lie is nothing else, than to
speak against the mind: for liers speak otherwise than they have in their
heart. But the desire to deceive, is utterly against justice, love and amity,
Three things joined with a lie.
which we mutually owe one unto an other. There are three things therefore in a
lie: first to speak that which is false: secondly his will in speaking: and
thirdly a desire to deceive. The first part longs to the matter of a lie:
the other two parts pertayne unto the form.

A division of a lie.
A lie is divided into a Serviceable lie, a Sportfull lie, and a Pernicious lie.
And this division comes of no other thing but of the effects, or of the
ends. For this is evermore true, that the ends them selves, may have the
nature both of the cause and of the effect. For lies do either profit, or
delight, or else hurt. The end of a pernicious lie, is to hurt. The end of
a Sportefull lie is to delight: and the end of a Seruiseable lie is to profit.
But Aristotle, because in virtue he chiefly considers the mean, Aristotle.
therefore if in speaking thou excede that mean, he calls that boasting: but
if thou want of the mean, he names it Irony. And in that evil this is chiefly
hurtful, because an evil or false opinion is engendered in the mind of our
neighbor. A lie is both evil and also to be avoided.
For the which cause the same Aristotle seems to have said well, that a lie is
both evil, and also it is to be avoided. Which thing we may also prove by
testimonies of the holy Scriptures. For to this belong al those things which
we before brought to stir us up to speak the truth. And very many places are
here and there set forth, which detest lies. David says: Thou will destroy al
those which speak lies. In a lie is an abuse of signs.
There are reasons also which persuade us the same: whereof one is, in a lie is
an abuse of signs. And for as much as it is not lawful to abuse the gifts of
God, a lie is understand also to be prohibited. Farther (as it is before said)
a lie is contrary unto humane fellowship, for in lying the conceauinges of the
mind are not communicated unto our brethren, but lies. Wherefore seeing man is by
nature made unto fellowship, and communication, when he speaks false things,
he fyghteth with his own nature. And as Augustine says: Faith is therein hurt,
Augustine.
for he which hears, believes those things which are spoken. Wherefore that
faith, which he gives unto other men's words, is made frustrate. And so great
a thing cannot be hurt without blame. And lastly every man by lying, leeseth
his own credit: for being taken in a lie, he shall ever after be suspected.
Wherefore though he would, he shall not be able by admonition or correction to
help his neighbor. For the which cause the fault which is in a lie,
pertains not only to the hurt and loss of our neighbor, but it is in it by
the general word, as by that which we have already said manifestly appears.
But among lies, What kind of lie is most grievous.
that lie seems to be most grievous, which is committed in religion, doctrine,
and godlynes, because in no other thing can guile be more hurtful and
pernicious. For there if we shall err, we are thrust from the eternal felicity.
Augustine.
Wherefore Augustine in his Encheridion the.18. chap. has very well written
that they in deed do sin grievously, which deceive trauelyng men, showing
them a contrary way: but they are much more detestable, which as touching
godlynes by lying, do bring men into errors.

If the three kind of lies should be compared together, I mean a pernicious
lie, a sportefull lie, and a serviceable lie: A pernicious lie, Two euyls in a
pernicious lie
should rightfullye be counted more detestable, because in it are two euyls.
One is the abuse of signs: the other is, the hurt of our neighbor. And that
both of the mind which deceives (which thing is common unto all lies) and
also of the thing which is lost. But as for other lies, although they are not
without fault, yet is that not a little diminished by the good added unto it,
either of delectacion, or of help. And in deed a sportefull lie, has in it
but a small and sclender nature of a lie: A sporteful lie.
for as much as the falsehood is straightway found out, neither can it be long
hydden from the hearers. Augustine.
Yea Augustine writes that such lies are not to be counted for lies. But as
touching a serviceable lie, the judgment of it is more dark and hard. For
some deny it to be sin: for they say it has a consideration to this, Whyther
a serviceable lie be sin.
to help our neighbor, whom we ought in words and deeds to relieve as much
as we can. Wherefore they think, that thereby comes no abuse of signs, for as
much as al our things ought to have a respect to the commodity of our
brethren. Neither do they think that in it is sin committed against humane
society, when as by this kind of lie men are made safe, and kept harmless.
Farther, they say, that where as it is in the holy scriptures written, that God
will destroy al those which speak lies: the same is not to be understand of
every kind of lie, but only of a pernicious lie. Which thing Augustine also in
his Encheridion the.18. chap. seems to grant. Plato.
They bring also the opinion of Plato in his book de Repub, who although he
feared away the people from lies, yet he gave Magistrates liberty to lie,
especially in making of laws. But in my judgment, the thing is far
otherwise, neither will I easily grant that a serviceable lie wants the abuse
of signs. Aristotle.
For Aristotle in his book (...), defining words, says that they are notes
of those affections which we have in our mind. Whereby it follows, that al
they abuse words, which signify things to be otherwise, than they think in
their mind. Farther, that reason which they bring of love, is a very weak
reason. For we ought to help our neighbors: but yet by just and honest means,
otherwise let us permit thefts, to be bestowed in alms giving. But the
sentence of the Apostle must abide firm and stable, which is, that evil
things must not be done, that thereby good things may come to pass. Neither
do I think that true, that by those kind of lies humane fellowship is not
hurt, for as much as take away faith, and there remains almost no traffic
among men.

But as touching that sentence of the holy scriptures, wherein it is said: Thou
shall destroy al them that speak lies. We grant with Augustine, that that
sentence is not universally spoken, for as long as the power and conjunction of
faith abides with Christ, so long those sins are not imputed, which otherwise
of their own nature should be our destruction. And this also will I easily
grant of serviceable and sportful lies, because they are not so much against
charity, as are pernicious lies. But this can no man deny, that in making a
lie, we do against faith. And we must utterly grant, that he which lies,
loses thereby his own credit, so that afterward he cannot profitably
admonish, reprove, or with fruit give counsel, as he ought to do. For they
which hear him, will easily believe that he seruiceably lies, to call them
again into the way, and not that the thing is so in very deed. A contention
between Jerome and Augustine.
This undoubtedly was the cause that Augustine was against Jerome, who in a
manner attributed a serviceable lie unto the holy scriptures. If this (says he)
should be so, the authority of the holy scriptures would soon decay. For the
Readers of them would easily say, that the thing is not so, but that it is so
written, An error of Plato.
to keep men in doing their duty. Nether ought the authority of Plato much to
move us, for as much as in that place he very much erred, granting that in
things pertaining unto God, they might feign fables, which might serve to
bring forth and keep a good opinion of them. Without doubt we may not mock
in matters touching God. Farther, the law of God is equal, and the self same,
as it will not have the people to lie: so also it prohibiteth the same unto the
Magistrates.

Who are to be excused of a lie.
Howbeit they cannot justly be accused of a lie, which in their talk, ar far
from doublenes. For sometimes it comes to pass that some speak that which is
false, and yet they thought the same to be true. With which men they also ar
excused, which have given their promise to do a thing, which afterward they are
not able to perform. Because at the beginning when they promised it, they were
fully minded to do that which they had promised: and therefore they have not
lied. If so be that afterward they do not accomplish those things which they
have said, the same happens by some other means. And sometimes it happens,
that he which delivers his sword to some man to keep, falls afterward mad:
wherefore he ought not to restore the swoorde unto him, which has left it with
him: because a new case (as the Lawyers say) requires a new help. After which
self same sort Paul is excused, who said that he would go into Spain, when
as for all that he went not thither. Paul also promised the Corrinthians to
come unto them, which he performed not: but yet he lied not: because when he
spoke those words, he was determined so to do, but God had otherwise appointed
the thing, as Gelasius has well written, as it is found in the.22. question the
2. chap. Beatus. Undoubtedly the disposition of God dissolueth and breaks all
bonds, as it is written in the.19. question, the.2. chap. duae sunt.

Hiperbole per^^ne^^ not al^^yes (...).
But what shall we say to Hiperbolical places which are in the holy Scriptures,
which at the first sight seem lies? I answer, although there the sentences in
signifieng, hold not the mean, as touching quantitye, yet as touching the
substance it keeps it. For those Hiperbolis or excessive speches amplifye a
thing, for their nature is not only to set forth the thing, but also to bring
men into admiration of them, which thing by that manner of speech is most aptly
attriued unto. Neither have lies there any place, forasmuch as they breed not
in the minds of the hearers and readers any froward or false sense. A mean
therefore is there to be kept, not undoubtedly of the thing, but of the
substance. The Evangelists also are not to be accused of a lie, when as they
setting forth the acts of Christ, do not al use the self same words. For
unto the truth it is sufficient that a thing be set forth as it was: but it is
not required that it be expressed by the self same words. Yea it is often
times done through the goodness of the holy ghost, that the form of the
narration should varye. For by that means those things which are not
sufficientlye expressed in the one, are more amply declared by an other.

But they use to object the Midwiues of the Hebrews, Of the mydwyfes of ye
Hebrews and of Rahab. Augustine.
which although they lied, yet God rewarded them: The same also happened to
Rahab the Harlot, or a table keeper. Augustine answers, that in the Midwiues
the lie pleased not the Lord, but the faith and fear which they had toward
God, and the mercy which they showed unto the Israelites. And the same does the
holy history by express words testify. And no otherwise must we think of
Rahab. Gregory.
But Gregory's opinion I never like, who says, that for the lie which they
made, their eternal reward was turned into a temporal reward, because for the
celestial blessedness it is said that God builded them houses. But I judge, that
by reason of the true faith, which was strong in them, so that it brought
forth love and the fear of God, which are just and lawful fruits thereof,
although of infirmity they lied, yet were not they therefore bereued of eternal
felicity.

Abraham also is objected, who said yt Sara was his sister. Augustine. Whether
Abraham made a lie of Sara.
But therein (as Augustine teaches) he lied not: he told that which was true,
but yet he spoke not all the truth. And that is of no man required, to utter all
that is true, which he knows. He did not tell that she was his wife: yet
because she was his kinswoma^, he might according to the manner of the Hebrews
truly say that she was his sister. But he seems not to be utterly excused:
for although he lied not in calling her sister, yet it seems that therein he
fell, because in not opening that she was his wife, he put her in danger of
leesing her chastity. For he left her naked of that aid, whereby only she
might have been defended from coming into strange loves. Neither is it
necessary that I should labor utterly to defend Abraham: Augustine.
For he was a man, and by over much fear he might easily fall. Howbeit
Augustine mencioneth, that Abraham was then in danger two manner of ways: one
was least he should be killed himself, the other was the adulterye of his
wife. The first danger he might avoid by calling her sister: but the other,
namelye, least she should be defiled, he was not able to repel, for although
he had said that he was her husband, that would not have served to have
delivered her from the filthy lusts of the Egiptians. Wherefore he committed
unto God that, which he himself could not turn from him. And in that which
he had in his own power he would not tempt God. This seems to be Augustines
judgment. But what I judge, I have before declared.

But did not the same Abraham lie, when he said unto his servants: Tarry here,
and we will return unto you: when as for all that he was minded to sacrifice his
son: which if he had done, he should not then have returned together with
his son, but alone? Jacob also by express words lied, when he said unto
his father: I am Esau thy son. Paul likewise (as it is written in the Acts)
says that he knew not that he was the chief priest, which commanded him to
be stricken: when as yet (as Augustine testifies in his Sermon de puero
Centurionis, and as it is written in the.23. Question the.1. chap. Paratus) he
knew him well enough. Paul (says he) was brought up among the Jews, he had
learned the law at the feet of Gamaliel, wherefore he knew very well the chief
priest from other men. Iehu also manifestly lied, when he said that he would
worship Baal. Augustine. Two kinds of men.
Augustine writes that there are two kinds of men mentioned in the holy
scriptures. For hereby it is manifest that some were by God made so perfect,
that although they were not without sin, yet we may not rashly judge evil of
them, but rather see how we may defend those things, which in their works have
a show of sin. They oftentimes were so moved by the holy ghost, that God by
their words and acts would make open certain secrets. Wherefore we must
believe that oftentimes they both spoke and also did certain things by
prophecy. So Abraham, when he said: we will return unto you, prophesied
unawares, that which should be. For with Isaac in safetye he returned from the
mountain. And Jacob in saying: I am Esau thy son, would declare nothing
else, but that he was the man, to whom the degree, blessing and dignitye was
due, which things seemed to pertain unto Esau that was first borne. Paul also
prophesied what should at the length become of the high Priest, namelye this,
that he should be destroyed like a wall that is plucked down and as a thing
altogether fained and hipocritical. Farther (says Augustine) there were other
men not so perfect, but wicked, which in the old Testament are mentioned
either to have lied, or else to have done something which seems sin. Of those
men he thinks, we may not so labor for to defend a good fame and opinion of
them. Of this sort of men was Iehu: for although that murder pleased God,
which he executed upon Achab and his familye, and also his weeding out of
Baal, and the worshippers thereof, yet for all that he was a wicked king, neither
departed he from the woorshipping of golden Calves. Wherefore it is lawful for
us to grant, that in lying he sinned.

A distinction to be noted.
And (as I think, and before admonished) by this only distinction, we may
easily dissolve this doubt. Namely, that those men were styrred up to lie,
either by the spirit of man, or by the motion of God. When they did it as men,
we will not deny but that they sinned: but when they spoke so by the
inspiration God, we will marvel at their sayings and doings, but let us not
take example by them, or follow them.

Of dissimulation.
Dissimulacion is of two kinds.
But what shall we affirm of dissimulatio^? I answer, that it is of two kinds.
One is, which has a respect only to deceive. And that forasmuch as it
differs not much from a lie, it is undoubtedly sin. If one being wicked,
do feign himself to be good and holy, the same man without doubt is an
hipocrite: and in that he dissembleth, he haynously sins. Whosoever also
having a malicious and envious heart against any man, does flatter the same
man, and dissembleth to be his friend, he is not without sin, yea he is
infected with a detestable dissimulation. But there is an other kind of
dissimulation, which tends not to deceive any man, but serves only to keep
counsels secret that they be not hindered. And this dissimulation is not to be
repudiated, or to be condemned as a syn, forasmuch (as we have already declared)
that it is not always required, that we should open what soever truth we
know. What Christ me^t by his dissimulation.
So Christ being most innocent, took upon him the flesh of syn, and hid his
innocence and divine nature. And that not to deceive mortal men, but that he
might suffer for the salvation of me^t For if he had been known to have been
the Lord of glory, they would never (as says the Apostle) have crucified him.
The same Christ fained also before two of his Disciples that he would go
farther. He did not that to deceive them, but he therefore a while opened not
himself unto them, to reprove them of their incredulity, and to instruct them
by testimonies of the scriptures. Therewithal also he signified how far he
was from their hearts. Or as Augustine interprereth it, he shaddowed unto them
his departure into heaven. Wherefore it manifestly appears, that in those
dissimulations there was no lie, seeing his words did well agree with the
thing signified.

And David when he fell into a most great danger before Achin King of Geth,
changed his countenance and fained himself a fool, Of the dissimulatio^ of
David.
and for that he seemed such a one, he escaped. Here some say that he
committed no dissimulation, but that God, to deliver him, struck such a fear
in him, that his senses might be taken from him, and so did these things which
are rehearsed of him in the first book of Samuel. Wherefore in his Psalm
which begins: Psalm. 34.
I will always give thanks unto the Lord, he gave thanks unto God for so great
a benefit. And therwithal in his act by the inspiratio^ of God, he shadowed
what Christ should suffer for our sakes, namely that he should be counted as a
fool and a mad man. Either else we answer, that David is not altogether to be
excused of sin, if as a man being more afeard than was mete, he sought for
this kind of help. But if he by the mocion of God did it wittingly and with
knowledge, we will not accuse him of sin, although we may not follow his
example. Neither is it lawful, that any man should feign himself to have
committed any crime, which he has not perpetrated, Gregory. Augustine.
although Gregory says that good minds will there acknowledge a fault where
none is. Augustine writes more truly and soundly of that thing in his.29.
Sermon de verbis Apostoli. For he writes: In so faining, if before thou wast
not a sinner, thou shall be made a sinner, namely in saying yt thou have
committed that ill which thou have not perpetrated. It is lawful in deed for
every man to confess himself to be a sinner in universal. But this or that
crime in special no man ought to receive in himself, which he has not in very
deed committed. Farther, we must note, that this is true, that it is not
required of us, that we should open the truth every where, and in all places to
speak all that we know: but yet in judgment the same is not to be permitted.
For when two of us are examined as witnesses, there we are bound to testifye
that which we know serves for the thing, whereof at that time we be demanded.

Whither it be lawful to lie to preserve the life of our Neighbors.
But there arises a more hard doubt, namely, whether it be lawful to lie for
to preserve the life of our neighbor. Augustine of a lie to Consentius says:
Augustine.
If a man should be in very great danger of death, and the same man also
should know that his son also were in the like extreme danger, which
happens to dye, and thou know of his death: when the Parent shall ask
thee, lives my son or no? and thou art sure that he also will dye, if thou
shall tell him that his son is deceased: what would thou do in this case?
whyther thou say, he lives: or whither thou say, I cannot tell, thou
lie. But if thou shall answer, that he is dead, al men will cry out upon
thee, as though thou had committed manslaughter, and as though by thy heavy
news thou had been the occasion of the death of this father being sick
and lying at the point of death. Augustine grants that it is a hard case,
neither denies he but that as a man he should be moved, and peradventure it
might so happen, that affections would not suffer him to speak that which is
just and right. But all the length he concludes that he should not lie. And he
adds moreover, A similitude.
that if thou know that any unchaste woman loves thee inordinately, which
also threateneth to kyl her self, yea and will do it in very deed, unless thou
wylt grant to her wicked lust, whether therefore thou ought to be entised to
commit any filthye thing against chastitye? I think not. So also says he, thou
ought not for ye saving of thy neighbors life to offend against the truth.
And moreover what a window should be made open to lies, if we should otherwise
judge of this. For that which one shall think to be lawful for life, an other
will judge that he may do the same for money, an other for estimation, or for
defending of lands and possessions. And so shall it come to pass that there will
be no measure or end of lies. We may not suffer (says Augustine) that any man
should kill his own soul, for the corporal life of an oother man. Yea and he
affirms that we must not lie for the salvation of any man's soul. Every lie
(says John) is not of God: but we ought not to speak those things which are
not of God.

What if murderers should persecute a man to kill him, and thou know yt he
lies there hidden where thou presently art, and they demand of thee if thou
know whither he be there or no? He answers, that if thou be of a valiant
courage, and as it becomes a Christian, you must say: where he is I know, but I
will not utter it, do ye what ye will. But when the matter comes to this point,
yt for the safety of any man's life thou must make a lie, know thou that thou
ought to commit the thing unto God, and that thou have nothing there more to
do. Either thou must answer, that thou will not betray him, or else thou must
hold thy peace. But by thy silence the murderer will suspect that he is in thy
house, and then thou shall seem to have given occasion of his taking. But in
very deed thou have not so done. For thou can not let him to think what he
will. Wherefore the matter is rather to be committed unto God, than that thou
should make a lie. Howbeit thou must very well weigh with thy self, namely,
to speak so, that thou say not al, and yet speak not falsely. For in these
cases I thyncke it is not forbidden, yea I judge it is most lawful to speak
doubtfullye. And as touching this question, this is sufficient.

As I deny not but that our Ehud manifestly lied, so will I also say that he was
stirred up of God so to speak. Those words undoubtedly, although they
deceived Eglon, yet without controversy they declared that, which was in very
deed true, namely the word of God, and that he had a secret thing to do with
the king.

Whither it be lawful for Subjects to rise against their Princes.
But leaving these things, let us come unto the third question, whereof for as
much as I have somewhat before spoken, I think not to speak of it abundantly
in this place, least I should be more full of words than is needeful.

Let us divide subjects, as we have before divided them, so that some of them
are mere private men, and others are in such sort inferiors, that the superior
power in a manner depends of them, as among the Lacedaemonians were the (...),
and at Rome the Tribunes of the people. Those which only are subject, and
counted altogether private, ought not to rise against their Princes and Lords,
to dysplace them of their dignity or degree. The two Apostles Peter and Paul
have commanded the same, namely that servants should obey their Lords, how
rough and hard soever they be. Farther, the sword (as it is written to the
Romans) is given only to the powers. And they which resist the power, are
said to resist the ordinance of god. God would that the Jews should obey
Nabuchad-nezar, and he was angry with Zedechias the king, because he fell from
him. Yea, and Jeremy by the commandment of God admonished and exhorted the
people to pray for the health of the king of Babylon. David also would not
stretch forth his hand against the anointed of the Lord: when he might have
done it with out any difficulty, and to his great commodity. The godly
soldiers of Iulianus the Apostata, obeyed the same Iulianus in fighting and
pitching their camps: nether did they at any time (being also armed) rebel
against that most cruel tyran. Phocas when he had slain Mauricius, possessed
the Empire by great violence and injustice, and wrote to Rome to Gregory, who
obeyed him as his Prince, and gave unto him great reverence.

But there are in public weals other, which in place and dignity are lower
than Princes, and yet in very deed they elect the superior power, and by
certain laws do govern the public wealth, as at this day we see in done by
the Electors of the Empire, and peradventure the same also is done in other
kingdoms. To these undoubtedly (if the Prince perform not his covenants and
promises) it is lawful to constrain and to bring him into order, and by force
to compel him to fulfill the conditions and covenants which he had promised,
and that by war when it ca^ not otherwise be done. By this means the Romans
sometimes compelled the Consul, whom they themselves had created, to go out of
their offices. The Danes in our time did put down their king, and held him long
in prison. Polidorus. Virgilius.
Polidorus Virgilius writes, yt the Englishmen sometimes compelled their kings
to render account of the money which they had noughtely consumed. Neither are we
ignorant that Tarquinius the proud, Of Brutus and Cassius.
was by the Romans for his overmuch cruelty and arrogance put out of his
kingdom. I will not speak of Brutus and Cassius, which slew Caesar: but
whether they did it justly or otherwise, most grave me^ vary in the opinions.
And I in examining their enterprise by the rule of the scriptures, do not allow
it. Because they gave not unto him the tyranny or Empire of Rome, but he
usurped it himself by violence and power. And God (as Daniel testifies)
transferreth Empires and kingdoms. And although it be lawful to resist tira^nes
which invade a kingdom, yet when they have obtained the Empire, and that they
do govern, it seems not to belong to private men to put them down. Wherefore
forasmuch as the kingdom of the Jews was such a kingdom, that in it al men
depended of the king (for they were not chosen by the noble men, but by
succession the posterity of that family governed, which God had also
commanded) and therefore in the laws in Deuteronomy. and in the.1. book of Sam.
wherein the right of a king is constituted, there is no liberty granted to any
to resist them. Yea and sometimes it happens that some of them were killed. But
yet we never read ye god allowed the murder of them: yea he punished the
murderers. When God at any time would trouble the kings of Judah: he did it by
the Babilonians, Assirians, and Egiptians, but not the Jews. He only armed
Iehu against his Lord: which thing as it was peculiar, so also must not we
take example by it. He destroyed Saul also by the hands of the Philistians,
and not by David.

Neither am I ignorant how many things are decreed of this matter in the
Code, and in the digest in ye law Iulia^ maiestatis. But I studieng to be brief
do of purpose ouerpasse these things. And although I know right well yt the
Ethniks in the old time appointed rewards for such as killed Tirannes, yet I
have answered that godliness and the holy scriptures do not allow the same.
Undoubtedly if it be lawful for the people to put down kings that reign
unjustly, no kings or Princes should at any time be in safety. For although
they raygne justly and holily, yet they cannot satisfy the people. And so much
of this question.

31 After him was Sangar the son of Anath: and he smote of the
Philistians.600. men with the goade of an ox: and he also saved Israel.


What this Sangar was, or of what tribe or family, the holy scripture does not
declare. But this conjecture is very likely, yt when the Hebrews had a long
time lived in peace under Ehud, as soon as he was dead, the Philistia^s began
to vex them. Wherefore Sangar being stirred up by God, defended the people from
coming again into subjection under the Philistians. And among other victories,
of the which I think there were very many, this is chiefly me^cioned as a
miraculous and wonderful victory. The Hebrews think that this notable act of
this Sangar happened in the time of the oppression under Iabin. But they bring
no reasons why they should so think. Farther, Josephus.
by the holy scriptures it appears not how many years the Hebrews were kept by
this Judge: yet by Josephus we may know, yt he fought for the Israelites but
only one year. That which we translate with the goade of an Ox, the Grecians
call (...), that is, with the foot or staff of a plow. The common translation
in latin has with the plow share. Augustine.
Augustine (as it appears by his questions on this place) redeth, beside
calves of the kyne. Which clause seems to have no sense in it. And he judges
yt this Sangar in this murder of ye Philistians slew peradventure many oxen,
which are called calves. And he adds that ye Egiptians used in his time to
call all kind of oxen of what age soever they were, by ye name of calves. As we
(says he) call Chickens, all universally as many as ar comprehended under the
kind of hens, with out any difference of years and age. In the mean time he
confesses that it is not so in the Hebrew, and he has said truly: for in ye
Hebrew bibles we read Melamed. Which word is derived of this verb Lamad. And
that verb, in the co^iugation Kal, is to learn, but in the co^iugation Pihel,
it is to teach. Wherefore Melamed might be turned a teacher of Oxen, Kimhi.
namely to be yt instrument whereby Oxen in plowing ar guided. And least we
should doubt what it is, Kimhi writes yt it is a rod or a staff, in ye end or
top whereof there is fastened a prick. And ye Chaldey paraphrast testifies the
same, which in steed of ye word has put this word Perasch: and that word
signifies to prick. Wherefore it is an instrument whereby oxen in plowing ar
pricked. Wherefore the word Peraschim signifies horsemen, of spurs, whereby
horses are by the riders upon them, pricked. And thus much by the way.

The old writers think that in this place is used the figure Synechdoche, as
though Sangar did not alone kill so great a number of Philistians, but that he
with other rusticall men fought against them, which rusticall men were armed
with no other kind of weapons than with goades of Oxen. In deed I know that
the holy scriptures many times do admit change of numbers, which whither in
this place it be to be received, I do very much doubt. Yea (if I should speak
the truth as it is) I think the contrary: forasmuch as in this present hystory
me thinks no vulgar act is set forth, but rather a wonder or miracle. But
howsoever it be, this I think is godlily and profitablye to be noted: That any
thing may serve us for weapons, when the word of God is added. A slyng and
stones of a river furnished David nobly. The iaw bone also of an Ass was a
weapon to Samson, and a nail to Iahel, wherewith she slew Sisera. And
contrariwise, what kind of weapons of fence so ever we devise, unless it be
strengthened by the word of God, it shall be utterly unprofitable and serve to no
purpose. The walls of Jericho, which otherwise were well fenced, fell down of
their own accord: Psalm. xxxiii.
and the great sword of Goliath the Giant was made to cut the throat of his own
master. Wherefore it is most truly said in the Psalms: A king is not saved by
much strength, and a horse is a vain thing to save a man. But what do we
speak of weapons, when as the same happens unto al creatures? For so long
every one of them is and abides, as the word of God caryeth and vpholdeth
them. For althings whatsoever they be, do by yt only both abide and consist.
Yea and the Sacraments themselves, taking away the word of God, are utterly
nothing. For what do we think bread, wine, or water to have by themselves,
which may be profitable for our salvation, Augustine.
or serve to stir up or to strengthen faith? Undoubtedly nothing. Wherefore
Augustine has right well said: The word comes unto the element, and it is
made a sacrament. Wherefore in that.vi. hundred Philistians were killed with an
Ox goade, we must believe that the same came to pass by the commandment of
God, and by the power of his word.

The.iiii. Chapter.
1. ANd the children of Israel began again to do wickedly in the sight of the
Lord, when Ehud was dead.

2 And the Lord sold them into the hand of Iabin king of Chanaan, which raygned
in Hazor, whose captain of war was called Sisera, which dwelt in Hazoreth of
the Gentyles.


The cause of the oppression of the Israelites is mentioned, namely, because
when Ehud was dead, they began to do evil, that is, to sin. They abused
therefore the quietness and tranquillity of the four score years, in which they
lived peaceably, under their Judge, neither declined they only from the right
way, but also they increased in syn. This is the nature of carnal men, that by
prosperytie they are not made the better, but farrs woorser.

When Ehud was dead. It cannot be told how easily the people fall from the
right way, when as holy Princes are also removed from the same. Wherefore that
is not unworthily to be counted a most grievous plague when the pyllers both of
the Church and also of the public wealth are taken away. There is no mention
made of the death of Sanger.
But what should be the cause, why there is no mention made of the death of
Sangar, we cannot easily tell. The Hebrew interpreters say, that it therefore
happened, because he continued but a little time, and for that cause is scarcely
counted among the Judges: nether was the delivery which by him happened,
perfect, which is in the next chapter by express words declared. Farther, it
is in deed said of him, that he saved Israel: but it is not added as it is of
Othoniel and Ehud, that the land was any years at rest under him.

And God sold them. When al things seem unto the ungodly to be in quiet and at
rest, and that they think that on no side any hurt or evil can happen unto
them, God even then uses by a certain wonderful manner to stir up great
miseries and calamities out of ashes and sparckels, which were thought to have
been long time quenched. Iabin the king of Chanaan was killed by Joshua (as it
is written in his book the.xi. chap.) and Hazor his kingly City destroyed and
burnt with fire. Wherefore none would have looked that war should have been
renewed again on that part. But an other Iabin, the son or sons son of
him that was killed, took courage again, and invaded and oppressed the
Israelites. But least all that should be ascribed unto his strength, it is added
that God intermedled in the matter, when he sold the Hebrews unto him, that
is, granted unto him to use them as he thought good himself, even to all most
vile services, and that as most abject bondslaues. And this calamity is
amplified by many names. First, by the longnesse of the time: for it
continued.xx. years, when as before Othoniels time they were afflicted
only.viii. years. And before Ehud was stirred up, they served.xviii. years.
It is declared that this servitude was very cruel, because Iabin oppressed the
Hebrews by strength and violence. And Josephus writes that it was in such
sort, that they durst not so much as to lift up their head. And the cause of
his so great crueltye was, Why Iabin was so cruel unto ye Hebrews.
because he remembered that the Jews in the time of Joshua had killed his Father
or Grandfather. And had overthrown the kingly City Hazor, in wasting and
burning it with sword and fire. Farther, the violence and power of his tyranny
is by this declared, in that he had so great a number of iron or hooked
chariots, and (if we may believe Josephus) he went a warfare with three hundred
thousand footmen, Josephus.
ten thousand horsemen, and three thousand chariotes, among which.ix. hundred
of them were of iron. Neither for all his great host had he ben able to have
brought the Hebrews under subjection, unless God (as we have before said) had
sold the^. And undoubtedly, it is to be thought that Iabin used these.ix.
hundred chariots, which the history speaks of by name, to afflict the region
of the Jews, which he had now conquered, and to the end they should not fall
from him.

And he dwelt in Hazoreth. How reigned this man in Hazor, when as in the time
of Joshua ye City was overthrown? To this we answer, first yt after ye
overthrow which happened under Joshua, ye rest of ye Chananites fled into a very
huge wood which is called Of the Gentiles, and there by little and little they so
increased their power, yt they set over themselves a king, which was of ye
surname of ye first king, namely his son, or else his sons son, which is
therefore said to have reigned in Hazor, because he still retained ye title of ye
place, as very many kings do at this day, which keeping ye title of certain
places do call themselves kings of the same places, wherein in very deed they
have no possession at all. But the Hebrew interpreters think ye Hazoreth was a
large and huge wood, which contained in it many cities and Castles. Unto which
sense the Chaldey paraphrast leans, which turns that word, munition of
Castles. This day also in Germany, there is the wood of Hercinia, wherein are
both Cities and very many Castles. And it is called, Of the Gentiles, either
because a great number of diverse people resorted thither, or because those
places were built and fenced by the labor of many Gentiles. We might
otherwise also answer, and that much more likely to be true: namely, yt the
citi of Hazor was after Joshua, recovered and reedefied by the Chananites, so
that it was the kingly city again, where ( Iabin either the son or else ye
sons son of ye first Iabin) reigned. And to this reedefieng the times
served very aptly. For from the burning of Hazor there were passed.150. years
more or less, yt is, eight years of bondage, which happened under the king of
Mesopotamia.40. years of Othoniel.18. years of servitude under Eglon king of
Mesopotamia.80. years, wherein Ehud peaceably judged the Israelites, and.20.
years this Iabin afflicted the Hebrews. Wherefore he might easily reign in
Hazor being again reedified, and this makes with it, because it is not
written of this Iabin that he dwelled in the wood, but that Sisara his captain
dwelt there. For kings use not to keep an house in their kingly city, but
rather to have them in their borders or in the fields, where they may be prompt
and ready to accomplysh things to be done.

3 And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, for he had.900. chariottes
of iron, and.20. years he opressed Israel very sore.

4 And Deborha, a Prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, judged Israel the same
time.


Both by the things before declared, and also by these which are now spoken
of, we may understand the frowardnes of man's nature: for unless it be by
troubles and adversities bruised and broken, Men in desperate things call upon
God.
it regards not God, yea as long as there is any hope of other helps, it
neglects God and uses them. But when things ar past all hope and do
seperat, then god is required, as a certain holy ankerhold. Wherefore it is no
maruayle, though the Hebrews deferred their repentance 20. years long. Surely
I am persuaded, that they did oftentimes groan and cry. But because they
lamented not that they had offended god, and wickedly committed sins, but
only desired him to take a way the pain and long punishment, and paraduenture
murmured against God, therefore were not their prayers heard. But now at the last
at the.20. years end, when with faith and godlynes they prayed unto God,
Though God defer his help yet we must not despair.
he heard their prayer, and granted them their requests. By this example let
us learn yt we must never despair of the help of god, although it be
deferred. We all in deed desire to be strayghtwaye delivered of our troubles:
but god in his counsel thinks not good so soon to take away his punishments.
Wherefore that which he has decreed we also must patiently suffer.

Deborah a Prophetess. God which before to deliver Israel had chosen Ehud,
which had an impediment in his right hand: and then Sangar, a husbandman armed
only with the goade of an Ox: now choseth a woman, by whose conduct the
Jews might be delivered from a most grievous enemy. God uses both strong and
weak a like.
Wherefore by these examples he abundantly shows that his power is not
bound unto noble men and to strong men, but he can easilye use the weak and
feable ones. Yea and he shows forth his power rather in these, than in the
other. Howbeit to declare, that it is all one unto him, as touching both kind
of instruments, sometimes he uses the strong ones, and other sometimes the
weak ones. And when he takes the weak ones, he straight way endueth and
adorneth them with his grace and gifts. For as much therefore as he had unto
this ministerye chosen Deborah, being weak in kind, he straight way endewed
and adorned her with the spirit of prophecye. By which grace, and
peradventure many other more miracles, she was by God constituted, and by
miracles confirmed, as she that was elected unto so great an office.

Neither only this woman was endewed with the sprite of prophesy: We comen
prophetesses did openly instruct the people.
for in the holy scriptures we read of other women which were likewise
inspired by the holy Ghost, Mary the sister of Moses, Hanna the Mother of
Samuel, Holda in the time of Josias the king were Prophetesses. And in the new
testament Marye the Virgin, Elizabeth the mother of John, and Anna the wife of
Phanuel, the daughters also of Phillip the Deacon (as it is written in the
Acts of the Apostles) were prophetesses. Neither do I think that we may
deny, that some of those weomen endewed with the sprite of prophesy, did
openly teach the people, in declarynge those things unto them which God had
showed unto them. Forasmuch as the gifts of God are not therefore given, that
they should lie hidden, but to advance the common edifying of the church.

And yet hereby it follows not, that that which God does by some peculiar
privilege, we should by and by draw it for an example, because according to
the rule of the Apostle we are bound unto an ordinary law, whereby both in the
Epistle to Timothy, and in the first Epistle to the Corrinthians, Why women are
commounded to keep silence in the church.
he commands that a woman should keep silence in the church. And he
assigns causes of this silence so commanded, namely because they ought to be
subject unto their husbands. But the office of a teacher has a certain
authority over those which are taught, which is not to be attributed unto a
woman over men. For she was made for the man, whom she ought always to have a
regard to obey, which thing is also appointed her by the sentence of God,
whereby after sin committed he said unto the woman: Thy lust shall pertayne
unto thy husband. Farther the Apostle gives an other reason, drawn from the
first fault, because, as he says, Eua was seduced, and not Adam, wherefore if
women should ordinarily be admitted unto the holy ministry of the Church, men
might easily suspecte, that the devil by his accustomed instrument would
deceive the people, and for that cause they would the less regard the
Ecclesiastical function, if women should be believed. It ought therefore to be
committed only to men, and that by ordinary right and the Apostles rule. And
though God do sometimes otherwise, yet can he not be justly accused, forasmuch
as all laws are in his power. Wherefore if sometimes he send any prophetess,
and adorn her with heavenly gifts, if the same woman speak in the church,
undoubtedly she is to be heard: but in such sort, that she forgette not her
own estate. Two places of Paul conceliated.
Wherefore these two testimonies of Paul which seem to be contrary one to an
other, may easelye be conciliated. To Timothe the first Epistle he writes,
that a woman ought in the church to keep silence: which thing toward the end
of the first Epistle to the Corinth. he most manifestly confirms. And in the
same epistle he commands, that a man prophesieng or praying should have his
head uncovered, but a woman when she prophesies should have it covered: whereby
undoubtedly he teaches that it is lawful for a woman both to speak and also
to prophesy in the church. For he would not have commanded, that in this doing
she should cover her head, if she should utterly keep silence in the holy
assembly. The thing is in this manner to be taken, that we should understand
the precept of silence to be a general precepte, but the other which is for
the covering of the head when they pray or prophesy, pertained only to those
which were prophetesses. They undoubtedly are not forbidden to prophesy, for the
common edification of the church, Why women prophetesses were commanded to
have their heds covered.
but to the end by reason of their office extraordinarely committed unto them,
they should not forget their own estate and wax proud, they are commanded
to have their head covered: whereby they might understand that yet they have
the power of man above them. Farther whereas to Titus the ii. chap. it is
commanded that the elder women should admonish the younger women of temperance,
and that they should love their husbands and children, and diligently look to
their famely, this is not to be understand of public doctrine or
ecclesiastical sermons, but of private exhortacions, which it is meet, that
the elders have to the yongers.

5 And the same Deborah dwelt under a Palm tree, between Ramath and Bethell,
in mount Ephraim. And the children of Israel ascended up to her for judgment.


How Deborah judged the people.
The word of judging (as we have admonished) in this book oftentimes signifies
to revenge, and to set at liberty. Which signification if we now follow, we
shall se that Deborah was appointed unto the same, namelye to deliver the
Israelites. And as soon as they by the inspiracio^ of God understood that,
they ascended to her, to hear of her what they should do, to attain unto
liberty. But if any man will have the word of judgment to signify to set laws,
or to give sentence of controversies. I will not be much against it. For so
great peradventure was the oppression of Iabin, that now the Israelites could
not use ordinary judges. They therefore being taken away, when they saw that
Deborah was endewed with the spirit of God, they had rather be judged by her,
than by the Chananites. Josephus.
But Josephus inclines more unto the first interpretation, and he says that
they being oppressed by their enemies came unto Deborah, whom they knew to be
a most holy woman and endewed with the sprite of god, and desired her to pray
unto God for them, which she both did and was heard.

As touching the ministry of the church, how women may be preferred, and in
what sort they are not apt, we have before declared. And this we ad now, yt
when churches, ar newly planted, when there want men to preach the Gospel, a
woman may at the beginning be admitted to teach, but in such sort, that when
she has taught a while, some one man of ye faithful to be ordained, which
afterward may minister the sacraments, teach and faithfully execute ye office
of a pastor. But because Deborah was not only a Prophetess, but also in
setting at liberty, governed civil things, I might therefore demand, whether a
woman may be appointed to govern a pub: wealth. But I have determined to
entreat of this question in an other place, namely when I come to ye history of
Athalia in the books of the kings.

The wife of Lappidoth. What this man was we can not by the holy scripture
certainly know. The Hebrews think that he was Barak: but this is only the
reason why they think so, because the signification of these names have great
affinity one with an other. For Barac signifies lightninge, and Lapidh is a
lamp, A fained tale the Rabbines.
whose plural number is as well Lapidim as Lapidoth. And lamps or torches and
lightninges are very like. Other think that this woman was so called of her
handye craft, for that she made matches for the candles of the sanctuarye.
But that the Rabbines feigned as though God does never bestow freely his grace
or gifts. For they signify by their fable that she by desert became a
prophetess and a judge, because her works served for the tabernacle and that
very religiously. Others also write that she was so called, because in that
hour, wherein she was endewed with the sprite of prophecy, her face was made
shininge, casting forth beams, as the holy history writes of the countenance
of Moses. But all these things are trifles, and lean only unto the
interpretacion of the words, neither ar they by any means proved by the holy
scriptures. But there is a certain conjecture that Barac was not the husband of
Deborah, because she dwelled in mount Ephraim and he in Kades of Nepthalim. And
it is not agreeable that the wife and the husband did dwell one so far distant
from the other. Unless you wilt say yt Deborah went the^ only to mount Ephraim
when the people should come unto her. And if we grant this, the^ will it be
marvelous, why her husband went not thither together with the other Israelits.
Wherefore that way seems to be the plainer, namely to say yt she was the wife
of Lappidoth: but therefore she gave not this governance unto her husband. For
that thing should be governed by man's reason, but she did follow the counsel of
God as she ought.

Of the marriage of ministers.
God despyseth not those which are married.
THis is also very worthy to be noted, that married folks are not contemned of
God. For of them certain has he chosen to be Prophets and those notable
prophets. For Esaias is commanded to go unto a Prophetess, which both
conceived and also bare to him children. Ezechiel also was married. Wherefore
that Roman Sircius and his like are not to be herd, Sircius is not to be heard.
when they forbid the use of the ministration of holy things to such which are
married: and this godly reason forsooth bring they for it, namely because Paul
writes, that they which are in the flesh cannot please God, and in the old law
it is in this manner commanded, be ye holy, for I am holy: and again says
Paul, ye are the temple of God, or of the holy ghost. But these testimonies
now alleged, if they should serve any thing to their sentence, then
undoubtedly should they declare, that no men which are married can please god,
neither that any are to be counted holy, except they be chaste. The temple
also of God or of the holy Ghost should be drawn only to the clergy. But
how vain these things are, all men so well understand, that they need none
of my labor to express them. For who sees not that the sentences now
alleged are not spoken unto this man or to that man alone, The manner of the
Ethnykes as touching virginity or sole life.
but preached unto all the faithful? It was the manner of the Ethnickes, to
have their prophetesses either Virgins or such as were of sole life, as it is
written of the Sibils. They also appointed certain priesthodes unto women, but
yet only to virgins, namely the holy things of Vesta, and also of her that
was called Bona dea.

Neither must we believe, those married folks, They which were married and called
to the holy ministerye, did not forsake their wives.
which were by God taken to the office of prophesying or to the holy ministry,
did streightway forsake their wives, for neither God nor yet Christ were
authors that any man should deuource himself from his wife. We know in deed
that Paul permits them which are married sometimes to be a sunder, whereby
they might more expediently give them selves to fastinges and prayers: but he
permits not that unless they be both agreed thereunto, and that for a short
time, and he commands them to return to their old estate, lest by the
temptacion of Satan they should be overthrown. Wherefore this sentence which
they bring, is not sufficient to prove the necessitye of sole life for
ministers, forasmuch as the adversaries gather more out of it than can be
gathered. For the Apostle says that sometimes it is lawful to abstain from
accompanieng. But these men take it to be a commandment to all sorts of
ministers, ever to be unmarried. Which argument is both weak and unprofitable,
as the art of Logike manifestly shows. For we grant, that it is mete for
ministers sometimes to conteyne themselves, and that oftener than other men, but
not continually. This they object, if other men moderate themselves, making
their prayers but sometimes, what should they do, whose duty is always to
apply themselves unto prayers and to the administration of the sacraments? I
answer. First, that we much marvel at those which allege these things,
when as the clergy for the most part never almost teach, and distribute the
sacraments very seldom, and celebrate that their most fylthy and abominable
mass scarce once or twice in a whole year. But in ye mean time play ye
whoremo^gers and pollute themselves with adulteries. And they cauile that they
cannot mary, because of ye ecclesiastical degree which they have taken upon
the^. Undoubtedly the reasons which they bring do nothing defend this kind of
men.

Farther we must mark, that the words which Paul there speaks, A
distinction of prayers and fastinges.

Sometimes fastinges and public prayers ar commanded.


belong not to common fasting, or to common and usual prayers: otherwise it
were lauful for none either to mary or to have a wife, for as much as al me^ ar
commanded to pray with out ceassing. And there are sometime certain solemn
prayers and fastings appointed, either for ye avoiding of iminente calamities,
or for the chosing of ministers of the Church, and for such like necessytyes,
in which we must with the prophet and the Apostle council and exhort the
husband not to depart out of the bedcha^ber, and the bride out of her bed.
Howbeit I would gladly hear of these new masters and most severe ce^sors, what
they did in ye old time in the church of Rome, At Rome they did communicate
daily.
which they so much allow above all other worship, what I say was done when
christians did communicate as Jerome and Augustine write was done in their
time. They indeed communicated, and yet had they wives. Of the high priest of
the old Testament.
Moreover what did the high priest Aaron and his successors in the old
testament, whose office was both morning and evening perpetually to minister at
the tabernacle? For as the^ were not the courses of the priests distributed by
David, Solomon, and Ezechias. Used they not their wives? Undoubtedly they
brought forth children. But they say, that then it ought to have been done,
forasmuch as the succession of the priest hode was by carnal propagation,
neither might the priests he taken out of any other tribe, then out of the
tribe of Leui. But now that we are losed from that law, and that we may every
where have ministers of the church, it is mete that they be without wives. I
will ask these men, who was the author, that the high priests and the priests
in the old time should be continued by carnal propagation? It is marvelous if
they grant not that God was the author. I will therefore conclude that they make
themselves wiser then god, who is most wise, who also suffered and willed prists
to use matrimony. He might have taken priests out of every tribe and commanded
continency. But he would not do it. But these men dare do more then he has
commanded. Farther let them tell us whether there were ministers in the
primative church or no? The ministers of ye primitive church had wives and
used them. Canons of the Apostles.
undoubtedly there were, yea and those had wives, and yet for all that they
perpetually both taught and ministered. That they had wives, the histories
declare, the Canons do testifye, and these Canons in especial which are of the
Apostles, whereunto our adversaries think we must so much lean unto. For there
we read, that he is accursed, which teaches that a priest ought to despise
his wife.

I am not ignorant, that there are certain wily heads, which by triflinge
words do so avoid the place alleged, as though it were only to be
understand as touching meat and drink and clothing: for which things, they
say a priest ought to provide for his wife when he is separated from her. As
though a wife is not more despised, from whom the due benevolence is taken
away, then if she should be neglected as touching meat and drink and
clothing. The council also of Gangrensis decreed, Concilium Congrente.
that he is accursed which puts difference between the oblation of a married
priest from others. Here also (least they should be counted dum) they say that
a married priest, is taken for him which was once before married, and not he
which is presentlye married: which they think happens, when either the wife
is dead, or else if they be separated the one from the other. Who married
folks are.
But grant which of these two ways thou will, yet one of the clergy can not
be called a married man. For they are married folks, which both love together,
and are not separated one from an other. And that the ministers in the
primitive church had wives, and used them, the history of Nicolaus the Deacon
sufficiently declares. And it is hereby also easily proved, because if
ministers accompanied not with their wives, Sircius, Pelagius, and other Romayn
Popes should not have neded to have made so many prohibicions, that it should
not from thence forth be done, for these tyrans complained that it was so done,
and therefore to their power by decrees ordinances, and threatenings they forbad
ye use of matrimony to ecclesiastical me^: which they should not need to have
don, if such matrimonies had not then been in use. At the length they deny not
but yt so it was, but they fly to this, that we must have a respect unto the
times, and attribute somewhat to necessity. For in the primityue church (as they
say) was there a great want of ministers, wherefore they were feign to chose them
out of every state of men, and therefore there were very many of them which were
married at ye time. But now that the church is increased, we are not urged with
that necessity, wherefore justly it is decreed that only unmarried folks
should be chosen.

The primitive church had great abundance of ministers.
But I would have these me^ to remember with themselves, that in that first
time, when the heat of the holy Ghost did so much abound, there were a great
many mo which were mete for the ministry, the^ now ar, by reason of the great
abundance of grace and spiritual gifts. Besides that the church when it was
extended and increased, it then neded many more ministers. Farther an other
necessity oppresses us more grievously, Men are (...) weaker.
because men at this day are more weak than they were then, which their Popes
also deny not. For in the did. 34. chap: Fraternitatis, Pelagius judges that
a certain Deacon which was to be promoted (which had committed whoredom, and
yet having a wife of his own) should be more gently entreated because in these
days not only bodies are febled, but also virtue and manners. If they be not
ignorant of this weakness of our times, which is far greater than it was in
the old time, they ought not from thence to take away the remedy where they
perceive a greater necessity. Neither is it mete, that they should dissemble
the necessity of this age, which obiecting unto us the manner of the old
Church, dare lay against us the necessity thereof. There is on either side
necessity, and therefore if there be a consideration had of the one let there
be also a consideration had of the other.

There are some amongst them, which say, Whether it be lawful to mary a wife
after orders received.
that ministers in the old time had wives, and sometimes used them: but they
deny that after they had taken orders it was at any time lawful to mary wives.
Undoubtedly they err: For in the sinode of Ancyrana (as it is written in the
decrees the 28. did: chap. Diaconi) it is decreed, that if a Deacon while he
is in ordering, Synodus Ancyrana.
shall deny when the state of co^tinency is required of him and shall testify
that he will not live without a wife, if the same Deacon after he is ordained do
contract matrimony, he may not be hindered but may freely execute his ministry.
By which place we are manifestly taught, that it was lawful to contract
matrimony after orders received. Gratianus.
Which Gratianus saw well enough, and therefore he writes, that as touching
that Synod a consideration ought to be had both to the time and place. For it
is observed in the east Church, which in promotions of ministers admit not
the promise of continency, but as touching time he adds, that as yet this
continency of Ministers was not then brought into the Church: but if thou
shall ask, when that counsel was had, we answer, as it also appears by ye
same decrees under Syricius and Innocentius, which lived in the time of Jerome
and Augustine.

But it is a wonder to see, how Tyranny has increased, How punishments
against ye clergy which mary have daily increased. Conciliu^ Neocaesariensis.
and impiety by little and little taken deep roots. At the beginning, ye
Ministers of the Church which contracted matrimonies, were not altogether so
severely handled. For the counsel of Neocaesariensis (as it is recited in the
did.28. chap. Presbiter) commanded such to be put only out of their office,
and not from their benefice: for they were still norished, and received their
stipendes from the Church. Neither in the mean time will I ouerpasse, that ye
counsel did cast out of ye Church such Priests as were adulterers and
whoremongers, namely, in excommunicating them which was very mete and just,
when as our men now a days do altogether wink at those sins. After that
they began not only to put them out of their offices, but also (as they
speak) to remove them from their benefices, as it is written in the 33. did.
chap. Eos and chap. Decreuerunt yea and those which so married, they banished
either into a monastery, or into some straight place to do penance, but in our
time they burn many of them. And afterward they raged also against the women,
with whom the Ministers had married, as it is found in the did. 81. Concilium
Toletanum.
out of a certain counsel holden at Toledo, chap: Quidam, where it is
commanded that the women should be sold. And in the did. 34. chap. Eos, they
are appointed to be servants of that Church, wherein the Priest was, which
has contracted with them into servitude, and if peradventure the Bishop could
not bring them into servitude, he should commit it unto the prince or lay
Magistrate. They banished them also sometimes into a monastery to do penance, as
it is read in the 34. did. chap: Fraternitatis. Neither were they content with
this cruelty, but the children also which were by such matrimonies borne,
would they have to be servants of that Church, wherein their father had been,
and they deprived them of al their fathers inheritance. And that is written,
in the 15. question the last chap: Cu^ multae. They do so not punish their
adulterous sacrificers and whoremongers, neither their harlottes, nor yet their
bastard children: they only exercise their cruel tyranny upon the wifes of
Priests and their lawful children.

At the last, when they have almost no other thing to bring, they fly unto
their vow as to a holy anchor. They cry out that that must utterly be kept,
and therefore it is not any more lawful for Ministers to mary, because when
they are ordained they do vow sole life. Vow of unjust things are of no force.
As though it were not both by the holy Scriptures and also by humane laws
commanded, that a vow, promise, or oath should be of no force, if it compel
us to an unjust or dishonest thing.

And who sees not, that it is a thing very filthy, and against the law of God
that he which burns in filthy lust, yea and so burns that he daily
defiles himself with harlottes, adulterers and unlawful Vsu veneris, should
be forbidden matrimonye? Undoubtedly the holy Ghost has commanded matrimony
to all such as can not keep themselves chaste, yea and the fathers (which in
this matter are more enemies to us than they should) saw this. Wherefore
Ciprian as touching holy virgins, Cyprian.
which had unchastly behaved themselves, says: If either they will not or
can not keep themselves chaste, let them mary.

Jerome. Epiphanius.
Jerome also feared not to write the same unto Demetrius, Epiphanius also
against the Catharis, says: It is better those which can not keep
themselves chaste to mary wives, and sin only once, than daily to wound
their minds with vnpure actions. But the opinion of this father I do not in
this thing allow, because he affirms that those do sin, which when they
have made a vow of chastitye do contracte matrimonye, for as long as they do
obey the voice of GOD, they charge not themselves with sin. Neither do I
allow that his reason, wherein he says, that one sin is to be committed, to
avoid a greater, only this I mean to show by his words, that matrimony is
very necessary to such as can not keep themselves chaste. But I will entreat
no more of this thing at this present for I have abundantly spoken of all this
question in my book of Vows.

And the children of Israel ascended up to her for judgment. Some affirm that
this was done at certain appointed days, so that the Israelites should come
to her house, as to a certain oracle, and to an interpretor of the laws of
God. Or else then they ascended unto her, when he was inspired with the spirit
of Prophesye. And undoubtedly it is very lykely, that she then called the people
together, when she had any thing to show unto the Israelites in the name of
God. And they are said properly to ascend, because in passing over the mount
Ephraim they came unto her.

6 And she sent, and called Barac, the son of Abinoam, out of Cedes
Nephthalim: and she said unto him: Has not the Lord God of Israel commanded
thee to go, and lead unto mount Thabor, and take with the ten thousand men of
thee children of Nephthalim, and of the sons of Zebulon.

7 And I will bring unto thee, unto the river Kison, Sisera the captain of the
host of Iabin, with his chariots, and his people, and I will deliver him into
thine hands.

8 And Barac said unto her, If thou will go with me, I will go: but if thou will not go with me, I will not go.

9 Who answered, I will surely go with thee, but this journey that thou take
shall not be for thine honor: for the Lord shall deliver Sisera into the hand
of a woman, So Deborah rose up, and went with Barac into Cedes.


Deborah uses the authority of a prince, when she cites Barac unto her and
commanded him to be called in her own name. he came from the City of Cedes.
That was a City of the Priests in the tribe of Nepthalim, and also a City of
refuge as it is read in Iosuah the 19. chap. Has not the Lord God commanded
thee. She uses an interrogatiue speech: for that very much profits to
stir up minds, and earnestly to commanded any thing. Some think that
Deborah had more than once yea often times admonished Barac in the name of god
to accomplish this office and he for fear lingered it. Wherefore she at the
last openly and before the Israelites reproves them. And it is as much, as if
she should have said, In very deed it is God which has commanded thee these
things. That which I speak is not mine invention, I tell thee this thou must
take in hand by the counsel and will of God. To precepts are joined promises.
And in these words of the Prophetess may be observed a manner much used in
the holy Scriptures, which when they give any precepte, do straight way join
thereunto a promise. When children are commanded to obey their parents, length
of life is straight way promised. Deborah also declares, that she exercised
ye office of a Prophet among the people, when as she Prophecieth what shall
become of Sisera, and foretells a notable victory, which God had decreed
unto Barac. Mount Thabor, Mount Thabor is called Ithabyrius.
which is here mentioned, of the Ethnike writers is called Ithabirius: It is
nighe unto the Assirians; Nepthalites and Sabulonites. There the Lord Jesus
Christ, our Savior, was transfigured before three of his Disciples, as it is
declared in the history of the Gospel. This mount has by it the river Kyson,
The river Kison.
which by the destruction of the Baalites is made notable: for there Helias
the Prophet slew the Priests of Baal.

Draw, and take with thee ten thousand men. This seems to be a new kind of
speech: but unto the thing which is in hand it is most propre. For this
Hebrew word Maschach, is not in this place to draw by violence to, but (as
all the Rabbines almost do interpretate) with presuasion to lead, that is,
with fair and pleasant words to allure them. For without doubt it was a
great and perilous work whereunto they were called, and for as much as they
lived under a Tyrant, their soldiers could not by public authority be
mustered or gathered together, but must of necessity by fair means be
allured, to conspire against a Tyrant. By this place we are taught that good
and eloquent speeches are very profitable in warrelyke affairs; Rethoricke is
profitable in warlike affairs.
and that the art of Rethorike by the law of God is not forbidden, but may in
his place profitably serve for holy men. Farther this is not to be left
unspoken of, that those two tribes, namely Nepthalim and Zabulon, were not
warrelike tribes but the weakest of all the tribes among the Israelites. The
tribes of Nepthalim and Zabulon were of less estimation tha^ the other tribes.
And yet God commands to chose out soldiers out of them, whereby we learn
that it is a like to him to use either weak soldiers or strong warriers
against his enemies.

Some man peradventure will doubt, by what arguments or reasons Barac could
be persuaded, to believe the words of Deborah. To whom we answer, that he
weighed with himself, that those things which Deborah promised, did very
well agree with the words and promises of God. For he, as he had threatened,
that the Israelites when they sinned should by his commandment and will be
afflicted by outward nations: so again had he promised, that he would deliver
them out of the hands of their enemies, if they faithfully repented them of
their wickedness committed, and faithfully from the heart called upon him. He
promised that he would fight for them, neither should their weakness or
fewenesse in number be a let, The words of Deborah were agreeable with the holy
Scriptures.
but that they should get the victory over their enemies. Wherefore for as much
as Deborah prophesied that those things should come to pass, which the Lord
had promised unto the people of the Hebrews, it was convenient, that Barac
should receive those words for true and faithful

Farther the authority of the speaker helped thereunto. For Deborah was by God
constituted in the ministry, not undoubtedly by an ordinary prerogative, but
by a certain singular and principal prerogative. And if we should look upon
the Etimology of her name, Deborah signifies a be.
we shall think that her orations were very sweet. For Deborah with the
Hebrews is a be, which beast we know is a diligent artificer in making of
honey. And yet all these things had not ben sufficient, to make Barac to believe
her, unless the power of the holy Ghost had persuaded in his mind those things
which were commanded. For faith is only the work of the holy Ghost, which
he can work in the hearts of men without any outward instrument, but he has
decreed for the most part to use them, I mean the word and the ministry, not
as though he were bound unto them, but to show unto us, how much we ought to
make of these two instruments. Neither do I think that it is to be doubted,
but that this holy woman, was both by miracles, and also by prophesieng of
things to come, declared to be the Minister of the true God and the most
healthful Judge of the Israelites. We therefore ought hereby to learn, that
we must altogether hear the Ministers of God, when they set forth unto us, his
words, promises, and also threatninges out of the holy scriptures neither is
there any authority in the world, which ought to be preferred before the
ministry of the Church and word of God. They were heard things which Deborah
commanded.
Wherefore justly ought Barac to believe the things which Deborah commanded,
although they seemed both grievous and heard. For she commanded him, to move
sedition and tumulte, to rebel against his prince, a private man to gather an
host, and that a little one against a most mighty king.

Whether Barak were without faith.
And Barac said unto her, If thou will goo with me, I will go. In this place
it seems might be demanded, whether Barac were doubtful, and believed not at
the beginning (as he ought to have done) the words of Deborah. And that seems
to some absurd, when as in the Epistle to the Hebrews the 11. chap: Barac is
reckened with Sampson, Gedeon Iephthe and others, which by faith overcame
kingdoms. And therefore it seems that his faith being praised by the
testimony of God, ought not by our judgment to be empared. Wherefore they
affirm that he would have Deborah to go with him, not because he believed not
the promise of God, but that he might have a Prophetess ready and ac hand,
whose Counsel he might use in orderyng his war, in pitching his Camps, and
other chances which are wont to happen in wars. And I am not ignorant,
Augustine.
that Augustine reads it, after this manner. Because I can not tell in what
day the Lord will prosper his angel with me, etc. As though he should have
said, I will therefore have thee with me, because thou being endewed with the
spirit of Prophesy (which has not happened unto me) shalt easly know, in
what day the angel of the Lord will luckely fight for us.

But I do think that Barac did somewhat doubt: for Deborah Prophesied in the
name of God that because of this answer he should be punished. And more over
(says she) thy glory shall be taken away from thee, and the Lord will sell
Sysara into the hand of a woman. Josephus.
And as Josephus testifyeth she spoke these words being somewhat moved. And a
Prophetess would not have been angry, neither would GOD have diminished the
glory of Barac without a fault. And it appears not that he fell into any
other sin besides infidelity howbeit that incredulitye was afterward taken
away by the spirit and grace of God and when at the length he believed the
words of Deborah, Men although they be godly do not straight way believe.
and obeyed her, and by faith (as it is written to the Hebrews) he obtained the
victory. And how often that happens unto men, It is profitable for Captains
to have ministers of the word in their Camps.
although they be godly, namely, to doubt at the beginning, by reason of the
dregs of the old Adam, there is none which has not experience of it in
himself. Afterward when they are strengthened with the spirit, there
succedeth a great assurednes of faith. And I do not deny that which the first
interpretation says, namely that it is very expedient for Captains, to have
Prophets and Ministers of the word of God with them in their wars. For as
much as the law of God in Deuteronomy. so commands and in the 2. book of kings
it is written, that Helizeus the Prophet was in the camp, when the king of
Israel, the king of Judah, and the king of Edom went to fight against the king
of Moab. Wherefore Christian princes, when they take any just wars in hand,
The presence of Deborah was profitable in ye Camp.
do ryghtly and orderly if they have Preachers and Ministers of the word of God
with them in their expedition. Farther an other commodity came by the presence
of Deborah: for thereby godly men understood, that it was no rash war, or
taken in hand by humane reason, but enterprised by the commandment of God,
and Counsel of his Prophetess.

But in that it is written that the glory should be taken from Barac, and
Sisera delivered into the hand of a woman, it may be expounded two manner of
ways: either, because this victory should not now be ascribed unto Barac, but
to Deborah, namely, because she should have the praise to have judged Israel,
and to have set them at liberty, and Barac should not be counted among the
number of the Judges. Or else because Barac should not kill Sysera with his own
hand, but Iahell the wife of the Kenite should do it, as it shall afterward
be declared. And in deed this latter interpretacion seems to me more natural
and propre.

Of these things which we have now brought forth, are some most worthy to be
noted. The first is, that God might have delivered this people the Israelites
without the help or host of ten thousand men, whom yet he therefore chosed to
teach us, that he dissaloweth not just warrefarre. Farther that humane helps,
when they are present, are not to be despised. Moreover he according to his
wisdom used the gathering together of these soldiers thereby to provoke
Sisera, that he again might gathered an host, and come and overthrow Barac.

And in that God says he will draw Sisera unto mount Thabor, The drawyng of
God serves both to good things and to evil.
he teaches us, that his drawyng is of force, not only to good things, but
also to evil, in respect that they are pains and just punishementes. No man
can doubt, but that Sisera sinned in this, because with a great violence he
contented to oppress the Israelites, and that unjustly. And yet GOD promised
to draw him to it. Nevertheless we must mark, The manner of the drawing of
God is not a like as touchi^g good things and enui.
that the manner of the drawing of GOD is not a like as touching good things and
evil: because to good things we can not be drawn, execept God do heal our
understanding, and give us a good mind. For by nature we are the children of
wrath and utterly corrupt, but when we are induced to evil GOD needs not to
instill, any new malice in us, for as much as we always of our selves have it
ready and prompte to do evil: but only the doing of GOD, directs them to
what end he will, and he so governs them, to make open his glory as he has
decreed. After this sort undoubtedly was Pharao hardened, and Sisera now
drawn to destruction. God drew both the men of Barac and also Sisera but by
diverse means.
God also drew those ten thousandmen after Barac, for otherwise they would not
have followed him, but this drawyng was after an other manner: for here he used
the speech of this man, which he made to be of efficacy in the hearts of his
soldiers: but there to move and provoke Sisera he appointed both falling away
of Barac, and the host gathered by him.

This is also to be considered, that by this place is proved, Glory may
lawfully be desired.
that glory is a certain good thing, which just and good men may desire:
otherwise Barac, to be punished for his incredulity, should not have been
deprived of glory. And glory is certain nobleness coming of things well
done. What glory is
For those things which good men do very excellently of their own accord, do
bread a noble name or glory. The matter and end of glory.
Wherefore the matter wherein it consists are opinions and talks of just and
wise me^. But ye end whereunto glory ought to be directed, is ye setting forth
of ye name of God, and also an example which is set forth for our neighbors to
follow. And as ye brightness of ye name of god, and ye edifieng of others, ar
very excellent and good things so also is it manifest yt the glory which
serves unto the^ is a good thing. Wherefore although glory for it self is not
to be desired as the last end, yet for those things which we have mentioned,
God can do many things which he will not do.
ought it not to be neglected. Farther we must note that God can bring certain
things to pass, which yet he will not perform, except things be done of
us. For he could (as it appears by this place) have given the glory of this
victory and health of Israel only unto Barac: which he would not do,
because he refused to go alone to that expedicion. Helizeus also (as it is
written in the 2. book of kings) when he was sore sick, and commanded the
king of Israel which stood by him, to strike the earth with and arrowe, and he
did strike it only three times, the Prophet was grievously angry with him,
and said: If thou had stricken six or seven times, thou should utterly
have destroyed Syria. But now thou shalt only thrice vex^ and molest it.
This makes against those, which think that the power of God differs not
from his will, as though he can not do those things, which he will not, A
destruction of an absolut power and of an ordinary power.
when as for all that Christ said, that he could have xi. legions of angels
of his Father, to defend him from the Jews that they should not take him. GOD
therefore could have done that which he did not. Wherefore they seem not to
think evil, which refer things to an absolute power and not to an
ordinary, or definite power.

But how it is said that Sisera should be sold into the hand of a woman, we
shall not need now by many words to declare, and for as much as we have before
heard this self same word, and how ryghtly it agrees with God is there
expounded. This only will I add, that he was now sold of GOD to him, to
whom before God had sold the Israelites, and it is said that he shall be sold
into the hand of a woman, which should have power and might to kill him: for
he was killed by Iael, as a little afterward shall be declared.

10 And Barac gathered together Zebulon, and Nepthalim in Kedes, and he went
upon his feet with ten thousand men. Deborah also went up with him.

11 Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the Father in
law of Moses, was departed from Cain, and pitched his tente even to Elon in
Zaananuin, which is in Kedes.

12 And they showed Sisera, that Barac ye son of Abinoam was gone up to mount
Thabor.

13 And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundredth chariots
of iron, and all the people that were with him from Harozeth of the gentles,
unto the river Kisyn.


It is before showed by what means Barac gathered his men together, namely by
an oration of much likelihood and of much efficacy which was of so great
strength with these tribes, The counsels of men are so efficacy as the
predestinacion of God has or deyned.
that there came of them ten thousand men unto him, neither would God (as it
appears by the words of Deborah) have any more. Hereby we see that the
Counsels and words of men are so farreforth fruitful, as the predestination
or will of GOD has before appointed. Wherefore Luke in the Acts of the
Apostles feared not to write: And they believed as many as were ordained to
everlasting life. Some translate this Hebrew word Bergeliu, footmen, and
others, after him. But as for that matter we will not much contend: because if
they followed the feet of Barac, it is a token, that they also were footmen,
neither were the Israelites wont to be of any great force on horseback, for
as they were by GOD forbidden to keep any great number of Horses. And when
they should go up the mount, though they had been horsemen, they could not
have been so apt in those places. Farther this also makes with it, for
straight way is used the same kind of speech, when Sisera lept out of his
chariot, and would have fled away on foot. But thereof we will speak in his
place.

Deborah also went up with him. It was before said that she went with Barac
unto Kades: but because he should led his host from Kades to the mount, it is
properly said that she now also went up together with the Soldiers that were
collected. And there was no small faith both in the Captains and also in the
Soldiers, which durst take such enterprises in hand, being so weak and
few in number. But faith sees those things which appear not to the eyes of
the body. Helizeus the Prophet once prayed, that the eyes of the lad which
was with him might be opened, to see the wonderful number of angels, which
very valiantly fought for him against his enemies. And therefore as many of us
as do believe in Christ, when we are in dangers, ought by constant faith to
take hold of that help which God has prepared for us, although with our
eyes we see it not.

The things which are now by a Parenthesis declared of the Kenite, are
therefore in the history by anticipation set forth, that those things may the
easiyer be understand, which afterward shall be spoken of Sisara that was killed
by Iahell.

This Heber the husband of Iahell was of the posterity of Hobab the father in
law of Moses, of whom we have abundantly spoken before. Why the family of
Iethro were called Kenites.
But of this place we learn why they were called Kenites. For Cain was the
name of their famely: but this Heber dwelled a part from his kynsemen, neither
remained he any longer among them. For the rest (as it is written in the 1.
chap: of this book) departed from the City of Jericho, followed Othoniell,
and lived in the desert together with the children of Israel. Why Heber
departed from his kinsfolks.
But Heber of whom it is now written, went to the borders of Zabulon and
Nepthalim, and pitched his tente nere to Cedes. But what was the cause of his
departure from his brethren, it is not presently written. But we know that
Loath and Abraham by reason of the abundance of cattle and want of Pastor,
departed one from an other: and seeing the same might easly happen unto the
Kenites, it is not unlikely, but that they were upon the like occasion
separated. This word Tseenim, (if we may believe the Chaldey Paraprhast)
signifies ditches full of water, The Rechabites were Kenites.
with which that place peradventure abounded. It is no marvel that the
family which that place peradventure abounded. It is no marvel that the
family of the Kenites dwelled in tents: for so much as the Rechabites which
came of them, had no where any fyrme abydyng places, and that was wont to be
the manner almost of all shepeheardes, to follow Pastors that be plentyfull,
in what place so ever they be. And this word Acilun signifies sometimes an
oak, and sometimes a playnefielde. The Chaldey Paraphrast turns, it a
playnefielde: but it might be, that there was some notable oak or grove of oaks
in it.

It was showed unto Sisera only how Barac had gathered together an host and
told him that Deborah the Prophetess of God was there, because that all men
had a respect unto them at which was the Captain of the host. And though a
woman were their first counselor, of this enterprise yet there is nothing
showed him of her, for the things which are done by women, are wont for the
most part to be referred unto men. Neither had the Ethnikes peradventure any
regard to the gift of Prophesye wherewith Deborah was endewed. What number of
Soldiers Sisera had it is not in this place expressed: only there is mention
made of nine hundredth Chariottes of iron. Josephus.
But Josephus testifyeth (as we have before said) that the Chananites had
300000. footmen. 10000. horsemen, and lastly 3000. Charlottes. And in that the
historye now makes mention only of 900. Augustine.
it is to be understand, of hooked and iron chariots, which interpretacio^
Augustine in his questions on this place follows. Farther Josephus adds
that this Sisera by the commandment of Iabin his king directed this host unto
mount Thabor or Ithabyrius.

14 The^ Deborah said unto Barac: up, for this is the day, wherein ye Lord has
delivered Sisera into thine hand. Is not the Lord gone out before thee? So
Barac went down from mount Thabor, and ten thousand men after him.

15 And the Lord destroyed Sisera, and all his chariots, and al his host with
ye edge of the sword, before Barac. So that Sisera lighted down of his
chariot, and fled away on his feet.


Barac is made strong by the words of Deborah, and forced to join battle
with his enemies. For that is the power of faith, to strengthen the weakness
yea if the exhortation of Deborah had not been, Josephus.
Barak (if we may believe Josephus) by the sight of his enemies was so feared
and troubled, that he would have gotten him to the stronger fensed places of
the hill, but she called him back again, and by her words drove him to
fight. Being therefore strengthened, and confirmed, he forsook the well fensed
parts of mount Thabor, and came down to fight with Sisera. This is (says
she) the day. As though she should have said, no humane power, or warlike
might can let ye victory, which the predestination of God has this day decreed
unto thee. But a man will ask how it is now said that Sisera should be
delivered into the hands of Barac, when as before it was foretold, that he
should be sold into the hand of a woman? I answer that it is therefore
because that the host should be destroyed by Barac, and Sisera should be so
made to fly, that the matter was begone by the conduct of Deborah, and
finished by Iahell, but the flight and slaughter was accomplished by Barac.
Wherefore in the hystory there can not justly be noted any contrariety or
diversity.

Is not the Lord? The interrogation which the Prophet uses, does not only
stir up and encourage the heart of Barac, but also vehemently commands
him, as the Latin Poet also has said: Shall not armure dispatche the
matter, and shall they not follow me through the whole City? But here may
somewhat be doubted, in that our text has, that the Lord went forth before
Barac, when as the Chaldey paraphrast turns it, an angel. For it says,
Shall not the angel of the Lord prosper thee? And undoubtedly this
paraphrasis shows, Augustine.
what was the cause why Augustine read (as we have before admonished), that
Barac said unto Deborah go with me, because I know not in what day GOD shall
prosper his angel and me. Wherefore we must think, that the Greek
interpretors had these words of the Chaldey paraphrast, which afterward
crepte into the text, but yet out of place. But as touching the matter, Christ
was the angel which defended the Jews.
either is true, both that GOD and his angel were present and fought on the
Hebrews side. And undoubtedly Christ was that angel which defended the Jews
and fought for them. Of Malachie the Prophet he is called the Angel: and in
Exodus God promised both, that he himself would come with his people, and
also send his angel, for our Christ both is GOD and also had ever with him
angels as Ministers defending the Hebrews.

And the Lord destroyed Sisera. This Hebrew word Ieham may have for his
root or ground this word Hamam, which signifies to make afeard or to
trouble. And then shall the sense be, God made him afeard, but the same word
signifies also, to break, or to destroy, although as Kimhi writes, his rote
may be this word Hom and Him which almost signifies the same thing. And in
deed God did both, he terrified the hearts of the Chananites, and stroke and
brake their host.

How this slaughter happened, or by what singular aid of God the Israelits
overcame, it is not in this place written. But Josephus affirms that a great
violence of tempeste and hayle was cast from heaven into the eyes of the
adversaries, wherewith the Chananites were so hindered in the battle, Josephus.
that they were not able to defend themselves, and therefore they were
miserablye slain, when as yet ye misery nothing at al hurted the Jews. For ye
hayle was only on their back, and therefore their violence against their
enemies was in nothing let.

With the edge of the sword. It is said that God slew them, for he made them
afeard, and wonderfully troubled them with the tempest or hayle. Howbeit the
victory was so obtained, that the Israelits also fought: for it is written yt
the enemies perished by ye edge of the sword, by which kind of speech
undoubtedly is declared that they were slain. This I have for this cause
noted, God sometimes destroys his enemies without the help of men.
because God sometimes so makes afeard his enemies and grants victory over
them, that his people whom he delivers, do nothing at all: as it came to
pass in the red sea, when Pharao perished there with his host: and when the
host of Senacherib was wonderfully destroyed in one night by the angel.

16 But Barak pursued after the Chariotes, and after the host eue^ unto
Harozeth of the gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the
sword. And there was not a man left.

17 Howbeit Sisera fled away on his fete to the tent of Iahell the wife of
Heber the Kenite. For there was peace between Iabin the king of Hazor, and the
family of Heber the Kenite.


Again in this place we have this word Bergeliu that is, on his feet. And in
deed it appears yt it signifies nothing else but a footeman. For Sisera
thought he could not in that battle be saved in his chariote: wherefore he
determined privily to fly among the raschall soldiers. He now therefore
forsakes and abiecteth his chariot which was prepared unto him for a defense
and aid. And assuredly when God takes away audacity and strength, the things
which before were weapons, are then made burdens and lettes. Miserable Sisara
flies, but he escapes not. He made have unto the place, where god had prepared
a snare for him. For the other Cananits fled to Hazoreth of the gentiles, namely
unto the place from whence they came. But Sisera turned his iourny an other way
from the rest of the soldiers, neither fled he the right way as the other did.
He knew the shortest way, and he gat him to the tent of the Kenits: which he
knew was nigh home, and not far from the place where the battle was fought.
And there he hoped to have lurked, till the rage of the war should have been
pacified.

In that they were all destroyed, it is a token of a perfect victory. But as
concerning the peace between Iabin and the Kenites, in what sort or manner
it was, we have no certainty. Wherefore to affirm any thing of it for
certain, it should be rashly done. For it might be that Hebor paid somewhat
unto Iabin for the pastors which he occupied, and contrariwise that the king
promised him security and safety for his flocks, cattle, and family. There may
be also very many other things thought and those very likely, but not to be
affirmed for certain.

Whither it be lawful for the godly to have peace with the ungodly.
THis question is now to be discussed and defined, whether it be lawful for
godly me^ to make peace and to keep it with ungodly. And me thinks we may
say that it is lawful, especially if it be concluded for ye peaceable
defending and keeping of the bonds or borders on either side. Paul says, as
much as lies in you, have peace with all men. So did the most Christian
princes with the barbarous infidles, in making peace sometimes with the^. So
Jacob in ye old time made a legue with Laban. So also did the children of
Israel, with their other neighbors, excepting the seven nations, for God
commanded them not to make war with all those nations that dwelled about them.

But if thou shalt demand, whether it be lawful for the godly when they
take a common expedition in hand, to join their army and power with the
ungodly. An example of Iosaphat.
That seems to be denied. For Iosaphat had evil success when in making war
against Ramoth Gilead, he joined him self with the king of Israel. Neither sped
the same king luckely when he sent ships together with the king of Isreal's
ships into Tharsis. For there arose a tempest in Aschou-Gaber whereby happened a
shipwreck and so he lost his Navy. And as it is written in the latter book of
Paralip. God by the mouth of his prophet reproved Iosaphat, because he had
joined himself with an ungodly king. The Machabites also made league with the
Romans, An example of ye Machabits. The question is confirmed by reasons.
and Lacedemonia^s, but what displesure they had thereby, their history
declares. But now that we have manyfested the thing by examples, let us
confirm it also by reasons. This no man can deny, that in such hosts, namely
consisting of the ungodly and the godly together, the sincere religion and
idolatry are mingled together: wherbye it easelye comes to pass (such is
the weakness of our nature) that the vnpure do infecte the holy ones. And it
seldom happens but that some impiety cleaves unto the children of God.
Farther when they come to handy strokes they must call upon God, and when the
victory is obtained, they must also give thanks unto God. And in doing these
things, what invocation I pray you, what sacrifices, what thanks geuinge
shall there be? The true god shall be mingled with Belial, idolatrous rites with
lawful rites, and true piety with superstition. These things undoubtedly
displease God. For if he would have things after this sort mingled together,
why chosed he a peculiar people unto himself? Undoubtedly he did it, that the
faithful might live purely by themselves, and worship the true god sincerely.
And seeing the matter is so, it is not lawful co^fusedly to have to do with the
ungodly: otherwise the order which god has appointed should be troubled.

Of the league of Abraham with the Chananites.
A man might peradventure say, that Abraham made league with Abuer, Eschol, and
Mambre, and with their aid took in hand an expedicion, wherein he delivered Loath
his kinsman, which was led away captive. But they which object this example,
where find they that these men were idolatrers? I undoubtedly do not see that it
can be gathered by the holy scriptures. But rather I suppose that they were
worshippers of the true God. For God said unto Abraham, that he would not
straightway give unto him the land of the Cananites, because the sins of
that nation were not yet full. Wherefore it is not absurd to say, that these
three men were yet there, and did worship the true God simply. For as much as we
know assuredly that Melchizedech also was in those regions, who blessed
Abraham, and was the priest of the most high God. But grant yt they were
idolatres as these men will have them: Shall that which was by a certain
singular progatiue lawful unto Abraham, be strayghtway counted lawful unto al
men to do it justly and without punishmente, I think not. Farthermore we must
mark, yt the common wealth of the Jews was not yet ordained. And Abraham alone
could not dwell among the Cananites without some couena^ts or leagues made with
them. Whereunto thou maiste add that God had not yet given the law, wherein he
peculiarly forbad any thing as touching this matter.

Whither it be lawful for christians to seek for help of infidels.
But if a prince, or Christian pub: wealth (as sometimes it chances) should be
in danger, may they desire help at infidels hands? They cannot. For if
Paul will have us rather to suffer wrong and hurt, than that we should go to
the judgment seats of the infidels when we are in controversy with our
brethren: How much less is it lawful to use the help of the ungodly, to
deliver us from other Christianes, which unjustly oppress us.

I know that Asa king of Judah sent money, gold and silver, An example of Asa
the king.
unto Benhadab king of Siria, to make war against the king of Samaria, that
thereby he might be delivered from him which in a manner oppressed him:
Howebeit I do not think that the act of this king (though it had good
success) is to be followed. For he was reproved of God for it. And though it
be not expressed in the book of kings, yet in Paralip: it is manifestly
described. For there we read that the prophet was purposedly sent of God unto
Asa the king to reprove him greuouslye for this his act. An example of Amasia.
Yea and there is an other notable example of like sort written in the same
book, namely that Amasia did hier against the Edomits. C. thousand Israelites:
which the prophet in the name of God grieuouslye reprehended, and commanded
that he should put away the Israelitish soldiers from his host, because that
the will and good pleasure of God was utterly from the^. The king answered
unto the Prophet: But now I have given them an C. talentes for their stipend.
The man of God answered, that the Lord could aptly and easily repay him as
many talentes, and that for so small a loss he should not suffer Idolatrers
which were hated of god to be in his camps.

I will not tell how often the Jews were forbidden by the prophets, that they
should not require help of the Egiptians, or of the Assirians.

But to return to the matter from which we have somewhat decreased: This Heber
the knighte, if he had peace with Iabin, for his limits or borders, or for
some pencion agreed with him for pastor for his cattle, it cannot be
discommended. Forasmuch as godly men seek not to dwell out of the world, and
they ought according to the Apostles commandment to have peace with all men as
much as in the^ lies. But if he had peace, to take in hand any common
expeditio^, it was unjust, neither ought it to abide ratified. But the thing
which we have in hand was don by Iahel, and not by Hebor her husband. For he
either was not at home, or else if he were at he home was sick: Wherefore he
could not execute this notable act.

18 And Iahell went out to mete Sisera, and said unto him, Turn on my Lord,
turn in to me fear not. And he turned in unto her tente. And she covered him
with a coueringe.

19 And he said unto her, give me I pray thee, a little water to drink for I
am thirstye, and she opened a bottle of milk and gave him drink and covered
him.

20 Again he said unto her, stand in the door of the tent and when any man
does come and inquire of thee, saying: is any man here? thou shall say, nay.

21 Then Iahel Hebers wife took a nail of the tente, and took an hammer in her
hand, and went privily unto him, and smote the nail into his temples, and
fastened it unto the ground. For he was fast on sleep and weary: and so he died.


Iahel used guile and that euel guile: but against her enemy, not her own
enemy, but one already rejected of God and an oppressor of the people of God.
And in what sort it is lawful to use euel guile against such enemies, we have
before declared. The covering wherewith she covered him, it is uncertain what
manner of one it was, and the opinions of the interpretors do much differ
therein. For some affirm that it was of silk and fine, and other some that it
was a thick woollen garment full of hears and locks hanging in both sides. But
the matter is of no great importance, and consists wholly in conjectures.

The cause of the drought of Sisera.
That Sisera was oppressed with thirst we ought not to merueile, when as he had
traueled so far on foot, and was pressed with so great grief, for both they
which are weary and also they that are heavy for the most part are wont to be
thirsty. For both labor and the affection of sorrow, have a power of drying. The
woman gave him milk. Paraduenture she did it of purpose, to cause him to
fall on sleep. Neither was it any hard thing for her to give him milk to
drink, for she had it in hand, when as she and her whole family excercised the
art of graffinge of cattle. And in that it is said, that she opened a bottle,
it declares that she had no small store of milk, but great abundance
thereof. But Sisera when he had well drunk, forgot not yet his own safety, but
diligently admonishes the woman, what she should answer, if any body came
to ask for him. And that none should have occasion to enter into the tente, he
wills her to abide at the door, to answer such as should go by, to the end
that if they sought for him, they should sone depart from thence.

A nail of the tente I take to be that which they use to fasten into the
ground to cause the tente being bound unto it to abide spread abroad. And in
that the woman used a hammer and a nail, this I gather thereby, that the
Israelites whilst they served the Chananites, had their weapons taken away
from them by the Chananites that they should have neither sword nor dagger mete
to kill a man withal. This holy woman undoubtedly was governed by God, which
durst accomplish so great an enterprise. For the strength of women is not able
to atchiue these things. The cause of Sisaras sleep.
Sisera being on sleep, died. The causes of his sleep are now sufficiently
expressed, namely that he was weary by reason of his journey, he drunk a
great deal of milk, and lay well covered: He was oppressed with heaviness:
and it is possible, that he slept but a little the night before.

The woman came softly or privily, to se whither he were thoroughly on sleep
and when she saw that he was so, with a stout and valiant courage she gave him
a stroke. Sisera died, and that with ignominy. For God for this cause suffered
him for a time to fly, that he might not be killed in battle among men, but
being on sleep be slain by the hand of a woman.

22 And behold Barak pursued after Sisara, and Iahell came out to mete him, and
said unto him, Come, and I will show thee the man whom thou seek. And he
came in unto her. And behold Sisara lay on the ground dead, and the nail in
his temple.

23 So god brought down Iabin the king of Chanaan that day before the
children of Israel.

24 And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed against
Iabin the king of Chanaan, until they had destroyed the same Iabin king of
Chanaan.


Iahel meets Barak and she therefore shows him his enemy killed, that he
should no more travail in seekinge of him. Sisera was not deceived when he
thought that Barak would come to the tent of Iahel, for he came thither in
deed, for pursuinge the Chananites even unto Hazoreth of the gentiles, he saw
not Sisera among them which fell: wherefore he judged he lurked somwhere, and
suspected that he had without any more a do fled unto the tente of the
Levites, because of the league and peace which he had with them. God therefore
brought down Iabin, yea if ye may believe Josephus, the Israelites destroyed
his city with sword and fire.

Whither Iahel in violating the laws of hospitality did well, or no.
But it seems that Iahel in this her enterprise and notable act did violate the
laws of hospitalitye and league, and therefore now rests, either to
condemn her or to quitte her.

But because al controuersye, not a little depends (...), What manner of me^
the Kenites were.
that is of the circumstance of the persons, let us therefore set her before our
eyes, and consider with our selves what manner of men the Kenites were. They
assuredly in blood were joined with the Israelites. For it is written that they
were the posteritye of Hobab the father in law of Moses. Farther, in the study
of piety and the law of God they most purely consented with the Hebrews.
Neither was their faith idle, but of efficacy and working. For they leaving
their country, followed the Israelites, and God which was their guide through
the deserte places. Wherefore at the length when the lands were distributed,
they obtained inheritance together with them in the land of Chanaan. For these
causes, if Iahel went about to set the Jews at liberty, she did but her
duty, neither took she upon her any other man's office.

On the contrary part let us thus think of Sisera. What Sisera was.
He was an oppresser of the people of God, and now killed by the power of God,
and utterly confounded, neither appeared there in him any token of repentance,
but rather would therefore hyde himself, that escaping this so present a
danger, he might again gather a new host against the Israelites. In deed
after a sort he was in league with Heber the Kenite: but (as it is to be
thought) not with a pure heart, but only to pluck him away from the rest of
the Jews, whereby he might have the fewer enemies, and not be compelled to
fight with so many enemies at one time. Or else to get of him a great tribute,
or some other commoditye which he looked for. Farthermore in this his unlucky
chance, he calls upon no God, he imploreth not the prayers of others, but
only seeks hiding places, where he might hide himself till such time, as the
rage and brute of the Conquerers were somewhat staked: and only trusted in
humane aids and leagues. By these things it easilye follows, that both
Iahel did her duty, and that Sisera deserved so to be killed.

But as touching the laws of hospitality, Laws of hospitality ought
ordinarilye to be kept unviolated.
we also do judge that they by them selves and of their own nature ought to be
kept sacred and unviolated. This understood Loath, when he would have abandoned
his daughters to the fylthy lusts of the wanton Sodomites, to the end they
should do no injury unto them which had turned in unto him. Neither departed
that old man from his example, which received the Leuite with his wife as
strangers, as it shall be more at large declared in this historye of the
Judges. Whose counsel in betraying his daughters, although I allow not, yet I
do very much commend the defending of the strangers. Yea, and the Gentiles
worshipped Jupiter hospitalis, knowing by the light of nature, that God had a
singular care over strangers and gestes. Pythagoras.
Pythagoras also discommendeth the Swallows, namelye for this, because they
daily lodge under the covering of men's houses, and yet will never be made
familiar or tame unto their hosts. Mischievous houses.
There were also sometime certain mischeuous houses, in which no man might any
more inhabit (as probable authors have written) and that because in them the
laws of hospitalitye had been violated. And contrariwise where hospitality has
been well and faithfully kept, not only Angels, but God himself also sometimes
has been an acceptable gest. Christ also at the end of the world will say: I
was a stranger and ye lodged me, commending his in the sight of the whole
world, for the virtue of hospitalitye. And it is manifest, that men in the old
time decreed that between the gest and the host there should be great friendship.
Lastly God in the law commanded, that the Hebrews should not despise the
Egiptians, or utterly expel them from them, and that namely for this, because
at the beginning they showed hospitality unto their elders. Wherefore we must
affirm that by the universal and ordinary law, When God commands, all
laws of friendshyp are to be broken.
the laws of hospitality ought to be kept inuiolated. And this ought also to
he firm, that in laws, no friendships, are so honest and so just, but they are
to be broken if God command otherwise. For all these things ought so long to
be of force, as the will of God shall allow them. Wherefore, forasmuch as God had
now rejected Sisera and the Chananites, and would have them destroyed, no
covenants could iustlye be kept with them. For we must rather obey God than
man's reasons. And of this will of God Deborah was both a prophecier and an
interpreter. She had declared that Sisera was now rejected of God, and had
openly foretold that he should be sold into the hand of a woman.

After this manner the Levites when they had slain their friends and
kinsfolks followed Moses: to whom Moses in the name of God said, ye have
consecrated your hands, so far was it of that they were reproved for
violating the bonds of kindred. Jeremy also, when by the commandment of God
he had pronounced that the Moabites should be killed, he cursed those which
had withdrawn themselves from that murder. He is cursed (said he) which does
the work of the Lord deceatefully. In the law also it is commanded, that
none should be spared which entised any to idolatry, no not the Father, nor
the Mother, no nor he or she which sleeps in thy bosom. Who sees not here
that most strayghte bonds of kindred are to be contemned, if the will and word
of God be against it^ Abraham was commanded to kyl his son, and that his
only son, as touching whom he had received a most large promise. The promise
of God and fatherly kindness seemed to be against his precept, and yet against
these things, the word of God urging him, he ought to have killed his son.
So must we think, that al men, although they be night of kyn unto us, ar
sacrifices unto god, as many as he commands to be slain. Wherefore in Esaias
the.xxxiiii. chap. it is written: What happens unto them that be
preposterously gentle.
The Lord has a sacrifice in Bozra. But they which with a preposterous
clemency will against the word of God be merciful, let them remember what
happened unto the king of Samaria. He, when he had spared Benadab the king of
Siria, contrary to the commandment of god, he was in this manner reprehended
in the name of god by the Prophet. Thy soul shall be for his soul.

Wherefore Iahel in this place is not to be blamed, forasmuch as she obeyed the
counsel of god, and was excellently commended in the song of Deborah, as we
shall straightway see. And undoubtedly this her work came of a great faith and
singular obedience. I know that some think, that the act of Iahel is to be
commended, in that she killed Sisera, and had so ready a mind to set at
liberty the Israelites: but yet they condemn the lie which she made, and the
promise where in she promised that she would hide and defend him. For she said:
turn in to me, turn in to me, I pray thee my Lord, be not afeard. By which
kind of spech she seemed to promise him not to betray him to his enemies. I
also would affirm the same, but that I see that god was the governor of this
whole enterprise. I have before taught, that it is lawful to use guile, and
that evil guile against our enemies, and that certain proditions are just. But
I added, that there should be mingled no promises nor lies, nor oaths with
them. But al these things are to be understand by the common law. But if god
shall stir us up to do otherwise, there shall be no blame laid in us, if we
obey him: so that we be very assured that god will have it so to be done. And
this is not to be left out, that some think, that Iahel at the beginning, when
she called Sisera unto her, thought of no guile or fraud toward him: but
that she was minded to keep him safe, as she had promised: but afterward she
changed her purpose, because god had showed her, that she should otherwise
work.

The.v. Chapter.
1. THen sang Deborah, and Barak the son of Abimam the same day, saying:

2 Praise ye the Lord for the auenging of Israel, and for the people that
offered them selves wyllingly.


The ditty or song which is here written, belongs to a demonstratiue kind of
oration: for it comprehends both praises and dispraises. Praises chiefly of
god, which was the principal author of this victory: for in ouercomming Sisera,
it is mentioned that he used the aid of the Stars of heaven, and of the
tempest. Deborah also and Barak are praised, likewise Iahel, and also these
few weak and unarmed men of the tribe of Zabulon and Nephthalim, which obeyed
the Oracle of god. On the contrary part Sisera is dispraised as a most cruel
enemy of the people of god: and they are sharply rebuked, which believed not
the word of god, but despised the commandments of Barak and words of
Deborah: and having a regard to their own weakness, and not so much esteeming
the goodness and promises of god as they should have done, they refused the
battle appointed them of God.

Of Music and Songs.
THis song is a song of victory, A song of victory.
such a one as Moses sang when Pharao was drowned: and as Hanna the mother of
Samuel made by the inspiratio^ of the holy ghost, when she had brought forth
Samuel: and such a one as the Maidens of the Jews openly sang in companies of
players and dauncers after the victory of David against Goliath. And in like
manner in the new Testament, Mary, Zacharias, and Simeon gave thanks to god in
their songs. The Ethnikes also when they had obtained victories, were wont to
appoint supplications for certain days, which in deed was nothing else, than
to give thanks unto God. Wherefore being moved with the occasion of this
place, I think it good somewhat to speak of Songs and Music, as much as
belongs to piety. First, from whence they had their beginning, and to what
end they were instituted. Secondlye, whither they may be kept in the Churches.
Lastly, what kind of songs and measures are profitable and healthful.

As touching the first, we must understand that the men of the old time were
wont with common vows to sing certain solemn ditties, both when they gave
thanks to god, and also when they endeavored to obtain any thing of him.
Wherefore Orpheus, Linus, Pindatus, and Horace, Poets vsyng the harp. Sallij.
and such like Poets which used the Harp, wrote most part of their hymns for
these uses. And in the Roman public wealth, the Priests of Mars, which were
called Salii, carried shields, and sang their verses through the City.
Furthermore, it was the manner, that Music and verses were had, when the
praises of noble men were celebrated, chiefly at feasts: whereby they which
stood by, might be admonished to to imitate their noble acts, and to detest
such vices, which were contrary unto their virtues. Moreover, they used them
to recreate the minds, and to comfort such as were pensive for the dead. For
in burials they sang Epitaphes. Epitaphes.
And contrariwise, when any great cause of joy happened, it was expressed by
Music and Songs. Wherefore in weddinges they were wont to sing wedding
songs. (...),
Al these things, if they be done moderatelye and in due time, may be both
borne withal, and also commended. For Music and Songs contain three kinds
of good things, honest (I say) profit, and pleasantnes. For although synging
of it self delights the minds of men, yet when words are joined unto it,
which are of a just number, and bound by certain feet (as we see verses are)
it is then made much more pleasant. And undoubtedly Poetry had hereof his
beginning, and I cannot deny but it is a gift of god: Poetry a gift of God.
Against wanton songs.
but I would wyshe this that it be kept pure and chaste among men. And that I
for this cause say, because certain unclean and vnpure men have most filthily
defiled it, applying songs and verses to wantonness, wicked lusts, and every
filthy thing. Whose verses, although they be eloquent and good latin, yet they
are utterly unworthy for Christian ears, neither ought they by any means to
be taught unto young me^, who being themselves prone enough to vices, need no
new fyres or mocions to move and inflame them. Verses of this kind, may justly
be called the Sirenes of tender minds: wherewith young men being infected, it is
scarce possible, but that they shall suffer shipwreck.

The godly much used holy songs.
But holy songs the people of God much used. For the Hebrews in Moses time,
when they took up the Arc of the covenant, in their removing of their
tents, sang this song: Let God arise and destroy his enemies. Neither did they
set it down without some godly song, as it is written in the book of Numb.
Furthermore, in the Tabernacle and in the Temple which was built by Salomo^,
the Levites at hours appointed were present and sang holy himnes before ye
Lord in the hearing of the people, and when they gave thanks unto God, they
most swetelye celebrated certain notable benefits which he had bestowed on
his people, and they adjoined prayers and added sentences to the information of
the manners and life of godly men. Householders also, when they sat down in
their houses, or rose from a feast, did sing certain himnes, when they kept
solemn days among their household, according to the commandment of God: and
so in geuyng thanks to God, they delivered over in manner by hand, his notable
works to their posterity. Which laudable custom our Lord Jesus Christ seems
to have followed, when after the Paschal supper, in the night wherein he was
betrayed, he went out together with his Disciples into the mount Oliuet, when
they had said an himne. An example of Helizeus.
And of what force holy music is to pacifye the affectes of the mind,
Helizeus testifies, who being in mind somewhat moved against the king of
Israel, commanded one that played on an instrument to be brought unto him.
David also in playing before Saul, brideled the violence of the evil spirit
wherewith Saul was oppressed.

But why Music seems so to rapte men in a manner wholye, the reason is
plain. Music does in a manner rauishe ye whole man.
For there are certain pleasures, which only fyl the outward senses, and there
are others also, which pertain only to the mind or reason. But music is a
delectation so put in the myddest, that both by the sweetenes of the soundes it
moves the senses, and by the artificialnes of the number, and proportions, it
delights reason it self. Pithagoras.
And that happens then chiefly, when such words are added unto it, whose
sense is both excellent and learned. Pythagoras opinion was, that they which
studied his doctrine, should be brought on sleep with a Harp, and by the
accordes thereof also wakened, whereby they might quietly enjoy the time both of
sleeping and waking. Cicero.
And it is a common saying (as Cicero affirms) that rocks and wildernesses
do give a sound, and cruel beasts by singing are assuaged and made to stand
still. I will not speak, how the Poets fable, that when the walls of Thebes
the City were built, the stones of their own motion came together with the
sound of the Harp. And no man is ignorant, what the same Poets have written
of Arion and Orpheus. And who knows not how much David here and there in his
Psalms praises both Music and songs. Tertulian.
And among Christian men Tertulian in his Apology teaches that the faithful
did very often make suppers, wherein after they had moderatly and honestly
refreshed the body, they recreated themselves with godly songs. And in an
other place, when he commends Matrimony, that is of one and the self same
religion, he says: that Christian couples do mutually provoke them selves
tosing praises unto God.

Whether singinge may be received in the Church. The east church. Plini.
But now that we have seen the nature, beginning and use of songs and music:
there rests to inquire, whither it may be used in Churches. In the East part
the holy assemblies, even from the beginning, used singing, which we may
easily understand by a testimony of Plini in a certain Epistle to Traian the
Emperor: where he writes that Christians used to sing hymns before day unto
their Christ. And this is not to be left out, that these words were written in
that time that John the Evangelist lived, for he was a live unto the time of
Traian. Wherefore if a man shall say, that in the time of the Apostles there was
syngyng in holy assemblies. He shall not stray from the truth. Paul, who was
before these times, unto the Ephesians says: Be not filled with wine, wherein
is wantonness, but be ye filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in
Psalms, Himnes and spiritual songs, singing in your heart, giving thanks
always unto God, for all things, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. To
wine the Apostle sets the spirit as contrary: and forbids the pleasure
of the senses, when in steed of wine he will have Christians filled with the
spirit. For in wine (as he says) is wantonness: but in the spirit is both a
true and a perfect joy. Drounckerdes speak more than enough, but yet foolish
and vain things: Speak ye (says he) but yet spiritual things, and that
not only in voice, but also in heart: for the voice sounds in vain, where
the mind is not affected. They which be filled with wine, do speak foolish,
filthy, and blasphemous things: but give ye thanks to God, always (I say)
and for all things.

To this end undoubtedly ought Ecclesiastical songs to tend unto. To the
Colossians also are written certain things not disagreing from these. Let the
word of the Lord (says the Apostle) abound plentifully in you: teach and
admonish ye one another in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing in
your hearts with grace. By these words Paul expresses two things. First,
that our songs be the word of God, which must abound plentifully in us, and
they must not serve only to giving of thanks, but also to teach and to
admonish. And then it is added, with grace, which is thus to understand, as
though he should have said, aptly and properly both to the senses, and to
measure, and also unto the voices. Let them not sing rude and rusticall
things, neither let it be immoderatly, as do the Tauernhunters. To the
Corrinthians the first Epistle the.xiiii. chapter where he entreats of an
holy assemblye, the same Apostle writes after this manner: When ye assemble
together, according as every one of you has a Psalm, or has doctrine, or
has a tongue, or has reuelacion, or has interpretation, let al things be
done unto edifieng. By which words is declared that Syngers of songs and
Psalms had their place in the Church. The west Church. Augustine.


But the west Churches more lately received the manner of singing: for
Augustine, in his.ix. book of Confessions testifies that it happened in the
time of Ambrose. For when that holy man together with the people watched even
in the Church, least he should have been betrayed unto the Arrians, he brought
in singing to avoid tediousnes, and to drive away the time.

But as touching the measure and nature of the song which ought to be retained
in Music in the Church, these things are worthy to be noted. What manner of
measure the ecclesiastical song ought to be. Augustine.
Augustine in the same books of Confession, both confesses, and also is sorry,
that he had sometimes fallen, because he had given more attentive heed unto
the measures and cords of music, than to the words which were under them
spoken. Which thing hereby he proves to be sin, because measures and singing
were brought in for the words sake, and not words for Music. The manner of
the church of Alexandria.
And he so repented him of his fault, that he execeedingly allowed the manner
of the Church of Alexandria used under Athanasius, for he commanded the
Reader, that when he sang, he should but little alter his voice, so that he
should be like rather unto one that reads, than unto one that syngeth.
Howbeit on the contrary, when he considered, how at the beginning of his
conversion he was inwardly moved with these songs, namely in such sort, that
for the zeal of pietye he burst forth into tears, for this cause I say, he
consented that Music should be retained in the Church, but yet in such
manner, that he said he was ready to change his sentence, if a better reason
could be assigned. And he adds yt those do sin deadly, as they were wont to
speak, which give greater head unto music, than unto the words of God:
Jerome. Gregory.
To which sentence undoubtedly Jerome assenteth, as he has noted upon the
Epistle to the Ephesians. Gregory also of Rome, in the Synod of Rome was of
the same opinion. And both their words are written in the Decrees, Did. 92.
in the chap. Cantantes, and in the chapter, In sancta Romana. In which place
are read in the gloss two verses, not in deed so eloquent, but yet godly.

Non vox, sed votum, non cordula musica, sed vox
Non clamans, sed amans, cantat in aure Dei.
That is: Not the voice, but the desire: not the plesantnes of music, but the
voice Not crying, but loving, syngeth in the ear of God.

And in the words of Gregory, this is not slightlye to be passed over, in that
he says: Whilst the swetenes of the voice is sought for, the life is
neglected: and when wicked manners provoke God, the people is ravished by the
pleasantness of the voice.

The abuses of Ecclesiastical Music.
But now let us declare the cautions which are to be observed, to the end we
may lawfully and fruitfully use singing in the Church. The first is: That
Hymns of Ambrose.
than a true faith. Neither do I speak these things as though I would
disprayse the Hymns of Ambrose, and other which are of that kind, forasmuch
as by them I judge that the faithful may be both instructed, and also
admonished. The Symbol of Athanasius. The Psalms of Augustine. The Psalms of
Chrysostom.
The Symbol of Athanasius seems also to be allowed, and the Psalms of
Augustine against the Donatistes: and also the Psalms of Chrysostom (of which
the Ecclesiastical history of Eusebius makes mention in the.7. book) if they
were remaining. For whatsoever things were written in them, we must believe
that they agree with the holy scriptures, and that they do advance the
edification of the faithful in the Church. The Psalms of Valentine.
But contrarywyse the Psalms of Valentine (of which Tertulian makes mention)
ar above al things to be condemned. Psalms in the honor of Samosatenus.
And with them the most corrupt Psalms which were soong in the Temple in the
honor of Paulus Samosatenus, as the history of Sozomenus declares.

But now to conclude the matter, I affirm that godly and religious songs may
be retained in the Church: and yet I confess that there is no precept given
in the new Testament of that thing. Wherefore if there be any Church, There is no
precepte given for the having of Music in the Church.
which upon just causes uses it not, the same Church cannot justly be
condemned, so that it defend not that the thing it self of his own nature, or
by the commandment of God is unlawful, and that it do not for the same cause
reprove other Churches, which use singing and Music, or else exclude them from
the fellowship of Christ. For the Church of Alexandria (as it is before said)
used either very little singing, or else almost none at al. For they saw the
infirmity of the people to be so great, that they gave more heed to the
harmony, than they did to the words. Wherefore if in these days we shall
perceive, that the Christian people do run unto the Churches as to a stage
play, where they may be delighted with piping and singing, in this case we must
rather abstain from a thing not necessary, than to suffer their pleasures to
be cockered with the destruction of their souls. But now I think it good to
return unto the history.

Then sang Deborah and Barak. Who made this song.
It seems that Deborah alone made this ditty: for the spirit of prophecy had
persed her, and not Barak. Howbeit he is joined with her, because even as in
the battle he was the Captain, so also among the singers, and those which
gave thanks unto God, he was the chief.

In that day. We may thus enterprise, that in the self same day of victory,
this song of victory was both made and also song: which lyketh me very well,
that we might hereby learn straightwaye to give thanks for the benefits
received. For to defer it, as some do, It is vicious to defer thanks giving.
it can scarcely be defended from the vice of ingratitude. Neither can the
manner of certain men be commended, which to obtain any thing at Gods hands
cease not with most importunate vows to pray unto him, but when they have
obtained their request, they scarce return unto God, to give him thanks
sometimes at the last.

The Ethnikes (as we gather by good authors writers of histories) when they had
gotten the victory, did strayghtway sing hymns in praises of their Gods:
Co^querers did straightwaye sing Hymns unto their gods
and if they with so great a study gratified their false Gods, how much more
ought we for the benefits which we have received, without any tarying to offer
thanks unto the true and lively God, whom we woorship.

Praise ye the Lord for the auenging of Israel. Because this Hebrew word
Perag is doubtful, therefore the sense thereof may be taken diverse ways. First,
it signifies to make naked and to spoil, as it is put in Exodus, when Aaron
took golden ornaments of the Israelites, to make the molten Calfe. For he was
reproved of Moses, because he had with ignominy made naked the people.
Wherefore according to this signification the sense of the dittye is: Give
thanks unto God, which first made you naked both of strength and of his aid,
when we were given over unto the Chananites. Furthermore, give him thanks,
because he has afterward made you prompt both to take in hand war, and also
to recover your liberty. Each of these actions of God is to be praised, To the
elect (...) is profitable both to be^ c^st down, and (...) be deliue^ We must
(...) thanks o^ God for pro^^^rity and aduersit^
for they turned to good to his people. For the deiection calls them back to
repentance, and the delivery delivers them from a grievous yoke. Let god
therefore be praised, which both leads to hell, and brings from hell. Neither
must we give him thanks only for prosperous things, but also for adversity.
Also this word Perag signifies to revenge: and by this means forasmuch as
reuengeme^t may be referred to two things, the sense of it also may be taken
two ways.

The first is: That god in oppressing the Israelites, and delivering them to
the Chananites, revenged the injury that was done unto himself, wherein they
did grievously offend him, when they fell to impietye and Idolatrye. Neither
does this latter sentence vary any thing from the first. Forasmuch as by this
way also Deborah commands to give thanks unto god for the former
afflictions. For to the godly aduersitye also turns to good.

For the Saints when they have fallen, are wont by scourges wherewith they are
punished to be called back again to repentance, which repentance God
pours in them by diverse and many vexations. The third sense is, which is
every where, and almost received of al men: That they should give thanks unto
God, which at the last had revenged the injuries of the Israelites. For they
were before long time, and that grievously oppressed by the Chananites. And
then by the spirit of God they were made willing and prompt, which before were
such abiectes and cowardes. Two things therefore are expressed, namely, that
God confounded the Chananites, in revenging the euyls which they had done unto
the Jews, and also that he strengthened them in the battle. If God revenged
them, We do not ask those things of God which ar in our own power.
they by them selves could not revenge themselves. If he made them willing,
they themselves were not such. Wherefore free will is put down, and the goodness
of god commended. For even as we do not ask of god those things which we
have in our own hands and power: so for these things when they happen unto us,
we give him no thanks.

3 Hear ye Kings, hearken ye Princes: I, even I will sing unto the Lord, I
will sing praise unto the Lord God of Israel.


Why she calls Kings in special, there may be many reasons alleged. The
first is, because all the Jews were called in a manner Kings. For God made
that nation both a kingdom and a priesthood unto himself. They were all
therefore so called, even as we of Christ are called Christians, or anointed,
of our only head Christ, which was chiefly anointed with the oil of
righteousness and grace.

An admonition to Magistrates
Farther, he makes an Apostrophe to kings, because that she song these words
not only for her time, but also having a regard to the time to come:
wherefore by her, all Princes and Magistrates are in especial admonished,
because they being puffed up with pride and riches, both think and also
affirm that the people should look for safety at their hands. But now they are taught by the word of God, that it is he which defends and keeps,
although sometimes thereunto he uses the help of them that are preserved.
Lastly, Deborah speaks to strange kings, which had determined with them
selves to destroy the Israelites, and exhorts them diligently to weigh with
themselves the things which God has done, and to mark how he knows to
avenge his people in due time.

I, even I (says she) will sing. The repeating of the pronowne of the first
person, is not only used of Poets, but also of Orators: nether does it only
adorn the oration, Virgil. Cicero.
but also move the affections, and stirs up men unto admiration. Virgil
says: I, even I am present which did it, turn your weapon against me. Cicero
also says: Ah I miserable man the goods, the goods I say of Gnaius
Pompeius, were most cruelly by the voice of the crier. etc. This now is, as if
Deborah should have said: I although a woman, yet a Prophet. I although a
woman, yet a savior of Israel will sing unto my God.

They use to put a certain difference between these two latin words canere
that is, to sing, and psallere which is also to sing: but because that
difference is not always observed, yea, one is taken oftentimes for an other,
therefore I willingly ouerpasse it.

4 Lord, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou departedst out of the field
of Edom, the earth trembled, the clouds also dropped water.

5 The mountains melted before the Lord, as did that Sinai before the Lord God
of Israel.


In the ditties and periodes of songs and of the prophets this is a common use,
that the latter part differs not from the first, as touching sense, Why in
the periodes of the holy scriptures one sentence is repeated.
but co^tayneth the same thing, the words being somewhat changed: which
thing also in the Proverbs of Solomon is easy to mark. And I doubt not that
the same is done upon just causes. Forasmuch as of the holy ghost nothing is
done rashly or unprofitably. The sentences also which are entreated of in those
books, are very grave, and therefore by that tarying in them, our dulnes is
helped. For it quickly passes over the sense of the first part: therefore the
latter part being all one with the first, makes us to give more attentive
heed. Farthermore our hardenes is so great, that to one stroke it uses not
to give place. Wherefore it is no merueyle if God strike it with a double
stroke. And when the words are changed, the efficacy and wayght of the
sentence alredye spoken, is more and more expressed. The want of humayne
speech is helped, which want is such, that at one speaking, the whole
signification of a wayghty sentence can not be opened. Wherefore by that
repititio^, that which is not expressed by the first words, is expounded by
other words which serve for the same thing.

God therefore, by whose conducte this victory was obtained, is to be
praised: which is by very good reason done, forasmuch as his benevolence
toward Israel is proved to be no strange or new benevolence. Wherefore
Deborah celebrateth him as an old and ancient patron of the Jews. From the
time (says she) wherein the Israelites at thy commandment, walked.38. years
by diverse writers (as it is written in the.2. of Deutronomy) about mount Seir,
and then at the length by thy will departing from thence, they went forward to
the land of Chanaan, thou nobly take in hand their cause. For thou going
with us in a pillar of fire, and of a cloud, so fearedst the Chananites our
enemies, that they were not able to resist us, which were otherwise weak and
feeble. Before when we went about the mountain, they lived in securitye, and
stoutlye contemned us. But when thou leddest us out of those places, such a
fear came upon them, that even the earth seemed to tremble, and the heavens
and clouds cast down great tempests and showers. And it was so great as
though the mountains should roll down great heaps of water, to the inferior
valleis. By these alligories Deborah discribeth the fear that was driven into
the Amorites and Chananits. And it is no maruayle (says she) if at thy sight
they were so troubled, when as this Sina was not able to abide ye disce^ding
down upon it, when in old time thou gave ye law, for it was altogether
shaken, and it wonderfully trembled. Let the prudent reader mark that there
wants this particle Caph. Which is a note of a similitude, which should be
here put. This Sinai is written simply: when as we must understand eue^ as this
Sina in the old time was moved, so they at our coming were sore afraid and
trembled. To mount Seir or Edom, which is now mentioned, in the.30. chap. of
Deutronomy (where almost the same thing is written) is Pharan added, namely a
mountayn lying hard by it, and the like thing is red in the Psalm. The
Rabbines of the Hebrews do bring trifles, A farned thing of the Rabines
and say that God did therefore come from Seir when he would give the law,
because he would first have given the law unto the Edomites: which when they
refused, he went unto mount Sina to the Hebrews, which received the law, with
a willing and glad heart. But these fables are not drawn out of the holy
scriptures, but spring out of their own inue^tion, which immoderatly commend
their own nation, as though they by their own judgment and upright will, had
deserved to receive the law of God. But others think, that God when he came to
Sinai, was seen to have descended from those mountains of the Edomites, as
though he should begin to go from thence unto the Israelites. This also is
but a weak reason. The first interpretation fitteth best, for as touching the
hystory, when God caused the Israelites to pass over beyond the mountain,
then were the Chananites sore afearde, especially when Og, and Sihon the kings
were slain.

6 In the days of Sangar the son of Anath, in the days of Iahel the high
ways were unoccupied, and the trauaylers walked thorough bywayes.

7 The towns of Israel were not inhabited, they decayed, until I Deborah
rose up, which rose up a mother in Israel.


Hitherto is God commended as the ancient defendour of the Israelites, but now
is set forth this present victory. And is handled by comparison because it is
declared that God had now granted far greater things than before he had
given, when Deborah was not yet stirred up. For Sangar (of whom we before
entreated) although he obtained some victory over his enemies, and did
somewhat for the safety of the people, yet he did not perfectly set the
Hebrews at liberty. Neither performed Iahel a full delivery. For in their time
ye high ways also were not then safe, and men were compelled, either not to go
forward, or else to travail through bywayes and unknown places. And things
were come to that point, that villages, and towns which were not fenced and
enclosed with walls, were clean forsaken. Wherefore merchandise, husbandrye,
and judgments were hindered, and the Jews were compelled to keep themselves
in cities well fenced, except they would have been made prays unto the
Chananits. And this misery endured from the oppression of Iabin to the dominion
of Deborah.

But it may seem merueilous, why he makes mention of Sangar and Iahel both
together. Some think that she judged Israel after Sangar. But for as much as
the holy scriptures write not so, I dare not affirm it. I think rather that
she was named with Sangar for honors sake: as though she should have said:
Although GOD has by her now killed even Sisera, and that hitherto GOD has
loved her, yet as long as she has lived unto this present day, the
calamity of Israel has endured, neither was it taken away. This Hebrew word
Perzon in the singular number signifies, villages, and towns without walls
and fenses: and therefore it is construed with a verb of the plural number,
namely Chadelu. Virgill.
Farther we must note that this verb Chadelu is twice repeated, for it is put
both in the beginning and in the end of the sentence, as in that verse of
Virgil: He demanded many things of Priam, and many things of Hector.

She says that she rose up as a mother in Israel, because she was stirred up
not to reign as a tirant. Certain do sometimes fight for their country, and do
seem as though they would set it at liberty, Caesar.
but afterward the same men do oppress it no less than enemies. Caesar seemed
to have delivered the frenchemen and the Germans from the yoke of the
Romans, ^arius Silla.
but he utterly oppressed the public wealth, that is, the liberty of the
people. The same thing went Marius and Silla about.

What is the property of a lawful prince.
And here is touched the duty of a lawful and good prince. And that is to have a
fatherly mind toward his people. Wherefore Senators were called fathers, and
they were named Patres conscripti. That is, appointed fathers, whose familyes
also were called Patritiae. And assuredly in the old time it was counted an
excellent and a most noble title to be called a father of his country, for
Tulli esteemed it to be so honorable unto him, that he said: The city of Rome
called Cicero the father of the country.

8 When he chosed new Gods, then was there war in the gates, if there were a
shield or spear seen among.40000. of Iraell.


These words are expounded two manner of ways, and that not vnaptlye. First,
it may be said, that war did then strayghtway oppress the Jews, and that
the enemy also beseged their gates and cities, when they declined unto
Idolatry. According to which interpretacio^ the election is referred unto
Israel, and this word Elohim, shall be the accusative case, so that there is a
reason showed of the misery wherewith the Hebrews were afflicted. Undoubtedly
they were therefore bruised and made afeard, and also not one of many thousands
which durst take a shield, or shake a spear, because they had polluted
themselves with idolatry. And Deborah testifies this to be so true, that she
may confirm it even with an oath. Which this particle (If) which is here put
declares moreover we may in this sort interpreate it: I Deborah after that I
was stirred up of God, there was war in the gates, either of the tents, or
else because the Hebrew soldiers which before kept themselves within, were now
gone forth of the gates: because god has now chosen new things, that is, he
has brought in a new show and form of things longinge unto the Israelites.
Our men durst do nothing hitherto, which now burst forth and assail their
enemies. It is god therefore, which has chosen new things: And this word
Elohim in that sense shall be the nominative case. The things which god has now
wrought, are not unworthily called new things: For it is a rare and an
unaccustomed thing, that armed soldiers should be vanquished of unarmed me^.
And the Hebrews were so with out weapons, yt not among xl. C. men was found so
much as one shield or spear.

This Hebrewe word Aim is a particle of one that swears, and is very much
used in the holy scriptures. I have sworn in mine anger, if they shall enter
into my rest. Also: Lord if I have done this, or if there be iniquitye in my
hands etc. The reason of this kind of speech is, because they which do so
swear, do begin an execration, and sometimes they perform it not. If, say
they, they should add. I do it, let this or that happen unto me, let me
perysh, let me dye, let me suffer cruel punishment, and such like. But
sometimes they fully express it.

9 My darte is set on the gouerners of Israel, and on them that are willing
among the people, praise ye the Lord.

10 Speak ye that ride on white asses, ye that dwell by Middin, and that walk
by the way.


Deborah by an eloquent distribution turns herself to diverse kinds of men,
and exhorts every one of them to praise the Lord. She makes mention of
princes before the other, and says that her heart is set on them, namely
because she fervently desires them to be thankful unto God, and to praise him
for the benefit which they have received. She calls them Hokekei, because to
them pertained to make both decrees and laws. Afterward she speaks of all
those, which of their own will and accord had offered themselves unto the
battle.

Ye which ride on white trim asses. Almost al interpretours understand this to
be spoken of merchantes, which ride to and fro to fayres and marketes. Asses
are used in Siria.
And indeed asses are very much used in Siria: for there the asses be strong,
and mighty and of a good big stature, and do go pleasauntly.

Which dwell by Middin, Some understand it thus, that they which are judges
should be provoked to praise GOD. For (say they) as she had before stirred
up merchants and rich men to praise God, so now she calls upon judges to do
the same. For as before merchants were hindered from their trades, also were
judges let from exercising judgments. For they being oppressed of their
enemies could not minister justice. But it is better that by this word Middin
be expressed some certain place, which paraduenture was grieuouslier oppressed
by the enemies tha^ other places were. Or else because their marchandises were
wont to be much occupied, which being now set at liberty and in safety, the
inhabiters of that place are peculiarly stirred up to praise God, And lastly
this seems to pertayne to the common people. Which walk by the way. Namely
on foot. For other, either they did ride, or were carried upon asses, for that
they were rich and noble men. All ye (says she) Schichu, that is tell, and
show. But because that verb signifies also to meditate, we will thus expound
it: with a redye and an attentive mind tell or show. Or else it is said, Ye
which walk by the way, to declare a certain cause why they ought to give
thanks: as though she should have said: All ye, which I have mentioned,
therefore give thanks unto God, because now ye may walk by the way freely.

11 For the noise of the archers appaised in the places where water is drawn,
there shall they rehearse the righteousness of the Lord, his righteousness of his
towns in Israel, the^ did the people of the lord go down to the gates.


When she had now praised God, because he had restored the common high ways
free unto the Hebrews, she adds now an other benefit which he had bestowed
on them, Water is a very necessary thing in Syria
namely in that they might with out fear draw water, which before was in a
manner wholly let them. This thing undoubtedly, although in other places it
seems to be of no great value, yet in Siria where is wonderful great
scarecety of water, it ought to be counted for an excellent gift. The wells
or fountaynes which were without the cities by the streates and high ways,
could stand the Jews in no stead, by reason of the Chananites which kept
away al things. For the horsemen which were archers, hid them selves privily
near such waters, and assailed those which came forth to draw water there.
Many of them they led away captives, and with their noise and cry, they feared
away in a manner all from drawinge of water. Ye have now escaped (says
Deborah) the horrible and barbarous noises and cries of horsemen, which were
archers used to cry with an horrible voice when they assail their enemies,
Jeremy in the.4. chap. testifies. And the whole city (says he) fled away at
the cry of the horsemen, which they made whilst they bended their bows.

After that is setforth an other singular benefit, namely that ye little
towns and villages, which wanted fences, and were not enclosed with walls,
and seemed to be desolate and emptye by reason of the enemies which besieged
them, ar now by the help of God reedefied and restored. Wherefore she concludes
that for this cause also, god must worthily be praised. Lastly is added, yt the
people of god might now assemble at the gates of ye cities, Why they give
judgments in the gates.
from the which before they were altogether prohibited. The judgment place in
the old time was wont to be in the gates where they executed laws. But by
reason of wars and oppressions it seems that judgments ceased, which thing
how great a misery it brings to the public wealth, they do manifestly
understand, which are not ignorant that in judgments in a manner the whole
power of the public wealth is contained. But why the Hebrews executed these
things in the gates, this seems to me to be the cause, because they thought
those places most meet to be chosen, unto which not only the citizens, but
also the rusticall and husband men might easily come. And ye undoubtedly could
not be better done in any other place, then in the very gates of the cities.
Give thanks therefore unto God, says Deborah, because all these things by his
aid have now recovered their old form and order.

12 Arise, arise Deborah, arise, arise, singe a song. Up Barak, and lead thy
captivity captyue, thou son of Abinoam.


Forasmucch as Deborah studied to inflame all the Israelites to give thanks
unto god, by an eloque^t figure she now stirs up herself, yt thereby others
might be pricked forward, and endeavor themselves by her example to praise God.
Go to, Go to, Deborah, go to, go to sing a song. This without doubt, is, the
manner of saints in their Psalms and songs that they never satisfy
themselves in praising God, they always think that they are to cold, and for
that cause every where they use such stirringes up of themselves. Here R.
Solomon doteth, A feigned ^^sition of R. ^^lomon.
when he writes, that Deborah did to much boast of her self, and therefore
when her spirit began to wax faynte, she endeavored her self by such stirryng
up to kindle it again. If these things are spoken by the spirit, as in very
deed they are, there can no sin be in them without a great fault. Wherefore
let Solomon go whether he will with his fables. Lead thy captivity captive.
She exhorts Barac to triumph and with a certain pomp to boast of his
captives. For by that means it seemed that the honor and name of God should
more and more be illustrated, when all men understood, that the Chananites
were now captives unto the Hebrews who before thought that they would either
utterly destroy the Hebrews or else take them prisoners. This is the punishment
of the just law called the law of the like, that they should justly suffer
those things, which they unjustly went about to do unto others. Farthermore the
Rabbines have here noted that the song is peculiarly ascribed unto Deborah,
because she was a Prophetess: but the triumph was given unto Barac, because
in the battle he had fought against his enemies.

13 Then they that remain have dominion over the mighty of the people: the
Lord has given me dominion over the string.


Again the victory is by a comparison amplified, not as it was before, with
the evils and discommodities wherewith the Israelites were oppressed, but the
conquerers are very aptly copared with the^ which were overcome. They which
were overcome were undoubtedly of great renown, valiant, expert in wars, and
noble, but our men seem to be like remnants, for few came unto the battle
and those few were of few tribes. Besides that those few which came were men
despised and of no reputation. For that commonly such are remna^tes, namely to
be both small in number, and also vile and abiecte, if it be compared with
other, whose remnant they are. Howbeit these remnantes, what manner of men so
ever they were, they had the dominion, and were gouerners over the noble men.

The Lord has given me dominion. This is added by correction, lest any man
should think that any thing in this battle is attributed unto man's strength.
It is the Lord himself which overcomes and has dominion. Nevertheless
has done this by me. That word Li may be thus understand, as though she
should say thorough me: or as God would overcome by her: or the joy,
approbation and pleasure is noted which she conceived in mind of this great
honor of God.

14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them again Amalek, and after thee
Benjamin against thy people, out of Machir came rulers, and of Zebulon they
that draw with the pen of the writer.

15 And the princes of Isaschar were with Deborah and Isaschar: so Barak was
sent on his feet in ye valley: in the divisions of Reuben were great thoughts
of heart.


Vergill and Homere rehearsed the order and number of the ships captains and
people, which were helpers unto those princes whom they praised: so now Deborah
rehearses those of ye people of Israel which came to take in hand this war.

Deborah was of the tribe of Ephraim.
A root of them, that is a prince of Ephraim. This I think pertayneth to
Deborah her self: for as it seems, she was of Ephraim and judged the people
under the oak of Ephraim as is before said, and without doubt this war was
taken in hand by her conduct and admonitions. But this seems somewhat dark,
in that it is said that the battle was appointed against Amalek, but by a
figure or figurative kind of speech, we must by Amalek understand the
Chananites also. Howbeit I am not ignorant, that by this root of Ephraim, some
understand Joshua, who was both an Ephraite, and also fought against Amalek, as
it appears in the book of Exodus: and they suppose that in these things
which follow, therefore is made mention of ye tribe of Benjamin, to declare and
show forth that Saul which should come of the tribe of Benjamin should within
a while afterward finishe the war against the Amalekites which thing we
read was done in the first book of Samuel. This exposition, as I do not
abject, so also I do not easily allow it: because I do not think that the
acts of Iosuah are now rehearsed, neither can I be persuaded that Deborah by
the spirit of Prophecy, did Prophecy of those things which should come to
pass in the time of Saul. I will omit therefore that interpretation, and
return unto mine own. Some of the tribe of Benjamin did at the beginning
join themselves unto Deborah, although (as I judge) they were very few of
them. But out of Machir (which was a noble famely of the tribe of Manasses)
came some notable men. Zabulon also was not without some Doctors, Lawyers, and
Scribes, which were better with a pen than with weapons, and that is
signified, in that it is said. They which draw with the pen of the writer,
that is, which were exercised in drawyng the pen. And the tribe of Isaschar is
wonderfully commended, for from it came princes, yea even at the beginning.
Furthermore it is added that Isaschar was as Barac. For as Barac was sent unto
mount Thabor, so it seems yt Isaschar with his footmen was sent into the
valley, and there he the^ on each side invaded the enemies, when the battle
being begone the Israelites were in danger, there the Israelites behaved
themselves valiantly. Wherefore justly are they in this place excedingly
praised. The accomplices therefore of this war are mentioned, namely, Ephraim,
Benjamin, a part of Manasses, Isaschar, Zabulon, and Nepthalim. But there is
nothing spoken of Judah, Simeon, Leui, and Gad. Afterward are reprehended
Reuben, Dan, Aser, and peradventure al of the tribe of Manasses, as we shall
hereafter see. Wherefore they above named which aided in the battle, were
worthily called remnantes, because they were both few in number and also of no
reputation.

In the litel brooks of Reuben. The tribe of Reuben is reproved because it
detracted the battle. They dwelt beyond Iordane in the Pastors, and it
seems, that by reason of their sheep and cattle they had no regard unto the
publicque wealth. The places of the Rubenites are not unworthily called rivers:
for they had gotten fertile pastors by the river of Iordane. He attributes
unto the^ greatness and wisdom, but he accuses them for this, namely,
because they had so great a care unto their own things. Such a thing seems
here to have come pass, as is that which is set forth in the parable of the
Gospel, namely, that diverse which were bidden unto the wedding refused to
come, because some would go prove a yoke of oxen, some had bought a Town, and
other some also had married a wife. But of the remnantes which were gathered out
of the streets and high ways, was the wedding fulfilled. So also comes it to
pass in our days, when kings, Emperors, Princes, Noble and mighty men of
this world do therefore despise the profession of the Gospel, because they
prefer their own commondities before religion and heavenly things.

16 Why abydest thou among the shepefolds, to hear the bleatings of the
flocks? in the divisions of Reuben were great thoughts of heart.

17 Gilead abode beyond Iordane: but why does Dan remain in shipes? Aser sat
on the sea shore, and tarried in his decayed places.


Ruben is described both by the art of a shepherd which he exercised and also
by the places of Pastors which he inhabited: and therewith all it is showed
that they were great men, and men of a wise understanding, peradventure to
reprehend their swelling and pride, as though they would not obey the
commandments and conduct of Deborah being a woman. This is the nature of
high minds, that they think that al things that they do, are well done. But
in that it is added, To hear the bleatinges of flocks: it may be understand
plainly as though the Rubenites had more mind to the bleating of cattle,
than they had to the regard of the publicque wealth, but some understand
Allegorically, saying that the Rubenites sat still among the shepefoldes by the
fertile pastors of Iordane, although they heard they lamentations and
complaints of the flocks of Israel, that is of the people of God, with which
lamentations and complayntes they earnestly implored their aid.

Gilead abode by the river of Iordane, or beyond Iordane. Some think that the
Galaadites were reprehended together with the Rubenites, because they also with
their cattle abode by Iordane, and neglected this battle. Half the tribe of
Manasses, unto which the Galaadites pertayned, when ye land of Chanaan was
divided, obtained the region beyond Jordan together with the Rubenites. They
which thus expound it, are encombred with a certain doubt, because it is before
said that Machir came: and he was both the son of Manasses, and also
possessed the mount Gilead. Therefore if Gilead came as it is before said, why
is he here reproved as though he came not? Peradventure they will answer,
Two sons of Manasses.
that Manasses had two children Machir, and Iair, of which children were two
families derived, of which either possessed part of Gilead. Wherefore it might
be, that Machir, of whom before is mention had, came: but Iair is now
reproved, which together with the Rubenites neglected this battle. But
other, with whom I agree, do thus think, that the things which are now spoken
serve to aggrauate ye crime of the Rubenites as though it should have been said
(...): Thou Ruben without doubt dwell by the rivers of Iordane, and there
dwells Gilead also, who came for all that to the battle. Therefore all
excuse both of dwelling and place is cut of from the Rubenites. And it seems
that this sentence should be spoken by a certain interrogation. Did not Gilead
also dwell by the rivers of Iordane? Wherefore cease Rube^ to excuse that which
thou have naughtly committed.

Why does Dan go to the ships? The situation of the Danites
This can not be understand of ships lo^ging to the sea, for as much as the
lot of the Danites fell not by the sea side: but we must understand it of the
ships of Iordane. Not as though Dan did altogether dwell by Jordan, but (as
they say) this tribe was so feared with the sight of the hosts, yt they fled
unto their ships, to pass over to ye Rubenites. And that, even as it was
filthy and uncomely so also is it now justly and worthily blamed.

Aser sat on the sea shore, and in his decayed places. Aser is also blamed, who
seems to have excused his absence: first because he dwelled far of, yt is, by
the sea shore: secondly because his Cities and Towns were decayed and
vnfensed. And therefore would he tarry at home, for fear lest if he had gone,
his enemies should easily have had occasion to invade his borders. For, for as
much as he possessed places which were weak, he thought that if he were
absent, his neighbors would easly beriue him of them. I do not doubt, but that
it was grievous and troublesome to those tribes so to be reprehended, which yet
the holy ghost would have done: partly that they being admonished, might
repent: partly ye other and we also being by this example stirred up, might not
refuse to obey the word of God yea though it be with danger: which if we
shall not perform, as these men are now reproved, so also shall we in the last
day of judgment, not only be reproved with ignominy and irrecouerable hurt,
but also we shall be damned for ever.

18 But the people of Zebulon have ieoparde their souls unto the death, and
Nepthalim in the high places of the field.


She praised the tribe of Zebulon and Nepthalim for their deserts because they
had put forth to reproach their soul, that is their life. For other men
counted the^ fools, because so few and unarmed men durst rashly take in hand
war against so many and well appointed soldiers as they thought. Or They put
their soul to reproach, because they nothing esteemed their life, and in a
manner counted it as a vile thing, putting themselves forth into most certain
danger of death, if they should look upon man's judgment. Howbeit they are
for ye same cause very much to be commended, because they preferred both God
and also his word before their own life. And it is added. In high places of
the field, or else in high fields, because those were soldiers led unto mount
Thabor, from which place they might easily behold ye whole host of their
adversaries. But although they behold them, yet were they not so feared, to
leave of their enterprise.

19 The kings came and fought: then fought the kings of Chanaan in Thaanach
and by the waters of Megiddo: they received no gain of money.


Now is described the form of the battle or victory. She says in the
plural number that kings came and fought: because peradventure Sisera had
very many other rulers joined with him, who although they were not there in
person, they had for all that their hosts there. Or else by a figurative kind
of speech the plural number is put for the singular number, as is this sentence
of ye Poet. But we have gone a great space of the sea. Virgil. Cicero.
Cicero also says, we have deceived the people, we seemed to have been orators.
Thaanah, and Megiddo, seemed to have been rivers in the tribe of Manasses which
had by them two Cities of the same names, not far from mount Thabor. We must
think therefore that the host of Sisera possessed all the plain ground
which lay between these two Towns. Cicero.
And those repeticions, for one verb serve to adorn ye sentence or song.
Nilchamiu Are Nilchamiu, that is they fought then, they fought as Cicero also
says: No man looks upon the matter, no man considers the reason, etc. so
yt between two words repeted he puts this one word (no man) This word also
Melachim that in kings is repeted. Cicero.
For it is said that the kings came, and that they fought as Cicero also
says, This O fathers appointed is found to be your act, and not mine, and
undoubtedly it is a most noble act: but not mine (as I have said) but yours.

They received no gain of money. This may we thus understand, they came to
enriche themselves with the spoils of their enemies: but that came not to
pass according to their expectation. But others interpret these words more
subtelly, saying, that the enemies so deadly hated the Israelites, that they
had no regard to the gain of the pray, but they would fight under Sisera
against the Israelites even without wages, that is, as it is said, without
meat and drink and harness. Some refer it to this, that they think those
enemies of the people of God were such bloudsuckers, that if in the battle
they had gotten any of the Hebrews, they would take no ransom of them, but
straight way sley them, being such as desired not the pray, but only thursted
for their blood.

20 They fought from heaven, the stars from their courses fought against
Sisera.


She makes mention of the help that came from heaven and from the stars, by
the will and government of God. But how that came to pass, is not expressed.
But it might be, that fire was sent among the enemies, or that hailestones
thundering and lightninges (as Josephus affirms) afflicted the Chananites.
Peradventure also the wind so stirred up the dust in the face of the
Chananites: (as Leui writes happened unto ye Romans in the battle of
Cannensis) that they could utterly see nothing at all. Liuius.


The stars from their courses fought. That is from their degrees and
stations, least any man should think that they descended from heaven, or
departed from their course.

21 The river Kison swepte them away, the river of auncientes, the river Kison,
O my soul thou have marched valiauntly.


To the help of the heaven and of the stars, the river favorably joined it
self: for it swelled, when as otherwise it was wont to be but small. Wherefore
it was so increased, that it both choked and swept away many of the enemies.
But this word Goth signifies not by any means to sweep, but as it happens
when a house is sweapte or made clean with broomes, for then what soever is
unclean, it is together with the dust cast forth. So in this destruction, they
which were counted noble, were in the same sort sweapte away, as if they had
been dust and filthe. This word River is often repeated in this verse, which
undoubtedly is pleasant, when it is in due place done: which I therefore
speak, least any should think these repetitions to be to no purpose. Yea and
Cicero also writes in solute oration: Cicero.
When I shall come again into favor with Appius Claudius, and shall come
again by Cu. Pompeius: I therefore when I shall come again, etc. And this
Kyson is called Kedumim as though it had two names, and were called by both
the names, or else because there peradventure was some other river so called,
which river because it ran into Kyson, gave it also his name. But some
translate that word of Ancientnesse, namely of Counsels: because God himself
had before the foundacions of the world were laid, created and appointed that
river to this purpose, to be an aid unto him in this victory in time to come.
It chaunsed not so, that the whole host of Sisera was drowned in that river.
For how could that be, when there was an incredible number of soldiers, and
the river of so narrow a breadth? But as it is to be thought, ye chiefrulers
and captains which entered into ye water with their horses and chariots, were
drowned: which thing when the other soldiers saw, their courage was both
dawnted, and also they turned themselves to flight. And we see this to come to
pass oftentimes in ca^pes, yt those things which of their own nature seem
to be of no great value, do much profit either this party or ye part in ye
victory. This act without doubt has some affinity, with ye drowning of
Pharao, but yt the sea is not so well compared with a little river: neither did
a part of Pharaos host perish in the Sea, but the whole host was overwhelmed in
it. But all these men (as we have said) were not drowned in Kison. Farther the
rashness of the Egiptians seemed greater then these men's, when as it is much more
foolish to enterprise to pass over the sea, then to wade over a river.

22 Then were the houfes of the horses broken with the often beating together of
the mighty men.


Here is set forth the third calamitye, namely yt their horses hoofes were
broken. By nature in deed the horse houfes are mighty and strong, neither are
they easily cloven, but the spurryng of them forward to ruin was so great in
this conflict, that they were worn away. This word Sos, that is a horse, is
spoken in the singular number. And that number is also used of our men both
Poets and Orators, in stead of the plural number. For we say that France
has overcome Spain, Virgil.
and Virgill says: The stout Roman was no less valiant then his fathers.
When the houses of the horses were broken and torn, the horsemen could neither
invade the Hebrews, neither yet were they able to save themselves by flieng
away. The Hebrews because they want a superlatiue degree, therefore to
express it, they double both nownes and verbes: as it is here said Miu^haroth
Deharoth that is of great and very often leapynges. Wherefore the repetition of
one self same word serves not only for the adornyng of the sentence but
also to express the vehemence of the signification. There are therefore three,
disco^modities now rehearsed, which came unto the Chananites, namely one from
heaven, an other from the river, and the third of the houfes of the horses
being broken.

23 Curse ye Meroz (said the angel of the Lord) in cursing, curse the
inhabiters thereof, because they came not to help the Lord, to help the Lord
against the mighty.


She curses the City of Meroz which was great and nyghe unto the place where
the battle was fought, because they would not aid them which labored, being
also desired of them thereunto. Deborah curses not the Cities and tribes which
dwelt far of, because they, although they had no true excuses, yet had they
some, such as they were. But these men which dwelt nere at hand, saw ye
thing it self, and were called: and for as much as they would not hear, they
justly and worthily fell, under these sharp and sore curses.

Said the angel of the Lord. This she therefore puts in, least she should
seem to speak of anger, as though she should have said: Even God himself has
commanded me thus to sing. Other understand by the angel, Barac, and that
peradventure not ill: for it might be, yt he went to ye City to stir it up to
fight, who when he saw the citizens to be so wilful and obstinate, by the
impulsion of the spirit of God, he in this manner cursed it. As touching ye
composition, she makes ye co^clusio^ with ye help of Lord, and begins ye
next clause with the self same words, as does Virgill: Virgil.
O ye Periedes do ye these noble things to Gallus, to Gallus I say, whose love
does daily so much increase toward me.

What is to be judged of cursinges and bannynges.
We have at large before handled the place of cursinges, wherefore now I will not
speak much of it. The Sum is: That it is not lawful for a man, to curse any
man, for the satisfieng of his own anger. For when our own matters are in
hand, we must love our enemies: and we must bless the^ which curse us. But
when God does sometimes certainly make manifest, that he will have some
destroyed, they which are so admonished of his will, can not but allow it, for
by the spirit wherwt they are inspired, they will also the same thing ye God
will. And after this manner David and other Prophets burst forth ofte^tymes into
cursinges of the enemies of God, which self same men for all that, as they
were men, by natural compassion which is not vicious, were not a little sorry
for the destruction of the enemies of God. So Samuel, David, Jeremy, yea and
our savior himself, wept and lamented ye fall of ungodly me^. Neither is it to
be doubted, but ye duties of this kind were very acceptable to God, for as much
is they proceed from charity. Howbeit when we see some men cruelly to rage
against the godly men and Gospel of God, it is lawful in that case to pray,
that either their will may be changed, or their strength confounded, that they
should not accomplish all the things which they appoint to do. Which things
if they can not be obtained, this is at the least to be prayed for, ye God will
give us strength and might to suffer all such things which may advance his
honor and glory. And we must diligently weigh, that this curse was therefore
stirred up against the city Meroz, because they denied to help ye people of
god. What the^ is prepared for those, which do not only not help the
servants of Christ, but persecute, grieve, and cruelly vex them? Farther we
must mark, that it is said: these came not to help the Lord, as though God
neded their aid: and that could not be as touching him self: howbeit God in
his people wants help, and in the members of Christ when they are vexed,
Christ himself is vexed. Wherefore he will say in the last day of judgment: I
was hungry, and ye fed me, Math. 25.
I was thirsty and ye gave me drink etc. Wherefore let us hereby learn to obey
when God calls us as did the Israelites which are commended of Deborah,
neither neglected they to take in hand the battle. Let us learn also to
help those that are in need, especially when they follow their vocation.

24 Iahell the wife of Heber the Kenite shall be blessed above other women, above
women shall she be blessed in tents.


When she had cursed the wicked City, by a contrary phrase she adds a good
prayer: as the City Meroz was worthy to be cursed, so of the contrary was Iahel
to be commended. Christ in the last day of Judgment will not only say: Come
ye blessed of my Father: but on the contrary part, he will add: Go ye cursed.
Here is in his place a part of the salvation of the angel Mary, as it is
described in Luke: Blessed art thou above women. Which clause is here twice
put for the greater moving. But in that in this repetitio^ it is added, In
tents, it may be thus interpreted, For this cause let this woman be praised,
because she dwells in tents. So that by a wonderful, compendiousnesse of
one word, the slaying of Sisera is noted, which happened not in the camps,
but was done in ye tente. Or else we may say that Iahell is to be praised above
other women dwelling in tents. For the family of the Kenites dwelled not in
houses but in tents. Wherefore she is praised above all the women Kenites,
which are signified by this word tents.

25 He asked water, and she gave him milk, she offered him butter in a cup of
the mighty.


Iahel is here praised for her prudence and strength: For what virtues Iahell
is praised.
but the mother of these virtues is faith. It was prudence to call the enemy
unto her, handsomely to cover him, and to give him milk to drink. Also to
find out a hammer and a nail, and to chose out his head among the rest of the
members which she would strike, and among the parts of the head to smite
thorough the temples. Her might and strength is hereby known, because a woman
durst enterprise such a notable act, and feared not to assail such and so
great a Captain, but had a full confidence that she, notwithstanding that she
was a woman, should be able to kill him. Peradventure thou will say, the
Scripture makes no mention here of faith. I grant that it does not by
express words: but when it is said she shall be blessed or praised, her faith
is noted. For we be al by nature the children of wrath, neither are any blessed
with faithful Abraham, but by faith, as the Epistle to the Galathians
testifies.

He asked water, and she gave him milk. That he might the easelyer and sooner
fall on sleep. Why mencio^ is made of butter, this (as some say) is the cause,
because out of that milk the butter was not yet cherned. And in deed of that
kind of milk a man may drink a great draught, for as much as beside the
quenchyng of thirst it has also a certain sweetness.

She used the cup of noble men. Which namely was a very great one. For noble
me^ were wont to drink out of large and wide cups. Cicero.
Cicero also against Anthony says. If so be that it had happened in the
Supper time among thy great cups, who would not count it filthy etc. Yea
and they were wont in ba^quets of noble me^, at ye latter end to bring forth
great cups. Wherefore this witty woman, to the end she would provoke him to
drink a very deep drought, used a cup apt for the fame. Kimbi.
R. D. Kimhi expounds these things, as though she gave him not only
drink, but meat also. For he thinks that when he had drunk, the woman did
set butter before him to eat. Which exposition if we receive, we must then
put out this word cup when as that is used for drink, and not for meat:
unless by the manner of a cup we understand such a kind of vessel wherein
meat also is wont to be put.

26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workema^s hammer:
with the hammer smote she Sisera, she smote of his head, wounded him, and
persed his temple.

27 He was bowed down between her feet, he fell down, he slept between her
feet he bowed himself, and fell: and when he bowed himself, there he fell
down, destroyed.


That which is translated, She put her hand, in the Hebrew it is put in the
plural number, Taschlechauah, and yet the speech is but of one, namely of
Iahel, which seems can not aptly be done. Wherefore some do so expound it,
that the two extreme letters of that word are added by this figure Pleonasmos,
so yt the number may be reduced to unity, that Iahel be said to put her hand
to the nail. Other think that the plural number, ought not to be referred
unto Iahel, but unto her strength and might, which extended her hands to these
things. There are some also which to undo this heard doubt, say yt the
hands should be interpretated moved or put to, in the passive voice. For the
right hand was put to the hammer, and the left hand unto the nail. Lastly, ye
order of the words which seems to be troublesome, of some is thus construed:
Her hand unto the nail, A description.
namely her left hand: and her right hand to the workemans hammer, put
themselves that is, desired or gave themselves unto it. And this is a very
trim description, whereby this thing done is manifestly set before our eyes,
neither makes it us only in our minds to see the woman, holdyng in her hand
the hammer and the nail, but also it shows unto us one certain part of the
body which was stricken, namely the head, and in the head, the very temples,
because they are easily pearsed. And undoubtedly that membre was stricken of
her, which being broken or persed, the whole body is utterly left unprofitable.
Farther, there are here described certain mocions, which are propre unto such
as perish suddenly, and by a violent kind of death. For when he was very sore
wounded, and by overmuch pain in a manner astonished, he bowed his body twice
or thrice. For he went about to rise, and wanting strength he fell down
again, and miserably lay between the feet of Iahel. So God throws down and
puts to shame the arrogant and proud enemies of his people. For what thing
can be thought to be more filthy, then for such a great captain to be spoiled
of his host, to lie lurkyng, drunk, and snortyng, and so to be killed of a
woman?

28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried thorough the
lattece: why is his chariot so long a coming? why stay they the wheels of
his chariots?

29 Her wise and noble Ladies answered her. She also comforted her self.

30 Have they not found, and they divide the spoils? every man has a maid
or two: Sisera has a pray of diverse colored garments: a pray of sundry
colors made of needle work, of diverse colors of nedle work on both sides,
for the chief of the spoil.


In the last part of the song, to the end we might manifestly see, to how
great a confusion and ignominy the enemies of God came unto, and from how great
a hope they fell, the person of the mother of Sisera is brought in, and the
words both of her, and of other noble women which were together with her, ar
setforth. She might have said in few words: The mother waited, that her son
should return with glory and laden with spoils, whom the wretched woman knew
not to have so myserably perished. But if she should so have said, the
oration would have been slender and cold. Wherefore to make it of efficacye and
vehement, ye talk of the women is put here. Which manner also was very much
used among the Ethnike writers, and it is read also in Esaias the.14. chap.
where is expressed the talk of kings and princes which were dead, A
figurative speech is not to be accused as a lie.
with which they received the king of Babylon being miserablye destroyed and
discendinge down unto them. Neither do the holy writers lie when they feign
such things, forasmuch as they write not to deceive, but to declare ye thing
more openly. The motherly affection, and vehement natural love of the parents
toward the children is here expressed, which for the long absence of their
children are very much careful, and are many ways afflicted. It is said
therefore that the mother of Sisera, whilst he desired to return, being
troubled even herself oftentimes, looked out at the windows or through the
latesses beyond the windows, to see if she could see him returninge. And this
she did not without crieng and lamentation, suspecting by this his long tarying
that evil had happened unto him. But the women which stood by had a great
deal better hope, for they interpreted ye tarying of Sisera in ye good part.
Terence in Adelphis has notably well written. It is much better, Terence
yt those things happen unto us which our wives in our abse^ce suspect of us,
then those things which our parents suspect. For when a man tarieth long in
a place, the wife says with her self he loves, or is loved, he is a
drinkinge, his mind is pleased, and he is in so good case, that he forgets
to return home. But the parents when their sons return not in time, by and
by they are afraid, least they have had some fall, lest they be a cold, or have
broken something, and till such time as they return they are wonderful
careful. Neither do I rehearse these things without a cause, because the old
translation, writes yt that most wise princess of women which talked together
with the mother of Sisera, was Siseras wife. Wherefore it is no marvel if she
were in better hope then his mother. But because heavy things are not
pleasant, and even by the instincte of nature we fly from them, therefore
they which upon suspicion are heavy do easily receive comfort. Wherefore it is
now written, that the mother of Sisera was so satisfied with the words of ye
woman which comforted her, that she herself with the same words answered
her self. When she was pricked with sorrow and heaviness. The some of the comfort
was, that the victory was altogether on Siseras side, but his return was
differed to distribute the spoil which they had taken, and forasmuch as the
same distribution ought justly to be done, namely to give unto every one
according to his estate, labor, and desert, and for that in so great an host
very many things are to be divided after so noble a victory: it could not
therefore be done in a short time.

This Hebrew word Racham, signifies not properly a maid: but yet so must we
translate it, because that woman being an enemy of the Jews speaks with
great contempt of the Hebrew women, and names them by the secret part of
the body, namely by the belly and womb. It is spoken by the figure Sinechdoche
but very bitterly. For she signifies that they were unchaste, and appointed to
dishonest use. And forasmuch as the more noble rewards are wont to be given
unto princes and the best things to the captain of the whole host, therefore
she says, to every man shall be given a maid or two, that is, the pray of the
rascal soldiers shall be bondmen or bond women be given. But to our Sisera
shall be given the most worthiest things, garments I say of diverse colors and
nedle work. Plini in his 8. book the.48. chap writes that the men in the old
time used to dye their wolle and garments with such sundry and pleasant
colors, Plinius.
because they would imitate the most beautiful colors of flowers and herbs.
And the same writer attributes unto the Babilonians the invention of diverse
colors in garments, and even as garments of silver which were found out in
Asia under Attalus the king, were called Attalical, so those garments which
were by the Phrigians wroughte with the nedle, being set out with gold and
sundry colors and pictures, were called Phrigionical. And for that these
workmanshippes were in the old time had in estimation, god would have the holy
tabernacle, and the high priests garments wrought with nedle work. And this
is not to be passed over, that by the civil laws it was not lawefull for
every man to wear such precious garments. Wherefore it is said now in this
song, that garments of sundry colors, and such as were wrought with the
nedle ar attributed only to the prince. In the Code de vestibus oloberis, lege,
Auratas, It is prohibited upon great punishmente that any other men should
were precious garments. Laws for apparel
And it is no doubt, but that in the old time there were laws for apparel,
which at this day lie utterly void. These women spoke as they knew ye manner
then used, for they were not ignorant of the custom in war, whereby princely
garments were not distributed to private men, but unto captains and emperors.
Discipline of war among the elders.
Farthermore we must consider that the elders used greater discipline in their
camps, than at this day our men do. For when a town or city was sacked, every
man had not that which he by violence took: al things were brought unto the
king or Emperor, and not undoubtedly that he only should have them, but that
he should part them according to the labor, dignity, and quality of the
soldiers, which manifestlye appears in the decrees, 23. question the.5.
chapter Dixerit aliquis. They are the words of Ambrose in his book of
Abraham the Patriarche. And the same thing is most plainly taught, Did. the.1.
chap. Ius militare. This hebrew word Tsoari signifies properly a neck or
necks in the plural number, but in this place by translation it signifies a
captain or prince.

31 So let al thine enemies perish, O Lord: But they that love thee let them be
as the Sun when he rises in his strength. And the land had rest.40. years.


The things which are now mentioned, the holy Ghost does therefore speak them
by Deborah, to express with a great emphasis and signification, that those
things do happen unto the ungodly which they be afeard of: and the things
which they hope happen clean contrary. Therefore the song is now concluded
with an elegant exclamacion, and consists of things contrary: So let all
thine enemies perish O Lord, as Sisera has fallen. This her Apostrophe or
turning to God stirs us up, that we should with a singular affection embrace
God ye author of so great and notable acts. Deborah also in this speaking,
declares, that she sets not forth her own cause, for she says not, let my
enemies perish, but thine. But they that love thee, let them continually
increase in all kind of good things, as the sun increases from his rising,
until it be none wherein he is most strong either from the spring time to the
highest of summer. She adds not, Let them that love him be saved as the
Antithesis or contrary position required. For these two are contraries, namely
to be saved, and to perish. But let them be increased, says she, and
strengthened, as the sun increases from his rising unto his strength. By
this conclusion the use of example is taught under the form of a prayer.
Sisera is overthrown, but the people of Israel is increased with a notable
victory: so therefore shall it come to pass and happen unto us. We shall be
delivered if we be godly, and they which do persecute us for Christ's cause,
shall perish. Wherefore it is profitable, by examples to gather out rules of the
government of God, which rules with fruit let us apply unto our own things. This
performed David, as touching this self same historye, in his psalm, where he
says do unto them, as unto Middian, as unto Sisera, and Iabin at ye river
Kyson. Wherefore ye some of this hystory is to set before us ye severity of god
toward his enemies, and again his cleme^cy toward the godly. And therefore it
behooves yt the severity of his judgments breath in us a fear, and that by
faith we take hold of his goodness and clemency.

The syxt Chapter.
ANd the children of Israel did evil in the syghte of the Lord: and the
Lord delivered them into the hands of Middian seven years.

2 Wherefore the hand of Middian prevailed against Israel, from the face of
Middia^ the children of Israel made them dens in the mountains, and caves,
and strong holds.

3 For when Israel had sown, Middian came up, and Amaleke, and the sons of
Kedem came up against them.

4 And camped against them, and destroyed the fruit of the earth, even till
thou come to Haza: neither left they any food in Israel, neither cattle,
nor oxen, nor asses.

5 For they went up and their cattle and came with their tents as greshoppers
in multitude: so that they and their camels were without number, they came I say
into the land to destroy it.


Deborah and Barac were dead: by the authority of which princes the people of
the Hebrews were kept in their duty and religion. But after their death,
they fell again unto sins, and especially unto idolatry. But yet they are
not counted to have turned so heynously from God, as they did before: for it is
not written: And they added to do evil. Farther their punishment was not so
long, for they served the Madianites only seven years. Moreover it is not
said, that God sold them, as he did before, but that he delivered them. I
confess that these conjectures are but small: but yet not so small, that they
should seem utterly to be despised. Two things are principally entreated of
in this hystorye, The principal points of this history.

The order of things to be spoken of.


the affliction of the Hebrews, and their delivery by Gidion. But because each
of these parts have their causes, therefore we must also entreat of them. For
even as affliction springs of sin, and delivery begins of repentance: so
was it mete, that first it should be declared that the Israelites had sinned,
before mention be made that they were delivered unto the Madianites, and their
repentance must first be showed, before their setting at liberty be spoken
of, wherefore these things shall in just order be spoken of, and shall be noted in
their places.

First of all it is written, that Israel sinned, to the end we might
understand that they were justly punished. The kind of their sin (as we
shall afterward see) was idolatry. And the punishment which followed was their
delivery unto the Madianites to be vexed of them. And what these Madianites
were, I think it good in few words to declare. What the Madianites were.
Jerome
Madian (if we may credit Jerome) was a city so called of a certain son of
Araham whom he begat of his last wife Ketura. It lies beyond Arabia toward
the South, in the desert of the Seracens, not far from the Sea called
Erithreum. And these people were called Madianites, and peradventure by an
other name more in use with the Ethnikes, namely Maudrenites. From thence Moses
had his wife and of them also came the Kenites, which went together with
Moses into the land of Chanaan. And lastly from thence those black men ar
thought to have their offspring, which in our times wander every where, and of
some are called Egiptians: they dwell in tents: and being very theuishe men,
they live all always of other men's goods.

But what these Madianites were, it skilleth not much to know, let this content
us, in that by the history it is declared, that the people of God were by them
very grievously afflicted. And the Israelites to avoid the miseries made them
Caves for so does this Hebrewe word Manaharoth signify. What difference is
between a cave and a den.
And dens. It is in Hebrew written Mearoth. But what difference there is
between these two words, as much as I can gather by the Hebrews, I will
declare. Those first places were in banks of hills, and were so called
because from the upper parts, they had certain chinckes and holes, which were
like windows, so that through them they had light sufficient within. And the
same places were very handsome for men to dwell in them. R. Leui says, that
through those holes or clifts, which were like windows, spies, when they saw
the Madianites coming, did use either by kindling of fires, or by some other
token, to give knowledge unto the Hebrews, whereby they might gather their
stuff, fruits and cattels into the dens and lead them away from the
enemies which were coming by. For dens were not in mountains, but places
under the earth in the fields being dark and without light, wherein men did not
dwell, but they might after a sort hide their things and goods. But caves in
lattin are called Specus, a speciendo, which is to behold and to look upon,
because out of them as out of high places they which were there, used to
look through. They made also fenced places as bulwarckes and castles, which
might be openly seen, but that they could not be conquered. And not only the
Madianites invaded the Jews, Josephus
but with them were the Amalekites and also the children of the east, whom
Josephus calls Arabians. They suffered the Israelits to be in peace and quiet,
so long as they tilled and sowed the earth, but when the fruits were ripe,
they invaded them, and destroyed and wasted their fyeldes. And the Israelites
do aptly setforth the nature of sinners, which when they put little confidence
in god, and have almost forgotten him, then they fly unto man's inventions,
helps and municions: which yet iustlye and worthelye stand them in no stead:
for straight way it is said.

6 Wherefore Israel was excedingly impouerished by the Madianites, and the
children of Israel cried unto the Lord.


Of munitions and castles.
Neither caves, nor dens, nor strong fensed castles could help the miserable
Israelites. For sinners must not only take heed of outward enemies, but they
must chiefly fly from the anger of God, from which undoubtedly no man can
avoid by caves, dens or municio^s. And as long as that endures, these
human helps do not defend from outward enemies. And if any man will not believe
this, Ecbatanis.
let him call to memory the breadth of the walls of Ecbatanis, which as it is
written in ye book of Judith the.1. chapter) was thyrty foot broad, and
seventy foot high, and had in it an hundred Towers, and yet all those things
could not withstand those which besieged it. Babylon
And of Babylon also it is written, that the walls of it was an hundred foot
in higth, and fighty foot in breadth, and it is said to have been so large that
it might have been a province rather then a city, and yet it was conquered and
utterly overthrown. Such things men go about when they withdraw themselves
from God, these their horns are erected against God. These things do lead
unto desperation the afflicted, which thynk not upon God, as though tirannes by
whom they are oppressed could never be plucked out of so strong and well fenced
places. But in Abacuk the prophet such mad building are wonderfully laughed
to scorn of the spirit of God, and Abdia in the name of God threatens the
children of Esau, that their nest should be thrown down to the ground, how
soever it seemed unto them that they had set it in heaven.

But what more notable example need we to seek for, then that tower, which
men straight after the flood, began to build, as though they would defend them
selves against God, if he again should go about to destroy the world with
waters, but the Lord from heaven laughed to scorn their made furiousnes, as it
is amply set forth in the book of Genesis. God wants no excellent politic
devises: for first, from such, which so much trust to munitions, when they
thyncke they shall stand them in most steed, he uses to take away the
courages of the bold, and al promptnes, and so to strike them with madness, that
he utterly makes them void of wisdom. Wherefore he debilitateth their hearts,
and their strength fails them. Yea, and they seem to be made afeard and very
sore abashed, even of the very stones, beams and walls of their Castles. I
could here easily show things, which have in our age happened, but that I
must have respect to be brief. Read the.2. chapter of Barucke.

What then? Are not Cities or Castles to be fensed? Whither it be lawful to
fence cities and castles.
I deny not but that that may be done, but I would have Princes which do in
such sort build, first to be a certained of this, that no things created can
defend or succor men, unless with them be joined that power of God, whereby with
his beck he rules and governs the world: and when he withdraws that,
whatsoever men go about or enterprise, it utterly happens contrarily. And
even as out of bread, wine, or other meats we ought not to look for
nourishment, if God do draw back unto himself that his power and operation,
which he daily lends to those things: so also without it, there is no
defense to be had out of munitions, walls, being otherwise never so strong,
and Castles very well fenced. Wherefore before we begin munitions, we must put
our confidence in God, and we must lay the most profitable foundation of holy
prayers: and pray unto God, to keep us chiefly in true and sincere godlynes,
to call us back from sins, and daily to give unto us a perfect repentance.
Lastly, we must desire, that when a just and holy man shall have need to have
the use of such munitions, he would vouchsafe to bestow upon them that his
most mighty and healthful power. Which self same cogitations and prayers we
must use both in meat, drink, apparel, or any other thing, when we begin to
receive them.

And the children of Israel cried. Now shall be declared the deliuerye of the
Israelites, but first is set forth their repentance and invocation. Now at
the length the Hebrews fly unto the sure rocks, unto the safe dens, and
unto the true Castles. For the rock or castle best fenced, (as we read in the
Proverbs) is the name of the Lord. In that rock David escaped al adversities.

7 And when the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, because of Midian.

8 The Lord sent unto the children of Israel a Prophet, who said unto them:
Thus says the Lord god of Israel, I have brought you out of Egypt, I have
brought you (I sai) out of the house of bondage.

9 And I have delivered you out of the hands of the Egiptians, and out of the
hand of all that oppressed you, and have cast them out before you, and given
you their land.


The manner whereby the Israelites were stirred up to call upon God, is in this
place set forth. They were turned unto God by the impulsion of faith, which
was stirred up by the preaching of the word of God: for he had sent unto them
a man which was a Prophet, not legions of Angels, not a multitude of
soldiers, not armor, neither warlike engines. He directed unto them a
Preacher and Minister of the word of God. And this ought not to seem absurd,
if this verb Vaiischlah be interpretated in the signification of the
preterpluperfect tense, for as much as it is a thing very much used in the holy
scriptures. And yet I deny not, that this place may be understand an other
way: namely that the Israelites in deed cried first, but yet with a certain
violence stirred up by troubles and miseries, which violence by it self, could
not be allowed of God, nether had it obtained any thing at his hands, except
it had been adorned with a true faith and perfect repentance: for the bringing
to pass whereof, God not forgetting his mercy, sent them a Prophet or Preacher
meet thereunto. Howbeit the first sense, which consists all the
preterpluperfectnes, pleases me very well: although I deny not but that both
ways may be admitted. Farther, some think that these things ar to be
understand by Synechdoche, so that it is meant that not one prophet, but very
many prophets were sent of God. But I judge that it is written of some one
certain prophet, which was of great authority among the Hebrews. And I am not
ignorant that some think this prophet to have been an Angel: which I allow not,
forasmuch as he is called both a man and a prophet. And I find in no place of
the holy scriptures ye Angls were called prophets: although on the contrary we
read in them sometimes that a prophet was called an Aungel, Aflictio^^ make
open the way unto profitable sermons.
as it most manifestly appears of Malachi. But let us mark this rather, that
oppressions and adversities, which often times happen, do give good occasion of
profitable sermons: for as much as the hearers by such vexation ar made much
more attentive. The Hebrews think that this Prophet was Phineas, of whom also
they say that it is written in the first book of Paralip. the.ix. chap. that
he lived in the time of David, when as for all that the same place may
otherwise be expounded. But who he was, it makes no great matter. We must
rather mark the argument of the sermon, which is in few words toutched.
First, the benefits of God are rehearsed: their delivery I say out of Egypt,
whereby they were delivered from servitude most grievous: his defense against
those which went about to oppress them: and lastly, the possession of the land
of Chanaan. God had now faithfully performed al these things, as he had
promised unto their fathers. Whereby it manifestly appears that the covenant
made with the fathers, was on his part kept unviolated. Let us note in these
words, that God at that time was by this title praised, namely because he had
delivered his people out of Egypt: for his nature otherwise is most far
removed from the minds of men, neither can it any otherway be known, but by
the effects. But of this thing I have enough spoken, as much as seemed
sufficient. Wherefore it is manifest that the Preacher which was sent from God,
does beat into the Hebrews the benefit which they had received, namelye both
to stir up in the Israelites the knowledge of the true God, and also to show
forth his truth endued with constancy.

10 And I said unto you: I the lord your God. Fear not the gods of ye Amorites,
in whose la^d ye dwell, but ye have not obeyed my voice.


Now is added what God again required of the Hebrews, namelye that he should
be their God, and that they should not fear the gods of the Amorites, or not
worship them. For in this word fear is very often comprehended all manner of
worshipping and religion. For what should they woorship strange gods, when
they were the peculiar people of the true God, by whom they were delivered from
the house of bondage, that is, out of a prison or dungeon most hard, and
afterward in their journey they were delivered both from the Amalekites, and
also from the Moabites, and from Sihon and Og the kings? Wherefore forasmuch as
they had received these benefits of their God, it was neither lawful nor meet
that they should worship strange gods.

Two principal sins of the Israelites.
Ye have not obeyed my voice. Two most grievous crimes of the people are
reproved, whereof the latter depends of the first. First they believed not his
word, and then they obeyed it not. Undoubtedly they which believe not the things
that God sets forth, do not also obey his commandments. And contrariwise,
they which do truly believe, do willingly and without compulsion observe his
commandments. Although the wicked acts of the Hebrews were sundry and
manifold, yet only one is reproved, namely Idolatrye, because in it almost all the other sins are comprehended. For if we commit sin there, where God is
called upon, and if we sin in that thing wherein we seek to be reconciled
unto god, what goodness can there be in any other of our actions? If these things
be corrupted in us, which are taken for holy things, what may be judged of
other works which are counted profane? Wherefore forasmuch as in these
things the Hebrews grievously fell, we must understand that they also sinned in
all other things.

11 And the Angel of the Lord came, and abode under the Oak, which was in
Ophra, that pertayned unto Ioas the Abiezerit: and his son Gideon threshed
wheat to prepare his flight from Midian.


When by faith the sins of the Israelites were forgeuen, and that they had
called upon God and repented, their delivery is set forth, whereby they were
delivered from the outward bondage of the Madianites. Which without doubt God
would have done by Gideon the Judge, for the which cause he raised him up to
deliver ye Jews. And this brought he not to pass, til such time as things
were almost come to utter desperation: al humane helps were taken away, and the
Israelites trusted only to flight. Wherefore Gideon is not called, but when he
gathered some wheat to hide, least the Madianites should violentlye take it
away. And that is meant by this Hebrew word Lehanim, that is (if thou turn it
word for word) to prepare his flight. For he would hide that wheat from the
Madianites, were it never so little, that with it he might somewhat sustain
both himself and his household. He which appeared unto him, was in very deed
an Angel, as it shall afterward by manifest tokens and arguments be
declared. He came to Ophra, but to that Ophra which pertayned unto Ioas the
Abiezerit, which is therefore added, because there was also an other Ophra in
the Tribe of Benjamin, whereof is mention made in the book of Joshua. And I doubt
not but yt the Angel came unto Gideon in the shape of a man, for he abode under
the Oak: Gideon was of ye tribe of Manasses.
and (as we shall hear) he spoke unto him. Ioas the Father of Gideon was of the
family of Abiezer, which in the book of Numb. and in Paralip. is reckoned
among those that were of the Tribe of Manasses.

And Gideon at that time threashed corn in the wine press. Two manners of
threashing.
The Hebrews have two words, Dash, which signifies to thresh, but yet then
when we occupy to threashing beasts. The other word is Chabat, which is also
to thresh, but yet with flayles and without beasts. Wherefore it is noted that
Gideon used this latter kind of threshing, that he might the better hide that
which he did: and therefore it was in a wine press, where forasmuch as wine
was used to be pressed, no man did easily suspect that any wheat was there
threshed. Let us mark in this place, that the excellent men in the old time,
when they had gotten any leisure, either from holy services, or from civil
things, they spent all that leisure, either about husbandry, or about the art
of a Shepehearde. For they would not consume them selves with ydlenes,
sumptuousnes, glotony, or dronkennes. And this shall we not only learn in
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Gideon, and other holy fathers, but also it manifestly
appears by the histories of the Romans. For there we read that Curious and
Seranus and such like, were elected for the chiefest Magistrates, when in the
fields they were at plough, and tylled the ground. And the earth also at that
time (as Plini says) brought forth her fruits more plentiful and abundant,
when it was handled with the hands of Emperors most noble. Not undoubtedly,
because the earth was endued with any sense, but because wise men, as they used
wisely to govern weighty affairs, so also for husbandry, when they were
occupied about it, they exercised it with far greater diligence then did the
rude men. Our Gideon without doubt had servants, whom he might have
commanded to have wrought what work so ever was to be done, yea and his
father (as we shall afterward hear) was a man of power among the people. And
for all that he was such a one, yet he despises not rusticall works.

12 Then the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and said unto him: The Lord
is with thee, thou valiant man.


A salutacion used of the godly
Here is expressed a most ancient manner of salutacion, wherein they said: The
Lord is with thee. We read in the book of Ruth, that Boaz used it, when he
came unto his harvest men. The Angel also in this manner saluted the blessed
Virgin. Yea, and the Church of Christ by the Minister saluteth the people in
the holy services, and says: The Lord be with you. The angel called Gideon a
strong man, not by that strength (as it is thought) wherewith he was before
endued, but by the strength which should afterward be given him, for the
accomplishing of things. Although it might easily be, that Gideon was a man
skylfull in feats of war. But the first interpretation agrees better.
Howbeit Augustine in his questions upon this place, Augustine.
thus reads this particle, as though God him self should be called a strong
and warlike man, as if he should have said: That God which is mighty and
warlike, is with thee, or be with thee. Neither ought it much to move us,
because this word Man is added, forasmuch as it is after the same manner
written in the song of Exodus. For God may so be called by a Metaphore. But the
first exposition is more received, and seems more simple.

13 To whom Gideon answered: O my Lord I pray thee, is the Lord with us? Why
then is all this come upon us? and where be all his miracles which our fathers
told us of, and said: Did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? But now the
Lord has forsaken us, and has delivered us into the hand of the Madianites.


The hebrew word By signifies in me: and is spoken by the figure Eclipsis as
though it should have been, look lovingly upon me. And therefore they turn it,
I prai thee: which is a particle of one that exhorts. The next word is
Adonai, by which name Gideon called him which appeared unto him, not by a
religious or divine title, but by a common title, which is applied also to
profane men. For he understood not that he was an Angel: he thought he was
some Prophet or holy man. Gideon persuades himself that God was not with him,
when the Israelites were afflicted with so great miseries. For he understands
the saying of the Angel, as though he had said that God was not only with him,
but also with all the Hebrews. God is not supposed to be with those which ar
afflicted
And it is no doubt, but that the nature of man thinks that God is not with
those which are afflicted. The saints after this manner seemed to expostulate
with God. Wherefore in the Psalms it is written: Arise O God, why turnest thou
thy face away from me? why have thou forgotten me? and such like. This is a
grievous kind of temptacion, whereunto if a man give place, and be therewith
ouercom, he grievously sins. For he transgresses the first precept: I am
the Lord thy God. But, how far that sentence is from the truth, this
historye declares. For when Gideon thought that God was absent from him, then
was he present, and talked with him.

Where be al his miracles? These words may be understand two ways. The
first way is, as though Gideon should reason by contraries, saying: When God
was with our fathers, he did marvelous things for their health: but now has
he delivered us unto the Madianites, neither delivers he us by his excellent
works: therefore he is not with us. The other interpretation is, as if by a
certain godly expostulation he should say: where does God now restrain these his
marvelous works? What temptation is counted grievous to the godly.
Why suffers he the benefits which he so plentifully bestowed on our fathers,
so much now to want? Undoubtedly whilst we are thus forsaken, al these things,
as it seems, are frustrate of their end. These things manyfestly declare,
what is the temptation of godly men in adversities and troubles: For the devil,
the flesh, and the world go about to persuade them, that they are now forsaken
of God, and that they in vain put their confidence in him. Which kind of
temptation also was moved unto Christ, when upon the cross he cried: O my God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? For none (as I think) would believe that the
same had happened unto Christ, unless the Evangelists had written, that he
being upon the cross used such words. And this temptacion would he therefore
suffer, to the end that (as it is written in the second to the Hebrews) he
might be like unto us in all things without sin. Wherefore Esaias testifies:
He has in deed borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows.

14 And the Lord looked upon him, and said: Go in this thy strength, and thou
shall save Israel out of the land of Madian. Have not I sent thee?


The Angel looked upon Gideon, when he had spoken these words: For
peradventure whilst he spoke them, he looked not upon him: but then he beheld
him, when he sent him to deliver the Israelites. But in that he says In this
strength, it is expounded two manner of ways. The Hebrews say, that by the
sight of the Angel he was filled with strength, and therefore it is said: go
thou in this strength, which I have now given thee, and thou shall deliver
Israel from the Madianites. Neither is it any strange thing, that God does
change those whom he choseth to any function, and endueth them with sundry
gifts. For we read that it so happened unto David and Saul, when they were
called to be kings. And it is expressedlye written in this book that Iephthe
and Samson were adorned with the spirit of strength. That strength also may
here be noted, which God used in helping the fathers, when for them he wrought
myraculous things in the time of Moses and Joshua. Gideon had demanded where
those marvelous works were now become, and therefore the Angel answered him:
Go in that strength, whereby those things in times past were wrought, and by
it deliver Israel. By which words the Angel declares, that he should not
by his own strength bring to pass the things which he had commanded him, but
by that power of God, which was given the fathers in the old time, The Angel
calls himself the Lord.
And this ought not to seem marvelous, that the Angel is called the Lord. For
that is for this cause done, either because he did it and spoke it in the name
of God, or else because he was in very deed the son of God, which so
appeared. The calling of the Judges is therefore so diligently described, that
we might understand that private men are not able to attempt matters and
affairs of so great weight, unless a certain authority had been given them
of God. For to gather an host, and to take weapons against those which have
the chief rule of things, unto such as are weak and destitute of al aid,
it is altogether dangerous. Wherefore there is required an assurednes and
undoubted calling, which cannot be had, unless faith go before, which
consists of the word of God, when it is rightly understood. The Angel
uses an intorrogation when he says: Have not I sent thee? Because this manner
of speaking is very apt to augment a commandment.

15 And he said unto him: O my Lord, whereby shall I save Israel? Behold my
familye is the poorest in Manasses, and I am the least in the house of my
father.


God said not that he would deliver Israel, but he declared that it should be
done by Gideon, who therefore maruelleth, forasmuch as he saw that he wanted
all such things as were requisite to so great a work. For war could not
be made by a poor man, and one of the base sort, such a one as Gideon
perceived himself to be: when as to the accomplishing thereof were required
power, riches, and especially authority. Wherefore Aristotle to civil felicitye,
has joined outward goods, and that namely for this, because they are
necessary instruments of acts most noble.

Of his Myllenary or thousand, he therefore makes mention, because God in the
public wealth of the Jews (as we read in Exodus) instituted this manner,
namely yt by tribunes or thousands, and hundreds the people should be governed:
For it could not easily be, that by a few Magistrates, an infinite number of
people should be numbered, and so governed, that their manners, living and
ordinances might diligently be looked upon, which one thing chiefly
pertains to govern well and rightly. Why God appointed tribunes, Centurio^s
and Captains over ten.
For when every man is permitted unto him self in these things, he both
abuses his liberty, and also easily transgresses the laws, because he is not
noted. Wherefore God in his people would for that cause have rulers over ten,
and over hundredes, and also over thousands, least that public wealth (if the
people were necligently looked unto) should fall to ruin, and wax worse and
worse. That band of a thousand, whereof Gideon was one, he declares to be the
poorest among all those of the tribe of Manasses. Farther, he says that he was
the least in his fathers house or family, and therefore he saw not, by what
means he could set at liberty the Hebrews. Some say that Ioas the father of
Gideon was at that time a tribune or ruler over a thousand men, and that his
son meant him, when he said yt his family was the poorest among the tribe of
Manasses. This sentence I disalow not, forasmuch as afterward it shall easily
appear ye Ioas was of some authority among his people. But whither this word
Alpi, signify him or no, I will not rashly affirm, forasmuch as the first
exposition, is both apt and also well agrees with the words of the history.

Whyther Gideon sinned in gainsaying the a^ngel.

Many holy me^ seem to have resisted the promises and calling of God.


This must we rather note, wither Gideon in obiecting these things sinned or no.
Undoubtedly if we look upon the holy scriptures, we shall find very many
other, which said that their infirmity striued against the vocation and
promises of God. Abraham said he was an.100. year old, and therefore he desired
that Ismael might rather live before the Lord, than that he should wait for a
son of Sara which was both old and barren. Yea, and she also when she heard
that a child was promised her, she could not keep herself from laughing,
because she already felt her self unapt by nature to bear a child. Moses
also, that he might not be sent unto Pharao, alleged the impediment of his
tongue for a let. Farthermore Jeremy said: Ah Lord, I am a child, and I cannot
speak. The blessed virgin also said unto the Aungel: How can this be done?
forasmuch as I know no man. There might peradventure also be mention made of
others, but these are now sufficient. And I doubt not but that some of these
whom I have touched, fell in speaking these words. For God was angrye with
Moses, when he so obstinately excused the office which he had committed unto
him. Saras laughter also was reproved. But I know that the other were praised
for their faith: for Abraham, because he believed the promise, was justified,
and Elizabeth said unto Mary: What is the difference between those which seem
to resyst God.
Blessed art thou which beleuedst: for the things which the Lord has said
unto thee, shall be performed. The difference between these is hereby to be
taken, because some did in such sort ask an excuse, for that they believed
not the word of God, neither could they be persuaded to agree unto God which
sent them, or made promise to them. Wherefore forasmuch as they sinned, God was
not without a just cause both angrye with Moses, and also reproved Sara. But
there were other some of them, which believed the word of God, and yet for all
that they put forth certain questions, not in deed to resist, but to declare
what things seemed to be a let unto their calling, or to the things
commanded them, and in demanding these things, they desired nothing else,
than that they might be instructed of the way and manner, which they ought to
use, and they required to be confirmed, least those things which seemed to be
a let, The same words ar allowed in one, that are disallowed in an other.
might pluck them back, either for waiting for the promises, or else from
fulfilling the things commanded them. Howbeit these men can not be separated
one from an other, by the words which they spoke, when as almost they spoke
all one thing. But by the purpose and thought of the heart they are separated:
for if they spoke and excused those things of incredulitye, they ought not to
be counted without blame: but if they believed, and desired only to be
confyrmed and instructed, we ought not to diffame them as guilty of
incredulity. But who shall discern these things in them? Surely God which
knows the hearts and conscience of every one of them. And we know that the
faith of Gideon is commended in the.xi. to the Hebrews. But whither that were
straight way given him, when he heard the word of God, or whether it came
unto him after some tarying and wrestling with humane reason, we are ignorant.

16 Then the Lord said unto him: Because I will be with thee, and thou shall
smite Madian as it were one man.


Cease of (says he) these humane reasons, and have no regard to strength,
riches, and authority: if these things should ciuilly be done, thou might
iustlye require them. But now thou shall use my power and might. Thou shall
save Israel, not by thine own might, but because I will be with thee. So God
answered unto Moses when he detracted his message. So was it also said of
Joshua, I will be with him. After that manner was Jeremy answered, when he cried
that he was a child, and could not well speak. I will be with thee (says the
Lord) thou shall accomplish al these things to whatsoever I will send thee.
Gideon therefore is instructed of the way or manner of the victory, namelye,
that God would have the handling and charge of it: and that chiefly by these
words: Thou shall destroy the Madianites as it were one man. For with God it is
as easy to overthrow an infinite number, as one man. And the same thing as
touching the marvelous murder of the Madianites, then undoubtedly took
effect, when they smote one an other with their own swords, and by the
impulsion of God they wounded one the other.

17 The^ he answered him: I pray thee, if I have found favor in thy sight,
then show me a sign, that it is thou that talkest with me.

18 Depart not hence I pray thee, until I come unto thee and bring my sacrifice
and lay it before thee. And he answered, I will tarry till thou come again.


He therefore desires a sign, least he should think him self to be illuded
by a ghost or spirit. For he was not content with words, but he would have an
assured sign of the talk now had. But this sentence: That it is thou that
talkest with me, seems to be spoken by the figure Eclipsis, so that we must
understand, in the name of God, least peradventure I might think, that the
words which thou speak, are the words of a man, and not count them for
the Oracle of God. This vision happened to Gideon being wakyng, and not sleeping.
These things were not done when he was a sleep (as it appears by the
historye) but when he was waking, although God, as we shall afterward hear,
appeared also by night unto Gideon. He requires a sign, because it is the
part of a godly man to try spirits, and not rashlye to believe every spirit,
especially when any new and unaccustomed work is commanded: and that which
otherwise is not thought to be lawful, there no man will easilye assent,
except he be fullye persuaded that his calling is of God. But when doctrine now
received, and confirmed by holy scriptures is set forth, or works required,
which in them are commanded, we must beware that we require not signs, for
as much as we are bound to believe and obey them. But of this thing we will more
largely entreat afterward.

19 Then Gideon went in, and made ready a Kid, and unleavened bread of an Ephah
of flower, and put the flesh in a basket, and put the broth in a pot, and
brought it out unto him under the Oak, and presented it.


This place may be enterpreted two manner of ways. One way it is thought that
Gideon would have made ready a dinner for the man of God: for such a one did he
take him to be. Therefore for honors sake he desired to refresh him with meat
in his journey, and to talk with him at leisure for the showing of the sign.
And he thought not that God or an Angel was present with him. Wherefore he
thought to follow the example of Abraham and Lot. And in deed the things which
he presented, partained rather to a dinner, tha^ to a sacrifice. He erected no
alter, neither prepared he the fat to be burnt, nor the shoulder and the breast
to be lifted up, nor the blood to be shed. The other interpretation is, that he
would therefore bring him a sacrifice, that in that oblation he might obtain a
sign, as to Abel the favor of God was declared when he was offering sacrifice.
And the authors of this sentence believe that this does nothing let that Gideon
sod the flesh, Flesh in sacrifices was sometimes sod.
forasmuch as that kind of sething was sometimes used in peace offerings, as the
first book of Samuel testifies. Of the interpretours of this place this
latter sentence seems to be received: for they judge ye Gideon intended to
offer sacrifices: But I rather allow the first sentence as touching the feast,
although I know that the Angel contrary to Gideons purpose used that meat to
a sacrifice, and in it gave the sign, which a little before was desired of
him. This hebrew word Mitsoth signifies unleavened cakes. Why the Elders used
so often sweet cakes in their feasts.
But the root of the word may be Natsa, which is to have, or to make speed.
For the Elders were careful to prepare meat for strangers with as much
speed as might be. Wherefore they straightway baked new bread, because
peradventure their household bread was somewhat hard and stale. The measure of
an Ephah.
Therefore, to ye end they might the sooner refresh ye weary, they used sweet
cakes, which were very soon baked. This measure Ephah was not a measure for
liquide things, but for things dry, and (as the Hebrews affirm) it held three
peckes, and a pecke contained.144. eggs. And ten Ephas made one Corus.
Certain Rabbines fable that there is therefore mention made of sweet bread,
because this thing was done in the time of Easter. But how trifling this is,
hereby we may gather, because it is well known that sweet bread were by the
commandment of God used, not only for sacrifices at Easter, but also at
other times, especially such as were to be burnt at the altar of the Lord. But
if we shall say that Gideon prepared not a sacrifice, but rather a feast, we
have already showed the reason, why he brought sweet bread. Gideon is utterly to
be quitted of ydolatry. For his will was not to do sacrifice unto the Messanger
of God: because his purpose was either to set meat before the man of God, or
else to sacrifice unto the living God, by the hand of the Prophet, whom he
counted to be far better than himself.

20 And the angel of God said unto him: take the flesh and the unleavened bread,
and lay it upon this stone, and pour out the broth: and he did so.

21 Then the Angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff, that he held
in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened bread, and there arose up
fire out of the stone, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened bread: so the
Angel of the Lord departed out of his sight.


They which think yt Pinhas the son of Eleazar was this man of god, which
appeared unto Gideon, affirm yt the same man was also afterward called Elias.
And even as when Achab reigned in Israel, he obtained fire from heaven, whereby
the burnt offering was consumed, whereupon he had poured water and that
abundantly and very many times: so likewise now out of the rock, by the power
of god be raised up a flame, whereby ye meat which was put upon it was burnt,
whereupon he had before caused the broth of the flesh to be poured. I confess
in deed that there is some similitude between these two acts, but therwithal I
see many things to be causes, whereby the one differs from the other.
Farther, I utterly reject this fained tale, wherein they feign that Pinhas was
present either there or here. There, by reason of the great distance of times:
and here, because (as I have expounded, Augustine.
and the words of the history do manifestly testify) it was either god himself
or an angel, which talked with Gideon. Augustine in his book De mirabilibus
sanctae scripturae, teaches that the sign, which is here given, does aptly
agree unto that which was demanded. For it was showed, that by the wonderful
power of god, without man's labor and fight, the enemies of the people of the
Jews should be overcome, even as by the might of god above the ability of
nature fire came forth, Ambrose.
wherewith without man's healpe or industry those vittailes were consumed. But
Ambrose very elegantlye writes the Allegorye of this place, in the Proheme of
his book de spiritu sancto, which I to avoid tediousnes do ouerpasse. This one
thing only I will admonish you of, Al things that we offer, are to be offered
by Christ.
yt our gifts are then acceptable unto God, when we offer them upon the
rock, which is Christ. There our actions are by the fire of the holy ghost
purged, and that which otherwise of his own nature is unclean, is of God
received as holy.

And the Angel of the Lord departed. By this sudden departure Gideon understood
that it was an Angel whom he saw, wherefore he was sore afraid, as the words
of the history which follow, do manifestly declare.

22 And when Gideon saw, that it was the Angel of the Lord, he said: Alas my
Lord God, shall I because I have seen an Angel of the Lord face to face?


This is spoken by the figure Ecliptica: for when Gideon says: The fathers by
seeing of god and of angels were made alrayde.
Alas my Lord God, shall I because I have seen an Angel of the Lord: there
should be added, dye. Thou shall evermore perceive that the old fathers, after
that they had seen god or beholde^ his Angels, were very sore afraid, yea and so
astonished, that they feared present death to come upon them. And no maruail,
for they were not ignorant, what God answered Moses, when he desired to see his
face: Man shall not see me and live. John Baptist also (as we read in the first
of John) says: No man has seen God at any time. And Paul to Timothy has
confirmed the same writing. No man has sen God, neither can he se him: for he
is invisible, because he dwells in the light that no man can come unto. And
that also which now Gideon speaks, Mannah the father of Samson (as we shall
afterward hear) shall speak. Jacob likewise, after he had wrastled al night,
thinking that he had striuen with a man, when he understood that he was an
Angel, maruailed how he escaped a live and safe. Have I seen the Lord (says
he) face to face, and is my life saved? As though that yt was in a manner
impossible. Yea, and the Hebrews, when the Lord descended to mount Sina to give
the law, were so stricken with fear and dread, that they said unto Moses: Have
thou (we pray thee) to do with God, least, if he go forward so to speak
before us, we dye. To this serves that also which is written in the same book
of Exodus, when the covenant was then made between God and the people, and
Moses recited the co^dicions, and sprinkled the people with ye blood of the
sacrifices which were offered, he brought forth the Elders unto the mountain,
where they saw God sitting in his throne with chief glory and majesty. But
after the recital of that vision, it is said: Neither did God extend his hand
unto them: which declares that it was a new and unaccustomed sight, that men
should se god, and have their life still whole and sound. Wherefore that
altogether is mentioned as a thing given by a singular prerogative. Jerome.
Jerome also testifies, that Esaias was under this pretense killed of the Jews,
because he said that he had seen God sitting upon his throne, as it appears
in the.vi. chap. of his book. They caueled that he lied, forasmuch as God
cannot be seen of men, which yet remain still a live. Wherefore they condemned
him for a lier, as though in prophecieng he had taught ye people not the things
which the Lord had showed him, but his own inuencions. This they fained against
the innocent prophet, when as bysides it they had no other cause against him.

And there are the like examples in the new testament: when our Lord manifested
in mount Thabor to his Apostles a certain show of his majesty and glory, he was
altogether changed before them, and he shined with an incredible brightness and
light, with who^ were Moses and Elias straightway present, and the voice of the
father sounded from heaven. These things because they many ways ouerpassed
the faculty of man's sight, the eyes of the Apostles were not able to bear
them: wherefore they fell down to the earth, and were as it were dead. Peter also,
when in fishing at the commandment of Christ he caught an incredible number
of fishes: for before his word he had long labored in vain, marueiling at the
strange sight, and understanding that God was in Christ, he was so afeard of
himself, that he said unto him: Lord, I pray thee depart from me, because I am
a sinful man, and cannot without danger suffer the presence of God. Paul also
declaring his rauishing unto the third heaven, where he understood things
divine, which in word he might not expres unto me^, writes: whither it were in
the body, or without the body, I cannot tell. Verily he durst not affirm that
those things happened unto him, whilst he had the use of the body, and senses
of this life. Wherefore it manifestly appears, that Gideon was not without a
cause astonished.

But why the beholding of God or of the Angels seems to bring present
destruction unto men, Platos sect.
we must now show the reason. Peradventure that happens by reason of the
grosnes of the body, which (as the sect of Platos affirm) is to us as it were
an obscure and dark prison. Wherefore forasmuch as by it we are let, so that
we cannot see things divine, if peradventure at any time we behold them, by and
by we remember that the joining together of the body and mind is now
dissolved, and that we shall straightway dye, and that therefore divine things
are set before us to behold, because now is at hand the separation of the soul
from the body. For Aristotle in his Metaphisicis testifies, Aristotle.
yt the powers of our understanding are in such sort unable to understand
things divine, which of their own nature ar most evident, yt justly they may
be compared unto the eyes of the Owls or Battes, which cannot look upon the
brightness of the Sun, and light of the day. They which thus think, do in
deed say somewhat, but not so much as is sufficient, to expound the thing
manyfestly.

The body remoueth us not from the beholding of God.
The body from the first creation was not therefore given unto men, yt it should
be a let unto them to know God, neither that it should restrain our souls as
in a certain blind and dark prison: for so the goodness of God, which created
the bodily nature of man, should be accused. And that the thing is thus, the
historye of Genesis proves, which testifies that God was very familiar with
our first Parents, though they had bodies: for he led them into Paradise which
he had planted, he showed them the trees whereof they might eat, and for
certain trees he gave them a law that they should not toutche them, he set
all creatures before Adam, to call them by what name he listed. Wherefore the
body was not a let, whereby the first man could not be familiar with God. Sin
seperateth us from god
Sin undoubtedly remoueth us from the sight of god. Thereof comes our dimnes,
darkness, blindness and ignorance as touching things divine. For this cause we are
turned into Moles, Bats and Owls. But God of his own nature may be seen, yea
he is the light it self, but that the blot of sin is put between.
Peradventure thou wylt say, that is now sufficiently declared, Because of
sin men fly from the sight of God.
that sin is the original cause of our blyndnesse but we have not yet
showed, why me^ are so afeard at ye sight of god. Yea by cause of sin
happens all this also unto us: for men, besides yt by reason of their
darkness they are oppressed with ye divine light, being of sin accused by
their conscience, do fly from the judge who is no less mighty then just. For
they understand that God himself is such a one, that by reason of his
pureness and justice he will suffer no unclean or filthy thing before him.
Wherefore to have God present they think nothing else, then that their
punishment prepared for them and the pains which they have deserved are at
hand. For this cause our first parents when they had sinned straight way hid
themselves, and at the voice of God were so afeard, that they determined to
hide themselves among the trees of Paradise: which undoubtedly came of a
troubled conscience for as much as God of his own nature is both quickening and
also the author of all consolation. Wherefore it is manifest that these terrors
and discommodities, came not by his defaulte, but thoroughe our own
wickedness.

Of Visions, or in what sort and how much God may be known of men.
NOw the matter gives us occasion, somewhat to speak of visions of things
divine, and in what sort and how much God may be seen of men. But least our
disputacion should want either method or else an order, I will first set forth
certain distinctions which I perceive are needful.

First, the knowledge of God is supposed to be offered unto the se^ces,
Distinctions which serve to the question put forth.
or understanding. Or else we think that it comes of nature, either else by a
prerogative, and reuelacion which passes nature. Father the knowledge of the
substance, nature, and (as if I should say) of the very essence, is separated
from that knowledge which consists of tokens, testimonies, arguments and
signs of the divine presence. Lastly we must speak, either of that knowledge,
which agrees with this our life, or of that only which is looked for after
this world. The nature of GOD is not known by our senses.
I will begin therefore at the senses: and of the knowledge of them this I
suppose, that the nature, substance, and essence of God can not be
comprehended by the senses. For those things have no affinity with God which
are understand by senses, but are from him most far distant. And to say the
truth the qualities, which long to any certain general word, and are
reckened for accidences, do stir up the knowledge of the senses. And for as
much as God, which is most simple, is not subject to those, he can not
therefore be known by the senses. And this to be true is by certain experience
perceived which every man takes of his own judgment. For it is most
certain, that no man has by his senses perceived him. The error of
Anthropomorphites.
Howbeit the Anthropomorphites persuaded themselves that God might be known by
the senses, as men which did attribute unto god a humane body: but their
opinion is utterly rejected. For the holy scripture testifies that God is a
spirit, and it also puts a manifest difference between a spirit and a
body, when our savior says: Feel and see, because a spirit has neither
flesh nor bones. And there is none which understands not, that a humane body
and his members, can not consiste without flesh and bones. Farther their
foolishness hereby appears, because there is not a body found, which is
every way pure and simple: for let it be as equal as thou will, at ye lest way
it has parts, whereof it is composed. And that all composition is against the
nature of God, even the Ethnike Philosophers perceived.

But leaving the Anthropomorphites, we must speak of certain other, who^
Augustine in his Epistle ad Paulinam, de videndo Deo, makes mention of.
Augustine.
They as the Scriptures testify and the right faith confess, do believe that
God is altogether most simple, and that he wants a body. But they deny that
he can not be seen with the eyes of the blessed, in that blessedness which we
wayt for. And therefore they say we are deceived, because we measure the state
of the life to come by those things, which we see here to be done and to
happen. Wherefore say they, although the dull eyes of our body are not able here
to see God, the angels or spirits, yet when they are confirmed in felicity,
they shall see them, but not in deed by their own nature and power, and the
sharpness of their sight shall be so illustrated, Our bodily eyes do not
behold the essence of God neither here, neither in ye life to come.
that they shall see even the very essence of God. These men peradventure err
less than the Anthropomorphites: but yet they err. For how soever our eyes
shall be confirmed when we shall be in the blessed state, they shall for all that
remain eyes, and shall be bodily eyes: wherefore they shall not excede the nature
and latitude of their obiectes. In deed they shall then easily abide a
vehementer and larger light, than now they can in seeing suffer, neither shall
they be hurt by those colors wherewith they are now offended, but yet they
shall not attain unto the essence of god. For there are no bodies which in
the blessed resurrection shall be so nobled, that they shall either be made
spirits, or else cease to be bodies. Wherefore neither to the body of Christ is
this given, that after his resurrection it was turned into a spirit. For this
were not to have the body rise again, but to be abolished. Wherefore they,
which think that our eyes shall be made so perfect, that they shall behold the
substance of God, do not beawtifye them, but in very deed destroy them. The
Anthropomorphites do sin against the nature of God, in that they cloth it
with a body: but these men do injury unto the nature of man, which persuade
themselves that it shall not abide in the blessed resurrection. Our sentence
therefore abides and is true, as well of this life wherein we presently live, as
of the life which we wait for to come.

What the Patriarchs and Prophets saw.
But thou will ask, what then saw the Patriarchs and Prophets, to who^ we
read in the holy Scriptures that God many times appeared? I answer, that as
touching the outward senses, they saw only certain images, similitudes and
forms, which were offered sometimes unto them by god and by his angels,
whereby it was showed both that he was present with those fathers, and also
spoke unto them, heard them and admonished them of things healthful. But
these things, namely the presence of god or of the angels, also the words and
significations, the sense it self understand not, but by reason, and in mind
they were gathered by those things, which the judgment of the senses
received. Wherefore the Chaldey Paraphrast, when in Exodus it is written, that
god came to mount Syna, affirms, that god himself came not simply, but
translateth it, that the glory of god came: as though he should have said,
certain noble and wonderful signs were there seen, by which god testified
that he himself was there present: which selfsame thing he does in Esaias the
6. chap: where he writes. In what things God show him self to be present
I saw the Lord sitting upon his throne which was high and lifted up. But what
manner of similitudes and images they were, which offered them selves as tokens
of the presence either of an angel or of god, it is easy to be gathered out
of the holy Scriptures. The burning bushe appeared unto Moses, the cloud, the
pillar of fire, the smokes, voices, thundringes lamps, lightnings, the
propiciatory, the arc of the covenant, Vrim and Themim, and sundry forms
even of men, which either did, or spoke, or in some manner of sort showed
themselves either to Prophets or to other men. All these things I say, were
signs and tokens of the presence both of God and of the angels. And the same
things were seen of the fathers, either when they were slepyng or else when they
were waking: and sometimes by the spirit of god or industry of the angels at
the commandment of god, Prophets sometimes se things printed in imagination
and sometimes outwardly.
ye phantasy or imagination of me^ received form by such similitudes and
figures. Whereby those things which god would show, were no less expressed
in the minds of the understanders, than if they had been perceived by the
outward senses.

Wherefore in expounding the Prophets it is true, that very oftentimes we stand
in great doubt, whether ye thing were so done outwardly, or rather so appeared
to ye Prophet to be done in mind. And in certain of the^ by reason of the
circumstances of the matter, we are compelled to grant that it was only a
vision, as Jerome testifies of the breeches or hosen of Jeremy, Jerome.
which at the commandment of the Lord he put in a rock by the river
Euphrates: and he suffered them to remain there so long, till they were rotten:
and then he was commanded to take them, and to put them on again. And this
vision happened whilst the city of Jerusalem was grievously besieged by the
Chaldeyans, when the Prophet could not go and come to the river Euphrates. For
at the same time, when he would once have gone to Anathoth, where he was borne,
he was taken eue^ as he was going out of the gates, and accused of treason. In
like manner the same Jerome affirms, that that was only done by a vision,
which is written in Ezechiell, of the bread baked in the doung of an ox, and
how it lay many days upon one and the self same side. To these may be added
the eating of the book, and such like, which either humane nature, or
circumstances of the matters and times, suffered not so to be done, as it is
written. And as touching the preaching and expressing unto the people, that
things which ye Prophets had in their minds, a thing seen by phantasy or
imagination, was all one, and had as much efficacy, as if it had outwardly been
seen. But yet they fled not unto the visions of the mind, when the thing it
self might outwardly be done. For seeing God can use both ways, he has
sometimes taken this way, and other sometimes that way, as it has pleased him,
and as he has judged mete and profitable for us. But in all these things, me
thinks the sentence of Ambrose is to be holden, Ambrose. The visions of
Prophets were not natural.
which entreating of these images, says: That they were such as will did
chose, and not such as nature has formed: which undoubtedly makes against
those, which will have prophesieng to be natural, as though by the power of
the heavens, or some certain instinct of nature, or temperature of humors such
images and sights offered themselves to be seen, of the outward senses of the
Prophets, or to be known inwardly by imagination and phantasy. The will
(says Ambrose) namely of god or of an angel, would those things, and above
other things chose them, and not the power of nature formed them.

But there is an other doubt which in deed is not to be left unspoken of,
Whether God at any time showed himself or whether they were always angels that
appeared.
namely whether god himself at any time showed himself under these images or
forms: Or whether only angels always appeared, which wrought and spoke with
ye Prophets, sometimes in their own name, and other sometime in the name of
god? There have been some which said ye god himself never appeared, but by angels
in ye name of god all those things were accomplished which are written to be
either spoken or done in those visions. And they contend that they have
certain testimonies in the Scriptures which make with the^: among which one is
found in the Acts of the Apostles, where Stephen expressedly calls him an
angel, which called to Moses out of the bushe, when as for all that he is in
Exodus named God. Farther Paul to the Galathians testifies that the law was
given in the hand of a Mediator, be the disposition of Angels. And no man
doubts, but that in Exodus it is written, that the law was given by god.
Wherefore they conclude that we must understand that God appeared not by
himself, but by Angels. Howbeit forasmuch as the essence or divine nature,
can not be taken away either from the holy ghost, The holy ghost showed himself
in a Dove.
or from the son (for either of them by nature is God) how will they defend
their opinion, when as it is expressedly written in the gospel, that the holy
ghost descended upon Christ in the form of a Dove? If they say that an angel
came and not the holy ghost, they accuse the Scripture as a liar: but if they
confess, that together with that Dove the holy ghost appeared, what shall let
but that god himself also appeared unto the fathers under other figures and
images? They ca^ from this by no means escape, except (which I think they will
not do: otherwise they should bring in a manifest heresy) they will deny the
holy ghost to be God. And that which I have answered of the holy ghost, we may
object the like of ye son, out of the words of Paul to Timothe the 3. The
son of God appeared in humane flesh
chap, where he writes: Without controversy it is a great mystery, god is made
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, etc. For the whole Church and
right faith confesses that the word was the true god which appeared under the
flesh of man. Which if he did, as undoubtedly without conterfayting he did,
why may he not be said to have done the same in the old Testament under so^dry
forms and manifold figures? Without doubt that was much greater which he
gave unto us in the latter time. But he which has given the greater thing we
doubt not but that he also can give that which is less.

Peradventure they will say, that that which was given in the latter time, the
holy Scriptures do set forth to the end we should believe it: but that which ye
require to have been done in the old time is no where read. It is the word or
son of god by whom God spoke unto the fathers and Prophets.
Yea but if we diligently mark, the Scriptures teach, that also. For the son
of god is named by the Evangelist the word or (...), which we must believe was
not by him done rashly, but because it might be understand that by him god
spoke, when the scriptures testify that he spoke. Wherefore as often as we
read, yt the word of ye Lord came unto this man or to that man, I judge that
the same is so often to be attributed unto the son of god Christ our Lord,
namely that god by him spoke unto the fathers and Prophets. Which least I
should seem to speak in vain, I will for this sentence bring forth two
testimonies. John. 1.
The first is read in the first chap: of John: No man has seen god at any
time, and straight way by ye figure Occupatio is added. The son which is in
ye bosom of ye father he has reveled him. For a man might ask, If no man
have seen god at any time, who appeared then to the fathers when things divine
were showed unto them? who talked with them, when sundry forms and images
appeared unto them in the name of god, John. 12.
and wrought with them? Straight way it is answered: The son which is in the
bosom of the father he has reveled him: he was to man, the most true
interpretor of the father. An other place, is in the gospel the 12. chap:
where it is thus word for word written. Therefore they could not believe, because
again said Esaias: He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they
should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and should be
converted, and I should heal them. These things said Esaias, when he saw his
glory, and spoke of him. Undoubtedly these two pronounes His, and of Him, do
without co^trouersy signify Christ, for a little before the Evangelist had said,
Though he, namely Christ, had done so many signs before the^, yet believed they
not in him, that the saying of Esaias ye Prophet might be fulfilled yt he said,
etc. And to this sentence, which in very deed is natural, do agree Chrysostom,
Jerome, Cirillus, and Augustine. Farthermore the words of Hosea the Prophet
which he has in the 12. Hose. 12
chap: are diligently to be weighed, And thus speaks the Lord there: I have
spoken unto the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions, and used similitudes
by the hand of the Prophets, etc. Hereby we understand, that similitudes were
not given unto the Prophets from the beginning, but god himself spoke unto
them.

By examples it is declared both that God himself, and also that a^gels
somtymes appeared
But now must we by examples and such as are most evident, confirm, that the
appearynges of god are utterly distinct from the visions of angels. First it
is declared unto us in the book of Genesis, that Jacob saw a ladder which
reached from earth even to heaven, and by it the angels both ascended and
descended. Jacob heard noble and large promises. Hereby is gathered, unless we
will still be blind, that angels showed themselves in one kind of images and god
himself appeared Esaias, when he saw the Lord sitting in his throne, and with
him two Seraphins, which cried mutually the one to the other, Holy, holy,
holy. And with so great reverence they worshipped God which was in the midst,
that with their two upper wings, they covered their face, and with the two
neither wings their feet. Who sees, not here a great difference between god
and the angels which appeared? I will Ezechiell, which saw angels in the
forms of creatures, namely of an Ox, an Egle, and a Lion, by whom wheles were
turned, but God himself sat in the highest part in the form of the son of
man. Of Daniell also

And here we hear, what great difference there is between God and the angels
which ministered. Farther there is a place most manifest in Exodus, when God,
Moses was not content, and said that he would by no means go with the people,
except god himself would go together with the^. And undoubtedly by prayer and
constantly abiding in his sentence, at the length he overcame, and (as he
desired) had god for ye guide of their journey. How can these men therefore say,
yt god himself was not present under those forms, but only angels were seen
in such images? Moreover let us remember, that Moses (as it is written in the
same book Exodus) desired of God to see his face: which his request god (for
that he loved him excedingly,) would not utterly deny, but yet he would not
grant him all that he required. Wherefore he answered: My face thou shall by
no means see, because man shall not see me and live, but thou shall look upon
my hinder parts, namely my back. What is more manifest than this testimony?
Surely god by certain words here promises, to appear unto Moses in the
shape of a man, of whose form or image Moses should see not the face but the
back. And the same he faithfully performed unto Moses: for as god passed by,
Moses saw the back of his image by the rock, and heard the wonderful and
noble names of god rehearsed with a most loud voice. Which when he saw, he
fell prostrate to the earth and worshipped: and it is not to be doubted, but
that he gave unto him that adoration, which is only due unto the only god.
For forasmuch as he believed that he was there present according unto his
promise it is not to be had in controversy, but that he worshipped him as being
present in very deed. And undoubtedly god, except he had showed himself
present in very deed at the arc and Micheas the Prophet, which prophesied
before Achab king of Israel and said, that he saw god, with who^ was present
an host of angels, and he heard him ask, who shall deceive Achab, and that one
offered himself to be a lying spirit in the mouth of the Prophets of the king
Achab. By this vision also we understand, that there was an assured and notable
difference, between god and the angels, which appeared all together unto the
Prophet. Wherefore the gift of god which he gave unto the fathers, is not to be
diminished or to be extenuated: and we must confess, yt he was in very deed
present, when he appeared, forasmuch as we read yt it was so done, and there
is nothing that lets, as far as can be gathered out of ye holy scriptures,
neither is the very nature of god any thing against, it that it could not be
done. It were not sound to attribute unto angels all those things which in the
scripture are read of such visio^s. For so might we easily slip so far, yt at
the last we should believe yt the word was not immediately created by god, but by
angels at his commandment. Wherefore let us confess that god was present in
very deed, God was present in very deed, when it is said that he appeared
under diverse forms.
and showed himself under diverse forms, as often as we hear that the
scripture testifies or speaks the same.

Now rests to answer unto the places before brought. As touching the
Epistle to the Galathians, I grant that the disposition of the angels was in
the giving of the law: for they stood by God when he spoke, they made ready the
mist, Angels ministered unto god when he gave the law.
thundringes, lightnings, and la^pes, they prepared the tables of stone, and
many ways ministered unto God being present and speaking. Neither do the words
of the Apostle deny, but that God himself spoke, and gave the law, as the
scriptures testify. Yea and there have been some, which by the hand of a
Mediator, do not expound it to be Moses, The angel which spoke unto Moses in
the bushe, was ye son of God
but ye son of god: but whether they do it rightly or wrongfully, I have no
leisure at this present to discuss. But we need not in many words to answer
unto ye which blessed Stephen says (as it is written in the Acts of the
Apostles) namely that an angel appeared unto Moses in the bushe, and talked
with him. For if by the angel we understand the son of God (as I have often
admonished) there will then remain no doubt.

But that the things which I have now alleged, as touching this matter, may
the plainlyer and more certainly be understand, I think it good to confirm
them by some testimonies of the fathers. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom in his 14. Homely upon John says. The things which ye fathers
saw, were al of the^ by permission, but yet they saw not ye pure and simple
substance of god. And he adds: If they had seen it, then should they not
have seen it in any part differing, for yt it is pure, simple, and ca^ not be
described: Wherefore it stands not, it lies not, neither sits, as sometime
it was to those Prophets showed. He says moreover: God, before the son came
into flesh, exercised ye father with those visio^s and images. He there also
writes ye, which a little before we alleged, namely ye with bodyly eyes we ca^
not see created spirits, as are our souls and angels. Wherefore much less
must we believe, yt we can see god with the senses. And least a man think, yt
it only agrees with god ye father to be invisible, and not with ye son, he
brings this sentence of Paul, that he is the image of ye invisible God. And
without doubt he could not be his image, Augustine.
if he were not invisible, as he is whose image he represents. Augustine also
in his 3. treatise upon John, says of Moses: Although it be said that he
talked with god face to face, yet when he desired to see ye face of god, that
is his very substance, he could not obtain it. And in the same place he
adds: He saw the cloud, and the fire, which were figures. And within a little
after: If they say that the son was visible before he was incarnate, they
dote. Augustine besides these has in his Epistle to Fortunatianus, gathered
many more things to this purpose out of Nazianzenus, Jerome, and other fathers,
which were to long here to rehearse.

Howbeit I will bring two arguments, which are wont to be objected against
this sentence. In the beginning we said that the nature of God can not therefore
be comprehended with the senses, because his nature is not bodily. But all the
old fathers seem not to have believed so. Tertullian.
For Tertullian against Praxea writes that God is a body, and in other places
he oftentimes testifies the same. Yea in his little book de Anima he teaches
that our souls are bodies. And which seems more strange, he labors by
many reasons to confirm it. Yea and in his book de Dogmat. Eccles. the 11.
chap: he writes that all creatures are bodies, and even the angels by name:
because there is nothing, which fills all things as does God: but all
things are limited with certain places, as it appears of the soul,
Augustine excuses Tertulian.
which is closed in with the body. Augustine in his Epistle ad Quod uult deum
excuses Tertullian in this manner, that by a body he understood the
substance, and that which is in very deed, as though he therefore wrote that
god is a body, least he should seem to deny yt he is, forasmuch as the vulgar
people do think that yt is utterly nothing, The nature of god is without a
body.
which is not a body. Howbeit ye same Augustine in his book de Genesi ad
littera^, in this manner reproves him, that at sometime being overcome by ye
truth, he said, That every body is passible: wherefore, least he should make god
passible, he ought to have denied him to be a body. Neither neded he so to bend
himself to ye capacity of ye common people, ye therefore he should pronounce
false things of god. For Christians are not so to be instructed, ye like rude
persons (who^ Aristotle also co^futeth) they should think that yt is nothing,
which is not a body, but rather they ought so to be taught, yt in thinking of
god they affirm nothing without rules of ye holy scriptures. And as for ye book
de dogmate Ecclesiastico, we must attribute no more unto it tha^ is mete. For
it is ascribed unto Augustine, but the learned believe not that it is his.

The other thing, which is sometimes objected, is an argument of ye
Anthropomorphites. For they co^te^d, yt for this cause we ought not to believe
ye god is without a body, because the Scriptures testify, ye man was made to
ye image of God, which could not be true, except he have a body as we have. For
ye image should want ye similitude of ye whereunto it is referred. They think
also ye the Scripture makes with the^, when as it oftentimes attributes unto
god the members of men. Jerome.
But Jerome (as Augustine to Fortunatianus cites him) wittely and sharply
derideth their argument. If we should lean unto this reason (says he) we
shall easily prove yt a man has wings, because ye scripture sometimes
ascribes the^ to god, to whose image it is manifest ye man was created. These
men ought rather diligently to have weighed that the image of God, consists
in holiness, righteousness and truth, as Paul has taught. Which thing if
they had seen, they had not only removed a body from god, but they should also
have led away their minds from grosser cogitations. Why do they not affirm
that God is in very deed a bear, a Lion or fire, because so do Amos, and
Moses, and also the Epistle to the Hebrews call him? In the 95. Psalm it is
written: He that made the eye, shall he not see? he that made the ear, shall
he not hear? Jerome says that there should have been said: he that made the
ear, has he not an ear? and he that made the eye, has he not an eye? But so
it is not said, least in thinking of him, Why the scripture attributes members
unto God.
thou should be deceived, and suppose that he has those members. But the
holy scripture, if some time it attribute members unto god, undoubtedly this is
the only cause, to help our infirmity, whereby although we can not comprehend
the essence of God as it is, yet in very deed it provides that by some
certain simboles and shadows we may understand somewhat. Wherefore members
are by a most profitable Metaphore attributed unto God, that we diligently
remembryng his proprietyes, might godlyly and faithfully exercise our minds.
Why the Anthropomorphites are condemned.
And the Anthropomorphites: if for that cause they had ascribed members unto
God, as the Scriptures sets them forth, to be a help unto the weak
understanding of men: they might be excused, neither should they have been
condemned. But they contended that the nature of God had so in very deed:
wherefore justly and worthily are they accused. But what shall we answer to
Paul, which of the seeing the nature of God in heaven, says: We shall see him
face to face, and by that means he seems to grant unto our eyes and face the
beholding of god, and after a sort to ascribe unto god himself a face? There
is a face of the body and a face of the mind.
Augustine answers that there is a face also of the mind, when as Paul
says, that we now with a face uncovered do behold things divine, and not
with a veil put between, as the Jews used when they talked with Moses.

But these things being thus finished and concluded, In the eternal life the
blessed shall know the essence of God.
let us in few words speak of other kinds of the knowledge of God. In the
everlasting life the blessed shall know the essence of God, not in deed by the
senses, but by the soul or mind, for as much as John says: When he
appears, we shall see him as he is. Paul testifies the same, now we see him
thoroughe a glass and in a shadow, but than shall we see him face to face.
The same thing is gathered by the words of Christ: Their angels always behold
the face of the father, for in an other place he has taught, yt in the blessed
resurrection the just shall be like the angels of god. Whereof it follows, yt we
shall see god in like sort as the angels do: wherefore if they see his face,
tha^ shall we also behold it. There is an other testimony also written by Paul
to ye Corinth. Than shall I know, even as I am known. The nature of GOD is not
wholly and by all means comprehended. Chrysostom.
And ye god sees us thoroughly and essencially, no man doubts. Howbeit let
us not thus persuade our selves, yt the blessed shall wholly and every way know
ye nature and substance of God, but so much only as we shall be able to receaue^
for things finit ca^ not fully receive yt which is infinite: nether is ye which
is created, able fully and perfectly to comprehend his creator. Wherefore
Chrysostom in his.14. Homely upon John, Ambrose in his first book upon Luke
ye.1. chap, also Jerome (as Augustine in ye place before alleged declares)
all these I say deny yt the angels see god. But yt can not simply and absolutely
be understand, when as otherwise Christ says, yt they see the face of ye
father which is in heaven. Wherefore it remains, yt the same is to be
understand of ye whole and perfect knowledge of his nature and substance.
Wherefore in John ye 6. chap: it is written: No man has seen god, but he which
is of god, he has seen ye father. Also: As ye father knows me, so know I ye
father. Wherefore this is only given to Christ which is god, perfectly and
fully to know ye essence of god. Other also shall see it, but yet so much as
their capacity ca^ comprehend. If thou ask, whether it shall be equally or no? I
will not answer to that, at this present. For in an other place, we shall
have occasion given us to speak of the diversity or equality of rewards in
the blessed life.

But what shall we affirm of the state of this life? Shall our mind whilst we
live here in knowing of god attain to his essence? Whether in this life we may
in soul or mind know the essence of God, or no.
No verily, because it is written: Man shall not see me and live. No man has
seen God at any time. And Paul adds: He can not be seen, because he dwells
in the light that no man can come unto. Howbeit these things are not to be
understand as touching all manner of knowledge: for also whilst we live here,
it is given unto us after a sort to know god. Wherefore these sayings are to be
understand (to speak as the stoolemen do) of the substantial and essential
knowledge of God. Neither is this against it, in ye it is written that Moses
saw god face to face, which also before him Jacob spoke, neither ye which in an
other place is written of ye same Moses, ye god talked with him as a friend with
his friend. For these things are not spoken simply, but by co^pariso^ with
other, because those excellent me^ above other knew those things, which at yt
time were opened unto me^ as touching god. For unto the^ god would after an
exquisite and unaccustomed manner show himself, which he did not to others.
And this to be ye sense of these words. Augustine and Chrysostom hereby do
gather, because afterward when Moses desired to see the face of god, it was
denied him.

The natural knowledge as touching God, is slender and obscure. Symonides.
There remains, to entreat of the knowledge of god, which whilst we live
here we may obtain. First the same is natural, and that very slender and
obscure. Which thing Symonides knew right well, who (as Cicero writes in his
book de Natura deorum) being demanded of Hierone a tyranne of Sicilia, what
God was, he always deferred to answer, because ye more he thought as
touching ye thing, ye more obscure always it seemed unto him. Wherefore Cleme^s
Alexa^drinus in his 5. Clemens Alexandrinus.
book of Stromata, bringing a reason, why ye knowledge of God is so hard,
says: It is not Genus, it is not Differe^cia, it is not Accide^s, nor ye
subject of Accide^ces, and therefore it ca^ not be understand of us, which
comprehend only such things in our mind and reason. The effects, which ye
Philosophers used by their understanding to know god, are not equal with his
dignity, power, and faculties. Wherefore they declared only certain common and
light things. But we give unto him Attributa or proprieties, yt is, good, just,
fair, wise, and other such like: because we have no excellenter things, nor
nobler names, which ca^ better be applied, or agree with him. Neither yet are
these things so in him, as we speak: for, for yt he is most simple, The
knowledge of God by faith.
he is far otherwise good, just, and wise, tha^ men either are, or are called.

But besides this natural knowledge of god, this knowledge also offreth it
self unto us, which consists of faith, and is by the word of god reveled
unto us. But faith is not of us (as to the Ephesians it is said) but it is the
gift of God: for Christ also says: No man can come unto me except my father
draw him. Faith therefore abundantly gathers out of the holy scriptures ye
knowledge of god, as much as suffices to salvation, or as much as this our
life is able to receive. Howbeit as Paul testifies this knowledge also is
imperfect. For now we know him by a glass in a shadow and but partly: and
although in this knowledge we profit, whilst we live here, yet can we not
atteyn to the knowledge of the essence of god. I know that Augustine thought as
touching Paul and Moses, ye sometime, The opinion of Augustine, of Paul and
Moses.
in mind whilst they were here, they saw the substance of God: but I can not
easily agree unto it, forasmuch as I judge that those places of John, of the
law, and of Paul, which I before alleged, are most evident. Unto which this
may also be added, which is written in the 6. chap. of John. Not that any man
has seen the father: he which is of god, he sees the father. And this is not
to be passed over, ye that which is here spoken of the father, is true also of
the son, as touching his divine nature. Because, as I have above declared,
both out of Chrysostom and out of Augustine, the nature as well of the Son,
as of the Father is invisible. And it skilleth not if thou say, as Augustine
says, that they saw the nature and substance of God, not using the outward
senses but in a certain traunse or rauishing, or being alienated from the use
of this life. These things are not gathered out of the Scriptures, yea
contrarily we have heard that Moses was denied the sight of the face of God.
Wherefore by the knowledge of faith we both know God and his good will toward
us, as much as is sufficient to our true and perfect salvation.

But among all those things, whereby out of the holy sciptures we know god, In
Christ god is said to be made visible.
there is none more excellent than Christ himself. Wherefore Paul has justly
said: without controuersye it is a great mystery, God is made manifest in the
flesh, etc. The Lord also says: Philip, he which sees me, sees also the
father. Paul also said that he knew nothing else, but Jesus Christ, and him
crucified. And undoubtedly in Christ God may be said to be made visible:
because he was joined together with man in the same self person. Wherefore they
which saw Christ, might say yt they had seen God. And he which by faith
beholds and acknowledges him, does see far much more, than if he should
behold the burning bushe of Moses. Wherefore to the Collos. it is written, that
in him are put all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of god. And John
does healthfully admonish us in his Epistle the 3. chap. as he which has a
hope to see God as he is, let him prepare himself thereunto, by purging
himself, as he is pure and clean. Thus much of the Question, now let us
return unto the history.

23 And the Lord said unto him: Peace be unto thee, be not afeard, thou shall
not dye.

24 And Gideon built there an alter unto the Lord, and called it Jehovah
Shalum, even unto this day. It is yet in Ophrath ye pertayneth to the
Abiezerite.


When these things were spoken unto Gideo^, by ye history it appears not, but
I think it was ye next night after ye things already rehearsed, wherefore he
was commanded to build there an alter, where ye meats which was setforth were
consumed with fire, namely upon ye rock, whereof is mencio^ made a little
before. Why God appeared unto Gideon the second time.
Gideo^ was vexed with fear, supposing ye because he had sen god, he should die.
Wherefore god comforted him, yt he being void of ye fear, might ye
chearefullier prepare him self, unto those things which were commanded him.
That fear wonderfully let his faith. For how could he believe, that he
should set ye Israelites at liberty, which every hour suspected death to be at
hand. Wherefore god in co^forting him, removed away ye fear, yt he might
persecute ye work, which lo^ged especially unto faith. Thou shall not die,
says he Peace be unto the. In ye hebrew phrase, peace signifies tra^quility,
good success, and as ye common people say, prosperous fortune. This word
Shalu^ is derived of ye verb Shala^, which is to perform, to finish, and to
accomplish. The latin word Pax also which is peace, agrees with ye hebrew
signification. For if we may believe Augustine, Pax yt is peace, is a
tra^quility of order. And then we reckon al things to be peaceable, when they
are right and quietly disposed.

And Gideon built there an altar. These words are spoken by the figure
Prolepsis: for he was in the night admonished of ye Lord to build this altar,
for the holy scripture uses to set forth a thing summarily: and then to
declare the thing as it was done. Wherefore god came unto Gideon in his sheape,
comforted him, that he should not fear least he should dye, commanded him to
buyld an alter, to take a bulloke, to do sacrifice, to cut down the profane
grove, and to overthrow the alter of Baal, Why the Elders used alters.
which was had in estimation. The elders used alters not only to sasacrifice
upon, but yt they might be monumentes of some notable benefit given by god. We
read yt Moses did so, when the Israelites under ye Lord obtained the victory
against Amalek. After ye example of Gideo^, every one yt is justified by faith
and having peace toward god by Christ, and being assured of eternal life,
ought in his heart to grave such a little, Christ is our peace.
Christ is my Peace which thing Paul also has taught when he wrote to the
Ephesians. He is our Peace, which made both one.

25 And the same night, The Lord said unto him, Take thy fathers young bullok,
and the other bullok of vii. years old, and destroy the altar of Baal, that
thy father has, and cut down the grove, that is by it.

26 And build an altar unto the Lord thy god upon the top of this rock in a
plain place, and take the second bulloke, and offer a burnt offering with the
wood of the grove, which thou shall cut down.


That which before was in a su^me spoken, is now particularly expressed. Some
think ye two bullokes are here me^cioned, of which the one is called ye second
other by order of nativity, or as they stood in order at the rack and mangor.
And that second, is specified, to be vii. year old, in at which time being
made fat, at ye length to be offered to Baal: this bulloke god would have offered
unto himself for aburnt offering. And because there is no farther mention made
of ye first bulloke, neither did god command what he would have done with it,
therefore I think we must understand but one and the self same bullok which
before is put absolutely, and the^ by exposition repeted yt he might be by some
certain tokens known from other bulloks, whereof peradventure his father had
many, so yt it was vii. years fatted, and stood in ye second stalle. And as
touching ye vii. years fatting there is no cause why we should marvel at it,
Apis the ox was long fatted
forasmuch as ye ox called Apis or Serapis which was wont to be sacrificed,
was fatted certain years before. And it is not hard to believe, The Hebrews
used the superstitions of the Egyptians.
but that this custom of the Egyptians was supersticiously kept among ye
idolatrous Hebrews, for that they were not only neighbors unto Egypt, but
also they came out of it into the land of Palestine.

God would have an alter erected unto him upon a hard and strong rock, namely
upon yt, wherout fire was stricken, to burn those things which Gideon
brought, as though God by ye miracle had appointed it for himself. He
commands an alter to be raised up in a place apt, for ye stone or rock, as
it is to be supposed, was great. Wherefore he wills Gideon to chose one
certain even part of it above the rest, which was most fit to build an alter
upon. And this is chiefly to be noted, ye god when he would deliver the
Israelites from ye Madianites commanded above all things, ye idolatry should
be overthrown. For until as long as religion is not restored, Nothing goes
forward well in a plub. wealth except religion be first restored
nothing goes forward well and luckely in the pub. wealth. Farthermore faith
is ye grou^dsele and foundation of actions to come. And yt ca^ not be had,
where ye worshipping of god is turned into superstition and impiety. Which
thing if god in a manner in all expeditions does observe, let Magistrates thereby
gather, what they ought above all things to do among ye people who^ they
govern. Private me^ also by this example ar admonished, chiefly to frame piety
in their minds. It is not sufficient to build an altar unto the Lord, unless the
sacrilegious altar be cut down: neither is it enough to overthrow that, unless
unto the true god be his altar builte. There are which fall from the Pope,
but they so fall, that they will not follow the Gospel. And some there are
which do in such sort receive the true doctrine, that for all that they will
not depart from the pernicious masses, and other papisticall impietyes. God
has not so, not so (I say) commanded which soever of these thou
neglectest, thou breakest his commandment.

That there were groves by the temples of the idols, none, About idols were
groves.
which has red Poets or hystoryes, doubts. That was a certain mutacion of
the Patriarchs, which offered sacrifices under oaks, or in hills, which they
called high places. They delighted (as I think) in close places, whereby their
mind, when they sacrificed, was more void of worldly cares and affairs. And
for the most part experience teaches us, that in dark places, and where high
trees grow, a certain admiration comes unto the minds, by which admiration
they apply themselves the more to the meditation of things divine. God
commands the grove to be cut down, because it was together with ye altar
dedicated unto the god Baal. Yet he commands his wood, and the ox appointed
for him, to be transferred to his own sacrifice, least any man should think
that the true god is not lord of all things. For there is nothing so under the
power of the devil, but that it may be turned to the glory and honor of god.
Yet the godly ought not by this example to eat things offered unto idols,
when they know that they are such in deed. Not undoubtedly, bcause the nature
of that flesh is changed, or cease to belong unto god, but because of the
conscience of the weak ones, and least it should seem that we would be
made pertakers of the table of the deuilles. But such laws God has prescribed
unto us, not unto him self. Wherefore he may use things dedicated unto
idols for his own burnt offringes.

The grove, the altar, and the bullock are mentioned to belong unto Ioas the
father of Gideon: because he had ye office of a Magistrate in Ophrath: and
whatsoever was the cause, it is to be thought that he mayntayned idolatry
there. And forasmuch as sacred places and sacrifices are appointed to the
possession of private men, therefore magistrates are wont to have the rule and
disposition of them. Gideon is chiefly commanded, to do these things that
every man might understand, that in purging of religion, or amending any other
sin, we must first begin at our own famely, and at such as are niest of kin,
least any man should seem to correct other, and in the mean time leave his
own neglected and vnamended.

27 Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the Lord badde
him. But because he feared to do it by day for his his fathers householde,
and the men of the City, he did it by night,


The fear of Gideon resists nothing against his faith. God will have every
man to fulfill his vocation, but yet he forbids not to add prudence. We must
take place, time, and occasion, unless God appoint these things also Howbeit
we must beware, that in adding these cautions we go about nothing that is
against the precepts of God: for that prudence is praised which with things
well done neglects no sin. Supersticions are more set by o^ men, ^h^n pure
religion
Hereby also we gather that Gidion was not o^ to^ basest sort, forasmuch as out
of his famely he could take out ten servants. He feared, and so feared that in
the day time he durst not do that which the Lord ha^ commanded. For the
worshippinge of Baal was now confirmed: and superstitions once established by
taking deep roots, are wont to have more authority, than perfect, pure and
sincere worshipping of god can ever obtain. Such ungodliness is there grafted
in the hearts of men, that at this day, if a man in the papacy detest the
mass, or deride a piece of bread, which the wicked sacrificers both worship
and carry about, he shall be much more cruellye punished and tormented, than if he
should with horrible blasphemies defame the true God and our Lord Jesus
Christ. So at that time he was counted as a most detestable heretic worthy to
be killed, which had done any contumely unto the holy services of Baal.

Whereunto the fear of Gideon tended
But whereunto tended this policy of Gideon? That must needs be cut of which
was done, neither could the author of so great an enterprise be hidden. This
is true: but he judged that in the mean time this danger was to be avoided,
lest in the day time in the act doing he should be taken. For he should have
been let both by his fathers household, and also by the men of the city,
from executing the commandments of God. and peradventure in accomplishinge
the work should have been slain. The name Baall agrees very well with the
true God.
This Baal (as in an other I have declared) had his beginning of Bell the
father of Minus. But as touching the name, we must know, that by it an
excellent propriety of God is expressed. For Baal in hebrew signifies a Lord,
a master and a husbda^, al which things in very deed agree with God. For he is
Lord of all things, and the teacher of all true wisdom, and the only
husband of the church. Wherefore these men erred not in judging the
proprieties of God. Neither erred the Grecians when they called him (...). For
by that title they declared that God is the author of life. The Romans also
called God Iubiter, as though they should say Iubiter father. Wherefore these
words are for god most worthy: and it may be, yt the old me^ which so spoke,
had a respect unto the true god the chief of all. But that was utterly ungodly
and detestable, which afterward was committed, namely to ascribe these
proprieties as well to stars as to men, and also to brute beasts and idols,
whereby all things were filled with idolatry. Farthermore the Hebrews,
although God had taught the^ his name, by which he would have them call upon
him, and pray unto him, yet they forsook it, and used the names and holy
services invented by ye Ethnikes, and neglecting the rites commended unto the
both by the law and also by their elders, they received profane ceremonies.
Wherefore they had an altar dedicated unto an idol, a grove about it, and
certain years they fed and fatted some certain bullockes for the sacrifice.
And at the length they became not the worshippers of the true god, but the true
worshyppers of Baal in all things.

Gideon in the night overthrows the altar, cutteth down the grove, builds
an altar unto the Lord, and (as he was commanded) offered a burnt offering. Al
these things were testimonies of his faith, whereby he confessed, and that from
the heart that he detested idolatry, and perfectly believed in the only lord the
god of the Hebrews Gideon being of the tribe of Manasses sacrifices, when as
sacrificing belonged only unto the Levites. This if he had done of his own
brain, he should not have

28 And when the men of city rose rose early in the morning, they saw the
altar of Baall destroyed, and the grove, that was by it was cut down, and the
second bullock offered upon the altar that was made.

29 And they said one to an other, who has done this thing? and when they
enquired and asked, they said Gideon the son of Ioas has done this thing.

30 Then said the men of the city unto Ioas, Bring out thy son that he may
dye: because he has destroyed the altar of Baal, and has also cut down the
grove that was by it.

31 Ioas aunsweared unto all those that stood by: will ye plead Baals cause?
Or will ye save him? He that will plead for him let him dye ere the morninge.
If he be god, let him plead for himself against him that has cast down his
altar.

32 And he called him in yt day Ierubbaal: saying: Let Baal plead with him,
because he has broken down his altar.


They most grievously prosecute the matter against him which had inuiolated the
sacred things of Baal, and yet they suffered the worshipping of the true god to
lie neglected and despised. It is the manner of humane wisdom, with earnest
labor to defend their own inventions: and obstinately to resist those
things which god has commanded. They will kill Gideon, as a sacrileger and
most pernicious heretic, they behave themselfes sediciously against the
Magistrate, they show forth no laws, but in a certain blind fury they judge
the crime committed to be utterly worthy of death, when as they themselves
rather should have been condemned worthy of death, because they had violated
the worshipping not of an idol, but of ye true God. What he was ye showed that
Gideo^ did these things, the history expresses not. God suffers not such
things to be hidden therefore he had means and ways in a manner infinite,
whereby he would make them open. But to know what were the tokens of the things
done, it is no skill to us, but let us diligently mark the impotency of
idolatrers. Idolatrers can not abide to have ungodly worshippinges taken away.
They cannot by any means abide to have wicked worshippinges taken away. The
Hebrews said unto Jeremy that they would utterly worship the queen of
heaven, that is the moon and other stars. The Ephesians being as it were in
a rage, cried without mean or reason, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. The
Romans whilst Italy was wasted by the Goths, Vandales, and Lombardes,
neither cried nor desired any other thing, but that the alters and temples of
idols might be restored. That said they was ye head of evils, because the holy
services of country were abolished. The like example do we no see in these men,
they neither will nor can not abide, that Gideon should escape who^ they saw had
cut down their idolatry. Now is Gideon counted a seditious fellow, which has
committed such things as we at this day of the gretest part of christendom ar
accused of sedicion, which have disturbed false worshippinges now being
received. And we grant indede that seditions ar to be avoided as much as may
be, because civil peace is a good thing which wise and quiet minds ought to
desire. Obedience to the word of god is to be preferred before euil^ peace.
But contraryly the truth is not to be suppressed, nether must we sin against
the worshipping of God, and it is much better to defend the word of god tha^
civil peace. Every godly man so roweth when tranquillity of the public wealth
cannot be coupled with the obedience of the word of God. Wherefore for as much as
the one or the other is to be chosen, the whole and uncorrupted worshipping of
God ought rather to be wished for, tha^ the commodity of outward peace. For the
end of cities and public wealths is, to obey God, and rightly to worshi^pe
god, that is by his word and prescribed rule. For to have a city or public
wealth quiet and peaceable, is not by it self necessary, but to obey God, to
believe his word, and to worship him as he has prescribed, is the sum and
end of all humayne things, and therefore it is to be preferred above all good
things. Neither is it any new or unaccustomed thing, that by true piety
sedicions are stirred up. Christ of that thing has admonished us: I came not
(says he) to send peace on the earth, but a sword. I came to kindle fire:
what will I, but that it should burn? The time shall come says he, that for
the Gospels sake, the father from the child, the children from the parents,
brethern from brethren, shall not only be alienated, but which is more cruel,
The godly are not guilty of the troubles which happen for religions sake.
they shall deliver one an other to the death. And yet these sedicions and
troubles are not to be ascribed unto the godly: forasmuch as they whe^they obey
god, do not depart from their office, they do that which they should do: the
fault consists in the ungodly and idolatrers, they are to be accused, and
condemned as guilty of those evils, because they can not abide the truth,
neither will they obey the word of god. Wherefore prechers of the gospel ar to
be absolved of this crime: for sedicio^s spring not through their default which
obey god, but through the perverseness of the world, which straight rages
against the word of god.

Ioas, like a wise and stout Magistrate, at the beginning asswageth the people
being in an uproar, showing them how unworthy a thing they do, when they
being private men, dare avenge the cause of Baal. Will ye plead his cause? As
though he should have said. It is not your office, it pertayneth to me and the
other magistrates. And then he makes a proclamation against the sedicious
persons. He that will so stand in Baals cause, shall dye, and that this day, or
the morninge. He shall not live till morning, for he shall be executed out of
hand. If Baal be god, let him plead his own cause against him, which has cast
down his altar, and has cut down h^s grove. If the matter be to be discussed
without judgment and ordinary action, Baal has no need of this your help:
for seeing he is god, he can right well revenge himself. The last part of this
sentence is somewhat dark. He that will plead. Lo, for him or against him, let
him die this day before morning. Some expound this word Lo, to signify, for
him namely for Baal, as though the ^retor had put forth his decree after this
manner: Whosoever goes about to move sedition, as though he would plead for
Baal, him will I strayghtewaye punish, as a troublesome citezen, which dares
to take upon him more then his state may suffer. The other sense is to expound
this word Lo, against him, as though he should have said: do not rage in
this sort, because he shall utterly dye, and that this day before morning,
which against Baal has pleaded and contended. By the power of this god he
shall not so escape. And this sentence seems to be confirmed by the words
which follow: If he be god, let him plead his own cause against him, which
has done him iniurye. But I rather allow the first sentence: because the holy
scripture rather uses this word Lo in that sense.

Gideon by his fathers answer was named Ierubbaal. He shall plead (says Ioas
or let Baal plead against him. These ar words either of them that prays, which
would so speak in earnest or faynedly, or else of one that affirms as though
he should affirm, that it should utterly so come to pass. The men which herd
these word^s, either because they meruayled that the father wished these things
unto his son, or else because they believed that the earth would strayghtway
swalow him up, or the lightning would destroy him, or that god would by some
exquisit punishment punish him, they waited (I say) to see what would happen.
And therefore they called him Ierubbaal. And his surname was then of far more
estimation, when they saw that he escaped safe and sound, and contrary to the
hope of all men delivered the Israelites from the power of their enemies.

By this example Magistrates may know what they should do, The office of a
stout Magistrate against tumultes because of religion
when Papists stir up sedition or tumult in their dominion, because Masses
are abrogated, Idolatry taken away, and the Pope thrown down. They must
valiantly stand by it, and must declare, that this charge pertains not unto
these, by violence to defend rites and supersticions: forasmuch as they have
not the sword: their care should be this, to see that godlynes be rightlye and
orderlye appointed. If so be that they desire any thing against laws or
right, and think that they have the better cause, let them from God wait for
the success. He is of himself by nature both mighty and wife, and therefore
if he allow the Mass, the Pope and superstitions, he will then take those
things in hand himself. In the mean time they ought to compel their
subjects to obey just and healthful decrees. By these things it appears as
I suppose, that Ioas was not a Baalite from the heart, for he could not have
said: If h^^e God, let him plead his own cause. Unless thou will feign that he
said, in time to come Baal shall plead his own cause: but what he before
judged of Baal, now he declares, when he sees the danger of death that his
son is in for his sake.

33 Then all the Madianites, and the Amalekites, and the children of Kedem were
gathered together, and pitched their tents in the valley of Iszreel.

34 And the spirit of the Lord did put on Gideon, and he blew a trumpet, and
Abiezer was gathered together after him.

35 And he sent messengers through out al Manasseh, and he also was joined with
him. And he sent messengers unto Aser and Zebulon, and to Nephthali, and they
came up to meet him.


When the uproar and seditions were pacified, which were stirred up for a thing
godlily done of Gideon, God provided that occasion should be given, whereby he
might by Gideon give unto the Israelites the victory against their enemies.
That thereby at the last they might understand with how much godliness and
profit, the worshipping of Baal was taken away. In the coming of the enemies
the spirit of the Lord did put on Gideon, the spirit I say of strength, as the
Chaldey Paraphrast interprets. God had before appointed Gideon for a savior
of the Hebrews, now when he should go forth unto the battle, he suffers him
not to go unarmed, but endueth him with his spirit. The Metaphore of putting on
is derived of garments, which are put upon the body. The spirit of the Lord
therefore is inwardlye hidden in the outward man, and so woorketh by him, as
though he had put him on. And this is a phrase of speech very much used in the
scripture, and especially in this book. This did the Angel signify should
come to pass, when he said unto Gideon: Go in this strength, and deliver the
Jews from the Madianites. Now is it brought to pass that Gideon is endued
with the spirit of strength. For this was that power and might of God,
wherewith in the old time he delivered the fathers. He blew a trumpet, and
Abiezer followed him, which in deed was marvelous, forasmuch as they were so
angry for the overthrowing of Baal. But their minds were by the inspiration of
God changed. For when they saw that the Idol did to him no hurt, they began
to have a good opinion of him. The whole tribe of Manasses followed him, also
Zebulo^, Aser, Naphthali. Gideon alone was called, but yet he would not fight
with his enemies alone. For faith refuses not humane help which iustlye may
be had: for godly men are not by faith styrred up to tempt God.

36 And Gideon said unto God: If thou wylt save Israel by my hand as thou
haste said:

37 Behold I will put a fleese of wool in the threshyng place, if the dew come
upon the fleese only, and it be dry upon all the earth, the^ shall I be sure,
that by my hand thou will save Israel, as thou have said.

38 And it was so: for he rose up earlye on the morrow, and thrust the fleese
together, and wrynged the dew out of the fleese, and filled the vyole with the
water.

39 Again Gideon said unto God: Be not angry with me, and I will speak only
once more: Let me prove only once, I pray thee with the fleese. Let it, I
pray thee, he dry upon the fleese only, and let the dew be upon all the
ground.

40 And God did so the same night: for it was dry upon the fleese only, and
there was dew on all the ground.


Man's imbecility is diverse and manyfold, whereby it comes to pass, that in
the promises of God we waver and doubt. Gideon was called by so plain and
manifest words, that there was no occasion of doubting left. He had no common
sign when the sacrifice was consumed with fire: he is now furnished with an
host, and yet he now also wauereth, and needs a new confirmation. We use not
so to do when we believe men: for if there de but a bare promise, or a hand
writing made, we are content. But God must continually beat in into us those
things which he promises, and seal them with miracles and Sacraments, and
yet even then also we give little credit unto them. And though we should
endau^ger our selves for accomplishing of our own lusts, or prosecuting our
own affairs, there are we stout, there are we bold, and nothing afeard, when
as otherwise few there are found which in God his cause, or for his words sake
will put them selves in danger. In which thing nevertheless we ought to be
most stout: for God will not leave us destitute of his aid. He adds the
spurs of promises, the confirmation of miracles, and to those which cease of,
he threateneth very grievous punishments. Whence our distrust comes
And this pestilence springs of no other thing, but because we trust to our
own sense and reason, more then is convenient. And against this evil there is
no remedy so present, as from them to provoke our selves to faith and constancy
in God.

Whither Gideon in requiring these signs, be to be condemned.
R. Leui ben Gerson thinks that Gideon, when he required these signs, did
partly distrust, and partly believe: whose opinion if it be received, then
Gideon is guilty of infidelity. And I judge yt we must not labor much,
utterly to acquit him of al faults. To the Hebrews his faith in deed is
commended: but me thinks that we must not deny but that it was wavering,
before it was by diverse means confirmed. And undoubtedly it is a great matter,
to confirm the heart of man in the word of God. Although I am not ignorant,
that they which defend Gideon, do say that he doubted not, but that he was
called of god to set at liberty the Israelites. But in requiring these signs,
he only asked counsel of God: whither he should then obtain the victory
against the Madianites, when now he had collected and host. And that in the
old time with the captains of the Israelites was a common custom. For Saul
and David, although they were by God chosen kings, namely to save the people,
neither did they thereof any thing doubt, yet did they often times ask counsel
of God, whither they should ascend to any place, whither their enemies should
be delivered into their hands: or contrary, whither they should fall before
their enemies, or be delivered into their hands. So peradventure it might be
said, that this captain, for that he had not with him the Ark of the Lord, or
a Prophet whom he might ask counsel of, as touching the success of the
battle, by those signs did ask counsel of the Lord. Augustine in his.63.
Augustine. Ambrose.
question upon Genesis in this manner excuses Gideon, and affirms that he by
these petitions tempted not God, but asked counsel as touching the success.
And as concerning this thing, as he is wont, he agrees with Ambrose, who in
his first book de spiritu sancto, and.i. chap. affirms that Gideon doubted
not. And the Rabbines of the Hebrews think that these signs were given unto
Gideon by the ministry of some prophet: but what he was, neither the scripture
declares, neither can they tell. And there are some of them which suppose
that all this thing was done in a vision. But of these things what need we any
more to argue? Forasmuch as there is nothing which lets, but that Gideon
might in very deed both demand, and have experience of these things. Howbeit,
the thing teaches that al these things happened in the summer time, for that
there is mention made of dew.

I easily assent unto Augustine, which says that Gideon tempted not God,
Augustine. We may require a sign to strengthen our faith.
because I am persuaded, that by such signs he would have his faith
confirmed, which otherwise was wavering. It is sin in deed to doubt in
faith, but to strengthen the same, it is lawful in time to require a sign.
For in the Gospel the man cried: Lord, I believe, but help thou my
incredulitye. Yea and Gideon also in the self same thing had before trial of
consolation: wherefore it is no marvel if he again desired the remedy, which he
had had experience of. Why Gideon required contrary signs.
He requires contrary signs, because the first seemed not to be so great a
wonder, that the rest of the earth should be dry, and the fleese moist. Because
such is the nature of wool, that by a certain proper power it draws moystnes
unto it self, as the Magnete stone draws iron, and Naphtha, fire. Naphtha a
kind of chalk.
Wherefore the wool might easilye drink in the dew, and that abou^dantly,
although the earth were not yet moist. But that about the fleese the earth
should be moist, and the wool dry, it was utterly against nature.

What is the Allegorye of these signs, Augustine upon the.71. Augustine.
Ambrose. The Allegorye of these signs.
Psalm writes, and also Ambrose in his first book de spiriru sancto, in the
Proheme. The fleese they understand to be the people of the Hebrews, who in the
old time were watered with the word of God, when as the whole earth, that is,
all other nations, wanted the preaching of the word of God. Christ also was
the minister of the circumcision, and in the first embassadge he sent his
Apostles only to ye Jews. But afterward the thing was so altered, that the
whole world, after the coming of the holy ghost upon the Apostles, was watered
with the word of God, and the Jews utterly wanted it, and as barren bows
were cut of from the fertile and fat Olyue tree.

Of Miracles.
IN the end of the chapter two things are to be enquired of. The first is of
miracles: the other is, how much or in what sort it is lawful to require them.
The Etymology of ye words.


As touching the first, the Hebrew verb is Pala, or Niphla, which is, it was
hard, or marvelous: whereof ar derived these nownes Niphlaoth or Miphlaoth. By
which words are noted things severed from other, for their dignitye or
excellency, separated I say, and wonderful. The Grecians call it (...), of this
verb (...), which is to maruayle. The Latins call them Miracula, that is
miracles, because they are worthy of admiration. They call them also Prodigia
monstra, and Portanta, that is wonders, monsters, and things seldom seen, that
we should understand that God by these things will show that some certain
thing shall come to pass or be done, contrary to the common order of things
above hope or expectation. Miracles very much renoumed.
Wherefore seeing mircales ar done above the natural course of things, they
bring with them admiration. And undoubtedly there are very many miracles,
which by writers are made famous, as the temple of Diana in Ephesus. the Tomb
of Artemisia Queen of Caria, the horrible great image of ye Su^ne at Rhodes,
the walls of Babylon, and very many other of ye sort. Wherefore Augustine
against the Epistle of the Maniches, the.xvi. Augustine. A general description
of miracles.
chap. prudently writes, I call a miracle whatsoever appears hard or
unaccustomed, above the hope or faculty of the wonderer. By which words, a
certain large description of miracles may be had. Transubstantiation is ill
feigned to be a miracle.
And forasmuch as it said, that a miracle appears, they are worthily reproved
which do feign Transubstantiation, and will have it to be a miracle, which can
neither be confirmed by the holy scriptures, and seeing that it appears not,
neither can it be seen, it cannot be called a miracle.

After this very common and large description, there is to be added, that of
miracles certain are true, False miracles
and certain are false. For those are called false miracles, which either are
not that which they seem to be, or else if they be, they are not done by any
power, which passes nature, but by the powers of nature, although it be
secret. For Angels either good or bad may do them, and that three manner of
ways. For sometime they apply unto matter the strengthes of nature, which
they perfectly know, of which conjunction of ye matter with efficient causes,
do follow effects, and ar in deed in a manner upon the sudden, at the which
the beholders cannot but maruayle. The devils know that of things putrified
are engendered Frogs, woormes, or some certain Serpents, so that heat in
certain degrees be added. Wherefore seeing to them it is not hard to couple
these things together, they do it sometimes to deceive men with all. And by this
means Augustine thinks (as he writes in his.3. Augustine.
book de Trinitate) that the sorcerers of Pharao did sometimes the same
things which Moses did. Farther, the mouings of the spirits, of the blood and
humors, do very much trouble the bodies of men: whereby figures, images, and
shapes of things, which in them are kept, are in the same mocion brought
before the phantasy or imagination, and by that manner and order, that the
troubler of the spirit knitteth them. Whereof do spring sundry and manifold
sightes, which we see do sometimes happen in such as are in phrensy. And the
thing may come so far, that the forms and images which are inwardly kept,
may be called back even unto the outward senses. Whereby, he which suffers
such things, weeneth that he verilye sees and feels those things which
are in his imagination or phansye, and in his sense, when as in very deed there
is no such thing outwardlye done. And this kind of miracles ought rather to
be referred to illusions, then to miracles.

It also comes to pass, that sometimes these spirits by their own power,
either of the air, or else other elements do form certain bodies, yt they
appear utterly like men's bodies, and under them they appear to who^ soever
they lust. So came they sometimes to Abraham, Lot, and other fathers. These
things (if we speak properly and simply) are not true miracles, but in our
reason and judgment there is nothing lets, but that they may so be called.
Yea and commonly Iuglers are said to do miracles, when as for all that they
deceive by the nymblenes of the hands, or by the powers of certain things
natural, do represent things wonderful to the beholders.

What true miracles are.
But this is the definition of true miracles. A miracle is a work hard and
unaccustomed, by the power of God, which passes al faculty of nature created,
to this end wrought, to cause the beholders to wonder, and to confirm faith
toward the word of God. Causes of miracles.
Wherefore the matter of miracles are works: and the form is, that they be
hard and unaccustomed. The efficient cause, is the power of God, which
overcomes nature created. And the end of them is both admiration and also
confirmation of faith.

And that we should not doubt of the efficient cause, this I think good to be
added: That that power of God which utterly is above the faculties of nature,
is to be understand, sometimes to work by it self, and other sometimes
either by Angels or by men, and that in such manner as we shall afterward
declare. Augustine.
Farther, I will add, that Augustine writes in the place before alleged
against the Epistle of the Maniches, the.xxvi. chap. Miracles would not move
except they were wonderful, and they would not be wonderful, if they should
be accustomed things. As therefore they say that by admiration sprang
Philosophy, which Plato thought to be the Raynebowe, and for that cause calls
the daughter of Thaumans, so may we believe that faith, Faith comes not of
miracles but is by them confirmed.
which comes of the word of God, although it do not utterly spring of
miracles, yet by them it may be confirmed. And therefore Augustine in his.xii.
book of Confessions the.xxi. chap. says: Ignorance is the mother of wondering
at signs: this is an entrance unto faith to the sons of Adam, which have
forgotten thee. By this sentence he teaches that men which have forget God,
have by the admiration of miracles an entrance or coming unto faith. And
without doubt it is so. The will of God is hidden from us: but he, as he is
good, opens the same to holy Prophets and Apostles: which that they may
profitably declare unto men, he gives unto them the gift of his holy word.
But because he knows that mortal men are contrary and against his word, he
has granted the power of working of miracles, that those things might the
easilier be believed, which he would have his messenger profitably to speak.
That confirmation of faith comes by miracles, Mark testifies, who toward
the end of his Gospel says: And they went forth, preaching every where, the
Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs which followed. And
how apt this kind of confirmation is, hereby it is manifest. The promises of
God do of no other thing depend, then of his will and power. And the signs
which we now entreat of, do testify the power of God, forasmuch as they by all
means overcome nature, and set forth the truth of his will: for by the
invocation of his name, and by his grace and spirit they are wrought. Augustine.
Wherefore Augustine in the place now alleged against the Epistle of Manicheus
writes, that miracles do bring authority unto the word of God. For he, when
he did these miracles, seemed to have given an earnest penny of his promises.
Neither ar these words to be passed over, which the same Augustine has upon
John, in the.24. Miracles consist not in the greatness of works.
treatise. That miracles consist not in the greatness of works: for otherwise
it is a greater work to govern this universal composition of the world, then
unto a blind man to restore light, which he is destitute of.

These things declared, there remains that by apt distinctions we destribute
miracles into his parts. Some of them are to be wondered at, An other
distinction of miracles.
by reason of the thing it self which is done, for that it is so unaccustomed
and great, that in the nature of things, we cannot find the like of it. Such
was the staying of the Sun in the time of Joshua, and the turning of that
shadow in the time of Ezechias, the conception and birth of the Virgin, the
food of Manna in the deserte, and such like. But there are some which are
miracles, not for the nature and greatness of the thing, but because of the
manner and way which was used in bringing them to pass, as was the cloud and
rain of Helias, the budding of flowers and fruits in the rod of Aaron, the
thunders of Samuel, the turnynge of water into wine, and such like: For such
things are done by nature, but they were then miracles, because of the manner
whereby they were wrought, that is, not by natural causes, but at the
commandment and will of Saints.

There is an other division of miracles, An other division of miracles
because some of them do only move admiration, as lyghtenynges and
thundrynges in mount Sina, the turning of the shadow of the Sun in the time
of Ezechias, the transfiguration of the Lord in the Mount. There are other,
which besides the admiration, do bring a present commoditye unto men, as when
by the rod, drink was given out of the Rock, Manna from heaven, and when
by the Lord and the Apostles sick folks were healed. And sometimes they bring
punishment and hurt unto the guiltye. For by the words of Peter perished
Ananias and Saphira. Elimas the Sorcerer was made blind by Paul: and some
were by him delivered unto Satan to be vexed.

By this also are miracles divided, An other partitio^ of miracles.
because some of them are obtained by prayers. For so did Elias and Elizeus,
namelye by praying, restore their dead to life. Moses also praying for Pharao,
drove away Frogs and other plages. And other some are wrought by commandment
and authority. Joshua commanded the Sun to stay his course. The Lord Jesus
commanded the winds, and Peter said unto the lame man: In the name of Jesus
Christ rise and walk. There ar also other which are done neither by prayers,
nor by commandment, but of their own will and accord, the saints them selves
doing some other thing. Even as when the shadow of Peter as he walked, healed
those that were sick, and the napkin of Paul healed also folks diseased.

Augustine. An other division of miracles.
Lastly, Augustine (as it is written in his.83. book of questions, question
79.) deuideth miracles, that some are done by publik justice, that is, by the
stable and firm will of God, which in the world is counted as a public law.
By it, God would that his ministers, that is, Apostles and Prophets, should
in preaching work miracles. And there are other some which by the signs of
this justice are wrought, as when the ungodly in the name of God or of Jesus
Christ do work any miracle, which is not given but by the honor and reverence
which they use toward the name of God: not that God, or nature, or any
things created desire to gratefy them. As, when a man steals away a public
seal or handwriting, he may wrest many things, either from the men of the
country, or from the Citizens which are not given unto him, but unto the seal
which they know does belong to the Magistrate and Prince: So he, which followed
not Christ, did yet in his name cast out devils. Thirdly, are those miracles
reckoned, which by some certain private bargain are wrought, whereby the
Sorcerers do bind them selves unto the Devil, and the devil likewise to them.
But those at done neither by public justice, nor yet by the signs thereof, but
come only of a certain private conuention. Howbeit we must know, that
miracles of the second and third sort are not firm, neither do they assuredly
happen. For as much as we read in the.xix. chap. of the Acts of the Apostles,
that the sons of Sceua would have driven out Devils in the name of Jesus,
whom Paul preached, to whom the Devil said: Jesus in deed and Paul I know, but
not you. Which when he had spoken, Ciprian.
he invaded them. And the same thing does the act of Ciprian testify of the
third kind, before he was converted unto Christ. For by magical arts he
assayed to persuade a godly virgin to his filthy pleasure: which thing at the
last the Devil confessed that he could not perform unto him.

Howbeit we must mark, that these miracles which are by a private contract
done, They be not miracles in deed which the Devil woorketh.
are not in very deed miracles, but pertain only to those which we made
mention of before the definition: for although sometimes they be that in very
deed which they seem for, yet are they not true miracles. For who doubts, but
that it was true fire, wherewith the Cattle of Job were burnt? and a true blast
of wind, wherewith his house being thrown down, his children were slain? Yea
and Augustine conte^deth that the Serpents which the Sorcerers brought forth
were not illusions, Augustine.
but true Serpents in deed. For the history says, that when they came unto
the third sign, the Sorcerers said: This is the finger of God, and they
testified that now their cunning failed them, and that they could no more do
those things which Moses by the power of God did. And that is a token that they
wrought not before by illusions, and that the Sorcerers even till that time
contended with Moses in things in deed, and not in illusions. But some will say:
Which signs say: of Antichrist ar called lies.
If the matter be thus, that the things which are done by the devil and
Sorcecers, be in very deed that which they seem for: why is it unto the
Thessalonians of Antechrist written, that by him very many should be deceived
by false signs and wonders? We must say, yt the lie ought not to be referred
to yt which is to be done, but unto the miracle. For although the things
which are done, shall sometimes be the same things in deed which they seem to
be, yet shall they not be miracles, although they seem so. But Augustine
answers. Signs and wonders ar called lies, either because they appear, and
are not in deed, or else because they lead men to lies. For Antechrist by those
signs shall seek nothing else, but to deceive and allure men to believe false
things. That is no new or unaccustomed thing, that ye cause should by his
effect obtain his name or propriety. But in that they appear and are not, it
may be two manner ways understand: either because among true things some
illusions are mingled: or else because they are set forth for miracles, when as
they are no miracles in deed.

There is an other doubt to be dissolved, how that power of God, which passes
nature, uses either Angels or me^, as well good as evil, to work miracles. He
uses them as certain instruments, and sometimes he does miracles at their
desire, prayers, and commandment, without any of their outward work. And
sometimes he will have them, to add some work or maistrye of theirs. For
Moses smote the sea, and the rock with his rod. Christ touched the leprous, and
anointed the eyes of the blind. But we must understand that there is two
kinds of instruments. Some are so ordained, that although they are not the
principal causes efficient, yet do they very much profit, for the bringing
forth of the effect, as is pron to cut hard things, and medicines to heal,
when as for all that they are instruments of the woorkemen. What strength
instruments of God have in doing his miracles.
But God in woorking miracles uses an other kind of instrument, namely, which
of their own nature have no strength to bring forth the effect. For what good
could the rod do to open the sea? What could the shadow of Peter help to heal
the sick? Undoubtedly nothing, if thou look upon nature it self. The
instruments therefore which god uses in these miracles, do of their own
nature either nothing help unto them, or rather sometimes let them, as the
beholding of the brazen Serpent, the salt of Helizeus, the water of Elias,
which he poured on the burnt offering, and the clay which Christ put to the
eyes of the blind. Wherefore, when miracles are done by instruments of this
kind which nothing help, yea rather do let the might and power of God, is
much more apparently illustrated.

Christ also to teach that natural strength seems nothing hereunto, at the
marriage said unto his mother: What have I to do with thee O woman? Not that he
would in that thing derogate the authority of his mother, but that it might
manifestly appear, that the nature which he took of her, was by his own
power, nothing able to work miracles. Wherefore, God uses both good and
evil, as well me^ as angels, to work miracles.
forasmuch as God for the working of miracles uses men and Angels, and those
as well good as evil, and sometimes those miracles are benefits, and sometimes
punishments, wherewith men are either punished or helped, we must not doubt
whether God do sometimes punish by good Angels. For it is very manifest that
Sodom was overthrown by Angels, the host of Senacherib slain by an Angel,
and David saw the Angel which was the minister of the pestilence of the
Israelites.

But Augustine upon the.78. Whither God does by angels directlye help.
Psalm doubts whither God by evil Angels has wrought miracles, whereby
men were immediately endued with some benefit. And he faith, that he has not
red it in the holy scriptures: neither undoubtedly have I red it. Unless we
will say, that at the length it profited Paul, that he was vexed by the angel
of Satan. And that for that cause some were by him delivered unto Satan, that
their spirit in the day of the Lord might be saved. But the question of
Augustine tends not to this, but whither perfect and manifest benefits, as
restoringes to health, prophecies, gifts of tongues, food, deliuerye, and
such like, are of God sometimes by the Devil given unto holy men by some
certain miracle: I think herein as Augustine thincketh, that the same is no
where testified in the holy scriptures. But that by evil Angels, as well the
godly as the ungodly are tempted, punished and vexed, it is evident. But after
a diverse sort, Augustine.
because (as Augustine in the same place affirms) there are after a sort two
flocks of men, namely one of the wicked, and an other of the good. The good
are the flock of God: even as the wicked are the flock of the Devil:
wherefore toward them he woorketh more freely as toward his own, he vexes,
mocketh, and handles them ill, as by his own right. And yet toward them can
he not do any thing beyond the measure prescribed of God. But against the
flock of God he dares do thing, but so much as God himself will sometime
permit him, as we read was done of Job. God sometime suffers the saints to
be grievously afflicted of Satan, to the end his grace toward them may most
manifestly be declared.

Whither the plagues of the Egiptians were done by good Angels or by evil.
But when Augustine expounds these words of the Psalm: namelye, the sending
out of evil Angels, he doubts whither the plagues of the Egiptians were done
by a good Angel or by the Devil. And at the length he shows, that the plague
and destruction of the first begotten may be ascribed unto the ministry of
the Devil: but the other plagues are to be attributed unto good angels, that
the sentence both of the book of Exodus and of the Psalm may stand fast.
Howbeit, as touching that plage of the first begotten, in Exodus it is written
under the name of God: I will this night pass through Egypt, and will smite. etc
By these words that destruction seems to be ascribed, either unto god, or to
a good Angel, and not unto the Devil. But that moves me not much, because
although it were done by the ministry of the Devil, yet may it be ascribed
unto the Lord. For Job, when by the work of the Devil he was bereft both of
goods and children, said nevertheless: The Lord has given, and the Lord
has taken away, and that (said he) was done by the Lord, which was done by
the Devil. But some object: If we assign these things unto the Devil, then
shall he seem to have fought against himself. For the Sorcerers, by the help of
devils, withstoode Moses, when they did the same things that he did. And if
plagues were by evil Angels sent against the Egiptians, and the Sorcerers went
about to withstand them, then Satan seemed to resist Satan. Neither could the
Sorcerers have truly said that they failed, and testified that it was the
finger of God which wrought. But these reasons in my judgment are not strong,
because the things done by the Sorcerers, were done by the power of Satan,
which is unto him natural. For by it he is able to apply the seeds of
things and woorking causes to his matter prepared, and to work wonders as
touching the sight of man. But those things, wherewith God afflicted the
Egiptians, were by his most mighty power wrought by the instrument of the
Devil. Wherefore it is no maruail if the Sorcerers failed, and felt the most
excellent power of the finger of God.

The place of Exodus and of the Psalm is conciliated.
Howbeit the book of wisdom the.xviii. chap. seems utterly to ascribe these
plagues unto God, where he says: while al things were still, and when the night
was in the midst of her course, thy almighty word. etc. And in the.xvii.
chap. it is written, that the Egiptians being among those plagues, especially
when they were oppressed with darkness, were with horrible vexations of mind,
and sights very terrible so vexed, as though most doleful spirits had
perpetuallye been before their eyes, and about their phantasy: which
undoubtedly might be done by the sending of evil Angels, as the Psalm does
mention. Their heart also was hardened, and their minds were daily made much
more obstinate against the Israelites. And that seems to have pertained to
the sending down of evil angels. Wherefore these two places may easily be made
to agree, in ascribing the plagues which are mentioned in Exodus to good Angels,
and the terrible sights and hardening of the hearts to the sending of evil
Angels upon them, of which the Psalm now alleged makes mention.

The power to work miracles makes not me^ better or woorser.
But forasmuch as God (as it is declared) for the woorking of miracles, uses
both evil and good, angels and men, the godly men ought not therefore to be
grieved, because oftentimes he gives not unto them this faculty. For they are
not for ye cause of any worse condition, then are they to whom God grants to
work miracles. For the Lord said unto his Disciples, when they returned from
their embassadge: Rejoice not in this, because spirits are subject unto you:
rejoice ye rather for this, because your names are written in heaven. There are
some which are so desirous of such things, that to obtain signs, they are
not afraid to use even the help of ye devil: and under this pretense they
excuse themselves, To work signs we must not use the help of the devil.
because god himself to work signs uses Satan, in following of whom they
do well, so far ar they of that they can be condemned guilty of any crime.
They say also that Paul delivered some to the devil to be vexed: and therefore
they also may use his ministerye. But what manner of men are they, which will
affirm that it is lawful for them to do as much as is lawful unto god? God
is the author of all creatures, wherefore it is no marvel if he use them all.
But unto us it is by the law of god prescribed that we should not do it. It is
not lawful to imitate God in all things.
And the immitation of god is so farforth commended unto us, as by his law it
is commanded us and no otherwise. For he reuengeth his own injuries. And who
will say, that private men may do the same? God adjoined unto his own burnt
offering the bullock appointed for Baal (as we have have now hard) with the
wood also dedicated unto the same idol: Shall every one of us therefore eat
things dedicated unto idols? The rule of our actions, is the word of God.
Wherefore we ought not to be drawn to imitate him, but so much as the law
suffers. That law has he made, not for himself, but for men, that they
should frame their life after it. Wherefore it was to him lawful to require of
Abraham the immolation of his son, which thing none of us can require of our
friend. Paul and other Apostles had evil sprites subject unto them, and by
them it was sometimes lawful unto them, to punish the guilty for their
salvation: Wherefore those to whom such a gift is not granted ought to
abstain from excercising the same.

Wherefore the use of the power of evil spirits is of two sorts, whereof one
is with authority, and that belongs chiefelye unto god, also to the Apostles,
and to the saints of the primitive church. The other by compact and obedience
which is utterly forbidden me^. For what participatio^ ca^ there be of the light
with darkness, and of god with Belial? And for that cause the sorcerers which
believe the^, can not be excused, yet they are by the law condemned guilty of
superstition and idolatry. And it is not to be thought, but that god upon very
just causes, and to us most profitable has forbidden these things to be done.
Why God forbad men to use the help of the devil to work miracles.
For he provides that we should not be deceived, and that by those means we
should not be thrown hedlonge into destruction. For thereto at the length
comes the fellowshippes with Satan. For the devil is a lier, and the father
of lies, and he is also a murderer, even from the beginning, as Christ has
taught. Wherefore let this be a firm sentence, which the scholemen also in the
2. book of Sentences. Disti. 8: and among them Thomas especially, so that not
only the old fathers have ratified, that if there be any thing to be desired,
which is above the faculty of man, the same ought to be desired only of God,
which thing they which do not, they fall into Apostasy from faith, The
inconstancy of certain fathers and especially of scholemen.
worshipping creatures insteede of god. I would to god both the old fathers
and the schole men, would have abidden constant in it, who afterward
(forgettinge themselves I cannot tell how) consented to the inuocations of
saints, being now dead, and have instituted exorcistes or cuniurers to the
bodies and relics of saints, which being adorned with no peculier gift of
miracles, do with most severe threatninges, and very imperiously adjure devils:
desiringe of the saints, which are now dead, to drive out evil sprites out of
those that be possessed.

But those spirytes if sometimes they gooe out, as they are bidden they do
not that against etheyr will, but they dyssemble obedience, therewith to
establyshe idolatrye. And it is no less pleasant to them to possess souls,
then to vere bodies. Augustine in his x. book de ciuitate dei, the.xi.
Augustine.
chapt. tells that Porphyrius wrote unto Anebuntes, that certain sorcerers
were so accustomed with threatninges to fear devils, that they said: That if
they would not do those things which they were commanded to do, they would
break down heaven and earth, and so press and punish them. Who sees not here
the subtelties of the devil, which faineth that he fears such folish and
ridiculous cuniuratio^s, as they call them. But of this we have spoken very
largely

I think it good now to return to examine the last part of our difinicion,
wherein it was said, that miracles are therefore done to establish faith. And
that seems to be very much against this particle, that we ought not lightly
to give credit unto miracles, forasmuch as they may show occasion of erring.
And there hence is derived no sure kind of argument, but an argument very
dangerous. And that is proved by many places. First the Lord says in
the.24. chapter of Math. that the false prophets in the latter time shall by
signs so deceive men, that if it were possible even the very elect should be
deceived, which self same sentence Paul to ye Thessal. more amply prosecuted.
By the book of Exodus also we learn that we may not believe signs. For the
sorcerers of Pharao did for a little space work the same signs which Moses
did. In Deutr. also it is commanded that we must not believe a prophet,
although he work signs, if he move us to idolatry. Wherefore seeing miracles
may be wrought, as well for the defending of false doctrine, Augustine.
as for true, they ought not to be counted mete to confirm faith. Yea and
Augustine in his 10. book de ciuitate dei the.16. chapt. writes: If angels
require sacrifices to be offered unto them, and work signs: and contrariwise,
if other shall testify that we must sacrifice only unto God, and yet working
no miracles: we must believe them and not the other. The same Augustine contra
Faustum de Manichaeis says: Miracles are not sufficient to co^firm faith.
Signs ye work none, whereby we should believe you, yea and although ye should
work them, yet should we not believe you. Wherefore we must know that
miracles in very deed are not sufficient to confyrme faith: for it is before
all things needful to judge of that doctrine, which is brought: and that by
the testimony of the holy scriptures, wherewith if it do agree, we must believe
it even without signs. But if miracles be added, the beleuers are still the
more established: and they which yet have not believed, are made at the least
more attentife, and the way to believe is opened unto them

Miracles and sacraments ar after a sort like
Miracles also ar after a sort like unto sacraments: for both of them ar added
as certain seals unto promises. And even as miracles profit not, unless
first there be a respect had unto the doctrine: so also the Sacraments bring
no commodity but much hurt, unless they be received with a pure faith. Both of
them serve to confyrme faith, but neither of them are sufficient by
themselves. For they are blessed, and to be praised in deed, which believe
without the help of miracles. Our Lord says: Blessed ar they which have not
seen, and have believed. And yet for all that the confyrmation of signs is not
to be contemned. Why the lord sometimes forbad that his miracles should be
published.
Paraduenture thou will say: Seeing they are so profitable to confyrme faith,
why did the Lord in Math. the.9. and.11. and in many other places forbid
that they should be published? There were many causes thereof, he would
first have his doctrine preached, and afterward miracles should follow. But
if he had permitted certain whom he healed, strayghtwaye to have published
abroad that which he had done, then should not doctrine have been joined with
that spreading abroad of the miracle, forasmuch as they were not yet
instructed in godlynes. He did it also, least he should seem to be infected
with-vayne desire of worldly glory. Therefore he would by his own example
withdraw us from the same. Farther none knew better then himself, what they were
whom he healed. And he would not suffer every one to publishe and preach
his miracles. Wherefore he prohibited diverse, that they should not do it.
Moreover he saw that by the vain and naked preachinge of miracles, it would
come to pass, that the light and fickle vulgar people should not be led unto
the sincere faith, but rather to appoynte unto him worldly honors, which he
coueted not. And this to be true the.6. chap. of John declares, where it is
written, that the people because they received bread of him, would have made
him a king. Lastly, he would not stir up against himself the envy and
woodnes of the high Priests, Scribes, and Pharesies more then opportunity of
time would suffer. Wherefore in Luke the.9. chap. when in his transfiguracion
he had showed unto his Apostles a show of his glory, he commanded the^, that
they should not at that time publishe abroad that which they had seen. The
same thing also he commanded, when demanding what men said of himself, he
had wroong from Peter the true confession, wherein he affirmed that he was the
son of God, he commanded I say that they should not tell unto other that
Jesus was the Messiah. For they were not then so confirmed, that if they had
spread such things abroad, they could in disputing have confirmed the same by
apt testimonies. Wherefore he thought meet that they should tarry till they
were more fully instructed. He would not have the truth utterly to be unspoken
of, but yet to the openinge of the same, he chose a time convenient. Wherefore
it is not thereby rightly gathered that miracles are of no force to confirm
faith, because Christ sometimes forbad that they should be published, forasmuch
as that commandment of the Lord belonged only for the taking of better
occasions, and not perpetually to keep silence. Lastly there is an other
thing, Whi^^^ (...) goes b^^^^ rac^s or (...) me^h after.
which seems to be against that article of the definicion: For it seems
that faith cannot be confyrmed by miracles, when as they require it, and will
have it to go before them. For in Math. the 13. chapter it is written, that
Christ, because of the incredulitye of his own citizens, wroughte in a manner
no miracles. And Mark adds, that he could not. Wherefore it should seem that
it is rather to be said, that miracles ar constituted and stablished by faith,
when as if it be not present (as the Evangelists say) miracles can not be
done. I answer, that they which by prayers will obtayn miracles, must after
an accustomed and just manner be endewed with faith: for vain are those prayers
counted which lean not unto faith. But if a miracle be given, there is nothing
lets, but that faith which is begone, may by it be stirred up and
confyrmed. Farther this is for assured, that god is not let, but that he can
also give miracles unto the unbelievers, God sometime gives miracles unto the
unbelievers.
yea he has oftentimes given miracles unto them. Undoubtedly Pharao and the
Egiptians were infidels. And who knows not but that there were unto them very
many miracles wrought by Moses? Christ likewise did then show the miracle of
his resurrection, when all men in a manner dispayred of his doctrine and truth.
Wherefore nothing lets but that faith may by miracles be confirmed. And for
that cause as we have said, they which contend by prayers to obtain signs, do
labor in vayn, except they believe. Because prayers without faith are of no
value with God, which Christ has manifestly taught in Math. the.17. For when
his disciples could not heal the lunatike child, when the cause thereof was
demanded, he said, that it came of their incredulity: whose answer openly
declares, Against the coniurations which are made all the sepulchers or graves
of the dead.
what we must judge of those cuniurers, which at the sepulchers of saints and
at relics, go about to expel deuels. All things are there faynedly done.
Dead men are without faith called upon, and the devil plays to gether with
idolatrers, and faineth that he believes, to the end that pernicious
worshippynges may be retained: which is hereby manifest, because those
Exorcistes are both men most vnpure, and also they do all things there without
faith.

Origene upon the.17. Origene
chapt. of Matthew has very well written against this abuse. If at any time
(says he) we must be by these helped, we must not speak with the spirit,
either in adiuring him, or commanding him, as though he heard us, but only
let us persevere in geuinge our selves to prayers and fastinges. These words
spoke he, even then when the invocation of the dead, and worshipping of
relics were not used in the church. What would he at this day say if he
should se the madness of our times? But to return unto ye head of the doubt, I
judge that faith goes before miracles, as touching those which by prayers
obtain them, but not as concerning those which stand by, and have not yet
believed the preaching which they have heard.

With what faith evil men are endewed, by whom god works miracles.
But let us see by what means miracles may sometimes be done by wicked men. For
some shall say in the latter time: Lord, have not we cast out devils in thy
name, have not we prophesied etc? Unto whom shall be answered: Verelye I say
unto you, I know you not. They undoubtedly in working miracles, as it seems
credible, added prayers, when as for all that they wanted faith, neither were
they justified, neither pertayned they to the kingdom of God. Wherefore that
seems not to be firm, that prayers poured out without faith are not herd.
But we must note ye ill men which by prayers obtained miracles, were not utterly
without faith. Three kinds of faith.
For there are three kinds of faith found. For there is a faith which consists
of humayne opinion and persuasion, whereby those things which are written in the
holy scriptures ar believed to be no less true then the histories of Liui,
Suetonius, and those things which are now written of the new Islands. This kind
of faith, as touching many things, is common to the Turks and the Jews. There
is an other faith, whereby we being stirred up by the heavenly inspiration, do
lively and with efficacy cleave to the promise of the mercy of God. By this
faith certaynelye is attained justification. Lastly the third faith is called
the faith of miracles, whereby we are neither changed, nor made the better,
even by a hear: forasmuch as it is the mouinge of the spirit of God,
wherewith men are stirred up to desire miracles, Miracles are not always
wrought at the prayers of wicked men.
utterly believing that it is the will of God, that they should be done, and that
which is required, should have success. Wherefore whilst they lean unto this
faith, sometimes they obtain, that which they desire: which I therefore
speak because not always they do so, neither are they always illustrate
with that inspiration.

Chrysostom.
If so be that thou will demand, how this kind of faith can be proved, let
Chrysostom answer, which upon the.17. chapter of Matthew makes mention of
it. There Christ said: If you have faith as much as is a grain of mustard sede,
you shall say unto this mountain: throw thy self into the sea, and it shall do
it. In expounding these words, this father says: because at this day these
things are not done in the church, shall we therefore say that Christians are
destitute of faith? God forbid, that we should judge so evil of the people of
God. The faith which justifies, is present, but that which is called the faith
of miracles, has now ceased. This kind of faith also is showed by the words of
ye apostle in the.i. epistle to the Corrinthians, where he says: Although I
have all faith, so that I can remove mountains, and have not charity, I am
nothing. Neither let that trouble us, in that he says Al. For that
distribution is to be drawn unto the faith of miracles. But that is more
manifestly perceived by the same epistle, where the Apostle makes mencio^ of
fre gracious gifts, saying: to some is given the word of wisdom, to other the
word of knowledge, to some the power to heal, and to other some faith in the
same spirit etc. That faith can not in this place be understand, whereby we are
justified. For it is not rekened among gifts, which are privately distributed
to some, but is common to all true Christians. Now as I think it appears, by
what means they which are not justified by their prayers, do sometimes
obtain miracles, namely because they are not destitute of every kind of faith.
But now we have sufficiently spoken of this first question.

Whither it be lawful for godly men to desire miracles.
Now must we see, whither it be lawful for godly men to desire miracles.
These reasons they use to alledg which seem to be against it. First because god
in that thing should be tempted: and that does the law of god utterly forbid.
Yea and our savior with this answer reproved the devil: Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God. And the Hebrews ar reprehended for this by name,
because they tempted god in the wilderness. The son of god also, when the
Pharesies said, master, we will see a sign of thee, said: This froward and
adultrous nation seeks a sign and a sign shall not be given them etc. And
Achab otherwise a wicked king, pretended a show of righteousness, saying that he
would not te^pt God, and therefore he detracted to desire a sign.

Unto the question I answer: That after a sort it is lawful to desire signs,
and the same also after a sort is unlawful. The first part of the sentence
is thus proved: When holy men desire, as touching any unaccustomed vocation to
be made more assured of ye will of God, and are afraid, least peradventure they
should be deceived (for as concerning it they have nothing for certain in the
holy scriptures and we must not lightly believe men and angels in those things:
for evil angels use sometimes to be tra^sformed into angels of light) when I
say they are troubled with such doubt, and the will is ready, yea desirous to
obey the commandment of the Lord, if than they desire to be confirmed by some
sign, these godly men ca^ not be accused of tempting of god, or of rashness.
For who soever in those cases desires those things, which god uses to
offer, he departs not from the right way. No man is ignorant, but that to
Achab was offered a sign, that he might be confirmed of the promises offered him
by Esaias. Wherefore to desire those things which god sometimes gives and freely
offreth, ought not to be prohibited as unlawful. The thing wants no
examples. Moses when he had need of the help of god, oftentimes in the desert
obtained miracles for the people of god. And to confirm the doctrine of truth,
both Helias and Helizeus, desired of god that life might be restored unto the
children of their hosts. And to the same end Christ said: But that ye should
know that the son of man has power to forgive sins, he turned to the man
sick of the palsy and said: For what causes godly men may desire miracles.
Take up thy bed, rise and walk. Wherefore miracles are desired of holy men,
and that justly, either that they may be made the more assured of their
vocation, or to help a great and urgent necessity, or else to bear witness
unto sound doctrine. And always, when they desire miracles to these ends,
Cautions in desiring of miracles.
let them desire the same not of any creatures, but of god only, and in asking
them let them use a mean: for they declare that they will or desire nothing,
but that which is agreeable unto the will of god.

Now on the contrary part let us consider after what manner miracles are
unworthily and unjustly desired. First there are some, When it is not lawful
to desire miracles.
which therefore desire miracles, because they are not well persuaded of the
power, goodness and providence of god, neither seek they any thing else, but
to have a trial of those things. Neither are they content with the doctrine of
the holy scriptures, which manifestly and amply teach all these things.
Wherefore justly are they to be reproved, for as much as they be ready rather to
believe miracles, than ye word of god. Wherefore Abraham answered unto that
rich man which was tormented in flames of fire, when he desired that Lazarus
might be sent unto his brethren, that they also should not be thrust down into
the same punishementes: They have Moses and the Prophets. By which words is
manifestly declared, that we must rather believe ye holy scriptures, tha^
miracles. There are other also, which for this cause desire miracles, that they
may live more pleasauntly as touching the flesh, and to satisfy their wicked
lusts. Of which fault the Hebrews are accused, because in the deserte, when
very great abundance of Manna was ministered unto them, they desired flesh,
that they might live the more pleasauntly in that wilderness. Lastly, some
desire miracles for this intent, to satisfy their vain curiosity. For (as
Plinius has said) ye nature of man is most gredy of new things. Plinius.
Wherefore they seem to desire miracles as plays and passetymes to sport the^
selves withal. In that manner looked Herod for miracles of Christ: for when he
was brought unto him, he desired to feed and delight his curiosity with
miracles. Now I suppose it is manifest, how it is forbidden to desire signs,
and how it is lawful sometimes to desire them.

Now must we dissolve these things, An answer to objections. What it is to
tempt god.
which seemed to be against those things that we have spoken. They which by the
way and manner already described do desire miracles, do not without doubt tempt
God: forasmuch as that is nothing else, than of an unbelieving mind, and of
rashness, to desire a trial of his will and power, which vice certainly is
in the holy Scriptures justly and worthily reproved. Wherefore, the Lord Jesus
Christ, did not without just cause reprove the devil, when he would have led
him to have thrown himself hedlong from ye temple, whereby he might be made
the more assured of the benevolence of God toward him, when that by art
there was a plain way to discende by. The same son of god also did not
unworthily reprehend the Jews as a froward and adulterous generation, unto
whom he therefore denied a sign, because they had already seen very many, yet
they spoke evil of them al, and mocked Christ, in such sort that they desired
not every kind of miracle, but one from heaven, as though they would not also
deride signs from heaven: undoubtedly their purpose tended to no other end,
but to alienate ye people from the Lord, although he had wrought wonderful
miracles. And as touching Achaz the wicked king, I shall not need to stand
long about him: for he feigned that when he was called of ye Prophet, he did
very faithfully believe, as though he neded no miracle, when as for all that he
was altogether unbelieving, which the 2. book of kings manifestly declares:
for he sent unto Tiglathphalasar the king of the Assirians, to deliver him from
the siege, so far was he of from putting confidence in the Lord. And when God
was not ignorant of his discease, he offered unto him the remedy of a miracle,
and gave him his choice, which for all that he of hypocrisy refused.
Obedience is the principal fruit of faith.
If Achaz had in very deed believe god, he would not have refused to obey, for
as much as obedience is reckened among the principal fruits of faith.

Let us (I pray you) with this wicked king confer his most holy son
Ezechias. For he did not so, but to the end he might be made the more assured
of recovering health, he very modestly required a sign: unto who^ when Esaias ye
Prophet granted his desire, willi^g him to choose whether he would have ye
shadow of ye sun to be removed forward, or turned backward, he took his
choice, neither did he frowardly like his father wtsta^d ye miracle offered him
by god. But wicked Achaz added hypocrisy unto infidelity. For he considering
that miracles are for two causes refused, either for that a man believes fully
in god, neither has need of the aid of miracles, or else for that he utterly
contemns god, and passes no thing at al of his aid, he would hide ye latter
disease whereof he was sick, namely ye co^te^pt of god: and he disse^bled
virtue, whereof he was clean void, namely a singular faith, as though he durst
not tempt God. But for as much as God most perfectly knows the heart and the
raynes, he reproved him by the Prophet according to his deserte. What other
thing is it to refuse a miracle offered of God, tha^ to repel the succor of the
spiritual infirmity? As he that is hunger storuen is to be accused if the
refuse bread: so was he to be reproved, which rejected a medicine offered him by
god, when as he knows, what every one of us needs, far better than we our
selves can see. This is now sufficient as touching these things, which at the
beginning of the question seemed altogether to forbid the askyng of miracles.

I know in deed there are some which think that miracles are utterly not to
be desired: Augustine.
but only not to be refused when God offreth them. And they think that
Augustine makes with them, whom (in his 4. book de Consensu Evangelist. and
in his questions super Genesin. Question 63) seems to affirm this thing. But
if thou will object, that very many godly and holy men did it, and especially
our Gideon: they answer, that they were moved by the spirit of God to desire
miracles: and therefore it was all one, as if God had freely offered signs unto
the^, and they of obedience should have received the miracles which were
offered. But these things ought nothing to trouble us, because Augustine in the
places alleged, does not absolutely and simply prohibet to desire miracles,
except they be desired to tempte god withal, or upon some noughty occasion.
Yea in the 63. question upon Genesis he says: When this is not rightly done,
it pertayneth to the tempting of god. Let us hear him rather in his 10. book
of Co^fessions the 35. chap. where he says: In religion also is temptyng of
god, when signs and miracles are desired, to take a trial: Which thing I
also a little before have willed to be taken head of. And I will easily grant
that the Saints required not miracles by the instinct of the flesh, or
prouokyng of humane reason: other wise their prayers had been void and of none
effect, for that (as Paul testifies) it behooves, that ye spirit do with
unspeakable groaning pray for us. But I think I have now sufficiently spoken of
the questions proposed.

The vii. Chapter.
1 THen Ierubbal (who is Gideon) rose up early, and all the people that were
with him, and pitched beside the well of Harod, so that the host of the
Madianites was on ye north side of the^ in the valley by the hill of Moreh.

2 And the Lord said unto Gideo^: The people that are with thee, are to many
for me to give the Madianites into their hands, least Israel make their vaunt
against me, and say: mine own hand has saved me.

3 Now therefore proclayme in the ears of the people, and say: Who is timorous
and fearful? Let him return, and depart early from mount Gilead. And there
returned of the people 22000. and so 10000. remained.

4 And the Lord said unto Gideon: The people are yet too many: Bring them unto
the water, and I will try them for thee there. For of whom I say unto thee:
This man shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee: and of whomsoever I
say unto thee: This man shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.

5 So he brought the people to the water. And the Lord said unto Gideo^, As
many as lap the water with their tongue, as a dog lappeth them put by
themselves: and every one that shall bow down his knees to drink, put a part.

6 And the number of them that lapped by putting their hands to their mouth
were 300. me^: but all the rest of ye people kneled down upon their knees to
drink water.

7 And the Lord said unto Gideon, By these 300. men that lapped, will I save
you, and deliver the Madianites into thine hand: and let all the other people
go every man to his place.

8 So the people took vitayles in their hands, and their trompettes, and he
sent all the rest of the Israelites every man unto his tente, and retained the
300. men. And the host of Madian was beneath him in the valley.


As much as we can gather by the history, the host of Gideon consisted of
32000. soldiers: which number although it may seem great, yet in comparison
of the enemies it was but small. For they had 13500. men in camp, but of the
32000. soldiers of Gideons, god chose only 300, by whom he would give the
victory unto the Israelites. This is a very small number, that of every thousand
he took only.x. But so god wrought. For there are few good, said he. If in
Sodom there had been only x. men just, the whole City had been saved. The
number of good men, though it be small, yet it is of such force, that God for
their sakes spares the rest. Wherefore most true are the oracles, wherein it is
said: Many are called, but few are chosen, and the remnauntes only shall be
saved. But although God allowed not so great a number, yet the act of Gideon
is not to be condemned, which gathered it unto himself: for he used that
prudence, which was not contrary to the word of god: yea if he had not
collected an host, he might have seemed to tempt god, as he which had refused
helps prepared, and those just helps. Let us remember that in humane actions
there are two notable dangers: One is of rashenesse, Two very great dangers
in humane actions.
when we will not use means and helps set before us. With which evil the
Anabaptists are grievously infected: for they will use no weapons, and they
abhor from the offices of Magistrates. The other danger is, least we
attribute to much unto humane and natural aids, which they do that trust to
much in their works. Of these two dangers the one Gideon by himself auoydeth
in collecting a sufficient great army: for in his enterprise he would not
neglect an ordinary aid of soldiers. And God provides that he should not
fall into the other danger: for from the multitude of those soldiers he
withdrew the greatest part. Why God removed so many from the host of Gideon.
And why he did it, this reason he brings, because men do gladly usurp glory
unto themselves, neither will they grant any of it even unto God, as it is
mete they should. Therefore he says that his will is, that even as the victory
should be given by him, so also it should evidently appear, to be granted by
him.

Even then also when by many soldiers we overcome, god gives the victory.
Even then also when many soldiers get the upper hand, God gives the victory:
but that is not so manifest, as when with a little host we overcome our enemies.
God also fedeth us, even then when all things are abundant and good cheap:
but that is not so well perceived, as when a great multitude is refreshed with
four or five loaves. And undoubtedly it is the power of God, when the gospel
is defended and spread abroad by men very well learned and princes most stout.
But it is not then so evident as when it is sowed by idiotes and power men, and
that with great fruit, and incredible felicity. Wherefore Paul said: Brethren
see to your vocation: not many noble men, not many mighty men, not many wise
men are called, but god has chosen the foolish, weak, and conte^ned things of
the world, because he would not have the Cross of Christ and the power thereof
abrogated, but manifestly to appear, that even as Jeremy commanded, the
strong man should not glory in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches,
neither the wise man in his wisdom. God does very well agree with the Prophet,
where he says to Gideon, Least Israel boast against me. Who soever is proud
because of the prosperity which he has obtained, ye same man boasts against
god, and his doing is all one, as if he should choose unto himself an other
god. God commands a decree to be proclaimed, that they which were fearful,
should return home. No new thing is commanded, for as much as that precept is
found in Deuteronomy. the 20. That which is here commanded it is also commanded in
Deuteronomy.
chap: where precepts of warlyke affairs are very well set forth. First, the
Israelites are commanded, not to be afeard, when they see the weapons, horses,
chariotes and multitude of their enemies, because ye Lord stands on their
side. Then it is ordained, that the Priest should come forth amongst them,
with a sermon, confirming the hearts of the soldiers, that they are the people
of god, and therefore ought not they to fear their enemies. Farther it is
commanded, that they should be dismissed, which in that year had built an
house, which had planted a vineard, and which had married a wife. First, least
if they should fall in the battle, they should dye without tasting the fruit
of their own labors. Secondly (as I suppose) because such men have a great
affection unto those things which they have lately obtained, and therefore
they do little good in the camps, The cause of their fear which were dismissed.
when as their mind is at home. Lastly, that is also ordained which the Lord
now commands, that as many as are not of a valiant courage, but fearful,
should return home, least by their fear they should dau^t the courages of
others. For oftentimes it happens, that by the fear of a few, which begin
to give place unto their enemies, the rest of the camp, which otherwise are
strong and valiant, do turn themselves to flight. Great is ye number of those
which God refused, when as 22000. departed: But yet because God will have men
to acknowledge those things to be just which he does: therefore he makes it
evident, that al they which departed, were justly dismissed, namely because
they were fearful. R. Leui ben^ Gerischon.
And R. Leui Gerischon affirms that they were also evil men, for as much as
their fear proceeded not of a sound and perfect conscience. They feared
peradventure, that the vengance and wrath of God toward them was now at hand.

The profession also of Christian religion requires strength, In profession of
Christian religion we have need of great strength.
and that no common strength. And therefore the Lord said, that we must imitate
him, which would build a tower. For first he counts with himself the
charges, least afterward not being able to finishe the work which he began,
he be compelled to leave it unfinished. Also we must follow a king going on
warfarre, which diligently weygheth with himself, with how many thousand
soldiers he may mete his enemies. Neither is he mete for the kingdom of
heaven, which straight way pluketh his hand from the ploughe. And how great
a strength we have need in professing of Christ, the words of Paul do
manifestly declare, wherein he says: All they which will live godlyly in
Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. The same thing also testifies he,
saying: Our battle is not against flesh and blood, but against wicked
spirits which dwell in the air. Wherefore we are not called unto idleness,
but to a most sharp battle, and therefore we have need of stout and
valiant courages. What the bowyng of ye knees signifies.
Neither is it sufficient for good soldiers to cast away fear out of their
minds, unless also they be prompt and industrious. Wherefore the second time
they are brought unto the water, where yet the sluggishe are separated, which
will not drink, but bowing themselves on their knees. Those are they which
pamper themselves, they can abide no sorrow, and they are quickly overcome.
There were only 300. which drank with reaching their hand unto their mouth,
and they alone were joined unto Gideon. Here may we se, how god with drew from
Gideon his captain humanes aids, not undoubtedly to betray him, but thereby to
give him a more noble victory. Wherefore when helps of nature are taken away,
then must strength of faith remain, wherewith we must no less follow our
vocation, then if they were present. Which thing very many do not, which
straight way as soon as they see themselves destitute of humane helps, they
bid al pure doctrine farewell: when as for all that they ought to remember,
that the power of God, whereby the blind are made to see, the dead made a
live, and the poor, blessed, nothing depends of worldly helps.

Concerning the words of the historye two things are to be noted. The first
is, that the fearful are commanded to return unto Gilead, which seems not
to be agreeable unto the place where they were. For they were not on this side
Iordane, where mount Gilead lay in the tribe of Manasses, in the famely I say
of Machir, but they were come into the land of Chanaan beyond Iordane.
Wherefore we must say, that either there were two mountes so called: or that
that which is written of mount Gilead, is to be referred unto the beginning
of those which departed away: as though it should have been said, that they
were sent away, which were borne in mount Gilead. These things do certain
interpretors write, which whether they be true or false, it is not certain.
For we are ignorant whether Gideon with his host passed over Iordane or no.
Farther we must note that this word Tserath signifies to purge: whereby the
Historye shows, that the host should be purged of the Soldiers that were
dismissed, because (as I above mentioned) there were none removed from that
multitude of Soldiers, but such as were unworthy. Wherefore they could not
justly complain of the justice of God. Josephus.
I very much marvel of Josephus, which affirms that God would have none
to go forth with Gideon, but such as were fearful, that thereby the victory
might be the more noble, and referred to be received only of God. And he
says, that they which bowed their knees and drank, were valiant men, and
trusted to much in their own strength. And for that they nothing passed upon
their enemies, they kneled down without any fear and drank: but they which
stood and reached their hands to their mouth and lapped water out of them,
those says he were of a cowardishe mind, as they which for fear of their
enemies durst not freely even drink. But this feigned thing very much disagreeth
with the history, because God commanded to be proclaimed by express words,
that the fearful should depart, and he would have his precept observed which
he gave in Deuteronomy. Wherefore it seems not that he would adioyne timetous folks
unto Gideon. But Josephus in his narration omitteth the commandment that the
fearful should be dismissed, either because it was out of his memory, or else
for what other cause I can not tell.

An Allegory.
Here might be annexed diverse Allegoryes concerning the drinkyng of the waters.
For by those some understand pleasures, and some afflictions. And undoubtedly
they are not apt for the kingdom of God, which study to fill themselves with
pleasures and delights of this world. Neither are they commended, which
suffer themselves altogether to be troubled with adversities. For as they are
praised which use this world, as though they used it not: so also are they
commended, which in their mind do not so grievously take sorrows and
aduersityes as the Ethnikes do which have no hope, and are destitute of a
perfect consolation of faith.

The history mentions that the men which Gideon took unto him, namely the
300. had trumpettes, which ought not to be marvelous. For the sum of the
soldiers at the beginning was 32000. Wherefore there might be among every
thousand soldiers.x. trumpeters. And therefore it was easy to find.300.
trumpettes there. Augustine.
Augustine upon this place writes, that Abraham (as it is read in the book of
Genesis) armed 318. of his bondemen, against the three kings which had led Lot
away prisoner, and thereby, he gathers that he had yet more aid then
Gideon. Which is so much the truer, because besides servants and bondmen,
Abraham had Abner, Mambre, and Escholl to help him.

9 And the same night the Lord said unto him: Arise, get the down into the
host: for I have delivered it into thine hand.

10 But if thou fear to go down, then go thou and Purah thy lad down to the
host.

11 And thou shall hearken what they say, and afterward shall thine hands be
strong, and thou shall go down to the host. Then went he down, and Purah his
lad unto the out side of the soldiers, that were in the host.

12 And Madian, and Amalek, and all the children of Kedem, lay in the valley,
like grasshoppers in multitude, and their camels were without number: as the
sand which is by the sea side for multitude.

13 Gideon I say came, and behold, a man told a dream unto his neighbor,
and said: Behold I dreamed a dream. And lo a cake of barley bread tombled from
above into the host of Madian, and came even to a tente, and smote it, that it
fell: it ouerturned it, I say, and the tente fell down.

14 And his neighbor answered and said: This is nothing else save the sword
of Gideon the son of Ioas a man of Iscaell: God has given into his hands
Madian and all the host.

15 When Gideon heard the dream told, and the interpretation of the same, he
worshipped. And he returned unto the host of Israel and said: Up, for the
Lord has delivered into your hands the host of Madian.


Gideon is also confirmed by the words of his adversaries: he had withdrawe^
from him humane aids, and therefore least he should be smitten with fear, he
prepared a confirmation for him after a certain wonderful sort. God, which
made us knows right well the nature of man's flesh and reason. We oftentyme
brag that we put no confidence in prosperous things, when they are present:
but when we are destitute of them, we wonderfully wax cold, and there we feel
how we deceived our selves and other. We deserve assuredly for our inco^stancy
(I will not say infidelity) utterly to be abiected: but the heavenly father, as
he is good, breaks not a bruised read, and que^cheth not smoking flax, which
we now see in Gideon. He sends him to the host of his enemies to be
confirmed, and he uses ye Madianites, the enemies of ye Israelites for an
oracle. And it is not marvelous: for if in the old time he used wood and gold
in ye tabernacle, at the arc, I say, and mercy seat, to give answers, what
should let but that he may use men also unto that office? And without doubt the
beginning of the victory was, The beginning of a victory, is to know the
fear of the enemies.
to manifest unto Gideon the fear of his enemies. For in warfare nothing more
profits, then to know the fear of the enemies: and to know the same at the
length for assured, very much pertayneth to warlike pollecies.

And in manifestyng of it, God observes his old accustomed manner. Long
before that by Rahab of Jericho he showed unto Iosuah, that the hearts of the
enemies were excedingly smitten with fear, and now eue^ by the Madianites
themselves he teaches Gideon how fearful they were. Neither among other
testimonies (as the Rhetoricians say) are there any of more strength, A notable
example of obedience.
then the testimonies of the enemies. Wherefore when Gideon heard even of his
enemies how they were affected, he doubted not of the success of the battle.
Here is set forth a notable example of obedience. For Gideon was deadly hated
of the Madianites, because he had now collected an host against them, and yet
being commanded to go to their tents he obeyed. And if he had been afraid,
there was no other companion granted him, then Purah his lad. Wherefore seeing
he durst take upon him so great a thing, it is to be thought that he was
illustrate with no small faith. Neither can he justly be reproved of vanity, as
though he took hold of dreams, for as much as he obeyed the word of God.

Hereby also may we learn, Unto the wicked sometimes are given true dreams
and the interpretacions of them.
that dreams of prophecieng are by God given unto enemies of godliness, and
to that nation, which afflicted the holy people and the Church: and this is
not the first time. For unto an Ethnike king, namely unto Pharao were fat and
lean kine, full and empty ears of corn, showed by God in dreams. Unto the
baker also and butler, were showed things yt should come to pass, and
afterward, Nebuchad-nezar, which led away ye Israelites captives, saw twice
dreams yt had significations. But this is more marvelous, the dream which is
here declared, needs no Joseph or Daniel for an interpreter. For yt which the
soldier by ye inspiratio^ of god dreamed, his fellow soldier expounded.
Wherefore god gave unto ungodly men, both a true dream and also a faithful
interpretation thereof. And ye confirms, ye fre gifts of grace are common
both to ye godly and to ye ungodly, wherefore it is not mete yt any should boast
of the^. For they testify not the holiness of men, but only the liberal
bountifulness of God.

By it also is declared the wisdom of god, and his inco^prehensible power,
God ca^ use the most vilest things to the salvation of his children.
that he can to ye salvation of his use not only ye enemies, but also al manner
of thing, yea the vilest. For what is vain and of less reputation than
dreams? and yet for the salvation of ye elect, they serve ye will of god.
Nothing seemed unto ye Ethnikes more ridiculous the^ circu^cisio^: wherefore ye
Jews were every where called of the^ Apellites and Recubites, and yet
nevertheless by it God confirmed his covenant with the fathers. These elements
also, bread, wine, and water, are very common things if they be considered by
themselves, in which things for all that Christ has commended unto us
Sacraments of most great value. Let us rejoice therefore that we have such a
God, that can convert all kind of things to the salvation of his children. And
again let us count the ungodly (as they are in very deed) for most unhappy,
when as of their own they receive damage, so that not only of their enemies,
and they are wonderfully hurt even of every thing most vile.

As touching the Hebrew words, they translate Tsallil for noise, and sound:
for it is derived of this verb Tsalal which is to sound, to make a noise, or
to ryng, as metal does. Farther Tsalath signifies to roste. For the barley
loaf, which is now entreated of, seemed to be baked upon the coals, out of
which came a wonderful noise: and therefore this word Tsallil is transfered
hither. But I marvel, Augustine.
wherefore Augustine, writing upon this place, makes mention that there was a
table: I think it was false in the translacion which he used. But the Allegory
Josephus manifestly expounds. Josephus. In Allegorye.
In general (says he) barley bread is vile and despised. And in all Asia no
people are of less estimation than the Hebrews, which now begin to sound and
to make a noise, because they had now raised an host against them, and made
Gideon their captain. In that this loaf by his tombling seemed with great
violence to overthrow their tents, it manifestly foreshewed that the host of
the Madianites and Amalekites should be delivered unto Gideon and to the
Hebrews. This is the Allegory of the dream, and a most true interpretation
thereof. Why Gideon was more confirmed by the dream then by by miracles.
Gideon being thus confirmed, departed. But in that he was more confirmed by
this dream, then he was by the former miracles, it is not to be counted for
absurd, because neither miracles, nor dreams by them selves can confirm
doubtful minds, but they do it only then, when God by his spirit makes
them of efficacy, which he bestows sometimes to these, and sometimes to
other, according to his will. Wherefore it comes to pass, that they which
sometimes by miracles are not persuaded, may by dreams be drawn: and again
they which by dreams believe not, may with miracles be converted. For God can
freely give power and efficacy unto those outward things, according to his
will.

Of Dreams.
Ethnike authors.

The opinion of the Peripatetikes.


But now must we entreat of dreams: and first we will see what may be affirmed
of them by natural reason: and afterward how much we must attribute unto
them by the word of God. As touching the first, Aristotle, Hippocrates, and
Galene, also other famous Philosophers have written many things, and amongst
them Aristotle in his little book de Diuinatione per Somnium (if so it be his
book, although we can not doubt but that it is wytty and learned) says
first, that this kind of divination seems not utterly to be abiected, because
of the common sort very much is attributed unto it: and those things which
are commonly received of all men, can not universally be false. Hereunto he
adds, that there are very many dreams, of which an apt and mete reason may
be given: which (as experience teaches) deceive not men, but have their
success. Therefore it is not mete that we should despise all manner of
divination by dreams. Howbeit we must receive it warely, for that it is very
heard to give causes thereof, because nature in this part woorketh very
obscurely. Aristotle thinks not that dreams are sent of God.
And Aristotle thinks not that dreams are sent of God. For if (says he)
they should be sent of him, he would give them to good and wise men. But it is
not so. For foolish and evil men for the most part obtain this faculty:
beasts also do dream: And who will contend that God gives diuinatio^ unto
the^? Neither dreams which are occupied about the phantasye of such as sleep
are to this end given, that thereby they should foretell things to come. Farther
if god should give dreams, he would give them rather in the day time, that men
might the diligentlier behold them. Neither can we easily se why he should
choose the night unto him for that purpose. And lastly forasmuch as god is not
envious, he would not so obscurelye admonish them, whom he would instruct of
things to come, but he would show them manifestly and openly. But dreams are
so obscure, that for the interpretation of them we must go unto prophets, and
southsayers. These things are in a manner gathered all out of Aristotle, whereby
he utterly transferreth the thing from god unto nature, as though the reasons
of dreams should from thence be sought for. But I will in treat of that
afterward when I come to the doctrine of the scripture. Now will I declare his
opinion as touching this thing.

Dreams says he ar either signs or causes, The Peripatetikes exposicio^ of
dreams.
or else compared unto those things which are signified rashely or by chance.
Every one of these three members is thus expounded, dreams he says are signs
sometimes of the affections of the body or mind. For by those very often are
declared, Forms ar moved according to the diversity of the humors.
which humors do bear rule in the body, abound, and offend. For according to
the quality of nature, and te^pering of humors preuaylyng in the body, are
forms and images moved. Where choler abou^deth, are seen flambes, fires,
burning coals, lightnings, brawlings, and other of that sort. If melancholy
get the upper hand, smokes, deep darkness, all things almost black, filthy
things, dead bodies, and such like do offer themselves. But fleume stirs up
images of showrs, raynes, rivers, waters, hayl, ise, and such things as have
abundant moistnes joined with coldness. By blood ar moved sights that are fair,
bright, white, pleasant, and are like unto the common pureness and usual form
or face of things. Neither do the phisicio^s contemn these things, yea rather
(as Galene and Hipocrates teach) they enquire very diligently of the sick, of
the^: because thereby they may understand the tempera^ce of those humors which
lie inwardly hidden. Why forms ar more seen sleeping then wakyng.
But the cause why they which are on sleep, and not they which are waking, do
by sight feel the nature of these mocions, is this: because at the beginning
they are little, and when we are waking, the sense of them flies from us. For
by stronger mocions of outward things, which appear before our eyes, we are
drawn an other way, but being on sleep we cesse from outward labors, and ar
void from the course of gross sensible things. Wherefore the sightes and
images, which are by the humors continually moved, are better comprehended of
the fansy when we are on sleep, then when we are wakinge. And that when we
sleep we far better feel smalthings, then we do being waking: hereby it
appears, because we think that noyses, be they never so small, are great
thunders. And if any sweet fleame stick peradventure unto the tongue or roof
of the mouth, it seems to us that we taste honey, sugar, sweet wines, and
pleasant meats, yea sometimes we think that we largely eat, and aboundantlye
drink. Wherefore those mocions of humors which are small, are in sleep showed
to be as it were wonderful great: for which cause Physicions do hereby know
very many beginninges of diseases.

Dreams also are certain signs of the affections of the mind, Dreams ar
also signs of the affections of the mind.
as of covetousness, hope, joy, and mirth, and also of qualityes. Wherefore
fearful persons do se other manner of things then they do, which are bold: so do
they which are covetous se other things, then they which are in hope: also the
learned are wont to have far contrary dreams, to the dreams of the rude
people or artificers. For the mind also when we sleep, is occupied about those
things, wherein when we are wakinge, we are either daily, or else very often
busyed. There is an other thing also dilygentlye to be observed (as Galene
does very well admonyshe) that there are certain kinds of meats, Galene.
which being naturallye cholerike, melancholic, or fleumatik, do by their
quality, or about the phantasy of the sleepers move images and forms, which are
agreeable with those humors, although the temperature of bodies of them which
sleep do not of themselves offend in these humors. Which thing also the
physician ought to observe concerning dreams, namely to see what meat the
sick man did use. Wine also (as Aristotle teaches) being immoderatelye
drunk, does in dreams engender misformed Images.

When a dream is a sign it is referred unto a cause, namely unto the humors
abounding, which humors it signifies. It may also be called a sign of some
event to come, because from the same cause, that is, from the humors which are
signified, may be caused either sickness or health. Wherefore a dream, as it is
a sign of an humor, so also is it a token of an effect, which is produced of
it. For from the self same cause, namely from the humor, springs both a
dream, and also a discease. Howbeit they are not converted, for sickness or
health are not signs of dreams. Dreams are sometimes causes of ye things
which we do.


But now let us see, how dreams may sometimes be called the causes. That is
then, when any man by his dream is persuaded, either to do, or to try any
thing, as if a man be made whole of the sickness of the splen, for that that he
was let blood in the vtward side of his hand, for so was he taught to do in his
dream. And now and then it happneth unto the learned, yt they find those
things whereof they are in doubt in the same books, where in their dream they
thought they had found or red them. Dreams sometime by chanse resemble those
things which happen.


But now let us consider the third member of the distinction which we brought,
namely when dreams do rashly or by chance signify those things which
afterward do happen. That takes place in those things, whose cause is not in
us, but rather distant, and far of, as if a man should see a victory, or a
murder to happen in hosts far distant from him, or any man that is absent
exalted to very great dignity. These things say the Peripatitikes are joined
together by chance: neither can they be conferred together, either as
causes, or as signs. Even as if when we are talking of any body, the same man
paradueuture come in the mean while, we say Lupus est in fabula, when as yet
the same mention making of him, was neither the cause, nor sign of his
coming. So therefore these things are said to be joined together rashlye,
because both they come by chance, and also they seldom have success: for
this is the nature of things coming by chance, to happen seldom.

Who they be which naturally oftentimes se true dreams
Farther, Aristotle has taught, who they be, which above other foretell many
things in dreams. And the same be chiefly attributes unto idle persons and
such as ar ever prattling, and the^ to such as ar melancholic and phrantike,
which are deprived both of senses and mind. He seems also to ascribe
somewhat unto kinsfolks and friends. For these kind of men have very many
dreams when they sleep. For pratlers and idle persons are wholly void of
cogitations, wherefore they at inwardly filled with images and forms. The
melancholic also by reason of the power and nature of melancholy, do dream
very many things. Farther, they are very much given unto cogitatio^s. The
phrantike also, because their mind is void both of the knowledge of the outward
senses, and also of the use of reason: therefore they are utterly given to
imaginations. Lastly, friends do for that cause se many things of their friends
in their dreams, because they are very much careful and pensive for them. Al
these men now rehearsed, are wont by dreams to foretell many things, because
in diverse dreams and in a manner infinite, it is not possible, but that some
true things happen sometimes. They which the whole day exercise themselves
in shootynge, do much oftener bit the mark, then they which do very seldom
shoot. And they which play all the day at dyse or tables, do much oftener throw
good castes, then they which little or seldom use that kind of play.

Howbeit we must understand yt those signs, which are attributed to dreams, as
touching the first kind already declared, are not necessary, Of dreams which are signs there is no necessity of the effects to be gathered.
for as much as they may be let. And yet this hinders not but that they may
be signs. For this is so also in the clouds, which undoubtedly ar signs of
rain, when as for all yt sometimes they are discipated by the wind before it
rayn. And urine has tokens either of sickness or health, when yet the effect may
be let by vehementer causes, and the same also happens of the pulses. Yea
and those counsels, which we have appointed, and which with great deliberation
decree to do, very oftentimes are not accomplished, because some other things
happen between, whereby we can go no farther: which self same thing if it
happen in dreams, it is no maruayle, forasmuch as they are signs of things
not perfect, but rather of the beginninges of things, and those weak and
feable mouinges of humors may yet be easily let of many other causes.

Democritus thus expounds those dreams, Democritus.
which resemble things coming by chance, and far distante: There are
always (says he) defluctions from things themselves, which are carried to the
bodies of those that sleep, and do affect them with the quality and symilitude
which they bring with them. And ye same he affirms to be for two causes more
felt sleping then waking. First, because ye air by night is easlyer moved, as
we see done, when the water is smitten with a little stone, very many circles
ar with that stroke multiplied and driven a great way, unless some other
contrary motion resist it. But in the night the air is more quiet, then in
the day time, because it is not driven into sundry parts by the course of
creaturs which move themselfes. An other cause is, because they which sleep do
easlier receive light mouings. And lastly the same author also refers not
the causes of dreams to god. Galene.


Galene also in his little book which he wrote de presagiis in somniorum,
above other things makes mencio^ of this, when in dreams we se those
things, which when we were waking, we neither did nor thought, they ought not
to be referred neither to arts, neither to qualities, or custom of those
things, which happened when we were wakinge, but unto humors. This rule seems
to tend to this end, that we might understand of what things dreams are to
be counted signs. And he grants that these things are better known in the
night, then in the day, because then the soul withdraws it self into the
inward parts where it easilier feleth those things which are there. An history of
a certain dream.
And he makes mention of one who thought in his dream he had a thigh of
stone, which many thought to pertayn to his servants, but wtin a few days
after that, his leg fell into a palsy. An other thought that he was up to the
throat in a cesterne full of blood, out of which he could by no means escape.
And that declared that much blood abounded in him, and that he had very great
need to be let blood. He makes mention also of an other, which in his dream
thought that on his critical or judicial day he was washed in a bath with
great abundance of water, who afterward fell into a great sweat. Farther says
he they which sleep do think sometimes that they are greuousely laden, so that
they are not able to bear the wayght: and sometimes so light and nimble, that
they run, and in a manner fly. Al these things says he, are ^okens of excess
or defecton of humors.

Hippocrates also of these things in a manner writes the same namely that ye
mind in the day time, destributeth his powers into the senses and other
faculties: Hippocrates.
And in the night it draws the^ to ye inward parts, and therefore it does the
better know them. Howbeit he makes mention that there are certain dreams
which come by god, whereby calamities are foreshewed to come unto cities,
people, and other certain great men, for the expounding of which dreams,
some do profess certain arts. Unto which nevertheless he seems to give but
very small credit. When by dreams it is noted that ye humors do offend, he
says that they which are in danger, must be helped by diete, exorcist, and
medicine. And whither the dreams be good or evil, he will have prayers added.
When health is by dreams signified, we must pray says he unto the Sun, unto
Jupiter celestial, Jupiter possessor, to Minerua, rich Mercury, and to Apollo.
But if the dreams be unlucky, we must pray unto the gods says he which
turn away ill, namely unto the gods of the earth, and to the Heroical
men, etc. Wherefore either Hippocrates was supersticious, or else he would seem
so. But to me, as touching sincere godliness, that I mislike not: Yea it is very
much commended, that if at any time we be vexed with troublesome and terrible
dreams, we must pray unto god, that it would please him to turn away those
evils, if there be any which hang over our heddes.

What is the outward cause of dreams.
There is an other kind of dreams, which proceeds of an outward cause,
namely from the power of heaven, or (as it is commonly called) the influence,
which alters the air. For this air touching our bodies, affects them with
a new quality: Whereby sundry images and dreams are stirred up unto those
which are on sleep. Wherefore there are many effects wroughte of heaven, of
which it brings forth some in the phantasy, and power or faculty of
imagination: and other some in deed. And that may easily be showed by an
example. In deed in the air or clouds there are rain: and in the imaginacion
of the Crow there is such an alteration before the rain, that he begins to
croke. Wherefore the effects in the phantasy of those which are on sleep, and
also in deed, come undoubtedly of the self same cause: Yet have they great
diversity by reason of the subjects in which they are made. And it is not to
be doubted, but that there is a certain slender and hidden similitude between
these effects. But it is very hard to understand the reason of this
proporcion or analogy. And if we say, that the stars are the cause of such
effects or affections, who can refer these signs unto his own propre cause,
Why diuinatio^ by dreams is hard and uncertain.
that is, to some certain stars more then to other, Assuredly I suppose that
there are very few (I will not say none) which can do it. Farther if they
should also be referred unto propre stars, what can we judge to come to pass
by them, especially as touching things coming by hap, when as judicial
Astrology is evermore counted most uncertain? In fine, images and and
similituds which are said to portend things to come, ar so doubtful, uncertain
and ambiguous, that we can affyrm nothing for certain of the^. Wherefore this is
to be added, that forasmuch as dreams cannot be brought to pass of one only
cause, but of many (as we have declared) we shall easily fall into an error, if
we of those many causes choose only one certain cause. Therefore let us hold
this, that is, not easily to foretell any thing by dreams, for that they may
easlier de judged by the euentes, then the euentes can by them be foretold.
Wherefore there remains of dreams but only a certain suspicion, which
also of necessity is very sclender.

A gate of horn and a gate of puerye.
The two most noble Poets, Homere (I say) and Virgill, made two gates of
dreams, the one of horn, the other of yuery. That of horn (as they say)
pertayneth unto the true dreams, and that of yuery, to false: and they say yt
the gretest part passes through the gate of yuery, and not through that of
horn. Wherefore in judging natural dreams, let us not pass the measure of
suspicion, nor stick to much in dreams: forasmuch as it is not the duty of a
christian man to cleave more then is conueniente unto perilous and uncertain
conjectures, because whilst they so busily apply them selfs to those things,
Of dreams sent either of god or of the devil.

To fore show any thing by visions or dreams two things are required.


they neglect other things which are of greater wayght. And the devil very
often times mingleth himself with those things to this intent, either to call
us back from good actions, or else to drive us to actions that are evil.

Now let us see, what we ought to affirm of dreams sent of God, or moved
by the deuel. When any thing by ye work of god or of angels is in dreams
foresene, two things are required. The first is that certain notes or images
of things which are showed, do inform or imprint the phantasy or imagination.
Secondly must be adjoined judgment, to understand what those things at the
last do portend. As touching the first, we must know, that these notes and
images are sometimes offered unto the senses, because of those things which God
makes outwardly to appear, as when Balthazar the successor of Nebuchad-Naezar
saw in the wall the fyngers of a hand which wrote, as it appears in Daniel.
And sometimes without any outward sight are images and forms described in the
imagination or phantasy: which happens two manner of ways. For either the
forms or images which are kept in the mind, are called back to such use as
God has intended, as when to Jeremy was showed a seething pot turned to the
North: Or else new forms are showed, which by the senses were never seen, as
if forms of colors and images should be showed unto one blind from his
birth.

And in this kind or prophesieng, images or forms are in steed of letters.
Forms or images ar like letters.
For as they are ordered and disposed, so sundry oracles are showed. Even as in
the diverse changing of letters, orations and sentences are made diverse.
Teachers which instruct their scholars, may by their study and industry of
teaching fashion manifold images in the minds of the hearers: although they be
not able to give the judgment and right understanding. But God ministers
both, God sometimes gives not unto one and to the self same man forms, and
the understanding of them.

They which have only images, are not simply prophecies.


not in deed always together: for to some sometimes he shows only the
forms, as to Pharao, and to his Butler and Baker, and also to the king of
Babylon, al which men needed an Interpretor (namely Joseph and Daniel) to
expound their dreams. And undoubtedly those, unto whom are showed only the
images of things to come, are not truly and plainly counted Prophets,
forasmuch as they have but only a certain degree, beginning, and in a manner a
step of prophecye: even as Caiphas also the high Priest is not to be counted a
Prophet, when as he spoke those things which he knew not.

But why God would sometimes by dreams manifest unto Kings and Princes
things to come, as now he does, there are two causes: The one is, because he
had a regard unto the people and Nations whom they governed. For if the penury
which was at hand, had not ben showed unto Pharao, Egypt had utterly been
destroyed by famine. Secondly, it was the counsel of the Lord, by these
expositions of dreams, to manifest unto the world his Prophets and holy men,
which before were hidden, which thing the holy scriptures testifye happened in
Joseph and Daniel. The Ethnike Historiographers also do write very many
things of dreams, which Princes sometimes saw. Yea, Tertulian.
and Tertulian in his book de Anima, makes mention of certain of those
dreams, as the dream of Astyages of his daughter Mandane, also of Philip of
Macedonia, and of Julius Octauius, whom M. Cicero being yet a boy, thought he
saw him in his dream, and being awake as soon as he met him, he straightway
knew him. And the same man tells of certain other also of this kind.

But omitting these, let us by testimonies of the holy scriptures (which shall
easily be done) confirm, that certain dreams ar sent by God. Matthew testifies
that Joseph the housbande of Mary, was in dreams thrice admonished by the
Angel. The wife also of Pilate had knowledge by a dream, and sent word to
her housband, that he should not condemn Christ being an innocent. Peter in
the Acts of the Apostles the x. chap. saw a sheet let down from heaven. And
in the.xvi. chap. a man of Macedonia appeared unto Paul, and moved him to go
into Macedonia. And the Lord commanded the same Paul in a dream, that he
should not depart from Corinthe, because he had a wonderful great number of
people in that City. I might rehearse a great many other places, both out of
the old Testament, and out of the new, but that I will not be tedious. Philo a
Jew.
Philo a Jew (as Jerome in his book de viris illustribus says) wrote five
books of Dreams, which are sent by God. Ciprian also tells, Ciprian.
that in his time were certain things seen by dreams, which served for the
edification of the Church: and he does give not a little, Augustine. Three
kinds of dreams.
but very much authority unto them. And Augustine in his.xii. book de Genisi
ad litteram, the.3. chap. says: That there are three kinds of dreams. The
first (says he) pertain unto the outward senses, which he calls corporal.
Again, other some he calls Spiritual, which consyst of images, and have
place about the phantasy, or power of imagination. The last he names
Intellectual, because they are comprehended only by reason and judgment of
the mind. And those which consist by imagination, namely those that are put in
the second place (as we have a little before taught) says he, make not
Prophets, and affirms that Joseph was much more truly a Prophet, then Pharao.
And because we will not go from our history, we may affirm the same thing of
the soldiour, which in the hearing of Gideon expounded the dream of his fellow
soldiour, namely, that he rather was a Prophet, then he which had the vision.
But in this order or degree of Prophets, Daniel excels the rest. For he did
not only interpreate the dreams of the king: but when he had forgotten those
things which he saw in his sleep, he could revoke them into his memory
again. Farther, he did not only interpreate the dreams of other men, but
also he was by God instructed of his own visions.

By the Devil also are dreams sometimes moved, for Augustine in the place
already alleged de Genisi ad literam writes, that one possessed with a Devil,
by dreams declared in what hour a priest would come unto him, and through
what places he would pass. Oracles answered sometimes by dreams and visions.
And we are not ignorant that the Ethnikes had oracles, where men were al night
to obtain visions and dreams. Such a one was the oracle of Amphiarus,
Amphilochus, Trophonius, and of Esculapius. In those places, the Devil showed
unto those which slept, remedies and medicines to heal such as were sick:
and therwithal also he gave answer of other matters. And to obtain such
visions and dreams, there were commanded unto those which came to enquire of
any thing, I cannot tell what choice of meats, and separate lodginges,
Pithagorians.
and certain pure and chaste days. It is said also that the Scholars of
Pithagoras eschewed beans, because they make troublesome dreams. But our God,
to declare that he is not bound to those things, showed unto Daniel the
kings dream, when he and his fellows by prayers had vehemently desired it of
him. And it is not to be doubted but that the devil can mingle him self with
dreams, Augustine.
when as through his diligence there have been and also are now many false
Prophets, wherefore Augustine in his book before alleged the.xix. chap. If
an evil spirit (says he) possess men, he makes them either devilish, or
mad, or else false prophets. And contrariwise a good spirit makes faithful
prophets, speaking mysteries to the edification of other.

He also demands in the same book, the.xi. chap. by what means the
revelations of evil and good spirits may be discerned one from an other.
Augustine. How dreams ar to be known which are of a good sp^^^^, and which
are of an evil.
And he answers: That that can not be done, except a man have the gift of
discerning of spirits. But he adds that an evil spirit does always at the
last lead me^ to wicked opinions and peruers manners: although at the
beginning the difference can not be known with out the gift of the holy
ghost. In his Epistle to Euodius, which is the.100. epistle, inquiring of the
same matter, he says: I would to God I could discern between dreams, which are given to error, and those which are to salvation, nevertheless we ought to
be of good courage, because God suffers his children sometimes to be tempted,
but not to perysh.

Aristotle.
But what shall we answer unto Aristotle, who denies that dreams ar sent of
God, and that for this cause in special, because God would give this faculty of
divination to wise and good men, and not to the foolish and wicked? We answer,
that for the most part it is true, that true Prophets, which are by God
illustrate with dreams and visions, Why God sometimes uses evil Prophets and
unwise.
are both good and godly. Howbeit, least it should be thought that the power
of God is bound unto the wisdom or manners of men, God will sometimes use the
work of evil men in those things: to declare and show forth the great and
wonderful power of his providence, Tertulian.
as one which can use all kind of instruments. Farther, as Tertulian writes
in his book de Anima, seeing that he distributeth his Sun and rain both to
the just and to the unjust, it ought not to be marvelous, if he bestow also
these gifts, which serve especially to the instruction of men, both to the
good and to the evil. And that we should not be ignorant of his doing, the holy
history declares that the Ethnikes were by God very oftentimes admonished and
corrected in their sleep. So Pharao king of Egypt was commanded to restore
unto Abraham his wife, and Abimelech king of Gerar was in like manner
admonished. And Tertulian says moreover, that even as God, when he instructed
the wicked in their sleep, does it that they might become good: so
contrariwise the Devil inuadeth the godly when they are a sleep, by dreams to
seduce them out of the right way. Aristotle thought ye God in distributing
his gifts, ought to have a regard to wise men, and especially to Philosophers:
God reuealeth mysteries rather unto the little ones, then to the wise.
when as Christ has taught altogether otherwise. I thank thee (says he) O
heavenly father, that thou hydyng these things from the learned and wise,
have revealed them to little ones. etc. Paul also says, that the vocation of
God chiefly pertayneth to the unnoble, unlearned, and weak.

An other argument was, that beasts also when they sleep do dream, when yet
no man will say that God ministers and disposes their dreams. That
Philosopher is deceived, because he supposes that if God do send some dreams
unto men, he ought therefore to be made author of al dreams, which undoubtedly
to far from our meaning. For we refer not unto God himself, al those
things which are natural, as certain peculiar effects, by which immediately (as
to speak with Scholemen) men should be instructed of things to come. We have
sufficientlye before declared of what causes dreams come in creatures. God,
though he sometime se^deth dreams, yet se^deth he not all.
And to entreat Logs^like: There is no firm connection from a private or
peculiar proposition to an universal. Wherefore, though God do minister some
dreams, we may not thereby gather, that all dreams, whether they be in
beasts or men, ar sent by him. Beasts otherwise have the power to hear,
neither want they ears: and yet, because God sends not sometimes Prophets
unto them to speak and show them things to come, we cannot conclude that God
does not sometimes send holy men unto men, by whom they may be both
admonished, and instructed.

He says moreover, that if God were the author of dreams, he would cause
them to be done as well in the day time, as in the night. But I affirm, God
uses both times, as well the day as the night.
that it is free for God to use either time as he will, forasmuch as he is Lord
as well of the day as of the night, and as well of sleeping as of waking. And
that he sometimes did in very deed show visions unto prophets in their sleep,
and sometimes when they were waking, as it seemed best unto him, the holy
scriptures do restlfy.

Farther, what absurdity is it, if he oftentimes use the commodity of the night
and sleep, when as the Philosophers and Physicians them selves do confess,
that men are at such time more apt to receive mocions very light? Shall this
commodity serve the Physicians turn to know the humors of the body, and can
it not serve God, for the salvation of souls? In the book of Job the.33.
chap. there is a godly and apt place written after this manner: when sleep
falls upon men, and they sleep upon their beds, then God opens the ear,
and seals corrections.

Lastly was objected, that God if he would admonish men, he would do it openly
and manifestly, and not obscurely, or by rydles. I answer, that the true
prophets and such as were inspired by God, did very well understand the things
which God told them in such dreams: wherefore they needed no expositers. And
if he sometimes sent dreams unto Ethnike Princes (as he did unto Pharao and
Nebuchad-Nezar) he therefore did it, to make his Prophets that were hidden
(namely Joseph and Daniel) to be notable. Otherwise he gave unto his Prophets
judgment, and a clear understanding of such visions which he ministered unto
the^.

Why Aristotle erred.
But Aristotle is herein deceived, because he had a respect only to deceauers,
which prophessed such kinds of prophecies, and bewitched men, as though they
could expound al sorts of dreams, and show whet they portended. But we
understand not those things which we have now alleged, of al kind of dreams,
neither of al manner of prophets. For they pertain only to those, which God
indede sends: wherefore the conjectures of deceauers and Southsaiers have
nothing here to do. But the authority of so great a Philosopher does not
much move us: Epicurus.
because although that Epicurus favors that sentence which he does, who to
disburden his Gods from the labor of regarding of dreams, teaches that they
as al other things, Plato. The Stoikes.
do come rashly and by chance. Yet contrariwise Plato gives much to dreams
sent of God: and the Stoikes pronounced that dreams in the night, are as it
were a familiar and domestical oracle, by which God does provide for humans
kind. Augustine. Whyther the Soul of it self have power to foreknow things
to come.
This will I not ouerpasse, that Augustine in the place before alleged upon
Genesis ad literam, the.xii. book, and.xv. chap. does demand whither the
Soul of it self have power to foreknow things to come, and that by his own
nature. And he denies that it has: because (says he) if it had, it woold use
it, when as al men do so earnestly desire to know things to come. Wherefore
visions and dreams of Prophets attain to their truth, not by nature, but by
God.

But now must we see, how the consideration of dreams should be prohibited,
seeing they are suggested by God and his Angels: for if the matter be so, then
are not dreams to be contemned, Al regard of dreams is not forbidden.
but with diligence to be observed. I answer thereto, that al regard of dreams
is not forbidden, but that only which is procured by evil and vain arts,
and which is accustomed to be obtained by worshipping of Devils. Otherwise there
is nothing which lets, but yt by dreams we may judge of humors, or, if they
be of God, or by any means perceived to be of him, to obey them. This is
also forbidden, that we extend not natural dreams farther then their nature
may suffer. And that do they which apply dreams unto euentes coming by
chance, wherein they have no respect, neither to the cause, nor to the effect.

The Roman laws punished Interpretours of dreams.
And superstitious divination by dreams, is not condemned by Christians only,
but also is extremely forbidden by the Roman laws. For in the.9. book of the
Code de maleficis, and Mathematicis: In the law Et si excepta: It is ordained
that such diuiners should be very grievously punished, so that although they
were in any place of dignity, yea and longed to Caesar him self, yet might they
be punished: which otherwise was not lawful to do, to men of nobilitye. And by
these words are they expressed: Aut narrandis somniis, occultam artem aliquam
diuinandi. A lawful observation of dreams, and an unlawful.
etc. And this difference which we here put for the lawful and unlawful
observation of dreams, is very well set forth in Jeremy the.23. chapter.
For there god by his Prophet detesteth vain and fond dreams, but commends
such as are true and of god. In Deuteronomy. the.xviii. chap. obseruers of dreams
seem generally to be reproved. But we must know, that according to the truth of
the Hebrew, there is no mention made of them. In deed other superstitions and
idolatries are there condemned, but of dreams there is nothing at al spoken,
although in other places the wicked observation of them is reproved. It is
lawful to pray that we may be admonished, even by dreams.

Monica ye mother of Augustine.


Wherefore the good and lawful observation of them is not to be forbidden: yea,
it is sometimes lawful for holy men to pray, that they may be admonished even
in their dreams, of those things especially which they judge meet, and cannot
by them selves attain unto. Monica the mother of Augustine, being desirous to
have her son married, for the avoiding of fornication, desired god that he
would reveal unto her somewhat of that thing, even in her sleep: and she
affirmed that god granted her a certain taste, whereby she discerned those
things which of her self she saw in her sleep, from those things which were
showed her by the suggestion of God. And this does Augustine write in his.vi.
book of Confessions, the.iii. chap. And leaving him, we know assuredlye that
Daniel prayed to come to the knowledge of the dream of Nebuchad-Nezar. And
this is to be holden for certain, that it is the duty of godly men, to
pray unto God, that even then also when we sleep, we may be kept chaste and
clean, as touching the body and spirit. For which thing Augustine prayed in
his book of Confessions, Augustine.
the.x. book and.30. chap. For visions which come by night, wherewith either
the mind is troubled, or the body defiled, are punishments of sin,
especially of original sin. For it should not have been so in Paradise, if
Adam had abidden in that truth, wherein he was created, as Augustine writes in
his.v. book against Iulianus, the.viii. chap. Now will we return again unto
the history.

16 And he divided the.300. men into three bands, and gave every man a
trumpet in his hand, with empty pytchers, and lamps within the pytchers.

17 And he said unto them: Look on me, and do likewise. For be hold I will
come to the side of the host, and then even as I do, so do ye.

18 For I will blow with a trumpet, and al they that are with me: Then blow ye
also with trumpets on every side of the host, and ye shall say: For the Lord,
and for Gideon.

19 So Gideon, and the hundredth men that were with him, came unto the outsyde
of the host, in the beginning of the mydle watch, and they raised up the
watchmen, and they blew with their trumpets, and brake the pitchers, which they
had in their hands.


Gideons industry or pollecy is here set forth, Many policies of Gideon.
and the favor wherewith God prospered his successes and enterprises. He
deuideth his three hundredth men into three bands, that he might on sundry
parts invade the Madianites, and by a sudden fear trouble their host on
every side. He used also another pollecye concerning the time, for he set upon
them in the night. For when they were in a manner in a dead sleep, they were the
easilyer by a great hurly burly astonished with fear. Farther, he chused the
most commodious part in all the night, for such a purpose: for he assailed
the Madianites about the beginning of the second watch or guard. Wherefore it
is called Rosch Haticonath, that is, the head or beginning of the middle
watch or guard. This word Toch signifies within: Augustine. There are four
watches of the night, whereof every one contains three hours.
and thereof is derived Ticonah, which is a myddle. Augustine in his Sermon De
verbis domini, the.14. Oration, says, that the Elders divided the night
into.4. parts, of which every one contained.3. hours, which he confirms
also by the testimonies of the holy scriptures. For it is said that the Lord
came unto the Apostles in the.4. watch of the night, when they labored so
vehemently in the sea, that their shypp was very near soonke. The same father
writes the like thing upon the.79. Psalm. The Gloss also in the Decrees.1.
question, the.1. Superueniente Pascha, makes mention of the names of those
parts of the night, Conticinium, Intempestum, Gallicinium, and Antelucanum,
that is, the bed time, ye dead part of the night, the Cock crowing, and the
dawning of the day.

And Isidorus in his.v. book of Etimologies, makes.vii. parts of the night,
Isidorus.
for he adds these three, Vesperum, Crepusculum, and Matutinum, that is, the
euentide, the twylight, and the morning. The second watch may be understand the
middle watch, as touching our history. For there are.2. watches between the first
and the last: wherefore howsoever it be, the second must needs occupy the middle
place. The inuentone of night watches. Plinius.
But the inuenter of these gardes or watches in hosts (as Plini writes in
his.7. book and.56. chap.) was Palamedes, which by this place we see cannot be
so, forasmuch as the acts of the Judges are of far more antiquitye, then was
Palamedes, unless peradventure he spoke only of the watches of the Grecians.
The use of watches floorished in the old time, not only in hosts, but they
were had in use also, for the safe custody of many other things. For at Rome
there were watchmen, Watchmen for to give warning of fyres.
which in the night time went up and down the City, to give warning of fires,
and therefore both in the Digest, and in the Code, the title is: De officio
praefecti vigilium. This industrye also was translated unto Shepeheardes,
Watches of Shepeheardes
which we may see even by the Gospel: For in Luke the.ii. chap. the Angels,
when Christ was borne came unto the Shepeheardes, which kept watch over their
flock. We read also, that both Ethnikes and Christians used watches in holy
services. Watches used in holy services
At Rome there were holy services unto the Goddess Bona, which were done in
the night season. And in the old Testament we read, that godly women abode all
night at the tabernacle, for doing injury unto whom, the children of Ely were
accused.

Philo a Jew (as Eusebius Cesariensis in his first book rehearses)
affirms, that the Christians which were in the Apostles time, Philo.
amongst other their laudable institutions, did most chastely watch, in giving
thanks unto God, applieng them selves unto prayers, Tertulian.
doctrines, and praysinges of God. Tertulian in his Apology writes, that the
Christians supped oftentimes and moderatly together, because they knew they
should woorship God in the night time. In the Acts Paul continued his sermon
and disputation til after midnight, so that Eutichus a young man being oppressed
with sleep, fell down from a high loft. Yea, and Christ also, abode al night
upon the mountain praying: and he reprehended the Apostles, which could not
watch even one hour with him, and exhorted them to watch and pray, that they
might not be oppressed with temptation. Jerome upon the.25. Jerome.
chap. of Matthew writes, that the Jews had a tradition, that the Messiah
would come at midnight, in which hour in deed the first born of Egypt were
slain. Wherefore he writes, that he supposes that that tradition came from
the Apostles, that the Priests in the holy night of Easter should not send
away the people, so that if peradventure the Lord appear, he may find them
watching. But this is not at this day observed: for the watches are not kept
on the night of Easter, but on the night of the Nativity.

Consilium Carthaginense.
In the Counsel of Carthage the.4. chap. 49. it is ordained that a Priest,
which without any necessity of his body, ceased from keeping night watches,
should both be deprived of his degree, and also put out of his benefice. But in
the Counsel of Eliberinum, Consilium Eliberinum.
chap.35. watchings in Church yardes are prohibited, where they were wont to
watch, having wax candles lighted: which I suppose was invented, not that by
that observation they might deliver the souls of the dead from purgatory,
Watches at the Sepulchers of the dead. Jerome.
but rather in honor of them. For as every man held dear his friends which
were dead, that the memory of them should not be forgotten, they watched at
the place where they were buried, one day in the year, which we manifestly
perceive in the life of Hilarion, written by Jerome, where he tells that a
certain Deacon said, that he should watch at the tomb of blessed Antony,
within a day or two, because now a year, or certain years were passed since
he died. The Elders watched also at the Sepulchers of Martirs, thereby to show
unto them honor, applieng themselves to doctrine, exhortations, giving of
thanks, and prayers, especially in these perilous times, when they might not
easily in the day time assemble together. Farther, peradventure piety was by ye
means the better observed. For in the day time men were occupied with sundry
labors and works. Wherefore, yt the worshipping of God might not lie utterly
neglected, they appointed certain hours in the night for it.

Jerome against Vigilantius, maruelously commends the institution of ye
church for watching, and he thinks yt we should not cease from this
observation, although by occasion of these watches, some filthy things were
committed. For (says he) the errors of young men, and light women, which can
sin also in an other place, and play filthy parts at home, ought not to
revoke us from so holy a custom. But we see that at this day contrary to the
sentence of Jerome, watches ar abolished, not only of Martirs, but also those
which were done in the honor of the Lord, as it manifestly appears in the
Counsel of Antisiodorensis, chap. the.v. Consilium Antisiodorense.
although in some places there remain some remnants of watches, as at Mantua
upon the feast of Bartlemew, and at Versellis on the night of Saint Eusebius.
But al men know, how unreasonably and immoderatly me^ behave themselves in
those watches. Watches turned unto fastinges.
Wherefore they have converted the observation of watchings into fastinges. But
what manner of fastinges I pray you? Such which they use now adays in
abstayning from eating of flesh. But whatsoever it be, the sentence of the
Apostle is firm and constant, that the exercises of the body have no great
vtility, but piety is of force to al things. We must in deed fast and watch,
as much as reason requires, and strength of the body will bear. And I do not
think that in this thing we ought with to much zeal to imitate Basilius,
Nazianzenus and such like, which with outward observations so brake their
bodies, that at the length they became unprofitable, both to them selves, and
also to other. The golden mediocritye is to be kept, wherein we must keep the
laudable measure of frugalitye and temperaunce. And thus much by the way of
watches.

20 And the three bands blew with trumpets, when they had broken their
pitchers, and they took their lamps in their leaft hand: and the trumpets in
their right hand, to blow withal, and they cried: the sword of the Lord, and
of Gideon.

21 And they stood every man in his place, round about the host, and all the
host brake their array, and cried, and fled.


The blowing of the trumpets, with the wonderful great cry of men, on every
side, and the sudden light, which the burning firebrandes gave, when the
pytchers were broken, did not only astonish the Madianites, but they being yet
oppressed with sleep, were so troubled, that they could not tell what to do.
Wherefore they supposed that there were many and sundry hosts there, and had
now invaded their host, and God filled them with such a certain disines and
madness, that they counted their fellowsoldiours instead of enemies, and
miserably slew one another. The holy ghost suggested this warlike polecy
This warlike pollecy was not found out and invented by Gideon himself only,
but, as it is to be believed, he did it by the suggestion of ye holy ghost. And
how God favored his enterprises, the holy history declares, whereby we might
learn, that God must prosper our enterprises, otherwise they are easily made
vain and of no force. For trumpets, fyrebrandes, and empty pitchers, of their
own disposition and nature, have small force to obtain a victory, especially if
every one of the^ be taken a part, and although being joined together, they
seem that they can do somewhat, yet if God had not added his power, they would
have been but laughed at. And they cried: The sword of God, and of Gideon. God
is mentioned as the true and principal efficient cause, and Gideon is added
unto him, The victory must not be parted between God and Gideon
as a fellow worker and instrument appointed to this work. And it is not
therefore so written, because the victory should after a sort be parted, and the
one half given unto God, and the other part to Gideon, which thing also we
must observe as touching eternal salvation. For we must count the obtaining of
it, to be wholly received of God, and not by free will, as the Pelagians do. Not
undoubtedly to the end we should live ydlely, or cease from good works, when
as Paul to the Philip expressedly commands, that we should work our own
salvation: but that we might understand that all that we do, is of him, eue^ as
in the same place it is added: For it is he which works in us, both to will
and to perform, according to his good pleasure. Of this victory the.83. Psalm
makes mention: Do unto them as thou did unto Madian, as unto Horeb, and
Zeb, and Zebah, and Zalmona. Which shows unto us that the order of this
history is diligently to be kept in remembrance of us, that we may hope for
the like, by prayers desire them of God, and have a confidence to obtain them.
And not only David makes mention of this narration, but also Esaias in his.x.
chap. where he entreats of Senacherib. God (says he) will raise up a whip,
like the destruction of Madian. And in very deed it so happened, as the Prophet
prophesied: for the whole host of that king was by God destroyed, as was this
host of the Madianites.

The names of the Captains of the Madianites do expres the nature of tirannes.
And as touching the names of these Captains, they do very well signifye
their tyranny. Aareb is a waster, Zaab is a woulfe, Sabchah is killing, and
Salmona is prohibiting shadow and refreshing. So do tirannes behave
themselves, they wast and raven all things, they kill like woolues, and take
away all refreshing and commodity from their subjects: when as yet if they
were Princes in deed, they should do far otherwise. But God so punishes
them, that he will have their wicked affections of their minds, manifested not
only in deeds, but also in their names. Yea, and they them selves, as though
they were not sufficiently described and expressed in the holy scriptures, have
framed unto themselves certain arms, tending very much to this purpose. None
of them in a manner do in their arms carry virtues, but Lions, Woulues, Tigers,
Bears, Eagles and such like, whereby they rather set forth their cruelty,
then virtue and goodness.

22 And when the.300. men blew with trumpets, the Lord set every man's sword
upon his neighbor, and upon all the host. So the host fled unto Beth-Hasittah
in Zererath, and to the border of Abel meolah unto Tabath.

23 Then the men of Israel were gathered together out of Naphthali, and out of
Aser, and out of all the tribe of Manasses, and pursued after Madian.


This counsel or act of God is no new or unaccustomed thing. For so did he
when Ionathas with his armor bearer came unto the host of the Philistians, as
we read in the first book of Samuel. And that is not unlike which in the
second book of Paralip. the.xx, chap. is written, of the battle, which in
the time of Iehosaphat the king, was fought with the Moabites and Ammonites.
For in those battles also the enemies of the Israelites wounded one another.
And Goliath was by David slain with his own sword. And we also in these days
have many times experience of the like benefits. For when our adversaries have
decreed by violence and force utterly to oppress us, by a wonderful
providence they have turned their force against themselves, and being let by
many slaughters and wars, they have ceased from their enterprises most cruel.

24 And Gideon sent messengers unto al mount Ephraim, saying: Come down
against the Madianites, and take before them the waters, even unto Beth-Bara,
and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered together, and took the waters
unto Beth Bara and Jorden.

25 And they took two Princes of Madian, Horeb, and Zeb, and slew Horeb upon
the rock of Horeb, and slew Zeb at the wynepresse of Zeeb. And they pursued
the Madianites. And they brought the heads of Horeb and Zeeb unto Gideon
beyond Jorden.


Now were other of the Israelites gathered together, as Aser, Naphthali, and
Manasses, Gideon also sent unto the Ephraites, that the victory which he had
gotten might on every side have a lucky end. He enuieth not to have a
companion of his glory, when as yet he with a few put himself in great
danger. I would to God we were so conjoined in the Church, that when we have
begone any good and profitable institution, we would for the performance of
the same, desire other to help us: but, which is to be lamented, as our sins
do deserve, we oftentimes let one an other.

Come down against the Madianites, and take before them the waters. As touching
these waters, the Interpreters do varye. Kimhi thinks that it is not Iordane,
his reason is, because it is added, even unto Iordane. R. Semoloh understands
that of those waters which deuideth Palestine, or the land of Chanaan, from
Siria, and among those waters he rekoneth Iordane. But the place of Beth-Bara
is to be noted, because of the first chap. of John, Beth-Bara.
where our translation has Bethania, which in deed lies far distant from
Iordane, neither did John there baptize those that came unto him. But the
Greek text has Bethabara. Wherefore it is thought that this place, whereof we
now entreat, is there meant. He commands that the waters should strayghtway
be prevented from those which fled, whilst yet they were troubled with fear,
before they should recover strength unto them again. We must not slowlye
follow the victory.
For he knew that it was very much hurtful for Capitaines, slowlye and softlye
to pursue the victory. Wherefore he adds all speed, least his enemies might
have space given them to understand their error, and to renew their power
again. And therefore he commands that with speed they should meet them,
that the victory begone, might at the length have a full end.

And they took two Princes. The Ephraites accomplished that which Gideon
commanded, in preventing those that fled, and they slew the Captains of the
Madianites: Horeb they slew at the rock, which was afterward called by his
name, and Zeb in the wynepresse, which Kimhi expounds, as though there were
there a plain country. Whose form or figure was like a wynepresse. The
Ephraites brought the heads of the two Princes unto Gideon beyond Iordane.
This is supposed to be now put in by the figure Prolepsis: for it is thought
that it was not done till such time as Gideon had returned from the victory
being finished. In the mean time let us consider the ignominy that god put
those tyrannes unto, bringing their most proud heads under the power of the
Israelites, whom they counted for people very abject, and wonderfullye
oppressed them with their cruelty. It is thought that the head of Pompeius
which was offered unto Caesar, did much increase the calamity of that man. It is
also declared that the head of Cicero was brought unto Anthonius, as a thing
most miserable.

But now in few words we must touch the Allegory of this act, An Allegory
taken out of the holy scriptures
not undoubtedly a vain Allegorye, but which is drawn out of the fountains
of the holy scriptures. Esaias in the.ix. chap. entreating of the redemption by
Christ, writes in this manner: The yoke of his burden, the staff of his
shoulder, and the rod of his oppressor have thou overcome, as in the day of
Madian. By which words is showed, that this victory is to be referred unto
that deliuerye from sin, which by Christ we have obtained. Neither do these
trumpets portend any other thing then the preaching of the Gospel, now spread
abroad throughout the whole world. For God gives salvation unto the world,
by the ministry and doctrine of the Church, not as though this were
sufficient, but the pitchers being broken, burning fyrebrandes are showed
forth, because by the death of Christ upon the cross, the light of the holy
ghost shyneth in the hearts of men, and the cries of prayers are adjoined, from
whence salvation comes unto the true Israelite.

The.viii. Chapter.
1. THen the me^ of Ephraim said unto him: Why have thou done this unto us,
that thou calledst us not, when thou we^test to fight with the Madianites? And
they chode with him sharply.

2 To whom he answered: What have I now done in comparison of you? Is not the
gleanyng of grapes of Ephraim better, then the vintage of Abiezer?

3 God has delivered into your hands the Princes of Madian, Horeb, and Zeeb:
and what was I able to do, in comparion of you? And when he had thus spoken,
then their spirits abated toward him.


The Ephraits nobler the^ they of Manasses.
THe Ephraites envied Gideon, because great glory redounded unto him by this
battle. That Tribe was much more noble then the Tribe of Manasses. For Jacob
when he blessed the sons of Joseph, stretching out his hands preferred
Ephraim which was the younger, before Manasses, which otherwise was the first
borne. Wherefore it is no maruail, if they now took it hainouslye, that they of
Manasses carried away the victory without their conduct.

Is not the gleanyng of grapes of Ephraim. Gideon answers very wittely, and
by gentle words assuaged the spirits of the Ephraites. By the name of
spirit I understand violence, which proceeded of arrogance and hautynes of
mind, as we read in the Gospel: Blessed are the poor in spirit. Hereby it
appears that a gentle answer breaks anger. That which sprang of envy, he so
seems to have taken it, as though they had been styrred up by a certain honest
emulation, and desired that they also might be authors of the liberty of the
Israelites. They which be envious, are wont to be sorry for this, because they
want some good thing, which they see other have already obtained. Gideon
shows them, that the matter is not so as they think for: when as the greater
part of this victory redounded unto them. What have I done (says he) that may
be compared with your act? I began the war in deed, but ye have slain
Horeb and Zeeb, which was the principallest thing in this battle. The
gleaning of your grapes, are better then my wynepresse. For the two Princes,
whom ye have both taken and killed, are of much more price then the rest of the
multitude, which I have vanquished. And if a regard should be had unto the
Tribe or family, the least part of the tribe of Ephraim is better, and
stronger, then all the power and ability of the Abiezerites. Gideon tells
them not that he was peculiarly chosen of God unto this office: for that would
more have provoked them to anger. Wherefore he thought to give place to the
desire of glory, wherwyth they burned, and to their enuiousnes. And yet in the
mean time he lies not: for as much as the tribe of Ephraim was most strong.
Neither could Gideon by himself, or by his own power perform those things
which they did, although by the favor and help of God he did greater things.

Of the affections of envy and emulation.
But I think it good somewhat to speak of the affections, namely of Envy and
Emulation, and such like. Affections (as it is well known) pertain unto the
general word of quality, and ar contained in that form, which is commonly
called Passio, and passibilis qualitas. And amongst those there are two more
gross and very common, Four principal affections which follow knowledge.
Delectation (I say) and Sorrow. Their chief place is in the synowes, which are
dispersed in a manner throughout the whole body. Unto which, when either
agreeable things to nature, or things contrary ar applied, then either we have a
delectatio^, or else a grief. Farther, there ar other affections which follow
knowledge, by which as their nature is, the heart alters his mocion by moving
the pulse either upward or downward, according as knowledge does received
good or evil, and that either present or else nigh at hand. For when we feel that
good is present, Laetici^.
And this affection is called Gladness. But if we perceive that the good is
not present, but not far Spes.
then are we stirred up by hope to attain it, and the heart is in like sort
pleasauntly moved. But when Dolor vel Aegritudo. (...).
for it is contracted, it abhorred it, and is vexed: and this affection is wont
to be called both pain, and grief, in Greek it is called (...), so called as
the Stoikes think, as though it were (...): that is consumption: for even as
the body of him that is sick wastes away by sickness, so the mind seems
in a manner to wear away with sorrow. There is also an other knowledge of evil,
not now being present, Metus. The four affections which have their beginning
of Grief and pain. Misericordia. Nemesis. Inuidia.
and by his mouyng very manifestly declineth from it: and such an affection is
called Fear.

Of those four principal affections, these are now to be entreated of, which
have their beginning of Heaviness, or Grief. And they also are reckened to be
four. Mercy, Nemesis, Envy, and Emulation, of which Aristotle in his
Rethorikes has written many goodly things.

But before we entreat particularly of them, one thing is to be enquired of:
Whether Affections are to be counted good or evil. The Stoikes affirm that
they are evil, and they have universally condemned affections, Aemulatio.
Whether affections be good or evil.

The Stoikes.


this reason leadyng them thereunto, because by them the mind, judgment, and
sound Counsel is troubled. For they so distract and shake the mind or reason,
that it can not at pleasure and quietly have the conte^platio^ of things
natural and divine, neither orderly and rightly determine of things to be
done. Farther, because by their wayght they oftentimes drive men to perpetrate
filthy and unjust things: yea and they hurt the body also, when they are very
vehement. These in a manner are the reasons of the Stoikes. The Peripatecians
teach much otherwise, that is, that those things are not true, which the
Stoikes affirm, The Peripatecians.
but when affections are not chastised and kept under by reason, then are they
suffered immoderatly to run at randon. For eue^ ye affections, if they be kept
in with certain bonds, are both good and profitable, as being the matter of
virtues, and which are by nature appointed for their whetstones. For anger
brings no small help unto strength, and mercy is set under the virtue of
clemency. And in the same manner it may be said of many other.

But this sentence wherein the Philosophers do so disagre, What the holy
scriptures affirm of affections
must be decided by the judgment of the holy scriptures. They write, ye man
both as touching soul and as touching body was created of God. And they add,
that all things were good, what soever God created. Wherefore for as much as he
planted affections in man, but not evil and corrupt, as now we have them, but
right and sound, which should obey and serve reason, they must of necessity be
good. Farther the law of God does every where commend unto us mercy, and
preaches repentance, which can not consiste without pain and grief of the
mind. David also writes, and Paul repeteth it, be ye angry, but sin not.
Yea and which more is, affections are ascribed even unto God, as Anger, Mercy,
Grief, Repentance, etc. which things although they are not properly spoken of
him, yet this must we mark, that in the holy scriptures that is never
attributed unto God, which in a man is of it self vice, or of his own nature
sin. This so discussed, let us now entreat of mercy.

Of Mercy.
MErcy is a grief of the mind, which we take for the adversity of other men,
Cicero. Aristotle.
or (as Cicero says) a grief taken for an others ma^s misery. Aristotle
teaches, that Mercy is stirred up, if we see any suffer grievous things which
they have not deserved. For if wicked men be justly punished, Mercy is not
therefore stirred up. Farther he thinks, that those cases which we pitye,
should be terrible, otherwise if they be but light, we are by them little or
nothing moved. Lastly that they are touched with mercy, which do think that
such things may sometimes happen either unto themselves or to some of their
friends. Which is the cause, that Aristotle supposes, that they which are in
prosperity, and do judge themselves happy, are not prone unto mercy, yea they are wont to scoff and mock those which are in misery, as they which think
nothing can hurt them. Likewise he remoueth this affection from such as are
desperate and in a most miserable state, because they are not afraid that any
worse thing can happen unto them, then that which they have already. Wherefore
they seem in that desperate fortune to have become men without senses. But if
this were true, a man might doubt, by what means mercy can be ascribed unto
God, for as much as he without controversy is most blessed, and nothing can hurt
him. But to this might be answered, that mercy is not properly attributed unto
god, but by a metaphore taken of man, because he does those things, Mercy is
also to be showed unto those which justly ar punished.
which merciful men are wont to do. For they help the afflicted, which self
same thing god also does. But in this thing I agree not unto Aristotle, which
will not have mercy to be showed unto those which are justly punished. For
Samuel mourned long time for Saul, who^ God rejected not unworthily, but most
justly. Christ also wept over the destruction of Jerusalem which was at hand
unto that City, not undoubtedly without deserte, but justly. Neither think I
this true, that sins, which some me^ commit, do not stir up mercy, but
only calamityes and aduersityes do stir up mercy. For holy men are no less
grieved for other men's causes, when they fall into grievous sins, the^ they
are when they be oppressed with evil fortune, yea they are so much the more
grieved, as that evil is more pernicious, and less able to be cured. Wherefore
we can not deny, but that mercy is a good affection, for as much as it obeys
the word of God and reason, especially seeing the Lord by his own mouth has
pronounced, that the merciful are blessed, because they also shall obtain
mercy.

The other affection which has his beginning of Heuinesse or Grief, is called
Nemesis: Nemesis.
the same has no Lattin word, although of some it be called Indignatio, that
is Indignation, which yet by that word do not express all that affection: for
Indignation extends farther than Nemesis. Holy men ofte^tymes ar sick of
Nemesis.
But leauyng the word, let us thus define the thing. Nemesis is a grief, which
is taken for ye prosperity of wicked men, because they seem unworthy of that
fortune. Just and holy men are sick oftentimes of this affection. David when
he saw the ungodly flourishing, said: My fete were almost moved. Abacuk also,
was grieved that the ungodly were of such force, that they could oppress the
saints, and devour the just. And Job seems in a manner to complain unto his
friends for the same thing. Farther Plutarche in the life of Homere praises
this affection, Plutarche.
and by occasion thereof he far prefers the Peripatecians in disputing of
Affections before the Stoikes, and especially by the judgment of Homere, who
affirms that God at the length will angerly punish, after that the wicked
have a certain while flourished. Howbeit this is to be observed, that men are
not grieved with this affection, for that they shall suffer any loss, by
reason of the prosperous success of the wicked, or because that they by their
power can hurt them. For if they were in this manner grieved, they should not be
troubled with Nemesis, but rather with fear. But Nemesis is then, when a man
for the lucky success of the wicked, is moved with astomake and hatred of the
unworthiness of the person.

How mercy and Nemesis agree and differ.
This affection in two things co^municateth with Mercy: first because either of
them is a Heuinesse: farther, because each of the^ is stirred up by the
unworthiness of the thing. Mercy, because good men are grieved and oppressed,
and Nemesis, because wicked men live happily. But in this afterward they
differ, because Nemesis has a respect unto prosperous fortune, and Mercy unto
sharp fortune. Wherefore Nemesis is in a manner a mean affection between Envy
and Mercy, for of either it seems to take somewhat: of mercy it takes
unworthiness: of Envy prosperity, which it has a respect unto. Aristotle.
Farthermore Aristotle teaches yt none are affected with Nemesis for other
men's virtues: for if otherwise they of vicious and corrupt men, become just,
moderate, strong, and temperate men, we are not then angry, because when they
are adorned with virtues, they are no longer counted wicked men. But then at
the last we are affected with Nemesis, when those good things come unto wicked
me^, with which we think ye good me^ ought to be rewarded, as are riches,
honors, power, favor, and such like. But godly men must wisely deal with this
affection, that when their minds are affected with it, because of the felicity
of the ungodly, let them have a regard unto God, which is the true gouerner
and distributer of all good things. Wherefore if men should bestow these
outward goods upon the unworthy, their injustice might justly be reproved. But
such a reprehension has no place in God, because he does all things most
justly. This thing David when he did not diligently consider, said: My fete
were almost moved. As though he should have said: By reason of this Nemesis I
had almost grievously fallen. We must seldom give place to Nemesis. Inuidia.
Inuidenciae. Cicero. How envy and enuide^ce differ Envy. The definition of
Envy.
Wherefore we must seldom give place to this affection, least we seem to
reprehende the Providence of God.

Now must we speak of envy. Cicero thinks that it should rather be called
Enuidence, for they among Lattin men are said to be sick with Envy, which are
envied. But Enuidence pertayneth to them, which consume away with this disease.
And therefore he thinks that Envy or Enuidence is therefore so called, because
that they which are envious, do to much look upon other men's fortune. Envy
therefore is a grief which is taken for an other ma^s prosperity, especially of
those which are equal and like unto us. For a poor man enuieth not a king,
neither do beggars envy noble men. We envy those that are like and equal unto
us. And the likeness is to be understand, as touching kindred, riches, beawty,
age, wit, dignity, and such like. The cause of Enuidence is not, because we
fear that some hurt is at hand of those whom we envy: for that should be
fear. But of a certain hatred and stomach we can not abide the prosperity of
other men, especially of our matches and like. And thereof Envy is the cause.

Envy is evermore counted evil, and it is by the holy scriptures grievously
reproved. For it is most manifestly against Charity. For the Apostle said unto
the Corinth. the 1. chap. Charity enuieth not. Charity (...).
For Paul takes not properly there ye word (...) which is turned envy. But
to the Galathians he more plainly forbids envy, writing: Be not ye made
desirous of vain glory, provoking one an other, and enuieng one an other:
Where not only Envy is reproved, Desire of glory is the mother of Envy.
but the mother of it is also showed, namely desire of glory. As also we may in
this history perceive. For the Ephraites envied Gideon, because the glory of so
great a victory seemed to redound unto him. And this affection is of force in
all those things, wherein we desire to excel. Neither absteyneth it also from
virtues: for ye envious persons would not that his matches and like should
excel him in any ornament of virtues. But the cause why envy is conversant
among like, is this, because although the prosperous fortune of like or
matches, does take away none of our goods, neither makes us lesser then we
are, yet the Envious person so thinks of the good things of other men, as
though by them his honor and dignity, gain, Of (...).
and other ornaments were darkened. And this is not to be left unspoken of, yt
every envious person is one that reioyseth in an other man's hurt: for he
reioyseth in the adversity of his equal. Every envious m^nne is (...) that is
one that reioy^eth at another mas^^^^
Yet are not these to be counted for one and the self same vice, seeing they
pertayne unto contrary mocions of the mind. For Enuidence is a grief or sorrow,
when he that reioyseth in an other man's hurt is affected with joy. Yet are
these vices, although they be diverse, otherwise so joined together, that there
is no envious man which is not moved with the rejoicing in the hurt of an
other. And hereby it manifestly appears that Enuide^ce plainly is contrary
unto Mercy. For it lamenteth an other ma^s misery, but the envious man
reioyseth therein, because of the disease of rejoicing in the hurt of an other
wherewith he is sick. Nemesis is ioned also with (...)
They that are affected with Nemesis want not also this motion of the mind.
For he which is sorry for ye prosperous success of wicked men, the same man is
also affected with pleasure, when he sees them oppressed and vexed. The
Latins have no word to express this kind of joy, wherewith both the
envious man, and he that has Nemesis is affected, in beholding an others man's
prosperity.

Of emulation.
Lastly we must entreat of Emulation, which is a grief of the mind, which we
conceive for good things which happen unto other, which we want, which we
think should beautify us, and would gladly attain unto them. By this motion
of the mind we desire not, that other me^ should be deprived of their
ornaments, but that grieueth us, because we our selves are destitute of the^.
And it is a point of a good nature, in this manner to be affected: therefore
Emulation is numbered among laudable Affections. Emulation is counted among
laudable affections.
Cicero in his Tusculan questions, defines it to be a grief, which proceeds
of that, that an other enjoys that good thing which we desire. The same
writer observes also, that Emulation is sometimes so taken, that it nothing
differs from Enuidence: wherefore it is sometimes reproved. But if the
definition thereof be received, as it is now alleged, it is an affection
laudable, because it makes men better: for it uses to bring forth the
imitacion of good things. We must beware that Emulation degenerate not into
envy.

Cicero.

Riuality is the envy between two loving one woman.

The matter wherein Emulation is occupied.

Emulatio^ has hope joined with it.

The Ephraites were sick of Envy, and not of Emulation.


But we must take heed, which undoubtedly is easily done, that it degenerate
not into Envy, and Emulatio^ proceed not so far, that we should wish that men
fortunate and noble, and also wise men, might be spoiled of their ornaments
and good things. Wherefore Cicero said, that that Emulation is laudable, which
is not like unto riuality. For this is the nature of those that be Riuales, so
to enjoy their delights, that they utterly exclude all other. But addyng these
cautions, Emulation is both good and holy. Wherefore Paul exhorted the
Corinthians to emulate Charity, and the chiefest gifts. This affection is
chiefly occupied about virtues, and al things which are had in honor and
admiracio^. For that which a man contemns and dispyseth, he uses not to
emulate. Emulation has Hope continually joined with it, of obteyning that
which it desires. For if a man should despair, it is not possible that he
should emulate. And thus much of these affections.

Wherefore we gather that the Ephraites were moved with envy against Gideon,
because they would have him deprived of the glory which he had gotten. Neither
contended they so, because they studied to do the like, although peradventure
they made that their pretense. But Gideon makes not mention unto them of his
vocation, labor, industry, love of his country, his good act, and such other
things, which might have served to the amplifieng of his deserte toward the
people, and of his dignity. For by that means he should the more have moved
them to envy: but after a sort he gave place unto them, and interprets their
affection, as though it were an honest emulatio^. And teaches them, yt they
have now ye fruit of this affection, because they had not only imitated him,
but they had done more then he had accomplished. But now let us return unto
the History.

4 And Gideon came unto Jorden to pass over, he and the 300. me^ that were
with him, weary, yet pursuing them.

5 And he said unto the men of Succoth: Give, I pray you, morsels of bread unto
this people that are at my fete, for they are weary: and I will follow after
Zebah and Zalmonah Kings of Madian.

6 And one of the princes of Succoth said: Are the hands of Zebah, and
Zalmonah now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army?

7 Gideon then said: Therefore, when the Lord has delivered Zebah, and
Zalmonah into mine hand, then I will beat in pieces your flesh with thorns
of the wilderness and with briars.

8 And he went up thence unto Penuel, and spoke unto them likewise, and the men
of Penuel answered him: as the men of Succoth answered.

9 And he said also unto the men of Penuel: when I come again in peace, I will
break down this Tower.

10 Now Zebah and zalmonah were in Karkor, and their hosts with the^, about
fiften thousand, al yt were left of all the hosts of the children of Kedem:
and they which were slain, were an hundredth and twenty thousand men that drew
swords.

11 And Gideon went thorough them that dwelt in tabernacles, on the East side
of Nobah, Iogbehah, and smote the host, for the host was careless.

12 And when zebah and zalmonah fled, he followed after them, and took the two
kings of Madian, zebah and zalmonah, and disco^fited all the host.

13 So Gideon the son of Ioas returned from the battle, before the sun
rose up.


After a long parenthesis the history returns unto the just order of ye thing
that was done, and declares in what sort the end of the battle was. When
the Madianites and they of the East had wounded themselves one an other, and a
few of them which remained, fled away: Gideon pursued after them, and passed
over Iordane. And because he had labored all the night, and saw that his three
hundredth men were weary, he would somewhat refresh them. Therefore he required
meat of ye city of Succoth for his fellow soldiers. Two Succoths.
And Succoth lies beyond Iordane in the tribe of Gad. Jacob builded it, when
he departed from saluting his brother Esau. Which I therefore speak, because
there is an other place which is likewise called Succoth, but it belongs unto
Egypt, and is numbered among the first mention places of the children of Israel.

Gideon desires that he might have given him Kichroth, that is round pieces of
bread for his weary soldiers. Undoubtedly, if he had required great plenty of
bread or meat generally, they of Succoth might after a sort have been excused.
But by name he desired only bread. Wherefore they which would not do that, can
not but be condemned of great inhumanite. He brings two causes of his request.
He brings two causes of his request: my fellow soldiers, says he, are
weary, namely because for the public health they have labored all night:
whereby he signified that they were not unworthy of their reward. Farther we
pursue the Madianites, puttyng our selves again in danger for the health of
the Hebrews. Either of these cause were sufficient enough to allure their
benevolence.

The princes of Succoth answer, namely one for them all, and therefore it is
said in the singular number, Vaiiomer, and he said. Whereby is signified that
only the princes and senators of this city were in the fault, and therefore
they were at the length (as afterward shall be declared) punished by Gideon, and
he threatened them only, as it is here written. They do not only refuse to give
bread, but also they scorn the man. Are, says they, the hands of zebah and
zalmonah in thy power? Thou speak unto us with so great a stoutness, and
so desire bread, as though thou had already taken them. Gideon was
griuously angry with these mockes for so unworthy a contempt, and he freely and
plainly forespake, what he would do against them.

If these ungodly and rude men had been wise, they would have joined them
selves unto him, to assiste his endeavor in fighting for the common health. But
this they do not impudently deny bread which men use to give unto such as are
weary and hungry, although they be strangers. A wonderful diversity
undoubtedly of things: The Madianites which were strangers, were afraid and
fled: but those which were Israelites, mock Gideon the conqueror. If thou will say they were ignorant of his vocation: we may answer, that they could
not deny, but that his work was good. But grant that they doubted of the
vocation and principality of Gideon, what excuse at the last can their most
wanton derision have? For so did Nabal the Carmilite behave himself toward
David, when he required some meat of him for his Soldiers, making mention of
his faith, and the fidelitye of his men, in safegardyng his things. But he did
not only deny unto him that humanity, but sent away the messangers laden
with contumelyes. The things which Gideon required, were just and honesty.
Stipe^des and victuales are due unto an host which goes on warfare.
For stipendes and vittailes are due unto the Magistrates, for as much as he
labors for the publicque vtility. Wherefore Paul says: Therefore ye give
unto him tribute, because he is the Minister of God, namely in defendyng the
innocent, and punishyng the guilty. Wherefore they of Succoth were bound to
give those things which were desired, by the duty of justice. For the same
Apostle writes, render unto every man that which is due: to whom tribute
belongs, tribute, to whom custom is due, custom, etc. The Ethnikes also saw
this, when as there are many ciuiles laws exta^t, which do both weyghtely
and most just provide, that Soldiers should have vittayles found them, when
they goo on warfare. And how much they sinned in mockyng so great a man, we
may gather by the words of Christ, who says: If a man say unto an other man
fool, or Racha, be shall be guilty of judgment and Counsel: how much more
shall he be condemned, which wantonly scoffeth and mocketh his Magistrate?
Some princes did severely punish those which with contumelyes reproched even
their images: what ought this man to do with those, which so mocked him to
his face? These things I therefore speak, that we should not think that
Gideon did unjustly threaten them. It is not for private men to revenge their
own iniuryes: But it is the office of the Magistrate to revenge both his own
iniuryes and other men's, and in reuengyng his own, he reuengeth also other
men's iniuryes. For what souer contumely is committed against a prince, it
redoundeth unto the public wealth and all princes. Gideon at this present did
only threaten, yet he stayed not there, least by occasion of reuengyng of his
own injury, the commodity of the victory, whereunto he was called by God,
should be hindered. He differred therefore that which belonged unto himself:
but with speed he prosecuteth that, which chiefly pertayned to the delyuery
of the publicque wealth. But princes at this day do otherwise, who rather make
war among themselves, and that for very light causes, then they will take in
hand a common cause and defense against the Turk. Yea and there are some,
and those of the Cardinals, which write that they will (if they can) call
back Caesar himself from that course of victory, wherewith he might obtain
again even the City of Constantinople, and to punish the Germaynes and
Englishemen, and other which fell from the Church of Rome.

Furthermore, Gideon is for this thing to be praised, namely because, although
meat wanted, and he was despised of the Hebrews, yet he desisted not from that
vocation, wherein he was constituted by GOD. But now both princes and
ministers of the Church will not abide in their office, unless things
necessary for their living be most abundantly ministered unto them. He
threateneth thorns and briars unto the princes of Succoth. For that City
which the Ethnikes call Trogloditis, had a desert in the circuit thereof, Why
he threa^neth thorns and briars. Penuel.
wherein grew many thorns and briars. Penuel is of Strabo called the face of
God: in which place Jacob wrasteled with ye angel, and said at the last: I
have seen the Lord face to face, and my soul has escaped safe. The men of
Penuel in mockyng Gideon imitated them of Succoth, and because they puttyng
their confidence in the Tower which they had, did so scoff at Gideon,
therefore he threatened to overthrow it after his victory. But how this
Captain of GOD got meat, it is not written: and peradventure GOD so
strengthened him and his host, that without meat he perfectly obtained the
victory which he had begone.

He fyndeth his enemies living in securitye: it was night when he passed over
Iordane: and they had but even now escaped out of the borders of the
Israelites, and they thought ye Gideon would be in quiet at the least for that
night. These were the causes, that they so securely rested themselves. There
were fifttene thousand soldiers together, as certain small remnauntes: for at
the beginning there came one hundredth and twenty thousand fighting men, which
stood in the brunte, and bore weapons. Whereby we may easily gather what a
great number there were of boys, scullions, and unprofitable men, which use
to follow hosts. When the two kings were taken, Gideon returned, when the
Sun was elevated, that is, after his rising: by which kind of speaking, we
manifestly know, that this war, as it was begone in the night time, so also
was it finished by night.

14 And he took a servant of the men of Succoth: and enquired of him: and he
wrote to him the princes of Succoth, and the Elders thereof even seuentye and
seven men.

15 And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said: Behold Zebah and Zalmonah by
whom ye vpbrayded me, saying: Are the hands of Zebah and zalmonah now in thy
hand, that thou desire, that we should give bread unto thy weary men?

16 Then he took the Elders of the City, and thorns of the desert and briars
and brake with them the men of Succoth.

17 Also he brake down the Tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the City.


Gideon required of this fellow being either a young man or a servant, to
describe unto him the names of the princes or Senators of Succoth. He trusts
not his memory, but will have their names written, and studieth for this thing
only, not to commit any thing by anger with a furious mind. And therefore with
mature deliberation he would punish only the guilty, and not destroy the
unguilty together with the guilty. He saw that only the heads of the City
resisted him, wherefore he determined to punish them alone. Theodosius, A fall
of Theodosius.
an Emperor otherwise most worthy of praise, fell grievously, because in the
City of Thessalonia, for the killing of one Soldier, which bare rule under
him, he commanded a great number of Citezins to be slain without any choice,
whereby both the guilty, and the innocent were killed. Wherefore he was
corrected by the authority of Ambrosius being Bishop, The Emperor corrected
of the Bishop.
and compelled to public repentance: and by the commandment of the same
man of GOD he made a law, which is yet in the Code, that the sentence of
death being pronounced against any man, should be stayed the space of thirty
days, before he should be put to execution. But now a days it oftentimes
comes to pass, that some public wealth is most grievously oppressed, if
two, three, or four Citezins thereof have offended: all privileges, liberty,
and other ornaments are in a moment taken away. Why he saved the kings of
Madian on live.
Farther we must consider, that Gideon did rashely save one live Zebah and
Zalmonah whom he had taken: for he would show them unto the men of Succoth
and Citizens Penuel, that GOD had delivered them unto him. He vexed the princes
both with thorns and briars, as he threatened, that by their evil they might
learn, how much and what they had offended. Thorns are unlucky pla^ts.
Iodeach is in this place not only to instruct, but (as I suppose) it
signifies in Lattin animaduertere which is to punish. Thorns are counted
even of the Ethnikes among vnluckly plants: and therefore it is no marvel, if
they be occupied in punishementes. But whether he slew them, or only chastised
them, by the words of the Hystory it appears not. But of Penuel it is
manifest enough, both that the tower was overthrown and the Citezins slain,
because either they scoffed more wantonly than the men of Succoth did, or else
trustyng to the fense of the place they resisted Gideon, wherefore when they
came to the battle they were slain: or else let us grant that they of
Succoth also perished with thorns and briars.

18 Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmonah, What manner of men were they, whom ye
slew at Thabor? and they answered: As thou art, so were they: every one was
like the children of a king.

19 And he said, they were my brethren even my mothers children. As the Lord
lives, if ye had saved their lives, I would not slaye you.

20 Then he said unto Iether his first borne son, Up and slaye them. But
the boy drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a child.

21 And Zebah and Zalmonah said, Rise thou, and fall upon us, for as the man
is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and zalmonah, and
took away the ornaments, that were on the camels necks.


Now is set forth the punishment of these two kings of Madian, which Gideon
had therefore saved on live, to show them unto those Israelites, whom he had
determined to punish, when he had obtained the victory. First he asks them,
what manner of men they were, whom they slew in mount Thabor. They answered
that they were like him, and so comely and beautiful, that they might appear
to be the children of a king. And that may also be understand of one of them,
when as it is said Echad: we may also understand it of every one of them.
There are some also which think that those that were slain were in semblance
and beauty lykened unto the children of Gideon, Gideon was exceeding beaufull.
whom therefore they called a king, because they saw him bear dominion in
the host. Hereby is gathered that Gideon was excedyng beautiful. But when his
brethren were killed, we can not find by the holy History. But it might be,
that they committed this act now when they came to make this war, or else
before when every year they invaded the land of the Israelites in the time of
harvest. Of mount Thabor we have before spoken, when we entreated of the
victory of Barak and Deborah.

It was not lawful to save these kings on live.
As the Lord lives, if ye had saved their lives. Gideon might have saved
these kings lives, if they had not slain his brethren: but because they had
slain them it was not lawful. For in the book of Numbers there is a law,
wherein it is ordained, that the next of kynne must not suffer the blood of
him that is dead unpunished, not that a private man should kill a murderer,
but he must be brought unto the Judge that there the cause being known he
might be punished. And therefore Gideon being a Magistrate ought by that law
to punish them. Otherwise he might have let them goo, for as much as they
were not Chananites, whom GOD had commanded, that they should not spare.
Wherefore Gideon swears nothing contrary to the word of God. And he said
unto Iether. He commands his first borne son, being then a young manne,
to slaye them, but he feared, neither durst he draw his swoorde: The two
kings disdain, and would not be killed with the hand of a child, even as
Abimelech would be slain of his Armor bearer, least he should seem to be
killed of a woman. Farther, they easily saw, that they should be long in
pain or they were dead, when as the child by reason of want of strength
could not rid them out of their life quickly. Why Gideon willed his son to
kill ye kings.
And Gideon peradventure did for this cause command his son to do this
thing, to inflame his heart, even from his tend^r years against the enemies
of the peopl of GOD, as it is written of Hannibal, who from a child vowed
himself against the Romans: Or else he did it to learn him from his tender
age to obey the law of God, wherein was commanded that the blood of the next
of kynne being shed, should be revenged.

But might not he have committed that office unto a hangeman? why would he so
urge his son? To this may be answered two ways. First that in the old
time it was not uncomely to slay the guylty. Farther, The Hebrews had no
hangemen.
that it is not seen that the Hebrews had hangemen. And undoubtedly, that this
was no office among the Hebrews, this testifies, because in the law it is
written, that a blasphemer being taken, was so stoned to death, that the hand
of the witnesses did throw the first stone against him: neither was the
puttyng to death of any body committed to any peculiar hangeman. And there are
many examples which testifye that it was not ignominious to slaye the guilty.
Saul when he would have the Priests slain, called not hangemen to do it,
but turned to the noble men which were with him, and commanded them to invade
the Priests: who reuerensyng their ministry and dignitye, durst not obey.
Only Doeg the Edomite durst execute so great a wicked act, who was not of
least estimation with the king. Samuel also with his own hand slew king
Agag the prisoner. Ioab in like manner when he had cought hold of the horn of
the altar, was slain of Banaia the chief Captain of the host. Wherefore it
seems that the Hebrews in that ancient time had no hangemen.

But as much as may be gathered by the Hystoryes of the Ethnikes, Lictores,
were ministers appointed to execute corporal punishment. Plutarche.
Lictores began at Rome under Romulus, who (as Plutarche writes in his life)
were called so either of ligando, that is of byndyng, or because the Grecians
callem them (...), or (...), because they executed a public office. Romulus
gave them Rods bound together to carry, and to them was an axe joined. They
had also cords to bind the Citezins withal, that being bound, they might
either beat them with rods, or strike them with the axe. But the men of more
ancient time wanted this office: every man executed it without any infamy, as
it was by the Magistrate commanded him. And in very deed that work of
punishyng malefactors, has in it no dishonestye or vncomelynesse, For if it be
honest, for a judge or prince to give sentence of death against evil doers,
why then shall it not be just and honest to execute the same sentence? Yea and
GOD himself in punishyng, uses not only evil spirits, but good spirits.

But thou will say, Why Lictores and hangemen are of the common people evil
spoken of.
why are Lictores and hangemen commonly so evil men flattered the people more
then was meet, they sent away the hangeman out of the market place, and
judgment house of Rome, as even the Oration of Cicero for Rabirius testifies.
The Romans used not a hangeman for their Citezins.
The Citezins of Rome were not beaten with rods, nor put to death. Their
extremest punishment was banishement, they were carried into ylandes, and at
the length condemned to ye working of Mettalles. But the latter Romayne laws,
which are in the digestes, blotted out that exemption: for in very deed it was
unjust. For a fault worthy of death ought not to be wynked at, although a
Citezin of Rome were the author of it. And there were two principal laws
whereby the back and head of the Citezins were provided for, Portia lex and
Sempronia.
the law I say Portia, and Sempronia, whose power and defense nevertheless
Paul (as we read in the Acts) used, and so escaped both rods and bonds.
This is one cause why Lictores and hangmen are so hated.

The irregularity of the Canonistes.
An other cause hereof in the Papisticall opinion of irregularity, which as the
Canonistes will have it, is contracted of every murder. These men think that
a man can not so justly kill any man, that he may be promoted to the holy
Ministerye: when as yet the Inquisitours of the herecticall prauity (as they
term it) do daily cause an infinite number, and those innocents, to be
killed. The Popes Legates also in gouernyng of Cities, and Provinces, and
making wars, although they be Cardinals and Bishops, do still
continually cause blood to be shed. But in the mean time, with great
hypocrisy they take heed, that the sentence be given by a lay Judge (as they
call him) and so they wrappe themselves out of that irregularity. But the holy
Scriptures do not so teach. Moses said unto the Levites, which with him had
killed so many, ye have consecrated your hands: so far was it of that they
should be deprived of the holy Ministry. But the Pope says, that David for
shedding of blood, was in the old time prohibited to build the Temple. But in
this place we must mark the misterye wherein Solomon shadowed Christ, the
peacable king. For he was by him expressed, which has gathered together the
Church, the true Temple of GOD without weapons, unto the true and everlasting
peace. But blood being justly and ryghtly shed, Blood shed justly and rightly,
restrains not from the holy ministry.
restrayneth not from the holy ministry. For Pinhas who was high Priest,
thrust thorough two most vnpure whoremongers. Elyas, a man of the stock of
the Levites, slew with his own hand the Prophets of Baal. And Samuel, a man
of the same tribe, did himself kill Agag the king, and yet neither of them
both were rejected from their office. Neither do I therefore speak these
things, to commend the promotyng of murderers unto holy orders: but this only
I oppugn, that every slaughter and every murder makes a man so irregular (as
these men say) that he can not be ordained a Minister of the Church. What
if a man have been a Judge or a Magistrate, or in just war has fought for
his country, can not he therefore be ordained a Minister of the Church?
Peradventure he has obtained excellent gifts of God, and is endewed with
singular doctrine, adorned with a pure life, instructed with dexterity of
gouernyng, and godly eloquence: can not the Church (as these men most
absurdely think) use his gifts? Undoubtedly that was not observed in Ambrose,
he was servant unto Caesar, and decided matters in the law being Praetor of
Millan, and yet was he by violence taken to be a Bishop. I know that Paul
requires that a Bishop be no striker: but no man doubts, but that that
is to be understand of an unjust murder or violence. But what should a man
here do? all things are by the Papists handled supersticiously.

Lictores and hangemen are evil spoken of, is this, because very many of them
live wickedlye and filthy, and were before time noughty men. Aristotle.
Howbeit the office defiles them not: but rather by their fault they pollute
an excellent office. Aristotle in his.6. book of Politikes the last chapter
says, that good men abhor this kind of office, namely of punishing of me^,
(...).
because it has a hatred annexed unto it. For they do oftentimes incur the
hatred of men. But in my judgment, a good and godly man ought not for that
cause to abhor his administration. I remember an answer of Chrisippus, A
saying of Chrisippus.
who being demanded why he excercised not the office of a magistrate. If I
exercise it not rightly (said he) I shall displease god: but if I do rightly, I
shall displease men: but I will do neither of both. He seemed to some to have
answered very prudently, but me thinks he answered folishly. For he should
rather have answered co^trarily that the public wealth ought to be governed,
and that rightly, to please both God and good men: but a wise and good man
must not have a respect unto wicked men. By these things it is now
manifestly showed, that Gidion in that he himself killed the kings of Madian,
committed nothing that was not decent for him, neither that he commanded his
son to do any fylthy act.

22 Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon: Reign thou over us, both thou and
thy son and thy sons son, because thou have delivered us out of the hand
of Madian.

23 And Gideon answered them: I will not raygne over you, neither shall my
child reign over you, the Lord shall reign over you.


The people ^eceauinge a benefit at Gideons hand, would have made him king,
that they might not be counted ingrate. But seeing gratitude is a virtue, it
ought to have no unjust thing joined with it: which these men observed not.
For they appointed not their kingdom by the law of god. In Deuteronomy. the.27.
chap. it is written, that he should be a king whom god had chosen. It pertained
unto god to elect a king.
Neither perteined it unto the people, to appoint a king whom they would.
Wherefore that which they do now, is not freely to give any thing that is their
own, but to give ye which is an other man's. The right to appointe a king,
belonged to god, and not unto men: which thing also Gideon wisely saw, neither
was Christ ignorant thereof, when they which were filled with bread, came unto
him to create him a king, Christ refused a kingdom offered unto him.

What manner of men the old Romayne bishops were.


he wayghed the manner of his vocation, and for that his kingdom was not of
this world, and understood that they usurped an other man's right, and were
not moved thereunto: By just causes, he put of from himself such a burden. The
same things happened in a manner unto ye bishops of Rome. Which at the beginning
were holy: for very many of the^ were notable by constancy of faith, and
martirdom. Farthermore their church was kindled with feruentnes of charity, and
toward the poor most liberal, so that it sent alms even into the east part,
to the Islands and metalle places, where the holy confessors of Christ lived in
exile. All which things got that chair much favor and grace with the
faithful. Gregorius.
Wherefore the supreme power and kingdom in the church was in a manner
offered, some times unto those bishops: which they like Gideon refused with a
great spirit and singular modesty. Of which thing also what Gregorius the b.
of Rome judged, I will briefly declare. In his.4. book of Epistles. in
the.32.34.36.38. and.39. Epistles he of that matter writes at large, both unto
Mauritius the emperor, and also to Constantia Augusta, likewise to the
Patriarchs, Alexandrinus, and Antiochenus, yea and to John the Patriarche of
Constantinople, and lastly to Anianus Deacon of the same church.

In the time (says he) of Pelagius my predecessor, Ioannes
Constantinopolitanus when he had assembled a sinode, by an other pretense,
claymed unto him self the title of the universal supreme Patriarch, which
thing Pelagius took in evil part, and therefore made the acts of that Sinode
frustrate. Farther, he commanded his Deacon which was his deputye, whom he
had with the Emperor, that he should not communicate with John, being so
arrogant and proud. Gregorye succeeded Pelagius and decreed the same things, and
writing unto the emperor, says, Peter the chief among the Apostles, never
called himself universal Apostle, and nevertheless John bishop of
Constantinople now goes about to call him self the universal Patriarch: and
straightway he cries out: O times, O manners. And this reason he adds to
these things, if the universal head be so ordained of men, by the ruin or
corruption of such a head, the church also shall perish together. Of this
place Nestorius was once bishop, who believed most wickedly of the son of god.
Macedonius had the same dignitye, who believed not that the holy ghost was god.
If those Patriarchs had then been universal Bishops in the church, the whole
church had fallen also with them.

Let none of the papists cry that it is no strong argument: because it is none
of ours, but Gregory's their father: let them cry out against him, who
afterward adds: That he which makes himself universal bishop, takes away
from other bishops their office, for where any man is universal bishop, he
leaves no office of a bishop unto others. This also is the collectio^ of
Gregory, and not found out by us. And undoubtedly if a man at this day look
rightly and more nighly up on the thing, he shall see that the bishops of the
west do govern their churches only by the order given them by the bishop of
Rome. Gregory counts it for an absurdity that the Pope should be preferred
before the Emperor.
Gregory afterward adds that John prefers himself above the Emperor:
which thing Gregory counted for an absurdity. But our men now a days think
it necessary that Caesar should be subject to him: yea they have often times
resisted emperors, many times wearied them, and sometimes moved them out of
their place. And yet Gregory their father detesteth and inueigheth against it,
as a thing unjust and not to be suffered. And writing unto Augusta he is yet
more vehement, saying that the same belongs unto Antechrist. Wherefore let not
our me^ marvel, if we sometime call the bishop of Rome Antechrist, for as much
as their Gregory, calls him by ye most goodly title, which will be universal
bishop.

The sinode of Chalsedonia erred.
The Sinode of Calcedonia, as the same Gregory says, gave unto the seat of Rome
this prerogative, namely unto Leo the first of that name. Howbeit no man used
it, because our elders being men most holy, saw it was not meet for any
mortal man. Only Christ is the universal head of the church For he is the small
grayn of musterdsede, which has incresed into abroad and large tree, that it
ouerspreadeth the whole world: and he is that little leaven, wherewith three
peckes of meal were leauened. And the stone hewed out without hands, which is
become so great a mount that it has filled al things. Wherefore Christ him
self, for as much as he is able to be with us, is to al us the universal head,
to whom every one of us cleaves as members. Moreover Gregory admonishes
Alexandrinus and Antiochenus, that they should receive no Epistles, which had
written in them a tittle of so great pride. And he says, that to receive such
a title, is to fall from the faith. Now let our men go, and obtrude this yoke,
which by the testimony of their Gregory we can not receive, except we should
go back from faith: Namely in attributing that to a man, which we must believe
is propre and peculiar unto Christ. Neither doubts he to affirm, that this
John transgressed the decrees of Christ, the rules of the Apostles, and Cannons
of the fathers. All these things says he, has he violated in the usurpation
of this one title. And he adds, what will thou answer unto Christ in the
last day of judgment, thou that have arrogantly taken upon thee his office,
and wilt have al his members subject unto thee? He commanded, that we should
not call any a father unto us upon earth. But thou command men to call thee
universal father. In what estimation therefore have thou the words of the Lord?

An error of Gregory
Howbeit in collecting of these places of Gregory, I think there are some
things which are diligently to be taken head of, namely two: of the which the
one is, that he says yt Peter was the chief membre of the universal church:
and Paul, Andrew and John, were heads of singular churches. This I therefore
admonish you, forbycause the Apostles were not bishops of singular churches, for
they wandered abroad thorough out the whole world, they founded churches and
wan sundry nations unto the Lord, and al they were members, Another error of
Gregory.
and that principal me^bres of the universal church. Wherefore this se^te^ce of
Gregory is not to be admitted. The other thing, which I judge is to be
observed, is that Gregory does testify that this his John did first usurp unto
himself the title of universality, Theodoretus.
which assuredly I cannot be persuaded of. Forasmuch as Theodoretus in his
book de haerecibus, when he writes of Nestorius, oftentimes says, that he
was made universal patriarch. Yea and Iustinianus in suis nouellis,
attributes that title to diverse Patriarchs. And (to speak as the thing is)
I suppose, that Gregory this pretty little saint would have had the thing or
matter of an universal bishop, although he reprehended the name and title. For
as the history of those times teaches, and his epistles testify, he abstained
not from governing of other churches He showed indeed that the name should be
avoided, namely least the patriarch of Constantinople by that title should
either prefer himself, or be equal unto the bishop of Rome.

But before these times, Ciprian wythstoode the church of Rome, Cipria^
resisted the church of Rome.
who sought then to claim unto it self some tyranny, and he judged that
appellatio^s should not be brought unto the seat of Rome, but would have
Ecclesiastical causes judged in every singular province: namely, that they
which in any place were condemned by the judgment of bishops, should not be
restored by the aid of the seat of Rome: when as yet he chiefly reverenced the
church of Rome, and acknowleged it as ye Matrix in these our regio^s. And
assuredly to have it in great estimacion, is a far other thing, then to
grant unto it tyranny or dominion above al other. For to the first we may
after a sort agree, but to the other we must not assente, unless we will fall
from the faith. Afterward in Augustines time, when he was present at the
Sinode of Africa, The counsel of Afrike resisted the church of Rome.
there was great and long alteration about this thing, and at length the
bishop of Rome could never prove (which thing yet he chiefly endeavored to do)
that this power was given him in the council of Nice, that men from all
parts of the world might appeal unto him. Wherefore if it were either for
lack of knowledge or of some rashness, or by the people, or by flaterers given
to any bishop of Rome, it should by the example of Gideon, Leo, and Gregory
have been refused.

We must not trust unto the inconstancy of the common people, The inconstancye
of the common people.
which is always moveable now they will have Gideon to reign, a little
afterward you shall see that they were most ungrate against him: for (as the
historye declares) they slew his children. Gideon refuses not the
principality, as though he would not labor in the public wealth: What the
Popes ought to have before their eyes.
but because he understood that it was no lawful vocation: which the Popes also
ought to regard. He had before his eyes ye law in Deuteronomy. now alleged. The Pope
ought also to look upon the words of Christ: Kings of the nations (says the
Lord) bear rule over their subjects: but ye shall not do so: and being
demanded, who should be greatest, he aunsweared, that he which was lowest, and
which more served others. This is to govern the church, not to command, but to
serve. Peter himself also taught ministers not to bear dominion over their
flock. Who are in the church to ^^uerenced above other.
And Paul has written that Christ is set the head of the church, and not men:
although in it they are above other to be much made of, and to be honored,
which more then other profet the faithful, and are more largely endewed with
good gracious gifts: and as Christ required of Peter, do more depely love
him: and which are more abundantly endewed with those qualities, which Paul to
Timothe and Titus requires in bishops. If we highlier honor such men in the
church above other, not as lords, not as universal bishops, not as heads of the
church, but as excellent ministers thereof, the authority and obedience of the
word of god should thereby be nothing diminished.

An error very hurtful in the church.
But they do not so. They have fixed the exellency and dignity of the ministers
of the church, unto chayres, places, and cities, howsoever he be in greater
price and honor, which sytteth in those chayres or places, and what manner of
man so eue^ he be in life and manners. And so is there no regard had to the
graces and gifts of God, but only to the place and seat. This undoubtedly
was the fountain, ofpring, and beginning of al evils and superstitions. Our
elders thought it good, that in cities which were more famous, where
marchandises were traded, and were assemblies of men, where Proconsuls or
Presidentes governed, there also the bishops should be of greater authority and
jurisdiction. Whereby custom obtained, that those Churches and chayres were
had in greater honor.

But (as it comes to pass) ambicion crepte in, and in those places bishops
were ordained, not always such as were more worthy, but such as were better
favored of Princes. And oftentimes the better learned and more holy were given
over to small and abiecte bishoprikes. When Augustine was Bishop of
Hippouerhegium, one called Aurelius governed the most honorable church of
Carthago. And who knows not that Augustine in doctrine, manners, and
authority, far excelled Aurelius? The same thing happened unto Gregorius
Nazianzenus, who was bishop in an abject place, namelye in Sassimis, when as
many other, not to be compared with him, obtained the chief chayres. After this
way and manner the bishop of Rome began to be preferred above other, namelye
because of the most ample dignitye of the city: The cause why the bishop of
Rome was preferred before other.
which cause nevertheless he understanding that it was no firm groundsele of
the honor which he had obtained, he has fained other causes of his excellency.
And first he pretends that he had this privilege by ye council of Nice:
which yet he could not prove before ye fathers of Africa, because in that
Sinode the charge only of suburb churches was committed unto him. Not a
charge to bear dominion, but to give counsel to admonish, and if there were any
things of more weight, to refer the same to the counsel. As to the bishop of
Alexandria the suburb churches of Egypt, and to the bishop of Antioch of the
suburb churches of the east parties. And it was not given the bishop of Rome,
to be the universal pastor. Neither is it possible that a weak and mortal
man should feed the flock of Christ in all countries.

Farthermore the bishop of Rome boasted, that he was set to be the head of the
church: The bishop of Rome cannot be head of the whole church.
which cannot be meet for any man. For from the head ar derived mouinge and
sense by the sinews, into al members, as Paul very well teaches to the
Ephesians and Colossians. But no man can perform that, as of himself, by
closures and joints to quicke^ the members of ye church with the sprite of god.
It lo^geth only to christ, Magistrates and princes may be called heads of the
people.
to destribute unto his members spiritual mocions, illustracion of the mind,
and eternal life. Indede kings and magistrates may be called heads of the
people, because they govern ciuily, and from them we may look for good laws
and ciuyle mouinges: but in the church men entreat not of civil life, but of
spiritual and eternal life, which we cannot look for, but at gods hand,
neither can any mortal men quicken the members of the church. Kings and
magistrates when they are godly, in my judgment ought to have the chief
place in the church: and to them it pertains, if religion be il administered,
to correct the defaultes. For therefore they bear the sword to maintain Gods
honor. But they cannot be heads of the church. Paul to the Romans and to
the Corinthians, where he makes rehearsal of the members of the church,
puts some to be eyes, some noses, ears, hands, and feet: but he adorneth
none with the dignity of the head, who yet to the Ephesians says this of
Christ, that god had given him to be the head of the body of the church. We
must not make the church two headed.
Let the papists show written in any other places of the holy scriptures, that
Christ gave an other head unto ye church, and they shall have the victory. But I
know assuredly they cannot. For if that could have been done the church should
be a two hedded monster. But it is a sport to hear what John, sometimes B. of
Rochester in defendyng the Pope au^swered to this. To grant two heads of the
Church (says he) is not absurd: for the Apostle writes, the man is the head
of the woman, and nevertheless every wife has byside her husband which is the
head, an other head also. Wherefore he concluded that we may thus affirm of the
church, namely that it has both Christ and the Pope to be head. But this man
fails by a false Sillogismus of equiuocatio^. For speaking now of a head, as
it is attributed unto the Church, he falls to a natural head. In matrimony
the husband is the head of the wife, not the natural head, How the husband is
the head of the wife.
but as touching aeconomical life. But the natural head of the woman, is the
beginning of her natural life. And undoubtedly if we look upon the natural
head in the church, we shall find that it is not one head: but look how many
men there be in it, so many heads shall there be: for there is none without an
head in it. And when we speak of the head of the Church, we must keep our
selves in the Metaphore: and as it should be absurd and monstrous, for one man
to have two natural heads, so shall it be judged as portentous, for the Church
to have two Metaphorical, that is spiritual heads. We must always, when we
entreat of any thing, persist in the same order and kind: which thing if we
do not observe, we shall easily be deceived by equivocation.

But let us return to the Pope, Of the keys foundation of the Church.
who least he should seem to be destitute of testimonies of the holy
scriptures, takes two places out of them. Whereof the one is: Upon this rock
I will build my Church, and will give the keys. etc. But that place
pertains to al those which confess the verity of faith: for Peter, when the
Lord demanded what the Apostles believed of him, answered in the name of them
al, that he was the son of the living God. Wherefore, that which Christ
speaks unto him, pertains to all them, which together with him believe and
profess the same self thing. For the keys are given unto the Church. And in
John, the Lord after his resurrection gave them unto all them: at the last
also, when he should ascend up into heaven, he sent them all alike to preach
throughout the world. And as touching the foundation, the Church has no other
foundation but Christ. For Paul unto the Corinth. said: No man can lay any
other foundation, then that which is already laid, How the Apostles are called
foundations of the Church.
which is Christ Jesus. And if at any time the Apostles be called foundacions
of the church, that is to be understand, because they in the first time of the
Church cleaued unto the foundation, as the first and greater stones, not
because the Church leaned unto them as to the principal foundation.

The other place which they bring out of the scriptures, is, Not only to Peter
was the commandment given to feed the flock of Christ.
because Christ says unto Peter, feed my Lambs. But they are excedingly
deceived: for it was not the office of Peter only, but also of the other
Apostles, to feed the flock of the Lord. But it was so said peculiarly unto
Peter, because he had denied the Lord thrice, and therefore he might have
seemed to have fallen from the fellowship of the Apostles, unless he had of
Christ been restored by certain words. And that not only he, but also other
ought to feed the sheep of Christ, his own words testify, which be writes
in his Epistle, where he admonishes other Ministers to feed the flock of the
Lord. But grant, that the Lord gave unto Peter any principal thing: what
has the bishop of Rome common with him? Let him declare his spirit, and as
Peter has labored for the Church, let him also labor: which thing if he
perform, then will we acknowledge him, not as an universal bishop, but as a
good Minister of Christ. The spirit of Christ is not bound to chairs
He says that he has the chair that Peter had. What seat I pray you
speaks he of? The holy ghost is not bound to seats. But grant that it were
so, Antioche had Peter sitting in it before Rome had. For that church he
planted, and long while governed. But they say that he was slain at Rome. But
the Jews crucified Christ himself at Jerusalem, which is a thing of greater
weight. Wherefore if we should follow this argument, the bishop of Jerusalem
should be preferred above all other. Yea, and Peter, as it is written to the
Galathians, was not the Apostle of the Gentiles, but of circumcision, as it was
agreed between Paul, James, John, and Barnabas. Neither do we ever read that
Peter prescribed the other Apostles any thing, or that they depended of him.
Yea Paul most manifestly testifies, that he received nothing of Peter.
Farther, it is certain yt Peter was slain under Nero, and John lived even to
the time of Traiane. And they say that Cletus, Linus, and Clemens succeeded
Peter at Rome. What then, shall we think that John the Apostle was subject unto
Clemens? And of necessity he should be so, if the Bishop of Rome be the
universal head or general bishop. But who will say that this may be suffered?
Moreover, An Epistle of Clemens.
lies may be confuted with lies. Our adversaries bring the Epistle of Clemens,
which is a fained Epistle, as a thing certain. We will gratefy the^ in this
thing, Clemens Iacobo ^ratri domini, Epis copo Episcoru^, and regnanti
Ecclesiam que esi Hierosolymis, and omnes que su^t vbique, Dei prouidentia.
and we will now grant that to be true, which is false. Let them mark his
superscription, which is written after this manner: Clemens to James the brother
of the Lord, by the providence of God ye bishop of bishops, and governor of
the Church which is at Jerusalem, and of all the Churches every where. What will
they say here? The bishop of Rome ascribes his title unto the Bishop of
Jerusalem, and attributes this universal charge of all Churches unto him, and
not to himself. This argument makes very much against those, which have
unto the Churches obtruded this Epistle for true, and ratefied it. But that can
nothing hurt us, which is taken out of that epistle, against our doctrine. For
we know that it is a feigned thing, as that which was never alleged by any of
the fathers. And in it the same Clemens affirms, that he him self wrote the
little book called Itenarium Perri: which book (as it is said in the Decrees)
is counted among the Apocripha books. But of this thing I have spoken
sufficient, and these things have I rehearsed, only that we might understand,
how much Gideon is to be preferred before the Antechristes of Rome.

Whither the government of God be excluded by humane Magistrates.
Here is put forth an other question, whether the rule and government of God be
therefore excluded, because the Magistrate of a public wealth, or of
Aristocratia, or of a kingdom, is given unto a man. The cause of the doubt is,
because when it was said unto Gideon: Thou shall raygne over us: he answered, I
will not raygne over you, but the Lord shall reign over you. It is not hard to
dissolve this question proposed: forasmuch as the administration, wherewith God
governs public wealths, hinders not the Magistrate, which is his Vicar and
Minister. And assuredly God reigned together with David and Josias: and the
Israelites at that time had a certain Magistrate, and one of their own, with
whom also God himself also governed. Wherefore the words of Gideon do not
teach this, that God cannot reign there, where as is a lawful king. But this
thing only he regarded, that the present state of things, which was
instituted by God, When God is said to govern pub. wealths.
ought not to be altered without him. There was a public wealth then in Israel,
they had Senators, and in all places there were Judges appointed: wherefore the
form of the public wealth could not by men be changed, without great offense.
If so be thou will demand, when it is to be thought that God does govern and
rule in other Magistrates? I answer: Then, when this is only provided for,
that Citizens may live virtuously. And forasmuch as piety is of al virtues ye
most excellent, the Lord does then reign, when althings ar referred unto it.
Farther, as touching civil actions, when to every man is rendered his own, and
Magistrates govern not for their own commodity, but for the public vtility.

When the thing is otherwise, shall we say that God raygneth or no, as when
Nero, Domitianus, Commodus, Heliogabalus, and such wicked men were governors?
A distinction of those things which are done under Magistrates.
Did God then cease from governing of the world? I think we must make a
distinction of these things, which are done in those kingdoms, of the good
things I say from the evil: forasmuch as there is no Empire so vitiate and
corrupt, but that it still retains in it many good things. Let us look upon
the government of Nero, and we shall se there in a manner, an infinite number of
wicked and mischeuous acts, where yet many parts also of Justice floorished.
Provinces were governed by Pretors, and Presidentes, which execute laws, not
altogether unjustly. It was lawful for Paul to appeal unto Rome, neither could
the Hebrews by the laws be permitted to judge him as they lusted themselves.
And the same Paul, when he had showed that he was a Citizen of Rome, escaped
both from bonds and from stripes. Wherefore seeing in a government most
corrupt, very many good and profitable things floorished, the same could come
from none other but from God. It is therefore manifest that god at that time
forsook not the care and administration of things.

But if thou go forward and ask, How God orders himself toward the fauts of
Princes.
whether the vices and corruptions of Empires are to be referred unto God: I
will answer, that the true cause of sin is in man, but the will of God does
neither allow those vices, nor command them in his laws: yea, he prohibiteth
and detesteth them. But he uses them to punish the wickedness of the people:
for, for the sins of the people, he makes an hipocrite to raygne, and in his
fury he gives kings. For such things are evil and sins, and have in them a
consideration of punishments: and as they are punishments, they pertayne unto
the justice of God.

But when Princes are so corrupt, what is to be done? We must obey, Whither it
be lawful to rise up against evil Princes.
but vsque ad aras, that is, so far as religion suffers. May private men
take upon them to alter a corrupt Prince? They may do it in admonishing, in
giving counsel and reproving, but not by force of weapons. Yea, Citizens may
fight for the defense of the public wealth, as long as it lasts. Wherefore
Pompeius, Cicero, and Cato, are not lightly to be condemned, for that they
resisted Caesar, going about to stir up insurrection, although at that time
the public wealth was very corrupt. But when he had once obtained the Empire,
he ought not by private men to be deprived with weapons. Wherefore Augustus said
unto Strabo, who spoke evil of Cato, being then dead, that he was a good
Citizen, which contended that the present state of things should not be
changed. In the publyke wealth of the Hebrews, which floorished in the time of
Gideon, God governed in very deed. It was (as I have said) Aristocratia, where
Elders were chosen by common voices, to do justice: in which office, unless they
rightly behaved themselves, they were both punished, and put out of their
room: but if there happened any hard war, God himself raised up Judges, but
they were not chosen by the people, neither did the children succeed the
Parents in that office. After this manner did God govern the Hebrews. The
words of Gideon sufficientlye declare, that the Judges exercised not the
office of an ordinarye Magistrate. It was in the Lord to raise up for the time
whom he would, What we must consider when any thing is offered unto us.
therefore the Lord said unto Samuel: They have not rejected thee, but me, that
I should not reign over them. Hereby we gather, that when any thing is
offered us, we must always weigh, whither the same be good of his own nature,
and whither it be lawfully given, and may lawfully be used. Which if it be
not, let us put away from us, whatsoever is offered, as Christ rejected Satan,
when he promised him all the kingdoms of the world, neither received he the
kingdom offered him by the people. This the Pope considers not, who for his
unlawful Supremacye or tyranny, continually warreth, and there is nothing
which he attempteth not: so far is he of to refuse these things. etc.

24 Again Gideon said unto them: I would desire a request of you, that ye
would give me every man the earings of his pray (for they had golden earinges,
because they were Ismaelites.)

25 And they said: we will give them. And they spread a garment, and did cast
therein every man the earinges of his pray.

26 And the weight of the golden earinges that he required, was a thousand
seven hundredth syckels of gold, besides collers, and pomanders, and purple
raiment, that was on the kings of Madian, and beside the chains that were
about their Camels necks.

27 And Gideon made an Ephod thereof, and put it in his City, in Ophra. And all
Israel went a whooring after it in the same place, which thing was the
destruction of Gideon and his house.


Here is set forth an example of a most grievous fall, very much to be
lamented. A man holy in miracles, and notable in faith, filthelye falls.
Every man therefore is admonished, not to trust unto his former life, and
things that he has well done.

Kim his opinion of the Ismaelites and Madianites.
They had golden earinges, because they were Ismaelites. Kimhi thinks that
the Madianites and Ismaelites were al one, which he says is confirmed by the
book of Genesis, where it is written that the brethren of Joseph sold him to
the Madianites, and straightway it is added that the Ismaelites sold him in
Egypt, wherefore he gathers that they were al one, namelye which had their
offspring of Agara. And she (as some say) was Ketura the handmayd of Sara, and
afterward the wife of Abraham. But the Chaldey Paraphrast interprets the
Ismaelites, Arabians, and not Madianites. Yea and Josephus in his book De
antiquit. by the children of the East he understands Arabians. They turn
this Hebrew word Scheharonim lunulas, yt is little Moons, whereof is mention
made before. For in the Arabike tongue Schehara signifies luna, that is the
Moon. The other word Netiphoth is derived of Nataph, which signifies to
drop. For that word signifies a drop, namely that is odoriferous. That was
enclosed in small vessels either of gold or of silver, that with them both the
neck might be adorned, and the nose filled with a most sweet smell. Of the use
of carynges.
But the ornament of earinges was most ancient, and used in the time of
Abraham. For his servant gave unto Rebecca bracelets, when he desired to have
her for a wife, for Isaac his Masters Son. The Romans also sometimes used
them, as we may gather out of Platus in Epidico: Do thou not remember (says
he) that I brought thee an earing on thy birth day? The Egiptians also used
them: for it is written of Cleopatra, that she took from her ear a most
precious pearl, and dissolved it in vinegar, when she contended with Antonius
for a sumptuous preparation of a banquet. The Carthaginenses also were decked
with bracelets, as Plautus in Penulo testifies. For thus he writes: And as I
suppose, they have no fingers on their hands, because they go with ringed
ears. Gideon took also purple garments: but whither he used them to his
purpose, Ephod.
it appears not. He made an Ephod. The Hebrewe word Aphad is to bind, or to
gird, whereof this nowne is derived, signifieng a garment which compassed the
shoulders, and then it was bound together, and it after a sort girded together
the inward coat. Gideon did therefore make this ornament, to be a monument of
the victory which he had gotten, as some write: in which thing if he sought his
own glory, he cannot but be blamed. But if this were only his desire, to keep
in perpetual memory the benefit of God, he is not to be accused, for as much
as oftentimes such monumentes were erected, as ye holy scriptures testify.
Jacob erected a stone, when he went in to Mesopotamia, and whilst he fled from
Laban in Gilead, he builded a great heap of stones together. And it were to
long to rehearse all the monumentes or tokens, which were in the old time set
among the people of God, that the memory of the benefits of God should not be
forgotten. Gideon made an Ephod, and used a sign, not so apt and convenient.
Wherein Gideon sinned.
He might have written a song, as Barac and Deborah did, or erected a pyller,
or some such like thing.

God had not commanded in the law, to make an Ephod to this use, but only
that the Priests should put it on, when they should do sacrifice. Neither is
it needeful now to describe the form of this garment, for as much as in Exodus
it is most manifestly set forth: this thing only I will admonish you of, Two
kind of Ephodes.
that there were two kinds of it, as the holy scriptures declare, and as
Jerome both to Marcella, and to Fabiola, and against Iouinianus the first book
testifies. There was one which only the high Priest used. It was made of
purple violet color, sylke, and scarlet, it had gold wrought in it, and
sundry kinds of most precious stones. There was also an other which was called
Ephod bad, that is a linen Ephod, which the Levites also used in holy
services. Wherefore in the.1. of Samuel the.2. chap. we read, that Hanna made
every year for Samuel a little coat and an Ephod, when she had then offered him
unto the Lord, to minister at the tabernacle. Yea and David being girt with an
Ephod, daunced before the Ark of the Lord. The children also of David were
girt with an Ephod. But Gideon made his a pontifical and precious Ephod, for
the other kind was simple and of linne^, wherefore he should not have neded so
great cost to make such a one. For there were gathered (as the history teaches)
a thousand seven hundredth (as many expound the^) sicles of gold. Some suppose
that Gideon did therefore make an Ephod, that eue^ as Micha durst take upon him,
to have a holy ministry at home in his own house, so did Gideon now attempt the
same. But of this sentence we will afterward speak, when we declare
Augustines mind of this thing. But now following the interpretation which we
have already begone, which is of those which say, that Gideon made this, to
remain as a sign and monument of the benefit of God given unto the Hebrews,
this I judge is to be added, that the vulgar men began to have in admiration
the sign which was set up, and as they were prone to superstitions, they
iorneyed thither, and offered peace offringes there, which thing was a ruin and
snare unto them: for by title and little they fell into idolatry. Neither was
Gideon without blame. For he erected ye monument, and abused the sign: and
when he saw how the people fell, yet took he not away that monument, but rather
winked at it. Ezechias afterward did more rightly, who when he saw the people
offer insence unto the brazen serpent, he brake it down. Certain Rabbines
labor to excuse Gideon, because with a good mind he caused the Ephod or
monument of the benefit of God to be made, but the Israelites misused it. But
they go about that in vain, for as much as the scripture says, that it turned
to the destruction of Gideon and his house.

Augustine entreating of this place, Augustine.
thinks that the figure of Synechdoche is here to be understand, so that by
this word Ephod, al priestly ornaments may be noted, as though Gideon would in
his City have an holy ministry: which was plainly against the will of God,
who had appointed to be worshipped at the Arc of the covenant. That was no
other thing, then to pluck away men from the tabernacle of God, and after a
sort to divide the church. Gideon and the people did not (says Augustine)
sacrifice unto idols, but with these garments they constituted a worshipping
unto the true God in Gideon his house, that is in Ophra. But forasmuch as they
did otherwise then God had prescribed, they fell therefore into a certain kind
of Idolatry. And that Gideon worshipped not idols, it does not only hereby
appear, in that he overthrew the altar of Baal, cut down his grove, and
offered upon the alter of God, the bullock consecrated unto Baal, but also
because the people al his life time (as we shall straightwaye hear) are said
not to have woorshipped Baal.

This word whooring is to be understand Methaphorically, The Methaphore of
who^tyng.
which is a thing very common in the scriptures. For the Church is the Spouse
of God, and therefore it ought to worship him only, and to depend only of
him. Wherefore, even as a married woman, if she leaving her own husband, follow
other men, is counted an harlot and unchaste: even so also the Church, when it
forsakes the worshipping of the true God, and gives place to supersticions,
is iustlye called a harlot and an adultresse. And this is it which is now
written, that the children of Israel went a whooryng after the Ephod,
instituted by Gideon.

Wherefore Augustines opinion is, that Gideon would have had God worshipped so
in his country, that the same things might there have been done, which were
done in Silo, where the Arc was. Which opinion, although it can not be
confuted by the scriptures, yet it appears not very lykelye: For we read not
that he had Priests with him. Neither do the Hebrew Doctors (who otherwise
are diligent in expressing of things done) attribut these things unto him,
but rather agree with the other sentence, namely that he constituted it for a
monument of the victory which he had obtained, which afterward was an occasion
of superstition. Wherefore it seems to be spoken more probably, that this
erected sign was had in admiration of the foolish people, so that they
thought it to be a place very meet to do sacrifice there, and especially for
the offering of peace offeringes unto the true God, which seemed not worthy of
reproving. For at that time it was lawful to do that in a manner every where,
but superstition daily creeping more abroad, they began to attribute more then
was meet unto that sign, as to a thing divine, and which had in it some power
of God, and for that cause they offered sacrifices, and did incense unto it,
keeping nevertheless a pretense of the worshipping of God, and the name of God
the Lord, as in the time of Ezechias they did incense and sacrifice unto the
brazen serpent.

Whence came the beginning of relics and invocation of the dead.
And in the same manner we read happened at the beginning of the sepulchers,
bones, and relics of holy men. The Christians buried the dead bodies of the
Martirs, as honorablye as they could, and to have the memory of them kept,
they began to have places of prayer at their tombs, not undoubtedly where
they would woorship and invoke the Martirs, but where they might hear the
word of God, receive the Sacraments, and exhort one an other to defend the
faith. And in deed that place seemed not a little commodious for such a
purpose: For the sepulchers of Martirs seemed to admonish and inflame the
minds, to enterprise the same battles, and to behave them selves most
constantly for the name of Christ. Wherefore it was thought that in assembling
to the Sepulchers of Martirs, two commodities were gotten. First, because some
honor might be given to so great Confessors, whilst the memory of them was
not suffered to be forgotten, but with very great joy thanks were given unto
God for their happy victory. The other was, because men might be stirred up to
enterprise the like, The beginning of the images of Saints.
and to hope for the like gifts at Gods hand. And after the same manner began
the images of Christ and of the Apostles priuatelye to be made, namely that
their death, which seemed unto the world full of ignominye, might be made more
honorable, and that the memory of them might floorishe, and by beholding of
those images so set up, men might be provoked to the just and laudable
imitacion of them. If the thing had abidden within these bonds, it might have
been borne with all, neither was there any thing there which might justly be
condemned: but even as the act of Gideon was turned at the length to idolatry,
so in success of time followed the invocation of Martirs at their sepulchers,
and the images of saints began to be set up and woorshipped, not only in
private places, but also in temples.

The act of Gideon was a snare to him, and to his house, for both he sinned,
and his children (as we shall hear) were horribly slain. It brought also great
misery unto the Israelites. For from this superstition they fell by little and
little to the open worshipping of Baal, wherefore they were most grievously
oppressed of their enemies: howbeit as long as Gideon lived, they woorshipped
not Baal. Hereby we gather, that al worshipping of God, instituted without his
word, is to him unacceptable, and to us most dangerous. There is but one
God, and he will be worshipped but one way, namely as he himself has
commanded. And if to the worshipping of him, there be any thing to be added by
the decree of men ^o^ comelines sake, and for a just and civil order, the same
ought to be but little, Gideon sins two ways.
and also mutable, as it shall be thought good for to advance edification.
Wherefore Gideon synneth two ways, both in that he abused the Ephod which he
made for a sign, and also because when he saw superstition to come thereby,
he prohibited it not. The good intent of Gideon excused not his act, although
he had a show of piety. Leo the first of that name, Leo the first.
in his Sermon of the Passion of the Lord, says that Peter, when he cut of
the ear of the servant of the high Priest, was moved with a godly mocion. But
what godly mocion could it be, which Christ reproved, yea and so reproved it,
that he affirmed that he which so drew the swoorde, should perish with the
swoorde? What other thing was this, then to have a zeal of God, but (as Paul
says) not according to knowledge. Paul also the Apostle, when he afflicted
and destroyed the Christians, thought that he did God high service.

These things have a show of a good intent (as they call it) or of godlynes,
but they are not in very deed that which they show for. Even so increased the
pomp of the Mass, by no other means, then by a show of a good intent. For
it seemed good unto our Elders to adorn the Supper of the Lord. Wherefore this
Pope added this thing, and an other that thing, so that at the length the
thing came to this point, that these additions excluded the institution of
Christ, in such sort that it may seem to be any other thing else, then the
Supper of the Lord, for those things are observed which men have invented: but
that which Christ willed, namelye that brethren should communicate together,
and celebrate the memory of his death, this I say is abolished.

But why the woorshippinges instituted by man's invention are to be abiected,
this is an assured reason: Why worshippings invented by man, are to be abiected.
because in woorshipping of God we must do all things chiefly through faith,
but it is of no force if it want the word of God. Wherefore if rites which are
retained for the woorshipping of God, lack his word, faith may not be given
unto them, and therefore ar they rather sins, then works pleasing God. For
all that is not of faith, is sin, The authority of the fathers is not
sufficient.
as the Apostle says. But they say that in those woorshippinges, the
authority of the Fathers, which were present at Counsels, ought to be
sufficient, neither ought we to esteem their sentences of any less value then
the holy scriptures. But I will turn the same to them again, and ask whither
they think Gideon was a holy man? That they cannot deny, forasmuch as the
Epistle to the Hebrews the xi. chapter notably testifies him so to be. I will
demand of them also, whyther Aaron were a holy man? They will not deny it I
suppose: when as he was of God appointed to be the high Priest, and the
fellow of Moses in woorking of miracles. And yet for all that either of them,
when they instituted a woorshipping without the word of God, are grievously
accused by the holy Scriptures. Let them therefore cease to obtrude unto us
the Saints: but when we require the word of God, if they will that we should
believe them, let them bring forth the holy scriptures. We know that rites and
worshippinges instituted even by God himself, are not acceptable unto him,
when they are done without faith, as Esaias, Jeremy, and David most manifestly
teach, how much less will he receive those things which are invented of
men, which for that they are not grounded on his word, do utterly want faith?

Of a good Intent.
But because there is something alleged of a good Intent, whereby some go
about to excuse Gideon, I think it good briefelye to touch those things,
which are necessary, as concerning it.

As touching the signification of the word, Intent signifies a motion of the
mind, whereby by some mean we tend unto an end, as if a man should study
by giving of gifts or by services to attain unto any honor. For the nature of
things is in such sort, that many things are so connexed together between
themselves, that by the one is made a step unto the other. For by medecines
and drinks we attain unto health: by studies, reading, and teachers, unto
wisdom. Wherefore an intent is an action of the will, for it is his office to
move and stir up the mind. And forasmuch as the will does not perceive the
things that he desires, before that it has the knowledge thereof, it moves
not, nor forces the mind before knowledge, which raygneth in the power of
intelligence or understanding. It perceaueth both the end, and those things
which serve to the end, and ministers them unto the will. Therefore Intent
stirs up to the end, as to a term, The definition of an intent.
by those things which unto it are directed. Let this be his definition. A will
tending unto the end by some means. Will, which is his general word, is an
act of the power that wylleth. The differrence is taken of the object, namely
of the end, and these things which are ordained unto it: as now as touching
Gideon, his intent was a motion of his will, to keep the memory of the victory
given him, by the Ephod which he had made. In will therefore he comprehended at
once both the end and the mean.

There is both a good intent and an evil.
An Intent in divided into a good intent and an evil. And to a good intent this
is chiefly required, that the end be a thing just and good: which yet is not
sufficient. For if a man should steal to give alms, he undoubtedly should
set before his eyes a good thing, but because the mean is evil, therefore the
intent can not be called good. But if the end be both unlawful and evil,
then shall the intent also be evil. Wherefore that the intent be good, both
the end and the mean must be honest and good things. Howbeit certain
things are by their nature so evil, that we can never use them rightly. As
theft, perjury, adulterye, An evil intent of two kinds.
and such like. Wherefore the Apostles rule must always be firm, that we
must never do evil things, whereby good things may follow. Therefore an
evil intent is two manner of ways: that is, either by the naughtynesse of the
end, Two things are required in a good intent.
or else of the means. But the intent can never be good, except both end and
mean be good. Thus far the Philosophers and school Deuines agree with us.
Now must we see wherein they differ from us.

The Philosophers do think that the righteousness of the end and means
depends of humane reason or natural understanding, as though it were
sufficient to put a difference between just things and unjust: but that we
deny, and require fully faith and the word of God, Augustine.
as sure rules, which thing Augustine testifies in many places, and
especially upon the.xxxi. Psalm, where he says: Do not count thy works
good before faith, which are nothing else, then (as me thinks) great
strengthes, and a most swyft course out of the way, and he which so makes
haste, runs headlong to destruction: Wherefore a good intent makes a good
action, Faith directs the intent.
but faith directs the intent. Wherefore we must take heed, when we purpose
any work, that our heart have a regard unto faith, whereby it may direct his
endeavors.

The school Deuines will easelye grant that faith governs the intent, and
makes it good. But we differ from them for three causes. First, because we
Faith must not cleave unto fathers and counsels
and that in no case may be granted unto them, forasmuch as faith must be
constant, and utterly without error: which two things are not found in the
Fathers and Counsels, because they speak things one contrary to an other.
Fathers very often strive with Fathers, and Counsels are against Counsels: and
those Fathers are rare, yea in a manner none, which have not sometime erred, and
that in things most waightye, and very many Counsels have need of amendment.
Does not the scripture by express words testify that all men are liars?



will have the work to be made good by an habitual good intent as they speak:
The habitual intent of the Scholemen.
That is to say, done without any good mocion of the heart. They fayn that our
actions do please god, as prayers, reading of Psalms, and giving of Alms,
although in act we think nothing of God, and they suppose yt this habitual
intent which they place in him, is sufficient enough. So that if thou should
demand of him, which does these things, why he does so? he may be ready to
answer, that he does it to the glory of god, especially when in doing of it he
has not a contrary mind or repugnant will. But this can we not grant unto
them, for as much as in this negligence, whereby when we work we think not of god
nor of his glory, the commandment of god is violated, which commands us to
love god withal the heart, withal the soul, and withal the strengthes.
Wherefore we rather counsel that this may be knowleged a sin, then to be
counted a good work.

But because they perceived that their sayings have some absurdity, they
added, so that in the beginning of that work, we think somewhat of god and
his glory, and so that that which is purposed, be directed unto him. But no man
doubts but that the beginning of all those things which we do, ought to be
good: but afterward, if faith follow not those things which we have well
begone, and if when we are working, we have not a respect unto god and his
glory, we shall run hedlonge into sin, which may not be dissembled.
Farther, if we should work as we ought to do, and as the law requires, yet
should we (as Christ says) be still unprofitable servants: so far is it of,
that we can claim unto our selves any merits. Wherefore so long as we desist
from thinkinge upon the honor and glory of God, we fall, neither are such
falls to be dissembled, but rather to pray that they may be turned from us,
forasmuch as of their own nature they are sins, Faith is not sufficient in
h^bite, but we must believe also in act.
although unto the beleuers for Christ's sake they are not imputed unto death.
Wherefore let there be added to our works a good intent: But yet such an
entente as is adorned with faith, and let us perform the same not in habit
but in act. Wherefore the Lord says in the Gospel of Matthew the.6. chap: The
light of ye body is ye eye. And if thine eye be simple, ye whole body shall be
light. But if the light which is in thee be darkness, Augustine.
how great shall the darkness the^ be? These things Augustine (in his questions of
the Gospels, ye.2. book, and.15. question, and against Iulianus in ye.4. book,
and 20. chap.) judges to be understood of a good intent. And in like manner
writes he in his.10. Tome, the.2. Sermon, where he entreats upon this place,
we must not do righteousness before men, to be seen of them. The intent (says
he) is always to be applied unto the glory of God, but the will to have it
known unto men, is to be avoided, but so much as shall seem to pertayne to the
honor of God. And to that tends that which Christ speaks: A good tree
cannot bring forth euel fruits, neither an evil tree, good: for as much as the
tree signifies the intent. Wherefore this act of Gideon done of a good intent
(if those things be true which we have said) cannot be excused, when as
faith governed it not.

28 Thus was Madian brought low before the children of Israel so that they
lift up their heds no more: and the land had quietness.40. years in the days
of Gideon.

29 Then Ierubbaall the son of Ioas went and dwelt in his own house.

30 And Gideon had 70. sons which came out of his thigh: for he had many
wives.

31 And his Concubine that was in Sechem, bare him a son also, whose name he
called Abimelech.


When we hear that the earth had quietness, we may note two metaphores. The
first Metaphore is, whereby the land is taken for them that dwell upon it. The
other is, whereby silence is put for peace: for that in peace the cries of
soldiers, the noise of weapons, the blast of trumpets, and the running to and
fro of horsemen and fotemen are not hard. Augustine in this place doubts,
how it could be, Augustine.
that God suffered superstition and idolatrye so long unpunished. And he
brings two answers therefore. First, that Gideo^ did indede streyghtwayes as soon as the war was finished, Why the punishmente was differed 40. years.
gather a mass of gold, but he made not the Ephod by and by, but long after,
namely toward the end of his life: or that the Ephod was made as soon as the
victory was accomplished, but the people fell not to idolatrye, till about the
latter time of his life. An other cause he adds, because in that superstition
the name of God was kept, neither was the worshipping of Baal and other gods of
the Gentles admitted for that, as long as Gideon lived, the Hebrews came not
to that mischief, and therefore god dealt not so sharply against them. And it
was no small benefit to give them peace for.40. years: of which thing, seying
I have spoken before in the former judges, I shall not need now to repeat the
same again.

Ierubbaal went and dwelte in his house. He coueted not a perpetual rule, as
did Caesar, who after v. years did again, covet to continue unto himself the
province of France other. v. years. But Gideon when he had obtained peace,
ceased from wars, and dismissing his host, led his life at home in his own
house, in a manner like a private man. Such are vprighte minds which indeed
want ambicion.

In his comme^taries upon the 1. of Samuel the 25. chap.
He had.70. children, for he had many wives. Of having many wives I will not
now speak much, because it is to be entreated of in an other place: this is
sufficient to be said at this present, that god in the old law permitted the
same after a sort unto the fathers.

Which came out of his thigh. This is therefore written, least peradventure we
should suspecte that of those.70. children some were adopted. Besides the 70.
which he had of his wives which were many, he had Abimeleche by his concubyne.

Of Matrimony and having of Concubines.
THe place does now admonish me, somewhat to speak of having of co^cubines,
whereof is often mention made in the histories of the old testament. But first
must we define Matrimony, that therout we may gather the use of concubines: for
unless the nature of it be manifest, Of Matrimonye.

Marrimonium coniungium, nuptie connubium. The definition of matrimony.


we can not se how that having of a concubine differs from it. Matrimony,
marriages, wedding, and wedlock sygnify al one thing. And Matrimony (as it is
had in the.i. book Inst. Justin. when mention is made of the power of the
father, and in the degestes de ritu nuptiarum, is defined to be a conjunction
of man and woman, an inseparable conversation of life, and a communication of
gods law and man's law. But this diffinicion must be perfected by the holy
scriptures. Wherefore we must add, that this coniunctio^ of man and woman was
instituted by god, for the bringing forth of children, for the taking away of
whoredom, and that thereby humayne life might have helps and commodityes. In
this difinicion undoubtedly the conjunction of man and woman holds place in
the matter. The inseparable conversation of life pertains unto the form, for
with this purpose and will man and wife must marye together. For though by
adultery that copulation be taken away, yet when the matrimony is contract,
they ought both of them to have this in their mind, that being once joined they
must abide and live together. This belongs also to the form, that the
communication of gods law and man's law be had between them. For they must be
both of one religion, and communicate humayne things one with an other. For the
wife goes into the famely of the husband, and with the husband is counted all
one flesh. Yea and the substance of either parties are made in all points
common, but the efficie^t cause of this ordinance was god himself, even from
the beginning, who made unto Adam a helper. And the end (as we have said) is
the procreation of children: for god said, Increse and multiply. But as
touching the other end, namelye for the aduoydinge of whoredom, Paul in
the.1. to the Corrinth. has very well and plainly written.

If thou will demand, Whither bo^ds or writings ar required to contract
matrimony or no. Jerome.
whither bonds or writings are required for the co^tracting of matrimonye, we
may answer, that they are not required. For the consent of either party is
sufficient, as it is had in the Authentikes, and in the Code, where entreaty
is made of marriages. But that which Jerome writes to Oceanus, that hereby a
wife is discerned from a concubine, because a wife must have bonds and a
dowry, which things concubines had not, this I say is not universally to be
received. For his sentence is to be drawn unto ye wife, which before was a
concubine. As touching her she neded bonds, that she might no more be
counted a concubine, and yt the children which she had already, or afterward
might have, might be legitimate. But a dowry is not required of necessitye,
because (as it is a common saying,) a dowry has not place without matrymony, A
dowry is not necessary to contract matrimonye.
but matrimony may consist without a dowry. For a dowry is given for the easier
susteyning of the hurthe^ of matrimony. The Cannons have added, and ye
profitably, ye Matrymonyes should not be contracted privily. For if the assent
of the man and wife be secret and without witnesses, Against secret marriages.
Judges can pronounce nothing of such a matrimony contracted. Wherefore if
their wills should he changed, and after those secret matrimonies, they should
contracte solemn and public marriages, the first marriages give place unto
them, and the conscience is kept both perplexe and also wounded.

But to speak of having of concubines, two things ar to be considered. First
what the Roman laws ordained of it: Secondly, Of having o^ Concubines.
in what sort it was among the Hebrews used, or what is to be understand, when
we read that the fathers had concubines. As touching the first having of
co^cubines, was by the civil law a certain kind of matrimony: for a concubine
was not a harlot, Having of a Concubine seemed to the Romans to be a kind of
Matrimony.

The definition of a Concubine


which was common to many, nor also a harlot, which was kept of a man together
with his lawful wife. And how much it differs from a wife, it shall appear
by the definition of a concubine. For a concubine is she which has the use of
marriage with one that lives sole. But for that she is not inseparable,
(because they that are so joined may easily be separated) therefore a
concubine differs much from a very wife: Farther humayn rights are not
communicated with her, for a Concubine goes not into the famely of him with
whom she is conversant. Yea and their goods and facultyes are not commune
together, neither are the children borne of that conjunction, counted lawful
and just heirs, unless they be made legitimate by the benefyte of the prince.
Howbeit it is by the Romayne law forbidden that a man should have many
Concubines at once, and it is prohibited to have a Concubyne together with his
wife. Moreover by the Romayne laws, such can not be counted as Concubynes,
which may be used as harlots, as a fre virgin, and a widow under.25. years of
age: for if a man meddle with them, either it shall be matrimony, or else judged
whoredom. Howbeit a widow may be a Concubin, if before witnesses it be
declared, that she is taken not for a wife, but for a Concubine. And lastly
there can be no Concubine, which may not become a wife, although not in that
place where she dwells, yet at the least in an other place, which I therefore
ad, because by the Roman law it was not lawful for the President to mary a
wife of that province where he governed, which yet he might have as a Concubine.

And if thou will demand, whether the Romayne law allowed Concubines or no.
Whether the Roman law allowed concubines or no.
I will answer, that they did absolutely allow the^, because they condemned,
not having of Concubines as a thing unlawful, so that it were used as before
is said. Yet it shadowingly reproves that conjunction, when as it suffers not
the children borne of Co^cubines to be lawful and just heirs, unless at the
length of a Concubine she should become a wife, or unless it be by the
authority of the prince. Howbeit we must know that the children of a Concubyne,
were admitted unto a certain little portion of inheritance, but yet not to a
like and equal portion with the legitimate. Yea and the children borne of a
concubyne, are not in the power of the father. But when of a Concubine she is
made a wife, then it was necessary that there should be tables of Matrimony.

If we will retain the Romayn law, a handmayden cannot be made a Concubine:
for by that law a handmayden could not be made a wife. For the conjunction of a
free man with a hand maiden, the Romayn laws called Contuberniu^, neither did
they count it for a just matrimonye. Howbeit by handemaydens the Romans
understood not hired servants, but such as were bought: which I therefore
speak, because our hired handemaydens, are free persons, and therefore it is
lawful to contracte just matrimony with them.

The Concubines of the fathers were wives.
But now let us consider of the law of the Hebrews, and what is to be thought
of the Concubines of the fathers. They were in very deed wives, although
oftentimes they were handemaydens, as Agar, Bala, Zilpa, and as this Concubine
of Gideon. In the judgment seat, and as touching civil actions, it seems
that free men of those places where these fathers were conversant, could not
contract matrimony with them, and therefore paraduenture in holy scriptures they
were called Concubines. But yet before god, that is by the law of matrimony
institituted by him, they were wives. Wherefore in the book of Genesis Agar
which is called a Concubine, is also called a wife. Therefore there were two
differences between the Hebrewe laws and the Romayne laws: because with them
having of Concubines was no matrimony, but with the Jews it was before God:
although openly and by civil reason, because of the servile condition of the
woman, she was not acknowledged peradventure for a wife. Farther, herein they
differ, because the Jews had handmaydens to their Concubynes: and the same was
not lawful for the Romans, if we follow that law, that she should be a
Concubine, which may be made a wife. When as the Romayne laws counted not that
for matrimony, which was contracted with a handmayde^. But this civil law was
not in Ieromes time retained in ye Romayn Empire, Jerome
either because ye Ecclesiastical canons had mitigated it, or else for some
other cause. For in his Epistle to Oceanus, he speaks of certain, which had
their handmaydens in steed of wives, for this cause not calling them by the
name of wives, to avoid burdens, and charges, who yet if they became rich,
made their handmaydens wives. After what manner the decrees permit Concubines.
But we must know moreover, that where Concubines seem to be allowed and
permitted in the decrees, the same is to be understand of those which are in
very deed wives, although by the Romayn laws and ciuily they were counted for
Concubines, because that woman was not solemply married, although there was a
mutual consent between them of matrimony. This which I have brought is had in
ye distinction.34. chapter. Isqui and Christiano. Whereof the first is the
decree of the council of Toletanus: the other is the testimony of Isidorus in
his book de distantia noui and veteris Testamenti. But when in the decrees
there is mention made of Co^cubines, which are not in very deed wives, they are
universally prohibited. And that is, when either party will not always dwell
together, neither acknowledge one an other as man and wife.

Why the son of Gideon was called Abimelech.
And this shall be sufficient at this time as touching these things. Let us now
return unto Gidion, who had by his Co^cubine a son named Abimelech. The
Etimology of ye name is: My father ye king. Peradventure ye co^cubine of Gideon
was arroga^t and proud, which counted Gideon for a king, and therefore called
her son by this name, and kindled in him the flames of bearing rule, that he
might right sone play the tirant, and claim unto himself a kingdom as dew unto
his father.

32 So Gideon the son of Ioas died in a good age, and was buried in the
sepulcher of Ioas his father, in Ophra Abiezer.

33 But when Gideon was dead, the children of Israel turned away, and went a
whoryng after Baalim, and made Baal-berith their God.

34 And the children of Israel remembered not the Lord their God, which had
delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side.

35 Neither showed they mercy on the house of Ierubbaal Gideon, according to
all the good things which he had done in Israel.


There is often mention made in the holy scripture of a good age. What a good
age is.
And in the 15. chap. of Genesis, it is promised unto Abraham as a certain
excellent good thing. And it seems to show two things: first a just space of
life, so that death should not come untimely, and strike as yet in tender age.
Farthermore it signifies prosperity of life and a profitable end. Wherefore it
is required thereunto that the mind be sound, the body not broken with
diseases, no want of riches, the famely, country, and dignity abiding firm:
this is judged a good age. But what shall we recke^ of eternal life? I think
Gideon obtained it also, Whether Gideo^ was at the last saved or no
for as much as in the Epistle to the Hebrews the.11. chap. he is numbered with
those fathers, which lived adorned with faith. Thou will say peradventure that
his faith was not justifying and perfect, but only of that kind of faith
which sufficed to work miracles. But I do not think that the Apostle, when he
made mention of Gideon, and of the other fathers, wrote of that faith. For the
faith which there he speaks of, he defined in the beginning that it is an
(...) or (as they say) the substance of things to be hoped for, and a
certaynty of ye which is not seen. And in composing the Cataloge of the me^,
which where adorned with this faith, he makes mention of Abraham, who^ he
testifies to have been justified by faith. Whereby is gathered that the faith
which is there attributed unto the saints, is the true and perfect faith, by
which the godly are counted just before God.

But they say, he fell into superstitions. I grant yt, but he might be renewed
by repentance, which is the effect of true faith, and at the last attain
eternal life. But thou will say, what repentance was this? when he ouerthrewe
not the Ephod which he set up, neither revoked the people from superstition?
Undoubtedly there is never any repentance counted fruitful, unless that be
amended which was done amiss. To this I answer, it might be (as Augustine
says) that this superstition began toward the latter end of his life, which
thing, being repentaunt, he had decreed to take away if he had lived. But being
prevented by death, he was not able to perform it.

And was buried. They made no prayers or supplications to deliver his spirit
from the pains of Purgatory, And we read not in any place of the old testament
that for the same cause there were either sacrifices or oblations made.

And when Gideon was dead, the Israelites went a whoryng and worshipped Baal.
Whereby we may learn how ingrate men are toward God. He had adorned them with
so many benefits, and yet their good prince being dead, which kept them in
their duty, they fell straightway from ye true worshipping of him. Wherefore it
hereby manifestly appears how diligently we must pray for good princes and a
godly Magistrate: for then is understand with how great a commodity they were
given unto the people, when now at the length the anger of God waxing fierce,
they are taken away. For that there were many Baalim, What Bahal-berith was.
The Jupiter of covenant.
in this place is particular mention made of Baal-berith which a man may call
Ioue^ foederis, or Ioue^ foederatum. Him made they a God over them, and
worshipped him for the Lord. The sum of the worshipping of him seems to be
this, that they referred al ye good things which they had, as received of him:
and they believed yt he turned away from them those evils which they were not
troubled with. By reason of which faith, they counted him for their God, and
worshipped his outward image.

And forgot the Lord their god. We can not worship strange gods but straight
way we must cast away the true God. He is one, and therefore he refuses to be
worshipped with more. Wherefore it remains that they do not worship the true
GOD, but their own inventions, as many as do with the true God join other
which are idols: for there is no true God which will be worshipped that way.
Or else this is the sense of it, that the Israelites did wonderfully fall from
the true God, because they did not only worship Baal, but they so worshipped
him, yt they utterly forgot the god of their fathers and grandfathers, and
altogether abiected ye worshipping of him. Which thing they used not always to
do: for many times they so allowed outward gods, yt yet in the mean time they
retained some part of the old worshipping.

Neither showed they mercy on the house of Gideon. That happened unto the^,
which must needs come to pass. When we depart from the true God, the offices
of charity are neglected, for he which is evil against God, can not be good
to men. An example of Consta^tius the Emperor.
This understood the Emperor Constantius the father of Constantine: who
thought that they would not be faithful unto him, which for to keep still
their dignity, departed from the worshipping of Christ. Gideon in deed deserved
so to be punished: but they ought not so to have dealt against him, especially
seeing they behaved not themselves so for the revenging of religion.

To show mercy, is a phrase much used of the Hebrews, and it is read in many
places in the holy Scriptures, neither signifies it any thing else, then to do
good, and to be of a gentle loving and ready mind to help those which have
need. And that which is now spoken, by a certain anticipation comprehends
the narration which we shall hear in the chap. following, of the calamity and
destruction of the house of Gideon. In the mean time let us consider the
nature of the world: it is wonderfully infected with the vice of ingratitude:
we see in a manner no notable or excellent gift bestowed upon any man, which
by the children of this world is not recompensed with great ingratitude. We
must not besiste from well doing because of ingratitude.
And yet for this occasion we must not suffer our selves to be withdrawe^ from
doing good, least when as other are evil, we imitate them in departing from
our office. Let us go forward to do good unto our neighbors and brethren: who
if they be thankful, let us chiefly rejoice for the^, Why God permits
ingratitude in the world.
and afterward for our selves. But if they be otherwise, let us turn our
selves unto God himself, for whose cause we do rightly, decreing with our
selves, that we must not have a regard what the sins of me^ deserve, but what
God requires of us, or what is decent for us, remembryng ye God very often
permits the vice of ingratitude in the world, whereby our minds may be the
more erected unto him, for whose cause all our things are to be instituted,
and let us so direct unto him those things which we do, that we require nothing
of this world to be re^dred unto us as a reward. Farther, when we see that me^
do for the most part after this manner reward those with great evils, which
have done them much good, we may call to remembrance the life to come, where
shall be rendered unto every man according to his works. Which thing if we had
not a confidence that it shall one day come to pass, we should utterly take
away the providence of God.

The.ix. Chapter.
1 THen Abimelech the son of Ierubbaal went to Sechem unto his mothers
brethren, and spoke unto them, and to all the famely of the house of his
mothers father, saying.

2 Say, I pray you, in the audience of all the men of Sechem, whether is better
for you that all the sons of Ierubbaal, which are 70. persons, either that
one man reign over you? Remember that I am your bone, and your flesh.

3 Then his mothers brethren spoke of him in the audience of all the men of
Sechem all these words: and their hearts were moved to follow Abimelech: for
said they, He is our brother.

4 And they gave him.70. pieces of silver out of ye house of Baal berith,
wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light fellows which followed him.

5 And he went unto his fathers house in Ophra, and slew his brethren the
sons of Ierubbaal, seventy persons upon one stone. Yet Iothan ye youngest
son of Ierubbaal was left, for he hid himself.

6 And all the men of Sechem gathered together, with all the house of Millowe,
and came and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the image which was in
Sechem.


The destruction of the house of Gideon is declared, and the detestable
usurpation of tyranny. Abimelech went, as I suppose from his fathers house: for
he understood that he could not there easily go about that which in his mind
he purposed. He was minded to bring into Israel the power of a king, and being
otherwise a private man, went about to alter the state of the public wealth.
Which thing was utterly unlawful. For that form of government, which the
Hebrews then used, was instituted and allowed by God, even as it is written in
Exodus and Deuteronomy. Whereby is also gathered, that if at any time the people
would have a king, he ought to be created, whom the Lord appointed. Farther, if
they should have appointed a king by humane reason, so great a dignity
pertayned not unto him, which was borne of a concubine. It seems that it
should rather have been given unto the other sons of Gideon, and to the first
begotten, before the rest.

It is good to mark by what guile he works. He accuses his brethren,
Abimelech accuses his brethren unjustly.
as though they affected the kingdom. Whether (says he) is it better, that I
or they reign? As though he would say, one of these two things must needs
come to pass, and except I obtain the kingdom, they will claim it unto
themselves: which was utterly false. For they went about no such matter, yea it
is rather to be thought but they followed their fathers steps: who when ye
kingdom was offered him, refused it. Therefore it is very likely that they as
legitimate children would follow the example of their father. He goes to those
men chiefly whom he hoped would soon be won to come unto him, namely unto
the kinsfolks of his mothers.

He uses glorious reasons. First he declares yt the rule of one alone is
better the^ ye dominon of many. And yt is most easy to persuade humane reason.
Wherefore Homere says: It is not good ye many reign, let there be one Lord.
Homerus.

Aristotle.

Whether a kingdom be better then ^ristocratia, or no.


Which verse Aristotle brings in his Metaphisikes. Which thing in deed might
be granted as touching the institution and perfection of the nature of man.
For in a kingdom occasions in deliberatyng are not ouerpassed and corrupted:
and the execution of things decreed, is not delayed and slacked, as we see
often happens where many bear rule. But in this corruption of nature it
seems to be otherwise, for as much as in it hangs a danger and that most
grievous, le^st the kingdom should fall into the hands of a wicked man.
Wherefore it is better to retain Aristocratia, that is, the governance of many
good men. Abimelech urges not wi^h the other argument, as he did before,
namely the public vtility, but the proper commodity of his kinsfolks. I am
(says he) your flesh, and your bone. As though he would have said: When I am
created king, I will chiefly have a regard unto you. I will increase you with
riches, dignity and power. Wherefore it is better for you to chose me for your
king being your kinseman, rather then a stranger. He says that he is their
flesh and bone, when as yet he was more flesh and bone of his brethren, and of
his father which was dead. For children pertayne more unto the father, then to
the mother. But this fellow lies in all things, and speaks to get favor,
What to be flesh and blood of any man, signifies.
and yt guilfully. It is an Hebrew phrase, to be ye bone and flesh of any man.
Laban spoke so unto Jacob, when he required of him Rachel for a wife. This said
the Israelites also unto David, when they created him king. And Paul to the
Ephesians says, that we are the members of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and
bones of his bones: for as much as he is our head and the head of the Church,
as the husband is joined unto the wife. In sum, it is a speech whereby is
declared the greatest conjunction that may be.

The reasons of Abimelech are confuted.
Abimelech offends most grievously in these reasons. First, in that he
affirms, that it is better that one do rule, and that the government of many
is to be avoided: here I say he deceaueth and is deceived: because this thing
was not to be weighed by the nature thereof, but by the word of God: for we
must not obey humane reason, but the commandments of God. Farther, he
deceaueth the Sichemites, when as he says: Ye are my flesh and my bone, for
although we must have a respect unto our kinsfolks, yet that must be done
without any prejudice of the public wealth, or breach of the commandments
of God. Whereunto thou may add, yt in electing Magistrates, a regard must be
had to the common commodity, and not to a proper profit. But the people is
moveable, especially to sedicions and tumults: therefore the Sichemites ar
content with the reasons of Abimelech, and gave him money, which they would
not willingly have done for lawful uses. Why the money was in the Temple.
The money was in the Temple, either because it was gathered of oblations, and
therefore as holy there kept, or else because it was then the manner (as in the
old time it was at Rome) that the common money should be kept in the Temple of
Saturn, which was the threasory.

Seventy pieces of Silver. Some interpret it a pound of Silver, and other
some, Silver pieces of money. But whatsoever it was, this sum we can not know
precisely and exactly. But this is certain if they were pieces of money, we
must think they were of a great deal more weight, then are ours: for an host
could not be hired for so small a price. What manner of men Abimelech adjoined
unto him.
And the men with got them to this war, are set forth by two words of very
great signification: Rikim that is vain, poor: Pechizim, that is light, and
hedlonge. And as R. David affirms in libro Radicum, these men are understand
to be light, chiefly in science or knowledge: in which signification the same
word is read in the Prophet Zophonia the 3. chapter. Even at this day also
such men are ready to go on warfarre, namely beggarly fellows, which have
wasted and consumed their goods, and which are light hedded, yea hedlong to
take upon them, and to do any wicked act. And that comes hereof, because
they are light in science or knowledge, that is, they want judgment and right
reason. War may sometimes just be made.
Undoubtedly warfarre is a thing lawful and just, if a man use it ryghtly.
For, for as much as the holy Scriptures do teach, that the Magistrate
bears the swoorde to revenge wicked acts, and to defend the good, it
follows that he may arm soldiers, and call together his Citezins to a just
war. Wherefore Christian men in the old time went on warfarre, when they were
compelled to take wages even of Ethnike princes. For the army of the Thebeians
was holy: for they were al in a manner slain for Christ's sake, and Christian
soldiers sometimes when the host was almost destroyed with thyrste, by prayers
thorough Christ obtained water of GOD. But among these holy soldiers, Hired
soldiers are not commendable.
are not those hired warriers worthy to be numbered, which for three crowns a
month stick not to put their life to sale, and strayghtwaye offer themselves,
and run unto every one that calls them, when they hear a Trompet or a
Dromme, and addicte themselves to him that offreth them most, having no regard
at all unto the cause which they defend.

The Sechemites, if they had been wise, ought, The sins of ye Sechemites
when they had heard the accusation against the children of Gideon, to have
enquired whether the thing were so or no, and when they had found it so, they
ought to have brought them to the Senadrim, that they might by their judgment
have been punished. Senadrim was an assembly of 70. Elders.
But if they had found it otherwise, it was their part to have chastned and
kept under Abimelech as a false accuser. But they did otherwise, they consented
to the coniuration, and gave the common money unto Abimelech. At the least they
should have remembered this, that to them (which were but certain members of
that public wealth) it pertayned not to create a king. Examples of murderers
of kinsfolks.
At the length he proceeds to the murder of his brethren, undoubtedly a
heinous crime, which (as it shall be declared) sprange of a very great ambition.
An accustomed example both in the holy Scriptures, and also in the Ethnike
histories. Cain slew Abel. Joseph was sold of his brethren. Ioram the son
of Iehosaphat (as it is in Paralip. the 21. chap.) slew all his brethren.
Absalom also an ungodly son spared not even his own father. Romulus among the
Ethnikes slew his brother Remus, and Domitianus slew Titus, Bassianus
Caracalla also slew Geta. And undoubtedly time would not serve me, if I
should rehearse all the examples of like sort.

I am not ignorant that these manquellers pretended some excuses for their
wicked act, but they were but vain. First, Pretenses of murderers of their
kinsfolks
they pretended that they for the public wealths sake destroyed their
brethren and kynsfolkes which were all desirous to be kings, because the
kyngly power, An answer of Alexander the great. Cicero.
which one pertayneth only unto one, can not be very commodiously distributed
unto many. So Alexander the Macedonian answered unto Darius, that the world
could not hold two Suns, as though one should hinder ye other in governing.
Neither was Cicero ignorant of this reason, who in his.3. book de Officiis
says, that Remus slew Romulus upon a certain show of vtility, as though he
saw that the kingdom should better be governed by one, then by two. Whom yet
he confesses to have offended, being deceived with this show of vtility, and
that he put of all humanity and piety. The other thing which they pretended
is, that therefore they slew their brethren or kynsfolkes, because they had
conspired against them. But when (I pray you) complain they of conspiracies?
even then when they had slain those, whom they complained of, and they could
not defend themselves.

He slew 70. brethren, except one namely Iotham, of whom shall mention be
made afterward. The Hystorye writes that there were 70. slain, either
because Abimelech so willed and commanded, or else because only one wanted
of that sum: The manner of the scripture in reckenyng of numbers.
which thing we may see oftentimes used in the holy Scriptures, that some
certain number is mentioned as a full number, from which yet some may be
taken away.

He slew them upon one stone. It is thought to have been some notable stone
which was appointed for a place of execution. Abimelech therefore is by a great
and detestable murder of his brethren, consecrated king. Kings were
appointed to profit men, and to defend them: but he begins his kingdom with
murder. Wherefore he ought rather to be called a Tyranne, then a king. The
place where he was created, is setforth: wherefore we must understand that this
word Alon, signifies a plant, which R. David in libro Radicum supposes to
be a pine tree: Jonathan makes it a chestnut tree: and Jerome turns it
always an oak. Sometimes it signifies a plain: and the Chaldey paraphrast
interprets it Mischar, that is, a plain field, thither assembled the
Sechemites to create a king. There was an image or pillar set up (as some
think) to a superstitious woorshippyng: which thing although it be not
against the wicked manners of this people and impiety of Abimelech, yet it is
not of necessity that we should so think: for we read many times in the
Scriptures, that images were erected, not for divine worshippynges, but for
other causes. In the book of Genesis the 31. chap. a heap of stones was set
up in mount Gilead as a border and monument unto the posterity of Jacob and
Laban: and in the 35. chap. of the same book, a pillar was erected by the
tomb of Rachel. Yea and Absalon adorned his tomb with an image.

The famely of Millo.
The famely of the mother of Abimelech was not noble, when as she took her name
of the town. Millo is the name of her house. That word signifies other wise
a gulf filled, which Solomon built by the City of Jerusalem. The Sechemites
created a king, the other tribes neither were at it, neither were they called.
So was there a schism among the Israelites, which is wont oftentimes to
happen when the worshipping of god is viciated. These things have I briefly
noted as concerning the Hystory.

Now let us more nighly look upon the wicked and flagicious acts, by which
this man came unto his tyranny. First he was very ambitious, he deceatefully
and falsely accuses his brethren, uses the corruption of bribery to work
treason, is a robber of the common threasory, he wrought by open violence, and
at the last committed murder of his brethren, called Parricidium.

Of Ambition.
What Ambicion is.

What honor is Excellent men are justly honored.


AS touching the first, Ambition is to much desire of honor. And honor is that
reverence which is given unto any man, to bear testimony of his excellency.
And that testimony is borne unto him justly and of right: because it is mete,
that we recompense somewhat unto them, which do help and norishe us, and are
endewed with gifts of God. And we have nothing more worthy or better then
honor. Farther, that they and their like may go forward to exercise them
selves longer and more constantly in helping and keeping of other. Moreover,
that we adding such reverence, may get unto them authority, whereby they may
the more aptly and commodiously execute their office. It is lawful for godly
men to receive the honors offered them.
Hereby it is manifest that it is lawful even for holy men also to embrace the
honors which are given unto the^ for virtue, doctrine, and pietyes sake. For
they both desire and allow things that are just, and do rejoice that men
perform that which the law of God will have done. And he commands to honor
the father, the mother, the Magistrate, and such like. Wherefore if men obey his
precepts, holy men can not but accept it thankfully. Thou may add, that if
it should not so be, their ministry would be contemned, which is by all
means to be avoided.

What must be taken heed of when honors are admitted.
But because we are prone to pride, hautines, and arrogancye: therefore we must
beware, and that circumspectly, that for the desire of honor, we abuse not that
which after a sort may be just. Wherefore I thought it good to note those
things, which I judge are to be taken heed of in this thing. First, that we
rest not in this kind of good, as in the last end. Whatsoever we do, must be
directed unto God, and especially that honor which is given unto us, when we
rightly and orderly execute our duties, so that thereby both we our selves may
know, and also teach other to glorify God, Honor is the reward of virtue.
and not men in good works. For this has Christ commanded, that we should
so direct our wookes, whereby they which see the^, may glorify God the
heavenly father. Neither ought this to move us which is ^o^monly spoken, ye
honor is the reward of virtues. For yt is not to be understand, neither as
touching ye virtues themselves, nor yet in respect of the me^ which are adorned
with the^. For it should be very ill with either of the^, if they had no other
end performed then honor. The end of good men is eternal life, and the
heavenly kingdom. And the end of virtues, is to prepare and renew us to the
glory of God. But honor is called the reward of virtues, as touching other,
which do behold and wonder at the gifts of God in good and holy men: How
honor is the reward of virtue.
and and when they desire to offer or recompense them somewhat, and have
nothing excellenter then honor, then do they give that. Wherefore after this
manner is honor counted the reward of virtue. The other caution is, that a man
do not Salust has written an excellent sentence of this thing: Salust.
The good man and the evil do both a like desire unto themselves glory,
honor, and rule: this man the true way, but the other, because he wants good
arts, contendeth to attain it by guiles and disceates. Thirdely we must
beware,

Abimelech took not heed of the things which I have rehearsed, Abimelech is
ambicious.
but incurred them all. For he set before him the kyngly power, or rather
tyranny, as the last end: for to it directed he all his acts and
cogitations, also he contended unto it by disceates and guiles, and not by the
good way and just means. Yea he seems rather to grant unto a sentence of
Euripidis: A sentence of Eripidis.
That right it self is to be violated for dominions sake. And for as much as
he wanted merits, he rather extorted honor, which is given as a testimony of
virtues, then got it unto himself by just means. He deceaueth his Citizens
with no obscure kind of bryberye, for he flatteryngly requires of them the
kingdom, because he would bestow upon them great and most ample
benefits, for as much as he was their kynseman. The Ethnike laws condemn
inordinate ambicion.
The laws also of the Ethnikes do condemn such inordinate ambition. For as
much as in the law Iulia^, de ambitu, it is decreed, that he which by
bryberye obtained honors, should be condemned, both by paying of money, that
is, a hundredth crowns, and therewith all made infamous.

He deceaueth his brethren by a false accusation, as we have showed: Abimelech
falsely accuses his brethren and commits treason.
and goes farther and commits treason against the people of the Hebrews.
For he attempted to alter, yea rather to euerte the state of that public
wealth. In the digestes ad I. Iuliam, Maiestatis, he is said to commit that
crime, which did any thing against the people of Rome, or against the safety
thereof. And who sees not that Abimelech very diligently conspired against
the liberty of the Hebrews. He infringeth this law also: whosoever has with
him men armed with swoordes and weapons, and keeps possession of some certain
places: which thing the history affirms that Abimelech did. Abimelech is
guilty of robbyng the common threafore.
For he gathered together soldiers and came into Ophrath, and invaded his
fathers house. Wherefore he commits treason, which (as Vlpianus testifies)
is next unto sacrilege. Abimelech also is guilty of robbyng the common
treasure, when as he abused the money, whether it were public or holy, to his
own private use.

Of murder of parents or kinsfolks called Paricidium.
LAstly, which was most heinous of all, Parricidium.
he polluteth himself with the murder of his brethren: of which wicked crime
there are many things written in the civil laws ad I. Corneliam de
Parricidiis. And as far as I can gather out of the laws and Hystoryes, in
the old time the name of that crime was given unto those which murdered their
parents, grandfathers, great grandfathers etc. unto those also which murdered
their sons, neuewes, and sons in the.iiii. degree etc. But afterward
Pompeius extended the signification thereof farther, and they were called
Parricidae which slew their brethren, son in laws, daughter in laws,
father in laws, or mothers in laws, and such other. A law of Numa Pompilius
Although there was an old law, and given by Numa Pompilius: He that
wittingly brings a man to death, let him be taken for a parricide. And also
Augustine in his 3. Augustine.
book de Ciuitate dei the 6. chap. counted Romulus guilty of Parricidium,
because he slew his brother. And there he derideth the Ethnikes, which affirmed
that their gods suffered Troy to be destroyed, because they would take
vengeance of the adultery of Paris. But how (says he) were they favorable
unto Rome, when as the builder thereof committed straight way at the beginning
parricidium? But the same Augustine in his book de Patientia (which yet is
supposed to be none of his) in the 13. chap. appoints a certain latitude or
degrees between Paricides: for (as he says) he sins more haynously which
kylleth his parents or children, then he which murthereth his brethren. And
he which sleaeth his brethren, offends more, then he which destroys those
which are farther of a kynne. And the wicked crime of sleayng parents or
grandfathers, seemed to be so horrible, that at Rome for the space of 600.
years, from the building of the City it was not committed. Romulus in his
laws made no mention of Paricidium.

An answer of Solon.


Yea and Romulus, making no mention of it in his laws, and being demanded,
why he left it out, answered, that he could not be persuaded that any such
thing can happen unto men. Solon also being asked why he likewise by his laws
restrained not parricidium, answer: that he by occasion of his laws would
not admonish men of so horrible a wicked crime, and stir them up unto it
after a sort by his admonishyng. For it oftentimes happens that they which
prohibit certain vices, provoke men to fall into them, which very often will
do those things which they are forbidden.

The punishment of Parricides.
But as for the murder of brethren and kynsfolkes, it was a thing used even
from the beginning, as all historyes do testify. And the punishment of
paricides which slew their parents or children was by laws (as it is had ad
legem Corneliam de parricidis) that they should be sowed in Culeo, that is, in
a lether sack, and with them were put an Ape, a Cock and a Viper, and the^
they were cast into the deep of the sea, or into the next river. But they
which slew of their kinsfolks or cousins, were punished with the sword
only. These punishementes, if they were at any time by the Magistrates
neglected or winked at, God himself punished, as the history of Samuel
declares of Absalon, which slew his brother, and most cruelly invaded his
father. He strikes also with furiousnes and madness those men which commit
such horrible wicked acts, as both the Poets and also the historiographers
write of Nero and Orestes. For either of the^ when he had slain his mother,
was mad. And it is a common saying, yt they which commit so great a wicked
act, Cicero.
ca^ not be quiet in mind. Wherefore Cicero in his Oration for Roscius says,
ye certain young me^ of Terracine^sis which were accused for killing their
father, were by this means absolved, because they were found in ye morning
sleping, for ye judges could not believe yt they could sleep, which had
committed so detestable an act. Domitianus also which slew his brother Titus,
was killed by ye venga^ce of God. And in like manner Bassianus Caracalla, when
he had destroyed his brother Geta. And not to ouerpasse our Abimelech, God (as
we shall hear) sent an evil spirit between him and the princes of
Sichemites, and either party was taken with a certain fury, so that at length
they destroyed one an other.

7 And they told it unto Iotham, who went, and stood on the top of mount
Gerizim, and lift up his voice and cried, and said unto them: Herke^ unto me ye
men of Sechem, that God may harken unto you.

8 The trees went forth to anoint a king over them, and said unto the olive
tree, reign thou over us.

9 But ye olive tree said unto the^, should I leave my fatnes, wherwt by me
they honor God and man, and go to advance me above the trees.

10 Then the trees said unto the fig tree, come thou and reygne over us.

11 But the fyg tree answered them: Should I forsake my swetenes, and my good
fruit, and go to advance me above the trees?

12 Then said the trees unto the vine: Come thou and be king over us.

13 But the vine said unto them: Should I leave my wine, which makes merry both
god and man, and go to advance me above the trees?

14 Then said all the trees unto the bramble: Come thou and reign over us.

15 And the bramble said unto the trees: If ye will annoynte me king over
you, come, and put your trust under my shadow: and if not, let the fire come
out of the bramble, and consume the Ceders of Lebanon.

16 Now therefore if ye have done truly and incorruptly, to make Abimelech king:
and if ye have delte well with Ierubbaal, and with his house: if moreover ye
have done unto him according to the deseruyng of his hands:

17 (For my father fought for you, and adventured his life, to deliver you out
of the hands of Madian.

18 And ye are risen up against my fathers house this day, and have slain his
children.70. persons upon one stone: and have made Abimelech the son of his
maid servant, king over the men of Sechem: because he is your brother.)

19 If ye, I say have delte truly and incorruptly with Ierubbaal and his house
this day, rejoice ye with Abimelech, and let him reioise with you.

20 But if not, let a fire come out from Abimelech, and consume the men of
Sechem, and the house of Millo. Also let a fire come forth from the me^ of
Seche^, and from the house of Millo and destroy Abimelech.

21 And Iotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer and dwelt there from the
face of Abimelech his brother.


Iotham the brother of Abimelech inspired (as it appears) with the spirit of
god, threatens that punishments are at hand both for him and for the
Sechemites. He ascended upon the mount Gerizim, The city of Sechem.
which was nere unto the city of Sechem. In the book of Genesis. 34.
chapter. there is mention made of this city: at that time Hemor the father of
Sechem possessed it, who ravished Dina: wherefore the city was destroyed by
Simeon and Leui. And afterward Jacob gave it unto Joseph, Jerome A place of
Genesis is expounded.
to have it besides his common lot in the land of Chanaan for his posterity,
as we read in the same book the 48. chapter. Wherefore it was in the tribe of
Manasses, and as Ierom in his Hebrew questions upon Genesis testifies, Jacob
was there healed of his haltyng, which he got by wrestling with the angel, as
it appears in the same book the 34. chap. namely yt he came Salem to the city
of Sichem. And we must know, that Salem there is not a name of a city, but
signifies safe and sound. Otherwise Salem longed not to the Amorhites but to
the Iebusites, which afterward was called Jerusalem. In his Epistle to
Eustochius. which conteyneth an Epitaph of Paul, the same Jerome writes that
this city lay situate by the side or root of mount Gerizim, and in his time it
was called Neapolis, and it longed unto the Samaritanes. And the same is it
which John makes mention of in his Gospel the.4. chapter, where it is written
Sichar, but (as Jerome says) by a corrupt word, for it should have been
written Sechem. Thither went Jesus, when he went out of Iewry into Galile.

But the mount Gerizim and Eball lay one over against an other, and in one of
them every year were recited blessings, The Mountes Gerizim and Eball.
and in the other, cursings. Thither did Iotham ascend, peradventure at that
time (as some suppose) when the multitude was assembled, according to the
institution to hear the blessings and cursinges of the law. Which thing yet
(to speak as it is) seems to me not very likely, for as much as I rather
believe that for the worshipping of Baal, that ceremonye was omitted, and
partelye because it seems that the multitude did for this cause assemble
thither, with a solemn assemblye to constitute Abimeleche their new king.
Wherefore in that solemnitye, Iotham spoke these things, undoubtedly by the
holy Ghost, as the event taught. The su^me of his oration contains an
exprobation of the wickedness which they had committed, and a threatening of most
grievous punishments. And that the thing might be made more plain and
manifest before their eyes, he uses a most elegant Apology.

Of a fable and Apology.
What a fable is. Augustine.
AN Apologye they say is a kind of fable. And they define a fable to be a
narration of a false thing, feigned for commodities sake, or oblectation. Or as
Augustine says in his.2. book and.11. chapt. de Soliloquiis, a fable is a lie
made for delectation: although properlye it cannot be called a lie. For the
falsenes is strayghtway found out, and specially in Apologies. For in them are
brought in insensible or unreasonable creatures, talking one to an other, and
entreating of matters very weighty. And as soon as the hearer perceaueth yt,
straightway he understands that the thing is feigned, and not so done in deed.
And undoubtedly certain things in fables are very likely, Certain fables are
likelye and some are not.
and some are most far distante from probability. For it is very likely, that
sometime there arose a contention between Ajax and Ulysses, for the armor of
Achilles, which was judged at the length unto Ulysses, and that Ajax therefore
took such a displeasure, that becomminge mad he slew himself. But
contrariwise it is altogether improbable that a woman was turned into a plant
or into a stone. An Apology.
Wherefore an Apology may be counted a fable which is not likely.

The kinds of a fable.

What fables are to be repudiated, and what to be admitted. Filthy fables are
to be repudiated.


The kinds of a fable are, Comedies, Tragedies, Satires, and Narrations of
Lirike and Heroike Poets, and also Apologies. But which of these feigned things
are lawful, and which are unlawful, thus may be discerned. They which have
fylthinesse and scurility, that is, mirth joined together with filthiness, ought
not to be admitted. But those which are written honestlye and shamefastlye, so
that they refresh the mind with some pleasure, and ar also profitable to
setforth good manners, are not be despised. That fylthy ones are to be
repudiated, the Apostles confyrmeth by two testimonies. To the Corrinthians in
the first Epistle he writes: Evil communications corrupt good manners. And to
the Ephesians the. v chapter it is written, let whoredom and all uncleanness
and covetousness not reign in you, as it becomes saints: then is added
(...), and (...), and which are not comelye. By these words he reproves all
those co^munications which are contaminated with filthiness and scurilitye.
Plato.
The same thing saw Plato in his third book de Repub. where he excludes Poets
which spoke of gods, as though they should speak of men. Because they in so
writing, do both unworthily entreat of the nature of god, which is best and
most high, and also they excuse the sins of common men, when as they testifye
that both the gods and also noble me^ committed the same sins, which thing
assuredly we may see in the co^modye Enuchus of Terence, where Cherea a wicked
young man (beholding a wanton table in the harlotes house, Terence
wherein was painted Jupiter persynge unto Danae by a shower) began to have a
pleasure in himself, because he being a vile man did those things, which he
knew by that table the chief God in the old time committed. I did it (says
he) and I did it with a good will. Cicero.
Cicero also: Homere (says he) feigned these, and transferred humayne things
unto the gods: I had rather they had transferred things divine unto us.

Augustine in his.2. book of Confessions the.15. and 16. chap. complains and
soroweth, that he being a child and young man, learned profitable words.
Augustine.
But yet in things vain. I would to god (says he) I had been instructed in
profitable writings: I hard Jupiter thu^dring and therwithall committing
adoultry. The minds and affections of men ar prone enough unto vices: wherefore
it is wickedlye done, that children and young men should in that age be by
vile and filthye fables stirred up unto sins. Apologies are profitable, which
consisting both of honest words, and good arguments, do rightly instruct that
first age. Esope.
Esope the aunciente writer happily excercised himself in this kind,
although there are some which refer his Apologies unto Hesiodus, who was
au^cienter the^ Esope. But this our Apology (whereof we now entreat) was written
long before Esope and Hesiodus time. For the time of the judges, and namelye of
Gidion, was an hundredth years and more, before the war of Troy. There is an
other Apology also in the.2. book of kings the.14. chap. where Amasias
obteyning the victory of the Edomites, provoked the king of Israel to make war
with him. Unto whom the king Ioas answered thus: The thistle of Labanon sent
unto the Cedre that is of Libanon, and said: Give thy daughter to my son to
wife. And ye wyld beast went out of Libanon and trod down the thistle. By
which Apology he showed that he was so much greter, the^ Amasia the king of
Judah, as the Cedre excels the thystle, and admonished him that he should
after that sort be trodden down and oppressed of his host, as was the thistle by
wild beasts.

These things have I therefore rehearsed, lest the Greek and Ethnike writers
should be thought to be the first inuenters of these profitable fayninges. The
use of Apologies.
Al men agree in this, that the use of Apologies are then to be had, when we
have to do with rude persons. For they understand neither perfect Sillogismes, or
imperfect, neither are they able to perceive inductions, so that of perticulars
they cangagather universals. And they pass not upon the examples of noble men,
for that Menenius Agrippa by an Apology wo^ne the people, which were departed,
to adioine themselves again to ye Patritia^s. For these causes ar Parables,
dreams and visio^s of Prophets very much used in ye holy scriptures.

The fable of Esope of the frogs which desired a king, differs not much
from this Apology which we are now in hand with: for to the^ after the beam or
post which they despised, was given a dragon, which by little and little eat the^
up al.

And I will begin at ye declaration of the fable wherein it is said: If ye have
done rightly and orderly, rejoice with Abimelech, and Abimelech with you. But
if not, let a fire come out from him, and consume you. The olive tree, vine
tree, and fyg tree is the famelye of Gideon: and the trees which desire a king
are the Sechemites. And as among trees there are some noble and some abject: so
also among men there are some noble and excellent, and some unnoble and of no
reputacion. The bramble brier signifies Abimelech. Of the bra^ble or briar.
Plini.
Plini in his 24. book and.14. chapt. writes of this kind of thorn. And as
touching this matter, these are the properties thereof: it is a plant vile and
abject, as was Abimelech, who was a bastard and borne of a hand maid, so that
he was not to be compared with his brethern. And as he without any vtility
governed the Israelites, so is the bra^ble wont to bringforth no fruit. The
bramble also pricketh, even as Abimelech very much hurted the Israelites.
Moreover some write that the bows of brambles are sometimes so vehemently
shaken and moved with the wind, that out of them is fire kindled, wherewith
not only they themselves burn, but ye whole wood wherein they grow is burnte:
which thing Iotham now foretells to come to pass of Abimelech. Wherefore
the properties do wonderfully well agree.

But here are two questions offered unto the readers. The first is, because it
is said that the trees went to the Olive tree, vine tree, fig tree, and
bramble, to create them a king, when as the Sechemites went not unto Abimelech,
and unto the sons of Gideon, but rather Abimelech went unto them. The other
is, we do not here read that the sons of Gideon refused the kingdom offered
unto them, or answered those things which the trees said, when they were
called to raygne.

The latter question I think may be dissolved two ways, saying, that the
sons of Gideon in deed answered not so: but they would have answered so, if
they had been demanded. Wherefore Iotham knowing so rightwell al their minds
and will, seems not to speak so much from the purpose. Or else we may say,
that Gideon himself answered for his sons, when he said: I will not reygne
over you, God himself shall raygne over you, And that we may understand, what
the three noble trees meant by their aunsweres, this is to be called again to
remembrance, that the kingdom was offered unto Gideon, not only for himself,
but also for his son, and sons son. Wherefore he refused the kingdom for
three. And hereof it comes (as the Rabbines suppose) that there are three
kinds of trees brought in.

But as touching the first question, the Sechemites and Israelites came not
unto Abimelech, to make him their king, but yet the holy ghost so speaks by
Iotham, because he is he that knows ye hearts, and knew that that people
labored with this desire to have at the length a king. For they had manifestly
declared it before, when they offered ye kingdom unto Gideon, and afterward
more manifestlye they showed it in the time of Samuel, when they altogether
desired to have a king given them, as other nations had.

What manner of argument is gathered out of this Apologye. Argumentum a
comparatis A maiore ad minus. Mayor.
Out of this Apology is drawn an argument of things compared together. For the
sons of Ierubbaal are compared with Abimelech, as far nobler then he, even
as the olyue tree, vine tree, and fyg tree do far excel the bramble and
brier. And the reason is from the greater unto the lesser by negation, as
though it should have been said: If even they would not reign, and judged that
it was not lawful for them, which were most excellent, endewed with virtues and
faculties, apt and mete for to raygne: much less is it lawful for him to
reign which wants virtues, and is unapt for a kingdom. But they which were
noble, and might have raygned, Minor.
would not, neither did they think that it was lawful for them. Wherefore
Abimelech neither could, neither ought, to have been by you appointed king.
The first proposition is manifest enough by the rule of things compared: and
the second most manifestly appears by the Apology. We may by the like
argument reason of the Ecclesiastical state.

For if the fathers which were endued with a great spirit, The argument is
ap^^ed vn^ the Pastors of the Church.
notable in wonderful virtues, and excellent doctrine, would not execute the
office of a Pope or Monarchy in the Church, or take upon them principality over
all Bishops and Churches: that is much les to be granted unto their posterity,
which are much inferior unto them, yea not to be compared with them. But they
would not: wherefore neither is it meet that those should. The first
proposition appears (as we have already said) by the rule of things
compared: but the minor is proved both by Ciprian, and also by the Counsel of
Carthage, likewise by Augustine, Leo, and Gregory.

Farthermore, by this act we gather, what evil comes by changing the state
of a public wealth, especially when it was allowed by the word of God, as was
the Aristocratia of the Hebrews. Neither was there any cause, why they should
change that form of the public wealth: The Church ought not to have altered
the form of the government thereof
for God him self governed them, gave them.70. Elders, and raised them up
Judges in perilous times. In like manner there was no cause why the Church
should change the form of her government. Neither can they which brought in
the Papacy allege any thing which the Hebrews could not have said to defend
their peticion for having a king. For as these men feign for themselves, that
the Church should be rightlier governed by one, namely the Bishop of Rome,
then by many Bishops, of which every one fully should have care, as touching
his own portion: So might the Jews have alleged, that their kingdom should
be far better governed by one, then by many. And they might have spoken that
with much more likelihood, when as the land of Chanaan extends not so far
as the Church, and very many things as touching civil matters may be better
executed by a King that is absent, then the Church which extends most
largely, can be governed of a Pastor that dwells in Regions most far.

Fire comes out of Abimilech, Tirannes oppress and govern not.
because oppression takes his beginning of Tirannes. So said Samuel unto the
Hebrews, that the king would make their children Carters, their daughters
handmaidens, and compel them both to ear and till their ground, and take away
from them their best Olive gardens and vyneyardes. Neither was that which
Samuel rehearsed, the right of a king and appointed of God, but that, which as
the Prophet saw, kings would afterward usurp. Otherwise the law of a king is
contained in Deuteronomy. the.xvii. chap. From the Pope, as it is here said, there is
come forth a fire, which has wasted and corrupted all Churches.

But it is meet to consider what the profitable and fruitful trees answered
when they were required to take upon them a kingdom. Holy men will not be
promoted above other men.
They said they were content with their own good things: and therefore they
would neither receive a kingdom, or suffer any alteration of their state.
After the same manner even holy and godly men do. Ambrosius very much and long
time resisted, because he would not be created bishop of Millane. Augustine
also many ways labored to be no Elder or Bishop. And among the Ethnikes Numa
Pompilius long time and much deferred, before he would take upon him ye kingdom
of Rome. Diocletianus, although before he governed very tira^nically and very
cruelly, yet after yt, he resigned it, and being desired to take upon him the
Empire again, he utterly refused it. Saul also (to turn to the holy history)
hid him self among the stuff and burdens, when he should be publicly
consecrated. But now a days, because we have thorns and brambles every where,
al men with a wonderful ambicion desire to be created Bishops or Popes, and by
their tumult and importunity, all Christendom is in a manner shaken. Wherefore
it is the part of good men to be content with their vocation, and not rashly to
demit themselves unto that vocation which is against ye word of God: especially
when in that vocation, where in they are placed of God, they may be both beloved
of him, and also profitable unto me^: as the Olive tree, vine tree, and fig tree
in this Apology testify of the^ selves.

But how answered the Olive tree, that his fruit is much made of, not only of
men, but also of God? That is therefore so said, because God in his tabernacle
would have lights burning, Oblation.
which were maintained with the purest oil. Farthermore, Minacha, whither it
were of meal, or of graynes, of fruit, or of fine cakes, it was commanded to
be ouersprinkled with oil. Moreover, Priests, Prophets and Kings, were
anointed with oil. Also with oil were made many plasters, salues, cered
clothes, and diverse and manifold medicines. And in many other countries, for
want of abundance of butter, meats are seasoned with oil. And in the
Psalm.104. it is said, that it is good to beautify the face. Therefore it is
not absurdlye said, that both God and man make much of this liquor. But in
that it is said, that wine makes God merry, it ought not so to be understand,
as though God either drinks, or has need of wine, to make him merry: but
because in sacrifices pouringes out of wine were had. And as the Rabbines
declare: the Levites in the oblation of sacrifices, did then begin to sing with
the voice, trumpets, and harpes, when the wine was poured out.

Of wine and dronkennes.
But because very many intemperate men, being reproved for dronkennes, are
wont by this sentence to excuse their sin, which otherwise is most filthy,
saying that they abuse not wine, forasmuch as they use it to that end, for
which it was invented, and created of God, namelye that men with it should
make them selves merry: A division of that which shall be entreated of.
therefore I thought it good to refell their wantonness. Wherefore first I will
declare the just use of wine. Afterward I will show the abuse thereof,
teaching it to be against the law of God. Then will I bring examples, manifestly
to open that the abuse of it is a thing as well damnable as filthy and
detestable. Moreover I will rehearse the horrible effects of this evil. And
lastly I will answer to those cauillations and sophistical arguments, by which
the Epicures defend dronkennes, and the abuse of wine.

Healthful and honest uses of wine.
which might also be done with water, but not so commodiously: because wine in
quenching of thirst, makes a man strong, and enge^dreth Paul writes unto
Timothe to use wine for Luke it is written, that the Samaritane bound the
wounds of him whom he found half dead, and poured Solomon writes in his
Proverbs the.31. chap. Give strong drink to them which are heavy, and wine to
them that have grief of heart. Let them drink and forget their poverty, and no
more remember their sorrow. And we read in the.104. Psalm, wine rejoices the
heart of man.

The wonderful liberality of God toward men.
For so great was the goodness of God toward men, that he would give unto them
not only things necessary to live by, but also largely bestow on them
delicates: because properly and by himself he delights not in the
pensiuenes, sadness, and heaviness of men, but desires to have them live
holilye, and godlyly, with an honest and holy mirth of heart. Wherefore he has
granted unto the^, not only the use of wine, but also oil, and most pleasant
odours, also flesh, and likewise diverse and manifold kinds of meat.
Undoubtedly the use of wine is sometimes profitable unto those, which are
recovered of their diseases, and must be restored to their old health, and as a
certain Philosopher says, a heuines and certain bitterness of old men are by
it likewise mitigated and lenified, as hoppes, which otherwise are most bitter,
become sweet, being stiped in water. But we must take heed that we keep a
measure, We must keep a measure in drinking of wine.
otherwise the gladness which by wine is sought, is easily turned unto most
great heaviness. For the intemperance of wine does easily lose his vtility. Yea
if men come to dronkennes, then is the use of wine a very heavy thing, and full
of danger. Wherefore it is necessary to put a difference between the use and
abuse thereof.

Moreover, this is to be added, that to have to much drink, or to be droonke,
A distinction of dronkennes. Marsilius Ficinus.
may be taken two ways, either properly, or Metaphoricallye. This difference
Marcilius Ficinus plainly teaches in the argument of his Dialogue de Iusto,
and makes one kind of dronke^nes above the Moon, or celestial, stirred up by
drinking of heavenly drink, whereby the mind being set without it self, and
above it self, forgets al mortal diseases, and only considers things
divine, by the brightness whereof, first it waxes dim, but after that it
somewhat tastes the savor of them, it is by a new heat changed from his
first habit or quality, whereby whithin a while it clearly beholds
spiritual things, and whilst it healthfully tastes them, it is with great
fruit nourished. Wherefore it is written in the Psalm: we shall be made dro^ken
of the plentifulnes of thy house. Musaeus. Orpheus.
Yea and Museus an ancient Poet says, that the reward of virtue, is perpetual
dro^kennes. And Orpheus before Museus said, that the same was signified by the
ceremonies and holy seruises of Dionisius. The other kind of dronke^nes he
says is under the Moon, and worldly, which is stirred up of drink called
Letheus, that is, carnal drink, whereby the mind being set without it self,
and under it self, it forgets things divine, and doteth. Neither is it to
be doubted, but that this kind of dronkennes is utterly to be avoided. Of the
first kind of dronkennes, which is Methaphorical, there is plain mention made
in the Proverbs of Solomon, where wisdom stirs up men to drink wine,
which she has set forth on her table, plentifully and abundantly. Yea and
Christ also our Savior, which is the true wisdom, promises us such a wine in
the kingdom of heaven. By Translation also is described the wine of
compunction and furye, which God will give the ungodly to drink, whereby they
shall become mad, and according to their deserts be turned into furiousnes.

But leaving these Methaphores, Dronkennes condemned by the holy scriptures.
let us return unto dronkennes properly taken, whereof we now entreat, and let
us declare by testimonies of the holy scriptures, that such abuse of wine is
prohibited and forbidden. To the Ephesians Paul says: Be ye not made drunk
with wine, wherein is wanto^nes. But be ye filled with the spirit, speaking to
your selves by Psalms, Himnes, and spiritual songs. Upon which place Jerome
says: Jerome.
we cannot at one time be filled with wine and the holy ghost: For the Apostle
puts these things as contraries, even as we cannot serve two masters. He
that is filled with the spirit, has wisdom, meekenes, shamefastnes, and
chastity: and he which is filled with wine, has folishnes, furiousnes,
malepertnes, and filthy lust. They which are not filled with wine, can easily
sing Psalms, Himnes, and spiritual songs: which thing they cannot do, which
have gorged themselves with wine. The same Paul also writes: Have no care of
the flesh, for the lusts thereof. And Christ by express words says unto
his Disciples: Take heed your hearts be not ouercom with surfeting and
dronkennes. And in the old testament in the Proverbs the.31. chap. it is
written: Give not wine unto kings. And in the.23. chap. Look not upon the
wine when it is red, and when it shows his color in the cup, and goes
down pleasantly. And in the.2. chap of Ecclesiastes, Solomon says, yt he
thought to give his heart to wine and pleasant things, and at the length he
found that this study and purpose was mere vanity. Laughter (says he) I
thought to be error: and I said unto joy, why do thou in vain deceive?
This mirth of wine and pleasant things, ought not to be often used of holy
men, for as much as Christ has taught that they are blessed which mourn: they
(says he in Matthew) shall receive consolation. But in Luke the.7. chapter it is
added, that they shall laugh. And it is the surest way, that we presently want
some joy, to laughe perpetually. In the.v. of Esaias it is written, woe unto you
which rise up carely to follow dronke^nes, and to drink even til night, to be
inflamed with wine: and the harp, and viole, timbrel and pipe, and wine are in
your feasts. etc. And again in the same chap. woe unto you that are mighty to
drink wine, and are strong men to mingle dronkennes. Joel also in the first
chapter writes: Awake ye up which are dronken with wine. And this is not to be
passed over, that in Leuiticus, Aaron and his sons are commanded not to
drink wine, before they come to sacrifice before the Lord. And Paul twice
commands that the Ministers of the Church should not be given to much wine.
And when he counseled his Timothe to use wine for the stomach and diseases, he
adds that it should be but a little, least he should let lose the bridle to
dronkennes. In the old law also the use of wine was forbidden the Nazarites:
and the Rechabites are in Jeremy commended, because at their fathers
commandment they abstained from wine: at which time yet they knew that these
things were written, which now in the history we have in hand, as concerning
wine, namely that with it both God and men ar made merry, and that also which is
written in the.104. Psalm, that wine makes merry the hearts of men. Wherefore
let us gather that these are not contrary, to use wine temperatly and
moderatly, and that it was given of God, to make us merry in a due time, and in
a right use.

There are certain times wherein myrthe is not convenient.
Neither ought we to be ignorant of this, that some such times chance,
wherein it is not meet for Christian and godly men to give them selves to
mirth: sometimes we must mourn for the sins which we have committed. And
sometimes we are troubled with very grievous miseries: and when we are under the
hand of the rod of God, we must pray more vehemently, whereunto fastings and
chastning of the body much helps: which thing Paul declares in his first
Epistle unto the Corrinthians, when he says, that it is lawful sometimes for
the husband and wife to depart one from an other for a season, but yet with the
mutual consent of them both, that they may give themselves to fastings and
prayers: although we must not for such abstinence appoint any certain days of
the year, but leave the time to the prudence of the spirit. Howbeit this
reason makes much against those, which contend that we must continually
drink, that at no time we may want mirth. Yea and the same Apostle said of him
self: I chasten my body, and bring it in to bondage. By which saying he
admonished the Corrinthians by his example to bridle the lusts. There might be
many more examples rehearsed out of the holy scriptures, manifestly to
declare, that both dronkennes, and also to much use of wine are prohibited. But
these shall be sufficient at this time. And this only will I add, that even the
very Ethnikes knew this thing also. Plato. Testimonies of the Ethnikes.
Seneca.
Plato in his.7. book de Legibus, toward the end writes, that Minos by his
laws prohibited the Cretenses, that they should not drink together to
dronkennes. And Seneca says in his.84. Epistle: Dronke^nes is nothing else then
a voluntary madness. And straight way after: The quality of dronkennes
continuing many days, is furiousnes. Moreover, they which strive with cups,
although they overcome other in taking much wine, yet will they or nyl they,
they are overcome of the tonnes. And it is filthy for a man to take in more
then he is able to receive, and not to know the measure of his stomach.

Hitherto we have sufficiently declared, that the abuse of wine is both against
the holy scriptures, and also humane reason. Now let us prove the same by
examples: that they which will not believe by the sentences before alleged, may
yet at the least be taught by these examples. Noah a great man, just, and loved
of God, The dronkennes of Noah.
who saw two constitutions of the world (for he lived both before and after the
flood) is set forth unto us, as an example utterly to avoid dronkennes, when
as he having droonke more wine then was meet, lay in the tabernacle most
filthely naked, and his privy parts, which were wont to be covered, he left
bare and uncovered: and he which was wont to be a schoolmaster of virtues,
was a great offense unto his children. Cham mocked him: the other two sons of
a better and holier nature, were sorry, and very much ashamed of their fathers
filthiness. By this act it is sufficiently declared, that shame, derision, and
offense follow dronkennes.

But of this sin we have a notable example in Lot, The dronkennes of Lot.
who undoubtedly drank not immoderately, to the end he would abuse his
daughters, and to commit incest, but to put away cares and griefs which he
had taken, for the overthrow of the.v. Cities, for the loss of his dear wife,
and also of his substance. He would also comfort his Daughters, that they
should not take to much thought, specially for the loss of their mother:
although he ought to have invented other ways of comforting. But this I speak
only, least any man should think that he did with his will drink to much,
to pollute him self with most fylthy lusts: Yet for all that, to much
abundance of drink was the cause of his most vile incest, being otherwise an
old man, and in a time far out of purpose, for as much as the judgments
of God were declared against the fylthy lusts of the five Cities. And which
is wonderful, wine so alienated Lot from him self, that he understood not
with what women he had companyed. Wherefore rightly says Seneca in his.84.
Epistle before alleged: Seneca.
They which are droonke do many things, which afterward when they are sober,
they are ashamed of. Lot sought to make him self merry by wine, and he incurred
a perpetual heauynes. Let them therefore which seek to be made merry with
ouermuche wine, remember that they put them selves in to a most present
danger, and by that means may easily throw them selves headlong into most
grievous wicked acts.

Neither is yt to be allowed which some allege for an excuse, that such events
are uncertain, so that a man cannot tell for certain, whether he which drinks
to much shall fall into these filthy things or no: because the thing is so
surely known, that even the daughters of Lot being yet virgins, understood
it, namelye that the old man by wine, might be driven to filthy lust, and so
be deceived, that also he had to do even with his daughters. Who will therefore
say that he knows not that which they understood? Lot was deceived and
snared by his daughters, but such as love to much mirth, that is, dronken men,
snare themselves, and openly fight against them selves. God punishes
dro^ke^nes wi^h most grievous punishments. Why the holy scriptures se^ forth
the history of Lot.
Neither think they with themselves that God with most grievous punishments,
takes vengeance of dronke^nes, and suffers the abuse of his gift most
precious, long unpunished. These bibbers are wont sometimes to bring forth Lot
as a patron of their intemperance, Neither do they mark, that the holy
scriptures do set forth the historye of him as an horrible, and in a manner
tragical example. God did not meanly punish that man's dronkennes: for he had
to do with his daughters, they conceived by him, and the thing could not be
dissembled: incestious children were borne, Ammon and Moab, of whom came the
Nations of the Ammonites and Moabites, which were both hated of God, and
enemies unto the Israelites. Lot him self (as it is to be thought) was always
sorry for the crime which he had committed, and was talked of, of every man.

And seeing that the testimony of the holy Scriptures is extant, and shall
remain unto the end of the world: as often as they are red, so often is noted
and spread abroad his infamy. If so be that God spared not a man, otherwise
holy, the Neuew of Abraham, and harborer of Angels: what will he do to those
glottons and Hogs, which having no virtue, day and night, either lie or sit
dronken? That which we read happened once unto Lot, these men every day
exercise it.

But that which our dronkards allege of Lot, Dronke^nes objected to Cato.
the Romans in the old time alleged of Cato, excusing their dronke^nes,
because that most grave man somtymes in the night recreated his mind, not
undoubtedly in bolling and bibbing immoderatly, but in sipping and drinking a
little, adding therwithall much honest talk. Neither considered they, that
that good man was sober all the whole day, labored much in determining and
judging of causes, in consulting with other Senators concerning the public
wealth, in having to do with the people, in executing the office of a
Magistrate, in reading and writing. These should have imitated these good and
honest studies.

But let us go on in rehearsing examples. Ammon David's son was slain of
Absalon, not assuredly when he was sober, but when in the banquet he was more
merry then was meet, by drinking of to much wine. And as it is declared in the
latter end of the.1. book of Machab. Simon the high priest was with his.2.
sons Mattathias and Judas slain of his son in law, when in the feast they
were in a manner dronken with overmuch wine. And the history of Judith (although
it be not found in the Canon of the Jews) shows that Holofernus, otherwise a
most fierce Captain of an host, was so overwhelmed with wine, that with small a
do he was behedded of a woman. I might add how Sisera being dronken, was
slain of Iahel, although his drink was milk, and not wine.

And if that we will besides these read over the histories of the Ethnikes, we
shall find many and notable examples of those, which were most grievously hurt
by dronke^nes. Alexander of Macedonia.
Alexander of Macedonia, the Conqueror of the world, was most filthely overcome
with wine, and being drunk, slew Clitus his friend, most valiant and faithful,
whose diligence, industry, labor, prudence, and strength, he had in wars
long time used, to his great commodity. Wherefore when he had slept after his
wine, and being awaked, and remembering the wicked act that he had committed, he
was so ashamed and sorry, that he wished himself dead. But yet he amended not
the vice of dronkennes: yea once afterward he droonke so much wine in one
night, that he fell into a fever, and for that he would not temper himself from
wine, within a while after he died. Wherefore Seneca in his 84. Epistle already
alleged, writes that Alexander, which had escaped so many dangers, and
vanquished things most dificile, by intemperaunce of drinking, M. Antonius.
and by that herculaue and fatal cup, perished. M. Antonius, otherwise a stout
and valiant Emperor, a vanquisher in many battles, so laded himself
sometimes with wine, that even in the Tribunal seat in the morning, before
the people of Rome, whilst he was sitting to give judgment, he was compelled
to vomit. And in Egypt he used much drinking, whereby he could do nothing
noblye, The feast of the Lapithares and Centaures.
but was by Octauian driven most filthylye to flight. What the Poets write of
the feast of the Lapithares and Sentaures, it is better known, then I shall
need now to recite. And I think I have now brought sufficient examples:
which being diligently considered, serve much to the detestation of
drunkenness.

The effects of dronkennes.
But they which are not feared from the filthynes thereof by the words of God,
which we have first set, and do not abhor it, being persuaded by the
examples now alleged: shall peradventure be won, and led from it, by
considering of those euyls, which spring of the abuse of wine. It is expedient
that the tree be known by his fruits. And undoubtedly such a thing is
drunkenness to be counted, as the fruits are known, which spring of it. But
that we may speak orderlye, The hurtes and damages coming of dronkennes.
we will divide the euyls thereof by their subjects: for it hurts the body,
vexes also the mind, wastes the goods, and is hateful to our neighbors.

As touching the body, by dronke^nes come oftentimes sudden deaths,
dissolucions of the members, Apoplexia is, when man's se^ses are taken a way.
the disease called Apoplexia, and sundry and miserable chances. For the
smoothe and plain ground is unto dronkardes a den: for they fall, break
their legs, their arms, and sometimes their necks: and are burnt when they
fall into the fire. The liver is inflamed with to much drink, the head is
pained, the members are made weak and tremble, the senses ar corrupted, the
natural heat is overwhelmed with ouermuche wine, the stomach which is over
largely distended, is sick with crudity or rawnes, and with intolerable
pains: the whole body is in a manner inflamed, and the thirst is augmented.
Dronkardes lie groueling like blocks, and so are beriued of their strength,
that neither head nor foot can do their office. Wherefore it is written in
the.23. Proverb. 33.
chap. of the Proverbs: To whom is woe? to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to
whom is sighing? and to whom are wounds without cause? Or to whom is the
rednes of the eyes? Even to them that tarry long at the wine, and to the^ that
go and seek largely to pour in wine. Look not upon the wine when it is red,
and when it shows his color in the cup, and goes down pleasantly: in the
end thereof it will bite like a Serpent, and put out his sting like a
Cockatrice. Thine eyes shall look upon strange things, and thine heart shall
speak leude things. And thou shall be as one that sleeps in the midst of
the sea, and as he which sleeps in the top of the mast of a ship. They have
stricken me, and it payned me not, they have bruised me, and I felt it not. When
I awake, I will seek it again. etc. And behold with how many punishments God
afflicts dro^kardes. Esaias in his.v. chapter, agrees with Solomon: For he
also says, Esaias 5.
woe unto those which are mighty and strong to drink wine. And in the same v.
chap. he says that dronkardes regard not the work of the Lord, neither
consider the work of his hands. Moreover, to such men is woe: Jerome.
because (as Jerome upon that place writes) they are most unhappy, who being
from morning to night occupied in dronke^nes, glotony, and sundry pleasures,
they understand not the works of the Lord in them: and not considering
wherefore they were created, sleep out in a manner their whole life. Wherefore
Joel cried out unto them: Joel. 1.
awake up ye dronkards, weep and howl all ye that drink wine. But dronkardes
are not by these cries stirred up, for they do not only sleep, but seem to be
in a manner buried. Wherefore Vergil aptly says of a City, Virgil.
that it was buried with sleep and wine.

But now let us see how much the soul or mind is hurt with dronkennes. How
much the mind is hurt with wine.
Dronkardes are oftentimes stricken with the spirit of amasednes, and are
turned in a manner into furiousnes: they become like brute beasts, so that
there seems to remain in them no understanding. It is a grievous thing
without doubt for a man to wound himself, or to deprive himself of any
member, but of his own free will to take away his mind from himself, it is an
evil intolerable. In Hosea the.4. chap. it is woorthely written, that wine
and dronkennes take away the heart. And in the.xix. of Ecclesiasticus it is
written: wine and women make wise men to apostatate, that is, to depart from
right institutions, so that they are no more their own men: for they are
withdrawn from their office and virtue, and also fall from the right trade of
life. And in the same book the 31. chap. it is written, wine dronken with
excess, engenders bitterness of mind with braulinges and skeldinges.
Dronkennes increases the courage of a fool till he offend: but it diminishes
his strength. In these words there is an elegant Antithesis, namely that wine
increases the courage and spirits, and causes greater audacitye, but it
diminishes and weakeneth the strength. Plato.
Wherefore Plato in his.vi. Dialogue de Iusto, at the beginning: A dronkard
(says he) has a tirrannical heart, for he would rule all men as he lust, and
not by any reason or law. Dronkennes also brings oblivion of laws and
right. Wherefore Solomon says in his Proverbs, that wine must not be given
unto kings, least peradventure they drink, and forget the law ordained, and
change the judgment of al ye children of the poor. Plato also writes in
his.3. book de Repub. ye dronke^nes may be suffered in any man, rather then in
a Magistrate. Plato.
For a dronke^ man knows not the ground whereon he is. And if a Magistrate be
dronk, the^ has ye keeper need of a keeper. This is moreover to be added, yt
there is nothing kept secret where dro^ke^nes reigns. Because it opens not
only the secret parts of the body, but also of the mind. And in drinking ar
poured out words unshamefast, foolish, unapt, Horace.
and wicked. Wherefore Horace describing the effects of dronkennes, says:
What is it that dronkennes commits not? It discloseth things secret, it
establishes hope, and thrusts forth the unarmed man into the battle. It
takes away the burden from careful minds, it teaches arts. Who^ have not
full cups made eloquent? and whom being in extreme pouertye, have they not made
careless? Plato.
And Plato in his first book de Legibus, toward the end says thus: When a
man drinks wine, at the first it makes him cherefullyer: afterward the more
he drinks, the greater and better hope he is in, and feels him self
stronger. Then, as though he were wise, the man is filled with that confidence,
liberty and audacity, that without fear he both says and does whatsoever
pleases him. The same Plato in his.vi. Dialogue de Legibus, says: He which is
filled with wine, is stirred up with a woodnes, both of mind and body, and
both draws, and is drawn every where. And a dronkard is as a man out of his
wit.

Seneca.
Seneca in his third book of Natural questions, the.20. chap. says, that
dronkennes till it be dried up, is madness, and with overmuch heaviness is brought
on sleep. And in his.60. Epistle to Lucillus toward the end: One hours
dronkennes recompenseth his long madness, with the wearynes of a long time. And
in the.84. Epistle: Dronkennes draws out al vice, and kindles it, and
detecteth it. It puts away all shamefastnes, whose nature is to resist
evil endeavors. Where to much power of wine possesses the mind, whatsoever
evil lay hidden, bursteth forth. Dronkennes makes not vices, but brinketh
them to light. In dronkennes, he that is proud, his pride increases, crueltye
in the cruel man, malice in the envious man, and all vices ar detected and
brought to light. By it a man forgets himself, speaks doubtful and
stamering words, it causes unconstant eyes, a reeling pace, disines in the
head, and the house to seem to go round about, torments in the stomach, when
the wine boyleth, and it diste^deth even the bowels. Cruelty for the most part
follows dronkennes, for M. Antonius, wonderfully rejoiced at the heads and
members of the banished me^, that were brought him at a feast. Also in the.20.
chap. of the Proverbs it is written: Wine makes a mocker, and strong drink a
troublesome fellow. Whosoever erreth in it, shall never be wise. But because
there are some which boast that they can drink a great deal of wine and be
still sober, and of a sound judgment, I desire them to harken unto Seneca in
the Epistle now alleged, who says: Let such men also say that by drinking of
poison they shall not dye, and by taking of poppy they shall not sleep,
Barefoote.
and by drinking of Elleborne they shall not cast forth and purge whatsoever is
in the inward parts.

The disco^modities of wine when it is excessiuely dronken, which we have
hitherto rehearsed, Dronke^nes wa^eth the goods
pertain both unto the body and unto the mind. But now must we add, how it
brings hurt unto our substance and goods. In the Proverbs the.21. chap. it
is written: He which loves wine and fat things, shall not be rich. And in the
same book the.23. chap. it is thus written: Keep not company with wine
bibbers, and those that devour flesh. For the bybber and the glotton shall be
brought unto pouertye, and he which gives himself to much sleeping, shall be
clothed with torn garments.

Dronkards discommodious to the^e neighbors
And how much discommodious dronkardes are unto their neighbors, it is easy
to see. They are injurious, and rail upon those whom they meet. And being in
their fury, they fall into filthy lusts, and so easelye polute other men's
Spouses and wives. And by horrible means they rage against the famelies of
their neighbors. They are an evil example, yea and offense unto other
Citizens. And whilst they spend and consume their substance upon wine and
dronkennes, they have no regard to provide things necessary for their own
house. Yea, whilst they are in their dronken fury, they handle their innocent
wife and children euilly, and defraude the poor of their alms, which if they
lived more sparingly, they might be able to bestow upon them. They make them
selves unprofitable for the public wealth, when as dronkardes can neither
execute the office of a Magistrate them selves, nor yet well ar they able to
obey those that govern. They trouble also and infame the Church, wherefore
they are separated from it. For Paul in the.1. to the Corrin. the.5. chap.
nombreth dronkardes with those, with whom we ought not so much as to eat.
There is scarce any evil which cannot be adjoined unto the effects of
dronkennes.

But to conclude the matter, An answer to those which defend overmuch drinkyng.
first we grant unto those (which do naughtely usurp this place which we
have now in hand, and lay it for a color to defend the vice of dronkennes)
that it is lawful to use wine for necessity, for medicine, and also for mirth,
but yet it must be tempered with sobriety, neither may it excede a mean, yea
it must agree with time, place, degree, age, and kind. After this manner let
the saints rejoice before their God, namely with giving of thanks, and
celebrating divine praises. Neither Solomon in the.23. chapter of the Proverbs,
says woe unto those which drink wine, but unto those which in it consume their
time, which give them selves to nothing but to drinking, contending who can
drink most, provoking one an other, and compelling others to drink. These
are reprehended, and not those which modestlye use the gift of God. Let men so
make them selves merry with wine, that afterward they may be more chereful to
obey God, and to suffer heavy things, if need be. And let men beware they
forget not them selves, that they ouerwhelme not their senses, and choke up
their strength. Neither is the holy scripture ungodly and violently to be
drawn unto the license of the flesh. Yea we ought so to be ready that we may
obey the Apostle, who said: It is good not to eat flesh, and not to drink
wine, if it should turn to the offending of the weak brethren. Let us also
remember that the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, neither ar they
commended of God, which can drink more wine, then the rest. The word of God
is no defense for dronkennes, yea it detesteth it. We will plead therefore
against these, with the doctrine of Ecclesiasticus, the.31. chap. where it is
said: show not thy self a man in wine, that is, show not thy strength in
drinking. For there are some which try how strong and mighty they are in this
intemperaunce, and also with overmuch drinking of wine, do oppress all the
powers, both of the body and of the mind. The wise man goes forward and
says: for wine has destroyed many. As the furnace proves the hardness of the
swoorde in the tempering: so does wine the hearts of the proud when they are
drunk. Wine moderately dronken, is profitable for the life of man. What is his
life that is overcome with wine? But it was created to make men merry: Wine
measurablye dronken, and in time, brinketh gladness and cherefulnes of the
mind. etc. These things may easily teach and answer those men, which under
the pretense to make them merry, labor to defend and maintain dronkennes.

Let them consider with them selves, that the gifts of God should never be
separated from the rule of modesty and temperaunce. Let them not forget that
the Apostle in the Epistle to the Galathians, reckoned dronkennes among the
works of the flesh. He also admonished the Romans that they should not be
conuersaunt in Chambers, in eatynges and dronkennes. And to the Thessalonians
he shows the filthiness of this vice, when he says it pertayneth unto the
night. They which are droonke (says he) are drunk in the night: as though he
would affirm it to be a thing unworthy, to be seen by the light of the day.
But as concerning this thing, these are sufficient: Let us now return unto the
history. We have already said what the Olive and vine trees answered unto the
trees which would have promoted them to a kingdom, and we have manyfestlye
showed how the Olyue and Vine trees serve, both for God, and for men. Of the
fig tree there is no question: for he makes no mention of God, but only
says, that he will not forsake his sweetenes.

22 And Abimelech reigned.3. years over Israel.

23 And God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Sechem: and
the men of Sechem brake their promise to Abimelech.

24 That the injury of the.70. sons of Ierubbaal, and their blood might come
and be laid upon Abimeleche their brother, which had slain them: and upon
the men of Sechem, which had aided him to kill his brethren.

25 So the men of Sechem set men in wait for him in the tops of the
mountains: who robbed all that passed that way. And it was told Abimelech.


Tirannye is of no long time.
Abimelech exercised his tyranny three years, and no longer: for violence ca^
not be either perpetual, or of any long time. He judged not the Israelites in
setting them at liberty, neither did he them any good, but only raygned. God
at the length took vengeance, and made the blood of the sons of Ierubbaal
to redound upon Abimelech and the Sechemites.

And he sent an evil spirit between them, to revenge the murder, which not
only Abimelech, but also the Sechemites committed. Abimelech was anointed
king only by the Sechemites, but (as the history here declares) he usurped
his tyranny over all the Israelites.

God required the blood of the sons of Ierubbaal at the hands of Abimelech
and of the Sechemites. Unless men do with just punishments punish murders, God
by himself punishes them.

Of Murder.
But to make the thing more plain, two things seem to be entreated of.
First, what manner of murder is condemned by the word of God, and ought by the
Magistrates to be punished. Secondly, who are guilty of this crime.

As touching the first, we must know, that not every murder is condemned. For
if one kill a man by chance, in exercising a thing honest and lawful, he
incurreth not the punishment of Homicides. Wherefore in the old law there were
granted Cities of refuge. For in very deed he kylleth not: but as it is
there written, God (without whose will nothing is done by chance) delivered
him to be killed. A Judge also or Magistrate, when he punishes flagicious men,
is not therefore a murderer, because it is not he that kills, but the law,
yea rather God himself, who has wylled, and also commanded that it should so
be done. Farthermore, he which is set upon by thieves or enemies in a solitarye
place, or where he can not be helped by other: if in defending him self, and
according to the laws, repelling violence by violence, he slay a robber or
thief which inuadeth him, he is not guilty of murder: for as much as in that
case he is armed both by the laws and by the Magistrate. For the public
wealth will not that a Citizen should so perish: therefore it gives him leave
to defend him self by weapons. Cicero.
By this means Cicero defended Milo, because he had slain Clodius, who first
set upon him by snares. Also the woman Thecoites obtained of David, that the
Magistrate should not kill her son, who had slain his brother, falling out
in the field. They were alone says she, and therefore it is not known which
of them invaded one the other first. Soldiers also, when in just war they
slay their enemies, commit nothing unjustly.

Wherefore that murder, which is to be punished, and condemned by ye laws, is
the^ judged to be committed, when of purpose a man is killed of private men.
And they which were to be code^ned of this crime, were not by ye Romans called
homicides, but sicarii. In ye law Cornelia, the title is de Sicariis and not de
Homicidis. Sicarii.
And they are so called, which do wear about them Sica, that is a short
skayne for to kill a man, and by the figure Synechoche, by the word sica is
understand all kinds of weapons. And not only they which kill are guilty of
this crime, but also they which either in deed or counsel do help, and in
their sayings and aids have a respect unto this, how to kill a man. Yea the
will is to be punished, The will is to be punished in this kind of evil.
although it have not success: which thing in the civil judgment is not
used, but only in three kind of crimes, namely of manquellers, called
Sicarii, of rauishers, and of traitors. Wherefore that manqueller is to be
punished, which throws a weapon at any man, to the end he would kill him, or
having that mind, wounds him, although he dye not thereof, as it is had in
the digest in the same title in the law Diuus, where Adrian ye Emperor
answers yt we must have a respect unto the will, and not to the euente. And
that is to be understand, when the will manifests it self by any toke^. But
I did not without cause say that all these things are thus, as touching civil
judgment: because otherwise before God the desire and decree of the mind, as
touching all kind of sins, are condemned for sin. Christ says, he that
beholds a woman and lusts after her, has already committed aduoutry in his
heart. And that the will in those crimes is counted for the fact, even the
holy fathers and Canons do decree. Jerome.
Jerome upon Esaias (as it is in the title de Paenitentia, distinction the first,
chap. Omnis) writteth: Ciprian.
Thou have not killed with the sword, but thou have killed with the will. Yea
and Ciprianus in his Sermon de Mortalitate writes, yt he which desires
martyrdom, is a martyr before God. It is one thing (says he) for the will to
want martyrdom, and an other thing for martyrdom to want the will. These
things are had in the same destinction, chap. Nunquid. And in the same
destinction, chap. Periculose, Augustine.
Augustine is brought in, who says, yt the Jews did no less kill Christ then
the Romans, although with their hands they invaded him not. By this
destinction he conciliateth the Evangelists, who seem to disagree as touching
the hour of the death of the Lord. One of them says, he was crucified the
third hour, and the other, the sixth hour. Augustine affirms both to be
true: Augustine.
For the Jews at the third hour cried Crucify, Crucify: wherefore as touching
them, they slew ye Lord then, who yet was afterward at the sixth hour crucified
by ye soldiers of Pilate.

But Abimelech and the Sechemites were murderers and parricides, not only in
will, but in help, work, and deed, and therefore it is no marvel if God so
severely punished them.

Furthermore we must consider, how meruelously and wonderfully God uses the
ungodly. By them (as we here see) he takes vengeance of other ungodly, and
sometimes by their labor, he both excerciseth and corrects the just. What
more? They are his hangmen, whom also when he has used, he destroys also at
the last, either here, or after they be departed out of this life.

He sent an evil spirit between them. For they were stirred up one against an
other. The Sechemites (as it is to be thought) against Abimelech, because he
both oppressed and contemned them. And again Abimelech against them, because
(as the hystory declares) they dispysed him. What contempt is. Contempt
consists in three things.
And it is well known that by contempt is provoked anger: for it is called an
action, which pertayneth to estimation and opinion, because some thing seems
to us not worthy of estimation, when peradventure it is not so. Moreover
despising consists chiefly in three things: for either we conte^ne only in
mind, when we despise any men and their goods, or when we do the^ any
disco^modity, not thereby to seek our own gain, but only to rejoice at their
discommodity: or lastly when we add words or deeds: which have ignominy or
contumely joined with them. These three things may we easily see in the
Sechemites. First, they despised Abimelech, when they received Gaalus a
soldier as a captain, having Zebul appointed their gouerner by the king. And
undoubtedly they so received Gaal, yt they did put their confidence in him.
Wherefore it follows that in mind and estimation they despised Abimelech.
Farthermore they dammaged him, when by conspiracyes they spoiled and slew
those that passed to and fro. These, whom they iniuried, pertayned unto
Abimelech, or at the least way, for that that he was king. Lastly they added
reprochefull words, as we shall afterward hear.

Christ prohibited anger as the beginning of hatred, murder and destruction,
for he said: He that is angry with his brother, is worthy of judgment. For
anger and reuengeme^t are separate one from the other, only as the root and
the fruit. For he that is angry with any man, if he hurt him not, that
chances, because either he can not, Kings are vehemently angry Homere.
or else fears the punishment of the laws. He yt hates his brother (says
John) is a murderer. But among those which are counted very angry, kings above
other are numbered, when they perceive yt they are despised of their subjects.
Wherefore Homere says: Great is the anger of a king displeased.

The conspiracies of the ungodly are of no long time.
Hereby we learn that the conspiracies of the ungodly can not continue long.
They are in deed oftentimes joined together to do evil, but yet they are
easily disseuered. The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes assembled
together, against the Lord and against his Christ. But the Lord which dwells
in heaven, shall laughe at them, and the Lord shall have them in derision.
Thieves, robbers, whoremongers, and such as conspire against the Church,
public wealths, and princes, do oftentimes confederate together: but
straightway great enemityes rise up amongst them, and they betray one an
other, yea and sometimes kill one an other. Aristotle.
Wherefore wisely says Aristotle, that honesty is only the sure foundation of
amity, because that which is honesty is not changed: but pleasant and
profitable things, do not always abide the same. Princes of our time, as
often as they have made league one with an other, have afterward not only ben
made enemies, but they have gone to war one with an other. Wherefore Solomon
rightly writes in ye 11. chap. of the Proverbs: Although ye ungodly conspire,
they shall not escape. Wherefore their fellowshippes are to be avoided, and we
must enterprise or go about nothing, having confidence in the amity of the
ungodly.

How Sin depends of God.
NOw remains to examine how it is written that God sent an evil spirit
between them. But because of that matter, I have in an other place more more
fully entreated, and will shortly speak more aboundauntly of it, here I will
but briefly teach the thing.

The scriptures testify, that sins sometimes have a consideration of
punishments: wherefore when it said that god punishes and takes vengeance of
the ungodly by sins, he does nothing unmeet of him self. For he brings not
forth the deformity and filthynes of sin, but is the author of just
punishment. For sins are to men evil, but unto God, who uses them, good.
God planteth no new malice in the ungodly: but yet he uses that malice which
is in them by reason of original sin, and other sins which they adioyne
unto it. He suffers it not to burst forth, but when it seems good unto him,
he governs and directs it whether soever it pleases him. A Similitude.
As the Physician coming unto the sick person, does by medicines draw
corrupt humors out of his body, and brings them out either by a purgation, or
by a sweat, or vomit, or letting of blood, as he judges it best, yet does he
not graft in the sick person naughty and corrupt humors: So God causes to be
brought to light our malice, which was not brought forth before, but lay hid
within, to make manifest his justice, and to open our sins, and yet he
suffers them not to break forth by chance or rashely, but orders and
governs them according to his judgment, that even by the^ he does fulfill
the limits of his providence. Wherefore Esaias says that the king of Babilone
was like an axe or staff in hand of God: for he would force him against the
Jews rather then against other nations. Wherefore ye malice of sin is wholly
ours, but the gouernyng, success, and effects thereof ar under the rule of
God, so that they can accomplish no more then he will suffer. Neither can the
ungodly bring to pass those things which they go about against every man,
nor also at all times, but they are governed according to the determinations of
God, which are most holy and just. Neither is it absurd that one and the
self same action, as it is governed of God, is both good and holy, but as it
comes of us, it is vicious and corrupt.

And because we will not go from our history, the sin of cruelty and ambition,
was utterly Abimeleches. But that it should burst forth, and first destroy the
famely of Ierubbaal, and the^ the Sechemites: that is to be referred unto the
government of GOD. Farthermore the disobedience and wicked desire of tumultes,
was altogether of the Sechemites. But that it should burst forth, when the
famely of Gideon should be punished: and that they rather chosed Abimelech to
their king, then an other: and that their fury should rage against him, rather
then against any other: yt was of the government of God, whereby (as the holy
hystory shows) he sent between them an evil spirit, namely the devil, by
whose labor, enemities, and hatreds were on either side kindled, and
wonderfully inflamed, by mete occasions serving thereunto.

Farthermore we must consider, that God is bound unto no man, God is fee and
gives his grace not being d^u^e
to give unto him his grace. For, if it should be given of dewty, then should it
not be grace: and yet he never, either not gives it, or else being given,
takes it away, but upon just cause. He in deed created man upright, and being
indewed with it: but yet he by sinning, spoiled both himself and his of it. And
for as much as we are borne under original sin, and the children of wrath:
to whom soever it is not given, it is justly not given: and to whom soever it
is given, it is freely given. Moreover we daily heap sins upon sins:
wherefore god in withdrawing it, is not to be accused of injustice. For he
co^pelleth no man to do evil, but every man willingly sins: wherefore the
cause of sin is not to be laid in him. The cause of is not to be said in God.
For seeing he procreateth not in us wicked desires, he ought not to bear the
blame, if wicked actions do spring out of a corrupt root of wicked
affections: yea the goodness of God is rather to be acknowledged, which is
present, and so governs the wicked affections, that they can not burst forth,
nor be hurtefull and troublesome to any, but when he has appointed to chasten
some, and to call them back to repentance or to punish them.

Neither ought we to think that after the sin of the first man, Whence ou^
frowardness springs.
God created a wicked lust, and evil affection, to corrupt all our whole
kind. It was not so done: but nature when it departed from God, fell by it
self from light to darkness, from the right way to vice, and from integrity to
corruption. And how good so ever it was before, it now degenerated into evil.
Wherefore let this be holden for certain, that sin entered into the world by
men, and not by God, as Paul testifies to the Romans. And in that Christ
says, Sin entered into the world by man and not by God.
that the devil when he lies, speaks of his own, it is not to be
understand only of himself, but also of his members, which when they lie or
do evil, work not by the word of God, neither are they moved by the
inspiration of the good spirit. And they excedingly rejoice, and have great
pleasure in those things which they do, so far is it of, that they should
be compelled by any violence.

Moreover we must note, Of permission.
that when either the Scriptures or fathers do seem to affirm God to be the
cause of sin, this word permission is not then so to be added, as though he
only suffered men to sin, and by his providence or government wrought
nothing as concerning sins. In deed he lets the^ not, though he can, but
uses them, and shows in them his might, and not only his patience,
Augustine.
which thing Augustine understood right well, and in disputing against
Iulianus, he confuteth that sentence, wherein it is said that God suffers sin
only according unto patience, and proves yt his might is also thereunto to be
added by the words of Paul, who wrote unto ye Romans: If God by much
patience has suffered vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, to show forth
his anger, and to make known his might. And undoubtedly there are many things
in the holy scriptures, which can not always be dissolved by the word of
permission or patience. For the heart of the king is said to be in the hand of
ye Lord, so that he inclines it whether soever it pleases him. And Job
testefieth, that it was so done as god would. But as touching the sin of the
first man, when yet nature was not viciated and corrupted, Of the sin of the
first man.
we grant, that the cause thereof came from the will of Adam, and suggestion of
the devil, and we say that God permitted it: because when he might have
withstanded and let it, he would not do it: but decreed to use that sin,
to declare his justice and goodness.

Whether we can resist the grace of God, or no.
But now arises an other doubt, as touching our nature, as it is now fallen,
and corrupt, whether it can resist the grace of God, and his spirit being
present, or no? There are sundry degrees of grace of God,
I think we must consider that there are as it were sundry degrees of the help
or grace of God: for his might and abou^dance is sometimes so great, that he
wholly boweth the will of man, and does not only Counsel, but also persuade.
And when it so comes to pass, we can not depart from the right way, but we
are of Gods side, and obey his sentence. Wherefore it was said unto Paul: It is
hard for thee to kycke against the prycke.

There is no violence or coaction inferred to man's will.
And yet must we not think that when it is so done, there is any violence or
coaction brought unto the will of man: for it is by a pleasant mouyng and
conversion altered, and that willing, but yet so willing, that the will thereof
comes of God: for it is it, which wills, but God by a strong and most
mighty persuasion makes it to will. But somtymes that power of God and spirit
is, more remiss: which yet (if we will put thereunto our endeavor and apply our
will) we should not resist: yea we should obey his admonishmentes and
inspirations: and when that we do it not, we are therefore said to resist him,
and oftentimes fall. And yet this is not to be understand as touching the first
regeneration, but as concerning those which are regenerated, which are now
endewed with grace and spirit. For the will of the ungodly is so corrupt and
vitiate, that except it be renewed, it can not give place unto the inspirations
of God, and admonishynges of the holy ghost: and it in the first immutatio^ of
ma^s conversion, it only suffers: and before the renewyng, it continually (as
much as in it is) resists the spirit of God. But the first parents whilst
they were perfect, if with ye help of grace being somewhat remiss, they had
adjoined their endeavor, they might have perfectly obeyed the commandments of
God. But we although we be renewed, seeing grace is more remiss, remitting
nothing of our endeavor, we shall not be able constantly and perfectly to obey
the commandments of God, but yet we may be able to contain our selves
within the bounds or limits of an obedience begone: which thing because we do
not, therefore oftentimes we sin, and grievously fall.

Why the grace of god works not alyke always in us.
But why God gives not his grace always to his elect after one sort, and one
increase, but sometimes he works in them more strongly, and sometimes more
remissedly, two reasons may be assigned: First, least we should think the
grace of God to be natural strengthes, which remain always after one sort.
Wherefore god would most justly alter the degree and efficacy of his help:
whereby we might understand that it is governed by his will, and not as we lust.
Moreover it oftentimes happens yt our negligence and slouthfulnes deserves
this variety.

Lastly let us conclude the matter, that if we will speak properly, it is not
to be said that God either wills or brings forth sin, in that it is
sin: for what soever God wills, and whatsoever he does, it is good. But
sin, in yt it is sin, is evil. Wherefore god neither wills nor does it,
in that it is sin: yea he detesteth, prohibiteth, and punishes it by his
laws. And if at any time it be said in the Scriptures, that he either wills
or works sin in men, that must be referred unto other considerations,
which I have declared both in an other place, and also now here. And this is
sufficient as touching this question.

And God sent an evil spirit. By an evil spirit I understand either the devil,
What is understand up an evil spirit.
or wicked affections, or cruelty stirred up to revenge iniuryes, but the end
was to take vengeance for the blood of the sons of Ierubbaal.

The men of Sechem laid wait against him. The cause of ye lying in wayt
There may be three causes of their lying in wait. First, because they would
slay him as he passed by. And an other was, because they would not have his
soldiers to go to and fro. The third was, to shake of their yoke, and to
declare that they were free. This was as much as to say, as they now nothing
passed upon his kyngly power.

It was told Abimelech. A short sentence and cut of: whereby yet we understand
that Abimelech passed not that way, for fear of falling into their snares.

26 Then came Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren, and they went to Sechem:
and the men of Sechem put their confidence in him.

27 Therefore they went out into the field, and gathered in their grapes, and
trodde them, and made merry. And they went into the house of their God, and did
eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech.

28 And Gaal the son of Ebed said: Who is Abimelech? and who is Seche^, that
we should serve him? Is he not the son of Ierubbaal, and Zebul is his head
officer? Serve rather the men of Hamor the father of Sechem. But why shall we
serve him?

29 And who will give this people into mine hand, and I will take away
Abimelech? And he said unto Abimelech: increase thine army, and come out.


Here comes an occasion of the evils: one Gaal by chance travailed that way:
the Sechemites hired him to be their ruler and captain: and therefore puttyng
their confidence in him, they go out into their vineardes, gather the grapes,
and tread them, with great security. What this Gaal was, it appears not by
the Scriptures R. Solomon thinks he was an Ethnike. R. Solomon.
The Sechemites were so afeard of Abimelech, that they durst not gather their
grapes: wherefore they hired this man. First, now they go forth into the field,
which thing before they durst not do: they make great joy and mirthe. For in
the old time also (as it seems) they used, as they do now a days, The
wa^to^nes used at the gatheryng in of grapes.
great wanto^nes and liberty in the gathering in of the grapes: of which
custom sprange the Comedyes and Tragedies with the Grecians. And when Bacchus
returned a conqueror out of India, the people led daunces in honor of him at
the wynepresses. Yea and the Chaldey paraphrast makes mention of daunces in
this place.

They went into the temple. It was also the manner among the Ethnikes, to give
thanks unto God of their first fruits. But these men go into the temple of
God, and rate, drink, singe, and curse their king: and whom before they had
anointed, him now they rail upon, and tear with reproaches. And that in the
temple, wherein before they had taken counsel for to make Abimelech their ruler.
Such are the judgments of God. The place might have admonished them: for out
of it they gave him money: but forgettyng all things, they curse him: Although
the scripture expressedly declares not, whether this temple were that self
same, where out they took the money in the beginning.

Who is Abimelech? In the feasts of their wine gathering, they mock their
king, and that he being absent, and above the rest Gaal, much more grievously
scorneth him. Let us mark the peruersenes of man's nature: if any sin be by
chance committed, it adds not a just remedy, but heals mischief with
mischief, and cures sin with sin. They should have called upon the Lord,
and have repented: but these do far otherwise, they se that they have done
noughtly, and yet they go farther to reproaches. This is the manner of the
frowardnes of man: yea and David when he had committed aduoutry, did not
strayghtway repent, as he should have done, but slew Vrias. Judas when he had
betrayed Christ, would not repent, but went and hanged himself, and so was
author of his own death. So in a manner when we have sinned, we go to worser
sins. They ought not in deed to have chosen Abimelech: but when he had once
gotten the dominion of things, they should not so have cursed him. Before the
victory they sing a song of victory. There is nothing more foolish, then to
contemn an enemy: for an enemy is not to be contemned, unless he be overcome.
But this Gaal goes childishely to work. He exhorts and prayseth the
Sechemites, because they had shaked of their yoke. And he composeth his oration
of things compared together. A co^paratis.
He compares Abimelech with Hamor the prince of that City, whom the sons of
Jacob slew by guile.

Who is Sechem? Sechem in this place is not the name of the City, but of the
chief man, namely the son of Hamor.

Who is Abimelech? He is the son of Ierubbaal. He has in us neither right,
nor jurisdiction. Let him goo and brag among his own. Sechem was in the
old time Lord of this City, him we ought to have obeyed. But we slew him,
how then can we obey this man? This comparison is now manifest youghe. But
to increase the contempt more, Zebul (says he) is the servant of Abimelech,
known well enough unto us, whom he has made ruler over his City. Therefore
we shall have two Lords. And we which would not obey the Lord of Sechem,
shall we now obey a servant? It is an unworthy thing. The sense of the
oration of Gaal.
Wherefore this seems to be the sense of his oration. If we should have
served, we should rather have served Sechem. But we have not served him:
therefore neither will we serve this Abimelech.

Serve the sons of Hamor. As though he should have said, serve them rather
which were the ancient Lords of this City: and if we have not served them,
why should we serve Abimelech etc.

And who will give this people into my hand? The other part of the oration
contains an exhortation, wherein he exhorts them, to make him ruler over
the people. Who will give? This form of speaking expresses an affection of
one yt wishes. I (says he) if I were your ruler, would easily take away
Abimelech. All the Sechemites were not of one opinion.
Hereby it appears yt all the Sechemites were not of one opinion* There were
many which the^ also were on Abimeleches side. Wherefore, I would to God says
he, yt all you were of one mind, I would the^ easily take away the tyranne.

(...) is a turnyng of a speech to some person.
And he said unto Abimelech: Increase thine army. He uses an Apostrophe to
Abimelech being absent: for it is easy to rail upon one being absent. He
speaks very Thraso like. It is as though he should have said: increase thy
power how thou will, I set nothing at all by it.

30 And when Zebul the ruler of the City heard the words of Gaal the son
of Ebed, he was very angry.

31 And he sent messangers unto Abimelech guilefully, saying: Behold Gaal the
son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Sechem, and behold they fortefy the
City against thee.

32 Now therefore arise by night, thou and thy people that is with thee, and
lie in wait in the field.

33 And rise up early in the morning as soon as the Sun is up, and thou
shall assault the City, and when he and the people that is with him, shall
come out against thee, do unto them what thine hand can find.


Zebul was ruler under Abimelech, and when he heard these reproaches against his
Lord, he could not suffer them. Hereby let us mark how foolishly the
Sechemites behaved themselves, when they go about to fall from Abimelech, they
retain yet still his ruler in the City. So god ofte^tymes strikes men with
madness. Neither want there exemples of this thing even in our time.

He sent messangers guilefully. The Hebrew word is Miremah or Tomah: and it
signifies nothing else, but that he sent letters privily, the sum whereof
was: Gaal is chosen captain against thee, the Sechemites fence the City, that
they may both defend themselves within, and also exclude thee without. And such
is the subtility of Zebul, that he not only tells what was done in the City,
but also gives Counsel what Abimelech should do.

When it is morning. The Hebrewe word Tischim in the conjugation Hiphil from
the root Schacham signifies to rise early, the Grecians say (...). And where
in Luke the 21. chap. toward the end it is said, Turba mane conueniebat ad eum:
that is: The people gathered unto him in the morning: the old translation was
(as Augustine also has noted upon this place of the Judges ( Populus manicabat
ad eum. But that word is barbarous and strange. Augustine. Manicare.
In Greek it is read, (...).

And assalte the City. This is the Counsel of the ruler, that early in the
morning he should besiege and assault the City by guile.

Do as thine hand shall find. By this Hebrewe phrase is signified nothing else,
but that so do thou as occasion shall serve.

34 And Abimelech rose up early, and all the people that were with him by
night: and they lay in wait against Sechem in four bands.

35 Then Gaal the son of Ebed came out, and stood in the entryng of the gate
of the City. And Abimelech rose up and the people that were with him, from
lying in wait.

36 And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul: Behold there come people
down from the tops of the mountains. To whom Zebul answered: The shadow
of the mountains seems men unto thee.

37 And Gaal spoke again and said: Behold there come people down from the
nauel of ye earth, and one Captain comes by the way of the plain of
Moonenim.


Their lying in wait was distributed into four bands, and when Gaal should
go forth of the city, Zebul was together with him, and as far as we may
conjecture, Zebul used double fraud: for first he sent a messanger unto
Abimelech, and signified unto him, what he thought good to be done: and
afterward he joins himself deceatfully unto Gaal, as though he would be on
his side, that he might the safelyer do those things which he thought to do,
and that Gaal should not mistrust him, Wherefore Gaal goes forth, being nothing
afeard of privy enbushements, and together with him went Zebul.

Thou see the shadow of montaynes. Zebul derideth him, saying: They be
shadows which thou think to be men.

Out of the nauel of the earth. This is a metaphorical kind of speech, for
as the navel appears above the belie, so are the mountains above the earth.
Wherefore by the navel he understands the mountains from whence Abimelech
descended with his company. And when he came from the mountains, it is very
lykely (which thing yet is not here mentioned) that he overcame the
guarrisons, which the Sechemites had put in those places.

38 And Zebul said unto him: Where is now thy mouth, that said: Who is
Abimelech that we should serve him? Is not this the people that thou haste
despised? Go out now I pray thee, and fight against them.

39 And Gaal went forth before the men of Sechem, and fought against Abimelech.

40 But Abimelech pursued him, after he began to fly before him, and many were
overthrown and wounded even to the entryng of the gate.

41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren,
that they should not abide in Sechem.

42 And on the morrow the people went out into the field. And it was told
Abimelech.

43 And he took the people and divided them into three bands, and laid wayt
in the field, and looked, and behold the people were come out of the City, and
he rose up against them and smote them.

44 And Abimelech, and the bands that were with him, rushed forward, and
stood in the entryng of the gate of the City: and the two other bands ran
upon all the people that were in the field, and slew them.

45 And when Abimelech had fought against the City all the day, he took the
City, and slew the people that was therein, and destroyed the City, and sowed
salt in it.


Zebul could not hold himself, but that he must nippe that Thraso. Thou
did contemn (says he) Abimelech: now come out against him, and show how
valiant thou art.

Where is thy mouth? This word Aphoh is ambiguous: for it signifies where,
and sometimes it signifies now. But because it is before said where, it is
mete to be taken here for Now, and so let us say: Where is now thy mouth: unless
we will have it a repetition, to say: Where, where is thy mouth: and by the
figure Metonumia a mouth signifies words: The manner of fearful men.
for we speak with ye mouth. He up braydeth him with the manner of fearful
men: for cowardes are wont before the danger stoutely to brag: but when they
come to the danger, they are wonfully afraid: but contraryly stout men brag
not much, neither do they rashely thrust themselves into dangers. But in
dangers they are most constant.

He went forth before the princes of Sechem. Gaal fights, but peradventure
not prepared, for Abimelech came upon him unlooked for. Yet Gaal goes forth
against him, least peradventure he should seem to be a coward.

And he fled before him. Abimelech followed him when he fled, even to the gates
of the City, where he slew many. Gaal thought he should have been received into
the City, and for that cause he flees unto the gate. But Zebul thrust him out
of the City. But thou will demand, by what means he could be excluded the
City, when as the Sechemites had made him their ruler? Kimhi answers, first
that all the Sechemites stood not against Abimelech: the people also (as they
were of an inconstant mind) when they saw Gaal fly, turned their purpose,
and fell to Abimelech. Hereby we gather how foolish it is to trust unto men.
Jeremy says very well and wisely: Cursed be every one, that puts his
confidence in man, and makes flesh his strength. The Sechemites put their
confidence in Gaal, and at that very instant used his aid. Gaal on the other
side puts his confidence in the Sechemites, and was thrust out of the City
by them, in whom he did put his confidence. This is the nature of the people,
when fortune a little favors, straight way they forsake them who^ before they
followed. The common people altogether depend upon chance. Here may we see
also an other foolishenes of the Sechemites, who thought that when they had
cast out Gaal, Abimelech had straightway ben satisfied. For they goo forth into
the fields, to exercise their rusticall works, to gather in their grapes, I
say, or to tyllage. But it happened far otherwise. For Abimelech placed two
bands to lie in wait, and he himself with his host came unto the City,
that neither they which were in the fields, could get into the City, nor
they which were in the City could come out, to help their men in the fields.
This pollecy of war used Abimelech. They thought he had now been pacified,
but the anger of kings are not straightwaye assuaged.

And he sowed salt. These most miserable chances happened unto the people,
they which went forth into the fields, were killed, the City it self was
besieged and conquered, the Citizens slain, the City defaced and utterly
overthrown. But Abimelech stomachyng the matter more then was meet, sowed
salt in the City: which was a token of a wilderness and deserte. What the
sowyng of salt signifies.
For salt dries the ground, and makes it unfruitful. In Hebrewe Malach
signifies salt. Thereof comes the verb Malach which is, to salt: but in
the conjugation Niphal, Nimlah, is a verb, which signifies to destroy, to
break down and to waste. That word Jeremy used in his 14. chap. and David
in his 107. Psalm, GOD turns a fruitful land into a saltishe ground,
that is, makes it waste and deserte. In the year.1165. Fredrike Oenobarbus
the Emperor overthrew Millane, and sowed salt there. For that City took part
with Alexander the third being Pope, against Caesar: which thing Fredrike
took in very ill part.

46 And when all the men of the tower of Sechem heard it, they came to the
castle of Thelberith.

47 And it was told Abimelech that all the men of the tower of Sechem were
gathered together.

48 And Abimelech went up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people that were with
him: and Abimelech took axes, and cut down bows of trees, and took them and
laid them on his shoulder, and said unto the people that were with him: That
which ye have seen me do, make have, and do as I have done.

49 Wherefore all the people cut down every man his bowgh, and followed
Abimelech, and put them to the castle, and set the castle on fire with them.
And all the men of the tower of Sechem dyed, about a thousand men and women.

50 Then went Abimelech unto Thebez, and laid siege to it, and took it.


That tower of Sechem was a bulwark of the City. Wherefore when the City was
taken, the princes distrusting themselves, entered into an other inward hold,
where also was a temple: and it was called the house of the covenant of God:
for the Israelites forsaking the covenant of the true God coupled themselves
unto strange Gods.

And it was told Abimelech. Mount Zalmon was nighe unto that hold, whether
Abimelech and his people got them unto: for he had determined to burn that
castle and temple which was in it. Neither ought we to marvel, that ye
temple was so fensed, Temples were wont to be builded in castles.
when as it was the manner so in the old time. For Rome, when long a go it was
taken and burnt of the Senones, the Capitolium, where in was the temple of
Jupiter, remained safe. Yea and Josephus says that when Jerusalem was besieged
of Titus, the temple was a strong bulwark for ye City. But the cause why the
Sechemites got them thither, was not only because the place was so well
fensed, but also because they had a supersticious opinion of Baal: for they
thought that he would be with the^, and defend his temple. So foolish men, when
they have in deed no religion in their mind, yet they put their confidence in
holiness of places, and wonderfully trust in images and temples, and also in
relics of saints. But thereby they are nothing helped, but to their
destruction they are slain even in temples, as we read it happened now unto
these men.

(...).
And by them they set the castle on fire. There is in these words Alleosis of
the gender, for the Masculine gender is put for the Feminine, for as much as
this relative Eos that is them, is referred to the bows, which in the Hebrew
is a word of the Feminine gender. Mention is made of the utter destruction of
the City, for it was not only overthrown, and strawed with salt, but also
the princes were slain with fire and smoke. Abimelech in this warlike pollecy
showed not unto all, what he would do, he only bids the people to follow
him. Gideon also when he took the pitcher, fire brand, and trompet, commanded
the other to do the same: so Abimelech took a bow on his shoulder, and the
other did the like. He kindles fire, and burns all them which were in the
hold, otherwise he could not have conquered the tower. Some think yt Gaal
also perished here, and that being put to flight by Abimelech, Why the ungodly
obtain victoryes.
he got him to this hold. After this sort God took vengeance upon the
Sechemites. And Abimelech, although he were an ungodly and cruel tyranne,
obtained the victory: so also god gave Nabucadnesar power, to afflicte the
Jews, and to lead them captives to Babilone. And likewise unto
Tiglathphalasar to oppress the ten tribes. All these men had the victory, and
yet was their cause nothing the better. This rule god uses oftentimes to
punish the evil by evil, although he do not straightway punish them all.
Some he punishes before, and other some afterward: and there are some also,
whose vengeance he reserueth for the world to come.

Abimelech triumphs as though he had better cause: but yet this his joy is
of no long time: A Similitude.
for the hand of the Lord abides him also. In Comedyes, the strength of the
Poet is not perceived by the Prologe, nor by one act or two, but we must
wait for the end and the conclusion of the whole fable. So if a man will give
judgment of an Image, or of any other fair Picture if he only mark the Knee
or Leg, he shall easily be deceived: for he must consider the Arms, he
Shoulders, the Sides, and proportion of the whole body. After which self same
manner, if we will understand the justice of God in his works, we must tarry
till the end, and then shall we see the judgments of god full. Augustine
says right well that god, Augustine.
when he punishes any certain wicked act, does signify that he hates all
wicked acts. And when he differs the punishementes of the ungodly, he
admonishes us, to think upon an other life. Wherefore if Papists, A comfort
in the felicity of the ungodly.
if Turks, if Tyrannes are not punished in this world, let us with a patient
mind wait for the last act, and last judgment of god: for they shall not go
unpunished.

David says in his 73. Psalm: My feet were almost moved, and my steps had
welnye slypte, because I freated at the wicked, when I saw the peace of
sinners. For there are no bands in their death, and they are lusty and
strong. They are not in trouble as other me^, etc. And I said, does god know
these things, and is there knowledge in the most highest? For so does our flesh
judge, when it sees ye ungodly live in prosperity: when the matter is so. is
there (says he) knowledge in the most highest? Wherefore I have cleansed my
heart in vain, and in vain I have washed my hands in innocence, in vain was
I punished all the day, and it was paynfull to me, to know this. For they are
most hard to understand, and I began in a manner to despair, until I went
into the sanctuarye of God, and understood their last end. For who may not
easelye be deceived in the rich man and Lazarus? When as the one in man's sight
seemed to have been most blessed, and the other most miserable. Therefore (says
he) it was paynefull unto me, until I was brought into the sanctuary of God,
and beheld their last judgment. But as touching Abimelech, the prophesy ought
to be fulfilled which Iotham pronounced: Let a fire come out of Abimelech and
destroy his enemies.

God suffers Abimelech to exercise his tyranny three years, in which space
be seemed to tarry for his repentance. But he heaped up unto him self anger in
the day of anger. For if he had been wise he would easly have thought thus with
him self after the victory: The Sechemites sinned thoroughe my persuasion: if
they are now so severely handled, what shall be be done to me at the length? But
he being blinded that he could not se these things, at the last was filthily
slain. So the ungodly ar dronken with prosperous fortune, and god seems to
feed them up, as sacrifices, which are first fed and fatted, before they be
killed. In which sense Esaias in the.34. chap. writes: The Lord has a
sacrifice in Bozra. Wherefore Abimelech, by all the things that he saw, is made
never a whit the better, yea rather he was made the more insolent, and
attempteth other things more tirannical. In the book of Ecclesiasticus the 8.
chap. it is written. Because sentence against the evil is not executed
spedely, the children of men do without any fear perpetrate evil things.
Therefore are men made so hedlong to sin, because they abuse the goodness of
god: and it is so far of, yt the ungodly, when he sees an other corrected,
should amend, yt he always becomes worse and worse, and always endeavors
to go on farther in wickedness. Which thing I would to God we would follow
in virtues and good deeds. Abimelech had overcome the Sechemites, neither was
that sufficient for him: then took he the hold, neither was that enough for
him: he conquered the city of Thebez, and yet did not this suffice him. He
will go on farther yet: and is most filthyly slain. As concerning the city of
Thebez, Kimhi says, that it also fell from the government of Abimelech. David
Kunht.


51 But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled all the men
and women, and all the chief of the city, and shut it to them, and went up to
the top of the tower.

52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it. And went hard
unto the door of the tower to set it on fire.

53 Then a woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimeleches head, and brake
his skull.

54 Who streightwaye called his page that bare his armoure, and said unto him:
Draw thy sword and slay me, lest men peradventure say of me: A woman slew him.
And his page thrust him through and he died.

55 And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed
every man to his own place.

56 Thus God rendered the evil of Abimelech, which he did unto his father, in
slayinge his brethern.

57 Also all the wickedness of the men of Sechem did god bring upon their heads,
and upon them came the curse of Iotham the son of Ierubbaall.


The men of Thebez closed and sensed the outward parts of the Tower very
well: And kept themselves within, having all the gates and entrances shut up.

They ascended upon the top. This Hebrewe word Gag sygnifieth the top of
the house, not sharp poynted, but plain, for upon it they might walk. And
because it was dangerous, least a man should fall from the top, it was
commanded in Deutronomye, that a cyrcuite or a stay should be added to the
roof of the houses.

To burn the gate. Because he had so good success before to conquer by
fire, he thought now also to had the like fortune.

A woman threw a stone. Abimeleche puffed up with victories, sets an
example before our eyes, that we should not to much put confidence in
present felicity. By his luckye success he thought his cause was good, and
that they whom he had destroyed, had their reward for their wickedness. Such
is the judgment of men, they think that according to the wayghte of the
punishments, so are the sins of the afflicted, and their evil deserts, so
that they which are grievously vexed, seem to have greiuously sinned. And
undoubtedly the book of Job is all whole in a manner of that argument. For
his friends did therefore gather that he was an evil man, The argument of the
book of Job.
because he was so grieuouslye afflicted. But yet ought we not so to think:
For there may be other causes why GOD will have the saints oppressed in this
world. Christ teaches us in the 13. chapter of Luke (when certain told him,
that Pilate had mingled the blood of ye Galileians with sacrifices, and they
looked that Christ should have cried out upon the crueltye of the President)
how we ought to take profit by the punishments of other men. We ought to
take perfect by the punishments of other.
For he answered: do you think that those Galileians sinned above all the
reast, because they suffered these things? No verilye, I tell you, but except
ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or think ye that those 18, upon
whom the Tower in Siloi fell, were sinners above all men that dwell in
Jerusalem? No verily, I tell you, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise
perish.

Abimelech also should rather thus have said with himself: If these things
have chaunsed unto them, what shall then happen unto me? Let us also speak
thus with our selves. If by the Turks and Saracenes so grievous things have
happened unto the Grecians, Hungarians, and Africanes, what shall then become
of us at the length? Except we repent, we shall likewise peryshe.

The names of two milstones.
A piece of a millstone. This Hebrewe word Rachab signifies a millstone. But
there are two milstones, namely that that is above, and that that is beneath.
The higher is he, which is called Rachab, because it is put upon the other, and
after a sort rides upon it. The other is called Schachab, because it seems to
lie still. By what means the woman had a piece of a mylstone in the upper
part of the house, it appears not. Howebeit it is very likelye, that they
carried up stones, and great heavy pieces of rocks into the upper parts of
the houses, to have them in a readiness to beat back the enemy.

And his page thruste him through, and he died. This is the end of a most
cruel tiranne. He is killed of a woman, and when he saw that he must needs dye,
he studieth to put away the infamye, neither would he have it said of him, that
a woman slew him. What madness is this? He is at the point of death and he
vaynelye thinks upon glory: He thinks it a reproach to be killed of a
woman, and is nothing careful for the soul, nor for the other life: he
only cares for his name and fame. And god when he had used this man's
cruelty to afflicte the Sechemites, at the last destroyed him also. He entered
in by evil arts: He raygned cruellye and tyrannouslye, and died most
filthylye. And when Abimelech was dead, every man returned into his country.
Neither was the tower which he assaulted, conquered. And least any man should
think that these things happened by chance, but that all men might
understand that they were done by the providence and counsel of god, the
conclusion is added: Thus God rewarded. Herebye we are very well taught, that
if at any time the like things do happen, we must not attribute them to
fortune, but only unto the providence of God. Achab the king when he went on
warfare, changed his apparel, and would not be known to be the king, but
be counted a raschall soldier: yet was he slain with an arrowe, which was
shut at adventure, which thing might have seemed to have been done by
chance, when as yet God in very deed governed the shafte. And in like manner
as Plutarch tells, Pirrhus was slain of a moman in besieging of Thebez,
Plutarch.
she throwing down a tyle from the house top. Very many such things are
done in our time, which seem unto us therefore to have happened by chance,
because we know not the causes of things, and judgments of God.

Moreover by this conclusion this we profitablye gather, that GOD at the length
reuoketh all things to his tribunal seat and judgment. If we should
demand, why the Sechemites were so myserablye afflycted, and why Abimeleche
was so fylthylye slain? The holy Ghost aunsweareth, God revenged the
ingratitude of the Sechemites toward Gideon, and the Parricide of Abimeleche,
who slew his brethren. For the blood of so many brethren cried no less
unto the Lord, then the blood of Abel, as is written in Genesis. Lastly let
us note, that there are hitherto some good Judges spoken of, among whom is put
Abimeleche, a most cruel tyranne, that their virtue by a comparison, or an
Antithesis might be made more noble. But happy was that publyke wealth
which among many good, had only one tyranne, but we amongst many evil,
have scarce one good Prince. And undoubtedly God gave not unto the Israelites
this tyranne, neither raised he him up after the manner of the other Judges:
but they elected him themselves.

The.x. Chapter.
1 ANd after Abimeleche, rose up to save Israel Thola, the son of Pua, the
son of Dodo, a man of Isaschar, and he dwelled in Samir in mount Ephraim.

2 And he judged Israel.23. years, and died, and was buried in Samir.


AFter the death of Abimeleche, followed a long peace, namelye.45. A peace
during 45. years.
years: which space of time is distributed into two Judges, whereof the one
governed the people three and twenty years, and the other two and twentye
years. So great is the goodness of God, that he would restore peace unto men,
though they deserved it not.

And after Abimelech, rose up Thola. In that it is written both of this Judge,
and of the other: And there rose up: we must not for all that think, that
they of their own mind claimed unto the^ selves the principality, but they
were elected unto it by the lord, and of him set to rule by the people of
Israel. And they are said to have risen up, because they followed the instinct
of the Lord.

To save Israel. Between good princes and tirans this is the difference:
Tirans seek only their own gayn, but good magistrates have only a care for
this, to save the people. David Kimhi thinks yt Abimelech also saved the
Israelites, although he both slew his brethren and made civil wars. The
difference between a tyra^ and a true prince. David Kimhi.
For he was a warlike and stout man: wherefore outward nations feared him. But
I will not easily grant unto this sentence: for as much as the holy scriptures
mention not that he made wars with outward nations, which they would not have
otherwise left unspoken of. If thou will say, that it may therefore seem that
he saved Israel, by cause he is nombred among the Judges: I aunsweare, this is
rather to be marked, that the scripturs called him not a Judge, but rather a
king: neither is it written that he judged, but reigned. But in that he is
nombred among the Judges, that was the cause which we have before touched,
namely that the virtues of the Judges might be more illustrat, and that it
might be made manifest, how much princes that are given of God, do excel those
which men choose unto themselves. Josephus in his book de antiquitatibus
leaves out this Thola, and only makes mention of the other; A judgment of
the storye of Josephus.
of whom we will straightway speak. And it is no marvel, for that author is
wont to over pass very many things, and sometimes to alter some things.

Of the tribe of Isaschar. That tribe was the lowest and obscurest tribe, but
god has no respect to persons. The state of this pub. weal was most excellent,
namely Aristocratia, wherein god chosed Judges indifferently out of all the
people. And there was none which could justly complain, that his famely could
not be exalted to the highest dignity of rule, which thing happens not in a
kingdom. For all the kings came of the famely of David.

The son of Pua Ben Dodo. That word is ambiguous and dark: for it may be
both a nowne proper and a nowne appellatyue. If it be a proper nowne, (as the
Chaldey Paraphrast supposes) we must say that Thola had to father Pua, and
that Pua was the son of a certain man named Dodo. But other think that it
is a nown appellatiue, and that signifies an uncle, and has a pronowne
affixed unto it of the third person. And some understand that by that pronown
is referred or signified Abimelech, as though it were noted that Pua was the
uncle of Abimelech: which sentence some of the Hebrews allow. Yea and the
lattin interpreter, to express that sentence, and that there might be no
darkness therein, adds the name of Abimelech. But how Pua should be uncle
unto Abimelech, and so the brother of Gideon, being of an other tribe, it
seems meruellous, because tribes were not mingled one with an other. Some
aunsweare that it might be that they were brethern on the mother side, but yet
not on the fathers side. For such women which had no inheritance, married
oftentimes in other tribes: but so did not they which had inheritance, that the
lands and inheritance should not be confounded, wherefore it might easly come to
pas, that either her husband being dead, or she by him repudiated, married again
in an other tribe. And by this means Gidion and Pua may be brethren, although
they came of sundry tribes. But yt those daughters which were inheritors, might
not mary in an other tribe, it is by many examples confirmed. Saul otherwise a
Beniamite, gave his daughter to wife unto David, who was of the tribe of Judah
Iehoida a priest of the tribe of Leui, married the daughter of king Ioram which
was of the tribe of Judah, as it is written in the latter book of Paralip.
the.22. chap. Aaron a Leuite married Elisaba, the daughter of Aminadab, of the
tribe of Judah. Wherefore there are two opinions, one is of them which think that
Dodo is a proper name, Now a man may be the son of his uncle.
and the other of those which say it is a name appellatiue. The third opinion
is, that that annexed pronown, namely of him, is to be turned, his, so that
this Thola had one and the self name to his father and to his uncle, which by
the ordinary means was not lawful, yet was it detested, when a man dyed
without children: for then the brother married his wife, namely him of whom he
was begotten, and the other which was dead, whose name he bare, and was made
his heir. This sentence lyketh me well: for it very aptly declares, how a
man might be the son of his uncle. etc.

3 After him rose up Iair a Gileadite, and he judged Israel.xxii. years.

4 And he had.xxx. sons, that rode upon.xxx. Coltes, and they had.xxx.
Cities, which are called Hauoth-Iair even to this day, and are in the land of
Gilead.

5 And Iair dyed, and was buried in Camon.


Of what tribe this Iair was, appears by this word Gilead which is repeated:
for Manasses had Machir to his son, who begat Gilead. And his name was
common with the mount, wherein Jacob and Laban made a league, and named the
place Gilead, because there they raised up a heap of stones for a wytnes.
Eusebius C^s^riensis.
Eusebius says, that the back of this mount tends to Arabia and Phenicia,
and is joined with the hyls of Libanus. And this mount has a City of the same
name. Machir conquered that City, and gave unto it a name, which was common
both to his son and to the mount. Wherefore Iair was of the Tribe of
Manasses, a man having plenty of children: for he had.xxx. And no marvel,
when as then they used to have many wives. His children was no Rascals or
common people, yea they were horsemen: which is thus described, which rode
upon.30. Ass colts. This Hebrew word Air signifies either a Colt or an Ass,
David Kimhi
according to which sense are signified.xxx. Mules: or the colt of a Mare, as
R. D. Kimhi expounds it. Neither were they only horsemen, but also rich: for
they possessed.30. Cities, because every one of them was ruler of a City:
wherefore their father must needs be very noble.

They were called Hauoth-Iair. Because they were not environed with a wall. And
were so called even to this day, namely even unto Samuels time, who (they say)
was author of this book. In the book of Numbers the.xxxii. chap. it is
written, Iair took many Cities from the Chananites, and they were called
Hauoth-Iair. Wherefore it is demanded, whither he were the same man of whom we
now speak, or whether he were an other? I do not think that he was the same,
forasmuch as between them both there were.300. years passed. He was a certain
other man distinct from this Iair, of whom we now speak, but yet he was of
the same famely: and paraduenture this was his Neuew, for they which are of the
same famely, do for the most part retain the names of their kynred. Unto this
Iair came those Cities, which that other Iair took from the Chananites.
Wherefore the places agree: but that it is not the same man. This Judge
therefore is noble, when as the two former were but of a base famely. Neither
does Nobility anything hinder to govern a public wealth, if self trust and
insolence be taken away: yea rather they have examples of their Elders,
excellent stirringes up to virtue, and very many helps, to govern things
well. And it is not unlikely but that the people under these two Judges,
rightly worshipped God in long and quiet peace, otherwise God would not have
given them so long a time of rest. But after them, the Hebrews turned again
unto Idolatry.

6 And the children of Israel wroughte wickedlye again in the sight of the
Lord, and served Baalim, and Astharoth, and the gods of Aram, and the gods of
Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of Ammon, and also
the gods of Pelisthim, and forsook the Lord, and served not him.

7 Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was kyndled against Israel, and he delivered
them into the hands of Pelisthim, and into the hands of the children of Ammon.

8 Who from that year vexed and oppressed the children of Israel xviii.
years, even all the children of Israel, which were beyond Jordan, in the
land of the Amorrhites, which is in Gilead.

9 Moreover the children of Ammon went over Jordan, to fight also against Judah
and Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim. And Israel was in very great
miserye.

10 And the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, saying: We have sinned
against thee, even because we have forsaken our God, and have served Baalim.


When they heaped sins upon sins, the latter sins were always more
grievous then the first. And this is not to be passed over, that they are
said to have sinned in the sight of the Lord: for the world otherwise is often
times deceived, and the judgment of men many times, either aloweth or excuses
sins. And the evil which the Israelites are said to have done, was nothing else
but Idolatry. As soon as the good Princes were dead, the people easily fell to
worshipping of Idols, and why they were so prone to this wicked crime, there
may be many causes alleged. Why the Israelites were so prone unto idolatry.
First, they saw that the Nations which were nyghe unto them, when they
woorshipped Idols, floorished in all kind of riches and honors, but they
themselves were wonderfully oppressed with penury of things. Wherefore they
thought that the Gods of those nations were both better and more bountiful,
then their own God. They considered that they them selves which woorshipped
but one God, were few in the number, but there was an infinite number which
woorshipped Idols. And as they detested the ceremonies and holy services of
other Nations, so on the other side other Nations both abhorred them, and also
vexed them with contumelies. Lastly, the woorshipping of the true God was more
severe, and after a sort more sad, it had no pleasure, no chalenging of
battayl one with an other, no stage plays, no dau^cings, no running at tylts,
no Comodies, no Tragedies, all which things they saw were used in the
woorshipping of Idols, yea and also often times were added most vile and
fylthy things. And forasmuch as the nature of man is of it self ready unto
pleasures, hereof it came, that they turned unto strange holy services. And
undoubtedly the same causes in our time do move the minds of many, and
therefore many cleave unto the Papists, whom they see to live much more
pleasantly, and to floorish in goods and riches: they see also that they are
more in number in Italy, in Spain, and in France, then we are. Because also
they think that they are infamed and reproched, when they are called
Schismatikes and Heretics. And lastly because our ceremonies, as touching the
senses of the flesh are dry, and without pleasures, they have no copes, no
descant synging, no musical Organes, nor stage play Masses. Hereof come these
defaultes and fallinges of many. I might also add, that many say their fathers
lived so, and died in that religion, The stubdernnrs of the Jews against God.
which reason is with many of great force. Such things without doubt did the
Jews think upon. But it is marvelous to behold their stubburnnes. It seems
that they had wholly bent their minds, perpetually to resist their God. When
God would have them to observe his ceremonies, they sought for other ceremonies
at the hands of the people that were nigh unto the^. And for as much as God
has now decreed, that those ceremonies should by Christ be made of none
effect, and they will still keep them: they do therein that which overthwart
wives are wont to do, when the husband will, they will not, when he will not,
then they again will. They did not only woorship Baal and Astharoth, but also
the Gods of Aram, and Zidon, the Gods of the Moabites, and of the children of
Ammon, and also the Gods of the Pelisthims. If we mark the number, they
woorshipped seven kinds of Idols.

And forsook the Lord. They did not only follow strange Gods, but also
forsook the woorshipping of the true God. There is a certain Emphasis in this
word forsook. It signifies as much, as if it should have been said: They
would not so much as have the woorshipping of the true God named, neither made
they any more mention of it. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord kindled against
them, and he delivered them into the hands of the Philistians. etc. When they
forsook the true God, he again took away from them his help, and sold them
to the Philistians and Ammonites, whom they so served, as though they had been
their bondslaues. And the yoke of the Ammonites was much more grievous, then the
yoke of the Philistians. Wherefore Iiphtah took in hand war, singularly
against the Ammonites, as against the chief vexers of the Israelites.
Farthermore let us mark, that even the self same year, wherein Iair died, they
were vexed and oppressed of their enemies. The Lord tarried not: straightwaye
after the death of the Judge, he began to afflict the people. In which
place we must note, that most strong Nations, so soon as they are destitute
of God, are easelye without any a do conquered and overthrown of their
enemies. For it is God only which gives power and strength, and therefore the
Israelites were straightway oppressed of their enemies, because the Lord had
forsaken them: for God is not only the efficient cause of might and rule, but
also it is he that keeps and preserves it. They oppressed universally all the
children of Israel. For they kept not them selves within any bonds: but
wandered and made rodes through out all the borders of the Hebrews, which thing
is noted by these words: Yea and they passed over Jordan. The tribes of
Ruben, Gad, The request of the two tribes and the half tribe was unwise.
and part of Manasses dwelled on this side Jordan. For all that region was
very fertile, therefore they required it of Moses, when the other tribes were
not yet passed over Jordan: but they did not well mark what they desired: for
although it were a most fat and fertile country, yet was it always in greater
danger: For often times their next enemies made rodes into their lands. And
this is very commonly seen, that men are more careful for gain, then for
health: but the Ammonites did not only rob and spoil those tribes, but they
also miserably afflicted al Israel. When they had passed over Jordan, they
would also fight against Judah, Benjamin, and Ephraim, which were of all the
tribes most noble. Wherefore we must believe, that they raged against all the
Hebrews.

Wherefore the Israelites were above measure oppressed. And they cried unto the
Lord. When they were but a little oppressed, they were nothing moved: but when
they were farther vexed, and most grieuouslye afflicted, What God has a
respect unto in the punishments, wherewith he punysheth sinners.
they began to turn to God, and cried unto him. Neither did they that lightly,
but weeping, repented from the heart, confessed their sin, and implored his
aid. This thing only God regards, when he afflicts his people with
aduersitye, where words will not serve, he adds stripes and vexations, which
are certain vehement sermons toward the stiffer sort, and are of great force
toward the godly, and those that are predestinate unto salvation, but to the
ungodly and impenitent, to their greater damnation. God did not these things,
as though he had a pleasure in the evils of men, or that he would satisfye
himself after this manner (for that thing only Jesus Christ upon the cross
performed) but that they which are fallen, may be called back into the right
way, vices corrected, and his justice declared. And the Israelites do not only
call upon God, but also humbly acknowledge, and submissedly confess their
sins. For they knew that God hears not sinners, except they repent.

11 And the Lord said unto the children of Israel: Have not I delivered you
from the Egiptians, and Ammorhites, and children of Ammon and Pelisthim.

12 Moreover the Zidonites and Abimelech, and the Moabites oppressed you, and
ye cried unto me, and I delivered you out of their hands.

13 But ye have forsaken me, and have served strange Gods: therefore I will
deliver you no more.

14 Go and cry unto the Gods whom ye have chosen: let them save you in the
time of your trouble.


How God answered the Israelites.
When the people called upon the Lord, and began to repent, God in deed
answered them, but yet sharply and hardly. He answered peradventure by the
high Priest, which had Vrim and Thumim, by him counsel was asked of God
publicly: It may also be that some Prophet was stirred up, by who^ God spoke.
The Hebrews think that God answered by Pinchas, whom they say lived until the
time of Elias, but that they feign without any testimony of the holy
scriptures. And if we look upon the time, Pinchas was at the least.330. years
before these things were done. Why God answered so sharplye.
But let us see why God answered so hardly unto the Hebrews, namely that the
people should repent, and that not vulgarly, but with stable and firm
constancy. It is as much as if he should have said: ye would be delivered,
that when ye are delivered ye may woorship strange Gods again. For who can
believe that ye will not hence forth depart from me? Have ye not called upon me
at other times, and as soon as ye were delivered, ye fell from me? I have
delivered you from the Egiptans, Ammorhites, Ammonites, Philistians, Zidonians,
Amalechites, and Maonites, but ye begone straightway to worship strange Gods
a fresh. For it was a thing most unmeet, that they which are by God set at
liberty, should take upon them to worship Idols of many nations.

A most sharp Irony.
Go and cry unto your Gods, whom ye have chosen. Does God command us to sin?
No undoubtedly. There are sundry figures in the holy scriptures, which unless we
diligently mark, we shall easily fall into most grievous errors. This
exprobation which is set forth by an Irony, is most grievous: as though he
would have said: Now at the length ye have tried, and ye understand what your
Gods can do. The same Irony used Elias toward the Prophets of Baal: Cry
(says he) more loud, peradventure your God is on sleep, or is in his summer
parler. He did not command them to cry, but more attentiuelye to mark, what
god they woorshipped. This is therefore an ironious oration, and a most bitter
taunt.

How God says that he will not give that which he will give, and contrarily.
HE says he will not help them, and yet afterward he helped them. Did Godly
therefore? No undoubtedly, but as yet the repentance of the people was not come
unto that point that he would have it, according to that state and condition
that they were then in, he says he will not help them. For God knows the
momentes of times. So uses a Physician to handle his Patient, when he
requires wine in his burning and heat of his fever. I will not give it (says
he) not because he will never give it, but because he knows when it shall be
profitable unto him. A similitude.
Again the sick person desires a purgation, the Physician denies him it,
because he will first have the humors well concocted, that they may the easelier
be educed: so does God now with his people.

And this is no unaccustomed form of speaking in the scriptures. The Lord said
unto Moses: Suffer my wrath to kindle, that in a moment I may destroy them.
These things he said, when as yet he would spare the people, but the prayers of
Moses pacefied God, and therefore he would have them inflamed, and his affection
and faith increased. In Matthew, the woman of Canaan cried unto Christ: but he,
as though he would not hear her, passed by, saying nothing. Then she being
more instant, I am not (says he) sent, but to the sheep which has peryshed
of the house of Israel. And she not yet ceasing, he called her Dog. It is not
good (says he) to take the childrens bread, and give it unto Dogs: and yet
had he even from the beginning decreed to help her. But first he would have her
faith brought to light, that it might be known by all means. And in an other
place under the parable of one that desired bread, he says: To whom the good
man of the house which was within, answered, I and my children are in bed. And
the other being instant, by his importunity obtained as many loaves as he
would. So in this place God answers, that he will not help, God is not
changed, but will have us changed
namely that people, as they were then. For their repentance was not at that
instantful. God changes not his sentence, but will have us more and more
changed.

Jeremy in his.xviii. chap. says: If I shall speak evil against any nation,
and that nation shall repent, I will also repent me of that evil, which I said I
would do. And that Jeremy might the manifestlier understand the things that
were spoken, he bad him go into the house of a Potter, where he saw the Potter
make a vessel of claye, which was broken in the hands of the woorkeman. But
the Potter made again an other vessel of the same clay. So says the Lord: If
they repent, I will also repent: I do now make for them evil things, but for
evil things I will make good: and yet as I have said, he changes not his
sentence, because such threatninges and promises do depend upon a condition,
which is sometimes changed, when as God yet abides the self same.

Of this thing right well writes Chrysostom upon Genesis, in his.xxv. Homely:
The Lord command Noe to build an Arc, and threatened that after 120. years
he would destroy all mankind by a flood: but when in the mean time they
nothing at all profited, he cut of twenty years, and sent the flood in the
hundred year, and yet was not god changed, but the condition of men varyed.
The same Chrysostom also (upon Matthew, in his.65. Homely, when he interprets
this: Verily I say unto you, ye which have forsaken all things. etc.)
demands: Was not Judas one of the twelve, and shall Judas sit upon the
twelve seats, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel? Did Christ change his
sentence? No (says he) but Judas was changed. Which self same thing we
must judge of the City of Niniue, and of king Ezechias, whom god pronounced
should dye. For neither Niniue at that time perished, nor Ezechias dyed:
because they were changed. God said at the beginning, that the fear of men
should be upon beasts. But it happens contrarily: for men are now afraid
of Lions, Bears, and Tigers, because they are of them oftentimes torn. But
that comes hereof, because of the condition of men is changed, and not the
counsel of God.

Wherefore those promises of god are to be understand according to the present
state of things. Therefore when we hear the promises of God, How we must take
the promises of God.
we must thus think: Either they have some condition adjoined, or they are
absolutelye put. Farther, either they are of force for this time only, or
hereafter they shall be fulfilled. And as touching the conditions of promises and
threatenings, we must diligently mark, that some promises are of the law, and
some of the gospel: and what they differ one from an other, I have before
aboundantlye entreated. Promises of the law have a condition annexed.
And this will I now briefly say, that promises of the law are those which have
a condition annexed, so that the promise is not due, unless the law be most
perfectlye fulfilled: and so those conditions may be called causes of rewards,
if we could fulfill them, which thing, seeing by reason and this corruption and
vice of nature we are not able to perform, god is not bound to render the
reward. Wherefore, seeing we cannot fulfill the law as we ought to do, all
cause of merit is utterly taken away, and yet are not those promyses given
in vain.

For although by reason of infirmity, we cannot perform the condition, yet if
we flee unto Christ, and being regenerate, do begin a better life, the promyses
which were promises of the law, Promises of the Gospel.
are made promises of the Gospel: not because we living under grace, do fulfill
those conditions, but because by Christ they are made absolute and perfect,
whose righteousness is imputed unto us. In this manner must we think of the
promises of God.

How we must understand the threatenings of God.
In like manner is it of threateninges: because often times must be added this
condition: Except ye repent. I said often times: because universally it is
not true, as it appears in David, who repented, and yet suffered those
things which Nathan threatened. Moses also repented, and yet came he not into
the promised land. And as touching the condition of repentance, we must not
over pass this, that it is not perfect in us: otherwise the forgeuenes of syns
should be due unto us as a reward: wherefore we must hold this for certain,
that the condition of repentance is Evangelical, and when there is
repentance found in us, it is a fruit of faith, and not a merit. Of this
thing right well writes Chrysostom in his.v. Homelye to the people of
Antioche, Chrysostom.
where he comfort the people, because of the threatninges of Theodosius. He
brings a place out of Jeremy the.xviii. chapter, A difference between Princes
of the world and God.
and adds that the sentence of God is far otherwise, then the sentence of
Princes of this world. For the sentence of a Prince is straightwaye, as soon
as it is once spoken, performed, and can scarcely be changed: but the sentence
of God, if it have threatened any thing, is not headlong unto destruction, nor
untreatable, yea rather it may seem a degree and a certain beginning unto
salvation. For by this means God oftentimes reuoketh sinners unto the right
way, and saves them. And thus much as concerning conditions.

But as touching time, we must not always look, that God should straightway
perform his promises. If he defer it, we ought thus to comfort our selves,
he has not yet accomplished, but he will do it in due time. He will in the
mean time after this manner exercise our faith. God seems many times to do
nothing less, then that which he has promised and threatened. He promised unto
David a kingdom: but by what tribulations did he exercise him, before that he
accomplished his promises? For first he was poor and a Shepehearde, afterward
being taken into the court, he began to be hated of Saul, and so endaungered,
that there wanted very little, but that he was almost fallen into his power.
When our Lord and savior Jesus Christ should be borne of Mary, the Angel
promised, that he should have the throne of David his father, and yet till he
was thirty years of age, he lived in a manner unknown. And then was he odious
unto the high Priests, Phariseis and Scribes: and was in that sort long time
ill handled, and at the length by them crucified. Wherefore Esaias very well
admonishes, that he which believes, should not make haste. For God will in
due time perform those things which he has promised: but it is our part in
the mean time, not to prescribe any thing unto him. Paul in the.x. to the
Hebrews writes: ye have need of patience, that doing the will of God, ye may
obtain the promise. For yet a little while, and he that shall come, will come,
and will not tarry: and the just lives by faith. But if any withdraw
himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. The same thing also must we
determine of threatenynges. God said he would overthrow the Babilonians: but
they floorished and triumphed, yea and they led away the people of God
captive. Wherefore God would not then accomplish his threateninges, which yet
afterward when he saw his time, he performed.

Let us apply these things unto our place. What said God? I will not help
you, that is, at this present: but afterward when I see oportunitye I will
help you. Yea and God oftentimes answers unto us also inwardly, and in our
heart, I will not help you: for ye are laden with sins. What shall we then do?
shall we cease of from prayers? Not so. Let us rather imitate the Hebrews:
they, the more sharply God answered them, the more they increased their
repentance. John says: If our heart accuse us, God is greater then our heart.
What we must answer to the accusation of our heart.
Our heart does then accuse us, when we say unto our selves: God will not hear,
because of our sins, God does the more accuse us, because he sees more in
us, then we our selves can see. Wherefore David said: Cleanse me Lord from my
secret sins. What remedy is there then? For who is he, whom his heart
accuses not? Let us turn our selves unto Christ: and if that our heart shall
say, he will not help, let us say unto it: This I may well believe, if I should
look upon my self only, but I look upon the son of God, who has given
himself for me. Hereof springs that confidence which Paul had, when he said:
Who shall lay accusation against the elect of god? It is god which justifies.
etc. Wherefore if god accuses us not, neither will our heart accuse us, when we
behold Christ. For we have now confidence toward god, and we shall obtain.
And whilst we are converted unto Christ, not only accusation and sin is
abolished, but repentance also is augmented, as we now see is done in the
Hebrews.

15 And the children of Israel answered unto the Lord: we have sinned, do
unto us whatsoever is good in thine eyes: only we pray thee deliver us this
day.

16 Then they put away their strange Gods from among them, and served the
Lord: and his soul was grieved for the miserye of Israel.

17 Then the children of Ammon gathered together, and pytched in Gilead, and
the children of Israel assembled them selves, and pitched in Mizpa.

18 And the people and Princes of Gilead said every one to his neighbor:
whosoever will begin the battle against the children of Ammon, shall be Captain
over all the inhabitants of Gilead.


The repentance of the Hebrews profited: god answered very sharpelye: The
propertye of true repentance.
I will not hear you. But they cry again: Do what seems good in thine
eyes, that is, what soever pleases thee. This undoubtedly is to repent, when
we are not only repentaunt for the sins which we have committed, but also
we willingly suffer, what soever pleases god. A notable example is set forth
unto us, in that they put away their strange gods, and woorshipped the true
god. It is not sufficient to take away evil things, except in the place of
evil things we substitute things that are good. Many have taken away
Masses, idolatries, and superstitions, and yet have not woorshipped god truly:
because he is not woorshipped by words, but by true faith and good works.
But there are very few which embrace these things.

And his soul was grieved. Contraction and ampliation of the mind.
This Hebrew word Tiktsad signifies to draw together. When we rejoice and
are merye, the spirits in us are made more ample: but when we are sorye, the
spirits are contracted unto the heart. So it is said that God contracted his
soul, Affections are improperlye attributed unto God.
and was after a sort sorry for the miseries of his people. This kind of
speech is not proper of God, but improper. For God is not sorry, neither is he
touched with affections. Wherefore it is a speech after the condition of men.
For often times those things are ascribed unto god, which are noted to be in
men. (...).
And often times things which happen unto men, are ascribed unto God. For men
are first grieved for the miserye of an other, before they have compassion of
them.

Therefore (because God does that, which men do that are grieved, that is,
because he helps) it is said he his grieved, which things happens in men
that help those that are in misery. Such a kind of speech is there in the
book of Numbers the.21. R. Moses Maimon.
chap. The soul of the people was faint, because of the journey: for that
wilderness grieved the people. But R. Moses Maimon says, that this word
Catsad signifies not only a mind, but also a will, which being before ready
to revenge, did now after a sort withdraw it self. Howbeit the first
interpretacion seems to hang well together. The Ammonites on every side
grievously oppressed al Israel, but because Gilead was a notable City and well
fensed, they determined therefore first of al to conquer it. But the children of
Israel pitched in Mispa, so far from thence, that they could not easelye
succor those that were besieged. Wherefore the Gileadites in so great a
danger, thought they had need of a captain, for the administration of
things: for the state consisting only of the people, there could be nothing
well done, unless some one man were made ruler over them. Even after the same
manner, as the Romans were wont in great dangers to create a Dictator.
Wherefore the Giliadites saw that they needed a Captain, but who that should
be, they could not easily provide.

Who so ever say they will begin the battle against the Children of Israel,
let him be our head. Peradventure they had desired a captain of the Lord, and
received an answer, that by this token they should know who should be received
as their captain: namely he, which first should begin the battle against
the enemies. Such signs God sometimes used, without any voice or outward
oracle: as when he promised the servant of Abraham, that she should be Isaacs
wife, which should give drink unto the Camels. It may also be that the
Citizens decreed so among themselves, that the chief man of the city being
stirred up with the desire of the reward, might the more couragiouslye and
cherefully fight against their enemies. In this manner Chaleb, when he besieged
Hebron, encouraged the minds of his soldiers. Whosoever (said he) co^quereth
Hebron, I will give him Achsa my daughter to wife. With which promise Othoniel
being moved, conquered the City, and was made the son in law of Chaleb. So in
these hard times, when things were in great danger, it was necessary to use
such counsel. But what if he which first would have begone the battle against
the adversaries, had been a naughty and wicked man? What I say should then
have been done? What also if he had been unmeet to govern the public wealth,
although he had had warlike strength? This objection makes me rather to allow
the first sentence, that is, that the sign was offered of God, and therefore
they were sure, that he would not give them an evil captain. Although as
touching the question, we may thus answer: All civil promises are so farforth
to be kept, as they may be performed by honest ways and right means, that is,
so much as conscience and the word of God will suffer.

The.xi. Chapter.
1 ANd Iiphtah the Galaadite was a mighty man, the son of an harlot: and
Gilead begat Iiphtah.

2 And Gileads wife bare him sons, which when they were come to age, thrust
out Iiphtah, and said unto him: thou shall not inherit in our fathers house:
For thou art the son of a strange woman.


HEre is set forth unto us Iiphtah, a man abject and obscure, not as touching
his Tribe: for he was of the Tribe of Manasses, but as touching his mother: for
he was the son of an harlot. Wherefore his brethren thrust him out as a
bastard. The name of his father was Gilead, who seems to have been so called
by the name of the mount and city. And that man had not only this bastard to
son, but also he had other which were legitimate children. Wherefore though
Iiphtah had a noble man to his father, yet that nothing profited him, because
he was a bastard, and not borne in lawful matrimony. Wherefore by the civil law
of the Hebrews, it was not lawful for him to have place in the congregation of
Israel. For in Deuteronomy. it is written: Bastardes had not place in the
congregation of Israel.
Mamzer shall not enter into the congregation or assembly. Zor is in Hebrew a
stranger. And a bastard is so called, because he pertains not unto the famely
of the father.

She that bare Iiphtah was not a wife, but a harlot. This Hebrewe word Zonah
signifies two things. First a vitler, that is such a one as sells things
pertaining to victuales, for Zon signifies to feed or to bring up. It
signifies also an harlotte. Paraduenture for this cause, because vitlers are
oftentimes evil spoken of, as touching chastity. As it appears by a certain
law of Constantine, which is had in the Code ad. l. Iuliam, de adult. And
undoubtedly either signification may aptly be applied unto this place. Some of
the Hebrews think that Iiphtah was not the son of an harlot, but only the
son of a concubine, which was not espoused with wedding tables or bonds, and
a dowry. The mother of Iiphtah was not a Concubine.
But that seems not very well to agree. For the Hebrews called not a concubine
Zonah, neither had it been lawful for his brethern to have thrust out Iiphtah
as a stranger, if he had been the son of a Concubine. For the having of
Concubines of that sort, was with the Jews true Matrimonye. Farther, we
must know that the Hebrews had an other word, which signified an harlot. And
that is Kedashah, as though a man would say, sancta, that is holy, as Virgill
says: The holy hunger of gold.

This word Kadash signifies to prepare. For as godly men prepare and sanctify
themselves to the worshipping of god: so do harlots prepare themselves unto the
decking and gain of the body.

And in Deuteronomy. the.23. it was commanded, that no such whore should be in
Israel. And it is added, that the hire of Zonah, that is of a whore, should
not be brought into the sanctuary: wherefore we may thereby gather that zonah
and Kedashah, are taken both in one signifycatio^. In the.21. of Leuiticus it
was not law full for a priest to have such a one to wife. Thou will say
peradventure, what should it avail to make such a law, if there were no
harlots in Israel? Why bastards were not admitted unto the pub. wealth. What
not to enter into the congregation signifies.
I aunsweare, that god in deed commanded there should be none, but the people
obeyed not. But why would not god have a bastard to come into the congregation?
Not because that he should be the worse man, if he should live uprightly: but
that the people might know, that god detesteth whoredom. And not to enter into
the congregation, was nothing else, then to be made unapt for the executing of
an office, either civil or holy. Although otherwise he had to his father,
either a priest or a ruler. Wherefore it was not lawful for bastards to execute
the office either of a Tribune, or of a Praetor, or Magistrate, or priest.

Why therefore does god now make a bastard ruler over his people? Because he
prescribed the law unto men, and not to himself. An other cause is, least they
which are so borne, should be therefore straight way discouraged. Farther,
that they might remember that they are not excluded for their own fault, but
for their fathers fault. But now to return unto Iiphtah, his brethren could
not have thruste him out, except he had been borne of an harlotte.
Otherwise a Concubyne was a lawefull wife, and the chylderne of Jacob which
were borne of his Concubynes, abode with their other brethren, and were
inheritors together with them. But thou will say: Abraham did thrust out
Ismael. That was done before the law, and by the singular will of God, that the
whole and perfect inheritance might come unto Isaac. Otherwise by the ordinary
law of the Hebrews, the children of Concubines, were not utterly excluded
from al inheritance.

Of bastardes and children unlawfully borne.
A division of children.
But to make the thing more plain, we will thus divide children: namely that
there are some which are lawful, and not natural, as they that are adopted.
Other some there are which were natural, and not lawful, as they which are
born of Concubines. (But here I speak of Concubines after the manner of the
Romans: For as touching the Hebrews, they which were born of them, were
legitimate). What child is called a bastard
And there are other which are both legitimate and natural, as they which are
borne in just matrimony. Lastly, there are some which are neither legitimate nor
natural, as are bastardes. A bastard is he, which can not tell who is his
father, or if he can tell, it is one, whom it is not lawefull for him to have
to his father, as it is written in the Digestes de statu personarum, in the
law Vulgo concepti. There is a great difference between the conditions of
children: but we, as touching this matter that we have in hand, will neither
entreat of children adopted, nor of children legitimate natural, but only of
natural children, and bastardes, which seem to be more obscure then the other.

Children natural not legitimate, may be made legitimate, as it is in the Code
de Naturalibus filiis. Lege^ Anastasii. And the ways how they might be made,
ar described in ye same Code, in ye law Si quis. But bastards could not be made
legitimate. If we will speak of the children of Co^cubines after ye manner of the
Jews, they were legitimate, as we have before taught. But the Romans counted
the^ not as legitimate, only this they ordained, that they might be made
legitimate. Farther, bastards are not in the fathers power, neither can they
be: but they that are natural, may be, if they be made legitimate. These
things I speak, that we might understand in how great a miserye bastardes
are. Wherefore Iiphtah could not atteyne to the inheritance of his father. And
these laws were made, that men might be plucked from whoredom, if it were but
only for the ignominy of their children. Chrysostom.
For when they do beget bastardes, they hurt them without hope of recovery.
Wherefore Chrysostom upon the epistle to the Romans (when he enterpreteth
these words: Now is the hour for us to rise from sleep) vehemently
inueygheth against whoremongers. Why do thou sow (says he) that which is
not lawful for thee to reap? Or if thou do gather, it is ignominious unto
thee? For infamy will thereby come, both to him which shall be borne, and to thee
also. For he as long as he lives, shall be full of ignominy, and thou, both when
thou art living and when thou art dead, shall always be noted of filthy lust,
etc. Wherefore it is ordained by the laws, that bastardes should not be
admitted to the inheritance of their fathers.

The father when he dies, may give somewhat unto natural children, yea they
succeed, though they be not put in the will, when there are no other children.
But yet they succeed not in the whole, but only in two twelve parts, as
appears in the Code de Naturalibus liberis, The ecclesiastical cannons.
in the law Licet patri. But the bastard was so far of from succeding the
father, yt he could not desire of him so much as should serve to find him, as
it is in Code de incestis nuptiis, in the law ex co^plexu. But the
Ecclesiastical Cannons deal somewhat more gentlye: for they permit that a
bastard should have somewhat given him to find him withal, as it is: Extra, of
him which married her, whom before he had polluted with aduoutry in the chapter
Cum haberet. And herein both the laws of god and man do agree. Neither as I
have before said, were these laws written of hatred or cruelty against
bastardes, but that at the least by this means the filthy lusts of men should
be kept under.

Howebeit this I will not ouerpasse, that by the laws of the Romans, the
bastard might succeed his mother, as it is had in the Digests ad Senatus
consultum Tertul. L. 1. he may also complain of his mother, if she leave him
out of her will, as it is had in the digests de inofficioso Testame^to. L. 29.
which is to be understand, except the mother be noble. And why bastardes are
not counted in the steed of children, and ar deprived of their fathers
inheritance: Augustine.
Augustine besides these reasons which I have before brought, brings also an
other out of the holy scriptures. For it is written in Leuit. the.20. chap. He
yt comes to the wife of his uncle, shall dye without children. But (says he)
many ar born also of incest, whose parents are not childles. He answers,
that the Lord so speaks in the law, because such are not counted for
children. Wherefore their fathers are justly said to be without children,
although they have children: because it is al one, as if they had none. And
because such children are conte^ned of the father, Bastardes prove oftentimes
worse then other children. Chrysostom. Plutarche.
neither are they rightly brought up nor chastised, oftentimes they prove worse
then the other. Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Hebrews the.12. chapter,
in his 29. Homely, exhorts the people, to think that god does like a father
when he chastises us: for the father neglects unlawfully begotten children
and bastardes. Wherefore god when he chasteneth, does part of a true and
lawful father. Plutarch in his Problemes the.103. Problem, says that the
Romans had four surnames, so that some were called Cnei, and other some
Caii, and those names they noted by two letters only, or by three. Wherefore
he demands, why Spurius yt is a bastard, was written by these two letters
Sp. because says he, the first letter S, signifies Sine, that is without, and
P, Pater that is, a father, because he was borne of an unknown father.
Although that may also be applied unto Posthumos, that is such as ar borne
after their father is dead: but to them it was not co^tumelius to be called
Spurii. For. Sp. Melius, Sp. Cassius and other of that name were very notable
citisens. We have hard the law of God, and the civil law, now let us see the
Cannons.

In the decrees distinction.56. chapter. Presbiterorum, What the Cannons decree
of bastardes. Chrysostom.
bastardes are not suffered to be admitted unto holy orders, unless they were
first brought up in monasteries, as though by this means they might be
amended. But the Canons which afterward follow, are somewhat more gentle.
Chrysostom upon Mathewe in his.4. Homely, as it is in the same place recited,
chapter Nunquam, teaches yt so to be borne, ought not to be hurtful unto the
children. For if a man have been a thief, a whoremonger, or a murderer, and
then repent him, his former life shall not be hurtefull unto him: much less
ought the sin of the father to be hurtefull unto the child, yea rather if
the child behave himself well, he shall be so much the more notable, and worthy
of more praise, in that he has not followed the steps of his father. Jerome.
Jerome in his Epistle contra Ioannem Hierosolomitanum ad Pammachium, as in the
same decrees appears in the chapter Nascitur. Bastardes says he, are not to
be contemned: for they have the hand of god to make them, Gregory
neither did god disdain to make them, and to give them a soul. etc. Gregory
also in the same place in the chapter Satis peruersum, says, that it is a
thing unworthy, that the child should be so punished, for the pleasure of the
father, that he should not be promoted unto the holy ministerye. Jerome in
the same place chapter Dominus. If Christ in his genealogy vouchsafed to recke^
bastards, why shall not we then admit them to the ministerye. etc?

After these Cannons which are somewhat favorable unto bastardes, What the
father hinders bastardes,
is brought out a strong argument on the contrary part. Whoremongers (say
they) do seem to pour in a certain power into the seed, which power passes
also into the children, whereof follow evil inclinations, and thereof are they
judged to be worse then other, because when they are children, they are not
corrected. Wherefore if they be promoted unto the holy ministry, the church
shall receive damage. Yet at the last it is added, in the chap. Cenomanensis,
if there be any that are notable, they may be admitted unto holy orders: but
yet not that it should be a general rule of all, but only a privilege. And
these things are written in the decrees.

But in the decretalles de filiis presbiterorum it is had, that bastardes if
they be made Monks, may come unto orders, but in such sort that they be not
promoted unto dignities, and be not made either Abbottes or Priors. But if they
live without the monastery, the bishop may ordeyne them, and give them small
benefits, but that is by his authority, and (as they commonly call it) by
dispensacion. But ecclesiastical dignities must not be given them, but by the
Pope: for that power he keeps to himself alone. The judgment for promotinge
of bastardes must be left unto the church.
But such releasinges of Popes and bishops tend only to gain. The judgment
of these things should have been left unto the church: which ought herein
to have a respect to two things, to her own necessitye, and to the excellent
virtues of him whom it will promote. If the Church shall have great need,
and he excel in virtues, the manner of his birth shall nothing let him.

For Paul to Timothy and to Titus, when he diligently writes of the election
of bishops and priests, forbids nothing of this kind of men. But thou will
say, in the old law bastardes were excluded from the ministerye. I grant
that, but we are not now bound to that law, and it was made only for the
detestation of aduoutry. But now if they can much profit the church, their
election is not to be prohibited. And it is vayn which is written in the
decretals, that legitimates may be chosen, A trifling division of the
decretals.
but bastards ought to be rejected, except with dispensation, as it is had in
the title de electionibus. For these couloures and deceates the Romayne
Bishops have invented to amplyfye their dominion. But the sentence which I
have allowed, agrees with charity: and we may gather the like of it out of
the civil law, where it is entreated of Decuriones, for these were civil Judges
for private cities and towns. Bastardes might be made Decuriones.
Wherefore it is decreed that bastardes might be made Decuriones, if necessity
so required. In the Digests de Decurionibus in the law generaliter,
paragrapho. Debet enim. The law therefore would have that order namely of
Decuriones to be full. Howbeit if an other legitimately borne, were a suter to
gether for the same, he should be preferred before the bastard. So think I
must we do in the church, that if any man be as good and as apt for the
ministry, being legitimately borne, let us have no regard unto the bastard,
who must give place in that lawefull case. It is added in the law: If they be
honest and good, the fault of the birth nothing hinders them. In the same
title in law Spurios, and in the law followinge. These things have I
therefore mentioned that we might understand, by what right Iiphtah was of
his brethren thruste out, and to see how the Civil laws agree with the law
of God.

Whither the son shall bear the iniquity of the father.
But in this place arises a question wayghtier and far more hard, because it
seems that the son bears the iniquitye of the father. For he that is
borne, played not the whoremonger, but the father, whom he could not let. More
over in Deutronomy the.5. chap. it is written, and also the same thing is
found in Exodus, I will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children unto
the third and fourth generation. And the same did God repeat unto Moses, when
he passed before him. For among his Prophets this also is added: visiting the
iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third I say, and fourth. And
it seems marvelous, by what means that may be numbered among the titles of
mercy. This thing the Heretics, as the Martionites, Valentinians, and
Carpocratians, What ye Heretics reprove in the old testament.
left not unspoken of, who for that cause rejected the old testament, and
affirmed the author thereof to be an evil God, as he which spared the fathers
that sinned, and punished the innocent children, being so far from mercy, that
he can not forget sin, but reserueth anger, even to the third and fourth
generation. The Jews also took that in evil part, who in Ezechiel the.18.
chap. said: Our fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are
set on edge. That was as much as if they should have said: Jeroboam erected
calves, Manasses setforth idolatry, and must we be punished for them? But the
Lord answered by the Prophet: Al souls are mine, both the soul of the
father, and also the soul of the son. The soul that sins, it shall dye,
and the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father. These things seem
not very well to agree together.

Some think that here must be used a distinction of evils and punishments. A
distinction of punishments.
For there are some punishementes say they, which pertayne unto eternal
damnation: and there are other, which dure but for a time. And they understand
the place of Ezechiel before alleged of the first kind of punishementes: for
as touching eternal salvation or damnation, every one shall bear his own
burden. And again the soul which has sinned, it shall dye. Neither do they
otherwise understand a place of Jeremy in the.31. chap. But as touching
punishments which dure but for a time, as are sickness, poverty, banishement,
death, etc. they affirm that it is not against the justice of God, but that with
these kind of punishments he may punish the son together with the father,
and the people with the princes. And in that sort they expound that which is
said in the law: I will visit the sins of the fathers upon the children,
unto the third and fourth generation. Augustine seems sometimes to have
allowed this distinction. Augustine.
For in his questions upon Joshua the 8. question, when he reasons concerning
Achan, which had hidden some of the things that were cursed, for whose sin
all the Israelites were miserably afflicted, and for the same cause not only
Achan was punished, but also his sons and daughters were put to death
together with him: Augustine (I say) says there, that those punishments may
both profit, and also hinder, which thing God himself knows, and therefore he
tempreth them according to his justice. For god so moderateth the^, that they
do both afflicte the wicked, and are not hurtful to the good. For such is his
providence, that those things which seem evil, he can make good: but as
touching eternal punishementes, because they always are hurtful, every man
worthily suffers them according to his evil desert. No man (says he) suffers
these punishments for an other man's fault. The same Augustine writes against
the adversary of the law and the Prophets in his.1. book and.16. chap. A
division of men into regenerate and into those that are not yet regenerate.
There is no doubt (says he) but that in this life one is vexed for an other.
And against Iulianus the Pelagian is his.6. book the 12. chap. he makes a
division of the estate of people, and says that some are regenerate in Christ,
but other some are not yet regenerate. And the sins of those that are
regenerate, are visited unto the third and fourth generation, that is, upon all
their posterity. And he alludeth it unto original sin, which was by Adam
sowed into all his posterity. But thou will say, why is it visited unto the
third and fourth generation? The same father answers, in his 42. question
upon Deuteronomy. because three joined with four make seven, which is a number of
fulness, so that to say upon the third and fourth generation, The number of
seven is a toke^ of fulness.
is all one, as if he had said upon all generations. Which kind of speaking
Amos used, saying: For three transgressions, and for four I will not turn to
it. Wherefore Augustine understands these words of the law, for visityng
the iniquityes of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation, as touching those that are not regenerate. For the law (says he)
entreated of those which were under the law. But Ezechiel and Jeremy entreat
of men regenerate, and of the gift of regeneration which should be given by
Christ. But men that are regenerate shall be judged every man according to his
own deserts, and not according to other men's sins. And so ye son shall not
bear the iniquity of the father, but the soul which has sinned, it shall
dye. But before regeneration, original sin infecteth and destroys all
posterityes.

This distinction of Augustine I disalow not, but I doubt whether it be
sufficiently applied unto the meaning of Ezechiel and Jeremy. Ezechiel and
Jeremy wrote both the self same words in sundry places.
Both those Prophets wrote these self same words. The fathers have eaten
sower grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge, when as yet the one was
in Iewry, and the other carried away into Babilone. Which is a manifest
argument, that they spoke both with one and the self same spirit. But
Augustine says that the exposition of Ezechiel is to be sought for in the.31.
chap. of Jeremy. For there after the same words it is added: Behold the days
will come, and I will make a new covenant, etc. Wherefore that place is wholly
to be applied unto regeneration: and therefore by these words of Jeremy, the
words of Ezechiel are to be interpreted of those that are regenerate. In this
manner that father thinks this question is fully answered.

But when I more attentyuely do weighe the chap. of Ezechiel, I think that he
speaks of the punishments and afflictions of this life. For why complained
the people, saying, that the fathers had eaten sower grapes, and the childre^s
teeth were set on edge? Did they complain of the pain of hell? No
undoubtedly, but because they were led away captive into Babilone and lived in
servitude. They complain that God seems to deal to hardly with them: because
for as much as their fathers were idolaters, yet they which had not sinned,
were punished. For those punishementes the people lamented: wherefore it was
necessary, that the Prophet should answer them of the same punishementes. The
soul of the father is mine, and the soul of the son is mine. The soul
which has sinned, it shall dye. These words therefore have a respect unto the
punishments of this life. Although I do not deny, but that it may also be
transferred unto spiritual punishme^tes: Argumentum a minori ad maius.
but not, unless it be by an argument from the les to the great. And that after
this manner, God does not for an other man's sin punish, with pains which
dure, but for a time, those which are utterly innocent, therefore much les will
he punish them with spiritual and eternal punishments.

Jerome.
Jerome when he interprets this place of Ezechiel, has the solution, which
Augustine also afterward followed, as in his place we shall declare. But the
interpretations do vary, because it is a thing obscure, and the difficulty
hereof ryseth, because it can not be denied, but that God does vex some for
other men's sakes. For although Cham uncovered the filthiness of his father, yet
the curse was transferred to Chanaan his son. And when the Sodomites had
grievously sinned, the children were also burnt together with the fathers. And
when David had committed aduoutry, God caused that the son which was borne
of ye aduoutry to dye. Wherefore in a thing so obscure Jerome brings his own
interpretation, but he declares also other men's judgments as touching this
question. An Allegorical exposition of some.
First he says that there were very many, which did understand this place of
the law. (That God will visit the iniquity of the fathers upon the children
unto the third and fourth generation) allegorically of every singular soul, or
man. Four degrees of sins.
impulsions and violences to evil, (...).
Then follows deliberation, when a man determines God is so gentle, that in
the first and second generation, that is in the first motions, and in
deliberation he says nothing, and winketh at it, but the third and fourth,
that is the perpetrating and boasting he punishes, when a man both does evil,
and gloryeth in his sins, and will not repent. Wherefore they say that God
reuengeth upon the bows and not upon the roots. For man, as they think, if
he neither do evil, nor boast of his evil, may be saved, although otherwise
he both lusts, and deliberateth to commit evil. And in that manner they
interpret Paul unto Timothe, when he says that the woman shall be saved by
procreation of children, so yt they abide in the faith, etc. that is: The soul
shall be saved, if it work that which is good, although it have evil motions
and cogitations.

This interpretation do not I allow: first because it is Allegorical, The
impulsio^s and first motions of ye mind are sins.
when as God especially in the law speaks simply and manifestly: moreover
because if the words of God should be applied unto allegoryes, they should be
made utterly uncertain: lastly, because that which is said is not true. For
these impulsions, and first motions are sins, because both they are against
the law of God, and also they are condemned of Christ, when he says in the
Gospel: He which sees a woman and lusts after her, has committed
fornication already in his heart. And he which is angry with his brother, is
worthy of judgment. For God does not so regard the ^ctes, but that he much
more has a respect unto the mind. Moses at the waters of contention sinned
grievously, and yet if we diligently weighe that hystory, we shall find
nothing that he committed evil outwardly. But God saw the incredulity of his
heart, and took great vengeance of him. Wherefore those motions and
deliberations of the mind are not only sins, but also are grievously
punished of God. Wherefore let us leave this interpretation, which Jerome also
brings not as his own.

But now to make the matter plain, as touching punishments of this life, As
touching punishementes which dure but for a time yt no man suffers which he
has not deserved.
no man can say he suffers that which he deserves not: because no man is
pure, no not the child that is but a day old: there is none which has not
deserved eue^ death, why then should men say: Our fathers have eaten sour
grapes, etc. when as every man shall bear his own burden, either as touching
this life, or as touching eternal life? But God does not always send these
evils which dure but for a time, as pains and punishments, God does not
always send those euilles which dure but for a time as punishements.
but has very oftentimes a respect unto others ends, as Christ in John
answered of the man borne blind: Neither has this man sinned, nor his
parents, that he should be borne blind, but yt the glory of God should be made
manifest. Also Peter and Paul, when they were put to death, could not complain
that they had not deserved death. Although God, when they were killed, had not
a respect unto this, to punish the^, What God regards in the martyrdom of
his saints.
but that by their blood might be left a testimony of the Gospel of his son.
Wherefore seeing the matter is so, and we be al subject unto sins, there is no
cause why we should complain, that God deals to severely with us, if we be
afflicted for the sins of our parents. For God can so direct those troubles,
The scourges of the children, profit sometimes the parents.
that they shall pertayne not only to his glory, but also to the salvation of
our parents. For ofte^tymes he punishes the parents in the children, and the
prince in the people. For the parents are no les grieved for the punishment
of their children, then if they themselves were afflicted. If the children dye
for the pare^tes cause, they have no wrong done unto them: for death, is also
dew unto then, and they should otherwise have dyed. Wherefore if God will so use
their death, he may do it justly. The grieves of the children are the grieves
of the parents.
Which thing also we may affirm of other calamityes. For if the son be vexed
with sickness, he deserved the sickness: and if he have lost money, the^ has
he lost things transitory and unstable, and which were given him on that
condition, that they might easily be taken away again. God as touching the
regenerate turns punishments into medicines.
Wherefore if god will with these kinds of calamityes punish the parents in
the children, he can not be accused of injustice.

Wherefore Augustine in his questions upon Joshua the 8. question: by original
sin (says he) many punishements are dew unto us, which yet God conuerteth
into certain medicines, and makes them very much to profit us, although they
seem unto us evil. For if the son had lived, peradventure he would have
followed the evil steps of his father, or else committed woorser things. Where
fore if God take him out of this life, he can not complain that he is ill dealt
with. For through the benefits of god his death redoundeth to his profit. For
he is taken away, least by malice his heart should change. And undoubtedly we
must suffer easy evils, to atteyne unto great good things. For so the
Physicians with a bitter purgation trouble the throat, to restore the sick
person to his former health. In like manner when we have deserved punishments,
God yet turns them to good. By this means discipline is kept in the world.
And by this means (says Augustine) a certain discipline is established in
the world. For unless it were so, men would continually prove worse and worse. A
certain conjunction also and society of mankind is declared, when one after
this manner is punished for the sin of an other. For they which pertayne unto
one kingdom or City, or Church, are after a sort one body among themselves.
And in the body one member suffers for an other. Wherefore seeing this is so in
the body, it is not absurd, that the same do chance also in the society of
men.

Plutarche.
Plutarche in his book de Sera numinis vindicta, has very well taught this:
The eye (says he) is sick, and the vain of ye arm is cut, so the father
has sinned, and the son is punished: the prince has behaved himself ill,
and the people is vexed: and such compassion or suffering together is there in
things humane. That author justly accuses the rashenes of men, (...).
which as often as these things do chance, do complain that God deals
cruelly. For the father (says he) is either good or evil. If the son of a
good father be peradventure afflicted with evil, straightway they cry out
that God does unjustly, neither is it meet that the son should be so
miserably handled, which had so good a man to his father. But if the father be
evil, and the son come into misery, again they make exclamation, that here
also god is unjust. For the son ought not to have been punished, when as the
father sinned, wherefore the common people think that the son should by no
means be afflicted. But what if the father be evil, and yet all things go
prosperously with the son? here also they compain (as he says) of the
injustice of god. For they deny it is just that then the son should live
prosperously, which has so evil a father. These things this man, though he
were an Ethnike, writes very godltly.

Children are certain parts of the parents
Moreover we must consider, that children are as certain parts of the pare^tes,
and have somewhat of the parents in them. Wherefore it is not absurd if God
punish ye part of the parents in the children. But I will return to
Augustine, who says, ye god by this means setteleth discipline in the world,
in the public, wealth in the Church, and in the famely. Whose saying in any
judgment can not be disco^me^ded: for if the children be punished for the
sins of their pare^tes, they have nothing whereof to complain. They owe
undoubtedly this duty unto their parents: for of them they have that they are.
Wherefore if they leave their life for them, they have no wrong done them. For
they render unto them that which they received of them. If god should say
unto them: I will use your punishment to the salvation of your pare^tes, they
can by no right refuse it. John says: that every one ought so to love his
brother, to be ready to lay even his life for him. And if we must give our life
for our brother, how much more ought we to give it for our father? God uses
sundry instruments, wherewith he draws men unto him. Why then should he not
use either the sickness, or death of the children either for the chastenyng, or
for the salvation of the parents? Augustine in his.8. Augustine. The lesser
part justly suffers punishment for the greater.
question upon Iosuah, which I have oftentimes alleged, says: That it is
just, that the lesser part suffer punishment for the greater, as in that
hystory it happened, because of the sacrilege which Achan committed. A few
fell in the battle, and the whole multitude was absolved. Hereby we understand
how great the anger and vengeance of God would have been, if the whole
multitude had sinned, when as the sin of one manne was so excedingly
punished. And Plutarche in that book, which a little before I brought: This
thing (says he) also the Capitaynes do in their hosts. If there be any thing
commonly committed of all, they put the tenth manne to death, that by the
punishment of a few, the rest may be absolved: and so one is punished for an
other man's fault. The manner of punishing the tenth soldier.
But GOD, as it is said, does no man iniurye: for he which dies, was
subject unto death, and GOD directs his death to a good end, namely to
help other, that is, that by this means, either the parents or the princes
may be revoked unto repentance, or to establyshe discipline. But those
things which we have said, can by no means be understand of spiritual
and eternal pains. For as touching them every man shall suffer for his own
fault.

Now let us expound the words of the law. I (says he) am a Ielous God,
visityng the iniquity of the Fathers upon the children, unto the third and
fourth generation, of them that hate me. Jerome. Augustine.
These last words Jerome upon Ezechiel the.18. chapter diligently notes. And
Augustine upon Joshua in the question before alleged. Of those, says GOD,
which hate me: as though he should have said, I will not touch the innocents,
but will take vengeance of their iniquity, which imitate evil Fathers, and
has me. After the same manner he promises to do good unto children, and
chyldrens children, even unto a thousand generations. But to what children?
Even to those, (says he) that love me. Wherefore though the Father be
ungodly, and the son good, the iniquitye of the father shall nothing hurt
him. But if the father be good, and the son wicked, the godlynes of the
father shall nothing profit him. And therefore Jerome says: He auengeth the
iniquitye of the Fathers upon the children, not because they had evil
parents, but because they imitate their parents. The words themselves do
sufficiently declare, that the law is not to be understand of Original
sin, but of that sin which they call actual. For then shall the son
bear the iniquitye of the Father, when he likewise synneth as did the Father.
Also the words of Ezechiel can not be understand of Original sin, as that
which follows easily declares. Although this sentence, that the soul
which sins, it shall dye, may be understand of Original sin. Every
manne has in himself his proper original sin.
For every manne has in himself a corrupt nature, and a prones unto evil.
Wherefore every manne bears his own sin. For although that vice were by
original drawn of the parents: yet now is it made ours.

But thou will say: seeing in the law it is said, Of them which hate me:
and infantes, for as much as they hate not God, therefore it can not pertayne
unto them. I answer. That in act in deed they hate not God, but by corruption
of nature, and prones unto evil. So a woolfe that is at full age deuoureth a
sheep. A young woolfe which is but a whelpe does it not, not because it has
not the nature of the father, but because it is not able. And thus much as
touching the words of the law.

But why it is said unto the third and fourth generation, and not unto the
fyft and sixth, we have heard what Augustine has answered. But in my
judgment we may say much more commodiously, that the parents may live unto
the third and fourth generation. GOD would therefore so punyshe the Fathers
in the third and fourth generation, that by that punyshement of their
posterity, some feelyng might come unto them, they being yet on live, and that
they might see the miseryes of their neuewes and childrens children. For this
cause the holy Scripture extends those generations no farther. When the
posteritye are evil, and are punished of GOD, there is no doubt but that the
parents are punyshed also in them. Chrysostom upon Genesis the. 29. Homely
when he interprets these words: Cursed be Chanaan, etc. But he sinned not
(says he,) but his father Cham. That is true in deed, he answers: but
Cham was a great deal more sharply touched with that curse, then if it had
been pronounced against himself. This is the power and fatherly affection, to
be more vexed with the afflictions of their children, then with their own.
Wherefore Cham did not only see that his son should be evil and subject
unto the curse: but also he saw that he himself should be punished in him.

This now rests to be declared, why among the Proprietyes of the mercy of
GOD, this also was recited before Moses: Visityng the iniquitye of the Fathers
upon the children, when as this seems rather to pertayne unto severity. But
it is not so, yea rather if we look more narrowly upon the place, we shall
understand that it is a point of mercy. For where the sin was first
committed, he might strayghtwaye if he would, justly be revenged. But he is
so good that he will defer the vengeance unto the third and fourth
generation, and in the mean time calls back the father to repentance, by
admonitions of the Prophets, by sermons and benefits, and many other ways.
At the last, when the third and fourth generation is come, and he made never
a whitte the better, he goes to stripes, and yet he does not then use
affliction, as the last punishment, but rather as a medecin. Who sees not
that all this is a work of great mercy? Wherefore justly and woorthily are
these words numbered among the proprietyes of mercy. And it can not be
denied, but that the Prophets were oftentimes afflicted together with the
people. For Ezechiel and Daniel were led away into captivity, and Jeremy was
cast into prison, and wonderfully vexed in the time of the siege: and
afterward going with the Hebrews into Egypt, he was slain. For God will have
the thing in this manner ordered, that good men, may not only ryghtly govern
their own life, but also in suffryng things grievous, they may admonish and
bring to amendment the evil. For they are conversant together with them in
the same public wealth and Church, and are after a sort members of one body.

It profits the just yt they are wrapped in the same punishments with the
wicked.
Wherefore the good ought thus to think with themselves: If God afflicte the
evil, we also shall be vexed together with them: we shall all be wrapped with
the self same punishment. Therefore we must see, that we labor for them, in
reprouyng and prayng for them: for their salvation being neglected, shall bring
euilles also unto us. After this sort we must understand Augustine, when he
says, that GOD by this means establysheth discipline among men. Because if
the people be afflicted for their kings, and the son for the father: then
must they labor and travail one for an other. Neither yet do good men so live
without sin, that God can find nothing in them to punish. Although the
afflictions which happen unto the godly, The afflictions of the godly are not
properly punishments.
can not as it is said, be properly called afflictions: but rather excercises
of faith. For so God tries their faith, and whatsoever he does in them, he
turns it to their good. Moreover he will have the^ to express in themselves
their first begotten brother Jesus Christ, which suffered in himself other
men's sins. For this also is a certain portion of the Cross of Christ,
although they are not so innocent, as Christ was: neither serves their cross
any thing to redeem sins. Daniel in his captivity after this manner confessed
his sins. We have sinned (says he) and done unjustly, etc. He said not: They
have sinned, but we. And Esaye says: All our righteousness are as a cloth
stained with flowers of a woman. There is in deed in holy men a certain
ryghteousnes, but not such a righteousness as they can boast of, before the
judgment seat of God. Wherefore if they suffer any thing, they have no just
cause to complain.

But thou, wilt say: Why is it said yt God in the^ punishes the sins of
other me^, when as they also sin? We should say rather yt he punishes their
sins, and not the sins of their parents. I answer: Because when god has
much and long time waited, that their father should repent, and it nothing
profited, and in the mean time it is come unto the third and fourth
generation, at the length he pours out his anger upon the children, which
therefore are said to suffer for their fathers, because unless the malice of
their fathers had gone before, their affliction might have been deferred till
farther time. But now because they have fallen into the third and fourth
generation, the consideration of the justice of god will not suffer the
punishment to be deferred any longer. And although they themselves also have
deserved those evils, yet because they are so corrected in the third and fourth
generation, they owe that dewty unto their parents.

And so God fears the pare^tes, that they should temper themselves from
wicked acts: and though they will not for gods sake, or for their own, yet at
the least for their posterities sake. It also makes the children afraid to
imitate the sins of their fathers, least the punishment due unto their
fathers be required of the^. Neither is it unjust that ye children suffer
something for their fathers sake: for by their fathers they receive
inheritances, and are above other honored and exalted. For god did not only
make fortunate David, but also for his sake favored his posterity. For the
kingdom perseuered in his famely ye space of.400. years. But as touching
eternal life, As touching eternal life the children are not punished for ye
sins of the fathers.
neither shall the father be punished for the sins of ye children, nor the
children for ye sins of ye fathers. Howbeit children obtain many spiritual
gifts by good fathers. For Paul in his.1. Epist. to the Cor. the.7. chap.
says: Otherwise your children should be unclean: but now they are holy.
Wherefore the children have of holy parents, some holiness, and some spiritual
gift, as that place teaches. And on the contrary part, Children obtein some
spiritual gifts for their parents sake.
by evil parents many such good gifts are hindered: neither are they heard of
God being evil, and not repentaunt, when they desire spiritual gifts for
their children. Yet by the providence of God it oftentimes comes to pass,
Evil parents do sometimes hinder their children of god spiritual gifts.
that of good parents are borne noughty children: and of evil, good, as
Ezechias a good king, had to his father Achaza a wicked king. And contrariwise
the same Ezechias being a very godly prince, begat Manasses a very ungodly and
cruel king. The same also might I say of Josias. This therefore comes so to
pass, least wickedness should increase without measure, Why good children ar
borne of evil pare^tes, and evil of good.
if of evil parents should continually be borne evil children. God puts
to his hand, and makes the son borne of an evil father, a member of
Christ. And therewith all he shows that his goodness can not be hindered by
the parents, though they be never so wicked. Farthermore evil children, are
borne of good parents, that grace should be the better known. And that the
goodness of the children should not be attributed unto nature, which they have
drawn of their parents. For god will have it known to be his gift, that we
are saved.

This one thing only is to be added unto the foresaid question: It is not
lawful for men to punish the sins of the parents in the children.
That it is in deed lawful for god (as it is said) to punish in the children
the sins of the fathers: but yt is utterly unlawful for men to do. For in
Deuteronomy. the.24. chap. it is commanded: That the fathers should not be punished
for the children, nor the children for the parents. Which is to be
understand, so that the father consent not unto the son, or the son unto
the father. Wherefore Achan if he had been called unto trial and to the
judgment seat, he should be the ordinary law have peryshed alone, and not
his children with him. But GOD has this his proper law, who would have it
otherwise done, although sometimes he observes this also. For in the book of
Numbers: the 26. chap. When Core conspired against Moses, he was destroyed:
but his children were not together with him extinguished, Samuel came of the
posterity of Core.
yea rather they were kept for the holy ministerye, and of their posteritye
was Samuel borne. Amasias the king was praised, who slew the murderers
which killed his father, and slew not their children: for he had a regard
unto the law of God. The cause of this prohibition Augustine brings:
Augustine.
God (says he) may punish the son for the father: because although he
afflicte him in this world, yet he can save him in the world to come. And
this can not man do. Farther, god sees that the children are not innocents:
but man sees not that. Although the civil laws are herein a great deal more
severe, and do punish the children for the fathers sake, as it is in the
digestes, In treason the children are punished for the fathers.
and in the Code, ad I. Iuliam maiestatis: yet they put not the son to death
for the father, but deprive him of all his fathers goods, dignityes, and
honors. Howbeit they left some part for the daughters, which part was
called Falcidia, to mary them withal. Otherwise the civil laws agree with
the law of god. For in the Code de paenis in the law Sancimus, it is
commanded that the punishment be not transferred unto other, either to
kinsfolks by affinity, or to kinsfolks by blood, but only to be laid upon
the author of the crime. And yet as well this law as the other before, were
ordained both of the self same Emperors Archadius and Honorius. But the cause
why it was so severely decreed against treason, seems to be this, to fear
men away from this kind of wicked crime. Yet the laws of god decree no such
thing of that matter: but this by express words they command, not to kill
the son for the father. But for goods they ordain nothing. But our
adversaries have transferred this civil law of treason unto Heretics. For
they do not only punish the father which is an Heretic, but also they
depryue his children of all his goods: how justly, I will not now tell. Of
these things I have made mention the more largely: because Iiphtah was thrust
out of his fathers inheritance, and thereby seemed to bear the iniquity of
his father. Now will I return unto the Hystory.

3 Then Iiphtah fled from his brethren: and dwelt in the land of Tob: and
there gathered idle fellows unto Iiphtah, and went out with him.

4 And in process of time the children of Ammon made war with Israel.

5 And when the Ammonites began to fight with Israel, the Elders of Gilead
went to set Iiphtah out of the land of Tob.

6 And they said unto Iiphtah: Come and be our captain, that we may fight with
the children of Ammon.

7 Iiphtah answered the Elders of Gilead, did not ye hate me, and expel me out
of my fathers house? and why then come ye now unto me, when ye are vexed.

8 And the Elders of Gilead said unto Iiphtah: Therefore we turn again unto
thee now, that thou may go with us, and fight against the children of Ammon,
and be our head, over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

9 Then answered Iiphtah unto the Elders of Gilead: If ye bring me home again
to fight against the children of Ammon, and if the Lord deliver them before me,
shall I be your head?

10 And the Elders of Gilead said unto Iiphtah: The Lord hear between us, if
we do not according to thy word.

11 Then Iiphtah went with the Elders of Gilead, and the people made him head
and captain over them. And Iiphtah spoke al his words before the Lord in
Mizpah.


The land whereunto Iiphtah fled, was called Tob, Why the land^ was called Tob.
namely of the name of the possessor thereof, otherwise Tob signifies good. But
here it is the proper name of the Lord of that land.

Idle men. That is vain. This word signifies poor men, and such as were
oppressed for debte. So also there came unto David, when he fled from Saul,
men that were in debt, and heavy of heart.

And they went out with him. Namely to war against the enemies of the people
of God: and they lived of the spoil. For Iiphtah being a man banished and
driven out of his country, had nothing wherewyth to maynetaine soldiers.

And the children of Ammon fought. We have told that the Ammonites made war
against the Israelites, which is understand to have been after Iiphtah
departed from his fathers house: and when he should go into the land of Tob,
he moved war against those Ammonites, and out of their borders took prays
and booties. Therefore, when the Gileadites were oppressed, they came unto
Iiphtah, to bring him home again, and by his conducte to defend the city
from their enemies. They desire to have him to be their head: because when they
were grievously oppressed of their enemies, they judged it expedient, that there
should be one to govern their things. And first they had decreed among
themselves, (as we have heard) that he should be their captain, which first
should fight against their enemies: but whither they did that by their own
judgment and civil reason, or by the oracle of God, the historye mencioneth
not. But the act or condition which the Gileadites ordained, was fulfilled by
Iiphtah: for he with a few soldiers assailed his enemies. Therefore they
seeing that they were bound to stand to their covenant, came unto Iiphtah and
chose him captain, because he first of all began the battle against the
Ammonites.

This is worthy to be marked, that the Gileadites call not Iiphtah king,
Iiphtah a^oli^ted captain, and not king.
but only captain or ruler. Wherefore they are not to be accused as the
Sechemites were. For they did choose Abimelech king, but these men constitute
Iiphtah captain, to fight against their enemies now for the present time, and
also hereafter when opportunity should serve. And undoubtedly they do well and
wisely in choosing Iiphtah: for he was a man expert and valiant in wars.

But god had with himself before in secret decreed, that he should be judge
over all Israel, which manifestlye appears by those words which we shall
afterward hear: And the spirit of the Lord came upon Iiphtah. Farther, we
must consider, that Iiphtah therefore fled, because his brethren had thrust him
out of his fathers inheritance, neither left they him any thing to defend his
life with all: wherefore he had rather fly, and live in exile, then to live with
ignominye in his country. This undoubtedly came of a noble stout courage, that
he would not live there, where he continuallye heard his birth vpbraided unto
him, and where al men counted him for a bastard. Therefore he got him to an
other place, and exercised the art of warrefare. It is also possible, that
that matter came in controversy, and the Judges, to gratify the legitimate
brethren, did not only judge that he should be deprived of his fathers goods,
The law commanded not to banish bastardes.
but also be thruste out of the city, and seems to me very probable. For
when the Gileadits came unto him, and of their own accord offered unto him the
pryncipalytye, he aunsweared: Did not ye expel me out of the city? These
words declare that Iiphtah was handled more seuerelye, then the law
commanded. For the law commanded not to banishe bastardes. The Gileadites
aunsweare that they did so in deed, but as before they could expel him, so
also now it was in their power, to call him home again and make him ruler.
But now, says Iiphtah, you call me again when ye are in miserye. As though
he would have said, otherwise ye would not have called me again. It is so,
say they, and therefore we come unto thee, that thou may fight against our
enemies: because we are afflicted.

But in that it is written we are turned again, we must not so understand
it, as though they had before been with Iiphtah, but to turn again, is in this
place to be referred unto the mind: as though it should have been said, we have
changed our counsel and purpose. Then Iiphtah, like a wise man, would not be
satisfied with these words, but required the covenants of the principality to
be confirmed If I says he, shall put my self in danger, and god shall give
unto me the victory, shall I be your head? He did not straight way give credit
to their first words: because he feared least they would not keep promise,
which had before done him such hurt: nether works he these things privily
with them, but in a place most famous, What place Mizpa was.
namely in Mizpa. There in the old time the kings of Chanaan assembled
against Joshua, whom when he had vanquished, and returned with the victory, he
built in the same place an altar to the Lord. Whefore it was a custom from
that time, that they which should take war in hand should assemble thither:
whereunto this also is to be added, yt Iiphtah (as we shall afterward
understand) dwelled there. He would also have them to swear, that the promises
might be the more certain, as by that appears which follows: God hear
between me and you. For to swear is nothing else, then to call God for a
witness of those things, which either we affirm, or deny.

But the request of Iiphtah is not ambicious. For that vice then has place,
when the office of a magistrate is sought by bribery, Iiphtah is not guilty or
ambicion.
deceit, corruption and evil arts. But when a man sees himself to be called
unto it, and that he may profit the pub. wealth, and understands that he can
obtain the office of a magistrate upon an honest condition, it can not be
said that he does it ambiciouslye. Iiphtah is now chosen, to endaunger
himself for his country, to fight against the enemies of god, A comparison
between Abimelech and Iiphtah.
he uses no bribery nor deceat: Wherefore he is far from ambition. But
Abimelech did far otherwise behave himself, he slew his brethren, did
violence unto the Sechemites, and took away the holy money.

But Iiphtah although he were reprochfully handled of his own friends, yet he
slays them not, neither did he sollicyte the Gileadites to create him
ruler, only he promises that he will go to the battle, so that they would
perform that which of their own accord they offered.

A question, whether these men's doyinges were lawful.
But here may justly be demanded, how it was lawful for them to give the
principality unto Iiphtah, or for him to take it upon him, being Mamzer. For
the law commanded that no Mamzer should not enter into the congregation of god
which was, either to take upon him any sacred ministry, or else the office of a
magistrate. Undoubtedly none of the Hebrewe, Greek and lattin interpreters,
that I know of, once marked this doubt. But I think herein may two reasons be
alleged. First, although the law seems to be violated, yet god, who was
the author of the law, would at thime time by this privilege have infringed.
And we may understand that they were admonished by an oracle, to choose him
prince, which should first set upon the enemies, whatsoever he were. This if
they received by the inspiration of god, then were they free from the law: for
they might think with themselves, that God made the law for men, and not for
himself. This is a singular privilege of god, wherein he commanded that
whosoever fought first, should be made the head. Iiphtah fought: Wherefore by
the covenant and judgment of God, it was necessary that he should be chosen
the head. But what if without any oracle they had determined this thing only
by judgment among themselves? Sinned they or no in making a bastard their
captain? No verily. For this is to be observed in all precepts, What is to be
done when two precepts for one time are contrary one to an other.
as well ceremonial as judicial and moral, when two precepts of god do seem
to be contrary one to an other, so that the one is a let unto the other, that
they cannot both be observed at one time, yea rather it is necessary that the
one of the^ be for that time omitted, then that which shall be judged to be more
weyghtye and better is to be retained. And yet in the mean time is not that
other which is counted of les value violated: because there in is nothing done
against the will of god. The law commands every man to defend the health of
his neighbor, and if a man be magistrate, A similitude.
to defend his city by municions. The same law commands not to labor on the
Sabbath day. The enemy beisegeth the city and that on the Sabbath day,
because he knows that that law is laid upon the citizens. Here seems
contrariety of precepts: for on the one part health is to be defended, and on
the other part the Sabbath is to be observed. The Machabites judged it best to
fight, because the health of the public wealth seemed greater and of
antiquitye, An other similitude.
then the ceremony of the Sabbath. Also the law is to feed the hungry, and an
other law commands, that the show bread should be eaten of none, but of the
priests only. David being hungry comes unto the priest, he has nothing but
the show bread: wherefore two contrary precepts come together. But the wise
priest follows and observes that which is the greater, namely to feed the
hungrye, and brings forth the show bread, and helps David. Also there is an
other law, The iii. similitude.
that we must minister weapons unto the Magistrate, For he must be helped of
his subjects. And it is contrarily ordained that things consecrated unto god
shall not be transferred to other uses. David the kings son in law, and his
captain which made wars for him, as the chief of his warrefare, was then
unarmed, the priest had no wepon at hand, but only the sword of Goliath. Here
ar two precepts which seem contrary, the priest follows the one, and gives
unto the magistrate the sword, because he judged it better to arm the
magistrate, then to observe the ceremony. There is also a law that the church
should not be without ministers, so that it should be destitute of them. The
fourth similitude
And there is an other law in Paul that Neophytus, that is, a man newelye
entered into Christian relygion, should not be made a bishop. The church of
Myllan was without a bishop, neither could it find a mete bishop, which was
both pure from the sect of the Arrians, and there withal had also great
authority and doctrine of god. There is none but Ambrose, but he is Neophitus
and Catechumenus. Ambrose a Neophite and newly instructed in religion is made a
bishop.
Here do two laws mete together, which in show seem contrary: but it was
mete that the less law should give place unto the greater. For Christ so
taught, when by the sentence of the prophet he said: I will have mercy and not
Sacrifice. And yet he does not say that he will not have sacrifice, but if two
precepts meet together, whereof the one is of mercy, and the other of
sacrifice, he testifies that he had rather have mercy then sacrifice. So it
seems was now don as touching Iiphtah, that when two laws urged, the one to
defend the city from strangers: and the other that a bastard should not be
made a Magistrate, that law was to be observed, which served best for the
safety of the city.

12 Then Iiphtah sent messengers unto the king of the children of Ammon,
saying: what haste thou to do with me that thou art come against me, to
fight in my land?

13 And the king of the children of Ammon aunsweared unto the messengers of
Iiphtah: because Israel took my land, when they came from Egipte, from
Arnon, even to Iaboc, and unto Iarden, now therefore restore them with peace.

14 Yet Iiphtah sent messengers again unto the king of the children of Ammon.

15 And said unto him: Thus says Iiphtah, Israel took not the land of Moab,
nor the land of the children of Ammon.

16 But when Israel came up from Egipte, and walked through the wilderness,
even to the Sea Suph, then they came to Cades.

17 And Israel sent messengers unto the king of Edom saying: Let me, I
pray thee, go through thy land. But the King of Edome would not consent.
And also they sent unto the King of Moab, but he would not. Therefore
Israel abode in Cades.

18. Then they went through the wilderness, and compassed the Land of Edome,
and the Land of Moab, and came by the East side of the Land of Moab, and
pytched beyond Arnon: neither came they within the coaste of Moab. For Arnon
was the border of Moab.

19 Wherefore Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Ammorhites, and
king of Hebron, and Israel said unto him: Let us pass, we pray thee, by thy
land into our place.

20 But Sihon trusted not Israel, to go thorough his coaste, but Sihon
gathered together all his people, and pitched in Iaaz, and fought against
Israel.

21. And the Lord GOD of Israel gave Sihon and all his people into the hands
of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all the land of the
Ammorrhites, the inhabitants of that country.

22 And they possessed all the coaste of the Ammorhites from Arnon even to
Iaboc, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan.

23 Now therefore the Lord GOD of Israel has cast out the Ammorhites
before his people Israel, and should thou possess it?

24 Would not thou possess that which Chemos thy God gives thee to
possess? So whomesoeuer the Lord our God drives out before us, them will we
possess.

25. And art thou now far better then Balac the son of Zippor king of
Moab? Did not he strive with Israel? Did not he fight against them?

26. When Israel dwelte in Hesbon and in her towns, and in Aroer, and in her
Towns, and in all the Cities that are by the coasts of Arnon.300. years? Why
did ye not then recover them in that space?

27 Wherefore I have not offended thee: but thou do me wrong to war
against me. The Lord the Judge be Judge this day between the children of
Israel, and the children of Ammon.

28 Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the words of
Iiphtaph, which he had sent him.


When Iiphtah by his messengers says unto the king of Ammon: what have thou to
do with me? he uses a phrase very much used of the Hebrews. He inquireth the
cause, as though he would have said: why inuadest thou our lands? what
discord or injuries are there between thee and me? The king of the Ammonites
answered, that he therefore made war, because the Israelites did him injury,
which took away his lands, namely from the borders of Arnon, even to Iaboc
and Iarden. He complayneth that all that coast was taken from him, which was
between those rivers. This he pretends to be the cause of the war. And he
desired that they would restore peaceablye, that is, without war, that which
they had taken away from him. He seems to promise that he will leave of from
war, if the Israelites would perform this. Iiphtah denies that the thing
is so: We have not taken away (says he) your land. And brings a reason:
Because when the Israelites came up out of Egypt, they of their own will sent
messengers unto the king of Edom, that they might have leave to pass through
his borders: which thing he would not let them do: so far is it of that we
did them injury. The people abode in Cades: so much tempered they themselves
from violence and weapons. They went on the side of the land of Edom: for the
Edomites would not permit Israel, to go straight through the midst of their
country. Wherefore my people rather iourneyed with great labor, then that they
were troublesome unto any man. And pitched beyond Arnon. There were the ends
of Moab Wherefore ye can not complain that we did any man iniurye. Therefore
when the Israelites saw that they could not lead their host through the
borders of Edom or Moab, they sent unto Sihon king of the Amorhites: But he
would not: neither did he only deny them passage through his borders, but
also assembled an host, and pursued them. And the battle being joined, God
delivered him in to the hands of the Israelites. The Israelites possessed ye
land by the right of war.
Wherefore (says he) we have done thee no wrong: for this land we possess by
the right of war. Sihon assailed us with his power, and the victory fell on
our side: wherefore both he, and all his land by the right of war came into
our power.

And the Lord delivered. Wherefore, forasmuch as Israel by the right of war
succeeded Sihon, that land which thou desire, is not thine, but in the old
time pertained unto Sihon the king. Therefore when we occupied this land, thou
did not possess it, but the Amorhites.

Neither do we possess this land by the right of war only, They also
possessed it by the gift of God.
but also by the gift of God: for the Lord our God, which is Lord of al
kingdoms, has given it to us, and delivered it into our power. This is the
second reason that Iiptah uses: for by the first he only shows that those
places came unto him by the right of war, without any wrong doing. But some
man might say: It is well perceived that god gave it because he drove out the
Ammonits.
how know thou yt God gave thee this land: Because (says he) he expelled
the old inhabiters the Amorhites before us: and wylt thou succeed the
Amorhites? as though he would say, by what right? He brings an argument a
simili, that is from the like. You (says he) worship the God Chemos, and you
think you have your la^d by his benefit, and ye believe that ye possess it by
very good right: So we have received our land, not from an idol as you have,
but from the true God, Chemos the god of he Ammonites.
and we retain it by very good right. He calls not Chemos god, because he
believed that idol to be a god: but speaks in this manner, because they judged
that it was so.

Art thou better then Balac the son of Zippor? They possessed also by the
right of prescription.
This is the third reason. We possess it (says they) not only by the right
of war or gift, but also by the right of prescription: for we have had it
now in our hands this.300. years, and Balac though he were a mighty Prince,
and other also, never required it again: wherefore then do thou demand it
again, especially seeing we have had it so long time? That which we translate,
Art thou better? in Hebrew it is Tob tob. For because they want the comparatiue
degree, they use in steed of it a repeticion of the positive degree.

Why Balac fought against the Israelites.
Balac of whom he speaks, was he which hired Bileam to curse the Jews. And
when he fought against the Israelites, he did not therefore fight, because he
would wrest from them that land: this was only his intent, that they should
not enter into his borders.

Hesbon.
Hesbon was the kingly City of Sihon. There dwelled Israel and in all her
towns.300. years, and now at the last demaundest thou it again? If a man will
count the number of the years even to this time, he shall not fullye
find.300. years, but only.270. But so use they to do which prescribe any
thing by time, to add somewhat above the just number. Although the scripture
also is wont in supputacions, many times to follow the greater number. And.270.
years come nere unto.300. years, then to.200. years. And for that cause it
seems that the number should be put whole.

Wherefore Iiphtah concludes after this manner: I have not offended thee.
Because thou art the occasion of the war, and have showed thee my reasons:
now rests to put the matter in Gods hand, he will judge best. This was the
message of Iiphtah.

We must first entreat by messengers, before we go to weapons. Titus Liuius.
This Oration, as far as it appears, pertains unto the judicial kind, and
entreats of possession, and the reasons are laid forth. But now let us
mark that Iiphtah before he moves battle, sends messengers before. That is
a custom very laudable: For Titus Liuius writes in his first book, that it
was the manner of Rome, that before war was proclaimed against their enemies,
messengers were sent to complain of the injuries, and to require again the
things taken away. And if by their message they nothing profited, they
returned unto the Senate: who understanding the matter, proclaimed war by the
public assent. For wise men judged it not best, rashlye and sodainlye to fall
to wars. So Iiphtah, though he were a warlike and valiant man, yet would he
govern the matter wisely and moderatlye: For he was not so light brained as
many now adays are, who first prepare them selves to battle, and make a
bragging, before any man know that there is any war proclaimed. God thus
ordained in the.27. chap. of Deuteronomy. when thou shall come to any City, thou
shall first offer peace. So Iiphtah assayeth first to compose the matter by
words, before he goes to hand strokes. The king of Ammon alleges a cause in
deed, but it is but a fained cause: for first it was not the la^d of Ammon, but
of Moab, and the Amorhites drove them out, as the second chap. of Deuteronomy.
testifies. For Israel had none of their lands. For God had before said that
he would give nothing unto the Israelites, of that which pertained either to
the Edomites, or to the Ammonites, or to the Moabites: and when they offered no
wrong unto any man, Sihon the king of the Amorhites pursued them with an host,
and assayed to destroy them: but God gave the victory, wherein both Sihon was
slain, and his kingdom came to the Israelites. Wherefore it can not seem that
they did wrong unto the Ammonites: for that land at that time longed to the
Amorhites, which they before had taken away from the Moabites.

Whither the Israelites sent messengers unto the Moabites or no.
But in this place arises a doubt: for it is written that the Israelites sent
messengers unto the Moabites, and that is not found in the.21. chap. of Numb.
The Hebrew interpreters say, that that may be gathered out of the.2. chap. of
Deutr. where it is after this sort written: I sent messengers unto Sihon the
king of the Amorhites with words of peace, saying: Let us pass through thy
land, and we will go by the high way, we will not decline neither to the right
hand nor to the leaft. Sell us meat for money, for to eat, give us water for
money to drink. Only, give us leave to pass through, as did the children of
Esau, which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which dwell in Arre.

There are three principal points in this message: What were the chief points of
I phtahs me^sage.
for first Iiphtah answers that he possesses this land by the right of war,
secondly by gift, and lastly by prescription, I think it good to examine
these things singularly and aparte.

Of things which are taken by the right of wars.
AS touching the first, we learn that it may be, that some thing may be
claymed by the right of war, which may be confirmed both by man's laws, and
by the laws of God. But I will begin with man's laws. In the Digestes de
captiuis et postliminio reuersis in the law Postliminium: Postliminium, a law
by (...) we receive again (...) ^hich^ we lost^ in wars.
The things that we have lost in war, or in affairs of war, if we afterward
recover the same again, we shall possess them by the law Postliminium. For so
long as they are not recovered, they are possessed of our enemies. And this
right is toward those, which are declared to be enemies. But such were
declared to be enemies, against whom the people of Rome publikelye proclaimed
war, or they which publicly prohibited war against the people of Rome, as
it is had in the same title, in the law Hosts. For Pirates or thieves cannot by
this means attain to be owners, or possess any thing by the law of war.
For war ought to be made, to the end to attain something by the right of
war. And in the Digestes de acquirendo rerum dominio, in ye law Natural,
paragrapho the last. Such things as are taken from enemies, by the common law
of all men, agreing unto natural reason, are straightwaye made theirs which
take them. And thus the laws of man as touching this thing, are very manifest.

So is it also by the laws of God. Abraham, as it manifestlye appears in the
book of Genesis the.14. chap. made war against the.v. kings, which had led
away Lot prisoner. The battle being finished, their pray came into the
hands and power of Abraham: which may easelye be proved, because of that
pray he gave tithes unto Melchisedech. But it had not been lawful for him to
have given tithes of an other man's goods: therefore they were his own, of which
he gave. Wherefore we must believe that that pray was truly in his possession.
For in that he gave it to the king of Sodom, it was of his mere liberality: for
he was not thereunto compelled by the law. I could make mention, what things
Joshua, Othoniel, David, Solomon, and many other mo possessed by the right of
war. For when those Princes had the victory, War is a just work to
attain possession
the things taken from their enemies, came into their possession. But it is
not sufficient to make war, to claim something by the right thereof, but the
war also must be just. Because unless it be just, it is not war, but robbery.

But how shall we know when war is just or unjust? Whereby just war is known
from unjust. Augustine.
Augustine (as he is alleged in th.23. Question.2. chap. Notandum) writes
that his war between Sihon and ye Israelites was just. For they desired to
pass without hurt, through his kingdom, which thing by humane fellowship
should not have been denied them, especial seeing they had faithfully promised,
not to be troublesome to any man. This sentence of Augustine, the Gloser goes
about to defend, and that by civil laws. In the Digestes de aqua pluuia
cohercenda, in the law in summa, in the Paragraphe item varus, somethyng is
permitted in an other man's ground, so that it be done without the hurt of the
possessor. And in the Code D^ Seruitutibus, in the law per agrum, Maximianus
and Diocletianus do thus ordain: That no man can prohibit thee to use the
common high way. And that thing only did the Israelites desire: wherefore
being repulsed, they justly took war in hand. So much says the Gloser,
Whither a wa^ ought to be given unto an ho^t
whose reason does not so fully satisfy me. For that which Augustine speaks
of private men, may easily be admitted, and these things which are brought out
of the civil law, do seem also to be written concerning private men. But if a
man will lead an host through an other man's country, and if they faithfully
promise, not to be troublesome, yet, whether a way ought straightway to be
granted him, or whether he ought to be believed, it is not certain. They
promise (thou will say) that their host shall do no harm, but if they stand not
to their promises, then shall the land be in their power. Undoubtedly Julius
Caesar would not permit the Heluecians to pass through his Province, although
they promised, that they would pass without doing injury or hurt. The
Israelits tought justly against Sihon.
But I say that the war which the Israelites made against Sihon, was just,
but not therefore because he denied them leave to pass through his country,
but because he came out of his borders with his host, and willinglye offered
wrong unto the Israelites. For every man ought to defend both himself and his
against violence. That which Augustine brings, has some show, yet his
reason is not firm. For how could Sihon know certainly, whither the Isralites
would do him no hurt, especially they being so many in number? For there were
six hundred, three score and six thousand armed soldiers, and well appointed
to the battle. He might peradventure have permitted them to have passed. and
that safely, although not al of them together, but by bands. But seeing the
first reason before alleged is sufficient, we must not much labor for
Augustines sake.

What manner of war is just.
But now I will generally declare, what manner of war is counted just. Such a war
is counted just, which is taken in hand at the commandment of the
Magistrate, either to demand things again, or else to put away injuries, or to
revenge them, as it is had in the.23. question, the.2. chap. iustum, and they are the words of Isidorus. Isidorus
For first we must beware that war be not taken in hand by the authority of a
private man. But the causes wherefore war may iustlye be made, are these, to
require things taken away, or else to repulse injury. Whereunto is agreeable that
which Augustine writes in the same place in the chapter Dominus: Augustine.
Just war is that which is taken in hand to revenge injuries. After this manner
war is justly proclaimed against Cities, when they will not either render
things taken away, or amend those things which of theirs was unjustly done.
For if they will not punish the guilty, it is lawful for other to make war
against them. So al Israel took war in hand against Benjamin, that a most
filthy wicked crime should not remain unpunished. But Augustine adds, that
those wars also do in especial seem just, which are taken in hand by the
commandment of God, as are many which were done in the old Testament. For if
God command once to make war, we must not seek for any other cause of
justice. For God knows very well what is to be rendered unto every man. For
then both captain and soldiers are not so much to be counted authors of the
war, as ministers of God and of his law. And therefore when the people are
after this manner called to war, they ought not to neglect the commandment.
Augustine
Wherefore the same Augustine in his.205. epistle to Bonifacius the Earl, a man
of war, which at that time governed Affrike under Caesar: Thou ought not
(says he) to think, yt they which with weapons serve the publik wealth, ca^
not please God. This was the proposition, whereof afterward he brings reasons.
For David says he, made many wars, and yet was he dearly beloved of God.

And undoubtedly I could bring forth very many examples out of the old
testament. But the Anabaptists cry, that the old Testament pertains nothing
unto us. I will therefore make mention of those things which Augustine alleges
out of the new Testament. The Centurion came unto Christ, and desired him to
heal his servant which was sick: but Christ said he would come to his house.
The Ce^turion said: I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof:
but only say the word, and my servant shall be healed. And other words which
are red in the.8. chapter of Matthew. At the last Christ answered, that he
found not so much faith in Israel, no not in those which seemed most holy.
And the same man was a Centurion, and had soldiers under him: unto whom for
all that Christ ascribes a very good and most excellent faith. In the Acts
also of the Apostles, the.x. chapter, it is written that Cornelius so lived in
warfare, that the Angel testified of him, that his prayers were heard of God.
Yea and God also so regarded him, that at Peter's hand he heard the Gospel,
was baptized, and received the holy ghost. And the Soldiers when they came
unto John, to be baptized of him, as it is in the third chapter of Luke, asked
what they should do. John answered, ye shall do violence unto no man: be ye
content with your wages. Neither called he them back from warfare, but rather
confirmed them, when he commanded them to be content with their wages. The
same Augustine against Faustus in his.xxii. book, and.lxxiiii. chapter
says: The Lord was tempted of the Herodians, whither it were lawful to give
tribute unto Caesar, and he answered: Give unto Caesar that which is Cesars, and
the things that are of God, to God. By which words he would signifye
nothing else, but that tributes are to be given unto Princes. And tributes are
given, that Princes should use the swoorde, defend the right of the public
wealth, and make war, when need shall require. Which thing if it had not been
lawful, the Lord would never have commanded them to pay tributes unto them.

But to return to the Epistle of Augustine. In making of just war, says he,
What things are to be taken heed of in just wars.
many things are to be taken heed of. For it is not sufficient that the war
be just, except also the war be justly handled. Wherefore he admonishes his
Earl: when, says he, thou put on thine armor, remember that thy
strength is the gift of God, and determine with thy self not to abuse that
gift against God. Yea rather do this, fight for his laws and name, let
promises be kept even with enemies, but much more with friends, for whom thou
make war. By which words he reprehendeth those Soldiers, which are
more grievous in Cities, then the very enemies, of which we see in our days a
great many mo then we would, which when they are in their places where they
winter, it is wonderful to see how they handle the Citezens, and the men of
the country: it is horrible to see what filthy and abominable things they
commit. He adds also the third caution. Think with thy self that war
must not be made but for necessity. Wherefore let the mind always be inclined
unto peace. Make war, because thou can not otherwise do: but if thou can
make peace, refuse it not.

War is taken in hand only to amend things amysse. Yea, and the Apostles
afflicted certain, that they might become the better. Paul said unto the
Corrinthians, deliver such a one to Satan to the destruction of the flesh,
that the spirit may be saved. And to Timothe he says of Hymeneus and
Alexander, I have delivered them to Satan, to learn not to curse. So ought
they also to restrain Princes, that they may be made better. Augustine also
in his.xix. Augustine.
book De ciuitate dei, says, that wars though they be never so just, yet
unto godly men, they seem both troublesome and grievous: for besides other
things which the nature of man escheweth, they shall see the iniquity of their
adversaries side, for which they are compelled to fight: and they cannot but be
sorye for it. And in the Epistle before alleged: Rage not, says he, nor
wax not insolent against those that submyt them selves, but show mercy to
those that are overcome. Wherefore Virgil says: Spare them that submit them
selves, Virgil.
and destroy the proud.

Moreover he admonishes the same Earl, to beware of vices, which are wont to
follow hosts, namelye of filthy lust, of ravenous pyllynge, and of
drunkenness. For it is a thing most vile for thee therefore to make war, to
amend the vices of others, when as thou in the mean time art a great deal
more vicious, and much more art overcome both with affections and diseases,
then they are which are overcome.

For in war we reprove not the end, but the desire to hurt, the crueltye of
auengement, the outragiousnesse of rebelling, and the lust of bearing dominion.
These things says he, are condemned. For they, which forsaking such vices
do make just war, are the Ministers of God and of the laws. The same father
against Faustus Manicheus: This order says he, is to be kept, that the war be
proclaimed, either of God, or of Princes, to break the pride of man, and to
came the stubburne.

Farther, the Soldiers ought to be persuaded, that the war is iustlye
made, and not taken in hand against the word of God: otherwise let them not
fight. Neither do I to this end speak these things, because I would have
Soldiers to understand the secrets of Princes, but that knowing and wittingly
they suffer not themselves to fight against true and just causes. Yet it may be
(says Augustine) that the Prince may make war against his conscience, and
yet his Soldiers nothing offend, so long as they obey the ordinarye power.
For the people must obey their Prince. And in their so doing, it may be
doubtful unto them, whether their Prince make war contrary to the
commandment of God. But they are excused, so long as they obey their own
Prince in a doubtful cause, their own Prince I say, and not a strange Prince.
Wherefore those hired Soldiers can not be excused, which having no respect
unto the cause, Against hired Soldiers.
but only for money and rewards sake do serve strange Princes. Wherefore
Iiphtah thus reasoned, as touching the first point of his Oracion, we have
taken the land by the right of war: therefore thou unjustly requirest the
same of us.

The next point is, our God has given it unto us, which is the Lord and
distributer of all things humane. He brinketh his argument from the gift of
God. God is ye distributer of kingdoms. Virgil.
And that God might give and distribute kingdoms, the very Ethnike authors
also saw. And therefore in Virgil Eneas does so often boast, that he by the
commandment of God went into Italy, and for that cause would not abide either
at Carthage, or in Sicilia, when he might have obtained either of those
kingdoms. Augustine
Augustine in his.v. book De ciuitate dei, the.xxviii. chap. Of kingdoms
says he, and Provinces it is certain that God distributeth them, both when,
and how much, and to whom he will: and that by secret judgments, but not
unjust. In the book of Genesis, God promised unto Abraham and his posterity,
the land of Chanaan: but he promised it after four hundred years. Now, says
he, I will not give it, for as yet the sins of the Chananites are not full. I
will not cast them out now, but I will tarry till their iniquitye be come to the
highest: afterward I will bring you in. Also in the second chapter of
Deutronomy, it is written that the Horites dwelled in mount Seir, which were
men expert in wars and very valiant, whom God says he drove out of those
mountains, that the Children of Esau might possess the land. And in the same
chapter he testifies that he did cast out the people of Emim, and gave their
kingdoms unto the Ammonites, and drove out Zanzumim out of their places, and
placed the Moabites there.

If thou wylt say, that this was done by God peculiarly against these nacious,
because the Edomites had their offspring of Esau, the Ammonites and Moabites of
Lot, which was kynsman unto Abraham, and had together with him accomplished
most dangerous viages: I answer, the same may be said also in the same place
of other nations, which came not of Abrahrm. The Capadocians drove out the
Heuites which were the first inhabiters, who going out of Capadocia, How
regions are said to be divided by lot.
destroyed them, and in their place inhabited those Regions. And in Deuteronomy
the.xxxii. chapter it is written, when God by lot divided the Gentiles, and the
people according to the number of the Children of Israel. In that it is said
to be done by lot, all that is to be referred unto our understanding, which see
not the causes of things. But with God nothing is done by lot. God has
distributed the nations according to the number of the children of Israel. For
the Israelites were not yet increased, when God put the people in those
Regions, who at the last gave place unto the Israelites when they came.

Neither ought we to be offended, if by this distribution oftentimes fertile and
fat lands happen unto the ungodly. For Augustine in his.4. Augustine.
book De ciuitate dei, the.xxxiii. chapter, says: That gifts which dure but
for a time, happen both to the just and unjust. For God makes his sun to
shine, both upon the good and the evil, and rayneth upon the just and unjust.
But by this common benefit the godly have this commoditye only, that they
understand that these things are not the chiefest gifts which we ought to
look for, because these are common both to the good and to the evil. But the
godly wait for other more excellent, which are not common to the good and
evil. Yea and Danyel says: The name of the Lord be blessed for ever: for it
is he which transferreth kingdoms, and drives out the first inhabiters, and
brings in other. Neither does he only bring men into Provinces, but also
sets Angels to rule over them, as we there read of the Prince of the
Persians and Grecians. And he has not only divided men by lands, but also by
tounges and manners. Farther, we must remember that these mutacions were not
done only at the beginning, but also in the latter times. For the French men
possessed Gallia, and the English Saxones Britane. but the Britanes heing cast
out by them, found new places in Gallia by power and violence, and that part
which they obtained, they called Britane of them selves. The men of Gallia
also of late, going out of their own borders, possessed a great part of Italy.
The Hunnes subdued unto themselves the Pannonites, and called the Country
Hungaria. So God distributeth kingdoms, casts out some, and brings in
other some, as it seems good unto his just judgment, which is secret. For
the earth is the Lords, and the fulness thereof. This distribution chanced
even from the beginning to the sons of Noe, and afterward to those which
builded the Tower of Babel: for God dispersed them throughout the whole world.

Now I will declare by what means God is wont to give kingdoms. God
distributeth kingdom^ of his mere liberality.
He gives them of his own liberalitye, no right compelling him thereunto.
That is the true manner of gift, which otherwise is not a gift, unless it be
free. And yet nothing lets, but that God by the duties and obedience of
godly men, may be provoked to give. He gives in deed often times many
things unto godly men, but yet of no duty. For there has been none at any
time so godly, that he could desire any thing of God, as his own by right.
For he must do his duty, though God give nothing. And yet is a gift a
certain reward, which although it be free, and given without any right
compelling thereunto, nevertheless, because it is after a sort bestowed upon
duties, it has a show of a reward. So in Ezechiel God gave a gift unto the
king of Babylon. Because (says he) he labored in the siege of Tire, I will
give unto him the land of Egypt.

There ar also amongst men recompenses, A gift in way^ of reward,
when one office is reco^penced with an other office. These also are
voluntarye, neither can they be demanded by judicial action, and therefore
they are counted among gifts. But we have nothing which we can give unto him.
We have nothing to give unto God.
Wherefore if we attempt to bring any thing unto him, we render unto him his
own. And therefore there is no respect of merit to be referred in us toward
him. Wherefore God gives liberally, no law compelling him thereunto.

Gifts may be revoked.
But it may be demanded, whether such gifts may be revoked? Why should they
not? when as the gifts of men also are sometimes revoked, as it is in the Code
De reuocatione donacionum. First, if they have conditions annexed to them,
which have not been performed. And after that manner undoubtedly God gave the
land of Chanaan to the Children of Israel, namelye that they should
woorshyppe him, not only in ceremonies, but also in good manners and holiness.
But seeing this condition was not performed, God iustlye revoked his gift, and
led them away captive, and gave the land unto the Babilonians, Assirians,
Egiptians, and Romans.

A great ingratitude also of him that is endued with the gift, debilitateth
the gift: for if he be so ingrate, that he will be contumelious and
reprochefull unto the geuer, the gift is then revoked. So God in Ezechiel
complayneth: I have clothed thee with vestures and garments of sundry
colors: thou haste made those proper unto Idolles, and haste given them to
Baal. Therefore will I take away my garments from thee, Gifts of God are
without repentance.
and my clothings of sundry colors. etc But thou wylt say, the gifts and
vocation of God are without repentance, as it is written to the Romans. I
grant that: but the changing is in us, and not in God. For if we shall
continue thankful, and stand to the conditions, the gift should be firm
and ratefied. Farther, Paul in that sentence spoke of gifts and calling,
which come unto men by the eternal predestination of God, and not of those
which are given but only for a time. Wherefore seeing God had not for the
causes before rehearsed, cast out the Israelites from the land of Chanaan, the
gift remained ratefied and whole. And Iiphtahs argument drawn of it, has his
strength and sure foundation. Moreover it may also seem that God gave that
land unto the Israelites in the name of a dowry: for he would after a sort
wedde unto himself the Church of the Jews, The land was given unto the
Israelits with out any injury to the Chananites.
and give unto it somewhat for a dowry. And yet gave he not that land unto
them, to the injury of the Chananites. For they were ungodly, and defiled with
most grievous wicked acts, as it appears in the.xx. chap. of Numbers.
Neither could they complain that they were cast out wrongfullye: wherefore
Iiphtah does very well make his argument from the gift of God.

He adds farther the third argument, derived from prescription: We have now
(says he) possessed this land three hundred years. Therefore thou do us
injury, in requiring it now of us at the last.

Of Prescription.
Why the law of prescription was brought in
HEreby we gather that the right of prescription is no new thing, but a thing
grafted of God himself in the hearts of men.

But why it was found out, I will in few words declare. It may be, that a
man may possess an other man's thing vnwittinglye. As for example: There is an
heir which succeeds him that is dead, and among his goods he finds
somethinges that were usurped by the former, while he lived, or received for a
pledge, which he being ignorant of, possesses all those things with a good
mind. And so being ignorant and unwitting, possesses an other man's thing as
his own. What then? shall the heir never seek for the just possession
thereof? If the true owner do never require his thing, ought the ignorant to
defraude the heir for ever, that he should never possess again that thing
as his own? For if the owner never demand his own thing again, that is to
be ascribed unto his own slothe and slouggishe negligence. Wherefore in
detestacion of such slouggishnes, and in commendacion of an vprighte faith,
and lastly for public peace sake, the law of prescription was found out.
Iiphtah now uses this law against the Ammonites.

We says he, have possessed this land this three hundred years. Why then
do thou make this garboyle and tumult against us? Except some certain time
were appointed, within the space whereof, and not beyond, things might be
demanded again, the possession of all things should be uncertain: but from
that humane things does wonderfullye abhor. Wherefore this evil is remedyed
by the right of prescription. The difinition of prescription.
And it is defined in the Digestes de vsucapionibus, law.iii. that it is an
addiction or claim of dominion by continuacion of possession, by the time
appointed by the law. The difinition is plain and manifest. But in these
days they make a difference between prescription and vsucapione, when yet in
the Digestes, and among the old Lawyers they were not separated.

In the time of Antonius Pius (as I remember) these began first to be
separated, so that vsucapio takes place in things moveable, What difference
is between prescription and vsucapio.
and prescription in things immovable. But thus much by the way. But in our
historye this is to be marked, that Iiphtah does wisely divide his arguments:
for he does not first place the law of prescription, but before all things
he obiecteth the right of war, afterward the gift of the true God: and his
cause being so confirmed, at the last he uses the law of prescription. And
that he does therefore, because a possession continued, does not by it self
and alone prescribe: What things are required to the right of prescription.
but it has need of a good title, and an upright faith. A good title is, that
the thing be gotten by right order and lawful manner. For he that has gotten
any thing by theft or rapine, although he have long possessed it, yet it
prescribes not. But if both the title be good, and his faith upright, and
continuance of time be added, the prescription is firm and good. If we have
gotten any thing, either by bying, or by gift, or by inheritance, or such
like ways, the title is good: but farther we have need of an upright faith,
whereby we are assured in our selves, that no man's right is injured, and that
we know that there is nothing which may by just means let us. Wherefore
Iiphtah has a good title, the right of war, and the gift of God. He
possesses also with an vpryght faith, because he means neither fraud nor
rapine. Wherefore he very well uses the law of prescription.

But the time of prescription in things moveable, Of the time of prescription.
is as touching our civil laws three years: but in things immovable, ten
or twentye years, if ignorance happen not. For if the owner know that it is
his own thing which is possessed of an other, and he hold his peace so long,
he cannot afterward demand it again. And the law seems iustlye to
punish such negligence. But if the owner be ignorant, the time is farther
proroged, namely to thirtye or fortye years. And this is done when ignorance
happens, and that he possesses it for himself, and not for an other:
otherwise it is no prescription. Howbeit this we must know by the way, that
the Ecclesiastical Canons, as touching prescription, do differ from the
civil laws. For they, as we have said, do appoint thirtye years, though
the possessor be of an evil faith. For they determine that evil faith cannot
let prescription. But as it is had in the.vi. De regulis iuris, chapter
Possessor. A possessor of an evil faith, prescribes by longnes of time. For we
should have a respect unto the word of God, and with what conscience a man
may possess any thing. These things have I alleged, that we might
understand, how Iiphtah uses the law of prescription.

Of Custom.
NOw because althinges are certain and manifest, I might return unto the
history. But yet I think it good somewhat to speak, although briefelye, of
Custom, because it has great affinitye with prescription, and because our
adversaries do stir up great tumultes, because of it, and would utterly
oppress us with Customs.

What custom is firm.
Custom (as it is had Extra. de Consuet. chapter the last) ought to be agreeable
unto reason, and lawfully prescribed. The civil laws assign unto custom ten
or twenty years, the Canons, thirty or forty years. But most firm is that
custom, Custom against the word of God, is of no force.
the memory of whose beginning is not extant among men. And this ought to be
firm, that those things which are against the word of God, do by no means
prescribe. Wherefore that which the Papists affirm, namelye that the Communion
has been given but under one kind this four hundredth or five hundredth
years: because it is manifestlye against the word of God, they cannot prove
that it is prescribed by custom. For such a thing is not (as you would say)
prescriptable. By which self same means they can not bring the custom of
the sole life of Ministers, as prescript: for it was at the beginning extort by
violence, Hostiensis.
and it is against the word of God: although Hostiensis says, that the
power of Custom is so great, that it compels Priests to sole life, What
custom is vicious.
in the distinction.xxiii. chapter Placuit. But, as the civil laws determine,
that Custom is vicious, which either is against nature, or else against the
common law. But that which I have affirmed, has his foundation in the holy
Scriptures. For when Christ said unto the Phariseis: Hipocrites, why violate ye
the commandment of God, because of your own tradicion? For God says: Honor
thy father, and thy mother. But you say: whosoever says to father or mother:
The gift. etc. they might have prescribed unto him custom, but it was not
lawful, because it was manifestly against the word of God.

In the country of Taurus there was a custom, to kill strangers and gests.
The Persians had a custom, never to deliberate of weighty matters, but in
feasts, and when they were drunk. Among the Sauromates there was a custom,
that when they were drinking, they sold their daughters. These prescribe not,
when as they are manifestly vicious and evil. But that custom prescribes,
which is neither against the word of God, nor the law of nature, nor the
common law. For the right of custom comes of the approbation, and secret
assent of the people. Otherwise, why are we bound unto laws? but because they
were made, What difference is between a law and a custom. Aristotle.
the people consenting and agreing unto them? For this is the difference
between a custom and a law, because in the one is a secret assent, but in
the other an open assent. Wherefore such customs cannot be revoked without
danger. Aristotle in Politicis admonishes, that men which have learned to do
sinister things, ought not to be compelled to do things dextere. Wherefore in
things indifferent, and of no great value, custom is to be retained. It is an
old Proverb, (...), that is, Law and Country. For every region has certain
customs of their own, which cannot easelye be changed. But as it is said,
when they are against the word of God, or against nature, or the common
law, they do not prescribe. For then are they not customs, but beastly
cruelties.

It is very well read in the Digestes, De legibus and Senatusconsultis, in the
law de quibus: Augustine.
Custom without reason, has no force. And in the decrees, distinction
the.viii. chapter Veritate, Augustine says: The truth being found out, let
custom give place: let no man presume to prefer custom before truth and
reason. And in the next Canon, Christ said: I am the way, the truth and the
life, he said not, Ciprian. Aquarii were they which in the Eucharist, used
water in steed of wine.
I am the custom. Ciprian against ye * Aquarii. Let al custom, though it be
never so ancient, give place unto the truth, otherwise Peter when he was
reprehended of Paul to the Galathians, might have claymed custom, but he
asse^ted rather, that custom should give place unto the truth. Ciprian in the
same Epistle against the Aquarii: Custom (says he) without truth, is the
auncientnes of error: and the more it obteyneth, the more grievous it is. Let
the Papists therefore cease to brag of their customs, which are altogether
full both of error and also of ungodliness.

Moreover to establish a custom it is not sufficient, that some men do a
thing, or that a thing be often done, unless it be so done, that it be received
into a use, What establysheth custom.
and an institucion to be observed. For many things are done either rashely or
of necessity, which yet we will not have drawn into a custom. In the digestes
de Itinere, and actu priuato, in the law.1. and last. Grant that I go thorough
the field once, and again, and the third time, because peradventure the high
way is so foul, that a man can not pass thoroughe it. Whither, because I
sometimes go and return thorough thy field, do I therefore get unto my self
in it the right of dominion and servitude? No: for I intended not with that
mind to go thoroughe thy field, but because I was of necessity compelled
thereunto. In the decrees distinction the.1. chap. Consuetudo: Custom is said
to be a certain right, instituted by manners, which is taken for a law, when a
law fails. What custom is.
When in the first times of the Church, when tyrannes persecuted Christian
religion, godly men thorough fear were compelled to assemble together in
houses and caves by night, and in the dark, this assembly was by a certain
right and manner then instituted, counted lawful. But if we would, now that the
Church is constituted, worship God after the same manner, we should both be
derided and laughed at, and also it were not to be suffered. For they used not
that manner, to the end they would have it drawn into a custom, or that it
should be an institution which other men should follow. Ambrose being
Catechumenus, that is, newly converted to the Christian faith, and not
baptized, was chosen Bishop of Millan, and Nectarius of Constantinople and
peradventure other. Yet is it not lawful for us now to follow the same
custom, and to elect a Bishop, which neither has seen sacred services, nor
has been washed with the water of Baptism. But they did so. They did so in
deed, but compelled by necessity: because they had no other, which were both
learned and endewed with authority, who^ they might oppose against the Arria^s.

So is that easily confuted, An answer to an example of Eusebius.
which they are wont to bring out of the Hystory of Eusebius, for the
communicatyng under one kind, that Serapion sent a child, and commanded the
bread to be dipped in the wine. I could in deed expound that place otherwise:
but at this time it shall be sufficient to say, that that was not therefore so
done then, thereby to bring in a custom which should be imitated of others.
Wherefore custom is not made by examples, but by the assent, approbation, and
institution of the people. Otherwise there are in many places dronke^nes and
night robbynges. But these things, because they are not allowed of the people,
as institutions to be observed, have not the power of a custom.

And that the thing may the better be understand, An other definition of
custom. Hostiensis.
I will bring a definition of custom, which I found in Hostiensis, in the title
de Consuetudine. It is an use (says he) agreing with reason, allowed by the
common institution of them that use it, whose beginning is time out of mind,
or which is by a just time prescribed and confirmed, so that it is by no
contrary act interrupted, but allowed with contradictory judgment. This is
(as he thinks) a full definition. But in that he says: That that use ought
to be agreeing with reason, it is not sufficient, but first it is to be said,
that it ought to agree with the word of God, for that is to be counted for the
chiefest reason. Afterward, it must be allowed by the institution of the
people: for as much as it is not sufficient, that it be done either rashly, or
of necessity, or for some other cause, but it ought also to be allowed by the
assent and institution of the people, and of whose beginning there is no
mention, or that it is prescribed by a just time, and appointed by the laws,
neither is interrupted by any contrary action. For if the judge or prince shall
give judgment against it, the custom is broken, as it also happens in
prescriptio^, when a man is cast out of his possession, or ye matter is called
into law, and the matter is in plead, the prescription is broken. Also the
allowyng of the contradictory judgment ought to be had, that is, that when one
part alleges the custom, and an other part denies it, if it be pronounced
on the custom side, that does confirm it. But all these things, as I have
before said must be revoked unto the rule of the word of God.

A custom that is burdenous to the Church is not to be suffered. Augustine.
Now this only is to be added, which is had, Extra de Consuet. chap. 1. that a
custom can not be suffered, if it be burdenous to ye Church. Augustine also
co^playned, that in his time were so many new ceremonies and rites brought in,
that the Church was grievously burdened, and the state of Christians, at ye time
was nothing at all more tolerable then in the old time the state of ye Jews
was. That also we lay against our adversaries: that the Church should not be
burdened. This is their own law. Why do they not acknowledge their own
words? These things have I therefore mentioned that we might understand how
firm an argument Iiphtah used of Prescription, namely that the Israelites
possessed that land.300. years: which is much more firm and of greater
force, then if they had possessed it but.30. or.40. years. Now let us go to
the other part of the chap. wherein Iyphtahs victory against the Ammonites is
described.

29 Then the spirit of the Lord came upon Iiphtah: and he passed over to
Gilead, and to Manasseh, he passed over also Mizpa Gilead, and from Mizpa
Gilead he went to the children of Ammon.

30 And Iiphtah vowed a vow unto the Lord, and said: If thou shall deliver
the children of Ammon into mine hand.

31 Then that thing that comes out of the doors of my house to meet me, when
I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall be the Lords, or I will
offer it for a burnt offering.

32 And so Iiphtah went unto the children of Ammon, to fight against them, and
the Lord delivered them into his hands.

33 And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith, twenty
Cities, and eue^ to Abel, a very great region of vineyardes: Thus the children
of Ammon were humbled before the children of Israel.


Two Mizpas
Mizpa Gilead, is an other City, differyng from that Mizpa which lay in the
tribe of Judah. The spirit of the Lord, which is said to have come upon
Iiphtah, was the spirit of strength. For there are sundry gifts of the
spirit, as of Wisdom, of Understanding of Counsel, etc. Among which, also
is reckened the spirit of strength. Wherefore the Lord gave unto Iiphtah this
spirit, that is, all warlike might, as well of the mind as of the body, that
he might valiantly execute that war. But we know that those gifts, which
in schools are called gratuita that is free gifts, Fre gifts justify not.
do not justify: for they happen as well to the evil as to the good. But the
spirit of god is three manner of ways in men. First, in that he is god: for so
he is infinite, and is every where. Secondly he is in men by fre gifts, namely
of miracles, The holy ghost is thr^^ manner of ways in me^
wisdom, strength, etc. And these two ways he is as well in the evil as in
the good. But the third way he is men by sanctification, and renouation. And
this dwelling of the spirit of God is to be wished for of all the godly. God
had before ordained Iiphtah to he head over all the people of Israel: but yt
was unknown unto the people. And ye Gileadites when they made Iiphtah their
captain, thought nothing of a Judge which should govern all Israel. Here
God shows his judgment, when he inspired him with the gift of strength, yt
all men might understand that God had chosen him to be captain. Neither yet do
I thus say, that Iiphtah had the spirit of strength, as though he had not
also the spirit of sanctification, for as much as he might have both. But being
moved with this spirit of strength, he went out with a great courage, and
finished the thing valiantly. Captains w^r wont to vow.
But before he went to handstrokes, he vowed a vow unto god, as the History
declares. It was the manner of Captains, that when they should make any great
war, they vowed something to God, so that they got the victory. In Leui we
read ofte^tymes, yt the Romayne Captains vowed rich spoils, prays, temples,
and such like, either unto Jupiter, or unto Apollo, or to other Gods. So the
people of god (as it is written in the book of Numbers:) when king Adar invaded
them, they vowed to make his land Cherem. Now also Iiphtah voweth: but his
vow is confused, and defines no certain thing.

What soever (says he) shall come forth, that shall be the Lords, and shall be
sacrificed. There are some expositors, which think this letter Vau otherwise
a copulative, to make in this place a disjunction: as though he should have
said: Either it shall be sacrified unto the Lord, if it be of that kind, that it
may be sacrificed: or if it be not, yet it shall be the Lords, that is, it
shall be dedicated unto the Lord. And in deed D. Kimhi is of that opinion. Kimhi.
The like manner of speaking is there in these words: If a man strike father
and mother, he shall dye the death: for there also Vau is a disjunctive. And
the meaning is. If a man strike either father or mother, etc. Herein what I
think I do not declare, I will afterward entreat more largely of this matter.
It is not gathered by these words, Iiphtah vowed not by the inspiration of the
holy ghost.
ye Iiphtah made this vow by the inspiration of the holy ghost. The spirit in
deed moved him, valiantly to atchieue the enterprise, yet we read not that it
moved him, to make a vow.

The Latin translation has: That which shall first come forth, but ye word
first is not in the Hebrew, but must needs be understand: otherwise he had
bound all things that should come forth of his house. But as I have said it is
an ambigous and confused vow. For what if such a thing should have met him as
might neither have been sacrificed, nor dedicated to the Lord? What if a dog
had met Iiphtah at his return, as it is a loving beast, and oftentimes meets
his Lord returnyng home. But it is an unclean beast, neither may it be
sacrificed, nor redeemed with any price. It is wonderful that so great a
Captain was so ignorant of the law of God, that he vowed not more distinctly.
It may be said that the Israelites had so long time worshipped Baal under the
Ammonites, and other nations, that they had forgotten the worshipping of the
true God. But especially Iiphtah which was both a bastard, and a banished man,
and also a man of war, which kind of men do not so much think upon the
laws. Wherefore he voweth, but not according to the prescript of the law. It
was lawful to vow me^ also unto God.
But we must know that it was lawful for the Jews to vow men also unto
GOD, and to dedicate them unto him. Yea and the redemption of man is seized
in the law by the variety of kind and age. Hanna the mother of Samuel
dedicated him from a child to the divine worshyppyng, and it is very likely
that Helkana her husband allowed the vow.

But that which Interpreters say of the virginity of the daughter of Iiphtah,
it cannot be gathered by the words of the history. Yea rather it is not true:
although some Rabines were of that opinion, but yet without example and
testimony of the word of God, I know that that Hanna, of whom Luke makes
mention, was daily in prayers, and other women for prayers sake, watched
continually at the Tabernacle, and that the sons of Hely accompanied with
diverse of them, but the scripture testifies not of any that vowed chastity,
neither did God in the old Testament ever speak any thing of this kind of
vow. Wherefore this sentence: And I will offer it for a burnt offering, is an
interpretacion, for it expounds and contracteth the first part of the
Oration: It shall be the Lords. How shall it be the Lords? He declares how,
when he adds: And I will offer it for a burnt offering. Other make Vau a
disjunctive, The vow of Iiphtah was unwarily made
as I have before touched. But that is not certain. Neither is the vow
therefore excused, but that it was unawarely made. For there might easily have
met him a dog (as I before admonished) which could neither be sacrificed
unto GOD, nor dedicated unto him.

He went forth and smote. The victory is not here only described, but also
amplified, namely that there fell many in that battle, and that he ouerthrewe
twenty Cities, and subdewed under him the Ammonites.

34 Then Iiphtah coming to Mizpa to his house, behold his daughter came out
to mete him with timbrels and daunces which was his only child, and of him
self he had neither other son nor other daughter.

35 And when he saw her, he rent his garments and said: Alas, Alas my
daughter, thou have brought me low, and thou art among them that trouble me.
For I have opened my mouth unto the Lord and can not go back.

36 And she answered him: My father, if thou have opened thy mouth unto the
Lord, do unto me as thou have promised, seeing that the Lord has avenged thee
of thine enemies the children of Ammon.

37 And she said more over unto her father. Do thus much for me: suffer me two
months, that I may go down to the mountains and bewail my virginity, I and
my friends.

38 And he said. Go: And he sent her away two months. So she went with her
friends, and lamented her virginity upon the mountains.

39 But after the end of two months she returned to her father, who did to
her according to the vow, which he had vowed. Wherefore she had known no man,
and it was a custom in Israel.

40 The daughters of Israel went from time to time to lament the daughter of
Iiphtah the Gileadite, four days in a year.


When he had gotten the victory against his enemies, he returned home to Mizpa:
for there he dwelled. And therefore we heard before how he made the covenant
with the Gileadites before the Lord in Mizpa. Here let us note with how great
a moderation godly princes in those times made wars, they prolonged them no
longer then necessity required, but as soon as their enemies were tamed, they
strayghtway returned home. So also the dictator among the Romans, his enemies
being vanquished and all things accomplished according to his mind, he
straight way forsook his office of a Magistrate. Iiphtah is said not to have
had other children of himself: because peradventure he had by his wife
children in law. Yea and he might have children which were adopted. Of him
self he had begotten only this daughter. And this is put in, that we might
understand how heard and bitter it was unto him, to slaye his only
daughter. Things nobly done of princes were publicly song.
She went out to mete her father by the way with timbrelles and daunces, to
rejoice for his victory, and to singe a song of victory, for so were the
things that were nobly done by princes wont to be celebrated with daunces and
songs. The maiden also when Saul returned, came and met him with rejoicing.
And undoubtedly such reioysinges were nothing else then public geuyng of
thanks.

In that it is said, thou have brought me low, In Hebrew it is expressed by
this verb Caraa: as though it should have been said, thou have thrust me done
or thou have humbled me: of late I was puffed up with the victory which I
obtained against mine enemies, but thou have thrust me down, yea rather thou
have utterly destroyed me and brought me to nothing, for as much as my
posterity is undone, mine enemies did grievously vex me: and now thou my
daughter also art one of them which trouble and afflicte me.

I have opened my mouth. This is a circumscription or description of the vow.
He tare his garments, after the manner of the Hebrews, when they saw that
they were overwhelmed with any grievous calamity unlooked for, What the fearyng
of garments signifies.
they tare their garments, signifyeng that they were now subject unto the
anger of God, and not worthy to be covered with garments. I have opened my
mouth (says he.) The law of God in the book of Numbers, the.30. chapter
intreatynge of Vows, uses such a form of speaking, whereby might be
understand, What to open the mouth in vowyng signifies.
that the vow was conceived, not only in mind and purpose, but also
outwardly expressed by words. Wherefore they were called calfes of the lips,
which a man had promised to God, not only in mind, but also in voice. And I
can not go back (says he.) It is marvelous why he should say so. For in the
last chapter of Leuiticus are many things written of the redeemyng of vows,
which I will thus gather into a few. If any had vowed a man, it was lawful
to redeem him with a price, and there was an estimation set. And therefore it
was called the vow of estimation. For they vowed either themselves, or their
servants, or their children, and it was lawful for every manne to vow them
which he had in his power. From twenty years upward to sixty, they paid for
the male fifty sicles, for the female.30. From five years upward to twenty,
for the male they paid twenty sicles, and for the female ten. If a man had
vowed a house unto GOD, and would redeem it, the house was esteemed, and the
redemer added the fifth part besides the price. If a man had vowed a field,
the estimation was taken of the seed thereof, an Homer of Barley was esteemed
at fifty sicles of Silver. And how much nearer the year of Iubile was, so
much the more was there abated of the price. A clean beast being once vowed
ought utterly to be sacrificed, neither might it be redeemed: but if it had been
unclean, it might have been redeemed.

Wherefore seeing GOD did so diligently provide for the redeemyng of vows, how
does Iiphtah say, that his vow can not be revoked? This may be answered
two ways. First it might be, that Iiphtah as he was a man of war, so was
he ignoraunte of this manner of redeemyng of vows. Note the two manner of
vows.
An other way it may be answered, that he promised not the vow of
estimation, but Cherem, that is a curse. And this kind of vow never returned
to his owner, neither could it be converted to a profane use. Two kynds of the
vow Cherem.
A field after this manner dedicated, was always appointed for the
tabernacle: yea and asses and horses served the Lord, neither could they be
redeemed. So if a man had vowed to be a Nazarite all his life time, he was never
redeemed: although that were not in use. And unto this kind of vow pertayned,
if a man had made himself Cherem, because he never returned into liberty.
With such a vow was the City of Jericho bound, neither was it lawful for
the Jews to touch any of the things that were without life, pertaynyng to the
City which were under this vow. Therefore Achan sinned most grievously,
which took to himself some part thereof. But there was an other kind of
Cherem, which was not vowed but vowed to the death unto the Lord, and what
soever was after this Amalekites vowed, and Saul most bitterly reprehended,
because he had spared Agag their king, and saved some of their oxen on live.
Wherefore it may be that Iiphtah vowed, that whatsoever thing met him first out
of his house when he returned, should be slain. But he was very much deceived:
for this kind of vow had not place, but in wicked men, and such as were
declared to be the enemies of God: therefore he was not bound by this law of
vows to slaye his daughter. Wherefore in that he says, I can not call back,
if we understand it generally of vows, it is not true, because it was lawful
to redeem them, but if we have a respect unto Cherem, the person vowed ought to
be slain, if the vow had been of force: which thing could not have place in
this maiden, because she was not declared to be the enemy of God.

My father, If thou have opened thy mouth. The godlynes and obedience of this
daughter is very much commended: she obeys her father, and confirms the
vow. Do (says she) as thou have promised. For this was a great obedience, and
therefore she is praised of the fathers, Augustine. Ambrose.
Augustine I say and Ambrose. She might have justly not obeyed, seeing her
father had vowed so rashely, but it easily appears, what she had a respect
unto, for it is added: Seeing the Lord has avenged thee of thine enemies. She
had a regard only to the glory of GOD, as though she should have said: Seeing
the Lord has given thee the victory over thine enemies, it is not grievous to
me to dye. And God, seeing he has heard thee, seems to have allowed the vow.

But here aryseth a doubt: Why God heard this vow, when as it was unadvisedly
vowed. I answer. I doubt not but that God gave the victory: but that it was
given for the vow, it is not found by the words of the Hystory: otherwise we
should be compelled to allow this vow. The daughter does in deed obey the
father, but in the mean time she requires a little space, namely of two
months, that she might together with her fellow virgins comfort her self, and
bewail her virginity. But how is it said: That she would descend to the
mountains? For we go up to mountains, and not go down. Peradventure Iiphtahs
house was situate upon a mountain, and the maiden desired leave to discende to
the little hills under it: or peradventure she asked leave to go to an other
mountain, unto which she should go by a valley, and so we must understand
that she first descended, What was the bewayling of virginity.
and then afterward ascended. She bewailed her virginity. Because that seemed a
heavy and lamentable thing, that a virgin should dye, leaving no children behynd
her. For it was a certain curse, if any dyed without children. God had at the
beginning commanded men to multiply and fill the earth. Farther, the Hebrews
endeavored to augment the holy public wealth. They hoped also that Messiah
should be borne of their stock.

Ambrose. Two friends of Pithagoras school.
She returned at the time appointed. Ambrose says: That those two Pithagorians
were much to be praised, of which the one gave him self for a pledge for his
fellow, which was condemned to death: and the other for his friends sake
faithfully returned to death at the time appointed: but much more is this
maid to be commended, which after two months returned to her father, to be
slain, because she seemed to do that only of a zeal to godlynes, and the
worshippyng of God.

And it was a custom in Israel. The Hebrewe word is Choke and it signifies
a law not written, but a custom unwritten.

From time to time. That is from year to year: for it was a certain yearly
assemblye. This Hebrewe word Littenoth signifies to speak, to mourn, and
to comfort. The daughters of Israel went every year and bewailed, and seemed
to lamente, because that maiden was slain: for they would not have so great a
thing to be put in oblivion. And peradventure they did it to admonish the
parents, not to bind themselves hereafter with such a vow.

Of the Vow of Iiphtah.
Whether Iiphtah sinned in vowyng.
HEre seems to be demanded, whether Iiphtah sinned in so vowyng, and in
fulfyllyng his vow. It is a heard question, because it pertayneth not to the
law, but to the act. We know that in those times it was lawful to vow, but
what is to be thought of this act, nothing can be gathered by the words. It
is possible that he so vowed by the inspiration of GOD, which being a singular
example, ought not to be driven into imitation. As there are very many of this
kind in the holy Scriptures. There are which contend that Iiphtah did not in
very deed offer his daughter, but only punished her with civil death, namely in
separating her from the common co^uersatio^, so yt she lived only to god,
giving her self to prayers only, and living a part from other men. And they
seem to affirm that ye vow was Chere^, but not such, that the mayde^ should
be bounds to be killed: but yt she should live dedicated to God, and should
continually give her self to ye worshipping of god. And even as a field or
house vowed with this vow Cherem, could not be revoked unto the first owner:
so say they, this mayde^ being once dedicated unto the Lord, could not return
to her old estate.

David Kimhi in defe^ding this sentence brings these reasons. First he
weighs the words of Iiphtah, what soever comes out of my house, shall be ye
Lords, and I will offer it for a burnt offering. This letter Vau being a
conjunction copulative, as we have before said, he thinks to make a
proposition disiu^ctiue: as if it should have been said: If it be such a thing
as may be sacrificed, it shall be sacrificed: but if otherwise, it shall be the
Lords, and it shall be dedicated unto him. Farther he says yt ye mayde^ desired
space, to bewail her virginity: neither is it written to bewail her soul or
life. Wherefore it seems yt she bewailed this only, that she should want a
husband and children. But if she should have been offered up, she ought chiefly
to have lamented for her life. Lastly says he yt ye very words of ye history
declare this thing. For it is not said ye Iiphtah sacrificed her: but did
according to his vow. If he had killed her, it should have been written, And he
offered her a burnt offering to the Lord. Of the same opinion is R. L. ben
Gerson, and he adds, R.L. ben Gerson.
yt it is written in the text, And she knew no man. As though hereby might be
understand, what kind of sacrifice yt was. And he thinks ye Iiphtah builded a
house for her, where she should live a lone, and he permitted her fellow
virgins once in a year to go and se her, and bewail her virginity together
with her. And afterward he adds that a man so dedicated, ought not to live
without a wife, because the man is not subject unto the wife. Samuel, although
he were dedicated unto the Lord by the decree of his mother, yet had he wife
and children. But a woman being so dedicated could not marry: because it was
necessary that she should serve her husband, and if he removed any whether,
she should go together with him. And therefore it is written, that Iiphtah did
unto her according unto his vow, and she knew no man.

The same sentence Lyranus embraces, Lyra.
and there are of the new writers which are of great learning, which do
follow this interpretation. But Lyranus pondereth these words. And the
spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he says. That that spirit would not
have suffered Iiphtah to commit this murder. Farther he writes, that there
were two months space given, so that he might ask counsel of the Priests.
But it is, not very likely, that he asked not then Counsel of so weighty a
matter, or that they told him not that he might have redeemed his vow. Neither
is it probable that this Iiphtah constituted any thing rashely. when as the
Epistle to the Hebrews calls him holy. If thou will say: He did unto her as
he had vowed, but he had vowed a Sacrifice, and to offer what soever met him,
they will answer: He vowed in deed, but upon this condition, so that it were
lawful. But when his daughter met him, either he learned, or else he understood
yt it was not lawful. Wherefore if he had killed her, he had not accomplished
his vow, but should have contaminated himself. But on the contrary part it
seems wonderful that he was so abashed, and rent his garments, if the
maiden should not have been offered up. Farther, what should the virgins have
lamented her? For if she should not have been slain, there seemed no just
cause of mournyng. Moreover if her virginitye should have been offered unto
GOD, it should have been given with a willing mind and not with an unwilling
mind: What is chiefly regarded in vows.
and in rendryng vows this thing was chiefly regarded, to render them
wyllyngly and with a chierefull mind. Besides these things, Iiphtah had no
example in the scriptures, yt it was lawful for the father to bind his
daughter by a vow, to keep her virginity: but God contraryly promises
abundance of children unto the obseruers of the law, in Deuteronomy the.7.
and Exodus the.23. Wherefore that which God promised in the place of a great
benefit, the same could not be hyndred by a vow. Farthermore, the arguments
of the Rabines are cold and weak, as afterward shall be more abundantly
declared.

Paul in his.1. Epistle to the Corinthians the.7. chapter writes: If the
father shall determine firmly in his heart, having power over his own will, to
keep his virgin unmarried, he does well, etc. Why writes he having power over
his own will? If the maiden her self will, the father may keep her unmarried,
so that she consent. But Iiphtah knew nothing of the will of his daughter, when
he vowed, wherefore he ought not to think his vow to be ratified, when his
daughter met him. And if this kind of vow was not firm in the new testament,
it was of much les value in the old Testament, where the vow of virginity was
not known. But of this thing I have spoken more in my little book of Vows.

There were other which thought that Iiphtah did in very deed offer ye maiden,
which in these times ought not to seem so new and unaccustomed a thing. For God
required of Abraham to offer his son, and such a vow was thought of many to
be most acceptable unto God, and that opinion also did spread abroad among the
Ethnikes wherefore, this sentence is often spoken: Thou have assuaged the winds
with blood, and with ye virgin slain. There are works of Poets which make
mention of Pollixena and Iphigenia: and also Historyes of the Curtians and
Decians. And undoubtedly with this exposition agrees the Chaldey Paraphrast,
which among the Hebrews is in a manner in the same estimation and authority that
the holy scriptures are in. That Paraphrast says, that the maiden was
immolated: and reproves Iiphtah, because he asked not counsel of the high
priest. And the same thing do all the ancient Rabines think, which also
reprehe^d the high priest, because he of his own accord went not unto Iiphtah.
Josephus also is of their opinion. Josephus. Chrysostom. Jerome.
Chrysostom also writes many things of this matter, but altogether far
from the History: he follows allegories, so that in a manner no certaynty can
be gathered out of him. But Jerome writes against himself. In his Epistle to
Iulianus, he says that Iiphtah was numbered among the saints, because he
offered his daughter. But in his.1. book against Iouinianus he writes, after
the mind of the Hebrews, that because he made an evil vow by the dispensatio^
of god, he felt his error in ye death of his daughter. For there might have
met him either a dog, or an ass, which had hen wicked to have offered: and
so in one place he prayseth that, which in an other place he dispraiseth.

Ambrose.
Ambrose in his.3. book de Virginitate says, yt the maiden was in very deed
immolated, and he writes ye Iiphtah vowed not before the battle, but in the
fight, and in the very conflict, when things were doubtful. And he adds: I
do not allow ye murder, but I se a laudable fear, yt he would not violate his
promise yt he had made. And he says moreover, yt this act is to be co^ferred
with the work of Abraham. For Abraham, when he was about to kill his son, the
Lord cried out unto him: Now I know, yt thou love me. And he concludes, yt
after the same manner may Iiphtah be praised, because he showed by his example,
yt the oracle of god, wherein he commanded ye vows should be performed, was to
be preferred before children, although the only begotten child should be
killed. But he demau^deth, whether God have a respect unto persons, which
let Abraham, yt he should not offer up his son, but with stood not
Iiphtah. He denies ye God accepts persons, but it behooved (says he) to
declare unto Abraham, yt he delighted not in humane sacrifices. Afterward
succeeded the law, which in Deuteronomy. and Leui. prohibited the immolatio^ of
children. Wherefore the will of god was already declared both in Abraham, and in
the law, wherefore there neded no new oracle, or new prohibition. Farthermore,
he noted that in Iiphtah was not that perfection which was in Abraham. For
Abraham wept not, tare not his garments, deferred not two months, but
strayghtwaye went, and Isaac followed him. Therefore it is no marvel (says
he) if God prohibited not Iiphtah, for so much as he would punish his long
taryeng.

And in his third book de officiis the.12. chapter, he writes: I will never
be persuaded but that Iiphtah vowed unadvisedly, for so much as he afterward
repented. And he adds that in deed he allows not the act, but he says
that in a godly fear he fulfilled his vow, but in such sort, that he
appointed his posterity to lament it. He says farther, I can not accuse the
man, because it was necessary for him to pay that which he had vowed, but it
is a miserable necessitye (says he) which is paid with parricide: and it is
better not to vow, that thing which he will not, unto whom thou vowest. And
straight way he says: All promises are not to be kept: for eue^ god also
sometimes changes his will. By which words he alludeth unto the place which
is written in Numbers the.14. chapter, of the prayers of Moses.

Wherefore Ambrose is utterly of that sentence, to think that the maiden was
offered: and for that cause (as I have said) prefers her before the two
Pithagorians. And of her he says in his exhortation to virgins: She paid
with her blood the unadvised vow of her father. And upon the first Epistle
to the Corinthians the.15. chapter he says: In a thing which could not be
acceptable, he was found faithful, offryng his daughter, as he had foolishely
vowed. And again. The act is not allowed, but the perseueraunce of faith is
worthy to be brought forth for an example to follow.

But these words of Ambrose are not so lightly to be passed over: What things
are to be noted in the words of Ambrose.
for they can not be simply allowed, and as they be spoken of him. Yet have I
brought them, to show that he thought that the maiden was offered in very
deed. But in his words this first I mark, that he affirms a certain
godly fear to be in Iiphtah, whereby he was led to perform his vow: and that
children were not to be preferred before Religion: thirdly that Iiphtah was
found faithful in that thing, which could not be acceptable unto God. Lastly
that his perseverance of faith is brought forth for an example to follow.

As touching the first, I know not, how that may seem a godly fear, which
Godly fear drives not a man to commit parricide.
and that three or four times. There are in deed affections in us which are
grafted by god, but yet to virtues, and to do well. A fear, to eschew sins.
An anger, to punish wicked acts, etc. Wherefore fear, when it is applied unto
virtue, may be called godly: but if it serve for vice, it can not seem godly,
yea rather, What affections are to be counted godly.
it has a certain manner of ungodliness. Otherwise ye endeavor of Idolatrers
might be praised: for we see them diligently labor to worship god, but because
they apply not themselves to the sincere worshippyng of God, their endeavor can
not be called godly. So when that fear of Iiphtah drove him to commit
parricide, how could it be godly? If thou will say that by parricide he
understands not the sin, or the wicked act, but ye immolatio^ of his
daughter: I will demand, why he says yt he allows not the act? undoubtedly
if he ca^ not allow it, then perceaueth he yt it is sin.

But in that he says: That the love of children is les to be esteemed them
Religion. That is true: but that was no religion, but a foolish unadvised, and
rash vow. Neither is the love of children to be les esteemed then such
religion.

Thirdly he says, that he was found faithful. But what fidelity is there in
that thing, which could not be acceptable to God? If my servant should do
that which I had forbidden him, can he therein seem faithful?

But in that he calls the unchangeable mind of Iiphtah constancy, in my
judgment he erreth, when as rather it was wilfulnes, whereby he would needs
fulfill that which he had unadvisedly vowed: neither can perseverance in an
evil thing be called constancy. He attributes unto him a fear, which also
he calls a godly fear, and yet afterward he says that he repented. If he
repented him, he did against his conscience: but no man ought to do any thing
against it. For what is not of faith, is sin. Farther, if he repented, why
amended he not his fault? For if any thing had been done rashely, that ought to
have been amended. If GOD (as he says) do sometimes change his sentence, why
then is it not lawful for us to change a sentence that is not right?
Afterward he says: he can not but praise Iiphtah. But what will he praise? An
uncircumspect vow? But that ought rather to be reprehended. What, will he
praise the performaunce of the vow? But that he calls parricide, neither can
that be praised. I say therefore that Ambrose affirms, that the maiden was
in very deed immolated: and yet are not al his words to be allowed.

Augustine.
Let us hear now what Augustine says of this thing. In his question 29. upon
this book he writteth that out of this place, the enemies of the old
Testament, snatche occasion to speak evil of GOD the creator of the world.
For they called him both an evil GOD, and a cruel. Such were the Maniches,
Valentinians, Marcionites, and such like pestilences. When he delights (say
they) in the blood of man, how can he not but be cruel? Augustine
answers: God reioyseth not in blood.
So far is it of that GOD reioyseth in the blood of man, that he reioyseth
not even in the blood of beasts: only he suffered for a time that sacrifices
of beasts should be offered, by little and little to instruct men. But what the
Sacrifices of the Elders signified, which served to their erudition in that
place, What the sacrifices of the Elders signified.
he declares not, but I will in few words show it. First was set forth in
those Sacrifices, that the reward of sin is death. And that did he after a
sort testify, which brought the Sacrifice, namely that he had deserved to be
killed, but by the goodness of GOD his death was transferred to the Sacrifice.
By this means were the Elders instructed, that they should eschew sins.
Farther, those Sacrifices directed the minds of men unto Christ, and they
were certain visible sermons of him, and taught that Christ should be that
Sacrifice which should take away the sins of the world, and upon whom our
death and damnation should be transferred.

God might have required humane sacrifices.
Wherefore GOD of himself delyghted not in blood, but by this schoolyng he
instructed his people. Yea if he had delyghted in Sacrifices, he might have
required them of the number of men. For what should have let him, or what
injury should he have done us, if he would have had Sacrifices of men
offered unto him? For manne must needs sometimes dye. Wherefore to prevent the
time one year or two, it would not have been so grievous, neither should he
have done us any iniurye, chiefly when we should understand that with him we
should live for ever. Undoubtedly in this thing no man could have accused
GOD as cruel. But now seeing he has removed all those holy services, he
manifestly teaches that he reioyseth not, neither in the blood of men, God
would have the first borne of men redeemed, and not sacrificed.
nor in the blood of beasts. Yea the first borne of men, when they were
bound unto him, he would not have them Sacrificed, but redeemed with a price:
which he would not have done, if he had taken any pleasure in blood. In
Deuteromy the.12. chapter he says: The Nation which I will expel before
thee, do Sacrifice their sons and daughters: but see that thou do not so.

Certain kyllynges of men are acceptable unto God.
But Augustine demands farther, whether there be any slaughter of men which
is acceptable unto GOD? He answers that there is. But what slaughter? When
men (says he) are killed for ryghteousnes sake: not that the death of
Martyrs of it self pleases GOD, but because faith toward God and piety is by
that, Martyrdomes are like sacrifices.
both declared and also kept. And the death of Christ so pleased God, that it
redeemed the whole world: and the death of Christians which they suffer in
Christ's name, may be called after a sort a Sacrifice. Wherefore Paul in
the.2. to Timo. the last chapter writes, (...), that is, I sacrifice, etc. in
which saying he calls his death an immolation. And to the Phil. the.2. (...)
that is, The martirdomes of men make not satisfaction for sins.
but if I offer in an oblation and service of our faith. And yet do not such
sacrifices make satisfaction for sins: for that does the death of Christ
only. But the death of Martirs are acceptable, because the cause is
thankful. Augustine was baptized of Ambrose: and being wonderfully
affectioned toward him, he follows his opinion as his Scholemayster, as much
as he may, but somewhat more warely. He co^pareth Iiphtah with Abraham: but he
puts a difference, which Ambrose noted not. Abraham, says he, had the
word of god to sacrifice his son, so had not Iiphtah, yea rather he had the
law against him, that he should not sacrifice. And in Abraham not the death
pleased god, but the faith. Farther, there is great difference, for a man to do
any thing of himself, and to have a will to do those things that are
commanded him. And Augustine does subtly admonish, Iiphtah vowed an human^
sacrifice, as Augustine thinks.
that Iiphtah vowed an humane sacrifice, not deceived, but willinglye.
Whatsoever says he, shall come out of my house, I will offer it for a burnte
offringe etc. Do we think that beasts would come forth to meet him
returninge home? Men use to go and mete such as have the victory, and to
rejoice. Wherefore he vowed an humane sacrifice.

The scripture only makes mencyon of this act, but praises it not: as also
it is there written that Judas had to do with his daughter in law, but it is
not allowed. So there can nothing be gathered by these words, The rashenes of
the father is punished in the death of the children.
why the act of Iiphtah should be praised. Farther Augustine thinks with
Jerome, that god would punish the rashenes of the vow in the father, by the
death of his daughter. But there are two places, says he, why I cannot
reprehend Iiphtah. Because in the Epistle to ye Hebrews he is numbered among
the saints, and in this place it is written, that the spirit of the Lord was
upon him. But those holy men which are rekoned unto the Hebrews, did they
never sin? Undoubtedly their sins also ar set forth in the holy scriptures.
Gideon, who is in ye number, a little before his death made an Ephod, which was
ye destruction both of himself and of his house. But as touching the other
place: The sprite of the Lord came upon him. But this nothing lets, but
that afterward he might fall. But Iiphtah thou will say had the victory, but
Gidion after that act, nothing went well with him. Yea rather says he, Gideon
did before after a sort tempt God, and yet he had the victory. So much of
Augustine.

But I would say otherwise. For I agree not with Augustine, to think that
Gidion tempted God. Therefore I would answer after this manner: David committed
aduoutry, and straightway afterward obtained ye victory, and took ye city
Rabath-Ammon, in whose siege he prepared that Vrias should be slain. Saul
persecuted David, in the mean time there were brought him messengers from the
Philistians. He leaving David, went to war, and obtained the victory. Moses
sinned at the waters of strife: the people also had sinned many ways, and
yet they obtained the victory against Sihon and Og most mighty Kings.
Wherefore we will grant that Iiphtah was numbered among the Saints, and yet
he might sin, and although he sinned, he obtained the victory. And we will
grant that the sprite of the lord came upon him, but we have already
interpreted that it was the spirit of strength. And although the sprite of the
Lord was upon him, yet is it not of necessitye that he did all things by that
spirit. For we also which are Christians, have the sprite of Christ, when as
yet none of us is renewed in all parts, yea rather we all very oftentimes
sin.

Augustine adds moreover, that although the fathers sometimes sinned, yet if
nothing lets, but that god may use their sins, to signifye those things
which might instruct the people. For god is so good, that ever of sins he
picketh out laudable commodities, and makes them alligorically to declare what
seems profitable unto him. As in that Judas played the whoremonger with his
daughter in law, it signified that god would couple unto himself ye church,
which before was an harlot: so also may it be, that by this act of Iiphtah he
signified, that god so loved mankind that he would give his only begotten
son unto the death for it: for he did not in vain, and without any cause
suffer such a thing to be don by the fathers. Although they grievously sinned,
yet god could use their actions to the instruction of his people. They were
amassed at the sacrifices of beasts, neither did they as it was mete, lift up ye
eyes of their minds unto christ. Wherefore god would by this means stir up
the sluggish, that they should be enduced by the humayne sacrifice of Iiphtahs
daughter to think upon Christ. For he should give his life, and be made a
sacrifice for mankind.

Farthermore, Augustine touches a reason whereby he defends the act of
Iiphtah. It may be said, says he, that he was moved by the sprite of god to
make a vow, and led by the same spirit to perform it. Wherefore he is the more
worthy of praise, so far is it of, ye he should be reproved. But ye cannot be
gathered by the words of the history. But that which some say, as we have
before touched, he wept, tare his garments, and was excedingly sorye:
therefore he was not moved by the sprite of God: God so requires obedience
that he withdraws not affections.
this I say does not much move me. For god so requires of us the duties of
piety, that yet he withdraws not from our minds humayne affections. Christ
himself when he should willingly go to dye for our sakes, said for all that: my
soul is heavy even to the death. He prayed also, father, if it be possible,
let his cup go from me. But Augustine intends to declare how Iiphtah might be
defended: which I also would gladly do, if I had any part of the history to
help me. But that which follows in Augustine, is spoken to imitate Ambrose.
The error of Augustine.
For he writes: The error of Iiphtah has some praise of faith, which thing
(as I have before showed) can not be received. For if it were an error, then
can it not be ascribed unto the mocion of the holy ghost. Farther, if it were
sin, what praise of faith can there be in it? Because he feared not to render
that which he had promised. What if the vow were not lawful? Can faith be
there praised? Moreover he says: He declined not from the judgment of God,
and he hoped that he would have prohibited him, from killing of his daughter.
He would rather utterly perform the will of god, then contemn it. These
things were well spoken, if he had been assured of the will of God. But he was
not assured of it: yea rather god had otherwise prohibited it in his law.
Wherefore if it were an error, it ought not to be praised. But if the spirit
moved him, then was there in it no error. That which he afterward adds is
most true, and makes on my side. First he shows, that it was prohibited
that a man should kill his children, both by the example of Abraham and by the
law. Farther, why the maidens wept, he brings the same reason that I brought,
namely, both that the fathers should beware, not to bynd themselves with such a
vow, and that so great an obedience of this maiden should not be put in
oblivion. These things we have out of Augustine, by which words appears,
that he thought that this virgin was in very deed immolated, and not compelled
by the vow of chastitye to live alone. Which sentence I my self also do
altogether allow.

They which think otherwise, have not passing two or three authors, but I have
many which are on my side, and especially the ancient Rabbines, which lived
at that time, wherein the Chaldey Paraphraste, and the writing of the Thalmut
was made. Reasons which confirm the interpretation.
For the Chaldey Paraph. affirms, that the maiden was slain. Josephus,
Ambrosius, and Augustine are of the same opinion. And we have reasons reveled by
god, there remains no example of such a thing. Also by this interpretacion,
Paul admonishes yt he which cannot contain, Iiphtah tarried not for the
consent of the maiden before he vowed, without which (as I have before showed)
the vow of Virginity could not be ratified. I have opened my mouth (says he)
unto the Lord, and I cannot go back. Wherefore he vowed not the Virginitye of
the maiden, when as he asked not counsel of her. To this also serves the
weeping Rabbines, Kimhi and Ben Gerson, was this, because they will either
allow or excuse the act of Iiphtah. But we must not labor for that: not that
we would willinglye uncover the defaultes of the fathers, but because we see
that things which are not well done, are not to be excused. Moreover, also
this does not a litttle move me, because ye Jews at Iiphtah was in very deed
immolated.

But if it be demanded, whyther he sinned or no in doing this, The question
answered two ways.
it may be answered two manner of ways. First, because as he was a man, so
moughte he seem, as very many of the elders fell. Secondly, it may said, yt he
did this by the impulsion of the holy ghost, not as though god would have other
men to imitate this act, but that men might by it understand, that Christ
should dye for their salvation. It is indifferent for every man to chose either
of these aunsweres. But I think rather he fell. Now rests to confute the
arguments of the Rabbines.

In that they say the maiden was not killed of her father, but only punished with
civil death, namely that she should live a part from the followship of men with
out a husband and children, it is not well said: because it can not be proved by
the holy scriptures that there was any such kind of vow in the old time. I know
that there were Nazarites, which abstained from wine and strong drink, and
all drink which would make one drunk: but they abstained not from matrimony.
Samuel and Sampson being either of them a Nazarite, had wives, and Samuel had
children, as the holy history declares. But departinges from the company of
men, are not altogether to be disalowed, so that of them come some fruit unto
the church. Christ departed.40. days, and fasted: How departings from the
company of men are allowed or disalowed.
but afterward he returned to instruct the people. John Baptiste went a part,
but yet for certain days, and baptized and preached. So some of the fathers
went sometime a part, where they gave themselves both to prayers and godly
meditations, whereby they might return the better instructed to preach. But I
can in no case allow the perpetuitye of solitarye life: for we are not borne
to our selves, but to other also. But that in the old time there were some
which were Nazarites for ever, that was not don by the institution of man, but
by the commandment of God: which thing is written to have happened to Sampson
and John Baptist. Otherwise Nazarites vowed but only for a time. Wherefore that
which the Rabbines claim, is false: for there was no civil death by the law,
whereby men or women were for ever deprived of matrimonye.

Kimhi says that this letter Vau makes sometimes a proposition disjunctive. I
grant that the same is found in certain places of the scripture. But it is
not a fyrme argument, if we shall say: It is thus found in some places,
therefore it is so also in this place. But rather for the most part Vau makes
not a disjunctive proposition, but a copulative. And undoubtedly here it is
brought in by exposicion. It shall be the Lords says he. After what manner? For
I will offer it for a burnt offringe.

Farther they reason: The maiden desired space of time, wherein to bewail her
virginity: neither says she, her soul or life. This argument has a show, but
no strength. For if death be to be lamented, undoubtedly then is it much more
to be lamented when it has a bitter condition annexed with it. The maiden was
sure to dye at some certain time, but that seemed unto her very hard, that she
should dye without children. Therefore that condition is expressed, which made
the cause more miserable. He says moreover: It is not written that Iiphtah
offered her for a burnte offringe, but only that he did according to his vow.
I answer. That there is sufficientelye said, when it is said that he did
according to his vow. And it is often seen, that in narrations the sharpest
things are not expressed. And although the words be not all one, yet is it
sufficient, if they be equal.

Leui Ben Gerson reasons of this, that it is written, and she knew no man.
Therefore says he, she lived, but married not. But this reason has no force.
For this sentence is an exposition of the words that go before. For why did
the virgins bewail her? Because she was unmarried, and was not coupled to any
manne.

But Liranus says: The sprite of the Lord came upon Iiphtah, wherefore he
vowed not his daughter for a burnt offering. This reason Augustine (as we have
heard) aunsweareth. That spirit undoubtedly was the sprite of strength and
warrelike knowledge. Neither can all that Iiphtah afterward did, be said to have
come from the same spirit. Moreover says Liranus, there was two months
space between, wherein he asked counsel of the priests, and they gave him
counsel to save his daughter a Virgin. Yea but the ancient Jews affirm that
he was so stubburne that he would not ask counsel of the priests. And for
that cause he is reproved by the Chaldey Paraphrast. Neither is it any new
thing, that men sometimes sin, because they think not that they have need of
counsel, and that is wont most of al to happen unto princes. For they have a
high mind and proud stomachs, wherefore they think that they have counsel
enough. But he is numbered among the saints. To this Augustine aunsweareth
also, that other were also numbered among the Saints, which yet greuouslye
sinned. Lastly he says: If he had sacrificed his daughter, he should not have
fulfilled, but contaminated his vow. I grant that. Neither is it any marvel,
that he erred, seeing he was a man, and might fall.

Now should remain to declare what I think of vows in universal: but
because of that matter, I have written aboundauntly in an other place, namely
in my Apology against Smith, therefore I remitte the reader to read over that
book,

The.xii. Chapter.
1 ANd the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and passed over
Northward, and said unto Iiphtah: Why haste thou passed over to fight against
the children of Ammon, and haste not called us to go with the? We will
therefore burn thee and thine house with fire.

2 And Iiphtah said unto them: I and my people were at great strife with the
children of Ammon, and when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their
hands.

3 So when I saw ye delivered me not, I put my life in mine hands, and went
upon the children of Ammon. And the Lord has delivered them into mine hand.
But why are ye come upon me this day, to fight against me?

4 Then Iiphtah gathered all the men of Gilead, and fought against Ephraim.
And the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said: Ye Gileadites are
abiectes among the Ephramites, and among the Manassites.

5 And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephramites. And
when the Ephramites that were escaped said: Let me pass, the men of Gilead
said unto him: Art thou an Ephramite? If he said, Nay:

6 Then said they unto him: Say now Schiboleth: but he said Siboleth: for he
could not so pronounce. Then they took him and slew him at the passages of
Jordan, and there fell at that time of the Ephramites two and forty thousand.


HEre is a sedicion set forth unto us: The Ephraits were very proud
the cause whereof was the pride of the Ephramites, which was so great, that
they thought there was nothing which was not due unto them. Even the like did
they under Gideon, as we have before heard in the.viii. chap. But now are
they more insolent, for they would not be content with Iiphtahs defense. These
Ephramites also did the like when they instituted Jeroboam king, against the
house of David. They which are infected with pride, do evermore endeavor
themselves to be above other, Cicero.
and to excel them in dignity and other commodities. Cicero in his book de
Particionibus, says that Pride follows the loftynes of the mind, in
aduauncing of his own things. They which are proud, are swelled like bodies
that are puffed up, which have not sound flesh and sinoes, but consist of a
vain swelling. So the proud, although they excel not others in virtue, Pride
and noblenes of mind accompared together.
yet do they advance them selves above them. The true noblenes of the mind
consists herein, that we should contemn things vile, and be occupied about
those things, which ar in deed great things. But they that are proud have
not a noble mind, but a vain, for they study not for true glory, but for
vain glory, wherefore they are justly called vaynglorious. (...). Aristotle.
And they which are infected with this disease of the mind, the same men are
envious, as Aristotle teaches in his.2. book of Rethorikes, and he declares
that both the ambicious persons, and the vain glorious are envious. Which
thing Paul also to the Galathians confirms, where he says: be not ye made
desirous of vain glory, provoking and envying one an other. Of envy do
straightway spring sedicions. Wherefore by these two vices the Ephramites fell
into sedicion.

Were gathered together. Not undoubtedly by any order. For no lawful
Magistrate assembled them together, but they were tumultuouslye styrred up. And
they passed over Northwarde. For they passed over Iordane, to invade the
Galaadites.

Of Sedicion.
But that of hautines and pride do arise sedicions, the Apostle in the.2.
Pride is joined with sedicions.
to the Corrin. the.xii. chap. very well declares, (...), where he joins
hautynes with sedicions. In what thng this vice chiefly consists, appears
by the Code de sediciosis, in law.1. where it is thus had: They are counted
sedicious, which do gather the people without any certain commandment, and
do defend them against public discipline. Yea and also many things hereunto
belonging, may be had out of the Digestes, ad l. Iuliam de vi publica. In
sum, the^ chiefly is sedicion, when by a tumult, they which are of one and the
self same company and body, do mete out of sundry parts, to fight together.
This vice is in especial contrary to peace and civil concord. For in sedicion
there are many parts of one people, and the unity of Citizens is troubled
and endaungered.

Wherein the unity of citizens consists. Augustine.
But that we may know in what thing the unity of the people consists, let us
give ear unto Augustine in his second book De ciuitate dei, who in his xxi.
chapter brings something out of the books of Cicero de Repub. that are
worthy to be known, where Scipio thus speaks: Wise men called not every
company a people, What compani may be called a people.
but a company associated together by consent of the law, and communion of
vtility. Wherefore there are two hands of the people, one is that they agree
in the same laws of things divine and humane: the other is, that they have
among themselves a communion of public vtility. Whosoever rise up against
these things, may iustlye be called sedicious. Such tumultes when they
happen for doctrines of religion, or Ecclesiastical matters, are wont to be
called schisms. And they are more grievous offenders in this wicked crime,
namely of sedicion, which first have sowed the matter, the cause and seeds
thereof, although the other also which are adherentes unto the authors
thereof, are not unguilty.

And although the people are two parts at the least, which run together in
a sedicion with contrary minds, yet are not both parties guiltye of sedicion:
but only that part is to be accused of so great a wicked crime, which
inuadeth the bonds of unity, that is, common laws and public vtility. But
they which resist such troublesome men, are not to be counted sedicious, but
good Citizens. And hereby it is manifest, We are falsely accused of the
Papists as sedicious.
how falsely we are accused of the Papists as sedicious, when as in very deed
we desire to have the laws of Christian Religion, which have been even from
the beginning received by the word of God, to remain safe and perpecte: and
we by all means procure to reedify the public vtility of eternal salvation,
and of the woorshipping of God, which are on euerysyde fallen in decay, which
two things undoubtedly, pertain (as it is said) unto good Citizens. But they
have to their power overthrown these good things, and do continually hinder
them. Wherefore they are iustlye and woorthely both to be accused. and also to
be condemned of sedicion.

What are the punishments of sedicious persons.
But with what punishments this wicked crime is to be punished, it is easily
gathered, both out of the laws of God, and the laws of man. God punished
Dathan and Abiran with the opening of the earth, upon Core and his fellows he
sent fire, sometimes also he used the stinging of Serpents, and at length for
this wicked crime above al other of the number of the Israelites, which were
six hundred, three score and six thousand, when they came out of Egypt, there
diminished so many in the space of.40. years, that two only, namely Joshua
and Chaleb entered into the land of Chanaan. Also by the judgment of God
Absolon came unto an evil end, and Syba the son of Bichry, and Adonias,
which moved sedicion against David. But the Romans, as far as we can gather
out of Liui and Plutarch, did put to death the tenth man of sedicious
Soldiers. The Civil laws, as it is had in the Code, in the title De
Sedicionibus, l. 1. punished this wicked crime with extreme punishment, that is
to say, with cutting of the head: or if they had a respect unto the dignity or
condition of the person, they that were sedicious, were somtymes hanged on a
forke, and sometimes thrown to wild beasts, or banished into an Island, as it
is written in the Digestes, De paenis, in the law Si quis aliquid.

The ingratitude of the Ephramites against Iiphtah
Wherefore now that we have brieflye showed the causes of this troublesome
commocion, and have defined the crime of sedicion, and declared the
grieuousnesse thereof by the punishments, now let us see how ingrate the
Ephramites were against Iiphtah. He, seeing he had excellentlye well deserved
of Israel, they ought undoubtedly by the law of justice and honestye, to have
gone and met him, to have soong songs of victory, and with great honor and
praises have exalted and commended him. For as much as justice and honestye do
require this, that we should give thanks unto them, which have bestowed
benefits upon us. Nature follows this order, that we should convert the
effects into their causes, for as much as they have their conseruacion and
increase from thence, from whence they spring.

This therefore was due unto Iiphtah, The degres of benefits.
for as much as he should have had either the highest place, or next unto the
highest, among those that had well deserved of the public wealth. For first
thou see some, which when they bestow Iiphtah touched almost the chiefest
degree of good benevolence.
he redeemed mankind, with the loss of his own life. Unto whom Iiphtah after
a sort is like, who brought the Israelites into liberty, and that to his great
danger, which he declares by this form of speaking: I have put my life in my
hands, that is, I have not refused to endaunger my life. Wherefore the
Ephramites were most ingrate, toward so great a benefit.

The first place of ingrate men is, The degre^ of ingrate men.
when they recompense not again good Ephramites behaved them selves toward
Iiphtah, who because he had gotten the victory, would have burnt him and al
his. What other thing is this, then to contemn both the benefits bestowed,
and also the benefit given? But these men are most of all ungrate, forasmuch as
in so doing, neither ar men

But thou will say: when men that bestow benefits, Whyther benefits are to
be withdrawe^ from the unthankful
do sometimes light upon ingrate persons, what ought they to do? Shall they
straight way withdraw their benefits from them? Undoubtedly they deserve
this: but we must not so do straightway, because men, by reason nature is
corrupt, are slow, neither are they without difficulty moved to do their duty.
Therefore we must go forward in well doing: for he which is not moved to be
thankful with the first henefite, shall peradventure be styrred up with the
second, third, forth, or fifth. But if he al together stycke in his ingratitude,
we may justly withdraw from him our benefits, not moved thereunto by hatred or
desire of reuengement, but that he may be corrected, and that he do not
continually reproach the benefits, which are the gifts of God. This thing does
God also, who by Hoseas the Prophet says unto the unthankful Hebrews: I will
give unto you a heaven of brass, and an earth of iron. I will take away from
you my wool and my flax. etc. because ye have made them Baals things.

Thou will ask perdauenture: why did Christ command us, that we should be
perfect like our heavenly father: which makes his sun to arise as well upon
the evil, Two kinds of benefits of God.
as upon the good, and as it is written in Luke. 6. chap. He is good toward
the ingrate? I answer: That this sentence of the Lord, is not against the A
similitude.
Kings also do not make every Citizen a Ruler, a President, or other officer
longing to a Magistrate, but only them that are just and wise: which thing if
they do not, they execute not their office. But when they give unto their
people lyberall gifts, or a banquet, or distribute corn, because without
great labor and grief they cannot separate the good Citizens from the evil,
therefore they bestow such things which are of this kind, miredly upon al men,
and chose rather to deserve well of evil citizens, then to defraud the good of
their liberality, for whose sakes they are chiefly moved to be bountiful
toward the people. How we should behave our selves toward the ingrate.
Let us also imitate this, that when we bestow private things, although we
light upon one that is ingrate, let us not straightway withdraw from him our
humanity, but let us behave our selves in such manner, as we have before
declared, that if he stubburnly proceed to be ingrate, let us at the length
cease for his correction, to bestow any benefit upon him. But such benefits
as are common and public, let us continually bestow them, yea even upon ye
ungrate, as we are of God commanded, and let us rather choose to have our good
things distributed to godly and holy men, then to cease of from doing good, yt
the evil should not be made partakers of them.

But now let us return unto Iiphtah, whom the Ephramites offended most
grievously. First, he is accused of them, because he went to the battle and
called not them. This seems to be the color of their complaint, because
people confederated together, ought not to take in hand any war, before they
have called their fellows, and made them of counsel. Iiphtah purges himself
of this false accusation, and says that they have a false ground, because he
called them, but they denied to come. But these men when they saw that by
just means they could not defend that which they objected, they plead not
against him at the judgment seat, neither by the order of law, but make a
tumult, and sediciously brag of such complaints. The saints ar always
wrapped with new troubles.
And here we see the state of holy men sufficiently expressed, how they are
always wrapped with new troubles, so that they are almost no sooner passed out
of one, but an other is at hand. But by the goodness of God, even that woorketh
to good in us: for we are so corrupt and viciate, that when things go
prosperously with us, we are wonderfullye puffed up, so that by our insolency
we are made intolerable: which thing that it should not happen, God uses
again to exercise the elect with troubles, after that he has granted them
some prosperity. Wherefore let none of us think, when we have obtained any good
success, that straightway we must fight no more. Yea rather we must provide
that then chiefly we may even weary God with prayers, whereby he may bring to a
perfect and absolute end, the good work that he has already begone in us.

We must also mark the wisdom of Iiphtah, how first he would prove all
things, before he would take weapons against his brethren. First he makes
his Apology, wherein he says that he did not rashlye move war, but because
there was a very grievous contencion between him and the Ammonites, and that he
was much oppressed by them, and therefore he could not abstain from weapons.
Farther, he denies that he called them not. I cried unto you (says he) but
when ye saved me not, I took in hand war my self, to mine own great
danger. Wherefore he adds, that God delivered the Ammonites into his hands,
which might have been a token that God disalowed not his act. Which kind of
argument is in this place of force, for as much as he attempted no unjust
thing: otherwise there can be no firm reason derived of it, because God
sometimes favors the enterprises of the ungodly, by reason of his counsels,
which are always just, but sometimes hidden from us. Jeroboam the son of
Nabat was by a sedicion created king over the ten Tribes, and obtained that
which with naughty conscience he desired. Nabuchad-Nezar also fought
tirannously and ambiciouslye against the Hebrews, and obtained the victory,
when yet no man can allow those doings as godly, because of the success of
them.

The Ephramites were not content with this Apology. Wherefore Iiphtah fought
against them, neither overcame he his enemies only, but also followed the
victory, and that they should not escape, he prevented them, and possessed
the passages of Iordane.

He found out by a phrase of their speech, who were Ephramites. They which
would pass over, might peradventure be either Rabenites or Gadites, or of half
the tribe of Manasses. Therefore least they should be deceived, Diverse
properties or speech (...) one and the (...) same tongue.
he tried them by experience of their tongue. Neither need we to maruayle at
the diversity of pronunciation among the Hebrews, when as every nation,
although they use one common tongue, yet have they some differences in diverse
parts thereof. All the Grecians spoke Greek, and yet among them the Jones,
Attici, Doors, Acoles, and such like, had some difference in their speaking,
and that a notable difference. The Prenestines also which dwelt not far from
Rome (as we read in Plautus) for Ciconia sounded Konia. In Italy also there
are at this day very many differences of properties of speech. But it may be
doubted whereof they should come. From whence the diuers^ty (...) the ^roper^^es
in sp^^che is.
Some answer that it comes of custom, which is not sufficient inoughe:
because we will demand again why the first inhabiters of these places began
so to speak or to talk. Therefore there are other which being led by natural
reason, do refer that diuersitye unto the air, water, and sundry aspecte
of heaven. But we ascribe the beginning of this thing to have been from the
building of the Tower of Babel. For in the book of Genesis it is written, that
the differences of tounges sprang thereof, which as they are perfect and very
great between nation and nation, so are they found to have begone in every
nation.

They chosed this word Schiboleth, not rashly, but such a one as made very
much for this present matter. For it signifies both an ear of corn, and
also a passage of a River, as it is written in the.xxi. chapter of Esaias.
Wherefore when they were at the passages of Iordane, they put forth this word,
whereby they would prove whither the Ephramites should pass over, which word
should signifye the passage it self. They might in deed have tried the same
in many other words, if they would: but they proved it in a word, whose
signification was agreeable with the place.

Wherefore Iiphtah made civil war, but yet not unjust war. Al civil war is
not unjust.
For he had the sword, wherewith his duty was to punysh not only the enemies,
but also the citizens, when they offend either against the laws of man, or the
laws of God. God had given him the victory. The Ephramites contemned it. God
would have the Galaadites pertaining to Manasses to possess ye land: the
Ephramites endeavored to drive them out from thence, and to destroy them. They
invaded their borders, they reproched them, and called them the runnagates of
Ephraim. As though they were to be counted as certain fugitive bondsclaues, if
they were compared with the most noble Tribe of Ephraim. Or else they so called
them, as though at some other time they had made war, and they as fugitives
escaped out of the battle. But in the holy Scripture there is no such
battle found.

They also violated humane right and the laws: for with weapons they invaded
those that were condemned by no right, and they would take away the dominion
over the Galaadites which was given unto Iiphtah. The gift which was given unto
Iiphtah, could not be revoked.
But gifts can not be revoked by any humane right, unless peradventure there
happen any ingratitude. But that Iiphtah was not ingrate, the benefits which
he bestowed on his, do declare. Yea and also in the Digestes ( De
donacionibus, in the law last save one, in the Paragraphe Si quis) it is
had, that a gift given unto a man, for that that he has delivered the geuer
from thieves, could not be revoked not for ingratitude, if any should happen.
But Iiphtah delivered his, not only from thieves, but also from most
grievous enemies, from the Ammonites I say.

Wherefore the principallitye of his Country being given him, he could not
justly be spoiled of it. Whereunto thou may add, that he was instituted a
Judge by God. Therefore he ought to defend both him self and his in punishyng
wicked men. Let us in this place note the severe judgment of God, upon
sedicious and ingrate persons.

7 And Iiphtah judged Israel six years: then dyed Iiphtah the Gileadite, and
was buried in the Cities of Gilead.

8 After him Iibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.

9 And he had.xxx. sons, and.xxx. daughters, which he sent out, and
took.xxx. daughters from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven
years.

10 Then Iibzan dyed, and was buried in Bethlehem.

11 And after him Elon a Zebulonite judged Israel, and he judged Israel ten
years.

12 Then Elon the Zebulonite dyed, and was buried in Aialon, in the land of
Zebulon.

13 After him Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel.

14 And he had.xl. sons, and.xxx. sons sons, that rode on. 70 Coltes. And
he judged Israel.viii. years.

15 Then died Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite: and was buried in
Pirathon, in the land of Ephraim, in the mount of the Amelachites.


The Hebrews fable that Iiphtah for his wicked crime, in killing his
daughter, Now he was buried in the cities of Gilead.
was so smytten of God that his members rotted, and wasted away. And that when
he walked through the Cities of Gilead, he lost in every one of those Cities
some part of his flesh. And therefore it is not said that he was buried in
any one certain place, but in the Cities of Gilead.

Other say that he was very desirous of glory and renown, and therefore he
provided to have monumentes made for him in many Cities of that Province.
These ar things frivolous and full of fables: which other Interpreters seeing, do
thus expound that form of speaking, that In the Cities of Gilead, is nothing
else, then in some one certain of the Cities of Gilead. But I think that it
might be that the principal City of the Gileadites was so builte, that it
seemed to be not one City, but many. Wherefore it might be said in the
plural number Cities. So in Hungary is a City called Quinque ecclesiae,
which is five Cities, and Siracusae a City in Sicilia. So that Are Gilead was
the proper name of one City.

After him Iibzan judged Israel. This man counted to be Boaz.
Some conjecture that this man was that Boaz which married Ruth: but that cannot
be confirmed by any authority of the scripture. He had thirty sons, and
thirty daughters. And that we should perceive that they remained long on live,
it is said that they were all by him coupled in matrimony.

But because the acts of this Judge, and of the other two, which are
afterward mentioned, were not (as it is to be thought) notable: therefore they
are not spoken of. But this Judge was of the Tribe of Judah, which thing
Bethlehem his Country declares.

Elon, which was Judge after him ten years, was of the Tribe of Zabulon.

Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite, as the name of his country
declares, was an Ephramite, and he also was famous by his posteritye: for he
had fourtye Sons, and of them thirtye Neuewes. It is declared that they all
came to ripe age, for it is said that they were all horsemen, who (as it is to
be thought) in ryding compassed the sides of their father. To have many
Children is an excellent gift of God.
Unless a great number of children were an excellent gift of God, it should not
so diligently have been mentioned of in those places. God promised unto his
friend Abraham, that his seed should be increased like the stars of heaven,
and sand of the sea. Yea and David also syngeth: Thy wife shall be like a
fruitful vine in the sides of thy house, and thy children like Olyue
branches, round about thy table. Priamus also is renowned of the Poets,
because he had fyfty children. The law of children ^e^ the Roma^^
The Romans made a law, called the law of three Children. For if any at Rome
had three children a live, they were excused from personal offices. Throughout
Italy, to obtain that liberty, four were sufficient. But in a Province, five
were required, as it is in the Code, of those which have deserved an excuse by
the number of Children, in the law de Personalibus, and Eosvero. But there are
some which do hate plentiful fruit, because they have no confidence in the
goodness of God, and do despair that they shoulh be able to nooryshe them.
They synn^ which hat^ plentiful issue.
And there are other which are infected with this wicked affection, because
they desire to avoid the troubles of bryngyng them up, and are afraid that
they shall leave their Children beggars behind them. But this thing happens
unto them, because they do evil esteem the benefits of God, neither
understand they what great honor and dignity he gives them, What is the
dignitye of the Parents.
as often as they have issue. As God is the Father of men: so also would he
have men to be the Parents of men, that they should understand by the
fatherlye love or affection, what mind and benevolence God bears toward us.

The.xiii. Chapter.
1. But the Children of Israel continued to commit wickedness in the sight of
the Lord, and the Lord delivered them into the hands of the Philistines
fourtye years.

2 And there was a man in Zorah, of the family of the Danites, named Manoah,
whose wife was barren, and bare not.

3 And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto the woman, and said unto her: Behold
now thou art barren, and bear not. But thou shall conceive, and bear a
son.

4 And now therefore beware that thou drink no wine, nor strong drink, neither
eat any unclean thing.

5 Because lo thou shall conceive and bear a son, and no rasor shall come on
his head: for the Child shall be a Nazarite unto God from his birth, and he
shall begin to save Israel out of the hands of the Philistines.


This affliction of the Israelits is longer then the other.
GOd afflicted the Israelites, and delivered the^ to their enemies, because they
returned to their old nature, and forgetting the Lord their God, woorshypped
Idols. And this affliction dured fourtye years. We read of none longer then
this. From the death of Abdon the last Judge, even almost unto Hely this
affliction endured: because Samson did not fully deliver the people. He in
deed smote the Philistines, but he did not utterly repel them from
oppressing of the Hebrews. This word Zorah is a name of a place, and not of a
famelye, as we shall afterward understand, toward the end of the chapter.

Of the Tribe of Dan. The learneder sort do to this place refer those
things which are written in the book of Genesis the.49. chapter. There Jacob
when he was ready to dye, The prophecy of Jacob as touching Samso^.
foretold what should happen unto his children after long time. And when by
order he came unto Dan: Dan (says he) shall judge his people, and he shall be a
Serpent in the way, and an Adder in the pathe, biting the horses heels, so
that his ryder shall fall backward. For Samson after a sort did byte the foot
of the horse, when he overthrew the pyller, that is, the foot of the parler,
and laid the rider on the ground, that is, the company of the Philistines, with
the fall of the wall. These things I therefore make mention of, that it might
appear, that they were no small or vulgar things, when as Jacob so long time
before prophesied of them. Samson was of the Tribe of Dan, when as the next
Judge before him was of the tribe of Ephraim. God used not at ye time any
ordinary Magistrate, Only Samso^ appointed a Judge before his birth.
neither did the Children succeed the Parents in this kind of government.
There was no Judge unto this time of the Tribe of Dan. And there was none of
all the Judges, but only Samson, whom God appointed, and as it were published
a Judge, before he was borne.

And his name was Manoah, whose wife was barren. When God decreed to send any
notable and excellent man, Many excellent me^ borne of baren mothers.
he very often times styrred him up out of a barren woman, which thing also
we see came to pass in Samson, likewise in Samuel, and in John Baptist, and
in very many other, that it might manifestly appear to be altogether the
work of God. Barrennes among the Hebrews was a thing ignominious: but God
because he would declare, that of things most contemptible, he can bring
forth things excellent, has very often times done after this manner. And
that fault of barrennes was in this place in the woman, and not in the man.
For sometimes it may be in both: but the scripture here pronounces it of the
woman, and not of the man.

He shall begin (says he) to save Israel. Here is signified that Samson
should not fully deliver the people: for Israel did not under him fight in
battle against their enemies: he alone assailed the^, and sometimes grievously
afflicted them. The Angel appeared unto his mother a part, when her husband
was away, and showed her of the son which she should bear. Also the Angel
appeared unto Mary the mother of Christ when she was a lone.

Josephus in his books of Antiquities adds, Josephus.
that this Manoah somewhat suspected his wife: and thought that it was not an
angel, but some man, and that his wifes chastity was assaulted, but either
doubt was taken away, when as at the last when he made sacrifice, ye angel
vanished away in the flame. So Joseph, when he somewhat suspected Mary, herd of
the Aungel: Joseph, be not aferd to take Mary thy wife, for that which is
conceived in her, is of the holy ghost. God would have his, not only borne
lawfullye, but also cleared from all suspicion. But in Samuel there could be no
such suspicion: for when Hanna prayed softely, Heli the priest rebuked her, and
counted her for a dronkard, who yet when he understood how diligently and
earnestly she prayed at the tabernacle of the Lord, he promised unto her issue.

But here besides the promise of the son, is added also a precepte. For the
Angel commands her to abstain from wine, and strong drink, Why such an
abstinence was commanded the moth^s.
and all thing that might make her drunk. There is also a reason added:
Because he shall be a Nazarite unto the Lord. Wherefore the mother also is
commanded to abstain from wine, strong drink, and every unclean thing,
that the child should not be nourished with things unlawful, no not in the
womb of his mother.

Of the vow of the Nazarites.
ANd as touching the vow of the Nazarits it is manifestly set forth in the.6.
of Numb: But those things which are there written, The sum of the vow of
the Nazarites.
may all be reduced to three principal points. The first was, that they
should drink no wine nor strong drink, nor any thing that might make them
droonke. An other was, that they should not pole their head: but all that time
the Nazarite should let his hear grow. The third was, that they should not
defile themselves with mourninge for buriales, no not at the death of their
father or mother. These things were to be observed, but not for ever, but
only for some certain time. For he vowed to be a Nazarite, but for certain
number of days, or Months, or years.

But why did God institute these things? Why god gave the institution of the
Nazarites.
There may be many causes given. First, because men were so prone to choose
unto themselves certain kinds of life, whereby they might easily fall into
superstition. Therefore God would after this manner bridle them, as though he
should have said: Forasmuch as ye are so prone to your own studies, and to
invent new woorshippings, yet shall ye not do what ye list your selves, but
what I prescribe unto you. And so geuinge unto them the law of a Nazarite, he
kept them in doing their duty.

But what mente these things?

Some refer these things unto an Allegorye, that when the hears were
increased, the Nazarites should consider, that virtues also ought to increase
in the mind. But me thinks there may be an other cause rendered, namelye that
men should abstain from to much trimming and deckinge of the body. For the
clipping of the ear much adorneth the body. For Paul says in his 1. Epistle
to the Corrinthians the.11. Chapter, that to men it is uncomely if they let
their hear grow. Although other reasons of other men are not to be
contemned.

Cyrillus Procopius.
Cirillus and also Procopius upon the book of Numbers, say that these things
were instituted of God, to revoke men from the idolatrous worshippinges and
rites of the Ethnikes, that that which they gave unto idols, ye Jews should
give unto him. So also whereas they sacrificed unto Idols, he would have these
men rather to sacrifice unto himself, not that god so much regards
sacrifices, but to wythdrawe them from idolatry. We read that the Ethnikes
sometimes suffered their hear to grow, that they might afterward consecrate
it, either unto the Nymphs, or to Apollo. Wherefore Apollo was by them called
(...) that is a nourisher of the hear. Yea and Theseus (as it is written in
Plutarche) went to Delphos there to dedicate his hear unto Apollo. Plutarche.
And children at Rome when they were paste childehode, offered their hear and
beardes to some God. Sophocles writes that Oreftes put his hear in the tomb
of his father. Sophocles


There may also be an other cause rendered, and that not vain. For the
Nazarites ought always to be pure, and although they were not of the tribe of
Leui, yet they so behaved themselves all that time, as if they had been
priests of the tribe of Leui. And the Levites and priests were prohibited in
the.21. chapt. of Leuiticus from polinge their head. Which thing may also be
perceived by the.6. chapter of Baruch. Ye shall see (says he) priests in
Babylon with their heads shaven, The priests of the Hebrews shaued not their
heads.
and their garments cut. And they were priests of idols. Wherefore we see
that by the commaundent of God, the priests of the hebrews had not their
heads shaven.

In the book of Numbers the 6. chapter, god calls the hears of the head a
crown, or as other translate, it a seperatiion. But contrarilye the Papists
call their shauing of the head a crown: so do they peruerte all things as
they list themselves. But what should a man speak of them? They care not
what they do. They will have lights and censing in the temples. If thou ask
them why? Because say they God used them in the old testamente. But in the
old law priests had wives: these will have none. They suffered the hears of
their head or beard to grow: but these men shave both their head and beard.
Although at this day there is a great contention among the^ about a long beard,
because the counsel of Carthage in the.44. Concilium Carthaginense.
chap. is sundry ways alleged. For in exa^plers it is written Comam non
nutriant nec barba^ that is, They shall not suffer their hear to grow, nor
their beard, but in others it is red: Nec barbam tondeant, that is: They shall
not clip their beardes: whether of these two sentences will these men follow?
For they will not suffer to have a long beard, least any part (as they say) of
the sacrifice should stick in it. O holy me^: they fell yt their sacrifice for
three half pens, Why the sacrificing Papists will have no beardes.
and then least it should stick in the beard, they diligently provide. Is not
this to streyne at a gnat, and to swalow down a Camel? Howbeit some of them,
least they should seem to do not very wisely nor with any reason: The cutting
of (say they) of the hears, signifies that a priest must cut of all
superfluous things. This is the religion of these men, to have the signs,
when as they have not the things signified. But I rather refer that shauinge
of our papists to softnes or wantonness. Suetonius.
For Suetonius in the life of Otho says that he was wont oftentimes to shave
his beard, and to behold his face in a glass, whither it were trim enough. I
will not speak of other which did not shave the hears, but pluck the^ out, to
have the softer skin.

Nazarites should abstain from wine, and not from wine only, but also from
vinegar, from grapes, and from strong drink, called Sicera. What Sicera is.
Jerome.
This Sicera (as Jerome writes to Nepotianus) was a kind of drink much like
unto wine, which was made either of wheat, or of apples, or of dates, or else of
other fruits. Farther they were prohibited to eat the husks of grapes or
kernels, which are taken out of the wine presses. They were also commanded not
to drink Mishereth, which was nothing else then the washing of the grapes. For
the wine being pressed out, there was water powered upon the grapes that were
pressed, which when it was purified, retained some savor of the wine. That we
call the second wine. But the Chaldey interpretation caleth Sicera old wine.
And it is manifest enough, why the Nazarites were forbidden to drink both wine
and strong drink: for these things trouble the head, and stir men up to
lust, as Solomon in his 20. chapter of Proverbs admonishes, wine makes a
mocker, and strong drink a troublesome fellow, and whosoever is deceived
thereby, shall never be wise. Paul says also to the Ephesians the 5. chapter:
Be not drunk with wine, wherein is excess: but be filled with the sprite.
Farther the priests in the old law were prohibited to drink wine before they
came to holy services. Wherefore the Nazarites, forasmuch as they were like
priests, ought also to abstain from wine.

Nazarite was a certain seperacion from other me^. But what they did in the
mean time, it is not prescribed: howbeit many think that they were
commanded, to endeavor themselves to the contemplacion and knoweledge of the
law, and to worship and call upon God purelye and sincerely.

We se that god by this kind of vow would instruct the people with singular
wisdom. The Philosophers write that a man must contend, to be able to
behold high things, and with his knowledge to embrace whole nature. And that
they say can never be done, unless the affections in us be tempered,
otherwise we are very often carried away by anger and lust. Wherefore God
would have his to be void of these affections, namely of mourninge, pleasure,
to much care and vexation about the decking of the body. For these do not a
little hinder the tranquillity of the mind, and spiritual cogitations thereof.
Wherefore in the old law he instituted in a manner to prepare his, that they
should not come unapt and unmeet to higher things. Undoubtedly they which
are indewed with the knowledge of God, ought to frame and prepare themselves,
before that they come to hear the word of God, or to receive the
Sacraments. Jeremy in his 4. Chapter has very well admonished us: Break up
your fallow ground, and sow not among the thorns. And they vowed this kind of
vow (as we have said) for a certain time, either for a year or for a month,
or as every man thought it most profitable for himself: for the natures of
men are oftentimes changed, and the studies of piety do wax feable.
Therefore they ought by some means to be restored. Hereof sprange the
departures of the Elders, into solitary places for a time. So they which
governed the public wealth, when they were weary with matters, kept themselves
close oftentimes in fields or manors, not to sleep, or to give themselves to
sluggishnes and idleness, but to refresh their minds, and that they might
return the more prompte and better instructed to accomplish things. And the
most noble Rhethoricians being wearied with pleading causes of the law, went
sometimes into the country, to hear, to talk, to read somewhat, to peruse
over the oracions before herd, and so by that means to return more learned
and ready to the place of judgment: So the Nazarites for a certain time
departed from the company and felloweshippe of other men, that they might
be the better and holier afterward to execute the duties of life. Christ also
in the night time departed to the mountain: But in the day time he returned
unto the people. And when the Apostles returned, whom he had sent forth to
preach, he led them a way for a little while into a deserte, that they might
there be quiet, and refresh themselves.

The institucio^ of Lent.
For this cause peradventure was Lent first instituted, that men which had all the year been occupied with civil business, might at the least at that time
renew piety. This is the pretense of the Papists.

But grant that the thing was at the first institued for this cause, let them
consider what it is now fallen to at the length, undoubtedly into mere
superstition, whereby nothing else is obtruded unto the people, then choice of
meats, old wives fables, ungodly songs, and pilgrimages (which they commonly
call stations) very profane and idolatrous. In the mean time there is no
mention made for the abolishinge of covetousness, lust, lecherye, and other
wicked acts. Farther, men ought by so long a fast to have been made
better, but they are made much worse after Easter.

Paul took upon him ye vow of a Nazarite.
But to return to the vow of a Nazarite, Paul seems to have vowed it, when
as in the.18. chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, he poled his head in
Cenchre. And in the.21. chapter he was persuaded of the Elders to do it. There
are here (say they) four men, which have a vow: Thou shalt be with them.
There the shauinge of the head declares, that that vow pertained unto a
Nazarite. For as it is written in the law, if it had happened that the
Nazarite in the time of the vow which he had taken upon him, had defiled
himself upon the dead, or by any other means, then the vow was violate.
And the Nazarite ought to come unto the Tabernacle, and to declare unto the
priests what had happened, and to cut of his hear, to offer sacrifice,
and so to begin the vow of a Nazarite a new again. For what soever he
had before observed, it was counted as defiled and of no force. So Paul, as
though some thing had happened unto him among the Gentiles where he had
been conversant, would be purified in the Temple, as though he should have
begone the observation of his vow again.

A feigned tale of the Moonkes.
The Papystes cry that by this vow of the Nazarites, there was a certain
shadow at that time of their religious Moonkery, neither consider they that
the vows of the Nazarites were instituted by the word of God. Let them show
on their side the commandment of God for moonkry, which thing if they cannot
do, then rests there nothing but that we may say, that the institutions of
Moonkes are not the vows of Nazarites, but of superstitious men, and a
certain ridiculous imitation or an evil zele of the old vow of the
Nazarites. So also in the old time superstitious men, when they saw that
Abraham would have offered his son, Whereof began drawing of children through
the fire.
and that for the same cause he pleased God very well: They also would needs
offer their sons, and draw them thorough the fire. By which most wicked
institution they grievously offended God. But our worshipping ought to lean
unto the word of God. In deed civil institutions, yea even without the
express word of God, may be received, so that they be not against the word of
God: Against the vow of religious men.
but worshipping and religion ought not to come from any other thing, but only
out of the word of God. But I pray you, let them tell, whence they have that
vow of perpetual sole life, or how can it agree with the Nazarites? First it
is contrary to the creation of man, when as it was said unto the first
parents: Increase and multiply. Farther, it is against the oracle, which Paul
wrote: He which contains not, let him mary.

They vow poverty also. But what manner of poverty? forsooth to live of
beggyng. A trim vow, to be maintained with the labors of other men.
Undoubtedly that is against charity, when as Paul says unto the Ephesians:
He which stole, let him steal no more, but let him labor rather with his
hands, that he may have wherewithal to give unto him that suffers
necessitye. But thou will say that of the Monks there are some which are
rich. I grant that, but they also do contrary to the word of god, wherein it
is commanded: He which laboreth not, let him not eat. Farther, they vow
obedience. But to whom? To certain men, when as Paul expressedly writes: Be
not ye made servants of men. But they say: I am of Frances, I am of Dominike,
I am of Benedict, where as Paul would not suffer that Christians should say: I
am of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I of Cephas. They agr^ not but are contrary to
the Nazarites.
Why then do they cry that they agree with the Nazarites? Let us diligently
examine every thing. The Nazarites shaued not the hear: but these men do shave
it. The Nazarites did drink no wine: but these me^ glot themselves with wine.
The Nazarites came not to funerals: but these men desire nothing so much as the
funerals and obsequies of the dead. But I will ouerpasse these things. One
thing only will I add: Although in the Jewish religion the vow of the
Nazarites was the principal vow, Origene.
yet were they not forbidden to mary. In other vows (says Origene) they gave
either a sheep, or a a got, or an ox, or some other thing. But in this kind
of vow, they offered the^ selves, and yet their state agreed well enough with
matrimony.

But let us return unto Samson. He proved a most strong young man. Who would
have thought that this could have come to pass? The parents were not
commanded to instruct him in the art of warfare, or to send him forth to
war. A man would think much rather that he should be brought up as a Monk,
and not as a soldier. But God would show, that all the strength which should
be in Samson, should be derived from his spirit. But that he should be a
Nazarite all his life time, as Samuel also was, it was peculiar, and above the
common institution of others, by the deed I say and not by the right or vow
of the parents. Samson ought to have obeyed, although he had not vowed,
Whether it was lawful for Hanna ^o vow for her son.
because it was done by the word of god. Howbeit of Hanna the mother of Samuel
it may be doubted, how it was lawful for her to vow for her son. For it may
scarce seem just that the son should be bound by the vow of the parent. It
was demanded in the time of Benedict, whether the children offered by the
parents unto monasteries, when they came unto man's state, might mary.
Gregorius.
Gregorius Magnus to Augustine a Bishop of England, answers, that it is
utterly unlawful. Which is a very hard saying, and against the word of god.
For Paul says, it is better to mary then to burn. And he which can not
conteyne, let him mary. Conciliu^ Carthaginense.
In the counsel of Carthage the.3. whereat Augustine also was present, it was
decreed, that children offered unto ye Church, when they came to man's estate,
should either mary, or else vow chastity. This also was rough enough. For who
should require this at yt age, being unskillful of things, and not certain of
his own strength? But these things I speak, that we might know that decrees
are contrary to decrees. But to return to the matter, I say that Hanna might
vow for her son: for as touching the performyng of the vow, as long as he
was brought up by his pare^tes, she might easily provide, that he should not
drink any wine, nor cut of his hear, nor be at any funerals. But after he
came to lawful age, it was Samuels duty to observe these things, not in deed
in respect of the vow, but because of the obedience which he ought unto his
parents. For children ought to obey their parents in all those things which
are not against piety and the word of God. So the Rechabites (as it is in
Jeremy) when they obeyed their father Ionadab, The Rechabites.
who commanded them to drink no wine all their life time, or to dwell in
Cities, were for the same cause praised of God. Howbeit Hanna unless she had had
a peculiar inspiration from God, she could not have vowed, that Samuel should
all his life time have ministered at the tabernacle of the Lord: for as much as
the law of god absolved me^ from the ministry at a certain space of years,
namely in ye.50. year.

Magister sententiarum.
But that which I have said, that it was lawful for Hanna to vow the vow of a
Nazarite for her son, it seems not to be firm with ye definition of a vow,
which is thus brought of the Master of the Sentences: A vow is a
testificatio^ of a willing promise made unto God, The definition of a vow.
of things which pertayne unto God. But a vow which is vowed by the parent for
the son, can not seem willing. Yea but it is: because the parents vowed not
being compelled, but of their own fre will: farther, it is mete for the
children to obey the will of their parents freely and of their own accord,
especially when they command no ungodly thing, or contrary to the word of
God.

By this place some gather that Samson was sanctified in the womb of his
mother: which self same thing is believed both of Jeremy and also of John
Baptiste. How some are said to be sanctified from the womb.
And they will have him so to be sanctified, that afterward he committed no
mortal sin, as they call it. But this is false and vain. Neither to
sanctifye in this place is any thing else, then to appointe one to the
execution of some certain work. Samson therefore was sanctified, that is,
appointed of God to deliver his people. So was Jeremy ordained to Prophecy.
And John to be the voice of a crier in the wilderness. Neither of this kind of
sanctification does it follow, that these holy men never sinned. For every man
is a liar, and also there is no man says Solomon which sins not. Farther,
what shall we say of Samson: Did he never sin? He fell undoubtedly, and that
grievously. Paul also, who says to the Galathians that he was himself
separated from his mothers womb, and yet he persecuted the Church of God.
Moreover the children also of Christians are called holy, for as much as God
is not our God only, but also the God of our seed, according to that saying
of Paul to the Corinthians: Your children are holy, who yet no man doubts,
but yt they afterward fall and grievously sin.

If the vow be against charity it is to be broken.
One thing remains to be spoken of, and afterward I will return unto the
history. When the father voweth, and the son desires to perform ye vow of
the father, what if the vow be a gaynste the health of the son? He shall
peradventure fall into some disease, and he must needs drink wine, or cut away
his hear, what is to be done in this case? I have in an other place admonished
that the precepts of god ar of diverse sorts, so that some ar greater, and
some easier. As touching god which is the commander, all are equal and like
one to an other. But as touching ye things which are commanded, there is some
difference. Wherefore the less precept must give place unto the greater. For
which cause Christ says by the words of the Prophet, I will have mercy and
not Sacrifice: not as though God utterly contemned Sacrifices, which he had
commanded, but because he more esteemed mercy. And Christ also admonishes in
the Gospel in the.5. chapter of Math. that if thou offer thy gift at the
alter, and there reme^berest that thy brother has somewhat against thee, thou
must go first and reconcile thy self unto thy brother, and then return, and
offer thy gift. Whereby he declares that he altogether will have the les
precepte give place unto the greater. Wherefore we must thus answer unto the
question. God commands the Nazarites to absteyne from wine: he also
commands every man to defend his life by good means. Here when as the sick
man can not preserve both the precepts, it is necessary that he prefer the
greater before the les. For so did the Rechabites the sons of Ionadab behave
themselves. For although their father commanded them, that they should not
dwell in Cities, neither drink any wine, and were also commended of God,
because they obeyed the precepts of their father, yet at that time when Jeremy
wrote these things of them, they dwelled at Jerusalem, contrary to the precept
of their father. For the Chaldeyans had wasted all the fields. Wherefore they
perceived that there was then no place for their fathers precept. But in
monasteryes they do contraryly. For if the father be sick, the son is so
bound by religion, that he can by no means help him.

6 And the wife came, and told her husband saying: A man of God came unto me,
and the look of him was like the look of an Angel of God very terrible, and
I asked him not whence he was: neither told he me his name.

7 And he said unto me: Behold thou shall conceive and bear a son. Now
therefore thou shall drink no wine nor strong drink, neither eat any
unclean thing: for the child shall be a Nazarite to God from his birth, to the
day of his death.

8 Then Manoah prayed unto the Lord, and said: I pray thee my Lord let the man
of God whom thou senttest, come again unto us and teach us what we shall do
unto the child when he is borne.

9 And God heard the voice of Manoah. For the Angel of the Lord came again
unto the wife, as she sat in the field, but Manoah her husband was not with
her.

10 And the wife made have and ran, and showed her husband, saying unto him:
Behold the man has appeared unto me, that came unto me to day.

11 And Manoah arose and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said
unto him: Art thou the manne that spakest unto the woman? And he said: Yea.

12 Then Manoah said: Now let thy saying come to pass. But what shall be the
judgment of the child, and his work?

13 The angel of the Lord answered unto Manoah: The woman must beware of all
that I said unto her.

14 She may eat of nothing that comes of the wine vine tree, that is, she
shall drink no wine nor strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing: let her
observe all that I have commanded her.


The woman thought that it had been some godly man whom she had seen, or a
Prophet: for she knew not that it was the angel of God. His look (says
she) was terrible. The Hebrewe word is ambiguous: for it may be turned both
terrible and wonderful. And undoubtedly the things which are wonderful,
especially divine things, do strike into men a fear. She faithfully shows
unto her husband these things, and does the dewty of a good wife. What
matrimony is.
For Matrimony is an inseparable society, having the communion both of things
divine and humane. And this matter pertayned partly to things divine, because
it was showed in the name of God, and partly unto humane things, because it
was a matter as touching the receauyng and education of a child.

She says, she asked him not whence he was: because in such visions men are so
amassed, that they are attentive only unto the things which are spoken,
neither have they any leisure to enquire of more things. So the mother of ye
Lord, when the Angel saluted her, asked him not what his name was, or from
whence he came. Gideon also when he received the oracle of the Angel, for the
delyuering of the people, was altogether so astonished, that he was nothing
inquisitiue, what his name was. But the woman speaks these things by
anticipation: for she thought that her husband would hear, and inquire of
him the truth. Although Josephus in his book de Antiquitatibus (as I have
before admonished) says, that when he heard the words of his wife, he
somewhat suspected her of evil. Ambrose.
Howit Ambrose in his.70. Epistle, where he very diligently entreats of this
Hystory, denies that to be very lykely. For if (says he) he had been gelious,
God would not have sent an angel unto him. But me thinks Ambroses reason is
not firm. For Manoah might otherwise be a good man, although he were touched
with suspicion. Very good men also have oftentimes some suspicion of such
things. For even Joseph the husband of Mary, who^ the holy Scripture testifies
that he was a just man, somewhat sinisterly suspected his Spouse, to whom yet
the Angel appeared.

Wherefore I rather believe that Manoah, was either altogether without gelousy,
or else not very much gelous. For he accused her not abroad, her repudiated
her not, neither used he the public remedy of the law: For then was in force
that law which was given by GOD, that if a man suspected his wife of
aduoutry, he should bring her to the door of the tabernacle, where the Priest
should search out the honesty of the woman by solemn waters, and by a bitter
curse. The cause of the law of gelousy.
For God would that married folks should live together with a merry, quiet, and
not suspicious mind. But Manoah did not only not use these remedies: but also
he by no means rebuked his wife. But strayghtwaye prayed unto the Lord, that
that man of God would return the second time, whereby he might understand, how
the child should be brought up. Neither did he tempt god by his prayers. In
deed no man ought to desire a sign, yt he may believe the articles of faith.
For those things which are contained in them, are already before sufficiently
proved and confirmed by the word of God, and by miracles. But if there happen
any new and singular revelation, because there may be deceates and guiles of
deuilles, who transform themselves (yea even into the aungelles of light) if
we require a sign of the Lord or instruction, we sin not. That a baren
woman should bear, or that a child should set the people at liberty, it was
a certain singular thing. Wherefore Manoah prays for nothing curiously, and
therefore GOD heard him. He afterward demanded the name of the aungel, but
because he demanded it curiously, he was not heard.

The angel came again unto the woman the self same day, as all
interpreters do agree. And undoubtedly it might be, that first he came in the
morning, and the second time, either at noone, or about the sun set. Manoah
asked, Whether he were the manne which spoke with his wife: which thing when
he affirmed unto him, he said: Let thy saying come to pass. It may be an
oration of one that wishes, as if he should have said: I would to GOD it
might come to pass. Or it may by supposition, as if it should have been said:
If it come to pass as thou haste said, What then shall be the judgment of the
child? When he says judgment, he asks not Counsel of Astronomers, which
answer by the stars, what shall come to pass of a child. He only
demands what GOD had decreed of the child. Neither ought the decree of GOD
whereof he inquireth, to be referred unto the merits of the child, but only
unto the mercy of GOD. For Mischpat is very well turned a decree, for a decree
is of mercy and not of merit. The Angel repeateth unto him all those
things, which he had before commanded the woman to take heed of. She may
not eat (says he) of any thing that comes of the wine grape. Certain
wine ^rees bear not wine.
These words declare, that there are also other kinds of vynes, out of
which is not gathered wine. But when the Angel says: Neither shall she
drink wine, nor strong drink, his answer seems not to make much to the
purpose. Manoah demands of the child, and the angel answers of the
mother. But it is all one, as if he had said: That which I have said of the
mother, I have said it because of the child: Wherefore seeing god will have the
mother observe these things, much more ought the child to keep the self
same things. Howbeit the common translation (I ca^ not tell how) refers
these things unto the child, but yet not rightly: because in the Hebrewe the
feminine gender is kept still. Augustine is his questions upon this book
demands, Augustine.
why the mother is commanded to absteyne from all unclean things, when as
that was already before sufficiently forbidden by the law of God? He
answers: After that the Philistines possessed that land, Religion among the
Jews was feabled, and the people did without choice eat things unclean and
forbidden by the law. By these words Manoah easily perceived that his wife
did rightly understand the words of the angel, and that the child should be
a Nazarite as long as he lived.

15 And Manoah said unto the angel of the Lord: I pray thee let us retain
thee, and we will make ready a Kid for thee.

16 And the angel of the Lord answered unto Manoah: Though thou make me
abide, I will not eat of thy bread: and if thou will make a burnt offering,
offer it unto the Lord: for Manoah knew not that it was an angel of the
Lord.

17 Again Manoah said unto the Angel of the Lord: What is thy name, that
when thy saying is come to pass we may honor thee?

18 And the angel of the Lord answered him: Why ask thou thus after my
name, which is secret?

19 Then Manoah took a Kid and an oblation, and offered it upon a stone unto
the Lord. And he wrought a miracle whilst Manoah and his wife looked on.

20 For when the flame came up toward heaven from the alter, the angel of the
Lord ascended up in the flame of the alter. And Manoah and his wife beheld it,
and fell on their faces to the ground.

21 So the angel of the Lord did no more appear unto Manoah and his wife.
Then Manoah knew that it was an angel of the Lord.


When they had heard these words, they would have retained this man of god,
and have made him a banquet. Unto whom he answers: Although ye make me to
abide, yet will I not eat of your bread. This Hebrew word Leche^ signifies
not only bread, but sometimes meat in universal, yea and sometimes flesh
also. Hereof was invented ye subtility of ye Papists: to who^ when we say, yt
the bread remains in ye Eucharist, and prove it by ye which Paul writes: The
bread which we break, is it not ye communicating of ye body of Christ? They
answer: ye bread in that place may signify flesh, as it does ofte^tymes in
the holy scriptures. But they ought to remember yt Paul wrote these words in
Greek and not in Hebrew. But (...) yt is, bread in Greek, ca^ not signify
flesh, as Lechem may in Hebrew. Farther in the holy supper the flesh of Christ
is not broken, but they are simboles or signs which are broken.

We will make a Kid. So some read it, and do think that to make, Sundry
readyng.
is in this place nothing else then to Sacrifice. Peradventure Manoah thought
that that angel was a Priest. And in peace offringes one part was burnt unto
God, an other part was given unto the Priest, the third part they did eat
which offered the sacrifice, and so they banqueted together before the Lord.
Wherefore they would entertayne the Angel with a banquet. But other read in
this place, not to make, but simply to prepare.

If thou will make a burnt offering, offer it unto the Lord. He declared that he
looked not for a banquet, because in burnt offerings, al things were consumed
with fire. But in yt he says: Sacrifice it unto the Lord, he puts him in
remembrance of the true God: because the people at that time woorshypped the
Gods of the gentiles. The wilynes of ye Papists, whereby they affirm that ye
Mass is a sacrifice.
The Papists cry that to make, is to sacrifice: and that this word Facere,
that is to do or to make, is properly applied unto sacrifices. And thereby they
labor to prove, that their Mass is a sacrifice, because Christ said in the
Supper, Hoc facite, that is, do or make this, which they think is nothing else,
the^ sacrifice this. Neither do they cite these places only, but also very
many other, which are found in the old testament. They say also that the
Latin Poets used this word after this manner, Virgil.
as Virgil when he said: When I make a calfe for corn, come thou. Amitte it be
so. But how shall we understand the certain signification or strength of this
word as often as it comes? And when shall it signify this, and when that? From
whence significatio^s of words ought to be gathered.
For otherwise to make a garment, shall be to sacrifice a garment, and to make a
fire, shall be to sacrifice a fire: if that word as often as it comes shall
signify to sacrifice, undoubtedly what ye word signifies may be easily be
understand by the thing it self, and circumstances of the place, as that in
Virgil which they have alleged, where it is read: When I make a calfe, it is
certain that there is mention made of harvest Sacrifices. And so it oftentimes
happens in the old Testament. But in the supper, what was it that Christ
would Sacrifice? what oblation? what blood? Take (says he,) eat, drink. Do
this which I have said, namely to eat and drink, for a remembrance and
monument of my death. But the Papists bring forth these vain and frivolous
things, because they have no better, as they which have no wood use to burn
straw.

Whether it were lawful to sacrifice in any other place, besides the
tabernacle.
But to return unto the Hystory, this seems wonderful, when as the law
commands that sacrifice should be done but only in the place which the Lord
had chosen, how it should be lawful for Manoah to sacrifice at his own house.
David Kimhi answers, that this was done by the authority of the man of God,
by a certain extraordinary mean. For Elias also sacrificed when he was among
the ten tribes, yt is, in the kingdom of Samaria. But those things he says
were peculiar, neither might they be drawn into an example of others. But I
think ye whilst the ark of the Lord was yet wandryng, and whilst it had not
yet found any certain place, ye precept of the Lord had not yet his full
strength. For thus the Lord had commanded, after that I shall bring you into
the land which I have promised you, ye shall not sacrifice unto me, but in ye
place which I will show unto you. Wherefore although before it was permitted to
sacrifice any other where, yet after ye Solomon had built the temple, it was not
lawful to offer out of it: wherefore the high places were to be taken away, and
they should sacrifice no where but at Jerusalem. But of all the kings, only
Josias and Ezechias took away ye high places: so hard a thing was it to lead
ye people to ye true obedience of god. But Elias was moved by a certain
peculiar inspiration of God to Sacrifice other where.

Manoah demands after the name of the Angel, neither did he that so simply
as his wife did. But that he should not be thought to demand it curiously, or
without a cause, he adds a reason of his request. That if that come to pass
which thou have said, we may honor thee, that is with some reward. But I ca^
not recompense thee, unless I know who thou art, and where thou dwell. This
Hebrew word Peli is ambiguous to the Hebrews, R. Solomon. Angels ar named of
those things which they work.
and signifies both wonderful, and also secret. R. Solomon says that the
names of aungelles are secret, so that they themselves know not their own
names. And he adds also that the Aungelles have no names of their own, but
only have surnames given them of those things which they are sent to take
charge over. Which thing also the Epistle to the Hebrews touches, when it
calls them ministryng spirits. R. Solomon brings examples out of the holy
Scriptures. An Angel was sent unto Esaye, and because he did put a burning
coal to his lyppes, he was called Seraphim, of this verb Seraph, which
signifies to burn. So may we say of Raphaell, that he was so called,
because he had healed Tobias, as though he were the medicine of GOD. Gabriell
also, after the same manner, was called the strength of GOD. Also this word
Peli signifies wonderful: for therefore came the Angel, to work a
miracle. And undoubtedly it was very wonderful, to bring fire out of a rock,
which should consume the Sacrifice. And it may be yt the Angel would not
open his name, because men at that time were prone unto Idolatrye, and they
would easily, when they had heard the name of an Angel, peradventure have
woorshypped it to much religiously.

That which we have called an oblation, in Hebrew it is Minchah. But what
manner of oblation that was, is understood by the.2. chapter of Leuit. There
were diverse kinds thereof, but it ever consisted of corn, but yet not always
prepared after one manner, and it was so offered, that some part of it was burnt
unto the Lord, the other part was left for the Priests. The Papists babble
that Minchah was a shadow of their bready Sacrifice, which thing they have
feigned most impudently. But hereof we will entreat in an other place.

Manoah laid the Kid and Minchah upon the rock. Manoah might not Sacrifice
unto the Lord by the law, because he came of the tribe of Dan, and not of the
tribe of Leui. Wherefore he delivered the flesh unto the angel, whom he
thought to be a Prophet, that he should sacrifice it. For Prophets had an
extraordinary vocation, that although they were not of the famely of Aaron,
yet it was lawful for them to sacrifice: as we read of Helias and Helizeus.
For when religion was decayed in ye Priests, god suffered others to minister
their office. But the angel, when the flesh was put upon the rock, wrought
wonderfully. He raised up fire out of the stone, which consumed the offering.
Which thing we read also was done in Gideon. Although it be not herein
expressedly showed that fire was drawn out of the rock, as it was openly said
in Gideon, yet is no mention made of fire yt was brought by Manoah, and at the
last it is said that the angel vanished away in ye flame, therefore it is
credible yt fire was stricken out of ye stone. The angel ascended into heaven,
as though he used the flame for a chariot. He dissolved the body which he
bare, and vanished away into the flambe: which was a notable miracle. They
fell to the ground for fear: for they were wonderfully amassed and astonished,
when they saw that it was an angel, whom before they thought to have been a
man.

22 And Manoah said unto his wife: We shall surely dye, because we have seen
God.

23 But his wife said unto him: If the Lord would kill us, he would not have
received a burnt offryng and an oblation of our hands, neither would he have
showed us all these things, nor at this time told us such things.

24 And the wife bare a son, and called his name Samson. And the child
grew, and the Lord blessed him.

25 And the spirit of the Lord began to strengthen him, in the host of Dan,
between Zora and Esthaol.


In dyeng we shall dye. That is, we shall most assuredly dye. For the Hebrews
in doubling the words do earnestly affirm.

Because we have seen the Lord. Whereof this opinion sprang, I have told in
the Hystory of Gideon, where also I have declared, how God was seen of the
fathers. The opinion of R. Leui ben Gerson.
Wherefore it needs not to repeat them in this place. But this will I not
ouerpasse, that R. Leui ben Gerson writes, that this was not an angel, but a
man of god, and a Prophet, namely Pinhas the son of Eleazar. But he was
called angel because Manoah and his wife thought him to be so. For after the
same manner Ezras, although he was a man, yet was he called an angel. And
Christ which is very man, is called the angel of the Testament. But how he
being a man vanished away in the flambe, Leui ben Gerson declares not. But I
more simply do judge him to have been an angel in deed. For Pinhas had not a
secret name, but a name well known in his time, and the words of the text do
tend to this, Of the name of Elohim,
to teach that it was an angel. We have seen the Lord. In Hebrewe it is
Elohim, which although it be the name of GOD, yet is it communicated to
aungelles, yea and also to princes and Prophets, according to that saying: I
have said, ye are Gods. And Christ in the Gospel says: If they are
called Gods, unto whom is come the word of GOD, why do ye marvel. etc?

This woman seems to be of a stouter courage them the man: for she comfort
her husband. Whose Oration is grounded upon two arguments. The first is, I do
not think we shall dye, because God would not have accepted our sacrifice, if
he would have destroyed us. Wherefore seeing our sacrifice was acceptable unto
him, he counts not us as enemies. But whereby knew she that that sacrifice
was acceptable unto GOD. First, because the Angel had commanded it to be
done, which vndoubledly he would not have don, unless he had understood that it
should be acceptable unto God. Farther, because the flambe had consumed the
Sacrifice, and the angel therewithal flewe away, as though he carried up the
sacrifice with him into heaven. An other argument is: He would not have taught
us so many and such things, if we should perish. He came unto us once or
twice, and instructed us of things which we should do. Wherefore be of good
comfort, we shall not dye.

Of Sacrifice.
The offerer is more acceptable unto God then the Sacrifice.
Undoubtedly the woman's arguments are good: out of which may some things be
gathered, which are not unprofitable. And first that God more accepts him
that offreth, then he does the Sacrifice: yea the oblations please not him, but
for the offerers sake. This sentence Irenaeus proves by the scriptures in his
fourth book, and.34. chapter. For God had a regard unto Abel, and to his
gifts, but unto Cain and his gifts he looked not, because of the disposition
of them that offered. For look what manner of will he that offreth has
toward God, the like will has God to the oblation. Christ also says: If
thou bring thy gift unto the altar, and remembrest that thy brother has
somewhat against thee, go and reconcile thee first unto thy brother: and then
come and offer thy gift. As though he should say: If whylest thou art evil,
and enemy unto god, thou do offer, thine oblation shall not be acceptable
unto God. Wherefore Irenaeus concludes, Irenaeus.
that they are not sacrifices which sanctify, but the conscience of him that
offreth. And he adds a reason: because God needs not our Sacrifice. Among
men, the evil may oftentimes be absolved: because men are sometimes covetous
and nedy, and are easily won with money. But if it happen the Judge to be
both just and good, he will reiecte the money, neither will he suffer his
equity after that manner to be blotted. So God, because he can not be won by
flattery, observes the minds of men, and not the Sacrifices. In Esaias the.66.
chapter, he says: He that sacrifices a sheep, is as if he slew a dog: not
that god hates sacrifices in universal, but because he allows not ye
oblations of evil men. I have the largelier spoken things, because the
papists boast, that in masses they offer Christ unto God the father: which
thing if it should be granted, then must god the father more esteem a noughty
sacrificer, then he does his son. But this woman reasons most wittely. God
has received our sacrifice, therefore he is not angry, neither will he destroy
us.

We count the sacrifices of christians to be a contryte heart, prayers, The
sacrifices of Christians.
geuinge of thanks, alms, mortifienge the affections of the flesh, and such
like. These are left unto us after the abrogation of the carnal sacrifices,
that we should offer them as the fruits of our faith, and testimonies of a
thankful mind. But as touching the pacifieng of God, Christ offered himself
once upon the cross, neither is there any need that any man should offer him
again. For by an oblation he accomplished al things. Now remains, that we
embrace his sacrifice with faith, and we shall have God merciful unto us, who
of his goodness will by Christ accept those sacrifices which we have now made
mention of. But Augustine contra literas Parmeniani, in his.2. book and.8.
chapter seems at the first sight to make against us. Augustine.
For the Donatistes would not communicate with the other Christians, because
they counted them defiled and vnpure, and they cited a place out of John: We
know that God hears not sinners. Your men, said they, have betrayed the
holy books, have burnte incense unto Idols, have denied god, how then will
god hear them? Augustine answers, that it may be, that an evil minister,
although he be not heard for his own cause, yet when he prays for the
people, he may be heard. And he confirms his sentence by the example of
Balaam: for he being a most wicked man, prayed unto god and was heard. But if a
man diligently examine these things, he shall find that Augustine is not
against us, although at the first sight he seems a little to press us.

When he had said that the evil ministers also are heard, The public prayers
of the minister are the prayers of the Church.
he strayghteway adds, that yt is not done for their wickedness sake, but
because of the faith and devotion of the people, whereby we gather, that
although the minister be the guide in words, yet are they not his prayers,
but the prayers of the Church. For there must be one certain manne, which
may conceive the prayers for the rest, least in the multitude should rise a
confusion or tumulte, if every manne should by his own words pour out
prayers aloude in the Church. Wherefore the minister is a certain mouth of the
church. The Myniste^ is the mouth of the church.
Therefore if he be evil, it is not he which is heard, but the faithful
people, which speak by his words. This thing taught Augustine when he
writes that an evil minister is heard, not for his wickedness, but for the
faith and devotion of the people. Hereby are we admonished, that whilst we are
present at public prayers, we must take very diligente heed, and
determine that those prayers which are recited, are ours. How it is said that
Balaam was heard.
But Balaam by a certain form of prayer prophesied, and therefore his words
are called a blessinge, because he prophesied happy things unto the people of
god. And he was not moved unto these prayers of his own will, but by the
sprite of god. Wherefore he was not heard, but the holy ghost was the true
author of his words.

That which is alleged out of John: God hears not sinners, Augustine says
that that was not the saying of Christ, Whyther God hears sinners
but of the blind man which was no^ yet fully illustrate. Wherefore he
affirms that sentence not to be true in universal. For (as they define) the
prayers of perverse ministers ar sometimes hard, because they are of the church.
But as touching the oblation of Christ, I do not think that the papists will
grant, yt the whole church offreth it, when as they will have that to be
peculiar to the massemongers. And though they should grant that, yet is not
the whole Church greater or more acceptable unto god, then Christ: because he
is not acceptable unto god for the churches sake, but the church is acceptable
unto god for Christ's sake. But to return to the saying of John, that God
hears not sinners, addinge a profitable distinction, we may thus expound it.
A distinction of sinners.
There are some sinners which fall of weakness, or sin of ignorance, which
yet afterward acknowledge themselves, are sorry, and repent faithfully. But
there are other, which sin without conscience, want faith, neither are they
led with any repentance. The first sort, because they have faith, are heard,
the other, forasmuch as they want faith, do in vain pour out their prayers.
What manner of one the publicane was when he prayed.
But if a man will obiecte the Publicane, who being a sinner, prayed unto god
and departed justified. I answer, that that publicane was in such sort a
sinner, that yet when he prayed, he was not without faith, yea rather he prayed
with faith, otherwise god would not have heard his prayers. And undoubtedly
James does right well admonish us, when he says: Pray, having faith. In sum,
that sentence is firm and perfect wherein it is said: whatsoever is offered
unto God for a sacrifice, the same is acceptable unto him, if faith and
justification of him that offreth, go before.

A very subtle cauilacion.
Some do cauile of the first act of faith, whereby we begin first to assente
unto god, and they doubt, whither it be acceptable unto god or no. Undoubtedly
before it, he is an enemy, which now begins to believe. Then say they, if
that first consent be acceptable unto God, then accepts he the gift of an
enemy. But if it be not acceptable, then it justifies not. To this I answer
two ways: First that men are not justified of the worthiness of the act of
faith, but of the firm promise of god, which faith embraces. Farther, when
any man first assenteth, and believes, then is he first made of an enemy a
friend, and although before he was an enemy, yet so sone as he believes, he is
made a friend, and cease to be an enemy. Plato.
But that which we have before concluded, that he which offreth is more
acceptable unto God, then the gift, the Ethnikes also saw. For Plato in
Alcibiade makes mention, that the Athenienses upon a time made war against
the Lacedaemonians, and when they were overcome, they sent messengers unto
Jupiter Ammon, by whom they said that they marueiled for what cause, where as
they had offered so great gifts unto the Gods, and their enemies on the
contrary side sacrificed sparingly and sclenderly, and yet had they the
victory over them. Ammon answered, that the gods more esteemed the prayers of
the Lacedaemonians, then the most fat sacrifices of the Athenienses. For when
they burnt Oxen unto their Gods, in the mean time they thought nothing of
their souls. So in Homere Jupiter speaks, that the Gods are not moved with
the smoke and smell of sacrifices, when as they hated Priamus and the Troyanes.
Wherefore the Ethnikes understood, that which the Papists at this day see not,
which think that their blind sacrificer, though he be never so vnpure and
ungodly, does yet with his hands, offer up Christ unto god the father.

Now let us see the other argument of this woman. God would never have showed
us these things, if he would have killed us: Forasmuch as he is not wont to
make his enemies of his counsel. Thus the wife of Manoah comfort her
fearful husband. But this argument seems somewhat obscure, when as Balaam,
although he were ungodly, was not ignorante of the Councelles of GOD. Christ
also says: Many shall say unto me in that day, have we not Prophesyed in
thy name? To these things I aunsweare, that GOD did not only foretell unto
them things that should come to pass for the deliuerye of the people, but
also of the child which they should receive, and of his education. Wherefore
seying he used them as fellow workmen, it was a certain argument, that god
had not appointed strayghteway to kill them. Neither speaks she here of
eternal life, but of this earthlye and corruptible life.

And the child grew, and his name was called Samson. Hereby we know that Zorah
was the name of the place where Samsons fathers was borne. Samson. This Hebrew
word Shemesch signifies the sun, being therefore so called, as though he were
of the sun: but for what cause he was so called it is not known. I marvel
that Josephus interprets Sampson for strong or mighty, Josephus.
undoubtedly such an Etimology agrees not with the Hebrew word. But he
oftentims goes from the historye. And in this place also he says that the
woman prayed, when as that is not found in the text. God blessed Samson. That
is, bestowed and heaped benefits upon him.

The sprite of God. That is the sprite of strength and might began to
strengthen him. In the host of Dan. The history speaks thus by reason of those
times. The tribe of Dan had not yet obtained possession in the land of promise,
but they were in tents, and fought against their enemies. R.D. Kimhi.
R.D. Kimhi says that they did the^ besiege the city of Lais. Wherefore he
being a young man, was together with the^ in the host. The Hebrew word is
Paam, and it signifies to be moved, and to be stricken at certain times, not
perpetually, but by courses. He being a young man was moved, and waxed hot, to
fight the more vehemently against his enemies. And his impulsions, because they
were of God, therefore are they ascribed unto the spyrite. But because we are
already come unto the end of this chapter, before we enter into the next,
there are certain things which are to be marked.

First, hereby we gather a most sure argument with how singular a care god
governs his church. For although the Jews had grievously sinned, yet had god
a regard to their health, and sends the^ a captain, which should deliver
them, and foretells what things should come to pas, least they should seem to
have happened by chance. Farther he would have the child to be a Nazarite,
Outward things are not to be neglected.
and to have his hear to grow, and to abstain from wine and strong drink.
Wherefore we are taught that these outward things are not utterly vain, but
may be applied unto the glory of god. Men are wont sometimes to say, when they
are admonished of outward things: What, does god regard these things? In deed
we know also that in those things is no holiness to be put. Howebeit we must
take heed that both in living, and in apparel, and in going also in all
gesture and in habit, we behave our selves comely, both before God, and also
before the church, not superstitiously but holily, that our modesty may
advance the kingdom of Christ and his holy Gospel. Farthermore let us here
consider that the wife helps the husband with her council. For although by
the ordinarye law it is not lawful for women to preach and teach in an
assembly: yet are they not so destitute of the gracious gifts of God, but that
they may instruct their husbands with good counsels.

Of the visions of Angels.
THe next thing, is that I somewhat entreat of the visions of Angels. For
as we have now heard an Aungel appeared unto Manoah, and oftentimes in other
places (as the scriptures declare) angels have been seen of men, But it may be
demanded, how they appeared, whither with any body, or else only in
phantasye? And if it were with a body, whither it were with their own body,
or with a strange body? and if they took a body, whither they were for a time
or for ever?

The opinion of Platos sect.
Of these things, there are diverse opinions of men Platos sect do say that the
minds, that is, the intelligences are so framed, that certain of them have
celestial bodies, some have fyry bodies, some ayry, some watery, and some
earthlye. And some they affirm to be dark Demonia, which do continually abide
in darkness and mist. Of these things Marcilius Ficinius has gathered many
things in his. The Peripatetikes.

The schole deuines men.


10. books de legibus, and in his argument of Epinomides. The Peripatetikes
affirm that there are certain intelligences which turn and move the
celestial orbs, neither make they mention of any other. But the
scholedeuines, do determine that those minds and intelligences are altogether
spiritual, and yt they have no bodies. And this is the reason that leads the^
thus to think, because these intelligences must needs excel the souls of men,
whose most perfect faculty consists in understanding. Wherefore as they
think, in this act of understanding it behooves that these intelligences do
much excede the^, and ye comes to pass for that these heavenly minds have
no need of images, or of senses: and because the case so stands, they should
have bodies in vain.

The fathers Origene.
But of the fathers there are some which affirm far otherwise. Origene in his
books (...) (as Jerome has noted in his Epistle ad Pammachium, de erroribus
Ioa^nis Herosolymitani) says that those spiritual minds, as often as they
do offend, slide and are thrust into bodies, but yet not straightway into the
vilest bodies, but first into starry bodies, then into fiery and ayry, afterward
into watrye, and lastly into humayne and earthlye. And if then also they
behave not themselves well, they are at the last made devils. But if they will
at least ways then repent, they may by the self same degrees come to their
old estate. And this we ought to understand (says he) by that ladder, whereon
Jacob saw angels ascending and descending. Jerome.
And Jerome also to make the thing more plain, adds a similitude. A Tribune
(says he) if he govern not well, is dejected from his degree, and is made
the princes chief Secretary, afterward a Senator, a captain over 200. men, a
ruler over fewer, a watcheman, a horseman, and afterward a soldier of the
first degree. And although a Tribune were once a common soldier, yet is he not
made of a tribune a young Soldier, but the Princes chief Secretary. But these
things are absurd, and very worthy to be laughed at. And undoubtedly Origene
in those things speaks more like a Platonian, then a Christian. Against the
translation of souls into bodies after Origines faining.
That which he first takes that souls are thruste into bodies, as into
punishments, is manifestly false, for as much as god has adjoined the body
unto the soul for a help, and not for a punishmente. Neither does he well to
give hope of salvation to come unto the devil, when as Christ has contrariwise
taught, saying: Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
devil and his Angels. Neither can we interpreate it that this word eternum is
there set for this word diuturnu^, that is everlasting, for a long season. For
Christ most apertly expounds his sentence, when he says: Their worm shall
not dye, and their fire shall not be quenched. Neither does he truly affirm
that the souls first offend before they come into bodies, when as Paul
writes of Jacob and Esau, before they were borne, and had done neither good
nor evil, it was said, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated: The greater
shall serve the lesser. Wherefore this sentence of Origene is woorthely to be
rejected of all men.

Augustine seems in many places to attribute bodies unto Angels, Augustine.
namely in his second book De trinitate. chap. vii. and in the third book,
chap. 1. which thing the Schoolmen perceauing, have excused him, saying that
he spoke not according to his own opinion, but after the opinion of other men.
Which thing I also could well allow, for as much as I see that that father (in
his. viii. book De ciuitate dei, the.xvi. chap.) after the opinion of
Apuleius, Madaurensis, and Porphyrius, defines, that Demones are in kind
animalia, that is, having sense, in soul passive, in mind reasonable, in body
ayry, in time eternal. Undoubtedly, herein he follows the doctrine of Platoes
sect. But in the places before alleged he seems to speak altogether of
himself. Yea, Bernhardus.
and Bernhardus also upon Cantica Canticorum, as it appears, is of the same
opinion. Wherefore the schole men are compelled to invent an other excuse, and
they say that Angels, if they be compared with men, are spirits: but if with
God, they have bodies, because they fail from the unity and simplicity of God.
Tertulian de carne Christi, Tertulian.
affirms that Angels have bodies. But that is not so much to be marueiled
of him, for he attributes a body also unto God him self. But he calls a
body whatsoever is. For he had to do with unlearned and rude men, which think
yt whatsoever is not a body, is nothing. But the schoolmen say that Angels
are in very deed spirits, but when they come unto men, they take upon them
ayrye bodies, and thicken them and make them gross, whereby they may be seen,
touched, and felt above the nature of air. There are some also which say, that
some earthly or watrishe thing is mixed with them: and yet will they not that
there is there a perfect mixture, that they should not be compelled to put
generacio^ there. There were some also, which thought that Angels sometimes
took upon them dead karcases. But this seems unto the greater part a thing
unworthy, so to think of holy Angels.

Here some man will say that it is absurd, Whither it be convenient for Angels
to take upon them the shape of man.
to ascribe unto Angels fayning and lying, as to feign the^ selves to be men,
when as in very deed they are not men. Yea and this seems also to weaken the
argument of Christ, which he used after his resurrection, to teach that he
had a true body. Feel (says he) and see, for a spirit has not flesh and
bones, as ye see me have. For the Apostles being afraid, thought that they had
seen a spirit: wherefore Christ to put them out of doubt, bad them to handle
and feel his body. But the Apostles might have said: That which we feel is a
fansye: it seems in deed to be Christ, but peradventure it is not. For
Angels also seem to have bodies, and to be touched and felt, when as yet in
very deed they have no bodies. Also this sentence may debilitate the argument
of the Fathers, as touching the flesh of Christ, against Marcion. For he did
eat (say they) he drank, he was hu^gry, he slept, he did sweat. Wherefore he
had a true and humane body. Unto these things might be answered: that these
self same things have happened unto Angels, when as yet they had not bodies.

I answer: That which they first say, Not whatsoeeuer is feigned, is a lie.
that it is absurd to attribute lies unto Angels: they ought to consider, that
not whatsoever by any means is feigned, is straightway a lie. Christ appeared
unto his Disciples as a stranger, and yet he lied not: he appeared also unto
Mary like a Gardener, and for all that he lied not. So Angels, although they
seemed men, when as they were not men, yet were they not liars. For they came not
therefore, to prove them selves to be men, but only that they might come to
men, and talk with them.

To the argument of Christ touching his own body, I thus answer. Angels when
they seemed me^, lied not.
First the apostles thought it had been a ghost which had appeared. And Christ to
refel that, says: feel and see, because a spirit has not flesh and bones.
By the feeling might be perceived, that it was a true and perfect body which
was present, and not a vain fansy. But thou will say, that it was a true body
in deed, but yet taken for a time, and such a body, as sometimes Angels are
wont to put on. But how could it be taught, that that was the same body, which
lay before in the sepulcher? In this thing the authority of Christ and of the
scriptures ought to be of force. For the scriptures teach manifestly enough
that Christ should dye, and afterward rise again the third day: Tertulian.
Thomas Aquinas.
but nothing can rise again, but that which before fell, as Tertulian has most
learnedlye written. And this thing the schoolmen understood: wherefore Thomas
Aquinas says, that unless certain other things were added, this is no firm
argument. The same thing may be answered unto the reasons of the fathers
against Marcion. Many in deed of the actions before alleged, may agree with
Angels, or with the bodies taken, but yet not all. For to be borne, to be
nourished, and to dye, and to feel, happen neither to Angels, neither to
bodies that are taken. But the scripture most apertly testifies that Christ
was both borne, and that he grew till he came to age, that he was hungry, that
he dyed, and was true man. But of these things I will speak more largely
afterward.

There are very many other things in the school deuines, as touching these
matters: What manner of bodies the angels take upon them.
but because they are not so profitable, therefore I ouerpasse them. But this
thing I demand, whither Angels may take upon the^ true bodies, and that
natural, which bodies also had their being before, and use them at their
liberty, as the Devil did put on the Serpent, and by him deceived Eve, the
Angel also spoke in the Ass of Bileam. Why then can not an Angel after the
same manner, possess an humane body, and speak in it? Undoubtedly it is
written in Zachary the prophet: The Angel of the Lord which spoke in me.
Wherefore it seems that Angels may use the bodies of men and beasts.
Augustine.
Augustine in his.2. book De Trinitate the.1. chapter, says that this is a
very hard question, whether Angels unto their own proper bodies join other
bodies, and change them into sundry forms, as we are wont to do garments,
or also to change them into very nature, as we read that Christ changed
water into wine. This thing he says is not impossible. For thus he writes: I
confess it passes the strengthes of my capacity, whither Angels retayning
still the spiritual quality of their own body, very secretly woorking by it,
do take of these more gross inferior elements, any thing which being framed
unto them they do change, as a garment, and turn it into al corporal forms
or shapes, yea even into the true things themselves, as true water was turned
by the Lord into wine: or whether they transform their own proper bodies into
what they will, being framed to that which they have in hand to do. But whether
soever of these it be, it pertayneth not to this question.

But I say, if the bodies of Angels were true bodies, then was Christ's
argument firm, and I will willinglier grant to this, then to say as some do,
that Angels deceived the senses of men. A subtiltye of the Papists concerning
tra^substantiacion.
For after this sort they strive against us, when we say that in the Eucharist
remains bread, which is both seen and touched, they answer that it seems
bread in deed, but it is not, as the Angels seemed men, when as they were no
men. For I deny not, but that the senses may sometimes be deceived. A
distinction of sensible things. When the senses may be deceived, and when not.
But I affirm in the mean time, that there are two kinds of those things,
which are perceived by sense. For there are some things common unto many senses,
and other are proper to some one sense. For figure, magnitude, and number, are
perceived of many senses. And undoubtedly in such things the sense may
sometimes be deceived, as Carneades was wont to dispute of an ore in the water
appearing broken, and of the bygnes of the body of the Sun. But in sensible
things proper unto one sense, the sense is never deceived, unless there be some
fault in the body, or over much distaunce, or some such like let. Wherefore
seeing in the Eucharist the sense judges that the bread remains, there is no
need to feign that the sense is therein deceived.

But to appoint a certain compendious way of this disputacion, there are they
were seen in fantasy, so that they were thought to have bodies, when they had
them not. Which reason cannot be firm, for they illuded not the senses,
neither were they seen of any one only, but very often times of many, and they
were so seen, that Abraham washed their feet, and Jacob wrastled with an Angel
the whole night. Or else they appeared with a true body in deed, which yet was
not Tertulian
Of this third kind Tertulian has written most learnedly in his book De
carne Christi. Thou have sometime red and believed, says he, that the Angels
of the creator were turned into the shape of man, and that they carried such a
truth of a body, that both Abraham washed their feet, and also Lot was by
their hands delivered from the Sodomites: an angel also wrastled with a man,
and desired to be losed from the wayght of the body, by whom he was holden.
That therefore, which was lawful unto Angels that are inferiors unto God,
that they being turned into the body of a man, not withstanding yet abode
Angels, do thou take away thus from God which is more mighty, as though
Christ putting on man in very deed were not able to remain God? Thus Tertulian
fights against the Marcionites: The error of ye Marcionites
for they affirmed that Christ seemed to have a humane body, but in very
deed he had none. Tertulian obiecteth against them: and if ye grant this
(says he) unto the Angels, that they had true bodies, why do ye not rather
grant it unto the son of God? And he adds: Or did those Angels appear in
fantesy of flesh? But thou dare not say so: for if it be so, that thou count
the Angels of the creator as Christ, then shall Christ be of the same substance
as the Angels are, and the Angels shall be such as Christ is. If thou did
not sometimes of purpose reject, and sometimes corrupt the scriptures which
resist thy opinion, the Gospel of John should have of this confounded thee, Of
the Dooue wherein the holy ghost appeare^
which declares that the spirit coming down in the body of a Dooue, sat
upon the Lord, which spirit being that he was, was as truly a Dooue, as he
was a spirit: neither the contrary substance taken, destroyed the proper
substance.

I know there are some of the schoolmen which think that it was not a very
Dove, which descended upon the head of Christ, but only that it was an ayry
and thick body, which appeared to be a Dooue. Augustine.
Yet Augustine de Agone Christiano writes the contrary, namely that it was a
very Dove: for to express the property of the holy ghost, a thing (says he)
serves better then a sign, even as Christians also are better expressed in
Sheep and Lambs, then in the lykenes of Sheep and Lambs. Also if Christ had
a true body, and deceived not, then the holy ghost had in very deed the body
of a Dooue.

Tertulian adds: Thou will demand where the body of the Dove became, What
beca^^ of the Dove wherein the holy go^^ appeared.
when the spirit was taken again into heaven, and likewise of the Angels. It
was by the same means taken away, whereby it was made. If thou had seen
when it was brought forth of nothing, thou should also have known when it
was turned to nothing. If the beginning was not visible, no more was the end.
Farther, he remitteth the reader to John. Was he also (says he) a fantasy
after his resurrection, when he offered his hands and feet to be seen of his
Disciples? saying: behold that it is I, for a spirit has not flesh and bones
as ye see me have. Then Christ is brought in as a Iugler or Cuniurer. And in
his third book against Marcion. Wherefore his Christ, that is, Christ of the
true God, because he should not lie, neither deceive, and by that means
paraduenture should be counted the Christ of the creator, was not that which
he appeared to be, and feigned to be that thing which he was, flesh, and not
flesh, man and not man, wherefore Christ is also God, and not God. For why
should he not also carry the fantasy of God? Shall I believe him as touching
this inward substance, that is overthrown as touching his outward substance?
How shall he be counted true in a secret thing, that is found so false in an
open thing? And afterward: It is inoughe for me to affirm that which is
agreing unto God, namely the truth of that thing, which he obiecteth to three
senses, to sight, touching, and hearing. Again in the book de carne Christi:
The virtues (says he) prove the spirit of God, the passions prove the flesh
of man. If virtues are not without spirit, neither shall passions also be
without flesh. If the flesh with his passions be feigned, the spirit also with
his virtues is false. Why do thou by thy lie take but half Christ? He is al
whole truth.

The opinion of Apelles.
Apelles the heretic, being in manner overcome with these reasons, grants
that Christ had in deed true flesh, but he denies that he was borne, but
brought from heaven: and he obiecteth that the bodies, which were taken by
Angels, were true bodies, but they were not borne. Such a body (says he) had
Christ. Tertulian answers hereunto: They, says he, which set forth the
flesh of Christ, after the example of the Angels, saying that it was not
borne, namelye a fleshye substance, I would have them to compare the causes
also, as well of Christ as of the Angels, for which they came into the flesh.
No Aungel did at any time therefore discende to be crucified, to suffer death,
and to rise again from death. If there was never any such cause why angels
should be incorporate, then haste thou a cause why they took flesh, and yet
were not borne. They came not to die, therefore they came not to be borne. But
Christ being sent to dye, it was necessary that he should be borne, that he
might dye: for none is wont to dye, but he which is borne. He adds
moreover: And even then also the Lord himself appeared among those angels
unto Abraham without birth, namelye with flesh, for the same diversity of
cause. Afterward he adds: That the Angels have their bodies rather from
earth, then from heaven. Let them prove says he, that those angels received
the substance of flesh of the stars. If they prove it not, because it is not
written, then was not the flesh of Christ thereof, to which Christ they apply
the example of Angels. And in his third book against Marcio^: My God, says
he, which has reformed it, taken of the slyme in this quality, not yet of
seed by marriage, and yet flesh, might as well of any matter have framed flesh
also unto Angels, which also framed the world of nothing, into so many and
such bodies. Again in his book de carne Christi, he says: It is manifest
that angels carry not flesh proper of their own, as substa^ces by nature
spiritual, and if they have any body, yet it is of their own kind, and are
transfigurable for a time into the flesh of man, that they may be seen, and
have fellowship with men. Farther, in his third book against Marcion: Know
thou says he, that this is not granted unto thee, that the flesh in Angels
was putatiue, or by imaginacion, but of the very and sound substance of man.
For if it were not hard to give unto that putatiue flesh the true senses and
acts of flesh, much more easyer was it to give a true substance of flesh, to
true senses and acts, even for that he is the proper author and woorker
thereof. For it is a harder thing for God to make a lie, then to feign a body.
Last of al, thus he concludes: Therefore are they truly humayne bodies, because
of the truth of God, who is far from lying and deceate. And because they can
not humanelye be handled of men, The sum of the opinion of Tertulian.
but in the substance of men.

I could rehearse mo things out of Tertulian, but these seem sufficient for
this present purpose. In sum, he thinks that Angels have bodies, but yet
strange bodies, and not their own. For their proper bodies (as he thinks)
pertain unto the spiritual kind. Secondlye, he says that those strange
bodies which they take, are created either of nothing, or else of some matter
which shall seem good unto God. Thirdly he affirms that they were true,
perfect, and humane bodies, and not vain or feigned, but of a true flesh, and
not of a flesh only appearing, so that of men they might be both touched and
handled, to the end he might both remove dissimulation from God, and also
confirm the veritye of humane flesh in Christ. Whereby is concluded, that the
humane senses were not deceived concerning these things: as the Papists
contend that the senses are deceived concerning the bread and wine of the
Eucharist.

But Origene in his book (...) (as he is cited of Jerome against John bishop
of Jerusalem) thought far otherwise. Origene.
For where we say that the visions of Angels may be imagined three manner of
ways, namely either in fantasye, or in body, but not humane, or lastly in a
true and humane body: he takes a certain mean, and says that the bodies of
Angels wherein they offer them selves to be seen, are neither perfect nor
humane, nor also fantastical, but only bodies, and that he applies to them
that rise again. For in the resurrection says he, we shall have bodies, but
yet only bodies, not bones, not synewes, not flesh. And in deed there is
some difference between a body and flesh: Al flesh is a body, but not every
body is flesh.
for all flesh is a body, but not every body is flesh. Such a difference
touched Paul to the Collossians, saying: Being reconciled in the body of his
flesh. And in the second chapter: In the spoiling of the body of the flesh of
sin. And in the Symbol also we say, that we believe in the resurrection of
the flesh, and not of the body.

Origene said that he saw two extreme errors. One was of them which said
there is no resurrection, such as were the Valentinians and Marcionites, such
also was Alexander, who as Paul testifies, taught that the resurrection was
already done: and such also as at this day the Libertines are said to be, who
babble I cannot tell what of that matter, both vngodl^ly and unlearnedly. An
other error is of those which think that the perfect and true bodies shall
rise again with flesh, synewes, and bones, which thing (as he says) is not
possible: because flesh and blood shall not possess the kingdom of heaven.
But Origene ought to have considered what follows afterward in Paul. For he
adds: Neither shall corruption possess incorruption. Wherefore his sentence
is, that the corruptible body cannot possess the kingdom of God. But Origene
to retain that his meaning, confessed that the bodies should rise in deed,
but not thycke and with bones, but spiritual, as Paul has said: The body
shall rise spiritual.

But Origene in those words marketh not that Paul calls it a spiritual
body, not because it should utterly be changed into a spirit, but because
it should have spiritual conditions, namely incorruption, and most clear
brightness. But because he perceived that the body of Christ, which after his
resurrection he offered unto his Disciples to be touched and to be felt, was
against his doctrine, therefore he says: Let not the body of Christ deceive
you, because it had many synguler privileges, which are not granted unto
other bodies. Farther, that by this dispensacion he might prove that he
verelye was risen, he would after his resurrection have a true body, not that
other bodies in the resurrection should be like. But he showed the nature of
his spiritual body in Emaus, when he vanished away from the sight of his
Disciples. And an other time when he entered to his Disciples, the doors being
shut.

Jerome thus opposes himself against these things: Jerome.
If Christ (says he) after his resurrection did eat in very deed, then had
he also a true body: but if not, how proved he by a false thing the truth of
his body? But in that he vanished away from the sight of the Disciples, that
was not by the nature of the body, but by the divine power. For in Nazareth
when the people would have stoned him, he wythdrewe himself from their eyes.
And that which might be done of a Cuniurer, shall we think that the Son of
God cannot do? For Apollonius Thianaeus, Apollonius Thianaeus.
when he was brought into the Counsel before Domitian, foorthwyth vanished
away. And that that thing in Christ was not by the nature of the body, but
by the power of GOD, it is declared by that which went before in the same
Hystorye. For when he was in the way with his Disciples, their eyes were holden
that they could not know him. But in that Origene says, that the body of
Christ was spiritual, because he entered in, Now the body of christ entered, the
doors being shut.
the doors being shut, Jerome answers that the creature gave place unto the
Creator. etc. Wherefore the body of Christ pearsed not through the myddest
of the boordes and posts, so that two bodies were together in one, and the
self same place, but herein happened the miracle, because the very boordes of
the door gave way unto the body of Christ. The body of Christ went not out of
the sepulcher, it being shut. Leo.
Farther, that which some object, that the body of Christ went out of the
Sepulcher, it being shut, that also is not of necessitye to be believed, but we
may think that the stone was roled away before he went forth. And least a
man should think that I feign those things, let him read the.lxxxiii.
Epistle of Leo, ad Episcopos Palaesthinos. The flesh, says he, of Christ,
which went out of the Sepulcher, the stone being roled away. The bodies of
angels wherein they appeared, were true and humane.
etc. Now to return to the purpose, because I have said that the bodies of
Angels may be thought to have been either fantastical or spiritual, or else
perfect and in very deed humane, and the two first parts are rejected: then
rests that the bodies of Angels wherein they appear, are true and humane.
Which thing I affirm only to be true, for as much as Angels were so
seen, The visions of Prophets were sometime imaginatiue.
that they wrastled with men, and offered their feet to be washed. Neither do
I judge that it is lawful there to say, that the humane senses were deceived,
when as the things were outwardlye done. But I do not deny, but that there
sometimes happened imaginatiue appearinges unto the prophets, when as they said
that they saw God, or the Cherubin, or other such like things. For that, for
as much as it was in their mind or imaginatiue faculty, it might well be done
by forms, images, and visions.

Angels appearing in humane bodies were not men.
Now remain there two things to be diligently wayghed. One is, whither
Angels, when they after this sort put on humane bodies, may be called men.
I think not. For if we understand humane flesh, which is formed and borne
of a reasonable soul, undoubtedly Angels after that manner cannot be said to
have humane flesh. What then, will some man say? Were the senses deceived
when men saw them? Not so. For the senses judge only outward things, and
such things as appear. But what inwardlye impelleth or moves those things
which they see, they judge not. That longs to reason to seek and search
out. This also is to be added, that Angels did not continually retain these
bodies, because they were not joined unto them, in one and the self same
substance: So that an Angel and a body were made one person.

The holy ghost was not the Dooue, nor the Dove the holy Ghost.
The holy ghost also, although it was a true Dooue, where he descended, yet was
not he together one substance with it. Wherefore the Dooue was not the holy
ghost, nor the holy ghost the Dooue. Otherwise Angels may (as we have before
taught) enter in deed into a body before made, and which before had his
being, as it is read of the Angel which spoke in the Ass of Baalam, and of
the Devil, which by the Serpent talked with Eve. But at this present we
dispute not of that kind, but only say, that Angels woorking in this
manner in the bodies of creatures, are not joined unto them in one and the
self same substance. Wherefore the Ass could not be called an Angel,
neither was the Angel an Ass, even as the serpent was not in very deed the
Devil, neither was the Devil the Serpent.

The son of God, is God and man.
But the Son of God, for as much as he took upon him humane nature, was man,
and man was God, because of one and the self same substance, wherein were
two natures. But before when he appeared unto Abraham, and to the Fathers,
although he had true flesh, yet because it was not joined unto him in one and
the self same substance, he could not be called flesh, neither was flesh,
God. But afterward, when he took upon him both flesh and soul, so that
there was only one substance or person, then man was God, and God, man.
Whereby it came to pass, that he should truly be borne, that he should
dye, and redeem mankind. Wherefore he did truly call him self the son of
man: and in John he says, ye seek to kyl me, a man, which have told you the
truth. And in the Scriptures it is said: Made of the seed of David. And Peter
in the Acts: ye have killed, says he, a man appointed you of God. And Esaias:
Behold, says he, a virgin shall conceive and bear a Son. These words have
great force. For unless Christ had been true man, a Virgin could not have
conceived him, neither have brought him forth, nor called him her son. This
thing Tertulian prudently marked. If he had been a stranger, says he,
Tertulian.
a Virgin could not either have conceived him, or borne him. The Angel also
saluted Mary after this manner: Be not afraid said he, thou shall conceive. etc.
Elizabeth said: How happens this to me, that the mother of my Lord should
come unto me? If she had Christ only as a Stranger, she could not be called
his Mother. The Angel also said: Blessed be the fruit of thy womb. But how
could it have been said, the fruit of her womb, if he had brought a body
with him from heaven? And in Esaias it is written: A rod shall come out of the
root of Iesse, and a flower shall ascend out of his root. Iesse was the
stock, Mary the branch, but Christ is the flower which took his body of her.
Matthew also thus begins his Gospel: The book of the generation of Jesus
Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham. If Christ brought a body
from heaven, how was he the son of Abraham or David? Farther, the promise
made to Abraham of Christ, is in this sort: In thy seed shall all nations be
blessed. Paul entreating of these words to the Galathians: He said not,
says he, in seeds, as though in many, but in thy seed, which is Christ. And
in the Epistle to the Romans we read: Of whom is Christ according unto the
flesh. All these things prove most apeartly, that Christ was true man, and
in him was one substance of God and man. These things cannot be said of the
Angels, neither of the Son of God, before he was borne of the Virgin:
although whylest he appeared, he had true flesh (as we have before said:) but
yet not joined unto him in one and the self same substance: neither could it
be said of the holy ghost, that he was in very deed a Dooue, although that
wherein he once appeared, was a true Dooue. And in this sense wrote Tertulian
those things which we have before cited, which things being not well
understood, might breed either error or offense unto the Readers.

Now rests the other question: Whither Angels did in very deed eat and
drink when they appeared. Scotus.
Whyther Angels clothed with bodies taken, did in very deed eat and drink.
Of the Schoolmen some think that they did eat in very deed, and other
deny it. Scotus thinks that to eat is nothing else, then to chawe meat, and
to conueyghe it down into the bellye. And this thing did the Angels,
wherefore he gathers that they did eat in very deed.

Other think that to eat, is not only to chawe the meat, or to conueyghe it
down into the bellye, but moreover to convert it into the substance of his
body, by concoction thoroughe the power of vegitacion. This, for as much as
the Angels did not, therefore they did not eat in very deed. The book of
Thobias.
The book of Tobias is not in the Canon of the Hebrews, but yet it might be
applied unto our purpose, but that there is variaunce in the copyes. For in
that book which Munster set forth in Hebrew, in the.xii. chapter, Raphael the
Angel says: I seemed to you to eat and to drink, but I did not eat,
neither drink. The common translacion has: I seemed to you to eat and to
drink. But I use invisible meat and drink. Neither text denies, but that
the Angel did after a certain manner eat.

Augustine.
But whatsoever may be gathered of those words, me thinks the interpretacion
of Augustine is to be received, in his.iii. book de Trinitate, the.22. chap.
where he thus writes: The Angels did eat in very deed, but not for need, but
to contract custom and familiarity with men. Wherefore when in the one text it
is said that Raphael did not eat, What is the meat and drink of Angels.
it must not so be understand, as though he did not eat at al, but because he
did not eat after the manner of men. But this is there chiefly to be marked,
when the Angel answers that he uses spiritual meat and drink, that
spiritual nourishment was nothing else, then an apearte and manifest knowledge
of the true God, and execution of his will, as Christ also said, that that was
his meat, to do the will of his father. The same also is our meat, although
it be not after the same manner. For they see God manifestly, but we see him by
a glass, and in a riddle. Whereunto thou may add that they which believe in
Christ, Who eat and drink the body and bluode of Christ.

The flesh and blood of Christ are neither included nor poured into the
simboles or signs. Augustine


and do assuredly persuade them selves, that he died for their sake, they I
say, does both eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, to which use the
simboles or signs, for that they stir up the senses, are very much
profitable: not that the flesh and blood of Christ are poured into the bread
and wine, or are by any means included in those elements, but because those
things are of the beleuers received with a true faith. For they are an
invisible noorishment, which is received only in the mind, as Augustine has
faithfully admonished, saying: Why preparest thou the teethe and the belly?
Believe and thou have eaten.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
1 ANd Samson went down to Thimnath, and saw a woman in Thimnath, of the
daughters of the Philistians.

2 And he came up and told his father and his mother, and said: I have seen a
woman in Thimnah, of the daughters of the Philistians. Now therefore give her
me to wife.

3 Then his father and his mother said unto him: Is there never a wife among
the daughters of thy brethren, and among al my people, that thou must go to
take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistians. Samson said unto his Father:
Give me her, for she pleases me well.

4 But his Father and his mother knew not that it came of the Lord, that he
should seek an occasion against the Philistians: for at that time the
Philistians raygned over Israel.


NOw are we come to the warlike feats of Samson, which he wrought for the
health of his people, and first is set forth unto us, how he sought him a
wife. He went down to Thimnath. But why he went thither it is not written.
Some say that he went down to a certain sole^nity or feast day. But it is more
likely yt there was the^ some assembly, either civil or warlike, as it is
accustomed. At that time the Philistians raygned over the Hebrews. And he saw
there a maid, and desired earnestly to have her given him to wife. This thing to
do he was moved by faith: for the word of the Lord did to that stir up his
mind. For (as we shall afterward know) these things were done by the will of
God. The Epistle to the Hebrews numbreth Samson among those which pleased God
by faith. This is notable and woorthye to be marked, that a young man, although
he exceedinglye loved the maiden, yet durst he not speak any thing of
matrimonye, without the knowledge and will of his Parents. He returns home,
he prays them to give her him to wife. This was to honor his Parents.

Some think that Samson was minded to marye this maiden, but upon this
condition, to make her first a proselite, otherwise it had not been lawful for
him to have married with a stranger. But in our history there is no such thing
red: undoubtedly this seems to me to be a certain singular thing, and done
by the instinction of god, as shall be afterward more apertly understand.
Wherefore we must not curiously search for that matter.

But Samson neded no long Oration to his parents. They objected unto him the
kindred of the woman, and admonished him, that he ought rather to seek a wife in
his own nation: Howbeit they fulfill his mind, and went forward with the
marriages, as it shall afterward be said. But contrariwise among Christians it
oftentimes happens, that the children take them wives against their parents
will: Of which thing Esau remains as a most wicked example, who against the
will of his parent, married wives of the Chananites, whose sight and
conversation they could not abide. We must not regard that which is commonly
said, we mary wives for our selves, and not for our parents. But we must
rather think that God would after this manner provide for miserable young
men, that their rash and unadvised age should not deceive them. Howbeit
parents on the other side ought to see that they use not tirannycall power
toward their children, or marye them to such whom they can not abide. But
of these things we will speak more aboundantlye afterward.

Moreover we must note, that the Parents of Samson when they call the
Philistians uncircumcised, do after a sort vpbrayde unto their son, that
he would mary a wife borne of strangers and idolatrers. Yet they speak
nothing roughlye unto him, they thrust him not out of the doors, nor cast him
out of their favor. For that they saw his mind very fyrme and bente to that
purpose. And although it be not written in the history, yet is it probable that
Samson showed unto his Parents the mystery, namely that he was by the
impulsion of god instigated to this marriage: otherwise it had not been lawful
for them to have asse^ted unto their son, to mary one of a contrary religion.
His father and his mother knew not at the beginning, that this was the will
of God, that he should seek occasion against the Philistians. That is, that
by them some beginning of iniurye might spring, which he afterward might
seem by good right to prosecute.

5 Then went Samson and his father and his mother down to Thimnah, and came up
to the vineyardes of Thimnah, and behold a Lions whelpe roared upon him.

6 And the sprite of the Lord came upon him, and he divided him, as one
should divide a Kidde, neither was there any thing in his hand. And he
told not his Father nor his Mother what he had done.


The Parents when they knew and understood their sons will, and paraduenture
had knowledge of the instinction of god, do not only assent, but also follow
him, that the wedding might be the more honestly accomplished, the parents not
only requiring, but also being present. In this place appears the will of
God both hidden and manifest. The will of God was declared by the law that a
Jew should not take to wife a stranger, The will of god hid and manifest.
but by his secret and hidden will he contrarily decreed of Samson. But we
must follow the will of God expressed by a common rule, and sealed by his
law: to that will we must direct both life and manners. For the other will
we must not be to much careful, unless we feel it most apertly. And we must
with great diligence take heed, that when we think we are led by the
impulsion of the holy Ghost, we be not led by our affections. Of the secret
will of God Paul entreated, when he made mention that of Jacob and Esau, before
they had done any good or evil, it was said: Jacob have I loved, but Esau have
I hated. This will of God is obscure and hidden from the eyes of men: therefore
no man can render a reason of it. Wherefore when we hear any thing of it, we
must say with Paul: O the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of
God, etc. But by the will reveled we may understand that we are acceptable unto
god, when we trust in him, when we detest vices, and renew our life and manners
by the grace of god, not because these things are the causes of the goodness of
God toward us, These two wills in god are not in very deed separated.
but because they are certain sure tokens thereof. But how these two wills are
not in very deed separated in God, but are one and a simple will, we shall
declare more oportunely in an other place,

In that it is now written that Samson, or rather God sought occasion of the
Philistians, Of the occasion which God sought.
it seems very obscure. And what occasion was there to be sought for? Was
not this cause sufficient enough, that they by violence withhelde the land
promised unto the Israelites, and had put them to Tributes and taxes? Liranus
Liranus thinks that between the Hebrews and the Philistians there were
certain couenauntes made, which were not rashlye to be violated. I also add
this, that Samson was a private man, as far as any man knew of him then.
And therefore God would have an honester occasion for him to fight, so that if
he being by them contumeliouslye handled, should again somewhat endamage
them, he should seem to revenge his own private injuries, and not the public.

And undoubtedly it seemed that matrimonye after this manner contracted,
should rather have caused peace to follow. But contrariwise there ensued
grievous war, which happened not by the default of matrimony, but of men. So
also now are not a few found, which to possess kingdoms and to get them
other men's riches, do abuse matrimony. Wherefore we ought not to marvel, if
such marriages have very ill success. For oftentimes by them do happen both
wars and also ouerthrowinges of public wealths. But by whose fault (thou will say) sprange this war? What sins happened in this matrimonye.
By the fault of the woman which was married, and also of her parents, and
corruption of the public wealth. And these would God use to bring to light
their sins and to punish them. The maiden ought to have esteemed her husband
above all men. But she betrayed him, and showed his riddle to her citizenes, so
that Samson was feign to pay unto them a great reward. His wives father also
did him no small injury, for he took away from him his wife, and gave her to
an other. This thing ought he not to have done, for matrimonies ought to be
firm and ratified. But the coruption of the public wealth of the Philistians
may hereby be known, because such a wicked offense was not openly reproved
and punyshed, as though it had every where been lawefull to have done it.

By the way Samson turned a side from his Parents, whom a roaringe Lion
met, and met him being unarmed: so that he might easily have killed him.
But that we should understand, that Samson by the power of the sprite of God
prevailed against that wild beast, it is added: And the sprite of the Lord
came upon him, Four names of Lions among the Hebrews.
and he divided the Lion, as one should rent a kidde. There are four names
of Lions among the Hebrews according to the diverse decrees of their age. The
first is Gor, when he is yet a whelpe, The second is Cepher, when he is
somewhat grown in age. The third is Ariath, when he is strong and mighty. The
fourth is Liba, when he is waxen old: although he be called also Lisch, when
he is very old. That which is now written, is called Cephir, that is grown
in age, and fyerce enough, to thend a man should not think that he was a whelpe
of the first age. Neither was he tame and gentle, as so^times they are wont to
be, but he ran roaring to invade Samson. Why God would have Sa^son to fight
with the Lion.
God would give unto Samson an experience of the strength that he had given
him, that he should enterprise greater things afterward. So also he
excercised David from his youth, before he should fight against Goliath.
Wherefore he said unto Saul: There came a Bear and a Lion, and thy servant
rent them. Plini.
Lions ar very common in Siria as Plini affirms.

Whither it be lawful for children to mary without the consent of their
parents.
NOw shall it be good to see, whither it be lawful for children to contract
matrimony without the consent of their pare^tes. Undoubtedly Samson would not,
and it is a matter of much honestye and gratitude toward the parents, if
matrimony be not contracted without their consent and knowledge. Examples of
the Elders.
At the beginning Adam did not choose himself a wife, God was his father and
brought unto him Eve. Abraham when Isaac was now a man, sent his servant to
his kindred, to seek out a wife amongst the^ for his son. Isaac also sent Jacob
into Masopotamia to his uncle, to the end he might get him a wife there. The
law of God.
Afterward succeeded the law given of God by Moses, that Children should
honor their Parents. But the honor which is to be given unto them, is not
only to uncover the head, to give the upper hand, and to rise up (although these
things also are to be performed, but yet ar they not sufficient) but they must
also norish their progenitors if need shall be, and show themselves humble and
diligent toward them. Wherefore the power of the father is defined to be a
bond of piety, What is the power of a father.
wherewith the children are bound unto the parents, to perform the offices
of humanity and gratitude. If children in other things ought to obey their
parents, undoubtedly they ought chiefly to do it in contracting of matrimony.

Of this thing there is a peculier law in Exodus, the 22. chap. If a maide^
which is not betrouthed, shall be deceived, he that has defiled her ought to
give her a dowry, and to take her to wife. But it is added, if the father will:
otherwise he shall only give a dowry, neither shall he have the maiden to
wife against the fathers will. And in the book of Numbers the.30. chapter, if
a maiden vow a vow, and the father hear it, and lets it not, the vow
shall be firm: but if he gainsay it, it shall be in vain. But what is a vow? A
promise made unto god. But matrimony is a promise which is made unto man. If god
permit a vow made unto him to the judgment of the father, much more will he
permit matrimony unto him, when as it is a promise made between men. In the
second book of Samuel, Thamar answers unto Ammon her brother: If thou
desire me of my father, he will not deny me unto thee? The custom was then that
the daughters were desired of the parents. Here I dispute not whither it was
lawful for David to give to Ammon his sister to wife. This shall be entreated of
in his convenient place. Farther Paul says to the Ephesians: Children obey
your Parents in all things. He excepteth nothing when he writes so, but he
says in all things, namelye which they command not against the word of
God. And in his first Epistle to the Corrint. the 7. chapter is most manifestly
declared, that it longs to the Parents to place their daughters to husbands.
And that was known not only by the law of God, but also by the light of
nature, which thing also the Comedies of Terence and Plautus manifestly
declare. Euripides
And in Euripides a maiden answered: Of our marriages my father shall have
charge, for that judgment pertayneth not unto us.

Ambrose.
Which verse undoubtedly so pleased Ambrose, that he rehearsed it in his book
of the patriarchs. Farther it serves very much for domestical peace: for the
daughter in law ought to be to the father in law instead of a daughter:
Contrarily of rash marriages rise great discords at home. And forasmuch as the
father ought to help the son with his goods, it is right, that the son
again in contractinge matrimonye obey the father. In other civil contractes
the son can do nothing without the consent of the Father, as appears in
the Digestes De mutuo, ad senatus consultum Macedoniarum. Wherefore in a thing
far greater it is meet that the judgment of the Father be had.

What the civil laws judge in marriage of children.
The civil laws have decreed this self same thing. Justinian in his
institutions, in the title de Nuptiis, will not that marriages should be firm,
without the consent of the Parents. And in the Digestes De statu hominum in
the Law Paulus: If a son mary a wife against the will of his parents, the
child which shall be borne of those marriages, shall not be legitimate, etc. And
in the Code De Nuptiis in the law Si proponis, the case is diligently to be
marked. The daughter marieth by the consent of her father, she afterward
complayneth of her husband, and departs from him. Afterward he comes into
favor again, and she marieth him again against her fathers will. It is
answered, that that matrimony is not lawful. Hereby appears how much the
laws esteemed the power of the father. Afterward in the law Si furiosi:
Children, if peradventure their parents be mad or bestraught of their wits,
because they cannot use their consent in contracting of matrimony, shall use
the consent of their tutors.

What the cannons judged.
Wherefore it seems marvelous, how Christians at this day determine that
marriages are lawefull without the consent of the parents, and for that thing
they lay for an excuse the Cannons: of which I think it good brieflye to
declare some. And first I will make mention of the better Cannons which were
more aunciente: For the later they were decreed, the more corrupt they were.

In the decrees.30. quest. 5. chap. aliter: Matrimonies are then lawful, when
the maidens are desired of their parents, and delivered openly. Otherwise they
are not matrymonies, but whooredomes, dishonest companieng, aduouteries, and
fornications. Euaristus. Nicolaus.
Thus decreed Euaristus. Nicolaus also at the consultacion of of the Bulgares
in the.30. quest. 5. chap. nostrates. Those matrimonies are firm which are
joined with the consent of those that contracte them, and of those in whose
power they are. Leo also the first in the.30. quest. 5. chap qualis: Then it is
to be counted matrimony, when the maiden is by her parents delivered unto her
husband. Leo
And in the 31. q. 2. chapt. non omnis. A woman which marieth by the consent
of her father, is without blame, if any man afterward shall find fault
withal, Gratianus
And thus Gratianus concludes that place, that he says, in contractynge of
matrimonye, the consent of the Parents is always required.

Ambrose.
Farther, Ambrose entreating of a place of Genesis where it is written, that the
servant of Abraham came into Mesopotamia, and found a wife for his masters
son, the parents of ye maiden, when they labored to retain him longer, and
he would not abide, they called ye maiden, and asked her whether she would go
with him. After this manner he says, as also it is declared, in the, 23. q. 2.
chap. honorandum. They asked not her (says he) touching ye weddyng, but only
whether she would go with him. For it pertains not (says he) to maidenly
shamefastnes, to choose unto her self a husband. And the same thing affirmed he
of wydowes which are young. Although to speak the truth, I can not in this
thing grant unto Ambrose, yt the maiden was not demanded the question whether
she would mary him, neither do I doubt but that she was asked the question of
either cause. For in the.30. q. 2. chap. vbi non est, it is had: The consent of
children is required in spousages.
That there can be no matrimony, where is not the consent of those that
contract, yea in marriages of children, which are but.7. years of age, because
at that age they are thought to understand somewhat of matrimony, the consent
of those that contract is necessary. And because there is mention made of
spousages, this seems good to be noted by the way, ye children so contracting,
ought to be seven years of age, otherwise the parents can promise nothing for
the^. The same children, if afterward, being of more years, they shall contract
an other matrimony, the same is of force, and not the spousages: which yet is
to be understand if the parents consent to the second matrimony. Moreover in
the.31. quest. 2. chap. tua, Hormisdas answers, that children when they
contract after this manner, ought to stand to ye will of their parents. And
Extra de sponsatione impuberum. chap. tua, it is ordained that children when
they come to ripe age, ought to obey their parents, for as much as also they
gave their faith, and consented.

I thought it good also to bring somewhat of the counsels. Counsels.
Concilium Toletanum the fourth.32. q. 2. chap. hoc sanctum, decrees: If
widows will not profess chastity, let the^ mary to who^ they will: and the
same thing it decrees of a maiden, but it adds, so yt it be not against the
will of ye parents or her own. Such an addition we se that Nicolaus the second
added, as it is had in the.27. quest. 2. chap. sufficiat, where he writes
after this manner: To ioygne matrimony, the consent of those which contract, is
sufficient, and it follows, according to the laws matrimonyes of children
are not acknowledged, if they be made without the consent of ye parents. Yet
the gloss refers not those words unto ye civil laws but to the Canons,
because (as the Canonist say) the civil laws are sometimes corrected by the
Canons. But oftentimes happens that those Canons are in very deed (...),
that is rules without a rule, as, Extra de coniugiis seruorum, A discord of the
Canons and of the civil laws as touching ye matrimony of bondemen.
chap. 1. if bondemen contract, yea against the will of their Lords, such
matrimonyes shall be ratified. Behold, says the Gloss, the Canons amend the
civil laws. For in them it is forbidden, that a bondema^ should mary a wife
against the will of his Lord, yea if a free man have very much resort unto an
others ma^s bond woman, he is made a bondeman, and a free woman if she have
much access unto an other man's bondeman, she also loses her liberty. The
gloss says more over, that more is attributed unto matrimony, then unto holy
orders: because it is not lawful to bring a strange bondeman into orders, but
it is lawful to contract matrimony with him. Wherefore it manifestly appears
that ye latter Canons were viciated and corrupted, which took away from
marriages the consent of parents, as necessary.

But now let us see what reasons they pretend. Extra de sponsalibus, chap. cum
locum, it is said: There ought in contracting of matrimony to be most full
liberty. And in the same chap. veniens: If there should be there any fear, the
matrimony ought to be void, and there is given a reason, because she can not
long please him of whom she is hated. And because such contractes have
oftentimes an unlucky end, and also because that is easily contemned which is
not loved: Yea the Canons seem so to have loved liberty in contracting of
matrimony, that the Counsel of Paris (as it is had in the.30. quest. 2.)
decreed: That it is not lawful to desire a wife by the letters of a king.
Although the same thing also be decreed in the Code de Nuptiis, in the law.1.
chap. si nuptias ex rescriptio. The reason is, because the letters of princes
are in a manner commandments and threatninges. Neither do I dissalow that:
although I do not a little marvel, that the Canons have proceeded so far, that
they have decreed that matrimonye may be co^tracted between him ye steals away
a maid, and her that is stole^. Extra de Raptoribus and Incendiariis, chap.
cum causa. A maiden that was stolen away out of the house of her father, had
contracted matrimony with him that stole her, ye father withstandeth such a
marriage. Here the good Pope answers, for as much as the maiden consents,
she can not seem to be stolen. Wherefore he decreed that matrimony to be good.
And in the next chap. Accedens: If a man had stolen away a maiden, not only
against the will of her parents, but also against her own will, which maiden
yet, if she afterward consented with him that stole her, he decreed that firm
matrimony may be contracted between the^. The same thing seems to be decreed
in ye.36. q. 2. chap. in summa, where is entreated of the stealer and her that
is stolen, and it is decreed: If she ye is stolen shall consent with ye
stealer, matrimony may be contracted between them; but yet in such sort, that
first they do some penance. But because some Canons make against this decree,
therefore they thus moderate the matter, that wheresoever they read that
matrimony ca^ not be contracted between such persons, that they understand to
be said for some one of these three causes, either because she that is stolen
did not consent, or else because she was betrouthed before unto an other by
words (as they use to spoke) of ye present tense, for I say not of ye future
tense, for ye husband was not compelled to mary one defiled, or because she was
not marigeable.

But in the Code it is far otherwise decreed for stealers away of virgins,
namely that matrimony can by no means be contracted between those persons, yea
although the father consent unto her that is stolen, and Justinian also in his
Authentiques, Collation.9. in the title, que raptoribus nubunt, decrees the
same to the detestation of so great a crime. But our Canonistes, in gods name
do think that matrimonyes are lawful even against the pare^tes will, wherefore
in the.32. q 2. chap. Mulier, the gloss says, yt the power of the father is
broken as touching an oath and matrimony, when ripe age comes, which sentence
the schoolmen also have followed. Of this matter they dispute in the.4. book
of Sentences did. 28. where they define that a man, even the son of the
father of the house, has a certain dominion over his own body, neither is so
bound to his parents, but that he may at his own liberty dispose of it, as
touching matrimony. And when they read in the Canons that the consent of the
parents is required for the contractyng of matrimony, they by their
interpretation corrupt them, and say that Euaristus, How the Papists require
the consent of the Parents.
Nicolaus, and Leo when they so decreed, did judge that the consent of the
parents is required as touching the honesty of matrimony, but not as touching
the necessity: which thing peradventure they drew out of the gloss Extra de
desponsa. impuberum, in the law tua, which is after this sort: That the good
will of the parents is to be required, but rather for the comelynes of the
marriage, then for the necessitye, so that if the parents will not assent, yet
are the children free, and may contracte matrimony at their own liberty. Yea
and the Master of the Sentences also in the distinct.28. The master of the
scholemen.
The consent of the parents (says he) serves for the comelynes and honesty
of marriages, and not for necessity. And he brings the words of Euaristus,
but he says there is a difference between those things which are required
to the substance of marriages, and those things which serve for the honesty
and comelynes. And the good will of the parents as he says, pertayneth not
to the substance of marriages, he thinks that without it children may
lawfully contracte. And for as much as he makes matrimonye a Sacrament, he
wylleth that in such marriages should be the virtue of matrimony, and not the
honesty.

But because they very much press the words of Euaristus, when he writes
that marriages contracted without ye good will of the parents, are whoredoms,
fornications and aduoutries: the master of the sentences answers that that
is true, not because such marriages are in very deed such, but because they
assemblyng together secretly among themselves, and privily without the parents
knowledge, are wont to be counted as whoremongers and adulterers, but yet the
matrimony abides ratified and is firm, because of the words of the present
tense which were therein used. Also Thomas Aquinas in the same place, Thomas
Aquina^.
is of the same judgment, and unto that which is brought out of Paul unto the
Ephesians (where he says, children obey your parents in all things:) He
answers that that is to be understand of those things, wherein the children
have not any liberty, namely as touching familiar and domestical things. And
this reason he adds: because matrimony is a certain kind of servitude,
which the child is not compelled to take upon him against his will. And in
that it is written of Abraham, that he sought his son a wife out of his
kindred, he answered that that happened, because he knew that that land was
promised unto his posterity, and that God had decreed to take it away from the
Chananites. Wherefore he would not have his son contract matrimony with them.

These fellows in deed speak many things, but they bring not so much as one
word out of the holy scriptures: they still contend that children ought to have
most full liberty left them, as touching marriages. But that is a mere invention
of theirs, which by no means has his foundation upon the word of God.

The old fathers were of our opinion: but of them it happened, as of the
Canons, What the old fathers judges Tertullian.
for the more ancient they were, the more sincere they were, and the more new,
the more corrupt. Tertulliane in his.2. book to his wife, as touching the
marriages of Christians with Ethnikes, writes very well, neither allows he
marriages between persons of a contrary religion. God says he, delivers thee
to a spouse. And he adds: No not in earth ca^ daughters right and justly mary
with out the consent of the parents. How therefore will thou mary without the
consent of thy heavenly father? Chrysostom upon Genesis and upon Matthew,
Chrysostom.
when he entreats of marriages, remitteth the matter unto the examples of the
fathers in the old Testament: neither is it of great necessity to rehearse his
words, when as the same father upon the first Epistle to Timo. in his.9.
Homely, entreats very manifesty of that matter: there he exhorts parents,
because of the slippery age of their children, to join them in matrimony, but
he exhorts not the children that they should choose unto themselves husbands
or wives, but by Apostrophes he conuerteth his oration unto the parents, that
they should provide for them as touching matrimony: and he adds a very
notable sentence: If (says he) they begin to play the whoremongers before
they be married, they will never be faithful in matrimony. I will note also by
the way, what he writes in ye place of weddyng crowns or garlandes. For even
at that time they used crowns or garlandes in weddinges. What (says he)
signifies the crown or garland? Forsooth that the husband and the wife should
declare, that eue^ to that time they had been vanquishers of lusts: if thou
have ben an adulterer or whoremonger, how wearest thou a crown or garla^d?
Augustine in his.133. Epistle, Augustine.
being desired to make ye marriage between a manchilde and a woma^child, I would
do it (says he,) but the mother of the child is not present, and thou know
that to contract the marriage, her good will is necessary. In this place
Augustine writes more severely then the civil laws. For they will not have
the child to be in the power of his mother. Of Ambrose I will speak nothing
now: I have sufficiently spoken of him before. Wherefore seeing the law of God
and the law of nature, the civil law and eoconomical law, the fathers and
sincere Canons do affirm, yt the consent of the parents is necessary, and the
examples of the faintes declare the same, what should let but that we should be
of ye same mind? Neither ought this to seem griuous unto children: for it was
for their commodity so appointed by God and by laws. For young persons in such
things, and specially weme^, provide very ill oftentimes for themselves. It is
mete the children should require the consent of their parents.
Wherefore it is written in ye Code de sponsalibus in the law si pater: When a
father has betrouthed his daughter, if he afterward dye, ye gouerner or tutor
cannot undo the covenant of the father, and a reason is added: because tutors
sometimes are won with money, and women thorough weakness fall to their own
discommodity. The example also of Christ ought to move us, which was given of
his father a husband unto the Church, and he always said that he did not his
own will, but the will of his father, of who^ he was sent. Farther, how great a
discorder arises in ye public wealth of this deprauation and abuse? how
great a window is opened unto fylthy lusts? He that can first have carnal
fellowship with ye maiden in some places, hops to obtain her to wife, yea
even against her parents good will.

To the reasons of the adversaries.
But now must we answer the reasons which the contrary party allege for
themselves. First, as we before said, they cry that in contractyng of
matrimony, there ought to be full liberty. But I pray you what liberty? Of the
flesh, or of the spirit? Undoubtedly that liberty of the spirit is the
greatest, when we obey the commandments of god, The chiefest liberty is to
obey the commandments of god
who if he would have us obedient unto our pare^tes in other things, why not
also in contractyng of matrimony? Wherefore they break the law of God, which
obey not the parents also in this thing. Farther, if they will have the liberty
of contracting of matrimony to be so great, why do they themselves prohibit
so many degrees of marriages, which God never prohibited? Once the Popes would
not suffer matrimony to be co^tracted, eue^ unto the seventh degree, but now
they contain within the fourth: moreover why do they forbid marriages unto the
ministers of the Church? Farther, why did God himself forbid matrimonies
between persons of contrary religion, if in marriage there ought to be so great
a liberty as they feign to be? But they add: Children for fear of their
parents will say that that matrimony pleases them, which pleases them not.
But the son is not compelled so to say: nothing lets but that he may
answer, that that wife pleases him not, and that such a matrimony he can not
abide. And in deed without his consent matrimony can be by no means
contracted. In the digestes de ritu nuptiaru^, in the law non cogitur, we read
yt the son ca^ not be compelled to mary a wife, and de sponsalibus, in the
law sed ea, if ye daughter hold her peace, she seems to consent unto the
father: and there are two causes ascribed wherefore the daughter may resist her
father, if either ye father offer her a wicked husband, or a disfigured
husband. Otherwise, if there be none of these causes, it is required of her to
love him whom the father has chose^. If she will not assent, when the husband
has neither wicked manners, nor is misshapen, The punishment of ingratitude.
she incurreth the crime of ingratitude: which is so great that the father may
disinherite her for it. And in ye title de ritu nuptiarum, in the law si
cogente patre. Although the son have assented for fear of the father, yet
because he had rather assent then offend his father, such a matrimony ought to
be firm and ratified. I would add unto the former cause the third, if the
father offer a husband which is of a contrary religion: and I would ever
counsel the parents to gratify their children, What may be done against to
straight parents
unless they see them to obstinate and unjust. But when the parents deal to
tyra^nically with their children, and compel them to mary wives whom they ca^
not abide, the matter ought to be brought before the Magistrate, whose office
is to hear the cause, and to deliver the son from injury, if he be to
cruelly oppressed. Then if the son mary a wife by the authority of the
Magistrate, yea against the will of the father, he can not seem utterly to have
married without his fathers consent. The Magistrate is the father of the
country.
For the Magistrate is the father of the country. The same thing seems to be
decreed de ritu nuptiaru^, in the law qui liberos. And methinketh the
schoolmen have not well said, that the children of the householde have
dominion over their own body. For as much as they owe unto their parents that
they are. They ought not to be compelled to marriages against their will, but
that they should mary without the consent of the parents, it can not be
granted the^. And when they so often obtrude unto us liberty, The daughters of
Zalphead.
and allege ye dominion of their body, we lay against it ye answer of god as
touching ye daughters of Zalphead, who says of them: Let them have heritage
among their brethren, but let them mary in their own tribe. These weme^ are
compelled to mary their nyest of kynne, neither had they that liberty which
these men feign. And the brother was sometimes compelled to mary the wife of
his brother being dead, neither could she mary an other: therefore so great
liberty is not necessary in marriages, as these men pretend. And by the civil
law, It is permitted unto the parents to sell their children.
so great is the power of the father over the son, that he may sell him if he
fall into grievous necessity. And least that should seem barbarous unto any
man, the same thing is permitted by the law of God in Exodus the.21. chap, but
yet adding certain cautions, which I think not good here to repeat.
Wherefore they did not rightly argue, when they said, that matrimony is a kind
of servitude, which the son ought not to take upon him at the appointement of
his father.

Paul the Apostle prescribes them to obey their parents in all things. And
the same thing writes he unto the Phillipians the.4. chapter. That which
remains brethren: What soever things are true, whatsoever are honest,
whatsoever just, whatsoever pure, whatsoever profitable, whatsoever lucky,
these things do ye. etc. By these words appears that the things which
are honest, must not be separated from the commandments of God. Wherefore
look how necessary it is to obey the commandments of God, so necessary is
it not to mary without the consent of the parents. And that which they add
that the consent of the parents is in deed Euaristus: that when Euaristus
says that matrimonyes contracted without the consent of the parents are
whooredomes, and fornications, and not matrimony, he dare expound that the
matter is not so in deed, but because they so assemble rogether, as
whooremongers and adulterers use to do. But the sentence of Euaristus is
manifest. They are not (says he) matrimonyes, and he adds what in deed
they are, namely fornications, adulteryes, and whooredomes. And he says not
that they seem to be these things, but that they are.

Genesis, where it is written that Esau married Chananitishe wives, which his
parents took in very ill part, for he had married them contrary to their
commandment. And yet the Scripture calls them wives. Wherefore it seems
that matrimony may be contracted even against the parents will. I grant in
deed that in the holy Scriptures they are called wives. But yet for that
cause, because he so counted the^, and because the nations among whom he
dwelled, counted the^ for wives. But hereby is not gathered, yt the scriptures
do confirm such matrimony. The same form of speaking used Paul in the first
to the Corinthians the eight chapter: Even as there are many gods and many
Lords. He says that there are many gods, not ye there are so in deed (for
there is but one God,) but because the most part so believed, and public
persuasio^ thought yt there was an infinite number of gods. Therefore he says
many gods, but to us that think rightly, there is but one God, The scripture
so calls things as they are commonly called of men.
and one Lord Jesus Christ. It is no unaccustomed or strange thing in the
scriptures so to call things as men use commonly to speak: yet in an other
place, when they speak properly, they call every thing by his own name. But
thou will say, we never read that ye children of Esau were not legitimate. I
answer, that Esau had in deed a great posterity, but whether it were
legitimate or otherwise the Scripture declares not. Whereunto add, that with
those nations among whom he dwelled they were counted legitimate. For they had
not the word of God, wherein it is commanded that that should not be done:
and they had wonderfully corrupted the law of nature.

Euaristus ryghtly judges. But whylest the laws which are now of force, are
not abrogated: I do not dissolve the matrimonyes which are so contracted,
neither do I say that the children borne of those marriages are bastardes: but
I declare what seems more agreeable unto the word of GOD, and unto honesty.
But Euaristus might justly write so, because in his time the Roman laws were
of force, which counted not such conjunctions for matrimonyes. Farther, I
add that fathers are not to be obeyed, when they let the marriages of their
children, only for religion sake, because in that case God is to be obeyed
above all things, who is the chief father of all men.

7 He went down I say, and talked with the woman, which pleased the eyes of
Samson.

8 And within a few days when he returned to receive her, he went aside to
see the carkase of the Lion. And behold there was a swarm of bees, and honey
in the body of the Lion.

9 And he took thereof in his hands, and went eating, and came to his father
and to his mother, and gave unto the^, and they did eat: but he told not them
that he had taken the honey out of the body of the Lio^.

10 So his father went down unto the woman, and Samson made there a feast. For
so used the young men to do.

11 And when they saw him, they took 30. companions, and they were with him.


In this place the Lion is not called Cepher as he was before, but Ariah:
because that difference which I have before showed is not always observed.
The matrimony of Samson is celebrated: wherein the providence of God prepares
occasion, whereby he should do some violence unto the Philistines. And that
occasion was, because as he returned he remembered the Lion which he had
slain. He went a little aside, to look upon the carkase of the Lion. And he
found therein a swarm of bees, and a comb of honey. And this is such a
strange thing as has not been heard of: for it is in no other place, that I
wot of, either showed or red, that bees have made honey in the carkase of a
Lion. Pliny. Virgil. Plutarche.
Pliny and Virgil in his.4. book of Georgiques teach that of dead bullockes
or oxen do come bees, as of a horse Waspes, and of an ass Hornets. Plutarche
in the life of Cleomenes says, eue^ as of a horse do enge^der Waspes, of an
ass Hornets, of an ox bees: so also of the carkase of a man, and especially
of the marow and humor which falls upon the earth, are brought forth
serpents. For that cause the elders were wont to consecrate serpents unto
noble men. But we never read any such thing of a Lion, wherefore this ought we
to judge, yt this was done by ye singular providence of God. Ambrose.
Ambrose thinks that the place where Samson had cast the Lion, was a
pleasant and fertile place, and the bees flyed thither for flowers, and made
hoony in the carkase of the Lion. But I (as I save said) do attribute all this
unto the providence of God. Pliny in his.7. book says, Pliny.
that bees use not to make honey, except it be in the hyue, or in a tree, or in
caves under the earth, and he affirms ye above al things they fly from evil
sauors. Farther, he says ye hornets and waspes do eat dead carkases, but
bees touch the^ not. Ambrose says that Samson turned aside to ye Lion, to
take his skin, that being clothed with it, he might come unto the feast as a
great valiant man, as afterward did Hercules. But because he saw that that
apparel was not very handsome for wedding apparel, he took rather thereout
the hoony combs, of the which he might give part unto his parents, and part
unto his wife.

They took thirty companions. Some think that these thirty companions were
joined unto Samson for to do him honor. But some of the Hebrewe interpreters
suspecte that the Philistines, when they perceived that he was a strong and
valiant man, brought these men to be kepers for him, least thorough the show
of marriage, he should make some commotion.

12 Then Samson said unto them: I will now put forth a ridle unto you: and if ye
can declare it me within seven days of the feast, I will give you 30. sheets,
and 30. change of garments.

13 But if ye can not declare it me, then shall ye give me.30. sheets, and.30,
change of garments. And they answered him: put forth thy ridle that we may
hear it.

14 And he said unto them: Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong
came sweetenes: and they could not in three days expound the rydle.


The elega^cy of ye riddell consists in contraryes, for he which eats, and
he ye gives meat, What the ridle of Samson signified.
and he yt is fierce, and he that is swear, are contraryes. Such a ridle was
not only put forth to quicken the wits, but also the holy ghost would by it
signify things to come. At that time the Philistines ruled over the Jews, and
oppressed them with tyranny, and after a sort devoured them. Therefore by the
ridle is signified that at the length they should be overcome, and be eaten of
the Jews: and for as much as they were most fierce, they should be at ye last
not hurtful, but great commodity unto ye Hebrews. Augustine.
Augustine upon ye.70. Psalm refers these things unto an Allegory of Christ
and princes of the earth. For when ye Gospel began first to be preached,
princes ran upon Christians, like Lions, withal their might to devour them.
But our sun, that is Christ, was present, and took away the Lio^s, whom yet
he did not so deiect that they should not be, but that for deuourers of the
flock, they should be noorishers of the Church, and defenders of the Gospel.
This is a very elegant allegory, and the foundation thereof, is the kylling of
the Lion, whereby we first understand what should happen in the people of ye
Jews, and then what should come to pass in Christ. Ambrose. Why ridles were
put forth in feasts.
Ambrose demands the cause why Samson put out this ridle, and he answers:
because in feasts men are sometimes wont when they have well drunk, to be
somewhat full of talk, and somewhat to intemperatly to rebuke others, which
things turns for the most part into braulyngs and chidinges. And to avoid
that, grave me^ were wont to put forth ridles or problemes, omitting dangerous
talk, and turning their mind to the exposition of the things put forth. Whose
example Samson followed, and set forth a reward for him, which should expound
his question: as though the knowledge and sharpenes of the mind ought to be
rewarded, and contraryly punishment is instituted for ignorance and
sluggishenes. The Ethnikes also in the old time were wont so to do. A Fable of
Sphing.
Wherefore the Poets fable that Sphing was wont to set forth a reward, namely if
a man had absolved his ridle, he should have been let goo free. But if he had
failed, he should have been thrown hedlong down a rock. What ye Poets would
by this fable signify, I will not at this present declare. This thing every man
may easily understand, that the wit of man is so composed by nature, that it
is not easily stirred up, but either by setting forth reward, or danger.
Which also we may easily see in children. Farther, let us note that it is one
thing to put a man's money to hasard or chance, and an other thing to contend
for wit. But in this contention which Samson instituted, there was no place
for chance, but it was a certain kind of play, ciuily, honest, and laudable.

Of Plays.
ANd because we are fallen into mention of play, I think it good somewhat to
speak thereof.

Ambrose.
Some of the fathers seem to abhor from all kind of plays. Ambrose in his 1.
book de officiis, chapter.23. Plays (says he,) and pastymes seem sweet and
and pleasant, when as yet they are contrary to the rule of a Christian. For it
is not found in the holy Scriptures, Chrysostom.
how they ought to be used. Chrysostom upon Mathewe the.6. Homelye, says
that GOD invented not play, but the devil. For the people sat to eat and
drink, and rose up to play, in the honor of a most filthy idol. For when
they had worshipped the calfe and incurred idolatrye, they seemed to have
obtained this reward of the devil, namely to play. Peradventure Chrysostom
alludeth to that which Plato wrote in Phedro, that Theut the demon of the
Egyptians found out Numbers, Geometry, Astrology, Augustine
letters, and dyse. But Augustine in his.2. book de Musica, says that it is
a part of a wyseman to revoke the mind from earnest matters: and that is
chiefly done by play. Wherefore it seems to be lawful. But how so great an
oblectation ryseth of play, it is not heard to understand. Aristotle in
his.2. Aristotle,
book of Rhethoriques puts victory or hope of victory among the causes of
oblectation. But when we play, either we obtain the victory, or else we are
in some hope thereof. Wherefore they which defend play, Play is a cause of
defectation.
do determine with themselves, that the mind ought sometimes to be no les
refreshed, then the body: and as the body is renewed by rest or quietness, Why
play seems to be lawful.
so they say the mind is recreated by play. By which means they think to
prove that there must some place be left for plays: addyng yet certain
cautions. First, that there Cautio^s to be added unto honest player.
It is not seldom seen that in playing both filthy and also blasphemous words
do happen. We must also take heed, that there be not used to much lyghtnes,
and dissolution of gravity The law of god entreats nothing of plays.
although in the^ are read many kinds of plays. In Genesis the angel
wrastled the whole night with Jacob. Sara saw Isaac play with Ismaell, which
she took in evil part, not undoubtedly because he played, but because he
played together with the son of a bondewoman. David also daunced and played
before the ark of the Lord. And the maidens sang in their daunces, Saull has
overcome in his thousands, and David in his.x. thousands. And Christ
complained that the Jews were like unto children playing in the streets and
saying: We have song unto you, etc. And although of these things there be no
certain rules manifestly written in the holy Scriptures, yet are they set
forth in the civil laws.

But before I speak of them, it shall be good, A distinction of plays.
to distribute plays into his forms and kinds. There are some which are
utterly referred unto chance, as he which casts most, or casts this
chance or that, carries away the reward. There are other whereby the powers
either of the body or mind are excercised.

Such plays as depend upon chance and are understand by the name of diseplay,
Of dyseplaye. Dyseplaye is condemned by civil laws.
are both by the civil laws and by the fathers condemned. In the digestes de
aleatoribus the Praetor says: If a diseplayer be iniuried by his fellow, I
will not give him judgment. But if one steal or do violence to an other, I
will in deed render right, although they be unworthy. And afterward: if a man
compel an other to play, let him be punished, so that he be cast either into
the quarreys to dig stones, or else into the common prisons. By these things
it appears, yt by ye civil law to play at dyse was a thing very odious.
Cicero in.2. Phillip. against Anthonius: His house (says he) is full of
dyseplayers and dronkardes. Farther, the laws add, if dyseplayers lay any
wagers among themselves, they are not firm. Howbeit it is permitted unto them
of the household to play among themselves, for that which may afterward be
eaten in a feast. But in the Code de religiosis sumptibus funeru^, it is more
severely ordained of play, dyse, and dyseplayers. In ye old time soldiers were
permitted to play at dise after their business done. But ye Emperor complains
that at yt time al men played, and in trying of chau^ces, wasted all their
patrimony, and lastly added blasphemy against God. Wherefore he decreed, that
it should not be lawful for any man to play, nor to look upon him that
plays: and he admonishes the Bishops, diligently to look that these things
be observed. The same Justinian the Emperor in his Authe^tiques, in the title
de sacrosanctis Episcopis, in the paragraphe Interdicimus does prohibit by
name, that no Bishop, Priest, or Deacon, should either play themselves, or
look upon them that play. But if they shall do otherwise, he gives
commandment to thrust then into Monasteryes for three years. Now let the
Popes go and say, it is not lawful for Emperors to ordain of
Ecclesiastical matters. De excessu praelatorum, in the chapter Inter dilectos,
because a certain Chanon was found to be a dise player, and had in play given
his money to usury, to receive for.x. pieces of money.xii. he was deposed. Also
de vita and honestate clericorum, chap. Clerici: Let them not play at dise nor
tables, neither let them be present at such plays. The same thing is had in
the distinctio^s.35. chap. 1. Either let them cease to play, or else let them be
condemned.

Against those which defend diseplay.
But they which defend this kind of play are wont to say: What if we will so
bestow our money? Are we not Lords of our own things? We do no wrong to our
neighbor, we take not away other men's goods. These things have they
continually in their mouth. But they ought to understand, that it is the dewty
of the Magistrate, to see that every man use his own things well. Farther we
must consider more deeply that God gave unto these money, wherewith they might
have to noorishe their family, and to help the poor, and not to cast them to
chance, and put them to the slippernes of Fortune. Farther it behooves and
especially Christians to represent the image of God: who governs and rules
all things with reason. But so to consume money, is not to be a Lord over his
own things, but a tyranne. This also may thou add hereunto, if any thing be
gotten by this means, the same both is, and also is called, filthy gain.

Whether things lost by dyseplaye may be recovered.
But for as much as it is counted filthy gain it may justly be demanded,
whether those things which be lost by dyseplaye, may justly be demanded
again. I answer, that if he which loses be not in his own power, but
under an other man, as are the children of the householde and servants, the
laws do give recovery, and that even to.50. years. But if they be their own
men, recocouery is not granted, and the cause is assigned, because filthiness
is on either party. In which case the cause of the possessor is the better. In
the digestes. In the title de condictione ob turpem causam in the law vbi
autem, when filthynes is in either party, there is no judgment given. What
then shall be done with the money? They say it must be bestowed upon the poor,
so that he which has lost, may have hurt, and he which has gained, shall not
have the fruition of things evil gotten. This is to be done when the
possession is transferred. Of the same mind was Augustine in his Epistle.54.
Augustine.
to Macedonius. Where the possession (says he) is transferred, let the money
be given unto the poor. But where it is not transferred, as if a man take
away any thing by theft, and lose it at dise, let it be restored. Wherefore we
must decree, that such plays ought not to be suffered which are governed by
chance and rashenes, so that in them, goods and money are endaungered: because
it longs to the public wealth, to see that things be ryghtly governed: and
God gives goods, to be spent to good uses. And because by it spryng
oftentimes horrible blasphemies, and robbyng of our friends, and covetous
desire of other men's goods is stirred up, besides the great loss of time.
These things both the civil laws and also the Ecclesiastical do see: but at
this day they are not regarded. For the Canonical laws are contemned of the
Clergy, and the civil laws are despised of the Princes. For there is no where
either more often or more filthily play used, then among princes, and
Ecclesiastical men: which in deed were of good judgment, when they wrote
those laws: but they have lived and also do live most filthily.

What plays are permitted.
But the other kind of play, which pertayneth to the excersyng of the powers,
either of the mind or of the body, is not utterly forbidden. Iustinianus in the
law before alleged, when he had taken away plays which depended of
chance, substituted this other kind of plays, as throwing a round balle into
the air, Aristotle.
handling of the spear, running, and such like. Yea and Aristotle in his
Rhethoriques comme^deth these exercises of the body. And undoubtedly for as
much as a man has need of some refreshyng and pleasure to recreate him self
wtal, those things yt are honest, are mete to be granted unto him. So at this
day public wealths do sometimes set forth rewards unto such as ca^ best
throw weapons yt they may have their Citizens ye better exercised. Howbeit it
must be taken head of, ye the kinds of plays be not hurtful or pernicious, so
that it be dangerous, least in that play, they which exercise the^ selves, or
which assemble to behold, be killed, or miserably torn or lamed. And without
doubt this kind of plays is prohibited ad legem Aquiliam, in the law Nam
ludus, and in the decretals de torneamentis. Those things which of their own
nature are not evil, but are evil because of those things which often times
follow, ought to be prohibited. In the old time rewards were set forth unto
Syngers, Orators, Poets, Readers, which are not universally to be dissalowed,
if they be done justly or moderatly. Afterward were added stage plays, whereof
I will not speak in this place. Dau^ses also were added, of which we will speak
in this book in his due place. But men could not be content with these plays:
because also their minds, which for sundry causes cannot exercise the powers
of the body, are to be recreated with some pleasure: therefore they have found
out an other kind of play, namely the play of Chessemen, commonly called
Chesse: neither is this kind of play thought worthy to be condemned.

Farther, there is a certain other manner of playing, Tables.
which leans partly to chance, and partly to industry, as is playing at
Tables, and such like, where in deed they cast by chance, but the castes are
governed by industry, Plato.
wherefore Plato affirmed that the life of men, is like unto the play at Tables.
For even as in tableplay, so also in the life of man, if any thing go not very
well, Terence.
the same must by art be corrected. To which sentence Terence also in Adelphis
alludeth: and undoubtedly these kinds of plays seem such, that sometime
they may be permitted, so that they bring no hurt, refresh the powers, and be
joined with honesty, and that that time which should be spent upon better
things, be not bestowed upon them.

But what shall we answer unto Ambrose? This undoubtedly, that that place De
officiis yertaineth not to plays, for as much as there he entreats of
pleasant talks, tauntes, and skoffes, especially such as are joined with
scurrility. But upon the.118. Psalm (upon these words: Turn away mine eyes
that I see not vanity) he calls stage plays vanitye, Augustine. Lactantiu^.
as does Augustine also together with Lactantius, Jerome and other Fathers. For
they had much filthiness, and were at the beginning instituted to the honor of
Idols, Jerome. Why stage plays be condemned of the Fathers.
and therefore they were odious unto the Fathers and Christians. But the reason
which Ambrose first alleged was, because there is nothing found in the holy
scriptures how these things ought to be used. To that we will answer, that they
are found in the holy scriptures generallye: whither ye eat, or whither ye
drink, or whither ye do any thing else, do al things to the glory of God.
Wherefore the body and the mind are so sometimes to be refreshed with plays,
that we may afterward be prompt to grauer matters. Farther, there is nothing
found peculiarly in the holy scriptures touching Bakers, Cooks, nor Shipmen,
and yet nevertheless their exercises are not utterly to be excluded.

Chrysostom said that the Devil found out play, and alleged this: Chrisostom^.
The people sat down to eat and to drink, and they rose up to play. If a man
look more narowly upon that place of this father, he shall see that he spoke
of those men which would not repent, but were wont to say: I would to God I
might never weep, but might always play and laugh. To whom, he says, Christ
preached: Blessed are they which mourn. And forasmuch as we so often sin,
and do so grievously offend God, how should we have leisure to play? He also
condemns those plays whereby we are made sluggish and unapt to good works.
We do not in play and laughing (says he) imitate Christ or the Apostles: for
we never read that they either played or laughed. How beit he adds a
moderation, for as much as he adds, I do not universally take away al
laughter, but the excessive and immoderate laughter. Lastly he turns him
self to stage plays, and says that they were invented by the Devil: for
they contain the wicked acts and whooredomes of the Gods, whereby the
consciences of godly men are grievously wounded, and wicked lusts are many
ways stirred up. And in that he says that these things were invented by the
Devil, he speaks nothing contrary to the truth: because (as I have
admonished) they were instituted in the honor of false Gods. Yea and this
thing he adds also, that the Devil builded stages in Cities.

But now to conclude, me thinks that those kinds of plays which serve to
renew strengthes in men, are not utterly to be forbidden. Neither ought we
lightly to be offended, if we se a man play at Chesse, with which play the
powers of the body are nothing helped, but only the industrye of the mind
exercised. For if through age strength fail, so that they cannot exercise them
selves by any other means, or that their body be but weak, why should they
not be permitted, moderately to delight them selves with this kind of play?
Neither also is he straightway to be condemned, which being sick or weak
recreateth himself with that kind of play, which depends of Fortune or
chance, so that there in be no danger of loss of money. To what intent the
laws restrained or prohibited plays.
For we must chieflye regard to what intent the laws forbad that. It was
undoubtedly that a man should not waste his goods prodigally, and therefore it
was provided by the law that a man should not hasard above a shilling: as it is
had in the Code, in the place before alleged. This was the meaning of the law,
that money should not be ill consumed.

But some say they delight not in play, except they play for money. But I will
demand of them to what use they entend to bestow that money? Peradventure they
will say upon a feast. Why not rather upon the poor? But I say it is much
better and safer not to play for any money. For although it may be that thou
thy self art not touched with covetousness, the other yet with whom thou
playest, is peradventure touched: Let the occasions unto evil be taken away,
which otherwise are very many which move unto evil. And if there were nothing
else to fear us away from plays, let us for Gods sake wayghe this, how great
the penury of time is. The law of God requires so many duties, that not our
whole life is able to perform them: and yet shall we bestow time in plays?
We are otherwise sufficientlye sick with covetousness of money, with ambicion
to overcome and excel other: why do we stir up these diseases with plays?
But thou will say: These things are never stirred up in me. But now thou must
remember that they may easelye be stirred up. And we must see not only to our
selves, but that we bring not other also unto ye same disease. These things
are spoken of the honest kinds of plays. If so be there be any which do
play, being entised with covetousness, let those men know that they rather like
evil merchants traffic, Male mercari
then play. For they seek no other thing but filthy gain. Neither seek they
pleasure, which in honest plays is the chiefest, but they seek their own
things, and that by filthye means. And when they which delight immoderatly in
plays, do say: There must be some pleasure in the life, whereby we may be
recreated: Their request is to be granted, but in the mean time they must be
admonished, that there are other pleasures more honest. Paul to the Ephesians
the.v. chap. says: Speak unto your selves in Psalms, Tertulian.
Himnes, and spiritual songs, singing and making merry in your hearts. And the
same thing writes he unto the Colossians the third chap. Tertulian in
Apologetico says that Christians used to assemble together to their moderate
short suppers, and when they were refreshed with meat, they sang divine
praises, or recited something out of the holy scriptures, provoking one an
other by them. And by this means they returned sober home.

Other honest pleasures besides plays.
There are also problemes, wherewith the wits may be exercised and refreshed:
which problemes if they seem to hard, there are histories, which may with
lesser labor be learned. Why are not men hired to read them unto them? There
is no history so sclender, which is not very much profitable for some part of
man's life. There are also histories of plants, of herbs, and of stones. There
are likewise communications of godly men one with an other, which are sweet
and pleasant, wherewith minds are refreshed, and therewithal edefied. I do not
(as I have said) utterly take away plays: but I prefer these things, as much
more honest and profitable. But now let us return unto the play of Samson,
which though it was honest and liberal, yet had it a deadly end. And if this
play had such ill success, what is to be hoped of those which are prohibited
by the laws? They which made those laws, were wise men in governing the
public wealth, who seeing their faith in other things is to be allowed, why is
it not also to be allowed in this thing?

And the young men could not interpreate. The feast endured seven days, and
when Samson had put forth his riddle the first day, they could do nothing in
three days: wherefore when wit failed them, they turned themselves to
craftines and evil arts.

15 And when the seventh day drew near, they said unto Samsons wife: Entise
thine husband, that he may declare us the riddle, least we burn thee and thy
fathers house with fire. Have thou called us that he should possess us? Is it
not so?

16 And Samsons wife wept before him, and said: Surely thou hate me, and
love me not: for thou have put forth a ryddle unto the children of my
people, and have not told it me. And he said unto her: Behold, I have not
told it my father, nor my mother, and shall I tell it thee?

17 Then Samsons wife wept before him seven days, while their feast lasted,
and when the seventh day came, he told her, because she was importunate upon
him. And she told the ryddle to the children of her people.

18 And the men of the City said unto him the seventh day, before the Sun
went down: What is sweter then hoony, and what is stronger then a Lion? Then
he said unto them: if ye had not plowed with my Heifer, ye had not found out my
ryddle.

19 And the spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he went down to Ascalon. And
he smote of them.xxx. men, and taking away their upper garments, gave change
of garments unto those which expounded the ryddle. And his wrath was kindled,
and he went up to his fathers house.

20 Then Samsons wife was given to his companion, whom he had associated unto
himself.


The young men come unto Samsons wife, desire her to entreat her husband, and
by all means to enquire of him what his proposicion signified. They add
moreover threatninges, and those horrible, namely that otherwise they would
burn her and her fathers house. This is the nature of peruers men, when they
can not overcome by strength and industry, they flee to deceites. This may be
seen in these young men: rather then they would suffer them selves to be
conquered or overcome, they go about fraud and snares. But chiefly they go
unto his wife, that (both because she was a woman, which might easelye be
won, and because she was dear and well-beloved of her husband) they might use
her labor to wrest and wring out the secret of her husband. They make her
therefore the betrayer, and that which is most grievous, of her own husband.
This is often times the end of plays. The thing for which they contended, was
of no great value. For every one of them were in danger only of the loss of
one garment and sheet a piece: and yet they say: Have thou called us, that he
should possess us? As though they should lose all that ever they had. These
things rightlye agree with those which do play to that end, to deprive other
men of their goods. They which have lost, may after this manner complain of the
winner: Thou have with this pretense provoked me to plai, to rob me, and not to
take any pleasure by play. The woman in the mean time (as Ambrose says) wept,
and complained unto her husband, Ambrose.
that he loved her not, neither esteemed her. Thou hate me (says she) for as
much as thou wylt not declare unto me thy secrets. But Samson answers
wisely. Yea, but I have not showed it unto my pare^tes, and think thou that
I love them not? What cause is there that thou should complain? There are
in deed many good and faithful women, but Samson had not yet had any trial of
his wife. It is not expedient always to communicate secret counsels unto
wives. Plutarch.
And seeing there are many evil and babbling women, which blab out things of
great importance, to their husbands great damage, therefore wise men commit
not many things to their wives secret keeping: for there are many things that
are not expedient for them to know. And babbling is a vice in a manner proper
unto women. Plutarche tells of this thing an elegant hystory of Papirius
Pretextatus, which now is sufficient only to show. Many, though they be
strong in body, and excel in strength, yet are they weak in heart. Samson had
overcome a Lion, but yet at the last he could not overcome the tears of his
wife. As long as his wife showed her self sad and heavy unto him, Samson
could not bear it. The holy ghost would have these things set forth in the
holy scriptures, whereby we might see the nature and corrupcion of our flesh.

The seventh day before the sun went down. The end of the day is the sun
set. Ambrose.
All they of the East did measure the end of the day by the going down of the
sun, which by this place we may gather, and by many other. They expounded the
ryddle after this manner: What is sweeter then hoony, what is stronger then a
Lion? Ambrose says that Samson, when he heard these things, strayghtwaye
added: what is more unfaithful then a woman? This assuredlye which is added in
the text, is not much unlike: Except ye had plowed with my Heyfer. To plowe is
to dyg, to turn, and to search the earth. So they searched out the maiden,
that by her they might come to the counsel of her husband. This undoubtedly
is an easy interpretacion. Leui ben Gerson.
For that is not sufficient which Leui ben Gerson brings, that those young
men committed aduoutry with the maiden, and by that abuse understood the
ryddle of Samson. For if this thing had happened, Samson would not have
retained her in matrimony.

When they had absolved the riddle, nothing remained but yt Samson should pay
unto them the wager. And that price would he pay unto the Philistines, of the
goods and riches of other Philistines. The miserable woman feared, that if she
had not showed unto the young men the secret of her husband, she should with
all her famely have been burnt. But by this means she did in very deed get
unto her self burning. For as we shall hear, when Samson had inferred
grievous euyls unto the Philistianes, they not suffering the injuries, assembled
a power, and burnt the house of his wives father. So the maiden fell into the
pyt which she had made.

And his wrath was kyndled, namelye against his wife. But why did Samson
require secretnes of her, which he himself could not keep? He ought to have
kept scilence, and not have revealed unto her the secret, if he would have
had his secrets kept close. Farther, as touching the murder of the
Philistians, if we think of Samson, as of some private man, he can by no
means be excused. For it is lawful for no private manne to spoil and kill
others, to pay his own debtes wythall. But because (as the hystorye teaches)
he was stirred up to do this by the impulsion of the holy ghost, therefore
ought he not to be accused. For it is written: And when the spirit of the Lord
came upon him, he went down to Ascalon. etc. Therefore we will not reprove
Samson, but yet we will not draw his act into an example. But this let us
imitate, to suffer our selves to be the instruments of the spirit of God, and
let us with a valiant and bold mind follow him being our guide. For although
Samson should fight at one time against.xxx. men, yet because he was driven by
the spirit of God, he was nothing afearde. He took away the spoils.
Celiphoth, that is, their uppermost and chaungeable garments, which he had
taken away from them which he had slain. But there is mention made that he paid
only Celiphoth: neither is there any thing spoken of the linen sheets, which
yet ought by the bargain to be paid. The Hebrews think that here is used the
figure Synechdoche, that by part is understand the whole. David Kimhi says, he
would not pay the whole, because they came to the knowledge of the riddle by
evil arts, but yet that they should not altogether complain of his faith, he
gave them part.

There arises a doubt, because Samson was a Nazarite, and by his profession it
was not lawful for him to drink wine, nor to cut his hear, How it was lawful
for Sa^son to handle dead Carkases being a Nazarite.
nor to touch any dead corpse. But he must needs touch their bodies, whom when
he had slain he stripped out of their clothes. There are diverse and sundry
answers brought. Some say he was a Nazarite, but not as touching this third
condition. For the Angel only admonished his Parents that he should drink
no wine, nor pole his head: but commanded nothing for touching of dead bodies.
But other say that he did in deed kill the Philistians, but yet he stripped of
their garments, while they were yet breathing and on live. And there are some
which think that he caused that one or two of them which were left a live,
should strippe the other, and should go free for their labor. But these seem
mere faininges. The difficultye may be dispatched by one word: a Nazarite was
bound by religion, not of his own accord to touch dead bodies. But this man
was moved by the spirit of God: neither did he these things of his own will.
Wherefore the commandment of the religion of a Nazarite ought in this steed
to give place unto the holy ghost. I am not ignorant how men do easily
marvel, that the holy ghost would mingle it self with plays and trifles of
young men. For that can scarcely seem to be agreeable unto the majesty of God.
Let humane reason marvel at these things, as much as it list: The providence
of God uses things, though they be never so light.
yet is it nothing contrary unto the majesty of God, if it mingle it self with
things never so light. For hereby the providence of God appears more bright,
when men understand that it also conuerteth things most base and most light,
unto the glory of the name of God. For, for a man with apt and meet
instruments, to bring any thing to pass, it is no great matter: but with
things unapt and deformed, to fabricate any excellent thing, this seems to
pertain to a cunning woorkeman. These things seem in deed to be light, but
what is more light then dreams? which yet God uses to the glory of his name,
as the history of Pharao and Nabuchad-Nezar do manifestly declare. But what
do I speak of Kings? God would by dreams exalt Joseph being a prisoner and
poor man, unto a kingdom. So would he have the inheritance of Esau turned
unto Jacob, in a manner by a play. And by fraud the blessing was wrested by
Jacob from Isaac, covering his hands and neck with Goats skyns. Yea and also
the spirit of God mingleth it self sometimes with the plays and verses of
Poets, when as they (how soever they seem to play) do yet sometimes write
true, profitable and grave things. And that those things are of God, no man
ought to doubt. Let this be had for certain, that all things do obey unto
God, dreams, plays, light things, grave things, and noble. He is the ruler
and governor of al things, wherefore no man ought to be offended when he
hears these things. God seems more and more to increase the strength of
Samson, for before being unarmed, he fought with a Lion: which assuredly was a
great thing. But this is much greater, to fight at one time with xxx. men. God
would so exercise him, that he should give over him self wholye to the
counsel of the spirit.

Samso^ ought not so lyghtlye to have gone from his wife.
Samson being angrye with his wife, because she had uttered the riddle unto the
young men, departed from her: which his fact ought not to be allowed. For he
ought not so lightlye to have separate himself from his wife. It was his part
to correct her, and if need had been, to chasten her. Neither had this
departure good success. For when he was gone, the father gave his daughter
unto an other husband, namely to the fellow of Samson, and paranimphe, which
had joined himself a companion unto him in the marriage. The maiden saw she
had grievously offended her husband, wherefore she fearing his fiercenes,
desires her father to provide her an other husband: For it is not credible (as
Ambrose says) that these things were done without the good will of the maiden.
Ambrose.
But diuorsement should not be made so rashly, and for so light a cause.
Christ has made one cause only of diuorcement, namely aduoutry. Paul adds
the difference of religion: although he will not have the faithful to depart,
if the unbelieving party will dwell together. Neither permitted he second
marriages, because man and wife agree not in religion, but because the one will
not abide with the other. There was here no cause of just diuorcement.
In Samsons cause there is neither of these. There was no aduoutrye, neither
did the maiden say she would not dwell with her husband: neither did Samson
repudiate his wife, although he then departed from her. For afterward he
returned unto her, as we shall hear. And although he so departed, that the wife
knew not where he was become, yet ought she not straight way to marye an
other. For the civil laws, when any such thing happens, do appoint her to
tarry five years, as it is had in the Digestes De diuortiis, in the law Vxor.
And in the Authentikes De Nuptiis, in the Paragraphe Sed etiam. The Canon laws
in the Decretals would have amended these things, and decreed that it should
not be lawful to marye again before some certain word were brought of
the death of the first husband or wife. But with what godlynes and wisdom
they did that, I will not at this time declare.

It is certain that in this place was injustice done for the wife to mary an
other, being not ignorant that her husband was yet on live. But the Father
excuses the act, saying: I thought thou had hated my daughter. But why
should he have suffered himself to be persuaded after this sort? It was
convenient that he should before have known Samsons mind, Josephus.
and tarried for a book of deuorcement. Although I see that Josephus is of this
opinion, that he thinks Samson did repudiate his wife. But that is not very
lykely, when as he afterward descended, to take his wife again unto him.
Neither should the Philistians justly have burned that man with his famely.
Ambrose.
Yea and Ambrose also denies that there was any deuorcement. This is in a
manner the fruit of those that are joined together in an unequal marriage. We
read the like thing in the first book of Samuel, the.xxv. chapter. David had
married Michol the daughter of Saul: and when David fled, her Father gave her
unto an other husband, when as the first husband had not yet repudiated her,
but afterward David demanded her again. In the mean time let us that are
Christians, determine this with our selves, that it is not lawful to dissolve
matrimonies for light causes. Paul says: If the wooman depart, let her
remain unmarried, or let her be reconciled unto her husband. Chrysostom.
Which assuredlye he meant not of aduoutry: for he would not amend the
words of Christ, but as Chrysostom says, he understood these things of
lyghter offenses, for as much as of them some reconsiliacion may be hoped for:
which is utterly cut of, if she be married to an other.

The.xv. Chapter.
1 But within a while after, in the time of wheat harvest, Samson visited his
wife with a Kyd, saying: I will go unto my wife into her chamber: but her father
would not suffer him to go in.

2 And her father said: I had thought that thou had hated her: therefore
gave I her to thy companion. Is not her younger sister fayrer then she? Take
her I pray thee in steed of the other.

3 And Samson said unto him: Now am I more blameles then the Philistines, and
therefore will I do them displeasure.


THis was the simplicity of those times, that the husband should bring unto
his wife a Kyd. It was a gift of reconcilement, to pacify his wife withal. In
saying I have said. That is, I did fyrmly and constantly think. That doubting
of words with the Hebrews, adds a vehemence, which self thing we may see
in that which follows: In hating, thou did hate her, that is, thou
did exceedingly hate her. The father in law seems to lay the fault in
the Son in law. For it is as much as he should have said: Thou wast the
cause, that I gave her unto an other.

Is not her younger sister fayrer then she? He feared Samson, because he was of
a strong and mighty body, least he should rage and kill and slaye the
Philistines: therefore he offers him his other daughter, to assuage his
anger. He offers her, but yet against the law of God, by which it was not
lawful to mary two Systers, as it is manifest in the eightene and twentye of
Leuiticus. Wherefore the father offers unto Samson marriage, but yet an
incestious marriage. Neither was it by the Roman laws lawful to marye two
systers, It is not lawful to ma^y two Sisters.
although the first were dead: and undoubtedly for a just cause: For, for as
much as man and wife are one flesh, thereby comes that the kynsfolkes of
the one are joined in the same degree with the other. Wherefore the sister of
my wife must be counted for my sister. Let the Pope therefore take heed what
he does, when he so easily gives license in this kind of marriages. But this
is nothing to him which thinks that all things are lawful unto him. But it
may be that the Philistians observed not these degrees in matrimonies. For
when Moses gave the law before brought: Ye shall not do (says he) as the
nations do, which the Lord your God shall subdue unto you. For therefore has
the earth syued them out before your face. Samson received not the condition
offered him. Of you (says he) is sproong the injury, my cause is the better and
more just, if it should come to judgment. Wherefore he has cause to be
revenged of the Philistians. And assuredly it was written before of God.

And he sought occasion. We must not think of Samson as of a private man.
Here the Reader is again to be admonished not to think of Samson, as of a
private man. For it is not lawful for any private man, after this manner, to
prosecute his own injuries. He must rather go unto the Magistrate. But Samson
was now constituted of God as a Magistrate. First he takes vengeance of the
goods of the Philistians, and that after a wonderful manner.

4 And Samson went and took.xxx. Foxes, and took firebrandes, and turned them
tail to tail, and put a fyrebrande in the midst between two tails.

5 And when he had set the brandes on fire, he sent them out into the
standing corn of the Philistians, and burnt up both the reekes, and the
standing corn with the vineyardes and olives.

6 Then the Philistians said: who has done this? And they answered, Samson
the son in law of the Thimnite, because he had taken away his wife, and
given her to his companyon. Then the Philistians came up and burnt her and her
father with fire.

7 And Samson said unto them: If ye had done these things: but I will be
avenged of you, and then I will cease.


This word Lampades they have translated firebrandes, which are easelye set on
fire. Samson bound the tails of the Foxes two and two together, with a
strong knot, and in the midst he bound a fyrebrande. When the Foxes could
not agree together in their course (for the one drew this way, and the other
that way, so that they could not hide themselves in their holes, but the flame
by stirring and moving was more and more kindled) they ran into the standing
com. And at that time was the wheat harvest, and the wheat partlye reaped,
and partly grew still. Wherefore the Foxes running through the corn, did them
very great hurt. For they lost both their straw and their corn, with their
vineyardes and Olives. Why Samson did choose foxes.
The consideration of Samsons pollecy was this: He chose a Fox to this
enterprise, rather then any other beast, because it is a craftye and subtle
beast, and goes by crooked and bye passages. But Samson goes the right way to
work: otherwise he might easelier have bound Dogs together, but he rather
used Foxes, for the cause before alleged, as David Kimhi affirms. Neither
would he to every Fox alone bind a firebrande: partly because they would have
drawn the firebrands along the ground, and so might easily have put them out,
and partly because they would soon have gotten them into their holes. But when
two and two were by the tails joined together, and the one drew one way, and
the other an other way, by that mocion was the fire the more kindled, Origene.
and when they ran into the corn, they did very great hurt. Origene upon
Cantica Canticorum, in his.iiii. Homely, as he is every where full of
Allegories, refers all this thing also to an Allegory, although he plainly
confesses, that it is hard to apply an Allegorye unto this History. But I, as
I have often in other places, so do I also in this place omit Allegories.

But if a man ask how Samson got so many Foxes, he must understand, that as
there are sundry regions, so are there also in them manyfolde and sundry
increase of things. In some place there are many horses, and those fair. In
some place there is great abundance of Cattle. In England there is great
plentye of Conies, and so is there in the Islands called Baleares. In those
Regions a man may easelye in one day, and in a little ground, take three or
four hundredth Conies: Siria abounds in Foxes.
which to some peradventure might seem incredyble. And so is it said that
there is a very great abundance of Foxes in Siria, and specially in the
borders of Iewry. Wherefore Salamon in his Canticles says: Take Foxes for us
which destroy the vyneyardes. Wherefore there was so great number of them,
that they also destroyed the vineyardes: for they delight most of all in ripe
grapes. Yea and David says of the ungodly: They shall be parts of Foxes,
that is, their pray, so that their karkases shall be devoured of them. And out
of the.4. chap. of Nehemias is gathered, that the number of them was so great,
that they could in a manner ouerturne the walls of the city. And Samson took
them either by his own industry, or by the help of his friends. He sent the
Foxes, and destroyed their corn. Hereby we may gather, that in just war, it is
lawful to use burninges and spoilinges, to endomage their enemies.

The Philistians said: who has done this? They seek for the author, and they
do not only find him, but also they understand the cause why he did it, and
they take vengeance of his father in law and his wife, that was married unto
an other. If ye had done these things. These are the words of a man that is
angry, and therefore cut of, wherefore we must understand, if ye had done these
things at the beginning, when my wife was first taken from me, I had been
pacified. But ye have done it to late, therefore I will yet be avenged of you.
For that which ye have done, ye have not done for love to justice and honesty,
but for fear of a greater hurt. If justice had moved them, they would at the
first have punished them. But they follow the common nature of men, which are
with no other thing more touched, then by the feelyng of present euyls, which
we may perceive not only here, Men are more moved by ^^r^ then b^ any other
means.
but also in the historye which is found in the latter book of Samuel.
Absolon had long lived in exile: Ioab obtained of the king that he might
return. Wherefore he returned, but he was not admitted unto the kings sight.
And when Ioab would not wyllinglye come unto him, Absolon commanded his
servants to burn the corn of Ioab. Wherefore Ioab being moved with this
iniurye, came unto him at the last. So also the Philistians, being in a manner
compelled, Whi sometimes the syn o^ a private man is the cause of the
destruction of a whole city or kingdom.
do revenge the injury of Samson. This also is to be noted, that often times a
whole City or kingdom is punished, for the sin of one man, or of one famely.
And that saw the Poets, when they wrote, that only the aduoultrye of Paris
ouerthrewe the kingdom of Troy. And undoubtedly when a public wealth either
wynketh at, or defends, or punishes not, the sin of a private man, God
counts it all one, as if they had all sinned together. If they have good
laws, and do follow them in punishyng wicked acts, God will not for their
sakes punyshe them all.

Hereby also we may see that the sentence of Solomon is most true, wherein he
says: That which the ungodly fears shall happen unto him. The ma^den feared
least her fathers house should be burnt: Why the ungodly call (...) those
euylls or which they be a feared of.
and she by that way most of all brought burning, by which she thought to
avoid it. But why happens i^, that the ungodly do fall into that, which
they fear. Because when they fear^ evil things, they go about to avoid them
by evil means, and not by good. Joseph's brethren feared least he should be
preferred before them, when they saw that his father loved him so well. And
that they might avoid his promocion, they sold him into Egypt. But by that
means chiefly it came to pass, that Joseph was made ruler over them. The
Jews feared least, if Christ should go forward as he began, the Romans would
come and take away their nation and place. And to turn away that, they gave
unto Judas a price, and crucified Christ, whereby they the sooner threw them
selves headlong into those euyls which they feared. The maiden was burned with all her fathers famely. By who^? By the Philistines, at whose hands she looked
for favor.

8 So he smote them hyp and thygh with a great plague. Then he went down and
dwelt in the top of the rock Etan.


What hyp upon thigh, or hyp together with thigh signifies, it is obscure, and
therefore there are sundry interpretacions brought. The Chaldey Paraphrast
expounds it to be horsemen and footeme^, so that thigh signifies horsemen,
because they sit on the horse with the thigh bowed, and the hyp signifies
footmen. Peradventure at that time it was a kind of proverb well known of
those men. David Kimhi brings an other reason, namely that Samson, Kimhi.
both slew the Philistians and also did put them to flight, who also as they
fled, did fall: as though by this kind of speech might be described the
behavior of them that fell, whereby the hyp is bowed unto the thigh. Farther,
this hebrew word Iarach signifies also a shoulder, and the meaning may be
that Samson smote them from the shoulder to the thigh. The rock Etan is the
proper name of a place.

9 Then the Philistians came up, and pitched in Judah, and were spread abroad
in Lechi.

10 And the men of Judah said: why are ye come up unto us? And they answered,
to bind Samson are we come up, and to do to him, as he has done to us.

11 Then three thousand men of Judah went down to the top of the rock Etan,
and said to Samson: know thou not that the Philistians ar rulers over us?
wherefore then have thou done thus unto us? And he answered them: as they did
unto me, so have I done unto them.

12 Again they said unto him: We are come to bind thee, and to deliver thee
into the hand of the Philistians. And Samson said unto them: swear unto me,
that ye will not fall upon me your selves.

13 And they answered him, saying: No, but we will bind thee and deliver thee
unto their hand, but we will not kyl thee. And they bound him with two new
cords, and brought him from the rock.

14 When he came to Lechi, the Philistians shouted against him, and the spirit
of the Lord came upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms, became as
flax that is burnt with fire: for the bands loosed from his hands.

15 And he found a new iawbone of an Ass, and put forth his hand, and caught
it, and slew a thousand men therewyth.

16 Then Samson said: with the iawe of an Ass are heaps upon heaps: with the
iaw of an Ass have I slain a thousand men.

17 And when he had left speaking, he cast away the iawbone out of his hand,
and called that place Ramath-Lechi.


This place is called Lechi by the figure prolepsis: because Lechi in Hebrew is
a iawbone, and therefore the place is so named, because Samson slew there a
number of his enemies with the iawbone of an Ass. But that was not then done
when Samson came thither at the first. The Philistians, to avenge their
iniuryes, pytched against Judah: for thither Samson fled. But the men of Judah
desire the Philistians not to be angrye, and demand of them why they led an
army against them. As though they should have said: we have not fallen from
you, and we have paid you our tributes: If Samson did any thing against you,
The leaugue of the Woulues with the sheep. Demosthenes.
it was not done by our counsel. And they were pacified and said: Deliver him
then, and we will depart. Undoubtedly an unjust and craftye Counsel: for in
such sort would the Woulues make a league with the Sheep, on that condition
I say, that they should deliver their Dogs, as Demosthenes said unto the
people of Athens touching their Orators. But why did not the Philistians them
selves take Samson? Ambrose.
Ambrose answers, because they durst not. And the men of Judah were so
cowardishe, that they refused not to do it. There came unto Samson three
thousand men to take him, and they lay for a pretense the authority of the
Philistians: VVylt thou (say they) have us afflicted for thy sake?

The like speech had the Hebrews in time past against Moses: for when the
people was oppressed of Pharao: Thou (said they) haste made our smell to stink
in the sight of Pharao. Samson vpbraydeth not unto them their sluggyshnesse and
desperatnesse, when as he might justly have said unto them: Are ye not
ashamed to betray him that has delivered you? He handles his own country
men friendlye, and tells them peaceably, why he did so. They (said he) did
me injury first, and the same would I avenge. This is the law of rendering like
for like, and it is a common rule of all laws. But swear unto me, Lextalionis
that you will not fall upon me your selves. Why requires he this oath that
they should not kill him? Because he was godly toward his country, neither
would he shed the blood of his citizens, which undoubtedly must needs have
been done, if the matter had come to handystrokes.

The Philistians mighthy a certain outward show, seem iuster then Sa^son. For
when they had burnt Samsons father in law and his wife and all his famely, yet
Samson not being content with that auengement, slew very many of them: and
they, though they had so many hurtes, yet they desire only the death of
Samson. Wherefore they may seem more just, but it is but in an outward show
only, The entente of the Philistia^s.
as we have said. For they would first take away Samson the head: who being
taken away, they might easily do what they would against the people of Israel.
And Samson would rather be delivered unto his enemies, then that his country
should for his sake come in danger: so great a love had he toward his people,
yea rather chiefly a firm and constant faith toward God. For puttinge his
hope in the mercy of God, he doubted not to commit himself unto his enemies,
and he would defend the Jews, not only by weapons and strength, but also
with his great danger.

And when he was bound, they made him to ascend. This is so said, because
that rough rock which Samson possessed, was lower then the mountains which the
Philistians held. Wherefore we read before that Samson descended to the
rock, and that the Jews descended unto him. When the Philistians showted
against him for joy, ye spirit of the lordcame upon Sa^son, so that he brake
his cords as easelye as if they had been flare burnte with fire. And he took
the iaw bone of an ass being new or grene. This Hebrewe word Teriah
signifies grene or new, and it is so called, either because it was newelye
drawn out of the ass, or else because it was rotten. For rotten things the
Hebrews call grene. Wherefore raw sores and wounds full of matter or corruption,
ar called of the^, grene Teriah. These words ( And Samson said, with the iaw of
an Ass: and then it is added in Hebrew Chamor Chamerithim) are very obscure
and have sundry interpretacions. For Chamor signifies both an ass, and also
a heap or gathering together. Wherefore some following the signification of
this word heap, do thus interpret it, there was made heaps upon heaps of
dead bodies, namely of me^ which he had slain. Or I have made heap upon
heap. And the sense is, that Samson says that he had made so great a
slaughter of his enemies, that he gathered great heaps of them together. But
other having a respect unto this word ass, do thus enterpretate it, of an
ass, of asses, that it should not be here understand in a metaphore. And they
think yt a sword which is called by ye name had ye form of an ass. He says
therefore yt it was ye iaw bone of an ass, of an ass I say of asses, as in
other places of the scripture we read, a kidde of goats, and a bullock of
Oxen. The Rabbines for the most part interpret this place for heaps and
gatheringes together of enemies.

When the slaughter was finished, then first the place was named Ramath-Lechi.
Ramam in Hebrew is high. Wherefore Ramah signifies a high place. And
Ramah-Lechi is nothing else then a hill or top of a iaw bone. There may also
be given an other Etimologye, so that the naminge of it may be derived of this
verb Ramah, which is to cast away, because Samson in that place threw away the
iaw bone, when he had fynished the slaughter.

18 And he was sore a thirste, and called on the Lord, and said: Thou have
given this great deliverance by the hand of thy servant and now shall I dye
for thirste, and fall into the hands of the uncircumcised?

19 Then god brake the cheke tooth, that was in the iawe, and water came
thereout, and when he had drunk, his sprite came again, and he was revived.
Wherefore he called the name thereof Ain Hakorah, which is the fountain of him
that calls upon, which is in Lechi unto this day.

20 And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistians twentye years.


Whereas it is written that god opened the cheek tooth which was in the iaw
bone, it is in the Hebrewe Aschar Belchi Hamachtich, wherefore the place is
dark: for this word Machtisch signifies either that holownes wherein the
teth are fixed, or else by a Metaphore it signifies a stone or rock, wherein
is a hole cut, Out of what thing god brought forth water. Josephus. R. Leui
Ben Gerson.
like unto the holes of the cheke tethe. And in fine it is that, which commonly
we call a mortar. And this latter interpretation Josephus and R. Leui Ben
Gerson do follow. And they think, that god brought not forth water out of the
iaw bone, but out of a rock being holow like a iaw bone. But others say that
water came forth of that iaw bone, wherewith he had slain his enemies. The
place was called the fountain of him that prays, because God at the prayers
of Samson opened the rock or iawe bone. And this word Aim, Leui expounds
for an eye, for in very deed it signifies either, namelye both a fountain
and an eye. And the sense that be gathers is, that the eye of the Lord was
upon him, which called upon him, that is, God had a regard unto the prayers of
him that called upon him. It is added that Samson judged Israel in the days
of the Philistianes: which is therefore written, because in his time the
Hebrews were not yet fully delivered from the tirranny of the Philistianes,
Samson began to deliver them, but he finished not.

In this latter history are certain things which we ought to observe. The
first is, that Samson was bound with two cords, and those new, that the
miracle might be the more wonderful. New cords are strong.
For new cords are more hardly broken, then old. And it is eligantly
described how they brake, namely as flax burnt with fire. The cords might be
broken two ways, either because the strength of Samsons body was increased, or
else because the cords were weakened by god: and either way is apt enough.
Farther, when he being naked and unarmed, was cast forth unto his enemies, god
ministered weapons unto him of a thing most vile: so can he use all things to
setforth his glory: the iawe bone was made only to chawe and cut small
meat, but God would use it to commit a slaughter. So although sometimes we
seem to be unarmed against our enemies, yet are we sufficiently armed, when
god will. Some to make the thing more probable, do imagine, that that iaw bone
of the ass was a great one, because that in Siria are so great asses that in
greatenes they may be compared with our horses. Which thing I do not disprove.

The Philistians shoute and rejoice as though a most deadlye enemy had
fallen into their hands: But the sprite of the Lord came upon Sampso^, and
there was a great slaughter made of them. And the song which he sang was a
giving of thanks for the victory, (...).
that is, a song of victory. But some doubt, whither the whole song be here
written, or only the beginning thereof. I think here is but the beginning
only: the rest paraduenture was known among the Jews, and soong thorough.

And he was sore a thirst. Josephus and Ambrose think yt god struck Samson with
thirst, because he attributed the victory unto himself, and not unto God, I
(says he) with the iaw of an ass have slain a thousand men. He says not,
Josephus. Ambrose Why Samson was vexed with thirste.
God has slain, neither erecteth he an altar or monumente unto God, nor
makes any sacrifice: and therefore is he afflicted with thirste. For god would
have him to understand that he was a man, and would also have him to know by
whose benefit he had obtained the victory. This say they: but because those
things which they allege are not of the holy Scriptures, therefore I do not
give credit unto them. Moreover let us note that in the old Testament, very
many places have their names given them of the benefits of God. For they
would have the goodness of God kept in memory for the^ yt should come after, yt
they also should hope that by the same means they should be helped, as they
fee their fathers in times past were helped of God. For which self same cause
the hebrews were commanded to enstructe and teach their children of the
benefits bestowed on them by god. Wherefore they instructed their posterity,
not only by words, but also by such tokens and monumentes, as by some certain
sacraments. Wherefore the thirste of Samson (as far as I judge) was not a
punishment for sin, which he had committed, but a certain caution or
prohibition that he should not sin. He might in deed by reason of overmuch
labor naturally thirste, but god would have him remember that in so great
fortune he was mortal. He had slain many: but herin was the danger, least he
also should have died together with the^ for thirst. Or it was done, that the
power and benevolence of God toward his people should be made the more
notable, which had not only delivered Samson from his enemies, but also had
quenched his thyrst by a wonderful means.

Wherefore Samson turns himself unto prayers, which God makes him to
express both by his spirit, and also by this present necessitye. We are not
able to think how much God delights in our submission. Thou, says he, Lord
God have given me this victory, and will thou now forsake me? Hereby we
understand that the remembrance of the benefits past, do excedingly stir up
our prayers, for they increase faith, whereby we hope that we may obtain the
like and also greater things. Neither is this a thing to be passedouer, that he
calls him self the servant of God. I am (says he) thy servant. For I have
not slain these me^ at mine own lust and motion: I have done thy business, and
I have executed thy war. And will thou now suffer me to dye for thurst? And
by that means to fall into the hands of mine enemies? And which is most
grievous, into the hands of the vncicumcised? For I undoubtedly, whatsoever I
am, am thine, and I have set abroad the glory of thine name. Thou have promised
that I should be a judge unto thy people, suffer me not therefore to come into
the power of mine enemies, contrary to that promise which thou have promised me.

The.xvi. Chapter.
1 THen went Samson to Azzah, and he saw there a harlot, and went into her.

2 And it was told to the Azzathites, Sa^son is comhither. And they went about,
and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city and were quiet all the
night, saying: Abide til the morning early, and we shall kill him.

3 And Samson slept till midnight, and rose at midnight and took the doors of
the gate of the city, and the two posts, and lift them away with the bars,
and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of the
mountain, that is before Hebron


It is no rare or unaccustomed thing, that excellent men, when they have
accomplished things after their mind, There happen sometimes grievous falls
of godly men, and of churches.
do slack good studies and honest entenprises, as though they had done with
labors, and are now in that place yt they can not fall. God suffers them
sometimes so to fall, that they should acknowledge the^ selves, and be called
back to repentance. But that is not done by the merit of the sinners, but by
the goodness and mercy of god. So God suffered David to fall, so Solomon
contaminated himself with a most grievous wicked crime: so Judas the son of
Jacob, being in good estimation among his brethren, yet committed incest with
Thamar. Neither do these things happen only unto singular me^, but also unto
the church, as well the new as the old. In the time of Byleam when ye
Israelites could not be won by any other means, they were conquered by harlots.
And the church of the Corrinthians, was at the first so contaminated with
whoredoms, that Paul was compelled to show by arguments and testimonies of
the word of god, that foricatio^ was sin. Yet did not god straightway depart
from those which I have mentioned, God does not straightway after sin take a
way from men his free gracious gifts.
nor from Samson as touching his free gracious gifts, as are strength, gift
of tongues, prophesies, and such like: because they are given, not for their
sakes which possess them, but for other. Bileam though he was an evil man,
yet had he still the gift of prophesy, yea and he prophesied most excellently
of Christ. The Lord also says: many shall say unto me in that day: Have not we
cast out devils in thy name? And in thy name have we prophesied: and it shall be
said unto them, verily I say unto you, I know you not.

Howbeit for discipline sake, free gracious gifts are also sometimes taken
away: sometimes I say, not always. And Samson did not strayghtewaye at the
first time when he sinned, lose those gifts of God: yet afterward he lost
them. But seeing these are not always taken away, Whither the gifts which
follow justification are firm.
what shall we affirm of other gifts, which of necessity follow justification?
Those undoubtedly ar taken away in sins that are most heinous, For he which has
committed any grievous sin against himself, holds not peace of conscience,
neither the zeal to call upon God, nor hope toward God. Faith also for that
time, either sleeps and lies still, or (as some think) is taken away,
although it be afterward restored unto the elect, and those that are
predestinate, when they repent. Such falls of excellent men are setforth, How
great the verity of the holy scriptures is How the country of the Philistians
was divided.
that we by them should have an example, that if at any time we fall, we should
not despair. And hereby we understand how great the veritye of the holy
scriptures is. For they dissemble not errors and vices in the greatest me^, and
in those specially which they have taken in hand to praise.

Azza was one of the head cities of ye Philistians. For that country was
divided into provinces and Lordshippes: of which in every one of them there was
some one excellent and notable city. Our interpretors have translated Azza into
Gaza: for it is written by this letter Ain, which our men turn by g: And so
the Ammorhites they call Gomorhites. But why went Samson down hither? because
now having obtained so many victories, he contemned his enemies: and
peradventure he sought occasion to invade them. But in this city he fell: for
he had there to do with a harlot. This word Zonah signifies in Hebrewe a
harlot, of which thing we have spoken in an other place. Some think that
Samson did nothing here offend, but only turned into a woman that kept a
vitling house. For by that word is also signified a woman yt keeps a vitling
house, because she prepares meat and other necessary things for gestes. So
some think that Rahab in the book of Joshua, which received the spies, was
not an harlot, but only one that kept a vitling house. But I think that Rahab
was an harlot. For so is she called in the Epistle to the Hebrews, which had
done her injury now being dead, How women that kept vitling houses are called
by the Romain laws
if it called her, being a chaste woman, an harlotte. The Roman laws called
such women as kept vitlinge houses stabulariae, as it is had in the title de
furtis stabulariorum. Ambrose says that Helena the mother of Co^sta^tine ye
great was a stabularia after this sort, and he calls her a good stabularia

He entered into her. This Hebrew form of speaking signifies carnal
fellowship, namely that he had to do with her. Other think (as I have said)
that he only lodged in her house. But ye Philistines when they heard of it,
did secretly enuiro^ the city in the night season, for they would make no noise
for waking of Samson being on sleep, for they durst not set upon him in the
dark, for that they knew him to be most strong. They tarried till it was day,
neither doubted they that he could escape, being so on every side enclosed and
besieged. Liranus thinks, Lyrauus.
that the Philistines drew not Samson out of his lodging, because peradventure
in that region it was a law, that men should be safe in their lodgyngs. But I
marvel that Ambrose says, that the Philistines besieged the house where
Samson was, Ambrose.
when as in the Hebrew we manifestly read that they besieged the City. Samson
came and took the doors, and carried them away with him. So he despised his
enemies, neither was there any that durst withstand him.

Neither yet must we think, yt that was the strength of a man, Things are to
be judged by ye word of God, and not by the success.
but of the spirit of God. But we must not therefore affirm that God favored
whooredome: because in judging of things, we must not have a regard to the
success. David also filthily committed aduoutry, and at the same time wherein
he grievously sinned, he conquered Rabbah, the City of the Ammonites. Solomon
had fellowship with idolatrous women, and yet all things in a manner went with
him as he would desire. Wherefore as touching actions, we must not judge of them
by ententes. Wherefore in Ecclesiastes it is rightly said, yt the self same
things happen unto ye evil, that do happen unto the good, and therefore of
the^ the love or hatred of God toward us is not known. Neither by the euentes
may we judge who is godly, or who is ungodly. We must judge by the word of
God. The things that agree with it are good: the things that disagree, are
ungodly. But in that God does not strayghtway take vengeance, he therefore does
it, to call us back to repentance. Wherefore it is our part to see that we
heap not unto our selves anger, in the day of anger, as Paul says unto the
Romans.

Samson escaped the danger, and carried away the gates of the City unto a
montayne, that they might be a wonder, and that the Philistines might see how
great strength there was in the God of Israel: yea and that the Jews also
might behold so notable an act of God. For that montayne was in the midst
between Gaza and Hebron, which the Hebrews inhabited. By that spectacle it
came to pass, that the courages of the Philistines were daunted, but the
Hebrews were boldned. We may not (as I have often admonished) think of Samson,
as of a private man, for he was a Magistrate appointed by God, and not by men.
For if he had been a private man, his acts could not be allowed: for it is
wicked to violate the walls and gates of Cities. Which thing was also
prohibited by the Roman laws. In the digestes de rerum diuisione in the law
sanctum, and in the law sacrum, it is had that some things are sacred, some
things religious, and some things holy. Things sacred, as the alters and
temples of the gods. Religious, as the sepulchers of the dead, holy, as those
things which are by laws defended from the iniuryes of men, as gates and
walls. In the same title also it is red. Gates and walls of cities are by the
laws counted as holy.
These things are holy, which are neither sacred nor profane, but confirmed
and defended by laws, that they should not be violated. As if a man should do
this thing or that thing, he should suffer this or that. In the same title in
the law Si quis, the violating of the walls is made death. Wherefore Remus was
put to death, Why Remus was killed of Romulus.
because he went over the walls of his brother: Which self same thing is
decreed of prisons, as it is written in the title de Effractoribus in the
law.1. And in the title de custodia and Exhibitione in the law in cos. Prisons
are not to be violated.
Howbeit if the door were but slenderly shut, and any manne had fled, he was
more lightely punished, but yet in such sort, that he should be counted for
a condemned person, although otherwise he were innocent.

Socrates when he was in prison, and might have escaped, he would not, An
example of Socrates.
least he should seem to have violated the laws. It was objected unto him:
Thou art wrongfully held in prison. But he answered: we must not by injury put
away injury, because to do injury is always evil. He also took an argument
of an example. For wise men ought not to open this window unto other: Which
other would easily imitate, if they should fly out of prison. Farther if all
man should by themselves remedy iniuryes, and breaks prisons, what manner of
public wealth would there be at the length? Moreover hereby we should seem to
fear death more then is mete. But we must not so be afeard of death, to
violate laws and rightes. Lastly we must not doubt, but that good men fall
into the hands of tyrannes by the will of God. Wherefore they ought not by an
unjust way to deliver themselves thereout. Neither ought any man to object unto
us Peter, for he fled not, but was by an angel brought forth by the will and
commandment of God. Let us rather see what Paul and Silas did in prison: they
would not fly when they might. It is not lawful for bound servants to fly
from their masters.
It is not lawful also for bondeseruants to fly from their masters. And
undoubtedly Paul sent home again Onesimus unto Philemon. What if the
bondeseruant feared fornication or murder at his masters hand? It was lawful
for him to fly unto sanctuary, or to the image of the prince: there was he
helped by the laws, and the unjust Lord was compelled to sell his bondserua^t.
But a Citizen for as much as he is free, Free men may change their abydynges
for just causes.
neither is held in prison, because by the laws he may dwell where he will,
for him it is lawful to change his abiding and go whether he please. But that
which Samson did, must not be followed, neither drawn into an example. For he
(as we have often said) was appointed a Magistrate by God, and was most
certain of his vocation.

4 And afterward he loved a woman by the brook Sorek, whose name was Delila.

5 And the Lords of the Philistines came up unto her, and said unto her:
Deceive him and see wherein his great strength lies, and by what means we may
prevail against him, that when we have bound him, we may afflicte him: And we
will every one of us give thee a thousand one hundredth pieces of Silver.

6 And Delila said to Samson: tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great
strength lies, and wherewith thou might be bound, to do thee hurt.

7 Samson then answered unto her: If they bynd me with seven green rods
that were never dried, then shall I be weak, and be as an otherman.

8 And the princes of ye Philistines brought her seven green rods that were
not withered, and she bound him therewith.

9 (And she had men lying in wait with her in the chamber) then she said unto
him: the Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he brake the rods, as a thread
of towe is broken, when it feleth fire: so his strength was not known.

10 After Delila said unto Samson: See, thou have mocked me and told me lies:
I pray thee now, tell me wherewith thou myghtest be bound.

11 Then he answered her: If they bind me with new ropes that never were
occupied then shall I be weak and be as another man.

12 Delila therefore took new ropes and bound him therewith, and said unto
him: The Philistines be upon thee, Samson: (and men lay in wait in the
chamber) and he brake them from his arms, as a thread.

13 Afterward Delila said to Samson: Hitherto thou have beguiled me, and told
me lies: tell me how thou might be bound. And he said unto her: If thou
plattedst Seven locks of mine head with the threades of the woufe.

14 And she fastened it with a pin, and said unto him: The Philistines be
upon thee, Samson. And he a woke out of his sleep, and went away with the
pin of the web and the woufe.

15 Again she said unto him: how can thou say, I love thee, when thine heart
is not with me? thou have mocked me these three times, and have not told me
wherein thy great strength lies.

16 And because she was importunate upon him with her words continually, and
vexed him, his Soul was payned unto the death.

17 Therefore he told her all his heart, and said unto her: There never came
rasor upon mine head: for I am a Nazarite unto God from my mothers womb:
therefore if I be shaven, my strength will go from me, and I shall be weak, and
be like all other men.

18 And when Delila saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent, and
called for the princes of the Philistines, Saying: Come up once again: for he
has showed me all his heart. Then the princes of the Philistines came up unto
her, and brought the money in their hands.

19 And she made him sleep upon her knees, and she called a man, and made him
to shave of the seven locks of his head, and she began to vex him, and his
strength was gone from him.

20 Then she said: the Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he a woke out of
his sleep, and said: I will go out now as at other times, and shake my
self, but he knew not that the Lord was departed from him.


By the outrageous love of Samson unto women, we easily understand, that the
desire of lust is never satisfied, so long as we obey it. Samson had played the
whoremonger before, and yet not being content with that, he took unto him a
harlot again. Wherefore no man ought to cocker his sins, as though he might
afterward leave them at will. Seneca has ryghtly admonished Lucillus: Senec^.
That we must not add to lusts, but rather pluck away from them: otherwise
they will grow unto vnmeasurablenes. We see in this history as in a glass the
perverseness of man's nature, when God wynketh, and defereth the punishment, we
are made worse, and the more forward he goes in forgeuyng, so much the more
and more do we go forward in sinnyng. Wherefore Paul to the Romans writes
truly and profitably: do thou not know that the goodness of God calls thee
to repentance? but thou according to thy hardness and unrepentant heart,
heapest unto thyselfe wrath in the day of wrath. God seemed to spare Samson,
but he was never a whit the better.

But what this woman was, whether she were an Hebrewe or a Philistine, R. Leui
be^ Geeson.
it appears not by the History. It is only written that she dwelled by the
river or brook Sorek. R. Leui ben Gerson thinks that she was a proselite,
and yt she had received the profession of the law of the Jews. But he
confirms not his opinion by any testimony of the scripture. Howbeit if she
had been a proselite, Samson had sinned much more grievously. For he ought
rather to have dissuaded from fornication a woman being a stranger, and
peradventure not thoroughly instructed in religion, then to have allured her to
sin. For that cause Christ rebuked the Scribes and Phariseys, saying: Woe unto
you Scribes and Phariseis, because you compass about sea and land, to make one
proselite: and then ye make him the child of hell, twice so much more then ye
your selves. And even the same self thing is also now a days practiced, and
that very often: the Papists labor very much, to convert a Jew to their
Christian religion, and then they corrupt him, and make him woorser then they
are themselves. After which self same manner Monks lead young men and
maidens to their institutions, whom afterward by evil arts they make most
corrupt. But these things have I spoken by the way.

But how many of the Philistines came unto the harlot, it is not written. Some
think, that there were five, because there are so many pronounces in that
region. Every one of them promised to give her xi. hundredth pieces of Silver,
the whole sum therefore was.5500. pieces of Silver. So the Philistines, when
they could not conquer Samson by strength, assayed to win him by deceate,
and they allure the woman with money to betray him. By the voluptuousnes of
Samson they take occasion, and with large promyses they stir up the
covetousness of the woman. Of how great force the entisementes of women are.
But of honesty and virtue, they have no regard. And that the nature of
strong men is such, that by the flatterynges of a woman it may be deceived,
we may understand not only by this Hystory, but also by many other. But it
shall be sufficient to set before us Adam for an example: whose nature in that
first innocence being yet perfect, was yet by a woman brought into deceate.
Wherefore we must continually pray unto God, that he would not suffer us to
be led into deceate, for we must not trust to our own strength.

The woman being intised by the Philistines, goes unto Samson. Wherefore she
is not only an harlot, but also a betrayer. Such an end ought they to look
for, and be most assured of, what soever they be, that have fellowshyp with
harlottes. There are extant examples of many, which partly were very evil
handled of harlots, and partly betrayed by them to their enemies to be slain.
For she which sells her self, will undoubtedly much easelyer sell her
lover. Wherefore Solomon has wisely admonyshed, that a harlot is no les to be
avoided, then the mouth of hell.

And Delila said: Show me wherein thy strength lies. These things are here
set forth simply, but it is very likely, that the woman did thus flatter
Samson saying unto him, that she much meruayled at his so great strength, and
that she much reioysed, that she had gotten her self such a lover. And
therefore she exceedyngly desired to know this, wherein his so great strength
consisted. Samson mocked her two or three times. And first he says: If I be
bound with green rods. That is, with bounds made of Osiers and new
twigges, which have not yet been dried. The second time he bids her take
new ropes, wherewith Delila afterward bound him, namely when he was on
sleep. Thirdly he fayneth that seven locks of his head should be platted
with the threades of the woufe, to take away his strength: He puts a
certain number for an uncertain. He would in deed have been constant, and
hidden ye secret from the woman, but on the other side his weakness and
softenes was so great yt he faynted. For after he disse^bled once or twice, she
was so much the more importunate with him. And though she were mocked, yet she
gives not over, neither dispaireth she to obtain yt which she sought for. The
Hebrew interpreters think yt these things were not done in one day, straight
after an other, but at sundry times, yt the woman as occasion served might
repeat the same request. Lastly it is said yt the harlot was greuousome unto
Samson, even unto the death. He could not suffer to be rejected of his lover,
it was like death unto him to be repulsed from his pleasures and delyghtes. So
Samson is taken, bound, and lead away.

Of Whooredome or Fornication.
NOw I think it good somewhat to speak of whooredome or fornication. For as
in the old time there were very many, so also at this day there are not a
few, which affirm that it is no sin. But I will prove by Scriptures, and
by most certain reasons that it is a grievous sin.

They which extenuate this wicked crime, do lean unto sundry arguments.
First in the Acts of the Apostles the.15. chapter, when in those first
times, there arose a dissension among the Jews and the Gretians, it was by
common assent decreed, that the Ethnikes should absteyne from blood, from that
which was strangled, from things offered unto idols, and from fornication.
Here, say they, that whooredome or fornication is reckened with those things
which of their own nature are not sins. Wherefore it appears that of it
self it is not sin: for these things were then for a time decreed of the
Apostles, that Christians should live peaceably together. For there is no
creature of GOD evil, as says Paul to Timothe: Farther they say, GOD would
not command that which of it self is sin. But he bad Hoseas the Prophet
to take unto himself an harlot, and to beget children of whooredome or
fornication. Wherefore of his own nature it seems not evil. Farthermore
every sin is against charity, either against that charity which we owe unto
God, or that which we owe unto our neighbor. But in whooredome or fornication
there seems nothing to be committed against God: for his worshyppyng and
Religion is not hurt. Neither also against our neighbor, for there is no
violence offered his wife, neither is there any violent oppression. Moreover
Augustine in his book de bono coniugali writes, Augustine
that what meat is unto the body, that is accompaniyng together for
procreation. But if a man eat or drink a little more then he ought, he is not
accused of sin. Wherefore also if a man in accompanieng together do a little
straye, he is not to be counted guilty of sin. Lastly, those things which god
has prohibited as sins, ar so plain and manifest, that even by ye light of
nature every man may understand yt they are sins: but whooredome or
fornication in man's judgment is not so judged, and many think yt it is no
sin. Mitio in ye Comedy in Tere^ce says: Believe me, it is no wicked act for
a young man to commit fornication. And in ye Church of Corint. there wa^ted not
some which so thought also. Wherefore by these reasons ye filthynes of whoredom
is so extenuated, yt either it is not counted for sin, or else counted among
ye lest sins.

We must have a regard not to humane reasons, but unto the word of god, not
what men think or judge, but what ye holy ghost speaks in ye holy
scriptures. And in ye Prophets and in Solomon, there is in every place
detestatio^ of fornication. Fornication is prohibited by testimonies of the
scriptures.
But in the law they say there is nothing decreed against it. But for as much as
they will reason by ye law, I will bring testimonies also out of it, whereby it
may easily be understand ye fornication is prohibited. In Leuit. in ye book of
Nu^b. and in Deuteronomy. ye Jews are prohibited to adioyne unto themselves strange
women. Again in Deuteronomy. ye.23. chap. it is commanded, yt there should be nor
harlot nor whore in Israel. Let these places be compared together. It was not
lawful to have harlots, neither strangers, neither Israelites, therefore they
were al forbidden. But some will say: How then had Sa^son fellowship with an
harlot? Some of ye Hebrews answer yt she was not a harlot, with whom Samson had
fellowship, but one yt kept a vitling house. But for as much as that is a weak
answer, me thinks we must otherwise answer unto it. The public wealth of
the Hebrews was at that time corrupted. For they lived now under the
Philistines: neither is it any marvel if they were imbrewed with any of their
vices and corrupt manners. Wherefore they had some harlottes, but not by their
laws, but by the use and custom of the Philistines.

Testimonies of the new testament.
But in the new Testament whooredome or fornication is apertly and manifestly
prohibited. To the Hebrews it is thus written: Adoulterers and fornicators the
Lord will judge: ye Lord is not said to judge and to avenge, except it be for
grievous sins. And to ye Ephesia^s, not only covetous men and idolaters, but
also fornicators are excluded from ye kingdom of God. To the Corinthia^s also,
where Paul writes of Excommunication, I do not speak (says he) of all
fornicators: but if any be called a brother, and is a fornicator, with such ye
shall not so much as eat meat. But he entreats much more manifestly of
all this matter in the same Epistle the.6. chapter, and yt of purpose: for many
(as it is said) were of an evil opinion, as touching this kind of wickedness.
First, he says, meat is ordained for the belly and the belly for meat, but
God shall destroy both this and that, now the body is not for fornication, but
for the Lord. For all meat of his own nature is pure: but for the offense of
our neighbor, we ought sometimes to absteyne. But some man might say: Meat is
necessary to live by. It is, says Paul, in this life, but in the blessed
resurrection, GOD shall destroy both the meat and the belly. Wherefore thou
must not so much esteem them, that for their cause thou should offend thy
brother. It is not universally commanded to absteyne from all meat, but from
that only whereby thy weak brother is offended. But as touching fornications
(says he) which ye contemn, the reason is far otherwise. Your body is not
given for fornication, but for the Lord. And this is not to be passed over,
that Paul with great prudence says not, not for procreation, but not for
fornication. For the body is given also for procreations sake. Men are went
oftentimes to excuse their faults and to lay them upon nature. The nature of
the body (says he) is to be given unto the Lord. Wherefore of it is to be
taken the rule of life, and not of evil examples.

The nature of relatiues.
This is the nature of relatiues, not only of such as in that thing that they
are, are referred unto other, but also of those which are by any means
referred unto an other thing, as the head unto the body, and again the body
to the head. For when we see the head, we straightwaye require the body, and
again when we see the body, we require the head. Such relatiues (as the
Logitians say) are called secundum dici. The Lord is the head of the body of
the Church, and it is the body of that head. Wherefore Paul both wisely and
pithely disputes, when he says: The body is not made to this end, and to
pollute it self with lusts, but to be correspondent unto the head, and to
be conformable unto it. And he adds, GOD which has raised up Christ,
shall raise us up also by his power. The first argument was taken from
relatiues. The second is drawn of GOD. For if he will raise up our bodies, as
he has raised up Christ, why do we then defile them with ignominy? He goes
on and says, do ye not know that your bodies are the members of Christ?
Shall I then take the member of Christ, and make it the member of an harlot?
Undoubtedly a sore conclusion which he concludes. Shall I take (says he)
the member of Christ? As though he should have said: No without doubt, for
this were to tear the body of Christ. And it is a thing most cruel to
pluck away the members from a lively body, and to join them unto a rotten or
dead body. But the strength of the reason consists herein. Christ can not
commit fornication: wherefore if thou will commit fornication, thou must
first be plucked from Christ. Here is showed that fornication is not only a
sin, but also a deadly and most grievous sin, which plucketh us away
from Christ.

Afterward he adds: He which coupleth himself unto an harlot, is made one
body. For they shall be two in one flesh. And: He which is joined with God is
one spirit. This place is most full of consolation: for as much as it
declares that we are most nigh joined unto Christ, from whom we must needs be
first plucked away, before we be made the members of an harlot. He which
cleaves unto an harlot is made one body: For they shall be two in one flesh.
The Apostle seems at the first sight to abuse the words of Genesis. For he
transferreth the^ to whooredome which are spoken of matrimony. For these
words were spoken first of Adam and Eve: because the flesh of Eve was before
in the flesh of Adam, from whom God took a ribbe, and made thereof a woman,
which he again adjoined unto Adam, to be with him one flesh. But in very deed
the Apostle abuses not this sentence, for as much as whooredome is a certain
corruption of matrimony: for one thing is common to them both, namely, the
conjunction of the flesh. For bodies are communicated as well here as there.
Wherefore Paul had a respect unto that which is common to them both, when as
yet this difference is there between them, that in whooredome the conjunction
is against the law of God, and therefore fornicators must be plucked a sonder,
otherwise there is left no hope of salvation for them. But in matrimony, the
conjunction is made by GOD, and therefore it is made an indissoluble knot.
Wherefore seeing that the conjunction is in either all one and the self same,
Paul has ryghtly applied that sentence to whooredome: He which cleaves unto
God, is one spirit. These words serve much unto this present matter. For if
we be with God in spirit, we must with earnest labor fly from those things
which he has prohibited. Wherefore aptly the Apostle has added fly
whooredome.

He says moreover: Every sin that a man commits, is without the body: but
he which commits whooredome, sins against his own body. If the
arguments which I have before brought do not move you, yet at the least have
a respect unto your own body, which ye seem in committyng of fornication to
hate and contemn.

But it may be demanded how other sins are without the body, but by
fornication we sin against our own body. For we doubt not, but that he
which is very angry, noorisheth and augmenteth choler, whereby the body is not
a little hurt. Sickness also does very much weaken the body: wherefore Solomon
says: A sad spirit dries up the bones. Dronkennes also and glotony do
hinder health, and do in a manner utterly destroy the body: yea and envious
persons seem also to sin against their own bodies: For thou shall see them
dried, withered, and in a manner killed with leannes. How can it be then, that
other sins are without the body? Some say, that fornicators do sin
against their own body, because very oftentimes by having fellowshyp with
harlots they are infected with the pockes, and with leprosy. But let other say
what they will, I rather think, yt the Apostle had a respect unto those
things which went before. For he had said, yt the fornicator is made one body,
with the harlot: and he seems to sin grievously against ye dignity of his
body, A Similitude.
which makes it all one with ye most vile and filthy body of an harlot. For if
a king or prince should mary a wife of a base and obscure stock, it would be
said that he had contaminated his kindred. I know that there are some which
think yt these words are spoken Hiperbollically, because there are found
other sins also which do hurt the body, but this hurts it most grievously
and most of all.

The same Paul does still go on and says: do ye not know, yt your bodies are
ye temple of the holy Ghost? And assuredly he which destroys the temple of
God, God will destroy him. As though he should have said: ye have not your
bodies of your selves, but of god. God has made them his temple, and the holy
ghost dwells in them. Ye are not your own: Wherefore ye do not a little
violate Justice in contaminatyng an other man's thing. Ye are bought with a
great price, wherefore glorify God in your body. These arguments of Paul are
both most pleasant, and also most strong, which if they satisfy not some, let
him look upon our Samson. He was no idolatrer, no murderer, no these, and yet
is he taken, bound, his eyes put out, and is compelled to grind in a prison,
even as if he had been a four footed beast.

Paul labors by many arguments to prove whoredom is sin. And no
maruayle: because then he wrote vno the Corinthians which at that time
abounded above other in fornicatio^s. Whereof came the Proverb, No^ quiuis
Corinthu^ yt is It is not for every man to go to Corinthus. And in universal al
ye Ethnikes were in an ill opinion touching this vice. Eusebius.
For which cause, when ye Church was yet springyng (as Eusebius testifies in
his.3. book of his hystory the.29. chap.) the Nicolaites did openly and
manifestly commit fornication, and laid ye custom of their wicked crime upon
Nicolaus ye deacon: Cleme^s Alexandrinus. The history of Nicolaus the deacon.
although Cleme^s Bishop of Alexandria in Stromatis do excuse Nicolaus: For he
says, that he neither thought, nor taught any such thing. But having a very
fair woman to his wife, and therefore being thought to have been gelous over
her, he brought her forth before the people and said: This is my wife. And yt
ye might understand yt I am not gelous over her, I am co^te^t for my part that
any of you take her to wife. Which thing also he me^t, as far as the law of
God would suffer. But they which were afterward called Nicloaites,
understanding his words peruersly, supposed yt he thought ye wives among
Christians ought to be common. Of this Sect it is written in the Apocalips:
But this thou have, because thou have hated ye acts of the Nicolaites, which
I have hated. Wherefore it is no marvel, though Paul took so great pains to
teach that whoredom is sin.

Fornication contrary to matrimony.
This wicked crime is contrary unto matrimony. For they which haunte wandryng
lusts and harlots, are far from contracting of Matrimony. Wherefore Terence
says: They which love, can ill abide to have a wife given the^. For which
cause Clemens says: Clemens.
whoredom leads from one matrimony to many, that is from one lawful
conjunction, to many unlawful and wicked. The Epistle to the Hebrews joins
fornicators which aduoutrers, and testifies that God will judge them. And
those two vices are so joined together, that they are comprehended in the self
same precept, wherein it said: Thou shall not commit aduoultry.

Fornication is repugnat unto Christ and the public wealch.
This pestilence also is repugnant both unto Charity and to the public wealth:
unto charity undoubtedly, because the fornicators do injury unto their
children, which not being lawfully procreated, are scarsely at any time
brought up honestly and virtuously. And they hurt ye public wealth, because
they defraud it of good Citizens. For Mamzer, a bastard I say, and one borne in
fornication, is prohibited to be received into the Church, not that he is
restrained from the holy communion, or from the misteryes of salvation, but
because it is not lawful for him to govern the public wealth, and to be
numbered among Citizens. Some think yt this evil may be remedyed, if a man
should keep a concubine at home. So, say they shall the issue be certain. It
may be peradventure certain, but it shall not be legitimate. Seeing therefore
this wicked crime is both against matrimony, and charity, and also the public
wealth, it ca^ not be denied but it is a sin most grievous. A Christian
magistrate ought not to suffer harlottes.
And for as much as it is so, why are fornications now a days openly suffered
in Cities? I speak not of the Ethnikes: I speak of Christians, and of those
Christians which will alone seem and be called the successors of Christ.
Whoredom or fornication is most impudently mainteyned in their dominion, they
not only willing thereunto, but also taking a commodity and tribute thereof.
That which is against ye word of God, against matrimony, against charity,
against the public wealth, is no sin, or else it is a notable sin. If it
be sin, why is it not taken away and weded out? Augustine
But I know what they will babble, they bring forth Augustine, who in his book
de Ordine writes thus: Take away harlottes, and all things shall be filled with
filthy lusts. But let us consider in what time Augustine wrote that book.
Undoubtedly when he was yet Catechumenus, and not sufficiently enstructed in
religion. And although he had not been Catechumenus, yet this his saying
agrees not with the word of God, neither with Augustine himself, who in an
other place affirms that the good which comes of evil, as a recompensacion,
is not to be admitted. Which thing also Paul has taught to the Romans: even
as they were wont to say of us: Let us do evil things, yt thereby may come good
things, whose damnation is just. We must never have a regard to the end and
event, when we are urged by the commandment of god. Sometimes men say unto
us: Unless thou commit sin, this evil or that will succeed. But we must
answer, let us do what god has commanded us, he will have a care of the
success. Neither is it meet, that one only sentence of Augustine should be
of greater authority, then so many reasons which we have brought, and so many
most manifest words of God.

God commanded absolutely and by express words, that there should be no
harlot in Israel. But some go about to wrest this place out of our hands, in
saying that these hebrewe words Kadschah and Kedaschim signifies not whores
or harlots, but rather the priests of Priapus, which were vowed or consecrated
to things most filthy. I contrarily think that Chadschah signifies an
harlot, and Kedaschim, unnatural, and effeminate persons. God would have
neither of these suffered among his people. But in that they object the holy
services of Priapus, it is nothing. For it was sufficientlye before decreed
touching idolatry: and what need it again to be repeated? But that we may the
more manifestly understand that Kadschah signifies a harlot, let us read the
historye of Judah and Thamar in the book of Genesis, Certain words ar taken
both in ye good and evil part.
and there we shall see that Louah and Kadschah are taken both for one and the
self same thing. For which cause we must note that there are certain words
which may be taken both in the good and evil part: of which sort is this
word Kadschah among the Hebrews, which signifies both holy and also an
harlot: even as among the lattines this word sacrum that is holy, Virgil.
wherefore Virgill says Auri sacra fames that is the holy hunger of gold. This
Hebrew word Kadasch is to prepare, or to be prepared. Whereof is derived that
word which signifies an harlot, because such women are ready and setforth unto
all men, or else because they are wont to go trimly docked and painted.
Wherefore Clemens says, Clemens.
that the Lacedaemonians permitted harlots to wear wroughte garments, fine
apparel, and gold, which things were not lawful for matrones to use.

Now let us see what follows in Deuteronomy. And the hire of a whore shall not be
brought into the sanctuary. Here again ye law calls her Zanah, which before
is called Kadschah. But thou will say: If the law would not have harlots
suffered, what neded it to have forbidden their oblactes? What neded this law?
they which say this, do seem indede to speak wittely, but yet they speak not
sufficientlye. For outward nations also sent gifts for ornaments and uses
of the temple. The Eunuch of the queen of Ethiope came to Jerusalem, to offer
in the temple. The Macedonians and Romans gave yearelye oblations and
sacrifices in the temple. Wherefore the law forbids, that if any thing be
offered by strangers, that is gotten by the gayn of a harlot, the same should
not be admitted into the sanctuary. Farther, god had commanded that there
should not be harlots in Israel, but he knew that they would not observe that
law. For when the Philistians, Macedonians and Romans raygned over them, they
had harlots. Yea and Christ makes mention of harlottes and publicanes
together. Wherefore god does rightwell first forbid that there should be no
whores among the Hebrews. And afterward he ordeineth, that if by any chance
there were any, their gayn should not be admited in to the sanctuarye. Which
thing undoubtedly he commanded, because of the vileness and filthiness of the
gain. In the same place he adds: The price also of a dog shall not be
brought into the sanctuarye, because that beast is filthy and unclean.

Caligula otherwise a filthy monster, commanded (as Suetonius writes) that
harlotes and baudes should be openly punished. Suetonius Hostiensis.
Of this thing Hostiensis writes ridiculously. Harlots indede (says he) ar
bound to pay and to offer, but the church can not nor ought not to receive
them. Yet the Gloss does much better decre in the decretals, did. 90. chap.
Oblationis, namely that nothing at al should be offered in the church, that is
of the gain of an harlot. But priests and monks when they feared least some
of their profit should depart, have invented an other reason. For although,
say they, the gain of harlotes cannot be received for an oblacion, The Pope
does unjustly get gain of harlottes.
yet nothing lets but that it may be received for alms. But by what
means does the Pope receive the money of harlots? Not undoubtedly, as an
oblation, because he cannot: not as alms, because he is not poor. Wherefore
the^ must he needs receive it as a prince. The lord would not have this kind of
money in his sanctuary: but the pope will have it in his treasury, and has it:
and gets a wonderful great gain by it. Whose vicar then is the Pope? Gods
vicar? God refused such a gayn. What, is he Christ's vicar? Christ never
departed from the will of his father. Then must it consequently follow, that he
is Antichrist, when as he both teaches and does those things which are
expressedlye and of purpose against the word of god and of Christ. But he will
say yt he exacteth this money as a prince. Let him then be prince. But I will
demand, whither he be an evil prince or a good? For a good prince it is not
lawful to depart from the laws of God. Let him then be an evil prince, let
him also be even Caligula.

Paraduenture he will answer, that in respect he is a prince, he does
according to the civil laws, which do not take away harlots out of ye dominion
of the Romans, yet rather they disdain not to decree something touching
their price or reward. In the Digestes de Condictione ob turpem causam, in the
law idem etsi: it is decreed, that there can be no requiring again, if thou
give any thing unto an harlot. And there is a reason added: because although a
harlot do filthily in that she is a harlot, yet she receaueth not filthily, in
that she is a harlot. These words are dark, so that they may seem to be a
riddle. Farther, in ye digests in the title de donacionibus, in the law
affectionis gratia, it is decreed, yt it is lawful to geueas well unhonestly as
honestly. It is not lawful to give unhonestly.
It is lawful honestly to give, as unto parents, kinsefolks friends etc.
Unhonestly, as to harlots. But I would know, by what license that is lawful?
Has god given goods unto men, to cast them upon harlots? But here they
confess there is some filthiness: for although it be lawefull to give, yet if
thou haste promised any thing unto an harlotte, thy oblygatyon byndeth thee
not, neither can the harlotte require thy promise, as it is had in the gloss,
in the title de donacionibus, in the ^awe ea quae. But there is a doubt, if she
receive not filthily, why is it not lawful without filthiness to require it?
They answer, that that follows not: because many things are taken
honestly, which are not required honestly. And to that purpose there is cited
the law.1. de variis and extraordinariis cognationibus. Wherefore the Pope will
by the cyuill laws not take a way harlots, but receive monye of them, which
he sees can not be suffered by the laws of god. But here I will a little
reason with him. Undoubtedly he professes that he is ruler over the civil
laws, and in very deed he has altered many of them, as though he would
amend them: when as yet he has taken away the good, and for the most part has
set evil in their place. Why has he not amended these laws for the suffringe
of harlots, when as they are against the law of God? Undoubtedly the true cause
why he has not taken away the laws of harlottes, is this, because it should
be to much hurtefull unto the Popes treasorye. For at Rome they measure their
laws by profit, and not by honestye.

But by what civil law do they receive money of harlots? They answer for
tribute. But why do they not rather say, for baudry? Assuredly, What the laws
decre of baudry
if we will speak truly, Popes are not as touching this thing, otherwise then
bawdes. Let them diligently mark the civil laws, whereby they now go about to
defend themselves, and over which they boast that they are rulers, and let
them look what they judge of bawdry. In the Digestes de ritu nuptiarum, in the
law palam it is thus written: He which has bondewomen for gain, and filthilye
sets them out, and is partaker of the gain, the same commits bawdry. Now
I demand of these men in what condition they count the harlottes of Rome? For
citizens? Nothing less. They count them therefore in a manner for bondewomen,
and of them they make gain, wherefore they are in a manner baudes. As much
might be said concerning usury. They suffer in their dominions Jews which are
usurers, and they take gain of their usury, every year a certain part, at
the least the twenty part. Wherefore the Pope is not only a baud, but also an
usurer. And that which I affirm of the Pope, let profane princes also take
heed, least the same may be said of them also, which exercise this kind of
gain of the Jews. To them undoubtedly agrees that saying of David: If thou
saw a thief thou ranst with him, and thou did put thy portion with
adulterers.

But they say yt these ar tributes. What tribute is.
But in ye Code in ye title de vectigalibus and co^mensis, in the law ex
prestatione, and in the law allegatis: Tribute is defined to be that which is
paid for those things which are brought into the public wealth from outward
nations. For they are called in latte^ vectigalia, that is tributes, of this
word Vehere, which signifies to carry. And the eight part of every thing was
paid in the name of a tribute, Octauarii.
wherefore publicanes were called Octauarii of octaua part, that is the.viii.
part which they gathered. But what do harlots I pray you bring into the
public wealth? Uncleanness and filthy lusts, of which things the courtiers and
sacrificers of the Pope do not gather the eight part, but the whole. These
things are called tributes and customs, which are taken of fields and
lands, but what fields have harlottes? What lands? None. Wherefore let the^
cease to excuse a most filthy thing with an honest title. I know they will say,
if harlots were suffered free and at liberty, they would more licenciously
sin. O godly kind of correction. Can harlots be by no other means
restrained, but so? They should rather decre that they should not be in the
city, that they should have filthy and dark houses, that they should cast
away all the ornaments of their body, that they should not come abroad openly,
and should be dishonested by some marks of filthiness, that thereby they might
be a mocking stock unto all men. By this means peradventure they might be
revoked into the right way. But now good God, how are they restrained? The
sumptuous^es of harlots of Rome.
They have most gorgeous houses, they openly ride in Chariots, apparaled like
princes, they ride upon their fine ambling horses, they have with them as
fellows, men decked with chains and disguised, yea and sometimes Cardinals,
especially in the night, and a most sumptuous flock of waiting maidens. Will
they deny that these things ar true? Let grave and sincere men then, which have
at any time been at Rome, show whither the thing be so or no. If they will not
believe me, I can bring for witnesses Cardinals and Prelates of Rome.

Paulus.iii. once declared that he intended some reformation of the Church: and
he committed the matter to Cardinals and Bishops, which were counted more pure
the^ other. And what they judged, it is extant in the.3. Volume of counsels.
And they complain yt the power of harlots was greater at Rome, then it was any
where else. But has Paulus.iii. amended this? In the Sinod also of Trident ye
clergy of Rome promised some great reformacion. But they did it not, neither
went they about any thing at al. Why do they not rather imitate and follow the
laws of Justinian? He in is Authentikes, in the title de lenonibus, will have
harlots to be utterly thrust out of the city, and that if they promised any
thing unto bauds, they should not be bound to pay and accomplish the same. Yea
rather, if they have sworn to be harlots for a time, he absolueth them of their
oath. These things these men dissemble, and suffer and maintain harlots. Which
thing yet ought not to be meruailed at. For, forasmuch as they do so diligently
cetain and increase spiritual fornication of minds, that is, superstition and
idolatrye, why also should they not mayntaine fornication of the body? But
saying they took away wives from their sacrificers, it was a hard thing, yea
and impossible to want brothel houses. Iustinianus sorowed, because he saw
brothell houses nighe unto the Churches of God, but now they dwell in the
midst of cities, and not from the houses where holy services are ministered:
and it nothing greueth the Pope. But let the Lords of those houses which the
harlots dwell in, plead their cause. But such houses pertain for the most
part unto Bishops and churches, and they will say, we do not take part of the
gain of a harlot, but as it is mete, we receive rentes for our houses: which is
not prohibited by the civil laws. For in the Digestes ( de petitione
haereditatis in the law Ancillaram) it is said, that brothell houses are
occupied in the city rents of honest men. And in ye same title in the law
possessor, it is ordained, that if a man have dishonest gains, he should be
compelled to restore the^, least an honest interpretacio^ should bring profit
unto the possessor with an dishonest gain.

But because they will maintain it by laws, why have they not a respect unto
the interpretacion of those laws? That is: If this kind of gain be once
exacted of harlots, that ought to be restored unto the hire: otherwise it is
not law full to require them. Neither can contrariety of laws be avoided by
any other means. For these laws should not agree with those of Justinians,
which are had in the Authentikes de lenonibus and scenicis mulieribus. But let
them mark I pray you the things which are had in the title de ritu nuptiarum,
in the law palam, and in the title de iis qui notantur infamia, in the law
Athletas, namely that that woman is infamous, which has prostituted herself,
and he also which is partaker of the gain. And that universally al bawdes are
infamous. Let us also (which is of much more weight) have a regard to the
words of god which commands: Be ye holy, because I am holy. What do we
gather by these words? That yt is not to be suffered among Christians, whereby
men are made infamous: wherefore take away baudes and harlots, for as much as
these kind of persons ar by the testimony of the civil laws noted infamous.
But they will say: Men fall very oftentimes, and sometimes commit those things
whereby they are made infamous. I grant that, yet is not this to be borne
withal, whereby will or nill they, they are made infamous. But though they had a
thousand civil laws on their side, Jerome.
yet ought we more to esteem the word of God. Jerome speakinge of this thing,
writes very well in his Epitaphe of Fabiola: Civil laws says he, are not
so diligently to be cited. Pampinianus writes one thing, and Paul an other.
Tertulliane
And before Jerome, Tertulliane de anima: Brothel houses (says he) are
execrable before God.

But if they should be suffered, say they, there is some hope of their
conversion. For Christ says: Harlots and publicanes shall go before you in the
kingedome of god. How harlots do go before the Scribes and Phareseis in the
kingdom of heaven.
But let them tell me, whither they can by no other means be revoked into the
right way, then to be borne withal? It is true indede that Christ said: Harlots
and publicanes shall go before you in the kingdom of God. But he understands
not Harlots as long as they be harlots and are not converted. For what cause
then is it said that they shall go before the Phareseis and Scribes in the
kingdom of God? because they being converted, do acknowledge and bewail their
sins: but the Phariseis and Scribes regarded not their wicked acts, but
would seem to be most holy. If harlots should be suffered because they may be
converted, then shall there be no sin so grievous which ought to be punished:
for there is none so far past grace, but there is some hope that he may be
revoked into the right way: and so al laws shall sleep.

They add moreover: God has prohibited harlots, In the time of Solomon there
were harlots in Israel.
as it is had in Deuteronomy. which yet were afterward suffered. For Salamon gave
judgment between two harlots. First I answer, that it is not certain that
they were harlots, for as much as this word Zouah signifies also her that
keeps a vitling house, and one also which gets her living by sundry kind
of gain. Farther, though they were harlots, yet is it a frivolous and most
weak argument. For we must not reason from that which is done, to that which
ought to be done. God in deed prohibited harlots, but afterward discipline
quailed, and many things were committed against the law. But we ought to have a
regard not to that which is done, but to that which God has commanded to he
done: otherwise if we will live according to examples, there are evil examples
enough every where. For Popes and Cardinals do not only suffer harlots, but
also keep them themselves, as things most dainty. Neither are they afearde of
the Canons which decree that Priests for whooredomes should be deposed, in the
distinction. 82. chap. Presbyter, when as yet the gloss says there: Now a
days no man is deposed for whoredom. The same is had in the second
question.7. chap. Lator: The Apostle excludes whooremongers from the kingdom
of God. But these exclude them not from the Church, neither think they, that
they ought to be deposed. But that is no marvel, Aduoutries accounted of the
Papists very light crimes.
for as much as they say that the Bishop may dispense with aduoutries, and
other light crimes, as it is had Extra. de Iudiciis in the law At Clerici, they
are the words of Alexander.3. whereby it appears, that these men count
aduoutries for crimes very light. Why ought we then to depend on their
examples. Philo a Jew says, that in the public wealth of the Jews, Philo.
harlots could not be suffered. For all when they came to ripe age, ought of
necessity either to be husbands or wives. Widows in deed there were some, but
yet well grown in years, and of an approved incontinency. This example should
we follow, namely of such an holy publik wealth, and not the example of the
papisticall court. When I was on a time at Rome, I remembered a wittye saying of
Crates. An Apothegma of Crates.
He when he came to Delphos, and saw in the temple of Apollo a golden image of
Phrynis a very notable harlot, cried out: Behold a token of the wantonness of
the Grecians. So I, considering there such sumptuous harlots, and so
gorgiously appareled, said: Behold a token of the wantonness of the bishop of
Romes Prelates. But let us leave them, and go on with the words of God, and
the reasons brought from thence.

Basilius (in his first book upon the Psalms, expounding these words:
Basilius.
And has not sit in the chair of pestilence) writes very well. Whooredome
(says he) stays not in one man, but inuadeth a whole City. For some one
young man comes unto an harlot, and takes unto himself a fellow, and the same
fellow also takes an other fellow. Wherefore even as fire being kindled in a
City, A similitude.
if the wind blow vehemently, stays not in the burning of one house or two,
but spreddeth far and wide, and draws a great destruction with it: So this
evil, being once kindled, spreddeth over all the parts of the City. Ambrose.
Ambrose also wisely writes upon the.119. Psalm, alleging the words of
the.vi. chap. of the Proverbs: who can noorishe burning coals in his bosom,
and not be burnt? who says he, can think that harlots can be noorished in a
City, and young men not be corrupted with whooredome? The sentence of Augustine
inuerted.
And so may we aptly turn that sentence of saint Augustine clean contrarelye:
If thou take away harlots, thou shalt fill all things with filthy lusts.
Not so, but rather contrarily: Noorishe harlots, and thou shall fyl al things
with filthy lusts.

They object again, that the good which comes of evil, is a recompensacion,
and they will have brothel houses to be suffered, least violence should be
offered unto honest Matrons. I have answered before, that evil things are not
to be done, that good things should ensue. Yea, but (say they) God himself
has ordained that the good which comes of evil, is a recompensacion. For
because of the hardness of heart of the Hebrews, that they should not follow
greater evils, he granted them the book of diuorcement. But these men ought
to remember, that we must not call God unto judgment, neither is it lawful to
require of him a reason of his laws. It is not lawful always to reason by the
example of God.
Wherefore it is no firm conclusion, God did so, therefore it is lawful for us
to do the like. We must not look what God has done, but what he has
commanded us to do. But as concerning diuorcement, we shall have occasion in
an other place to speak thereof. God saw that hatred often times happens
between man and wife, and danger of committing murder, which thing rather
then it should happen, he granted the book of diuorcement. But it is a false
argument, God gave the book of diuorcement, therefore it is lawful for us to
keep brothelhouses.

To the reasons of the adversaries. To the first.
Now rests to confute the reasons of the adversaries. First they said,
whoredom is in the acts of the Apostles nu^bred among those things, which of
their own nature are not evil, as blood, things strangled, and things
dedicated unto Idols. For there is no creature of God evil, which is received
with thanks giving. Wherefore fornication is no syn, seeing it is reckoned with
those things. But this is a weak reason, for these things are not reckoned of
the Apostles, that in them should be like reason of fault, but because that
all those things, if they should have been used, would at ye time have
disturbed the Church. The Jews by the custom of their law, abstained from
blood, and that which was strangled: and the Ethnikes made nothing of
whooredome. Wherefore, that peace should be had among them all, they decreed
that they al should abstain from these things, whereby it follows not, that
al these things are like sins, but rather this we may infer, that all these
things were an occasion of disturbing the Church.

To the second.
Farther, they objected that God commands not sins, but he commanded Hosea
the Prophet to have fellowship with an harlot. I answer: Every sin, What is
the proper nature of sin.
is in that respect sin, because it is against the word of God. But if God
command any thing to be done privately, which otherwise disagreeth with the
word written, the same undoubtedly is not sin, because universally it
repugneth not with the word of God: for although it disagreeth with the word
written, yet it disagreeth not with the word privately revealed. It is sin
to take away an other man's good. But God, when the Hebrews should depart out
of Egypt, commanded that they should borowe stuff and silver vessels of the
Egiptians, and take them away with them, which thing they did with out sin.
No man doubts also but that murder is sin, and yet Abraham, if he had
sacrificed his son at the commandment of God, which he was ready to do,
had not sinned. So may we say of Hoseas the prophet: If he committed whooredome
at the commandment of God, his whooredome was no sin. I know there are
some which think that Hoseas was not commanded to commit whoredom, but to
take a harlot to his wife, but that agrees not: for it follows, and thou
shall beget of her children of fornication. Children gotten after that manner,
namely of a lawful wife, should not have been children of fornication. Jerome
does better interpret these things Hiperbollically, Jerome.
and says, that by this image was expressed the wickedness of the Jews, which
had forsaken god their common husband, and had committed fornication with the
Idols of the Gentiles, and had begotten unlawful and bastard children, as
touching the woorshipping and religion of God.

To the third.
Farthermore, that is false which they allege, namely that whooredome is
neither against religion, nor charity. For we have before declared that it is
otherwise, neither is it needeful here to repeat that which we have said.

To the fourth.
They bring Augustine also which says, what meat is unto the body, that is
accompanieng together for procreation, but to eat or drink a little more the^
needs, is not a grievous sin: therefore neither is fornication also. A
similitude is not taken to agree in every part, but serves only for that part
for which it is taken. And undoubtedly, he which eats or drinks more then
he ought, does not straightway loose the health of his body, but he which
strayeth in carnal fellowship, and commits whoredom, may easelye
straightwaye beget a child, unto whom he does injury, because through his
fault he is borne a Bastard. Farther, there succeeds evil education, and so
charity is hurt. I might say also, even as evil and hurtful meat destroys
the body (yea Adam by eating of the prohibited aple corrupted his posteritye)
so whooredome kills the soul. Lastly, that which they alleged, To the fyfte.
namely that fornication is therefore no sin, because it cannot be so judged
by the light of nature, that I say is nothing. For the precepts of God are
known to be just of nature, but yet of a nature vncorrupt and perfect: when
as a corrupt nature does often times allow sins for virtues. For with the
Lacedaemonians theft was praised, Thucydides.
and as Thucydides writes among the ancient Grecians piracy was counted a
virtue. Farthermore it follows that the precepts of god may by nature be
known to be just and honest, but yet of a nature instructed and formed by the
word of god, otherwise as Paul testifies: The carnal man knows not the
things which are of god. But now let us return to the history.

21 Therefore the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him
down to Azzah, and bound him with fetters: and he did grind in the prison
house.

22 And the hear of his head began to grow again, after that it was shaven.

23 Then the Princes of the Philistines gathered them together to offer a great
sacrifice unto Dagon their God, and to rejoice. For they said: Our God has
delivered Samson our enemy into our hands.

24 Also when the people saw him, they praised their God: for they said, our
God has delivered into our hands our enemy, and destroyer of our country,
which has slain many of us.

25 And when their hearts were merry, they said: call Samson, that he may make
us pastime. So they called Samson out of his prison house, and he was a
laughing stock unto them, and they set him between the pyllers.

26 Then Samson said unto the servant that led him by the hand: lead me
that I may touch the pyllers that the house stands upon, and that I may
lean to them.

27 (Now the house was full of men and women, and there were all the Princes of
the Philistines: also upon the roof were about three thousand men and women,
that beheld while Samson played.)

28 Then Samson called unto the Lord, and said: O God I beseech thee
strengthen me at this time only, that I may be at once avenged of the
Philistines for my two eyes.

29 And Samson laid hold on the two myddle pyllers, whereupon the house
stood, and on which it was borne up: on the one with his right hand, and on
the other with his leaft.

30 Then said Samson: Let me lose my life with the Philistines: and he bowed
him with al his might, and the house fell upon the Princes, and upon all the
people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at his death, were mo
then they which he had slain in his life.

31 Then his brethren, and all the house of his father came down and took
him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Esthaol, in the
Sepulcher of Manoah his father: now he had judged Israel twenty years.


When Samson was kept in prison, his hear in the mean time grew to the same
length that it was before it was shaven by the harlot. God at the length took
vengeance of the Philistines, when yet he had first begone at his own house.
For Samson for his sin, came into the power of his enemies, and his eyes
being put out, he was compelled to grind in prison, and was utterly made a
mocking stock. Howbeit the wicked Philistines in the mean time escaped not
unpunished. The custom of God in punishing. A similitude.
Thus God uses to do, first to punish his own, before he afflict strangers.
Physicians also, when a man has taken poison, have this as their chief care,
to drive away the poison from the heart, from the liver, and other principal
parts of the body, then they apply medicines unto the other members of the
body. So also the good man of the house first enstructeth and chastises his
children, and afterward he enstructeth other. Wherefore Paul writes of a
Bishop: If he cannot well govern his own family, how shall he govern the
church of God? Wherefore it is no maruayle if god chastised Samson first, and
afterward grievously afflicted the Philistines. But in that it is written that
his hear was grown again, we must not believe yt his strength lay in his
hear, for it was a gift of god given him freely, The vow of the Nazarites
being violated, was renewed.
but yet God required, that for that gift he should be a Nazarite: unto which
it belonged, to let the hear grow, and not to cut it with a rasor. But if a
man had transgressed, he did not therefore straight way cease to be a Nazarite,
but ought to let his hear grow, and be cleansed, and so begin again his
institucion, which he took in hand. Wherefore Samson repented that he had
violated his vow, and returned to the rule of a Nazarite, and when his hear
was grown, and he restored both unto god, and to his old state and strength,
being assured of the help of god, he took vengeance of his enemies.

In the mean time the Philistines ascribe their victory against Samson, unto
their god Dagon. What Dagon was.
But what this god was, it is not very well known. Howbeit as far as may be
judged by the Etimology of the word, it was some god of the sea. For Dag in
hebrew signifies a fyshe. And that both the Grecians and the Latins
worshipped gods of the sea, Gods of the sea
it is certain. For they had Neptune, Leucothea, and Triton. Above the belly
(as they say) it had the form of a man, and downward it ended in the form of
a fyshe. Such a god woorshipped the Philistines. And undoubtedly the old
Ethnikes sinned grievously therein, in that they would rather serve the
creature (as Paul says) then the creator, and changed the glory of the
immortal God, and transferred it, not only into the similitude fashioned like
a mortal man, but also into the images of birds, fourefooted beasts, What
manner of things the Gods of heretics are.
and Serpents or creeping things. Neither did they only woorship those
things, which are in nature, but also they fained unto the^ selves Monsters,
which appear no where. Such gods in a manner do heretics woorship. For they
do set before them selves some shape and head of God, when they confess that
they heleue in God the creator of heaven and earth. But when farther they add
their own thoughts and fancies, they make the inferior part to end in a
fish. Of this Dagon there is manifest mention made in the first book of
Samuel. The Philistines extolled their Dagon, because he had delivered their
enemy into their hands: which was nothing else, then to blaspheme the name
of the true God. For they attributed his works unto an idol. Neither
considered they that Samson was therefore taken, because he had sinned against
God. Wherefore our sins are a cause, why God is blasphemed: for when by reason
of them we are destitute of the help of God, our enemies, which get the
victory against us, do ascribe the same, both unto their own strengthes,
and to their supersticions.

So happened it in the conqueryng of Constantinople, Horrible examples of
blasphemies.
where the Turks when they had gotten the city, carried about in derision the
image of Christ, clothed with the apparel of the Turks, throughout all the
host, and throughout all the ways of the City. And not many years ago, when
the Emperor Charles the fifth lost a great navy, and many soldiers at Argery,
I remember I heard some soldiers say, that Christ our savior was now become
a Mahomitan or Moore, How holy men called upon (...) in tribulacions
neither considered they that they them selves were become far worse then the
Mahomites. So the name of God is mocked for our sins. Wherefore holy men were
wont not without a cause thus to pray, and to implore mercy, that the name of
God should not be evil spoken of among the Gentiles. So dealt Moses with God,
when he was angry with the people, for making the golden Calfe. The Prophets
also said: Be mercyful unto us Lord for thine own sake, and for thine names
sake, least the nations say, where is their God? Let us in the mean time, when
we hear or read these things, thus think with our selves: Seeing God has
for sin so grieuouslye afflicted Samson, so great a man, sanctified from his
mothers womb, and appointed to deliver Israel: what shall become of us if we
sin? So Paul to the Corrinthians in his first Epistle, sets forth unto us
the examples of the Israelites to consider, whom God sundry ways chastised.
And to the Romans he says: If he has not spared the natural branches, take
heed that he spare not thee. Mark the goodness and severity of God: his
severity on those which have fallen, and his goodness in thee, if thou abide in
goodness: otherwise thou also shall be cut of. Wherefore by these cogitacions we
may take fruit by the punishment of other.

For this use are examples set forth unto the Church, What is the fruit of
holy histories.
that we in readyng them should become better. Paul said: what soever
things are before written, are written for our learning, that we through
patience and consolacion of the scriptures should have hope. Wherefore when we
read that holy men were so corrected, we ought to tremble, least we also fall
into the like anger of God. If we do not take such fruit by reading of the
holy scriptures, we then read them in vain.

The Philistines give thanks unto Dagon their God for the victory. So were
they delivered up into a reprobate sense, to give thanks for those things,
for which they ought most of all to have been sorry. For how obtained they
Samson? By the arts of an harlot, and by most filthy deceate. After
sacrifices follows a very sumptuous banquet. For in those holy services of
Idols, was set forth a certain communion, that the people in that feast,
should rejoice together with a certain common joy.

So also in the old Testament the Israelites in their peace offeringes feasted
and rejoiced together before the Lord. Neither is it unlikely, but that the
Fathers also before the law, had such holy services and solemnities. To what
end the Supper of the Lord was instituted.
Christ also our Savior instituted a Communion and holy Supper, that we
should there celebrate his name and healthful death. But in the Sacrifices of
Idols, all things were ordained for riot and pleasure, and they seldom
departed from thence without fylthy lusts or murder, as at this day do the
Papists in consecrations of their Churches, after Mass they celebrate a
feast, afterward they fall to dauncyng and wanton leapinges: whereby oftentimes
they fall together by the ears.

The Philistines assembled together above three thousand men, and at the
length command that Samson should be brought before them, a man miserable,
bound, and blind. When they had with so many injuries not sufficientlye
fulfilled their hatred, they would moreover make him a mocking stock. These
things were far more hytter, Josephus.
then if they had put him to death. For as Josephus writes in this place:
Death is natural, and may after a sort be suffered: but for as much as to
be made a mocking stock, has reproach and contumely joined with it, that
seems not possible to be borne wythall. It is a thing very cruel to add
affliction unto the afflicted. Wherefore, although God seemed to have smytten
Samson, they ought to have been touched with some mercy toward him, neither
must we be molestious unto them that are smytten by God, as though we would
imitate God. Wherefore Amos the Prophet writes: For three transgressions of
Edom, and for the fourth I will not be turned. For when the Jews were driven
and banished out of their own country, and had escaped to their borders,
they handled them most cruellye. This thing, says God by the Prophet, he
will not leave unpunished. For although the Jews were for their deserts
afflicted of God, yet it was not the duty of neighbors to heap more injuries
upon the afflicted.

David in his hundredth and nine Psalm curses him which should persecute him,
whom the Lord has stricken. Set thou (says he) the sinner over him, and let
Satan stand at his right hand. When he is judged, let him go out condemned,
and let his prayers be turned into sin. Let his days be few, and let an
other take his charge. Because he remembered not to show mercy: but persecuted
the afflicted and poor man, and the sorrowful hearted to kill him. These
things we read, A cruel manner toward those which have suffered shipwreck
and contemn them, and it is horrible to see the manner in certain regions,
for if any that has suffered shypwracke escape to the shore, their goods, if
peradventure they be cast on land, are made forfayte. What other thing is
this, then to add affliction to the afflicted?

How Samson was reconciled unto God.
Samson being brought before them, declares by the success, how dear he was
to God. Not that the sufferaunce of the prison had purged his sins, it is
Christ only which purges sins. Not that by patience or any other virtue
he had deserved the mercy of God: away with all consideracion of desert. But
in prison he acknowledged his sin, he believed truly in Christ, and as it
becomes a godly man, he repented, and that so much the more, how much
greater the calamitye was, wherewith he was oppressed. Wherefore being endued
with faith, whereby he took hold of the mercy of God by Christ, Samson is
proved to have had faith.
he was reconsiled unto God. And that he had faith, manifestlye appears by
that, which he prayed. How (says Paul) did they call upon god, in whom they
believed not? And in the Epistle to the Hebrews, Samson is numbered among them,
which being excellent in faith, wrought wonderful things.

And he said unto the Ladde: lead me unto the pyller. As though he had been
wearye, he made as though he would have leaned to the pyller. There were
there all the princes of the Philistines. They were assembled thither because
god had appointed to take punishment of them al together. In what manner Samson
prayed.
And Samson prayed: Remember me Lord. These prayers at the first sight seem
not very godly. For he prays to have vengeance granted him of his enemies,
because they had put out both his eyes. Undoubtedly if he did it of a stomach
or choler, we could not justly defend his prayers. For he should have been no
more allowed of god, then if be should expressedly have said: I pray thee
Lord, prosper either my theft, Augustine.
or my aduoutry. Augustine says that Samson did these things, not of his own
will, but by the impulsion and counsel of the holy ghost. Farther, (as I have
often admonished) we must not think of Samson as of a private man, but as of
a Magistrate, whom God him self had appointed.

And in deed as a private man, it was not lawful for him to revenge his own
injuries: but as a Magistrate, he both might and ought. If we have in hand a
private cause, that saying of Paul ought to be of force: Give place unto anger.
To me belongs vengeance, and I will render, says the Lord. But in a public
cause the Magistrate ought by the commandment and authority of God to avenge
injury: because he is gods vicar in earth: and god himself, although often
times he take vengeance of sins by himself, and as it is said without
means, yet for the most part he punishes by Magistrates. Wherefore those
words: To me belongs vengeance, and I will render, do not let the seueritye
of Magistrates, whereby they punish the guilty. For they are the Ministers of
God: and that which they do, God himself does by them.

By the same manner of speech it is said under the person of God: God
communicates many of his properties unto men.
Equity is mine, judgment is mine, and power is mine: all which things yet he
communicates with men, upon whom he bestows them. Wherefore God commanded
Samson to revenge the injuries of either, namely of the name of God and his
own: for as much as the Philistines had put out his eyes. But for what cause?
What, because he had committed whooredome? No undoubtedly: For what cause the
Philistines afflicted Samson.
but because he was an Israelite, a deliverer and revenger of the people of
God. Wherefore Samson auengeth either iniurye, both that which the Philistines
had done unto him self, and that which they had done unto God. When he calls
upon God, he prays him to prosper his vocation. And such prayers are wont
to be of most efficaye. For what other thing did the Apostles and other
brethren pray for (as it is written in the Acts of the Apostles the fourth
chapter) then that God would prosper their vocation and office? Give unto thy
servants (said they) not to regard their threatninges, grant them boldlye
to speak thy word. Streche forth thine hand, that they may work signs.
If a man will say, the signs of the Apostles were profitable and healthful,
because they delivered and healed the afflicted. But contrarilye the sign of
Samson tended to the slaughter of his enemies. Wherefore there is not in them
both one consideration: I answer, that often times it happens so, The signs
of the Apostles did not always heal. Similitudes.
but yet the signs of the Ayostles also were sometimes hurtful. For Paul made
Elimas the Cuniurer blind, and said: Thou Son of the Devil, why peruertest
thou the right ways of the Lord? Behold the hand of the Lord is over thee,
and thou shall be blind, and shall not see. Peter also with his word slew
Ananias and Saphira. Yea and Paul delivered many unto Satan. Wherefore Samson
prays unto God to make fortunate, and to help his ministry.

Neither can it be properlye said that Samson killed himself. Samson killed
not himself.
He dyed in deed, but he prescribed not unto himself this end, namely to dye.
But sought vengeance of his enemies, which he understood would by this
means ensue. The Apostles also did thus make reckonyng with themselves:
Similitudes.
If as we have begone we teach unto the people the kingdom of Christ,
undoubtedly we shall be killed: and in that they went on with their purpose to
teach the Gospel, it cannot be justly said, that they killed them selves.
Paul also, when he should go unto Jerusalem, and Agabus the Prophet told
him, that the Jews would bind him at Jerusalem, what did he when he heard
these things? Did he forsake his vocation? No verily. But rather affirmed that
he was ready both to be bound, and to dye for Christ. So says Samson: Let my
soul dye with the Philistians. He did not rashely incur death, but follows
his vocation. Soldiers when they go on warrefare, if a man peradventure say
unto them: ye shall be slain with gunnes, or with the swoorde, or with
arrows. They will answer, if they be men of valiant courage: we seek not
death but victory, or we follow the defense of our own things, whereunto we
are called.

But as touching Samson, God governed him by his spirit. Wherefore when he
dyed, he slew more of the Philistines then he did before while he lived. What
fruit therefore had the Philistines by their deceit and treason? They bought
to them selves death, and present destruction. And even as to them that love
god al things work to good, so to the adversaries and enemies of God, al
things are turned to their destruction.

The difference between the death of ye Philistines and of Samson. A most
profitable admonicion of Solomon
Samson dies together with the Philistines, but the end and manner is far
diverse. For they dye in their wanton behavior, cruelty, and idolatrye, but
this Samson in faith, and calling upon the true God. But as touching the matter
it self, the residewe were to either of them alyke. Wherefore Solomon
admonishes us most wisely, that we must not measure the godlynes of men by
outward things, because they happen alyke, both to the godly, and to the
ungodly. That Samson dyed in the faith, hereby it appears, because even in
the very destruction he called upon God, and was heard, and because God
restored unto him his old strength. But they which are in the flesh, can not
please God: neither can God be rightly called upon, unless faith shine before.
How shall they call upon him says the Apostle, in whom they have not believed?
And because he was heard, he prayed by the inspiracion of the spirit. For we
know not what we should pray. Therefore the spirit does with unspeakable
sighinges pray for us.

Samson had before fallen, he turns unto god, and he hears him. So let us
also, when we have sometimes sinned, return unto God, and faithfully call upon
him, and we shall be heard. For he is the same god that he was then, rich unto
al those that call upon him: Ambrose.
that which he did unto him, he will do also unto us. Ambrose upon this place
writes, that Samson was so heard of god, that he lost his life triumphantly,
Samson is a figure of Christ.
and he did not only overcome the Philistines, but also himself: for he
represented the image of Christ, who although while he lived, exceedingly
hurted the devil, yet when he dyed, he utterly triumphed over him. The
Philistines when they overcame Samson, got unto them selves most certain
destruction: So the Jews, when they crucified Christ, threw them selves into
everlasting condemnacio^. And, which is to be marueiled at, the Philistines
with this so great and so sudden destruction, were so amassed, that they
suffered the kinsfolks of Samson to come, and honorably to bury him. For when
the Princes were perished, the courages of the people were daunted, neither
durst they attempt any thing against the Hebrews. This place seems here to
require a disputacion, whither it be lawful for any man, for any cause, to kill
himself. But because we shall have a place more opportune for it, at this
present I will omyt it, and will in an other place fully write thereof.

The.xvii. Chapter.
1 THere was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Michaiehu.

2 And he say d unto his mother: The eleven hundredth pieces of silver that were
taken from thee, for the which thou cursedst, and spakedst it even in mine
hearing, behold the silver is with me, I took it. Then his mother said:
blessed be thou my son of the Lord.

3 And when he had restored the eleven hundredth pieces of silver to his
mother, his mother said: I had dedicated the silver to the Lord, of mine own
hand for my son, to make a graven and molten image. Now therefore I will give
it thee again.

4 And when he had restored the money unto his mother, his mother took two
hundredth pieces of silver, and gave them to the goldsmith, which made thereof a
graven and molten image, and it was in the house of Michaiehu.

5 And this man Micha had a house of God, and he made an Ephode, and Theraphim,
and consecrated the hand of one of his sons, and he was his priest.

6 In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that, which
was good in his own eyes.


First I think good to enquire in this history concerning ye time wherein these
things happened. For all men do not answer a like unto this question. When
this history happened
The elder Rabbines do think, that this was done, when Joshua was old, and he
not able for age to execute his office, neither was there any other Magistrate
substituted in his place. But this is not very likely, because we read that
in all his time the Israelites worshipped God rightly and orderlye, It is not
to be ascribed unto ye time of Joshua.
and that he in the latter time of his life, renewed the covenant of god with
the people. Other think that they were done after Iosuas death, when Othoniell
governed. This sentence R. Selomoh defends. The son of Gerson thinks that
this happened under Eglon king of Moab, whom Ehud afterward slew. R.
Selomoh. Leui ben Gerson.
But this also can not be proved, for in the x. chap. of this book it is
written, that the people cried unto the Lord when they were oppressed of their
enemies. And that Iiphtah was stirred up by the sprite to bear rule. But before
God aunsweareth the very sharply. For he said: I will not help you, because
you always return unto your Idols, and forsake me. But rather call upon your
gods let them help you. Which words when the people heard, they repented, and
put away from them their idols which they had made. But this idol which is now
spoken of, These things seem to have happened after the death of Samson.
endured to the time of Samuel: Wherefore it cannot seem probable that it was
done at that time. The order of the holy scriptures is of most high authority
with me, and therefore I think yt these things happened after the death of
Sa^son. Forasmuch as from that time even to Heli there were many years passed,
wherein ye Philistians possessed ye land of the Jews, neither suffered they any
magistrate to be over the^. Josephus.
Josephus agrees with the Rabbines, but he is many times deceued. Wherefore it
shall be best to follow that opinion, which agrees with the simple order of the
holy history.

Howbeit there is one thing which seems to be a let, An objection.
namely if a man reke^ the years from Samso^ unto Saul, he shall find the^ to
be scarce.60. or at ye most.70. And when as by reason of filthy whoredom ye
tribe of Benjamin was almost brought to nothing, and they which remained of it,
had no wives, but those which they got by violence: how could it be, that in so
short a time it should so much increase, ye Saul was out of that tribe chosen
a king? This argument has a certain show, but it is not firm nor sound enough
if a man more deligentlye examine it. For although there were but a few
remayninge of that tribe, yet were they not so few, but they might very much
multiply. For there escaped six hundredth me^ of war, who had wives given
them partly of the men of Iabes Gilead, and partly by violence. And six
hundredth men were able in the space of.60. or.70. years to beget a great issue,
and to se their childrens children. They could not indede be so many as to be
equal with the other tribes, but yet they might increase to a sufficient
number.

But that is far more hard which is objected concerning Pinhas, An other
objection.
namelye that he remained on live even to the time of the wars of the
Beniamites. Which if it be so, then must he be at that time.300. years of
age Therefore some think that it is more commodious to draw back this historye
unto the beginning of the Judges. But I see not what should let, but that god
might permit him to live so long. For when he had slain a prince of Israel
and a Madianitish woman, when they were committing whoredom, god granted him
not only to succeed his father in the priesthode, but also gave him very long
to live. D. Kimhi.
But undoubtedly I chiefly allow the order and course of the historye, from
which unless great necessity urge, I will not depart. And in this sentence I
follow the judgment of David Kimhi, whose authority in expounding of the text
I think is not to be contemned. Yea and all the Hebrews in a manner agree in
this, that Pinhas lived a very long time, and there are some which produce his
age even unto the time of Elias the Prophet. Unto whom I do not agree,
because no necessity compels me thereunto. Howbeit as concerning this thing
I will not much strive: But I leave it free to every willing mind to follow
which opinion he will.

And in this history first I mark the institution of idolatry, then the
consecration of a priest, which was twice done. For first Micha instituted
his son a priest: and then when by chance he met with a Leuite, he made him
a priest. But wherefore was this ido le made? What a vow is.
For her vows sake. For the promise of ye mother of Micha was not simple, but
with a vow. And a vow (as al deuines affirm) is a holy promise made to God of
things which are ours. Wherefore it must needs be that this woman was a widow,
with whom paraduenture her son dwelled. For if she had been a wife, or a
maiden unmarried, or a widow in the house of her father, she could not have
vowed a firm vow, as it manifestly appears by the book of Numb. Those
persons might not vow with out the consent of their father or husband. For the
law ordained that if they were against it, the vow should then be void. Hanna
did in deed vow in the first of Samuel, but we must believe that Helkana her
husband confirmed her vow. This woman sinned, not because she vowed, but
because she vowed a thing ungodly, namely, an idol. For it was at that time
lawefull for any to vow any thing of his own things, for the adorninge of
the temple of God, and to amplify his honor. But to institute a new and
forbidden worshippinge, it was utterly ungodly.

The son had stolen from his mother that money: neither is it any maruall if
he would steal, which was so ready to idolatry. He which sins against the
first table, does easily sin against the second.

The mother curses the thief, whosoever he were: neither does she so
grievously take the matter for the money taken away, as for that she could not
perform her detestable vow. And she curses, as men in a manner use to do, in
adversities. Yea and God himself also used curses in the old testament, in the
assembly to the mount Hebal and Garizim. The priest also cursedly prayed for
bare^nes, diseases, loss of children, and other things of like sort. And in
our time, the Pope, Women do easily fall to cursinges.
by what wicked zeal I know not, in the day of the supper of the Lord se^deth
forth curses upon all those which have alienated themselves from his
institution and sect. This woman cursed the thief: and no marvel. Because
women when they fail in strength, do easily fall to cursinges.

The son as soon as he heard the curse of his mother, was a feared. For so
has nature ordained, that children do wonderfully fear the curses of their
parents. But this man feared not to violate the law of God: which thing
happens not seldom unto men, to have horror of small sins, and to neglect
them that are more grievous. There is some fruit sometimes of curses, even as of
exco^municatio^. There ar some sometimes so hard and obdurated yt they can be
bowed by no other means then by curses, although they be corrected by public
and apert reprehe^sion. But whither this son knew that his mother had by a
vow dedicated that money unto the Lord, before he took it away, it appears
not by the words of the history.

Neither is this to be passed over, in that the mother says yt she had
consecrated it unto the lord, and he uses the name of.4. letters. The manner of
idolatries. (...).
Wherefore we must consider that there are two kinds of Idolatry. The one is,
whereby a strange God is called upon, the other is, whereby the true God indede
is worshipped, but not with that worshipping which he himself has commanded,
but by images or idols, or by some other means invented of our selves. To the
second kind of idolatry pertains the sin of this woman. As often as we
hear an image that is made, and a strange God not added, we must understand
that that image was made under the show of the worshipping of the true god: but
that religion is far contrary to the institution of sound religion. Wherefore
when the people (as it is written in Exodus) made themselves a golden calfe,
Aaron proclaimed a holy day unto the Lord, that is to the true god, and not to
an idol. For they counted it absurd, to worship, either the true god himself
without an image, or else an image without the title of the true God. And so
must we think that Jeroboam did when he consecrated the golden calfes in Dan
and Bethel. For I do not believe that in images he instituted the worshipping
of Baal, or Astharoth, or Chamos, but he would under them worship the Lord.
Into the self same error fell the Samaritanes also, Josephus.
who (as Josephus writes) would have a temple among them like that which was
at Jerusalem. And the self same thing went the Jews about at Helio polis,
when they were in exile in Egypt. And it was detestable to worship god with
oblations and sacrifices in any other place, then in that which he himself had
chosen to be worshipped in. Wherefore the woman vowed that she would make an
idol, which she delivered unto her son, that he should institute a new
religion in her house. I will (says she) that thou have the silver, but thou
shall make an idol thereof.

Why these two words graven and molten are so joined to gether, Graven and
molten.
the interpretors do doubt. Some of the Hebrews and some of our writers do
think yt there were two images, of the which the one was graven, and the other
molten. But this seems not to be so, because these words are oftentimes
joined together in the holy scripture: neither is it necessary, as often as we
find them, so to understand many images. Other think that that image was
first molten and then graven, or wroughte. The opinion of other is, that we
should read graven and molten disiunctiuely, that is, an image which was
either graven or molten. But I very well allow the opinion of David Kimhi, D.
Kimhi.
who writes that it was the manner to grave images first out of marble stone,
or some other matter, and afterward to cover them with silver or copper plates
or pieces. And so in one and the self same image was either: For it was both
graven, and the plates also were molte^ and extenuated to lay over it. For this
hebrew word Nasach signifies to cover. We must understand by this word house
of god, a private temple, wherein she would worship the idol. How much the
pieces of silver were, or of what kind, value and weight it is not expressed.
The Rabbines do think that they were silver syckles. And a syckle (as Josephus
says) contained.4. drammes of Athenes. And a dram of Athenes (as Budeus
gathers in his book de Ass) contained three shillings of Towers. A shilling
of Towers is the half part of half a batse. A sickle Josephus. Budeus
wherefore a dram was as much in value as a shilling of Argentine, that is,
three half batses. By which means a Sickle contained six baises. That is.4.
shillinges. Two sorts of Sickles. Obuli.
But there was two manner of sickles, one was usual and profane, and the other
was of the sa^ctuary. The holy sickle was double so much as the profane.
Wherefore Ezechiel in his 45. chapter says, that a profane sickle
contained.20. half pence, but the sickle of the sanctuary.40.

There is a fable among the Hebrews, that this woman was Dalila which
deceived Samson, as though she had received this money for the reward of her
prodicion. These things are said by the Rabbines, but without reason. But I
with reason think contrarily. For Dalila received of every one of the Lords
of the Philistians.xi. C. pieces of silver. Wherefore seeing there were five of
the lords, then must she needs have received 5500. sickles. But these whereof
we now entreat were but.1100. Seeing therefore the number agrees not, the
fained tale of the Hebrews is easily confuted.

The son brings again unto his mother the money which he had taken a way.
She straightway says: Blessed art thou in the Lord my son. As though she
should have said: Now I revoke my curses, and turn the^ to good and lucky
prayers. How supersticious ye woman was, appears by these words. She
comme^deth her son, because he had brought the money again: but she
reproves him not, because he had before stolen it. Straightway she entreats
with him about idolatrye. This money says she, thou shall not lose, thou shalt
have it indede, but yet in an idol. Neither made they only a molten and
graue^ image, but also an Ephod: The papists tunicle.
by which word we must by the figure Sinechdoche understand all ornaments
longing unto a priest. For an Ephod if we speak properly, signifies a priests
garment that comes over his shoulders.

Theraphim
They made also Theraphim. Touching the signification of this word, there is
great ambiguitye among the expositors. But I understand it to be that idol
which they had graven and molten, when all the other things were redye which
served for idolatry, they at the length brought that image unto the temple. And
of these Theraphim or images they were wont in the old time to ask oracles.
In Genesis we read that Rachel the wife of Jacob stale away the Theraphim of
her father. And in the first of Samuel the.19. chapter when David escaped,
Michel put in his bed Theraphim. In Amos also the third chapter, it is written:
There shall be neither Ephod nor Theraphim, that is, ye shall be so vexed and led
into exile, that ye shall neither be able to worship god nor idols. In
Ezechiell also it is written: They shall enquire of Theraphim. An in Zachary
the.x. chapter: The Theraphim spoke lies. Other think that Theraphim were
certain instruments of Astronomy, whereby hours, degrees, eleuations,
declinacions, both of the sun and of other stars are taken. Which opinion
Abin Ezra recites in the history of Rachell. But I think not this sentence
true. For here is entreated of an Idol, in worshipping whereof there neded no
astronomicall instruments.

It is said that Micha filled the hand of his son. By which Hebrew phrase is
signified that he consecrated him a priest. This form of speaking seems to
arise hereof, because Moses when he consecrated Aaron and his sons, did put
in their hands sweet cakes, the shoulder, breast, and other things, which
by them should be offered unto god.

Now is the idolatry instituted. But how could that be done in Israel?
Because says the history there was no king in Israel: but every man did that
which seemed right in his own eyes. By these words is declared that it was a
wicked and detestable act, that the mother and the son committed. If there
had been a law full magistrate, who ought chieflye to have a regard to the
worshippinge of God, and observation of the first table, this had not been
permitted nor suffered unpunished. Wherefore let it not seem marvelous if the
law slepte: For there was no Magistrate which should have been the keeper
thereof. And if at any time there be Magistrates which have no care of these
things, because they execute not their office, it is all one as if there were
none. Public wealths do ofte^tymes degenerate a kingdom into Tyranny,
Aristocratia into Oligarchia, and a public wealth into Anarchia, and an
unruliness of ye people, Anarchia which is w^^ of a ruler, is a destruction o
public wealths
yt every man does what himself lists. And there is nothing in the society
of me^ more pernicious, then that every man should follow his own will. For
our nature is corrupt and vitiated, therefore whosoever follows it only as a
leader, must needs exceedingly err. But a law is a true mind, and a firm and
sure rule of men in doing of things. Plato in Cratilo elegantly says: As we
call the mind (...), Plato. What (...)
so call we the law (...), as it were (...), that is an abydyng and stable
mind, otherwise the mind of men is wandering. For ye which seems good unto
one, the same seems not so unto an other. Neither does one and the self same
man abide always in one and the self same opinion. Wherefore for as much as
all things are uncertain, as often as any man does that which seems good
in his own eyes, for the most part he strayeth from the true end.

7 There was also a young man out of Bethelehem Judah, of the family of Judah:
who was a Leuite, and soiourned there.

8 And the man departed out of the City, eue^ out of Bethlehe^ Judah, to dwell
where he could find a place: and as he iourneied, he came to mount Ephraim to
the house of Micha.

9 And Micha said unto him, whence co^mest thou? And the Leuite answered him I
come from Bethlehe^ Judah, and go to dwell where I may find a place.

10 Then Micha said unto him: Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a
Priest, and I will give thee ten pieces of Silver by year, and a suit of
apparel, and thy meat and drink. So the Leuite went in.

11 And the Leuite was content to dwell with the man, and the young man was unto
him as one of his own sons.

12 And Micha consecrated the hand of the Leuite, and the young man was his
Priest, and dwelled in the house of Micha.

13 Then said Micha: Now I know that the Lord will be good unto me, seeing I
have a Leuite to my Priest.


Here is set forth the consecration of an other Priest. For by chau^se there
comes a young man of the tribe of Leui, whom Micha hyreth to minister in his
holy services, and remoueth his son from the priesthood. And the Leuite
soiorned to find out a place where he might get his living, for he desired a
state of life. Micha receaueth him to be his priest. By this Hystory is
gathered, Idolatrous worshippyngs do imitate the true worshypping of God.
ye idolatrous worshippings, although they be contrary to the institution of
god, yet they enterprise as much as may be, yt they may be like unto it. For
even as Apes will seem to be men, although they be not men in deed, so
idolatrers, although they worship not the true God, yet they will seem to
worship him. For they labor to retain some show of his worshipping as much as
may be. So Micha, that he might seem to worship the true God rightly,
instituted an Ephod, a temple, and a Priesthode. Lastly, because he would not
much straye from the institution of God, he ordreth a Leuite over his holy
services and ceremonies.

The Levites wandered hither and thither. The tribe of Leui was dispersed among
other tribes.
For that tribe was disparsed among the other tribes. In which thing we must
remember the manner of the public wealth of Israel. The other tribes had
lands and possessions, and contained the^ selves in some certain regions. But
the Levites dwelled dispersedly among them, that they might the easelyer
minister unto them. The Levites in deed had their Cities also: but many of
them wandered abroad through other tribes. This young man was of Bethlehem
which perteyned unto the tribe of Judah.

But it may be demanded, if he were a Leuite, how he belonged unto ye tribe
of Judah? There are some which think that he had a Leuite unto his father,
but his mother was of ye tribe of Judah. For tribes were oftentimes mingled as
concerning matrimonyes. D. Kimhi.
But David Kimhi somewhat doubts concerning that thing. For he says it is
not the manner of the holy Scriptures, for the sons to derive his tribe or
famely of his mother. Other answer, that which Kimhi says, is for the most
part true, but not always. For if ye mother were an inheritor, the son had
his surname of her, and to prove this true, they allege a place of the.2.
book of Paralp. where Ezron of the tribe of Judah took to wife ye daughter of
Machor of the tribe of Manasseh, and the children which he had by her, were
named by the name of their grandfather on the mothers side, and were called the
children of Machor. And that was done, because the mother was an heir of 30
Cities. So it may be, that this young man's mother was an inheritor of
Bethlelem, of the tribe of Judah. But me thinks these things are spoken
superfluously, The Cities called Bethlehem.
and peradventure not very truly. For it is said a young man of the tribe of
Leui, of Bethlehem Judah. And in that it is again added of Judah, ye ought to be
referred unto Bethlehem, that it might be separated from the other Bethlehem yt
lay in the tribe of Zabulon. If we fellow this interpretation, then is there
no ambiguity. But how dwelled the Leuite in Bethlehem? Not undoubtedly as a
Citezine, but as a stranger, and he wandered abroad to seek his living.
Wherefore it is not very likely that his mother was an inheritor, when as he was
compelled to seek his living beggingly.

Why the tenthes were not at this time given unto the Levites.
And that the Leuite so wandered abroad being compelled by hunger, was not for
lack of order by the law. For by it ye tenthes were given unto the Levites to
live by. But as the times were then, they were not given unto the^, partly
because ye Philistines oppressed the Jews, in polling the^ of their riches,
and partly because there was no Magistrate, to look that the people should pay
their tenthes. And me^ are of themselves willingly in a manner so covetous,
that unless they be compelled they will not pay the^. Lastly, because the
Israelites were at ye time very prone unto idolatry, neither did they much
regard ye worshipping or Ministers of the true God: therefore they suffered the
Levites to starve. Wherefore it is no marvel if this young man were compelled
to wander abroad, and to beg his living. Nehemias in his.3. chap. says, that
when Levites had not so much given them as was sufficient for their living,
they fled away, neither would they minister in ye temple.

The Leuite came and turned into Micha, not minding to tarry there, but to go on
in his journey, but Micha, when he understood that he was a Leuite, hired him to
be his Priest. The name of the Leuite is not in this place spoken of, howbeit
by the latter end of the.18. chap. of this book we learn that he was called
Jonathan the son of Gerson, the son of Menasse.

How much the stipende of the Leuite was.
He promised him ten silueringes a year: which su^me is (as they say) in a
manner as much as five crowns of Kyne, and an order or suit of apparel, yt is,
garments for winter, and garments for summer. Hereby we gather, yt although
Micha were an idolatrer, The law of nature judges that ye holy ministry is to
be had in honor.
yet had he ye ministry in estimation. For he noorisheth his Priest, he gives
him apparel, wages, and other things necessary. So did also the Gentiles which
knew not god. It seems to be the law of nature, that they which labor in the
holy services, should have both living, and honor. He does not in deed give
him any great stipend, but yet so much as was sufficient. Paul said: Having
meat and drink and clothing, The Synod of Antioche.
with these things let us be content. Also in the Sinode of Antioche (as it is
had in the.12. question the.3. chap. Episcopus) the stipend for a minister, is
appointed to be so much as is sufficient for the necessity of life. And
afterward in the.20. The seventh Synod.
question the.1. chap. Clericus, and it is the seventh Sinode, is decreed the
same thing, where the gloss demands: What Church is to be counted rich, and
what Church poor: and it answers, What Church is rich.
that that Church is sufficiently rich, which can noorishe his ministers with
their famely, so that they may be able also to keep hospitality. But in our
time nothing is sufficient. They heap benefice upon benefice, neither make
they any end of sekyng for riches. What then at the length shall be sufficient?
The gloss answers, that ye can not be prescribed, for we must have a respect
unto the place, person, and time, and sundry and diverse things agree to sundry
persons, times, and regions. The Synod of Chalcedonia
The Synod of Chalcedonia decreed that one man should not have a title in
sundry Churches. But they have now long since abolished these things.

And that the law of nature (as I said) wills that Ministers should be
noorished, appears also by that which Paul writes to the Conrinth. in
his.1. Epistle, when he teaches that same, he brings arguments even from
nature. No man says he, goes on warfare at his own charges. Thou shall not
mosel the mouth of the ox which treads out the corn. Who fedeth a flock,
and eats not of the milk? Wherefore ye young man sins not in that he takes
a stipend. For that was lawful both by Gods law and by the law of nature.
Wherein this Leuite sinned.
But in that he lets his ministry to hyre unto an Idol, he very haynously
sinned. For now he worshipped not God, but his belly. Such also were they
which Paul says, served not the Lord Jesus, but their belly. This man
nothing cared in what Religion he ministered, so that he might get a living. For
this thing do very many even now a days labor for, yea all the Massemongers
for the most part, who nothing regard, how ungodly it is to say Masses. Herein
is all their care to keep still their reueneues and benefices. This Leuite
says not, God is not so to be worshipped. Such a cup such a cover. An evil
Micha, has gotten an evil Leuite. In his thing also ye Leuite sinned, because
he was nothing made afeard by the example of Core, who when he would have
usurped the office of a Priest, was swallowed down quick into the earth. This
young man was not of the famely of Aaron, he was only a Leuite of the famely
of Gerson, as some say. Neither does Micha enquire of him from whence he was,
or of what famely, or how well he was instructed in the law of GOD, but he
straightwaye consecrateth him a Priest. But he ought first diligently to have
examined him: for GOD would not have unclean Sacrifices offered him, and shall
we think that he abhorred not from corrupt Priests? This young Leuite
thought it a goodly thing to be exalted to the ministry of a Priest. Thou
shall be to me a Father and a Priest. Ministers of God are to be^ counted for
fathers.
He seems undoubtedly with great reverence to honor the Minister. And in
deed the Ministers of GOD are to be counted for fathers. For the holy Ghost
uses their ministry for the regeneration of other. So Paul said, he had
again begotten the Galathians, when as he had before begotten them unto God.
The same Paul writes unto the Corinthians: Although ye have many
schoolemasters, yet have ye not many fathers.

Now the Lord will do good unto me. Now GOD (says he) will increase my
things: for there were many which would come unto those holy serseruices, and
he should be partaker of all the oblations and Sacrifices, and so the miserable
man thinks that gain is godlynes. And in deed Paul says to Timothe, that
piety is a great gain with sufficiency, but he adds: That they which will
be rich, do fall into temptacions and snares of the devil, and many which
desire to be rich, have fallen into shipwreck from the faith, and have
wrapped themselves into great sorrows. All these things happened unto Micha:
for he both strayed from the faith, and was most grievously afflicted with
unlooked for calamityes. For the Danites, as we shall hear, invaded his house,
and ouerthrewe it with all his felicity. They led away the Leuite with the
idol. And yet he in the mean time flattereth himself and says: The Lord
will bless me.

The.xviii. Chapter.
1 IN those days there was no king in Israel. And at the same time ye tribe
of Dan sought the^ an inheritance to dwell in: for unto that time their
inheritance had not fallen unto them among the tribes of Israel.

2 Therefore the children of Dan sent of their famely five men out of their
coasts, valiant men, out of Zora and Eshtaol to view the land and diligently
to search it out, and they said unto them: Go search out the land. Then they
came to mount Ephraim to the house of Micha and lodged there.

3 And when they were nyghe the house of Micha, they knew the voice of the
young man the Leuite, and they turned in there, and said unto him: who brought
thee hither? What make thou here? and what have thou to do here?

4 And he answered them. Thus and thus does Micha unto me, and has hired me
to be his Priest,

5 And they said unto him: Ask counsel I pray thee of God, that we may know,
whither he will prosper the way whereby we walk.

6 And the Priest said unto them: Go in peace. Your way whereby ye walk, is
before the Lord.


In that it is said there was no king in Israel, is signified that it is not
to be meruayled, The Danites were left destitute of their brethren.
that Religion, and the Public wealth was then troubled. There was no
Magistrate, which should justly have punished these sins. By this place is
understand yt the Danites were left destitute of their brethren, when they
should get their possession, which thing undoubtedly should not have been
done: for they ought every tribe, one to have helped an other, in getting their
inheritance. For so had Moses and Iosuah prescribed them before, but the
Israelites forgettyng their brethren, studied every man by himself for his
own commodity and profit. The vtility of a Magistrate.
Hereof sprang Idolatry, and the taking away of other men's goods, because there
was neither king nor Magistrate, to restrain these euilles. Hereby we may
know how much a Magistrate is to be made of: Who if he be good, then
keeps in he good order both the public wealth and the worshyppyng of god.
For he is the keeper as well of the first table, as also the latter. Neither
has he a care only for the bodies of his Citezins, but also for their souls.
And how ill soever the Magistrate be, yet to defend the common society of
men, he many ways profits ye public wealth. But now al things were
decayed, because ye public wealth was destitute both of a king, and also of a
Magistrate. They were not deprived of this good thing by the institution of
God, but by their own sin, whereby they were delivered into the power of the
Philistines.

An objection touching the primitive Church.
But thou will say: did not Christian men so in the primitive Church? For they
had not their Magistrates, but were most cruelly vexed of tyrannes. That is
true in deed, but in the mean time they had very excellent Ministers of the
Church, and therewith all most aboundaunt and great benefits of the holy
ghost. And when the Apostles wrought wonderful miracles, there seemed to be
the les want of a Christian Magistrate. Paul by a great power of the holy Ghost
made blind Elimas the sorcerer. Heresies increase unless ye Magistrate repress
them.
Peter slew Ananias and Saphira. They delivered unto Satan such as were past
correction. Howbeit in the mean time increased many heresies, because there
was no Magistrate to keep them down, even as now in Israel, when they wanted
their princes, Idolatry crept in. Afterward were given unto the Church both
Christian princes and Magistrates, and therewithal there ceased such gifts of
the holy Ghost, because they seemed not so necessary, when Christian Schools,
Christian Physicians, and Christian Judges happened unto the Church.

Of the head of the Church.
THis place ye Papists object unto us, An objection of the Papists.
and think yt it makes very much to establish their tyranny. Se (say they)
hereof spro^g so many sects and heresies among you, because ye have not an
Ecclesiastical Magistrate, and for yt ye have fallen from the only head of ye
Church. Wherefore that the state of ye Church may be the quieter, there must be
one head thereof in earth. But we neither will, nor may suffer this: because it
is manifestly repugnant unto the word of God. We acknowledge one head of the
Church that is Christ, from whom we feel that both life and spirit flows and
spreddeth abroad into all the rest of the body.

But they say there must also be an other head of the Church. For Christ (say
they) is the head as touching the soul and justification. But there must be an
other head also, concerning the retayning of outward rites and ceremonies, for
ye wedyng out of heresies, and to unite Churches together. To this we say, yt
it is sufficient yt every Church have his minister or Bishop, who may dispense
the word of God and the Sacraments, and retain discipline as much as may be.
But that there should be some one man to govern all the rest, neither is it
necessary, neither ought it to be suffered: because (as I have said) the head is
from whence life and spirit is derived into all the body. And such a head is
Christ only. God would have in the Church not one Minister only, but many.
And we must mark the institution of GOD, who would have many Ministers in the
Church. For so is it written unto the Ephesians, Christ has ascended into
heaven, and has led captivity captive, and given gifts unto men. And that we
should understand how he has given them, it is added: Some he has g^uen
Apostles, some he has given Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and
teachers, for the renewyng of the saints into the work of administration, for
ye edification of the body of Christ, wherefore to build the body of Christ,
God will have many and sundry gifts of the spirit and Ministeryes retained in
the Church. Let these men every one execute his office, let them confer
together, if there happen any controversy, and if need be, let them assemble
together to Synodes. But that every controversy should be referred unto the
Bishop of Rome, and that all men should obey the Pope only, it is
intolerable, and utterly Tyrannical.

Neither do the Popes contayn themselves, Popes do also change the
institutions of God.
to exercise power only in outward things, but also they change the
institutions of God, and rules of religion: Which thing we have now had
experience of to ye great hurt of the Church. It is a very good saying which
ye Apostle has unto the Romans in the.12. chap. Even as in one body we have
many members, but all members have not one and the self same office: so we
being many are one body in Christ, and every one the members of others, having
sundry gifts according unto the grace given unto us. And the same things in a
manner are written in the.1. to ye Cor. the.13. chap. Wherefore we must not
think that if we acknowledge not the Pope for head, that for that cause the
Church is troubled: yea rather hereof springs the contention and confusion
in the Church, because many, for that they will have the Pope to be head, do
most manifestly stand against the truth.

Neither is it true that they say, how that the Church can not consiste, The
Church was long time and that happy without a earthly head.
except all men obey the Pope only. For the Church was long time and that in
much better state, before the Pope obtained his tyrannycall power. Then (say
they) ye will have no Magistrate in the Church. We will have gouerners in it,
but not one only: we will have Aristocratia kept in it, as Christ has
instituted. They on the contrary side object that there ought to be but one
only, because in this place it is written that all things were troubled in
Israel, because they had not a king. But we must consider, that the Scripture
now speaks so by anticipation: for as much as yet there was no kingdom
instituted in Israel. Wherefore a king is in this place to be understand for a
lawful Magistrate.

An objection of the Papists: Thou art Peter, etc.
But leauyng this place, they say that Christ said unto Peter: Thou art Peter,
and upon this rock will I build my Church. I will give unto thee the kayes of
the kingdom of heaven, etc. These things (as they will have them) have a
respect unto one only, and ought to be understand of one which should be the
head. But was not this self same thing said unto others also? Undoubtedly in
John Christ said unto them all: Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins ye
forgive, shall be forgeuen. Wherefore Peter did not alone receive the kayes of the
kingdom of heaven. But they say that it was said unto Peter only: Feed my
Lambs. Yea but this he spoke unto them all, when he said: Go into the whole
world, Christ is the foundation of the Church.
and preach the Gospel to all creatures. But where as they boast that this
saying belongs unto Peter alone: Upon this rock I will build my Church, it
shall not be so sone granted them. For Christ is the foundation of the Church,
as the Apostle has taught. And there are some of the fathers, which do
interpret that Christ referred these words, not to Peter himself, but to the
confession which he had made of Christ. But grant that Peter was in some
sort after Christ the foundation of the Church: the same thing also may we
say of the other Apostles, forasmuch as in the Apocalipse are read.12.
fou^dations of the celestial Jerusalem. How there are 12. foundations of the
Church.
But of this matter we have spoken more abundantly before, and shall have
better occasion hereafter to speak thereof: only these things I thought good
to bring, that it should not be thought, that the Papists had gotten the
victory when they obtrude this place to the unlearned.

They sent spies. The cause was, because they had not lands enough to dwell
in, and to till. But how could this be, when as all the land of Chanaan was
distributed by Joshua? I answer, that it was in deed given unto every tribe
according to sundry porcions, but yet were not the Danites come to their full
and whole possession. Yea, we gather by the History of Samson, that the Danites
dwelled yet in tents, where the spirit of the Lord began to come upon Samson.
Farther we must remember, that they at the beginning were content with
tributes, which they exacted of those, whose lands they should have possessed.
But they were made unto them as thorns and briers. For when as they had not
driven them out, but dwelled together with them, they quickly learned Idolatry
of them. Wherefore we read in this book that the Danites were compelpelled to
dwell in the hilly places, when they could not descend and possess the plain.
But now those hilly places seemed very narrow, for they increased in number,
and therefore they neded more room to dwell in.

The promise of GOD was not weaker the^ the enemies of the Hebrews.
If thou shall say: was the power of the enemies of greater force then the
promise of God? No undoubtedly. For it was not the enemies that excluded them
out, but they hyndred themselves, for that they followed Idolatry. Wherefore GOD
punished them, and long time drove them back from the possession of their
portion. That thing therefore which happened, is to be ascribed unto their
impiety, and not to the strengthes of their enemies. And to the promise of God
was joined a condition, namely if they should abide in the law of God. Their
wickedness was the cause, that God did not straightway perform his promises.

They send spies to spy out for them some commodious place in the plain.
They send out five spies. Mikstsothim: which is from their coasts, and they are
signified to be in extremies: which may taken two ways, namely yt these spies
were either of ye basest sort, or of ye highest. For either of these in their
order ar extreme. They were in deed valiant and warlike men, but peradventure
obscure, whereby they might be the more unknown of their enemies. For they ye
ar noble ar more easily known. Co^traryly other think yt it is declared, that
they were most honest and most noble: because spies ought to be wise men, and
such as have good skill in warlike affairs. Homere writes that Ulysses was
commanded to be a spy, Homer^.
and that he in the apparel of a beggar went thorough Troy. Moses also sent
Joshua and Chaleb which were very excellent men, to search out the land of
Chanaan. But whether they were of ye basest sort or of the highest, it helps
not much unto ye matter. And paraduenture this opinion is more simple, namely
that they were sent from the utter parts of the places wherein the Danites
dwelled.

They came to the house of Micha. By a by way as it is thought, and not ye
right way as their journey lay. For it is very likely, that there was in ye
place an Inn, whereunto men out of every quarter resorted unto the idol. So we
see it happens in the Papacy, for in places where superstitious Pilgrimages
are had, there are many Innes builded, as at Humbert, and at Maria Lauretana.

The spies labored with ye young man the Leuite after they knew his ministry,
to ask an oracle for the^. And he answers the^ in the name of Jehovah, when
they asked him by this word Elohim. Those men were wise and witty. How they
knew the Leuite by his speech.
For when they heard the young man speak, they perceived he was a Leuite. And
although all the Israelites spoke Hebrew, yet were there sundry forms of
speech among those tribes. Wherefore we have before heard, yt the Ephraites were
known by the pronu^ciatio^ of this word Siboleth. They might therefore
peradventure note yt the young man spoke in ye speech of the tribe of Judah, for
as much as he was of Bethlehem, and peradventure they heard him intreatyng of
things divine: wherefore when they perceived yt he was a Leuite, which executed
holy services there, straightwaye they enquired of him an answer of ye success
of their journey. They nothing regarded how rightly he did it, but strayghtway
said: Ask of god. So at this day soldiers when they go on warfare, they come
to their Mass Priests, and desire them to say a Mass for the^ either of
George, or of Sebastia^, neither have they any regard whether ye Mass be good
or evil. This is to deal with god after our blind reason, At ye first burnt it
may seem yt the spies did not evil. For it is a point of piety to ask counsel
of god, when we shall do any thing. But we ought to take heed, yt what soever is
taken in hand, ye same be joined with right reason and sound judgment of ye
mind. For our actions must flow from the heart, which as it is affected, Good
looks also upon the heart, and not upon the actions only.
so are they to be judged either good or evil. Wherefore although god require of
us actions, yet he much more requires the heart. We must not separate ye action
and heart or purpose a sunder: let them abide joined together as the Lord
requires them.

If thou demand of a Philosopher how the action is good, and whether it alone
makes the man good, he will deny it, and will say that the action must be
directed be a right reason, which if it be away, then is the action corrupt.
Wherefore the goodness of every action depends of reason of the mind, and of
judgments. The goodness of an action depends of the mind or judgment of ye
doer.
If these be evil, the^ must ye action also needs be corrupt. Look what ye
root is in a tree: ye same is reason in a moral actio^, and in religious
works and such works as ar truly Christian faith: it is as it were the soul
of good works, as without which nothing ca^ be acceptable unto god. But faith
leans to no other thing the^ to ye word of God. Faith is the soul of good
works.
Wherefore for as much as these me^ command to ask counsel of God contrary to
the word of God, they do exceadingly displease God: they were more led by their
own commodity, then by true piety. So many at this day say: What evil is it to
come to Mass? and there, with a godly mind to pray unto god? The Mass has a
great show of piety: but we must remember that it ca^ not be good, for as much
as it is appertly repugnant to faith, and to the word of God. Let every manne
take heed he be not deceived with the outward show of piety: and let him
diligently consider, that outward works make not a man good, but rather
contraryly good works must proceed out of a good man.

But now come I to examine, and consider ye which is here entreated as touching
the asking counsel of God, The commandment for asking counsel of God is
moral.
and I find that it is commanded, yt in things of great difficulty ye mind
of the Lord is to be enquired of. This commandment though it were given unto
the Jews, yet it pertayneth to the moral kind of precepts. Wherefore it
byndeth us also. But unto the Jews were adjoined certain outward ceremonies,
from which we are by Christ delivered. They were bound to come to the Priest,
to the Ephod, and to the place of the arc of the covenant, or to the Prophet:
those things are now taken away. And yet ought we also, when we take in hand to
do any thing, to ask counsel of the Lord, but remouyng away these addicions,
which were necessary in ye public wealth of ye Israelites. But where shall we
in this time ask counsel of the Lord? We ought to ask counsel of the holy
scriptures when we appoint to do any thing.
In the holy scriptures, as we have before taught. Wherefore every Christian
ought to have them ready at hand, and to do all things by their guiding.
Whatsoever we shall do, let us first look in them, whether it be just or
unjust. This is to ask counsel of the Lord, which thing if we do not, we
shall be always in doubt concerning our things. Wherefore Paul has rightly
admonished: Every thing that is not of faith is sin. Neither are we ignorant
but ye faith comes of hearing, and hearing by ye word of god. Wherefore
whether we take in hand a journey, or do or go about any thing else, we must not
waver or doubt in mind, but must be assured that our work pleases God.
Which thing when we know, we must refer the event thereof unto God. Horace.
Let it suffice us to have known that. Remember this saying of the Poet: If
the world should break and fall, let the ruin thereof pearse the fearful.

The estate of the Hebrews and ours is diverse
But why the Hebrews were so careful for ye success of their matters, we have
in an other place declared. Their state was not all one with ours. They were much
careful for their public wealth, because God had promised them yt it should
endure eue^ unto Christ's time. Neither was true religion in any other place
publikly received. Wherefore they were very careful for the success of their
expeditions, namely that ye public wealth wherein only was appointed sound
religion, should not take hurt. Wherefore god also very oftentimes gave them
oracles for their euentes. But our state is far otherwise. Sound religion is
not at this day bound to one public wealth only. For ye inheritance of
Christ is dispersed thoroughe out ye world, neither shall it endure so long, as
one only public wealth stands. But rather if one public wealth fall by
reason of sins, an other shall rise. If there arise persecutions for the
Gospel sake (which ofte^tymes happens) it is lawful to depart to an other
place, which thing was not so free for the Jews, for they had not a temple of
god, and his outward worshipping in any other, then at Jerusalem. Superstition
and idolatry possessed all other nations. Farther, this was an other cause, for
yt the Jews for their religions sake were hated of all nations: wherefore they
had the more need to be by oracles admonished of ye eue^t of their things.
Wherefore for as much as such difficultyes are far from us, it is sufficient to
seek out by ye holy scriptures, whether those things, which we do and meddle
with, do please god. And to ye study joined with faith, let prayers be added,
yt that which we our selves are not able to do, god himself may bring to pass.
And the^ at ye length let us diligently and valia^tly atte^pte the thing which
we have taken in hand. So far (as I think) the precept for asking counsel of
ye Lord pertayneth unto us.

Why the Leuite answered in the name of Jehovah.
And in this Hystorye let us consider (as I have before said) that the Leuite
answers in the name of Jehovah, that is, of the Lord, because he would
signify, that he knew well enough, that the Idol was nothing. I (says he)
answer in the name of the Lord. This sentence, which R. Selemoh follows,
seems plausible. But to me it seems not so. For I think that the young
man did it to get authority to his Religion. For which cause he is the more
grievously to be accused, for that he contaminated the name of GOD, in applyeng
it unto an Idol. He answers: your way is in the sight of the Lord, that
is, God himself will go out before you, and direct your journey, all things
shall go well and prosperous with you, when as God is with you, and directs
you. And so did it succeed in very deed. For they luckely spyed out all
things, the event came to pas as they desired. Wherefore it may well here be
demanded why God so prospered these evil works.

Before I answer to this question, Our works do not therefore please God
because they have good success.
this I think good to put in by the way, that we ought not to take it for a
sure token that our doings do please GOD, because sometimes they have a
prosperous success: otherwise if we should measure things by the event and
success, we should allow the wicked and most evil doers, for as much as
fortunate and prosperous things do happen unto them. We should also praise
deuiners, sorcerers southsayers and coniurers, because they have sometimes
foretold things that are true. It is sometimes permitted unto the devil to
divine by them.

Let such foretellynges be referred unto the.13. chapter of Deuteronomye,
where it is thus written: If a Prophet rise up among you, or a dreamer of
dreams, and shall give thee a sign or wonder, and that which he has
foretold thee come to pass: Thou shall not harke^ unto his voice. If he
entise thee to Idolatry, let him be killed (says he) neither let him be
spared. The Lord proves his by the miracles of the ungodly.
Afterward is added a reason, why God deals after this manner, which thing was
at the beginning demanded: because (says he) the Lord proves you, whether ye
love him or not. And therewith agrees Paul in his.2. Epistle to the These.
the.2. chap. where he entreats of Antechrist: His coming (says he) shall be by
the working of Satan, with power, signs, and liyeng wonders, and withal
deceatefulnes in those which perish, because they received not the love of the
truth, to that end they might be saved. And therefore God shall send the^ the
efficacy of illusion, yt they should believe lies, yt all they should be judged
which have not believed the truth. Wherefore although we do see signs, yet
must we not straightwaye give faith unto those by whom they are wrought, but
must diligently examine, whether they attempt to teach any thing contrary to
the word of God.

In the Papistical Masses and marcha^dise of relics, were oftentimes wrought
great miracles, and yet ought we not to believe such superstitions, and to fall
from Christ and the true worshipping of god. How miracles profit for salvation.
God suffers this kind of miracles to be wrought that ingrate men, and those
which have forgotten their God, should be deceived, and be taken as it were by
these nets, and that the godly should become the more vigila^t and better.
Neither ar these things spoken to despise al miracles. For they which are done
in a true cause and for sound doctrine, are certain praises of god, and
trumpets of ye truth. But co^trarily, they which under the pretense of miracles
do with draw men from the worshipping of GOD, we ought to count them cursed,
though they work never so great miracles.

7 Then the five men went and came to Lais, and saw the people which were in
it, dwelling carelessly, after the manner of the Sydonians, quiet and sure. And
for that there was no man in the land which made them ashamed in any thing,
nor which by the inheritance received the kingdom, and for that they were
far from the Sidonians, neither had they any business with other men.

8 So they came again unto their brethren in Zora and Esthoall, and their
brethren said: What have ye done?

9 And they said: Arise, that we may go up unto them. For we have seen the
land, and behold it is very good: and do ye sit still? Be not slothful to go
to enter and possess the land.

10 When ye shall enter, ye shall enter into a careless people, farther, the
country is large in room: for god has given it into your hands, a place
which wants nothing that grows in the earth.

11 The^ there departed thence of the family of ye Danites, from Zorah and from
Eshtaol, six hundredth me^ appointed with instruments of war.

12 And they went up, and pitched in Kiriah iearim in Judah: Wherefore they
called that place. Mahaneh dan unto this day: and it is behind Kiriah-iearim.

13 And they went thence unto mount Ephraim, and came to the house of Michah.

14 Then answered the five men, that went to spy out the country of Laish,
and said unto their brethren: Know ye not, that there are in these houses an
Ephod, and Theraphim, and a graven and molten Image. Now therefore consider what
ye have to do.

15 And they turned thetherward and came to the house of the young man the
Leuite, which was in the house of Michah, and saluted him peaceably.

16 And the six hundredth men appointed with their weapons of war, which
were of the children of Dan, stood by the enteryng of the gate.

17 Then the five men that went to spy out the land, went in thither and
took the graven Image and the Ephod, and the Theraphim, and the molten Image:
and the Priest stood in the entering of the gate with the six hundredth men,
that were appointed with weapons of war.

18 And the other went into Michahs house and fet the graven Image the Ephod,
and the Theraphim, and the molten Image. Then said the Priest unto them: What
do ye?

19 And they answered him, hold thy peace: lay thine hand upon thy mouth,
and come with us to be our father and Priest. Whether is it better thou
should be a Priest unto the house of one man, or yt thou should be a
Priest unto a tribe and to a familye in Israel?

20 And the Priests heart was glad, and he took the Ephod and the Theraphim,
and the graven Image, and went in the midst of the people.

21 And they turned and departed, and put the children and the cattle, and the
substance before them.


The City of Lais is in the book of Iosuah called Lesem. And they saw the
people dwelling in security. This word people is in this place joined with an
adjective of the feminine gender. It is therefore the figure Enallage, because
one gender is put for an other. They dwelled careless after the manner of the
Zidonians. The Zidonians feared not the Hebrews, The Zidonia^s were most strong
men.
because they were none of those seven nations, which were delivered to be
possessed of them. Farther the Zidonians were men most mighty and of them came
many Colonii, which were people dispersed, to seek new seats and specially at
Carthage. Wherefore Virgil calls Dido a Sidonian, Virgil.
because she came from thence. But why this City of Lais was in such security,
Why the City of Lais was secure.
there may be other causes given. First it had no molestious neighbors, whereby
there should have been any danger at hand toward the^: farther there no was
tyran, which vsuped unto himself the dominion of ye City. Wherefore for as much
as they were not vexed, neither by any Tyranne, nor of enemies, they lived
securely. These causes are gathered out of the text, and also mentioned of ye
Hebrews. But I think moreover, that ye City had not severe Magistrates, which
should have kept the people in doing their duties, Securiti of the flesh is a
thing pernicious.
which thing inge^dreth most great danger unto Cities. Neither is there any
vice in a manner more hurtful, then the security of the flesh Wherefore God
will have his to be vigilant and attentive: because when all things seem to us
to be safe and quiet, then is danger most of al at hand. Whilst the
Sodomites lived most pleasantlye and most securely, they were or they were ware
burnt with fire from heaven: and in the time of Noe, when men made banquets
daily, married, and took wives, they were a with sudden flood oppressed. Wherefore
it is rightly said: when they shall say, peace, peace, and althinges are safe,
sudden destruction shall come. It is added, that they were far from the
Sidonians, A league ma^e with a people far distant, is little profitable.
for because by that means they might the easelier be conquered. Peradventure
they had made some league with the Sidonians: but confederates which dwell far
a sunder, cannot but with difficulty give succor and be at hand, when need
requires: which thing histories every where do teach us. It is also added,
that they had no busynes or traffic with other men: which is therefore
spoken, because cities are sometimes helped, not by reason of a league, but
because of communicating of busynes, namelye, because they cannot be destroyed,
without the misery of many men. These things the Spies diligently marked:
wherefore it appears that they were wise and subtle me^.

Come, arise, the land is large and wide, neither is there any thing wanting in
it. What are the chief points of this exhortacion.
They do in few words finish their exhortacion appointed. Then are we
stirred up to take in hand any thing, when it is easy and profitable. These two
things are the principal points of this exhortacion. They declare unto their
people, that that land is good and fertile, as wherein wants nothing that
serves for plentifulnes and abundance. In placing our selves these things
only ar wont to be considered. And the reasons thereof they conclude by
security. Then they add spurs to prick them, when they say: God has given
it into your hands, which thing peradventure they add, because of the Leuite,
which answered the^, that their iourny was in the sight of the Lord: or because
that portion of the land when it was divided, fell to the tribe of Dan.

There went out six hundredth men. It is not described after what manner, or
with what furniture they went forth, only it is said that they were armed.
But by those things which follow, we understand that they had their cattle,
children and wives in their company. And they pitched in Kiriath iearim. It
seems that it was a journey of three days: for they pitched twice before
they came thither: unless peradventure they went a by way, and not ye right way.
Kiriath-iearim is a City of woods or forestes. Whereby is given a reason why
that place was called the tents of Dan. And it lay on the backside of the
city of Kiriath-iearim. They came to the house of Micha, and there they pitched
again.

The five men answered. With the Hebrews to answer is to begin to speak.
The verb of answering in the Hebrew phrase signifies as much as to begin to
talk, or to begin to speak. They made mention of the Ephod and graven image,
whilst that they persuaded the fellow to theft or rather sacrilege. Their
counsel was that it was expedient, to have with them those holy things.

They came to the house of the young man. It is an exposicion of that which was
before said, how that they came unto the house of Micha, namelye where the
young man the Leuite ministered. They saluted him peaceably, and peradventure
they began to ask counsel of him, of the success and event of their
expedicion. The six hundredth men stood before the door, and held the Leuite
about the gate, whilst the five men spoiled the temple. For entering into it,
they took away al with them. Afterward they entreat the young man to go with
them. And he, for that he had no other guide but his belly, easily assented
unto them. An objection of the Papists.
With this argument of the Danites the Papists oftentimes assail us: Ye teach
by corners in one or two cities or provinces. Why do ye not rather come to the
catholic church with us are riches, honors, and benefices. Ye are fools: ye
neither provide well for your selves, nor yet for others.

By this kind of persuasion the heart of this Sacrificer was won, who was not
ready to cry out. And being persuaded, to the end he might be the more in
safety, he went in the myddest of the armed men, least peradventure Micha,
requiring his things again, should have pulled him back again to his
house: or rather he went so with his Idol, that he might somewhat resemble the
Arc of covenant. For we read in the book of Numb. that as often as they
went forth, and removed their host, the Arc of the covenant was carried about
by the Levites, in the midst of the host, so that the one part of the host
should go before, and the other part should follow behind. After this manner
the Leuite would set forth his Idol unto the Soldiers.

But this is to be maruailed at, that men were so blind and mad, to make them
their Gods, How great the blindness of idolatrers is. Augustine.
which were subject to theft and to sacrilege. Augustine in his.x Tome,
and.xix. Treatise elegantly derideth such defe^ders of cities and houses. Which
have eyes and see not, feet and hands and can not move themselves. Such says
he, were the governors and keepers of the Capitolium: who seeing they could not
defend themselves, how much less were they able to defend a cyty? Neither let
any say: They were not Gods that were taken away out of the temple of Micha,
but only two images of Gods. But Augustine says: If they can not defend
their own images, what hope is there that they can defend Cities or houses?
Virgil.
But this thing is so much ridiculous, that even the Ethnicke Poets deride it.
For Virgil has soong of his Eneas: He carried Troy with him into Italy, and
their Gods being overcome. Undoubtedly miserable Gods, which could be overcome
of men, and be carried into an other place. Some will object: That the Ark of the Lord was also taken once, and led away after a sort captive of the
Philistians. I grant that: But how was it carried away? To be kept as a
prisoner? No undoubtedly. For when it was put in the temple of the Philistians,
it threw Dagon their god to the ground. Farther, it struck the Philistians with
so grievous plagues and wounds, that at the last they were compelled to send
it home again with honor. And it was taken, not because God can either be
overcome, or taken, but that the Hebrews should be admonished of their
sins, who without repentance or faith, did put al their confidence in an
outward thing.

They placed their children, cattle, and substance before. Because they
suspected that Micha would with armed soldiers pursue them, to see if he could
recover the things which they had taken away. Wherefore they would chieflye
provide for their children, cattle, and substance. This word Supplex which we
turn substance, is called in Hebrew Kechodah, either because it signifies a
burden or a pack, or else a thing whereof men make their boast.

22 When they were far of from the house of Micha, the men that were in the
houses near to Michahs house, gathered together, and pursued after the
children of Dan.

23 And cried unto the children of Dan: who turned their faces, and said unto
Michah, what ayleth thee, that thou make an outcry?

24 And he said: ye have taken away my Gods, which I made, and the Priest,
and go your ways: and what have I more? How then say ye unto me, what ayleth
thee?

25 And the children of Dan said unto him: Let not thy voice be heard among
us, least peradventure men of a bitter mind run upon thee, and thou loose
thy life, with the lives of thine household.

26 So the children of Dan went their ways, and when Michah saw that they were
to strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house.

27 And they took the things which Micha had made, and the Priest which he
had, and came unto Laish, unto a quiet people, and without mystrust, and smote
them with the edge of the sword, and burnt the City with fire.

28 And there was none to help, because Laish was far from Zidon, and they
had no busynes with other men: also it was in the valley that lies by
Beth-rehob. After, they buylte the City, and dwelt therein.

29 And called the name of the City, Dan, after the name of Dan their Father,
which was borne unto Israel: how be it the name of the City was Laish at the
beginning.

30 Then the children of Dan set them up the graven image: and Jonathan the
son of Gershom, the son of Manasseth and his sons were the Priests in
the Tribe of the Danites, until the day of the captiuitye of the land.

31 So they set up the graven image, which Micha had made, all the while the
house of God was in Shiloh.


In that it is said that they which dwelled nigh the house of Micha were
gathered together, is declared that the number of the houses had increased, and
that by reason of peregrinacions, there was in that place a village builded.

Were gathered together. In Hebrew it is Noecu, by which verb is signified,
that they were raised up by an outcrye. For so are men gathered together when
they hear an outcry on every side.

The Danites made him afearde, and threatened that men of a bitter mind would
invade him, whom they so call, either because they were angry (for choler is of
his nature bitter) or else because they were desperate, as they in a manner are
which seek new dwelling places, and depart from home, because they can not
there abide commodiously. It is again repeated that they of Lais were far from
Zidon: which declares that they were in league with them.

But in that it is written that Jonathan and his sons were Priests there,
even to the day of the captivity of the land, we must not (as far as I
judge) understand it of the captivity which the Hebrews suffered, either by the
Assirians or by the Chaldeians: but of that which happened, when they were
plagued by the Philistians: when also the Arc of the Testament was taken away.
I know also that there are some of the Hebrews which fable that this Jonathan
was the ne^ew of Moses by his son Gerson, and that his Graundfather is here
called Menasseh, putting between this letter Nun, for to honor Moses with all.
As though the holy scriptures do not oftentimes make mention of most wicked
children borne of excellent Parents. But this is to be marked, that that is
not very firm, neither can it be certain, in that it was before said, that
this Leuite was a Gersonite, because Gerson was the Son of Leui, and not of
Menasseh. Wherefore it must needs be uncertain of what famely of the Levites
this man was. But now let us diligently weigh such things as are in this
chapter, worthy of peculiar noting.

Let us chiefly consider how hurtful it is to want a Magistrate. An evil
Magistrate also wants not some vtilitye.
For although sometimes there happen an evil or to favorable a Magistrate,
yet if the thing be well weighed, there comes from him more good unto the
public wealth, then there would come evil, if there were in it no Magistrate
at al. The Sun and Moon, although they have sometimes aspectes not very
favorable, whereby now and then ensue pestilences, dearth of corn, ouerflowing
of waters, or (...) altar, to the end that holy services should be done
thereon, but only they would have it to be for a monument, that they should
not be counted strangers from their brethren, but be thought to pertain to
the same people, and the same God. Wherefore if at that time the Israelites so
hated Idolatry, that they would for that cause have made war against the
Rubenites and Gadites, it is not credible yt they would have suffered the
impiety of Micha. How this history is touched in the book of Joshua.
How then could this history be mentioned of in that book? One of these two
things we must answer, either that there were two cities both of one name
pertaining unto the Danites, which they by force conquered, so that of the one
is mention made in the book of Joshua, and of the other in this historye. But
this seems to be but a feigned tale. For those things which are written in
the book of Joshua, do seem altogether to pertain to this place. Farther, all the Hebrew Interpreters do agree that it was the same city. Let us therefore
rather say, that when, as in the book of Joshua there is described the
distribution of the land, and that it comes unto this city, that which was
done long time after, is there added by an interpretacion, to expound after
what sort the Danites should in success of time obtain that city. And that
particle was added, not of any mean man, but either of Samuel or else of Ezra,
or of some other Prophet. And this is not to corrupt, or to confound the
scriptures, but to put in something that is not from the purpose, whereby the
whole matter may be the better understand, so that it be done by the holy
ghost. And I could bring forth a great many examples, which are found to be
spoken in the scriptures, by the figure (...), or anticipacion. But those
things ought to be sufficient, which are red in ye beginning of this book.

Of Security.
But because there is mention made of security, I will speak somewhat largely of
it in this place, how it is to be praised or dispraysed. Security seems to be
a contempt of Gods justice, whereby sins are punished. If we speak of that,
that can never be but vicious. But there is found an other also, which
undoubtedly is to be allowed, and is laudable,

Hope is a mean between security and desperacio^
But to make the thing more plain, let us consider three things, Security,
Hope, and Desperacion. Hope is ever the mean, which ought always to be
commended. Security is excess: but Desperacion is want. For as in puttyng away
the mercy of God, we are made desperate, so in contemning his justice we become
secure. Wherefore we may conclude that Security is a certain immoderate hope.

Whereof security springs.
And it springs hereof, either because we attribute to much to our own
strength and wisdom, as though by our selves we think that we are able to
obtain any thing: or else though we think that it lies in the mercy of God,
yet we suppose that he for our worthynes ought to accomplish it. So do they
which promise themselves remission of sins, or eternal felicity, although
they do no repentance, but live vnpurely and wickedlye. Or else it springs
hereof, for that we do not believe that there is in God any execution of
justice. And this Security whereof we entreat, The fear of God is contrary to
desperacion. Bernhardus.
is not only contrary unto Desperacion, but also unto the fear of God. For
Desperacion springs of to much fear of the justice of God against sins:
but Securitye thinks of nothing at all of that justice. Wherefore Bernardus
has rightly said: Even as the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, so is
security the ground of al impietye, and the beginning of foolishnes. For the
fear of the Lord (as the scriptures testifye of it) pertayneth chefely unto
piety and religion. Wherefore in the Acts the.x. chap. Cornelius is called a
man religious, and fearing God. Wherefore justly has security impiety joined with
it: and as it springs of an evil beginning, so also brings it forth evil
and noughty fruits, as sluggishnes, luskishnes, and slothfulnes. Therefore they
which trust unto themselves, neither seek for help at gods hand, nor yet for
aid of men.

These people of Lais lived securelye, What Negligence is.
although they were joined in no league or fellowshyp with their next
neighbors. They were also infected with Negligence, which is nothing else, then
a priuacion of that endeavor which we ought to apply for the governing of
things. By it the will is weakened, and the chearefulnes of the body is
diminished. This kind of security has always a danger joined with it. For
those things are not driven away which may be hurtful. For how can that be
done, when as they are secure or careless, thinking rightly neither of their
own strengthes, nor yet of the mercy of God, yea they are utterly unknown
unto them selves? For if they knew them selves, they would not live so
securely. Augustine.
Augustine upon the four score and nynetene Psalm writes: Where as is most
security, there is most danger. And he adds, that a Ship when it is
brought into the Haven, thou thynckest it is in safety. But by the same way
that the Ship enters in, the wind also enters in, and oftentimes tosseth
it, and breaks it upon a rock. Where then can there be securitye? Adam fell
in Paradise, Judas in the fellowshyp of Christ, Cain in the household of Noe,
many in the Law, and many also in the Gospel. Where then shall we live
securely? Undoubtedly no where. Therefore Ecclesiasticus does right well
admonish us: Son stand in the fear of the Lord, and prepare thy soul to
temptacion. The Israelites saw the Egiptians drowned in the red sea. Was it
then meet for them to live in security? No surely. Yea within a while after
they were tempted in the wyldernes. Christ was baptized of John: was he
therefore made secure? No. For he was strayghtway tempted of the Devil.
Wherefore we ought then to be most of all careful, when we are received into
the favor of God, for then the Dyuel does most of all watch for our
destruction, and seeks to make us to fall. And therefore there is no place
for securitye.

But are we so made of God, that we can in no place be secure? What Securitye
is good and laudable.
Not so undoubtedly. For there is an other good and laudable Securitye, which
(as Augustine says) consists in the promises of God, and is taken hold of
by faith. This engenders not luskishnes or sluggishnes, but chearefulnes and
diligence. Of it David has very well soong in his four score and eleven
Psalm: He which dwells in the help of the most highest, shall abide in the
protection of the God of heaven. Where as it is written in the lattine
Adiutorio, that is, in the help, the Hebrew word signifies a cover or
secret place, which no man takes hold of, but he which has faith in the
promises of God. By that buckler we are defended, with that shadow we are
covered against all hurt: this is the Security of faith, and of the spirit,
which cleaves unto the word of God. Securitye of the flesh.
And therefore it cannot be but commended. But the other Securitye is of the
flesh, and therefore it is execrable and detestable. Against it are set forth
most manifest commandments of Christ, namely that we should always pray,
knock, seek, and watch: for the day of the Lord will come like a thief. If
the good man of the house knew what time the thief would come, he would
undoubtedly watch, neither would he suffer his house to be invaded. We ought
always to pray and watch, because although the spirit be ready, yet the
flesh is weak. Paul admonishes us to put on the armor of God, that we may
resyst in the evil day. Stand (says he) with your loins gyrded with the
gyrdle of truth, putting on thee the breast plate of ryghteousnes, and having
shoes on your feet, to be ready to the Gospel of peace, above all things
taking unto you the shield of faith, whereby ye may quench all fyry darts of
that evil one, and take unto you the salet of health, and the swoorde of the
spirit, which is the word of God. So does Peter also arm us against
security, in his first Epistle, the fyft chapter: The Devil (says he) your
enemy goes about like a roaryng Lion, seeking whom he may devour: resist him
being perfect in faith.

There is a certain fear which is evil.
But because I have said that Security is contrary unto fear, I will not that
any man should think that all manner of fear is to be praised. Because there
is also an evil fear. And that spryngeth of an evil judgment of good and
evil things. As if a man should thyncke that the adversities of this world,
and the crosses which the elect suffer, are both altogether evil, and utterly
to be feared. Against these things we must sing together with David: I will
not fear what man does unto me. There is also an other fear of the ungodly to
be reproved, which fear an evil conscience engenders. For they which live
fylthely and wyckedly, are always afraid, that the heavenly vengeance hangs
over them. Plutarch. Sores of the mind.
Such fears Plutarche in his book of Felicitye calls sores of the mind.
There are (says he) sores as well in the mind, as in the body. And he adds
a trymme similitude. As they which in a fever either cold or whot, because
inwardlye they are cold or whot, are more grieuouslye sick, then if there
were heat or cold applied outwardly to their bodies: So they which are vexed
in the mind, are much more tormented, then they which are afflicted in the
body. After the same manner we may say, that they always tremble and are
afraid, whose consciences are troubled. Wherefore David said: They have
trembled for fear, where as no fear was. So Cain, and so Judas also were
wonderfully afraid. Seneca.
Seneca unto Lucillus, in his hundredth and six Epistle says, that no place
shall make a wicked man quiet. For thus he always thinks: Though I be not
yet taken now, yet I may at the length be taken. And that I have not hitherto
been taken, it came rather of fortune, then of confidence. They also do
exceedingly fear, which are them selves horrible and fearful unto other. For
he must needs fear many, whom many fear.

Against such fears Seneca has invented remedies, namely that we should live
justly, Remedies against evil fear
and commit nothing that is wicked. But by this means, who can at any time be
secure? For who is he which synneth not? But we much better rest our selves in
the faith of Christ, and put all our confidence and securitye in his mercy
only. After this manner Paul teaches us: Being justified (says he) by faith,
Carefulnes is not always laudable.
we have peace with God. This medicine is of force against al diseases. Also
Carefulnes, which seems to be contrary unto Security, is not always to be
praised: because in it are two vices to be taken heed of. The first is, that
being moved with it, we seek not by iniust means to remedy an evil that
comes unlooked for, as the Jews did when they said: If we suffer this man
to live, the Romans will come, and overthrow our place and Nation. Wherefore
they decreed to destroy him.

Farthermore we must beware, that we be not so moved for temporal things, to
cast away our hope and confidence of the goodness and providence of God. What
is the true and laudable Security.
Wherefore the true Security is that which is received by faith, and consists
of the promises of God. Paul did put us in mind of this, when he wrote unto
the Romans: If God have given his Son for us, how shall not he give us all
things with him? Who shall lay any faults against the elect of God? It is
God which justifies, who then shall condemn? It is Christ which dyed, yea
and which rose again, who sytteth also at the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us. Who shall separate us from the love of God? Shall
affliction? Shall trouble? Shall persecution? Shall hunger? Shall nakedness?
Shall danger? Shall the swoorde? I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things
to come, nor heygth, nor depth, nor any other creature, can separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Now it sufficiently
appears (as I think) what manner of Security is allowed, and what manner is
condemned.

The.xix. Chapter.
1 ALso in those days, when there was no king in Israel, a certain Leuite
dwelt as a stranger on the side of mount Ephraim, and took a wife a
Concubine, out of Bethlehem Judah.

2 And his Concubine playde the whore there, and went away from him unto her
fathers house to Bethelehem Judah, and there continued a few days, namely four
months.

3 And her husband arose and went after her, to speak unto her heart, and to
bring her again: he had also his servant with him, and a couple of Asses, and
she brought him in into her fathers house, and when the young woman's father saw
him, he rejoiced of his coming.

4 And his father in law, the young woman's father retained him: and he abode
with him three days. So they did eat and drink, and lodged there.

5 And when the fourth day came, they arose earelye in the morning, and he
prepared to depart: then the young woman's father said unto his son in law:
comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and then go your way.

6 So they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together. And the
young woman's father said unto the man: be content, I pray thee, and tarry al
night, and let thine heart be merry.

7 And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law was earnest,
therefore he returned and lodged there.

8 And he arose up early the fyft day to depart, and the young woman's father
said: Comfort thine heart, I pray thee: and they tarried until after mydday, and
they both did eat.

9 Afterward when the man arose to depart with his Concubine and his servant,
his father in law, the young woman's father said unto him: Behold now, the day
draws toward even. I pray you tarry al night: Behold the su^ne goes to rest:
Lodge here that thine heart may be merry, and to morrow get you earlye upon your
way, and go to thy tent.

10 But the man would not tarry, but arose and departed, and came over against
Iebus, (which is Jerusalem) and his two Asses laden, and his Concubine, were
with him.


By reason of sundry calamities and plagues wherewith the Philistians afflicted
the people of their grievous sins, the Israelites had now no lawful
Magistrates: whereby came to pass that many wicked acts were committed, the
woorshipping of God violated, and civil wars arose, which must needs happen,
where sins remain unpunished. And that which might have been restrained by
the punishment of one or two, brought the destruction of many thousands,
both of the Israelites, and also of the Beniamites. We shall see in this hystory
(which the holy ghost refers to the end of this book) first a most
heinous wicked act of the Beniamites. Secondlye vengeance taken of that Tribe
by the other Tribes, whereby the Beniamites were in a manner clean destroyed.
And lastly we shall hear the wonderful instauracion of that Tribe.

The occasion of this war was thus. A certain man being a Leuite, had a
wife, who committed adultery, and fearing the sharpenes of her housband, fled
to her Parents. Not long time after, her husband went to seek her, fyndeth
her, and is reconciled unto her. The woman as she returned home together with
her husband, was with most fylthy whoredom defiled of the Gabaonites, whereby
she miserably perished, and so suffered punishment for her first aduoutry. For
God punishes sins by sins. Neither suffered he adultry being not punished
by the Magistrates, to go unpunished.

As touching the historye, it is no marvelous or strange thing, that the
Leuite dwelt as a stranger. For although that Tribe had certain Cities and
suburbs appointed it, yet very many of the Levites went to the towns and
villages of the other Tribes, to serve them as touching doctrine and counsels:
whereof I have a little before somewhat spoken.

This man dwelt as a stranger on the side of mount Ephraim. The Hebrewe word
signifies a side, a hyp or thigh. And by translacion it signifies a region or
coast. And this is a very elegant Metaphore, when there is mention made of a
mountain. He dwelled therefore on the side of mount Ephraim.

He took a wife a Concubine. By this place is manifestlye gathered, that the
Concubines of the Fathers were wives. For the Jews were not bound to the laws
of the Romans, when as both at this time they were not made, and also they
pertayned not to that nation. Which I therefore speak because the Romans had
Concubines, which were not wives. But the Hebrews sometimes called their wives
Concubines, because they were not of the same honor and dignity that their
wives were, which had authority in the house. Yea the Master sometimes married
his handmayden, as Abraham married Agar, Jacob Bilham and Zilpa. Peradventure in
contracting of those matrimonies there wanted tables, or some outward
ceremonies, wherewith they used to adorn the principal matrimonies. Neither yet
was that a let, but that these were matrimonies. Of this thing I have spoken
largely before. Wherefore I will at this time cease to go any farther therein.

But in that the Leuite had a wife, which was of the tribe of Judah, it is not
to be marueiled at: because unless maidens were inheritours, they might mary in
other tribes, which thing was not permitted to those that had inheritance, to
the end that possessions should not be confounded. Farther, forasmuch as the
tribes of Judah and Leui excelled the other in dignitye, they were the easelyer
coopled together in matrimony. For the principality seemed well to agree with
the Priesthood. It is called Bethlehem of Judah, to put a difference from the
other Bethlehem, as we have before declared.

She committed aduoutry by him. We might also say against him. For there is
great injury done unto the man, when the wife plays the whore. And this
preposicion All signifeth either. But the plainer sense is by him. As though
it should have been said that she committed aduoutry, when she was yet together
with her husband, and had not departed from him.

She fled to her father. Being so afearde of her husband that she durst not
come in his sight, she got her to her fathers house. Adultery is committed,
which is a grievous crime, and yet is not punished by the punishment of the
law, for that there was no Magistrate to execute judgments. And though in
all persons aduoutry is a grievous wicked act, The wife of a Minister if she be
an adultres, synneth more grievously then other.
yet in the wife of a Leuite or Priest it is far more grievous, for as much
as the holy ministerye ought to be well spoken of. Wherefore if the daughter
of a Priest had played the harlot in her Fathers house, she was not stoned as
other were, but burnt with fire, as it is expressedly written in Deuteromy. But
why this adultresse was not slain, the cause (as it is before said) was, for
that there was no Magistrate in Israel. And this adulteress might think to
herself yt she had escaped punishment, This adulterous woman escaped not the
punishmente of God.
as touching men, but she could not escape the hand of God. For god shall
judge adulterers and whoremo^gers, as the Epistle to the Hebrews teaches,
which thing he does sometimes by magistrates: and sometimes when they cease, by
himself. The woman was with her parents.4. months, in which space of time, her
husband being either moved with mercy, or wearied with solitarines, went to
seek his wife, and to speak to her heart. Two manner of ways of punishinge
the guilty.
By this Hebrewe phrase is signified that he would comfort her being in misery
and afflicted, or give her some profitable counsel, peradventure that she
should repent her of the sin which she had committed, promising her that if
she would do so, he would receive her into favor again.

He joined a coople of Asses. That he might have one to carry his wife, and the
other to lade with things necessary for his journey. The wife as soon as she
saw him, brought him into her fathers house. By which act she declares that
she was not utterly alienated from her husband. The father of the maiden,
that is his father in law, met him and joyfully embrased him. Whereby we
gather, that the old man also wished a reconcilement between them.

He abode there three days. He abode there in very deed five days: but three
days willingly, the other two days he was in a manner compelled by his father
in law. And they did eat and drink. These things declare that they were
reconciled, and that the matrimony was renewed between them. But when he would
have departed, the father in law said:

Thou shall strengthen thy heart with a morsel of bread. And by this word
bread he understood all kind of meat. The old man would not so sone let the^
go, because he desired to have favor and love confirmed between them, to thend
they should not afterward be easly separated, the one from the other: This was
his purpose. Behold the day is weakened. He uses a Metaphore, and signifies
ye passage of the Sun to the west, and that there was a little of the day
remaining. So also men when they come to age, ar weakened in the body. The Leuit
would tarry no longer: which turned to his great hurt.

Let us by the way note in this place, that for him which shall make a journey it
is unprofitable to tarry long at banquetings. For commonly they are oppressed
with night, before they can come to their lodginges.

Now it seems that I should entreat of adulteries, whereby I might declare the
nature and greiuousnes of that sin, and setforth the punishments of that
crime, which are appointed both by the civil laws and by the ecclesiastical, but
these shall be spoken of when we are come unto the history of David, who
committed most filthy adultery with Bethsaba. Now I have determined to entreat
only of the reconsiliation of the husband and the wife, after the committing
of adultery, and I will touch the whole matter briefly.

Of the reconciliation of the husband and the wife after that adultery has been
committed.
THe civil laws are utterly against the reconciliation of the husband and the
wife, after the one has committed adultery. The civil laws abhor from
reconciliation after adultery.
For in the Code ad. l. Iuliam de adulteriis in the law Castitati nostrorum
temporum it is ordained, that if a man married again a wife condemned of
adultery, he incurreth the crime of being a bawd. And in the same title in the
law Crime^, it is had, that he which retains still in matrimonye a wife that
has played the adulteress, can not accuse her of adultry. Although afterward
by a new law it was otherwise provided for. Neither was it a light thing to be
condemned is a bawd: but it was even as greiuous as if a man had been condemned
of adultry. Yea and if a man retayn her that is condemned of adultry, he may
him self without an accuser be condemned of adultry. And if a man marie again
her whom yt he has once repudiated, he cannot accuse her of the adultry before
committed. But if she again commit adultry, he may. Because in marieng her
again he seems to have allowed her act. And if any woman be condemned of
adultry, no man can take her to wife. Wherefore ye civil laws do abhor from
reconciliacion after adultry, so that it be convict and condemned. For if it be
only his suspicion, it is lawful for the husband to retain and accuse her
whom he suspecteth: Who if he afterward see that he was led by a vain
supicion to accuse her, he may cease from that which he has begone, so that
he first obtain a release of the Judge.

Jerome upon the.19. chapter of Matthew may appear to agree with the civil
laws. For he writes: she which has divided one flesh into one or two, ought
not to be retained, least her husband be made subject unto the curse. For as
it is written in the.18. chapter of the Proverbs: He which retains an
adultresse, is ungodly and a fool. In deed so have the.70. interpreters turned
it, but the verity of the Hebrewe has it not. The same Jerome says: If there
happpen any sin, it breaks not matrimony. But if there happen adoultery, then
the wife is not lawful. And in the.32. question the first, ar rehearsed the
words of Chrysostom. If a man have to do with an adulterous wife, let him
do penance. And the same Chrysostom upon the.26. chap. of Matthew: Even as he
is unjust which accuses an innocent, so is he a fool which retayneth an
adulteress. The same thing is had in the decretals de Adult. in the chap. Si
vir sciens: And it was decreed at the counsel of Orleaunce. The husband which
retains an adulteress is partaker of the crime. And if a woman repudiated,
marye an other, her last husband being dead, she can not return unto the
first. For now she is unclean unto him, as it is written in the.24. of Deuteronomy.

But now omitting these things, let us see the reasons which serve for
reconciliation. God himself which is only good, would be the husband of the
church, and that not only in our time, but also in the times of the fathers.
But the church, especially the old church, oftentimes turned aside to idolatry,
and committed whoredom with the Gods of the Gentiles, as every where
appears in this book, and also in the history of the kings, and in the
prophets: Nevertheless yet Jeremy called it back again in the name of God to
return to her husband. Which self thing Hoseah the prophet also did, and that
with many words. And if god be ready to receive his wife being an adulteress,
man ought also to return into favor again with his wife, especially if she
repent, and begin a new life. For as many as are christian men, profess the
imitation of God. There is also an example of David, who took again his wife
Michol, although her father had placed her to an other man. Justinian
Justinian also in his Authentikes, when he commands that an adulteress
should be beaten and be shut up in a monastery, yet he gives liberty to the
husband to take her again, if he will, within the space of two years, and so
he most manifestly allows reconciliation.

Augustine
Augustine in his. 2 book to Pollencius is very much in this, yt they should be
reconciled. For many in his time would not receive their wives which had
committed adultery, as such, as which were now polluted and contaminated. Where
fore he wrote: do thou think her polluted, whom baptism and repentance
has purged? Whom God has cleansed? She ought not to seem to thee polluted. And
if she be now reconciled unto the kayes of the church, and admitted into ye
kingdom of heaven, by what right can thou put her from thee? These things
are had also in 32. question.1. If she have fallen, thou must know it came of
humayne nature, and mercy must be showed her, if she arise. For we would the
same to be done unto us. And extreme right, is extreme wrong. In the decretals
de adulteriis and stupris, in the chap. Si vir sciens, it is had out of the
counsel of Orleaunce. An adultresse if she repent, ought to be received. The
gloss in that place demau^deth, by what right or dewty she ought to be
received. It answers: Not by the law of necessitye, for if ye man will not,
he cannot be compelled to receive her, wherefore he ought by the law of honesty
to take her again. But I would demand whither it ought not also to be done
by ye dewty of piety and by the strength of the commandment of God, forasmuch
as Paul to the Philip. says, do these things, whatsoever ar honest and just?
Therefore it is also don by necessity of the commandment. But the gloser in
that place entreated of the outward judgment, wherein no man can be compelled
to receive an adulteress. But in the Cannon now cited it is added: Not very
often. For if she fall often into adultry, she ought not to be received. The
Gloss in the same place obiecteth unto it self christ, who when he was
demanded, how often we should forgive our brother when he offends against us,
answered not only seven times, but seventy seven times. To this he says, that
the words of the Cannon are to be understand, that when ye adulteress so
oftentimes falls, the church shall not entreat for her reconciliacion,
partelye because there should be opened a wyndowe to wyckednes, When the
church ought to entreat for those that fall.
and partly because she might think that penance is but feigned and
dessembled. There is also added an other answer, that that is spoken for a
terror, least men should more freely and carelessly commit sin. Hereby is
gathered that the church ought to entreat for the reconciliation of the
repentant, that they may be reconciled. Wherefore an adultresse, either shows
signs of repentance, or else shows not. If she show signs, the church
ought to entreat for her, that there may be a reconciliation made. But if she
show none, the church shall not entreat for her: otherwise it should seem to
maintain sins.

Now must we answer unto the arguments which seemed to be against
reconciliation. Aunsweres unto the reasons on the contrary part. The counsel
of Orleance. The cause why the law of Moses prohibited the return of a wife
repudiated unto her first husband.
As touching the civil laws they are to be corrected by the word of God.
Jerome and Chrysostom do speak of such an adultresse which repents not,
which self same thing is manifestly understand by the counsel of Orleance. For
that it is there had: He which retains an adultresse, is partaker of the
crime: but if she repent, let her be received. But why the law of Moses
suffered not, that a wife repudiated should not after the death of her latter
husband return unto her first, the cause may easily be assigned. For if he
had permitted yt, then diuorsements would easily have been had, in hope
sometimes to recover again their wife. God would that she that was repudiated,
should return no more, to the end that she should not easelye be
repudiated. There might also be conspiracies made against the latter
husband, whereby the wife might, when he were dyspatched away, return
again unto her first husband. Wherefore the law of God was most just,
which pertayned not unto adultrous women, which by the commandment of God
ought to be stoned. By these things now it is manifest that it is lawful for
the husband to return into favor with his wife being an adulteress, so that
she repent: who yet ought to accuse his wife of adultry, if it be a public
crime, or if she persevere in her wickedness, or else if she bring forth any
children by adultry, least the lawful heirs should be defrauded: for unless
she be accused, the husband cannot deprive the son borne in adultry, but that
he shall inherit. Farther, let the church entreat and work with him, that he
would receive again the woman being repenta^t. Wherefore our Leuite ought not
to be reproved, because he received again into favor his wife being an
adultresse, so that she repented her of her adultery. But now will I return to
the interpretation.

11 When they were nere to Iebus, the day was sore, spent and the servant said
unto his master: come, I pray thee, and let us turn into this city of the
Iebusites, and lodge al night there.

12 And his master answered him: we will not turn into the city of strangers
that are not of the children of Israel, but we will go forth to Gibaah.

13 And he said unto his servant: Come, and let us draw nere to one of these
places, that we may lodge in Gibaah or in Ramah.

14 So they went forward upon their way, and the sun went down upon them
nere to Gibaah, which is in Benjamin.

15 Then they turned thither to go in and lodge in Gibaah: and when he came,
he sat him down in a street of the city: for there was no man that took them
into his house to lodging.

16 And behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at even,
and the man was of mount Ephraim: but dwelte in Gibbaah, and the men of the
place were the children of Iemini.

17 And when he had lift up his eyes, he saw a wayfaringe man in the streets
of the city: then this old man said, whether go thou, and whence came thou?

18 And he answered him, we came from Beth-lehem Judah, unto the side of
mount Ephraim: from thence am I: and I went to Beth-lehem Judah, and go now
to the house of the Lord: and no man receaueth me into his house.

19 Although we have straw and prouender for our Asses, and also bread and
wine for me and thine handmayd, and for the boy that is with thy servant: we
lack nothing.

20 And the old man said: peace be with thee: al thy penury be upon me: only
abide not in the street al night.


Jerusalem was therefore called Iebus, because the Iebusites in the old time
inhabited it. The servant counseled his master to take iodgynge before the
Sun should set. But he would not. We will not turn in (says he) neither to
this city nor to that, neither to any other city of strangers which are
Gentiles. But it may seem merueilous how Jerusalem is called strange from the
Israelites, when as in the beginning of this book there is mention made yt the
Hebrews took it and named it Jerusalem. How it is said that Jerusalem was at
this time a city of strangers.
They which said that this history is to be referred unto the first times of
the Judges, namely that it was done before Othoniell began to judge, from the
death I say of Joshua, to the government of Othoniell, seem to be led by this
argument. In that space of time they say these things happened. These men's
conjecture has in deed some show of truth. But it is not very firm. For we
must know that the Jews often times behaved themselves ill in fallinge from
the worshippinge of the true God. Wherefore he left them destitute of his aid,
whereof they being beriued, they were again overcome of those, whom before they
had overcome, whereby it came to pass that the Iebusites recovered again
their city and dwelled in it. Wherefore those things which are written in the
beginning of this book, are not against those which are now declared. For
the Iebusites having recovered their city, inhabited it as they did before, and
it was called after the old name.

The wise counsel of the servant.
The servant did give his master wise counsel, if a man should look upon yt
the event. For it is dangerous to travail by night especially for a man that
is a stranger and unarmed, as this Leuite was, which had with him only his
wife and his servant. Neither is this any new or unaccustomed thing that
servants ar sometimes wiser the^ their masters, although it oftentimes
happens, that counsel has authority of the geuer: as we understand happened
here, where counsel although it were profitable, Aristotle.
is despised, peradventure because it came from a servant. Aristotle in his
Politikes says, they which excel in mind and counsel ought to bear rule and
they which are strong of body must obey. But that comes not always to pass:
yea rather it oftentimes happens that masters which are not of the wisest,
but yet strong in body, have servant far wiser then themselves, although they
be not very strong in body. Farther we must not deny, The gifts of God are not
bound unto the estates or conditions of men.
but ye prudence and counsels which are the gifts of God are not bound unto
the conditions or estates of Lordshyp and servitude, nor also to the
temperatures of bodies. God gives them, to them whom he thinks good, and
that most freely, somtymes to servants, and sometimes to Lords, sometimes to
poor men, and sometimes to rich men. GOD ministered unto a man being a
servant good counsel: which yet the Leuite would not fellow to his great
hurt. For if he had turned into the City of the Iebusites, peradventure he had
not fallen into that calamity which followed.

These things are spoken concerning the counsel of the servant if we
consider ye vtility thereof: but yet a thing is not to be judged by ye event.
The Leuite is excused.
Neither is the Leuite in this place rashely to be accused: because it seems
that he had a show of honesty and piety. For he thought, that if it were
possible, he should not go unto the ungodly and Idolatrers, such as were the
Iebusites, and he had a great deal better opinion of the Hebrews, then of
strangers. Yea and the servant, for yt he so earnestly desired to turn into
ye Iebusites, may be accused either of sluggishnes, for that he being weary of
the way, would take no pains to go any further: or else he may be accused of
unadvisedness, because he considered not with himself yt the Iebusites were
enemies unto ye Hebrews: or else of an ungodly mind, for that he little passed to
turn unto Idolatrers. Wherefore it seems that the Leuite did rightly and
wisely, if we look upon the ordinary way and law of piety, and not upon the
end. But all things happened contraryly. For in Gibaa (as we shall hear,) his
wife was by violence oppressed, and so died: and civil war stirred up,
wherein many thousands of men died. What we ought in counsel to count
doubtful, and what certain.
Wherefore we ought always to suspect our counsels as touching the end, but
yet not as touching justice, not that we should fear, least god should cast us
away, but least for our sins there might happen some miserable end. Wherefore
when we have determined to do any thing, we must with most fervent prayers pray
unto God to turn to good the counsel which we have taken, and to direct our
purpose. For unless he build the house, What is to be done after we have taken
counsel.
they labor in vain which build it. And except he prosper our enterprises,
all things are in vain taken in hand. And yet in the mean time we must use a
very great diligence. But now we read not yt the Leuite called upon God, when
as yet he was in some danger. Jacob when he should journey into Mesopotamia
called upon God with a great faith.

The counsel or purpose of the Leuite was to turn into Cities which the
Hebrews inhabited, especially either unto Gibaa or unto Rama. These Cities were
not far from Jerusalem. He entered into Gibaa, where no man bad him to his
house. That City longed to the tribe of Benjamin. It may seem that he would
rather have gone to Rama, but (as it is written) the sun went down upon him
nyghe unto Gibaa, wherefore he entered into a City of men discourteous. For when
the man being a stranger stood in the streets in the night time, no man
received him into his house. But where as barbarous inhospitality reigns,
there also are more grievous wicked vices wont not to be wantyng. Why no man
bad the Leuite to his house.
But why no man received him into his house, the cause was, for that in a great
number of evil Citezins, there were very few good men, and if there were any,
the same were afraid to receive him into their house, least for his sake some
evil should happen unto them. For they knew the wanto^nes and the filthy
lusts of those men. And so whilst the stranger was despised, the law of God
was in that City had in contempt. For it commanded, that gentleness should be
showed unto strangers, yea and God called himself the tutor and revenger of
strangers, neither could those Citezins seem any longer to be the people of
God, seeing they had cast away his law.

A praise of hospitality.
And even as to contemn strangers is a most grievous vice: so is Hospitality a
virtue most excellent. Wherefore in the Epistle to the Hebrews it is written:
Forget not liberality and Hospitality. Although (not to dissemble) in Greek it
be somewhat otherwise written (...). What is the general word of hospitality.
But (...) is the general word of Hospitality. Then it follows: For with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. Out of which place the Papists go about to
defend merits, as though he which shows himself liberal toward the
poor, shall deserve something at Gods hand. But in the Greek is read (...),
which signifies not, shall be won by deserte, but receaueth with a glad and
cheerful mind: which is to be referred unto God, and not to those which
show liberality unto the poor. The sense therefore is this, that god does
rejoice in such sacrifices, and does accept them with a glad mind, yea and
Christ himself also shall say in the last judgment: I was a stranger and ye
lodged me, for he that receaueth a stranger, receaueth Christ in him. So
Abraham and Lot when they thought that they had had strangers in their house,
received the son of God and angels. The Gabaonites being void of this
virtue, contemned the Leuite being a stranger walkyng in the street. But
there was in that City a certain other stranger, which was borne in mount
Ephraim, who being moved with mercy, received the Leuite into his house. And so
in Gabaa a stranger was better then the Citezins. This man peradventure was a
husband man, and in the euenyng returned out of the field from his rusticall
work. The Leuite tells him that he has prouendre for his Asses, and also
that he wanted not bread and wine, that he might the easelier and willinglier
be received. As though he should have said, we shall not be burdenous unto any
man, for we have all things that are necessary for our living.

Peace be with thee: Thy poverty be upon me. Care not (says he) I will furnishe
that which wants. I nothing pass what thou have with thee, or what thou
have not. The humanity of this man was great, which appears so much the
more excellent, because he dwelled among the inhumane and cruel Gabaonites. He
was borne and brought up in an other place, where the fear of God was more
regarded, then among the Gabaonites. Yet he seems not herein to be praised,
for that he dwelt so long among ungodly and wicked men. We must fly the
fellowshyp of wicked men.
For we ought not to esteem any thing so much, that for the cause thereof we
should have a will to dwell among idolatrous and wicked men. Wherefore if any
grievous chance happen in that society unto men which are otherwise good, they
can not complain that the same happens unto them undeserved. Lot sped ill
because he dwelt among the Sodomites. He saw the country fertyll and
plentiful, and having great plenty of heardes and flocks, he would abide
there. But with that he escaped not unpunished. For once he was led away
prisoner, and except Abraham had delivered him with an army which he had
assembled, he should al his life time have served in most hard bondage.
Afterward when these Cities were burnt, he scarsely escaped from burning.
Which benefit he may ascribe rather unto Abraham, then unto himself: How
unprofitable evil fellowship is.
for if he had perished together with them, he should have had no cause to have
complained of God. Evil fellowship always for the most part, either hurts
or eis engenders danger.

The Gabaonites being of the tribe of Benjamin, are called also the children of
Iemini, because that famely was noble in the tribe. Wherefore this famely
possessed ye City, D. Kimhi.
although David Kimhi expounds the sons of Iemini, for strong and migthy
men, for Iemini in Hebrew signifies the right hand. Wherefore the children of
Iemini (as he thinks) are they, which have law and right in the right hand,
and therefore do not what is lawful, but what they can. I do not deny but that
the Gabaonites were such, but I rather allow the first exposition as the truer
and more simple. For it is manifest that it was a famely in Benjamin, of which
came Saul also.

Mesapua signifies in Hebrew whatsoever meat is given unto cattle, besides
straw and chafe, that is Tares, Otes, and Barley. The old man had compassion
of the stranger, either peradventure because he was his contreyman, or else at
the least for that he himself also dwelt there as a stranger. For common
miseryes do oftentimes join men together. Wherefore in Virgil Dido says:
Virgil.
I not being ignorant of evil, do learn to succor the miserable. After the
same manner the Lord says in ye law: afflict not strangers, because ye were
sometimes strangers your selves in Egypt. But the Gabaonites had utterly
forgotten their old estate. But ye old man, because in time past he had been a
stranger, or rather because he was even then also a stranger, was moved with
mercy. Yea and God does somtymes somewhat afflict those that are his, that they
should learn to have compassion over other. For they which always florishe
in wealth and riches, are not greatly moved with the miseryes of other men. And
Paul to the Hebrews says, that Christ was made like unto his brethren in all
things, that he might have compassion of other.

The Leuite makes mention that he would go unto the house of God, that is in
Siloh where the ark of the Lord was. And Siloh was in mount Ephraim. He would
therefore go thither, peradventure to give thanks unto god, because bringing
home his wife again he had luckly finished his business. Other think that the
young man added these things of the arc and house of God, to the end the old
man should be the more gentle unto him, when he should understand that he was
no common man, but a Leuite, which would go unto the holy tabernacle of God.

21 So he brought him into his house, and gave foddre unto ye Asses: Afterward
they washed their feet, and did eat and drink.

22 And as they were making their hearts merye: Behold, the men of the City,
wicked men, be set the house round about, and smote at the door, and spoke to
this old man the master of the house, saying: Bring forth the manne that came
into thine house, that we may know him.

23 And this man the master of the house went out, and said unto them: Nay my
brethren do not so wickedly, I pray you: seeing that this man is come into mine
house, do not this vilannie.

24 Behold, here is my daughter, a virgin, and his concubine: the^ will I
bring out now, and humble them, and do with them what seems you good: but to
this man do not this detestable act.

25 But the men would not harken to him: therefore the man took his concubine
and brought her out unto them: and they knew her, and abused her all the night
until the morning: and when the day began to spryng, they let her go.

26 So the woman came in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of
the ma^s house, where her Lord was, till the light day.

27 And her Lord arose in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and
went out to go his way, and behold, the woman his concubine was dead at the
door of the house, and her hands lay upon the threshold.

28 And he said unto her, up and let us go: but she answered not. Then he
took her up upon the Ass, and the man rose up, and went unto his place.

29 And when he was come to his house, he took a knife, and laid hand on his
concubine, and divided her in pieces with her bones into twelve parts, and sent
her throughout all the quarters of Israel.

30 And all that saw it (said:) There was no such thing done or seen since
the time that the children of Israel came up from the land of Egypt unto
this day: consider the matter, consulte, and give sentence.


Where as it is said, And he gave his Asses foder. In Hebrew it is written
Vaiabol which signifies, he mingled, for this verb Balal signifies to
myngle. For in those regions they use to mingle chopped straw with barley, and
so to give them unto their cattle. The manner of washing of fete very much
used in Syria.
And washed their fete. In those places yt are extreme hot, when men have done
their journey, they use to wash their feet, and to wipe away the dust, which
office was sometimes showed unto Christ our savior, and he again executed the
same unto his Apostles. Paul also required this of good widows, namely to
wash the feet of the Saints.

Bring out the man that we may know him. By these words is described a thing
most filthy and an horrible act. There was never heard of the like boldness and
filthy lust as was this of the Gabaonites: therefore they are called the
children of Belial, that is, without an yoke, because they had shaken of good
manners, the law of God and of nature, neither would they abide to bear any
yoke. Hereby also appears their exceeding cruelty, for they did not only
despise a stranger, but also would reprochefully have done him great injury.

But ye good old man the host of ye Leuite, had not only received him into his
house, but also afterward defended him with ye danger and injury of his house.
He goes forth unto the^, exhorts the^ not to commit any such thing. First
because the thing was filthy and horrible: farther, because ye man had entered
into his house, and he counted it his part, by right of hospitality to defend
him from al injury. Lastli, when he perceived yt their lust was importunate and
unbridled, he offered unto the^ his own daughter and the wife of ye Leuite,
rather the^ they should do him so great a reproach. Howbeit they as conte^ners
both of god and me^ nothing care for these things. Of the faith of Hospitality.
The right of hospitality was of no force with the^, which the old man objected
unto the^. Undoubtedly faith is to be kept with an enemy, and much more with a
guest or stranger. Wherefore in the digestes de nautis and cauponis in ye law.1.
there is a double actio^ allowed against the host, if any thing be taken away
out of ye lodging from the guest, how much more if there be violence done
against his body? Among the elders ye religion of strangers was great, because
it seemed a thing acceptable unto god to defend and save harmeles ye stranger.
Jupiter Hospitalis.
Wherefore Jupiter, as he was called Stator and Pheretrius, so also was he named
Hospitalis, as it were a keeper and defe^der of strangers. Busyris a cruel
host.
But Busiris like a cruel and bloody Tyrant slew his guestes. But his cruelty
escaped not unpunished, for Hercules slew him with his club.

Every manne ought to be sale in his own house.
The Gabaonites without al yoke ra^ged abroad in the night time, beset the house,
threaten to break it open, and to stay them yt are in it, when as otherwise
every man ought to be safe in his own house. Which thing was also decreed
afterward by the Roman laws, as it is had in the title de in ius vocando, in
the digestes in the law plerique: No man ought to have his house invaded. For
the private house of every man seems to be a certain holy sanctuary to his
possessor. But with the Gabaonites there was nothing safe or holy: so much had
lack of a governor brought to pass.

The ungodly are sometimes called brethren.
The old man when he dissuaded them from their wicked crime, called them
brethren, to see if by pleasant and gentle speech he could have assuaged the^.
For if he should have dealt more sharply, he should more vehemently have
kyndled them. And yet in calling them brethren he lied not, for as they came of
the tribe of Benjamin, and he descended of Ephraim, they were begotten all of
one father, namely of Jacob. Lot also in the like cause called the Sodomites
brethren. It was undoubtedly wisdom in most dangerous corrections, to use
most gentle words. Yea and Augustine when he wrote to the Madaurenses,
Augustine.
which otherwise were Idolatrers, called them brethren. Wherefore it is to be
lamented and meruayled at, that the Ministers of the Churches of the Lutherians
do so abhor from our men, that they will not in any case call them brethren,
as though they denied the son of GOD, and preached not his Gospel. But our
Churches nothing regard their importunity, but of Christian charity count
them for brethren, whether they will or no: and although they differ from them
in the matter of the Sacrament, yet have they not broken the band of brotherly
charity toward them. But whether of us do behave our selves more sincerely
and faithfully in the field of the Lord: Christ in the last day, and also in
time hereafter shall declare.

But here comes a question whether this old man did well, in offryng his
daughter and the wife of the Leuite unto the Gabaonites, to the end they
should not violate his guest. To this all men answer not after one manner.
Some say that he considered the greatenes and horriblenes of the wicked crime,
and preferred the lesser evil before the greater, and would not break his
faith given unto his guest. And by these reasons they think to excuse him. And
after the same manner they judge of Lot. Chrysostom.
And among other Chrysostom excedyngly prayseth Lot in that thing: Ambrose.
which self thing does Ambrose also in his book of Abraham the Patriarche,
because he less esteemed the contumely of his house, then so great a wicked
act. But Augustine in his questions upon Genesis, Augustine.
considers these things, both more diligently and also more depely, and
denies that to recompe^se one fault by an other, is not in any case to be
suffered. Compensation of sins is not to be admitted.
By his sentence it was not lawful for him to permit his daughter to the
lust of the Sodomites, to the end they should not sin more grievously.
Neither is it lawful for us to commit the lyghter crime, to avoid a more
grievous. For the Apostle has apertly taught: That evil things are not to be
done, that good should ensue. Wherefore when the matter comes to sin,
although it seem light, yet we must utterly abstain from it. And if it
should seem that some greuouser sin would follow, if we should refuse to
sin, that care is to be committed unto GOD, but we under that pretense ought
not to commit any sin. This was Augustines opinion, which I excedingly
well allow. And not to goo from our Hystory which we have in hand, although
this old man ought faith unto his guest, yet ought he faith and defense also
unto his daughter, and unto the wife of the Leuite. Neither was it lawful for
him to perform more faith unto his guest, then the word of GOD would suffer.
Wherefore he could not justly humble unto them his daughter, or the wife of his
guest. For the father has not the daughter so in his power, that he may put
her forth to other men to be abused. Neither ought the daughter to obey in any
thing that is sin, though the father will and command her.

But they say: The lesser evil is to be preferred before the greater. How the
lesser evil is to be preferred before the greater.
I know that men are wont so to say. But it must ryghtly be understand, namely
that it takes place in outward afflictions and griefs of the body, and of
the life. Because in such discommodityes, as often as we must take deliberation
what we ought to prefer, the lesser hurt is to be preferred before the
greater: because it has the nature and reason of goodness. But in sin there
is no consideration of goodness. And undoubtedly what soever is sin, the same
must strayghtwaye be rejected, let follow what will. But Augustine, excuses
after a sort Lot and this old manne, because they fell with a heavy and
troubled mind. It oftentimes happens unto wise men, with a troubled mind to
do those things, which afterward when they come to themselves, they allow
not. But this excuse does not utterly absolve these men from sin, although
it somewhat release them. But if a man will say, Paul preferred the lesser
sin before the greater, when he said, he would be accursed of Christ for
his brethren, rather then they should persiste in that blyndnes and
stubbernnes, wherein they were holden. He which obiecteth this unto us, must
know that he does not rightly understand that place of Paul. For the Apostle
desired to redeem the salvation of the Jews with his danger, not undoubtedly
with sin, but with his loss or hurt, namely to be accursed of Christ, not
certaynely to be made an Apostata, or to cease to believe in Christ, but only
not to have the fruition of the eternal and blessed life. Augustine.
Augustine also has many things against this compensation of sins. And
among other things: What (says he) if a man require, either of a maiden
fornication, or of a married woman adultery, and threateneth to kill himself,
unless he obtain his request, ought the pure and chaste women to fulfill his
desire? No undoubtedly. Neither though he afterward slay himself, shall the
chaste women be counted guilty of his death. They ought in deed to be sorry for
him, to deplore his act, but not to think they have done evil, because they
granted him not unlawful things. The same Augustine upon the.146. Augustine.
Psalm writes: If a man deny dew benevolence unto his wife because he would
live chastely, and the wife in the mean time fall into adultery, he sins,
neither can his intent be allowed. For sin is not to be admitted in the wife,
for the exercising of continency. God (says he) does not recompense such a
hurt with such a gain. Wherefore the sentence of Leo the first, Leo
in the did.46. chapter. Non suo) is to be allowed, wherein he says, that it
is uncomely that any should bestow their faults upon other men's commodities.
Augustine in his book De mendacio to Consentius says: For the health of our
neighbors, Augustine.
we must do whatsoever may be done. And if it come to that point, that we can
not help them without sin, there remains nothing else for us to do. And he
adds that no man must be brought into heaven by a lie. The same Augustine
in an other place says: If poor men see a cruel and bitter rich manne,
and would steal any thing from him, either to help themselves, or other
poor men, they do not diminishe sin, but increase it. Gregory
And Gregory Bishop of Rome in his Epistle to Siagrius: To commit the less
sin, to the end to avoid the greater, is to offer Sacrifices unto GOD of a
wicked act, To Chrysostom and Ambrose.
as it is written in the.21. of the Proverbs. But in that Chrysostom and
Ambrose do for this cause praise Lot, they are thus to be understand, namely
that they allowed his charity and faith toward strangers, and had a respect
unto the horriblenes of the sin which the Citezins were ready to commit,
not that they allowed their abandonyng of their women. And thus much as
touching this matter.

How much the horrible sin of the Sodomites is to be detested. Augustine.
But in that the old manne calls it a villainy and a detestable thing, which
they went about to commit, he says most truly. For seed was given unto
manne for procreations sake. But these pestiferous men abuse the gift given
them of GOD, they resist his law, and against nature change men, in that
after a sort they turn the male into the female. Augustine to Pollentius:
Adultery (says he) is more grievous then whooredome, and incest more heinous
then adultery, but that which is done against nature, is of all most wicked
and detestable. And he adds: In things which GOD has granted, it is more
tolerable immoderatly to transgress, then lightly to sin in those things
which by no means are granted. And in his.3. book of Confessions he says,
that the fellowship of humane kind is violated with GOD, because nature which
we have of GOD, is polluted. This was the cry of the Sodomites and the
Gomorhites which ascended into heaven, and the grieuousnes of their wickedness
is most manifest by their destruction. For they were distroyed with fire and
brimestone from heaven, punishementes undoubtedly agreeable unto so great a
heinous crime: by the fire was noted their burning filthy lust, and by
brymestone their stynkyng and vnpure wicked crime. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom writes: Because they followed not fertility, but barennes,
therefore God made that so ill, baren, and infertyle which before was most
fertile. But he demands: Why god does in the^e da^es defer the punishment
of Sodomites.
Why are not they which are in the same fault in these days punished also
after the same manner? He answers, whom that punishment moves not, for
them abides the unquenchable fire. And they are not so punished in this life,
because such men for the most part are conuersaunt among good men: and
GOD promised Abraham, that he was ready to forgive Sodom, if there might have
been found there but only ten good men. Wherefore for as much as Cities
at this day are not altogether so corrupt, as Sodom was then, therefore GOD
deals more remissedly with them. It also oftentimes happens, that although
these men are most wicked, yet they had good predecessors. And GOD (as he has
testified) tarieth, and differreth the punishment unto the third and fourth
generation. Farther, we must mark that this vice wheresoever it rangeth, it
is not alone. With it are joined cruelty, inhumanity, pride, robbery, and
oppressing of the poor. And when it shall come to this point, that men
cruelly withdraw their dewtyes from their neighbors, GOD does then on the
other side withdraw his help and grace. Wherefore they being left unto
themselves, that is, unto their own corrupt and viciate strengthes, do
degenerate into beasts. The Sodomitical sin is to be punished with death.
The law of GOD in Exodus and Deuteronomy made this sin death. And Paul to
the Romans shows that this is the punishment of Idolatrers. And in an other
place he numbreth abusers of nature with them, whom he excludes from the
kingdom of GOD. Among the old Grecians this wicked crime was punished with
death, and that by the law of Laius, Bessarion. Tertulian.
whereof Bessarion makes mention against Trapezuntius. Tertullian de
Monogamia writes that among the Romans there was a law called Lex Scantinia,
Lex Sca^tinia.
which was of the same shapenes. For he would signify that the Bishop of
Vthinensis was contaminated with this kind of wickedness: He feared not (says
he) the law called Lex Scantinia. In the Code ad l. Iuliam de Adulteriis and
stupris in the law Cum vir nubit. Constantius Augustus, commands the laws
to arise, and the laws to be armed with the auengyng sword, that such as are
infamed by this crime, should be subject to most cruel punishementes.
Justinian also in his Authentikes in the title vt no Luxurientur contra
naturam, makes this crime death, and adds that for such a detestable crime,
Cities are overthrown, and plagued with pestile^ces, hunger, and earthquakes.
He might also have added civil wars, which (as this Hystory testifyeth)
do fellow, and those most cruel. Extra de excessibus prelatorum in the
chapter Clerici, it is ordained, that they which are taken in this crime,
should be put out of their place and dignity. And the lay men also should be
excommunicated.

But it is to be known that even GOD bends himself to vengeance,
and sends fury and madness upon such persons, where the Magistrate
neglects his dewty, and suffers wicked men to go unpunished. Therefore in
Genesis it is written that the aungelles smote the Sodomites with blyndnes, so
that they could not find the house.

We must also note that the Gabaonites came in a manner all of them upon a
heap unto the door, that it might appear that they all conspired into this
so detestable a crime.

But there arises a doubt, whether sin may by any means be excused for this
cause, Sin is not excused therefore because it is public.
because it was common, and almost all men were infected with it? No
undoubtedly, yea rather it was so much the more wicked and heinous, as it was
committed of many, and that without punishment. For they did not only
conceive and commit wickedness, but also publishe and set it forth openly, and
without shame ran together to accomplish it. Wherefore it is rightly
written, that the sins of the Sodomites cried and ascended up into heaven.
Esaias also writes: They have published abroad their sin like Sodoma. And
where we see that done, we must think that it is a certain token, that that
public wealth shall in short time perish. For men when they are touched
with some shamefastnes, although they sin, yet remains there some hope of
amendment and repentance. But when in a manner they openly profess wicked
acts, and write books of them, and will have their wicked crimes to be
public, there is nothing else to be looked for, but the vengeance of God.
With this wicked vice the Prelates and Papisticall Sacrificers in these days
are chiefly infected, and also the Antechristes of Rome, unto whom matrimony
is very odious.

Let us also consider the goodness of God, which stirs up this old man, to
admonish, and reprove them, and to bring them again into the right way. They
were men polluted and contaminated and utterly unworthy of so great a
benefit. But there are never men so evil, but that GOD does by some means
admonish them of their sins. The old man did his dewty: but they contemn
and deride him.

He brought forth his concubine. Who? Not the old manne, but the Leuite, who
delivered his wife, for fear least he should himself have fallen into their
power. But why did not the old manne deliver his daughter also? Paraduenture,
because those Citezins cared not for her beawty, who yet counted the wife of
the Leuite to be very fair and beautiful. They so afflicted her all the
night, that in the morning she dyed. Their wicked crime turned at the length
into murder. In this place the hand and vengeance of GOD shows forth it
self. This woman having before committed adultery, and not for it justly
punished, The adulteress as she sinned so is she punished.
at the length dies even in adultery, and suffers the law of the like. But
whether she repented at last or no, there is nothing written of that matter. We
only see the outward things, it is GOD which searches the hearts. But if
she did repent, and that with faith, then escaped she eternal punishementes.
Yet GOD will have discipline established in public wealths, and the
malefactors punished, who if they repent, then are they fatherly chastisynges,
and not punishementes. Neither is it lawful for the Magistrate to neglecte his
office, although they repent: for if they do cease to punish, God (as it is
before said) will by himself revenge. Wherefore that which is written to the
Hebrews: Whoremongers and adulterers GOD will judge, may be understand two
manner of ways, because God sometimes punishes by himself, and sometimes by
the Magistrate.

The Leuite laid his concubine being dead upon the Ass, went home and divided
her body into twelve parts, whereof he sent into every tribe a part. But it
may be demanded, How the Leuite distributed the pieces.
how he sent twelve parts into every tribe, when as they were 13. number. Some
think it was, because he sent nothing unto the tribe of Leui, for that ye
Levites dwelled dispersedly among ye other tribes. Other suppose that he would
send nothing unto the tribe of Benjamin, because he thought that they would be
no equal reuengers, for as much as the Gabaonites pertayned unto them. But
this sentence seems not probable, because it was the sin only of one City,
and therefore it pertayned not unto the whole tribe: unless peradventure we will
say, that he supposed that the Beniamites were of such minds, that they would
not know and take vengeance of the offenses of their own brethren. Neither
was he deceived in his opinion. For so happened it in very deed. Other say that
he sent two parts to the tribe of Manasses, because the Manassites dwelled
part beyond Iordane, and part on this side: therefore they say that in this his
distribution were omitted two tribes, Benjamin and Leui, for the causes before
alleged. The intent of the Leuite was, What was the intent of the Leuite.
that no tribe should excuse themselves by ignorance.

He was compelled so to do, because there was then no Magistrate in Israel,
neither any certain place of judgment where he might plead his cause. Wherefore
he stirs up al ye people to take away evil among the^. And it seems that he
more profited by this means, then he should have done if he had used letters
or spech. For those things do very much move, which are set forth before ye
eyes. And yet in so doing he sought not reuengeme^t, either by a wicked or by
an unlawful means, forasmuch as he did not tumultuously call soldiers
together, neither raised up sedicions, or invaded the city, which did him the
iniurye. He brought the cause before them, to whom it pertained to know it:
He complained not to Ammorhites or Iebusites, but to his own people. Wherefore
he ordreth his accusation well and lawfully: neither by accusing does he
violate the law, By accusinge the law is not violated, but helped.
yea rather he is an help unto it, as on the contrary side, they which hold
their peace and utter not wicked acts, ar against the laws. For eue^ as of our
selves we ought not to wish any man's death, so must we not suffer the laws to
be openly and vilanously violated with out punishment. This civil war is not to
be imputed unto the Leuite.
Wherefore let the bishops in the old time look how godly they did, when they
made intercession unto magistrates for wicked men, and for such as were
appointed to die. If thou will say there straight way followed most civil war,
which thing seems may be imputed unto the Leuite. But it is not so, it ought
rather to be ascribed unto the Beniamits, which would not punyshe so great a
wicked crime.

In this history Josephus somewhat varieth from the holy scriptures. Josephus.
First he denies that this woman was an adultresse, and that she therefore
departed from her husband. She was (says he) very beawtifull, and when her
husband loved her excedingly, and complained that she loved not him again, she
as one not able to abide his brawlinges, fled unto her parents. But the holy
scriptures do manifestly teach, yt she had played the harlot. In which
sentence all the interpreters agree together. Farther he denies that the
Gabaonites thought this, namely to abuse the Leuit, he says that they being
allured by the beawty of the wife, desired only to have to do with her. But yt
also is plainly against the holy scriptures, wherein it is by express words
written: Bring forth the man, that we may know him. Farther he denies that the
Leuit delivered his wife unto them, but the Gabaonites (says he) took her by
violence. At the last also he adds this (which I think also is very likely)
that the Leuite when he sent the pieces of the body, did send messengers also
to declare what was done: otherwise he should not much have profited, if he
had sent but the pieces only.

These evils did therefore happen, because there was no magistrate or prince to
judge the Israelites. In the papistical church there is no magistrate
The same thing also happens when there is a magistrate or prince, which does
not his office. And because the ecclesiastical men have at this day shaken of
the yoke of the political Magistrate, there is therefore no magistrate among
them. Whereby the Christian public wealth suffers great discommodities.

Of a Magistrate.
THis place admonishes me to entreat of a magistrate, whom I judge may thus
be described, namely to be a person elected by the institution of God, to keep
the laws as touching outward discipline, in punishing tra^sgressors with
punishment of the body, and to noorish and defend the good. There are
undoubtedly many persons elected by the institution of God which are not
Magistrates as the ministers of churches, which yet are keepers of the word
of God, and of his law, but not as touching outward discipline only. Because
it is the office of ministers, by the word of God to pearce eue^ to the inward
mocio^s of minds: for the holyghost adioyneth his power both to the right
preachinges of his word and also to the sacraments which are distributed in the
church. But the magistrate only exercises outward discipline and punishment
upon transgressors. The minister binds the guilty and unpenitent in the name
of god, and in his name excludes them from the kingdom of heaven, as long as
they so remain. The magistrate punishes withoutward punishments, and when
need requires uses the sword. Either of them nourishes the godly, but after a
diverse manner: the magistrate increases them with riches, honors and
dignities: the minister comfort them with the promises of god, and with the
Sacraments. Wherefore the magistrate is instituted, The end of a magistrate.
to the end that the laws should be most diligently kept, the guilty punished
and the good helped and noorished. And undoubtedly the law is a dumme
magistrate, and again the magistrate is a living and speaking law, and so also
is the minister of god (as Paul says) to their praise which do well: and
contrarily he bears the sword against the wicked, as gods revenger and judge,
neither tend these things to any other end, then to the health of men.

But the form of magistrates is not one only but many, as Monarchia,
Aristocratia, Many forms of magistrates.
and Policia: or Tirannis, Oligarchia, and Democratia. The discriptio^s and
natures of which forms Plato, Aristotle, and other Philosophers have elegantly
taught. Of all those forms the best is to be desired, and all men to whom it
pertayneth ought to provide, that a good or tolerable estate degenerate not
into an evil one. But if it happen that Tirans or wicked princes obtain the
government of things, An example of the Jews.
that is to be suffered as much as is by the word of god lawful. The Jews were
by violence oppressed of the Babilonians, whom yet god admonished that they
should obey, and to pray for the king, although he were a tiran, and possessed
the kingdom of the Hebrews most wrongfully. Caesar also held Iewry by tyranny,
and yet Christ said: Give that which is Cesars unto Cesars, and the things yt
are of god unto god. The Apostles also have taught that we must obey princes
and pray for the^. Nero was a most vnpure beast, who^ yet the Apostle in his
Epistle to ye Romans declared yt he ought to be obeyed, not only for fear,
but also for conscience sake. Phocas possessed ye empire of Rome by evil arts,
most cruelly slew Mauricius his prince, and also his children, whom yet ye
Romans acknowledged as their Emperor, and Gregory the.i. red unto ye people
his commandments and writings. If you wilt demand, what form of a public
wealth yt Jews had, it may easly be known by those things which we have in an
other place spoken. They had at ye beginning this form Aristocratia: for god
allowed ye counsel of Iethro, which was yt there should be chose^ out wise me^
and strong and such as fered god, which should govern the public wealth, as it
is written in Exodus and Deuteronomy. Yea and god himself did so with his sprite inspire
these.70. men, who^ he had commanded to be chose^ as helpers of Moses, yt they
also prophesied. So were the Israelite governed, although afterward they were
governed by ye power of a king.

Princes ar called Pasto^^.
But this is not to be omitted, ye princes in ye holy scriptures are not only
called Deaco^s or ministers of god, but also pastors, of who^ Ezechiel
co^plaineth for many causes for yt they cruellye and peruerslye fed the people
of God. Homere also calls Agamemnon the feder of ye people. For they ought
not to bear rule as thieues or hired me^, to flese and to oppress, but to
keep, norishe and feed like pastors. They are also called fathers, Magistrates
are called fathers.
wherefore the Senators among ye Romans were called Patres conscripti, yt is
appointed fathers, nether was there a greter or more ancient honor in ye
public wealth the^ to be called pater patrie, yt is the father of ye country.
Yea also a magistrate is contained in ye law of God under this commandment:
Honor thy father and thy mother. Wherefore princes owe unto their subjects a
fatherly love. And they ought always to remember, that they are not rulers
over beasts but over men, and that themselves also are men, who yet ought to
be far better and more excellent the^ those whom they govern, otherwise they are
not apt to govern the^. For we make not a sheep a head over sheep, but the
chief wether and then the shepeheard, And eue^ as a shepeheard excels ye
sheep, so ought they to whom the office of a magistrate is committed, to
excel the people. But now must we consider by whom Magistrates are ordained.
That sometimes is done by the consent of ye Senate, sometimes by ye voices of ye
people, By whom magistrates are ordained. God is first ordeiner of magistrates.
or by ye will of the soldiers, or else by succession of inheritance. But these
ar but instruments. But ye proper cause of Magistrates is god him self: which
may be by many reasons proved. First there is by god a certain light kindled in
ye hearts of me^, whereby they understand yt they can not live together without
a guide, and there hence spronge ye office of a magistrate. The law of god also
commands to obey Magistrates. And before the law given by Moses (as it is
written in Gen.) god ordained yt he which shedeth man's blood his blood, also
should be shed, not undoubtedly rashly and by every man (for that were very
absurd) wherefore we may gather by those words, that a magistrate was not
obscurely instituted by god, which should punish manquellers. Paul also
writes, that all powers whatsoever they be ar ordained of god. And Christ
answered unto Pilate: Thou should have no power against me, except it had
been given thee from above. By these testimonies and reasons it follows that
god is the true and proper cause of Magistrates.

But here some cauell, and say that if all magistrates are of God, then must
all things be rightly governed: but in governing public welthes many things as
we se, are done viciously and peruersly. Undoubtedly under Nero, Domician,
Commodus, Caracalla, and Heliogabalus good laws were conte^ned, good men
killed, and discipline of ye city was utterly corrupted. But if Magistrates
were of god, such things could never have happened. This reason neither can
nor ought any thing to move us: because the office is to be separated from the
person: The office is to be separated from the person.
and undoubtedly it is possible, that he which has the office may be a wicked
and noghty man, when as yet nevertheless the power is good and very
profitable. For there is nothing so good, but that men by their malice may use
it ill. Therefore it is no marvel if there have been kings and Emperors, which
sometimes have abused yt power given the^, which yet they were not so able to
corrupt, but that me^ received by it many good things and co^odities, as I have
before showed. By the testimony of Daniell it is most manifest that Magistrates
ar of God. For he (says he) gives and transferreth kingdo^s as it pleases
him. Farther we se that ye Monarche has sometimes been in ye East, sometimes in
ye South, afterward in the Weast, and sometimes in ye North: and also that
there has sometimes been good princes, and sometimes evil: sometimes have
reigned noble men, and sometimes obscure men. And we understand that it
oftentimes happens that riches or power profit not to get or keep a
kingdom: and to think that these things are done by chance without the
providence of God, it is most absurd.

Some Astronomer will peradventure say that these chaunges or mutacio^s are
imported by ye stars: but Daniell the minister of ye truth, says that it is
God which chau^geth times. For eue^ as he has in ye year appointed courses of
times, The chaunges of the wicked are not to be ascribed unto the stars.
so has he as it pleases him sometimes ordained and sometimes taken away
princes. He did cast down Saul, and he also promoted David. And he foretold
that he would so do: least it should seem to have happened rashely or by
chaunse. Yea and kingdoms and public wealths may be called certain work
houses or shops of the will of god. For that is done in them, which god himself
has decreed to be done, although princes oftentimes understand it not. God
called ye Medes and ye Assiria^s to afflict ye Israelits, and them (when it
seemed good unto him) he repulsed and took a way. He raised up the Persians
against the Chaldeans, and the Grecians against the Persians, and lastly the
Romans against all other nations. Who divided the kingdom of the Hebrews
into Judah and Israel? Undoubtedly God. Ahias the Silonite did foretell that it
should so come to pass, and said that the word was come forth from the
Lord, that it should so be. Who overthrew Achab? Who caused Iehu to be
anointed, but only God? But there are certain Tirannes which destroy public
welthes. What draws Tirannes to Pub. welthes.
I grant that. But our wicked acts deserve it. For there are oftentimes so
greiuous wicked acts and so many, that they cannot be corrected by the
ordinary magistrate, and by a gentle and quiet governance of things, and
therefore god does then provide tirannes to afflict the people, and yet for the
most part he tempreth and lenyfieth his punishment in raysinge up good and
godly princes. God sends good Princes after tirannes.
After the fall of Nero he set up Vespacian: after Domician, he sent Neruan and
Trojan: after Commodus, Pertinax and Seuerus: after Heliogabalus, Alexander.
But they which say: The wicked acts of Tirannes are not of God, yet do they
range and spread abroad in kingdoms and Empires, therefore Empires and
kingdoms are not of god: they (I say) make a false Silogismus a secundum quid
ad simpliciter that is, from that which appears to that which is indede,
neither does this rightly follow: Certain things in a magistrate are not of
God: therefore the magistrate is not of God. Or tather they reason (...) from
accidences for vices and wicked acts chance to public powers, but are not knit
unto them (per se) that is of themselves, or by their nature.

The godly may use Ethnike magistrates.
But some man will doubt: If the Magistrate be an Ethnike and also a tiran,
whither it be lawful for a godly man to use his help and aid? What else? Paul
appealeth unto Caesar a most wicked tiran. But it may seem that he did against
his own precepts. For in his first Epistle to the Corrin. he reprehended
those Christians which pleaded causes at the judgment places of the
Ethnikes. He iustlye reproved the Corinthians, because there were Christians
among them, which might in the church have decided their causes. Neither was
it convenient that Christians should contend with christians at the judgment
places of the ungodly. But Paul when he appealed unto Caesar, had not to do with
christians, but with ye Jews, and president of Rome. Wherefore forasmuch as he
had not a faithful magistrate, neither could it otherwise be done, and his
life also was sought, he did not il in imploringe the faith and aid of the
common magistrate, although he were an Ethnike. For eue^ as we use the Sun and
Moan, so also is it lawful to use the public and ordinary magistrate, what
manner of man so ever he be.

The church used an Ethnike Magistrate.
The Christian church did the same thing, when there were yet no Christian
Emperors. For Paulus Samosatenus was condemned as an heretic, and being a
bishop he was displaced. But because he would not render up the house which
longed to ye bishop, there was request made unto Aurelianus ye Emperor, and aid
obtained at his hands to co^pel him to deliver his house unto ye new bishop.
Who can say yt the church herein sinned, because it used ye public magistrate,
though he were an infidel? But let us return thither from whence we digressed,
and constantly believe that the magistrate is of god, although oftentimes (our
sins deserving the same) many things under him ar done wickedly and unjustly.
Howbeit Hoseah the Prophet seems yet to be against us when he says: they have
reigned, but not by me. How it is said that tirannes reign not by god.
But we must know that Hoseah entreated of tirans, which nether regarded laws,
neither norished ye good, nor took away ye evil from among ye people, and
therefore they reigned not by god, but by their own lust: they regarded their
own affections and not the law of god. Farther they invaded kingdoms, being
stirred up by their own wicked desires, and moved by their own ambicio^, not as
they which felt ye calling of god unto the kingdom, neither took they upon
them the power with a will to obey god, but to satisfy their own ambicio^. This
was not to reign by god. But yt they were not exalted to the kingdom by ye will
of god, it is contrary in a manner to ye whole scripture. For god calls
Nebucad-Nezar his servant, because he would use his ministry to afflict ye
Israelites, when as yet it might have been said yt he reigned not by god,
forasmuch as he foght against ye Jews by his own lust and covetous desire of
his mind, and not of a zeal to fulfill the will of god. Wherefore the sentence
of Hosea the prophet is nothing against us, but that we may believe that the
Magistrate is of God, and that we ought to obey him. Paul says: Let every
soul be subject unto the higher powers. The same thing is written to Titus.
And in the first Epistle of Peter, the second chap. And Paul to Timothe
adds, that we should pray for them.

But the Papists, and they which will be called Ecclesiastical men, Ministers
of the church are not exemted from the ordinarye power. Chrysostom.
will not hear these things. For they cry that they are exempted from public
and ordinary powers, when as yet the Apostle used no exception when he said:
Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. And: He which resists
the power, resists the ordinance of God. Yea and Chrysostom also upon that
place says, that the Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and Moonkes, are
comprehended under that law. And Chrysostom wrote these things of
Ecclesiastical persons, when as yet he was Bishop of Constantinople, and there
were then also Christian Emperors.

But it is a sport to bear the arguments, What the false ecclesiastical me^
trifle of two swoordes.
which these false Ecclesiastical men use. In Etrauag. de Maioritate et
Obedientia, chap. Vnam sanctam, Bonifacius the.viii. (whom they say entered in
as a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and dyed like a Dog) says that there are two
swords in the Church. And least he should seem to speak it rashly, he cites
these words out of the.xxii. chap. of Luke: when I sent you without bag or
scrip, did ye at any time want any thing? They said unto him: No. Christ added:
But now I say unto you, let every man take his scrippe and wallet, and he
which has none, let him sell his coat and bye a sword. They said unto him:
Behold here are two swoordes. Christ answered, it is sufficient. Bonifacius
says: Two swoordes are sufficient for the Church, namely the spiritual sword
and the temporal. Wherefore they which say that Peter had not an outward
sword, do seem not to understand the words of Christ, wherein he said: Put
up thy sword into the sheath. Thy swoorde (says he) and not an other man's.
For he had a sword of his own, although he were bidden to put it up.

But there must needs be some order kept and observed in these swoordes. For
what powers soever there be, they are ordained of God. For there should be a
great confusion, if for that being two swords in the Church, the one should
not be governed by the other. Wherefore the temporal sword ought to be governed
by the spiritual. And to make this argument more plain: The church (says he)
has two swoordes, but it uses them not after one and the self same manner.
For it exercises the spiritual sword, but the temporal sword ought to be
drawn, only at the beck and suffrance of the Church. This is so obscure,
that it may in a manner seem to be a riddle. How be it this is his meaning, The
Pope makes subject unto him self the swoorde of the Emperor.
that the sword of the Emperor ought to be drawn only at the will and
pleasure of the Pope, that when he commands, he must strike, and by
sufferance, that is he must go forward in striking, so long as he lists and
will suffer it. Wherefore these things must be in order: and the order is that
the temporal sword be reduced unto God by the spiritual. For (as that
Dionisius says, Dionysius.
who is thought to be an Areopagite, although he be far an other) all
inferior things are referred unto the chiefest thing, but yet by a mean.
Wherefore, says he, the temporal sword must be drawn at the beck of the
Pope, that by that means it may be referred unto God. So we see is now brought
to pass. For so often only as the most holy wills that war be made
against the Lutherians, he will that the Emperor straightway should obey. And
if any Prince will not with much submission obey him, straightway are sent
Legates hither and thither, that al other kings and princes should apply them
selves unto his beck, and make war and vex him, which will not obey him. The
Pope prefers himself before al kings and princes.


Bonifacius adds moreover that he himself is above al kings and princes.
For principallity is to be esteemed according to the dignity of the things
which by it are exercised. We (says he) exercise spiritual things, and they
temporal, wherefore their swoorde is inferior to ours, and they themselves
also unto us. He adds also an other reason, they pay unto us tenthes, but
tenthes ar paid by the inferior unto the superior. Wherefore seeing kings and
princes pai tenthes, they do testify yt their lands and revenues pertain unto
the church, and that they are subject unto it. Moreover, he which blesses, is
greater then he which is blessed. But Bishops consecrate and anoint kings. The
Gloss adds: That of kings only the right shoulder is anointed, but the
heads of Bishops are anointed. And upon Kings is poured oil, but upon
Bishops Chrisma. Wherefore we must needs confess that Kings are inferior
to Bishops. Farther, kings receive the crown and scepter of Bishops. For who
says he, anointed Saul, and who anointed. David, but only Samuel? who
anointed Iehu, but a Prophet sent by Helizeus? The matter also which is
entreated of by bishops, is greater the^ that, about which kings are occupied.
For Christ said unto Peter: whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, shall be bound
in heaven. This power is greater then al humane power. And God says unto
Jeremy: I will set thee over nations and kingdoms, to root out and destroy, to
scatter and to plant. Therefore we are greater then all the power of kings, and
are exempted from their right. Wherefore profane and lay powers of Emperors
and Kings must be judged by the Ecclesiastical men, The Pope will not be
judged or governed of any.
and ought by us to be appointed, and may by us be overthrown. For to whom it
pertains to build, to the same it belongs to destroy. Therefore the
spiritual Magistrate ought to judge of the civil Magistrate. But if the
spiritual offend in any thing, of whom ought he to be judged? The inferior,
says he, ought to be judged of the superior. But the Pope, which is the
highest of al, of whom shall he be judged? Of no man says he, but only of God,
because the spiritual is judged of no man, but he judges al things.

Oh how finely and trymly ordains he his tirannye? He calls him self only
spiritual. The Gloser, although he were otherwise gross enough, yet he could
not be so much a block, but that he saw that these things were spoken very
absurdly. How, says he, is the Pope spiritual, if he be vnpure and wicked? He
expounds himself by this distinction: Two manner of spiritualties of the
Canonists.
There is one manner of spiritualtye says he, of the person, and an other of
the state. Wherefore if there be any spiritual person, he may reprove al men by
a brotherly admonicion: but he ought to be reprehended of no man. Because for
that he is spiritual, he commits nothing filthely. But sometimes some
person which is not spiritual in life and manners, ought yet to be called
spiritual, because of his degree. As are many bishops and Popes: wherefore we
must call the bishop of Rome whatsoever he be, spiritual and most holy. But what
thing else is this, then to teach us to lie, if they will have a filthy varlet
called most holy? Bonifacius at the last concludes, that all Emperors and
Kings must be subject unto his power only. And he adds a reason: Unless we
will together with the Maniches appoint two begynninges: which thing we ought
not to do, for Moses said not, in the beginninges, but in the beginning God
created heaven and earth. The Pope pronou^seth that he of necessitye of
salvation ought to be obeyed.

Of the two manner of powers, the civil and ecclesiastical.


Wherefore, says he, we define, determine, and pronounce, that all men ought
of necessitye of salvation, to obey the Pope, as the chiefest power. And so he
excelle^tly I promise you concludes that al Ecclesiastical men are exempt from
the civil Magistrate.

Before I come to confute this their most shameless boasting, I think it
expedient briefly to speak of the two manner of powers: of the Ecclesiastical
power I say, and civil. In that it is said that the Ecclesiastical power is
preferred before al civil functions, it is somewhat that they say, if it be
rightlye and aptlye understand. All ecclesiastical power cleaves unto the
word of God, so that without it is none: but the word of the Lord is a rule
common, whereby all things ought both to be directed and be tempered. Ambrose
instructed Theodosius.
For it teaches in what manner the outward sword and public wealth ought to be
governed. And generally also it shows how althinges ought to be done of al
men. So Ambrose (who^ Theodosius the Emperor raged to cruelly, and without al
consideracion against the Thessalonians) persuaded him, that in all punishments
of death, there should be.xxx. days space after the sentence given, least the
Magistrate should do those things in a rage and fury, whereof although he
afterward repented him, yet they could not be amended. So many Bishops,
oftentimes in things most weighty, showed forth their authority, and many
times either put away cruel wars, or else pacified them, and out of the word
of God preached among them. Wherefore the Ecclesiastical power after this manner
comprehends althinges, because out of the word of God it finds how to give
counsel in all things. For there is nothing in the whole world, whereunto the
word of God extends not it self. Wherefore they are far deceived, which
use to cry: The preaching of the word of God has al me^ and al states subject
unto it.
what has a Preacher to do with the public wealth, what has he to do with
wars? what with Poticaries? what with Cooks? But let them tell me, when the
Minister of the word perceives the law of God to be violated in these
things, why should he not reprehende them by the word of God? Why should he
not admonish them? Why should he not exhort them to cease from sin? The
Minister of the Church works by the word, and not by the sword. How far
cyuill power exte^deth
Nndoubtedlye it is his duty to correct sinners, not in deed with the sword,
or punishing by the pursse, not by emprisonment, not by banishment, but after
his own manner, that is by the might and power of the word of God.

Again, the political power is extended to al those things which pertayne to
political power. But after what manner? Shall civil power require good mocio^s of
the mind, and inward repentance? It cannot cause these things: yet it must
wish these things, and use those means whereby they may be had. For he ought
to have a care, that Bishops, Pastors and Teachers in the Church do teach
purely, reprehende fatherly, and by the word of God administer the sacraments.
This thing in deed the Magistrate does not by himself, but he ought to have a
regard, that they may be in a redynes, which should do them well. Wherefore
either power extends most amply, and comprehends al things, but not after
one and the self same manner. And the rule of either of them is to be taken
out of the word of God, which is plain to be in the Church.

Again, there are two subiections: One is political and civil, Two kinds of
subjection.
whereunto all men are subject, who if they offend in any thing against the
laws, let them at the just Magistrates hand look for imprysonment, punishment
by the pursse, banishment, death, and outward pains. But if they do well, let
them look for honors, rewards, dignities, and praise. And after this manner
the civil power is not subject unto the ministry of the word, because by it
it can not by these kinds of punishments be afflicted and constrained. The
other subjection is spiritual, that is of faith, and of obedience. For
strayghtway, as soon as men hear of their duty out of the word of God, and
that either this thing or that is to be done, or this or that thing to be
avoided, they give place, believe, and obey. Because they perceive, that that
which is spoken, is the word of God. And these are the ends of either power.
A sentence of Valentinia^ the Emperor.
And so is to be understand that saying of Valentinian the Emperor, out of the
book called Historia Tripartita, which thing is had also in the
distinction.63. chap. Valentinianus: Choose (says he) such a bishop, unto whom
we which govern the Empire, may sincerely submyt our heads, and use his
admonicions as medicines. etc. By which words is understand that it longs
unto the Ecclesiastical power, An error of the same Valentinian.
to admonish out of the word of God for salvation. Although the same Emperor
afterward erred. For when he had appointed Ambrose Praetor of the City of
Millane, the people did choose him bishop. Which thing when the Emperor knew, A
bishop ought not to have a care only over souls, or only over bodies.
he gave thanks unto God therefore after this manner: I had made him ruler over
the bodies of men, but thou would have him ruler over the souls. etc.
Valentinian did not rightlye put a distinction between offices. For why? Ought
bishops to have a care only over souls, and not also over bodies? What if
they give them selves to glotonye or dronkennes, or live licenciouslye touching
outward things, shall they not reprove these things? Undoubtedly they must
reprove them. Neither must princes have a care only over the bodies of men,
and neglect their souls. For we do not imagine that a prince is a neateherd
or a swineherd, to whom is committed only the care of the belly, flesh and
skin of his subjects: yea he must provide that they may live virtuously and
godlily. But what if Christian Princes when they are by the word of God
admonished of public and most grievous sins, will not hear, neither amend
that which they have noughtely committed. What I say shall the bishop do herein?
Ambrose excommunicated Theodosius the Emperor, when he exercised so grievous
tyranny against the Thessalonians. Innocentius also excommunicated Arcadius,
when he had exiled John Chrysostom, who admonished him freely and truly, as
it is had in the did. 96. chap. Duo sunt, and in the did. 18. in the chap.
Quoniam quidam. And they are the words of the syxt Synod, where it is decreed
that there should every year be had two Sinodes. And if princes would hinder
them, let them be excommunicated.

Eusebius.
But what do I make mention of these latter things? Let us read Eusebius in
his.vi. book, and.xxxiiii. chap. where he says that Philip the Emperor, who
lived in the time of Origene, was the first Christian prince, and when he would
have been present together with the faithful on Easter even, and have
communicated with them in prayers, the bishop, because he was a wicked and
noughty liver, rejected him among them that were put to penance, that he should
make open confession before the Church, and acknowledge his sin, otherwise
he could by no means be admitted unto the Communion. This did the bishop at
that time against the Emperor and chief Monarche of the whole world. Wherefore
the civil power ought to be subject unto the word of God which is preached by
the Ministers. But again the Ecclesiastical power is subject unto the civil,
when the Ministers behave themselves ill, either in things humane or
Ecclesiastical. For these powers are after a sort conuertible and sundry ways
are occupied about the self same things, and mutually help one an other,
eue^ as Aristotle Theodectes calls Rhethorike and Logike interchangeable
arts, Aristotle.
because either of them are occupied in the self same things after a sundry
manner. The Ecclesiastical power is subject unto the Magistrate: not by a
spiritual subjection, but by a politic. For as touching the Sacraments and
sermons, it is not subject unto it, because the Magistrate cannot bend the
word of God or the Sacraments, which the ministry uses, neither can he
compel the pastors and Teachers of the Church to teach otherwise, or in any
other sort to administer the Sacraments, then is prescribed by the word of
God. Howbeit ministers in that they are men and Citizens, are without all
doubt subject unto the Magistrate, and also their lands, riches, and
possessions. So Christ paid tribute, so also did the Apostles, and the whole
primative Church, when there were yet most holy men. Their manners also are
subject unto the censures and judgments of the Magistrates.

Farthermore, we must add that Ministers are subject unto the Magistrate, not
only as touching those things which I have rehearsed, but also (as I before
signified) concerning their function. Because if they teach not right, neither
administer the Sacraments orderly, it is the office of the Magistrate to
compel them to an order, and to see that they teach not vnpurelye, and that
they myngle not fables, Princes may put Ministers out of their place, if their
be have the^ selves ill.
or that they abuse not the Sacraments, or deliver them otherwise then the
Lord has commanded. Also if they live noughtelye and wickedly, let them put
them out of the holy ministerye. This did Solomon, who dejected Abiathar, and
substituted Sadok in his room, as it is written in the first book of Kings,
the second chap. And in the new Testament, Justinian displaced Siluerius and
Vigilius, which thing I doubt not but other princes did sometimes. But how
justly, I will not presently declare: this one thing I will say, that that thing
was lawful for them in the causes now alleged. But some man will say, that I
speak now of the fact, and not of the right. Yea but I speak also of the
right. For the king ought to have with him the law of God written, because he
is ordained a keeper, not only of the first table, but also of the latter. It
longs not to the Minister of the Church to put down Princes.
Wherefore he which offends in any of them both, falls into his power. But
although a king may remove an unprofitable and hurtful bishop, yet can not a
bishop on the other side put down a king, if he offend. John in deed reproved
Herod, but he displaced him not of his kingdom. Ambrose and Innocent
excommunicated Emperors: but they went no farther. Yea and Christ called
Herod a woolfe, but he took not away from him his kingdom, and he paid
tribute unto Tiberius, a most wicked Tiranne, neither was he at any time author
to any man to shake of his yoke. Wherefore let Popes take heed by what right
as they lust them selves, they put Kings and Emperors out of their place. This
thing did neither any of the Prophets, nor the Apostles, nor Christ.

The Popes boast that they have great power: but if it be any that they have,
it consists wholly in the word of God. Let them teach, preach, and admonish,
if they will exercise their power: otherwise the civil and temporal power, whom
they so much crake of, is far from the ecclesiastical Ministers. In sum,
even as there is found no king nor Emperor so great, which is not subject unto
the power of the word of God, which is preached by the Ministers: so on the
other side is there no bishop, which when he has offended, ought not to be
reproved by the civil Magistrate. What difference so ever there be, the same
(as I have said) is wholye as touching the manner of reproving. The Ministers
of the Church do that by the word, and Princes by outward punishments. But
our false ecclesiastical men will be princes and reign. But Christ would be no
king. And when he was sought for, to that end to be made a king, he utterly
refused it: yea he openly professed that his kingdom was not of this world.
He said also unto the Apostles: Princes of the nations do bear rule over them,
but ye shall not do so. Peter also (whose successors they affirm them selves to
be) admonishes Ministers, not to exercise dominion over the Clergy. But these
men will have prysons, soldiers and swoordes, and stir up wars, as they
lust them selves.

Perduenture they will object unto us the Assamonites, Of the Assamonites or
Machabites.
out of the old Testament, whom it is certain that they were both Kings and
Priests, and confounded both the powers. That historye in deed is written in
the books of the Machabites, but we must see whyther they did it rightly, or
wyckedly and ambiciously. Undoubtedly I think they did it not orderly: for God
by his word had many times adjudged the kingdom unto the Tribe of Judah, even
to the time of Messiah. And contrarily he commanded the Levites, that they
should possess no lands, and much less to occupye a kingdom among their
brethren. But if a man had rather say, that they did this thing by a certain
secret reuelacion and hydden judgment of GOD, he shall not amend their
cause. For that whithe is so done, ought not to be drawn into an example. But
I think rather that they offended in so doing. They did well undoubtedly,
when they delivered their Country from tyrranny: but that thing being
finished, they ought not to have taken upon them the kingdom. Neither did GOD
obscurely declare that that their act displeased him. For (as we gather out of
Josephus) that house afterward never wanted Tragedies. How the Apostles
sometimes used outward punishments.
They farther obiecte unto us, that Peter slew Ananias and Saphira, and that
Paul struck Elimas the Sorcerer with blindness. That is true in deed: but they
did these things by the word of God, not by violence, not by the sword,
neither by the labor of a hangman. Let these men do the same things by the
word, and we will regard them. Why do they not harken unto Paul to
Timothe: Let no man going on warfare for God, wrap himself in cares of this
life. If they will go on warfare for God, why do they in such sort hinder
themselves with worldly business? Have they so much leisure from their own
affairs, that they can have a care over other men's things? Let them answer
plainly: would they at this day abide, that any king should attempt to teach
the Gospel, or administer the Sacraments? They would not suffer it. Neither
did God himself also suffer it: The offices of both the powers must not be
confounded.
but he struck Ozeas with Leprosy, when he would have burnt insence unto God.
Why therefore do they invade other men's borders? These functions ought to be
separated, because either of them requires a whole man a part by him self:
yea rather scarce has been found any one man at any time, which could
ryghtlye execute either of them, so hard a thing is the execution of them both.
Howbeit, both of them do help one an other: for the politic Prince gives
judgment, and the Ecclesiastical does not in deed give judgment, but he
teaches how judgment ought to be given. Have no respect (says he) of
persons in judgment: afflict not the poor and stranger: receive no bribes.
etc. So on the other side the political Magistrate preaches not, neither
administreth the Sacraments. But unless these things be ryghtlye ordered,
he ought to punish the Ministers.

Wherein either power differs and agrees.
And to be brief, there are two things to be considered of us in this
collacion. In the Ciuyll Magistrate is to be considered both the power, and
also the man which bears and exercises the power. He in respect that he is a
Christian man, is undoubtedly subject unto the word of God, and in respect
that he bears power, and governs, he ought also to be subject unto the
same word of God. For out of it ought he to seek rules to govern and to
administer. In the Minister of the Church also is to be considered both the
ministerye it self, and also the person which executes it. As touching the
person, the minister is subject unto the Civil power: for he is both a
Citizen, and pays tribute as other men do, and is under the correction of
manners. But as concerning the ministerye, he is also somewaye subject unto the
Magistrate: For if he either teach or administer the Sacraments against the
word of God, he must be reprehended by the Civil Magistrate. And yet must
he not seek for rules and reasons of his function at the same Magistrates
hand, but out of the word of God. By this distinction we may easelye
understand the differences and agreement of either power.

To the arguments of Boniface.
Now rests to come to that Thraso Bonifacius to confute his arguments. First,
he gathered out of that which the Apostles answered: Behold here are two
swoordes, and Christ added: It is sufficient, that the Church has two
powers, How the church may have twssiwoordes.
and both of them committed unto him. To that I answer, that it is possible,
that sometimes there may be two swoordes in the Church: but there were not so
always in it, neither peradventure shall be always so. What outward sword
had the Church in the time of Christ, and of the Apostles and Martyrs? The
Church has now almost al arts.
But yet now (they will say) it has. I grant that, because kings and
Emperors are Christians, which in the old time were Ethnikes. The Church
has also husbandrye, trade of marchaundise, the art of Carpenters, and other
such like. For they which exercise these things, are members of the Church.
But that comes to pass (as the Schoolmen speak) per accidens, that is by
chance. For there might be a Church, though those things were not. So now,
because there are Princes in the Church, it is said to have an outward
swoorde. But because Princes are in our time a part of the Church, it does not
therefore follow that the sword of Princes is the sword of ministers: even as
although there be in the Church husbandry and trade of merchaundise, and also
the art of Carpenters, it cannot thereby be gathered that ministers are husband
men, merchauntes, and Carpenters.

Now I come to the place of the Evangelist. The Apostles said, they wanted
nothing, when they were sent without wallet and scryp, unto whom Christ said:
Let every one take unto him his scrip and wallet, and he which has none, let
him sell his coat, and bye a sword. What would Christ signifye by these
words? Nothing else undoubtedly, but to show that the state and condition of
times hereafter should be far otherwise then they were before. Hitherto (says
he) whylest I was with you, ye felt no grief, neither wanted you any thing.
But now harder times are at hand: now shall ye have need of coats, scryps,
and swoordes. By these words he declares that he should depart from them,
and that he would send them into the whole world to preach and teach the
Gospel, in which ministry they should meet with so many adversities, that
they should think themselves to have need of swoordes. It is a figurative
kind of speech, whereby is understand one thing by an other, as is that in
Genesis, when the Lord said, that he repented that he had made man. For God
is not in very deed touched with repentance, but he does that, which men
repenting use to do, that is, he changes that which he has done. And
undoubtedly then he by the flood destroyed humane kind which he had created.
So now he has not instructed his Disciples, to fight with iron, but only by
a certain paraphrasis describes the condition of the time to come. And even
as a gown oftentimes signifies tranquillity and peace: so in this place a
sword shows troublesome and unquiet times.

After this manner Chrysostom interprets these words, Chrysostom.
expounding this place of Paul: Salute Prisca and Aquila. The Lord (says he)
has not broken the law, which before he had made, saying: And he which
strikes thee on the one cheek, turn unto him the other. Bless those that
curse you, pray for them that persecute you. How then does he command his
Disciples to bye themselves swoordes? He meant no such thing, says Chrysostom:
For it is a figurative kind of speech, whereby he signified that he should be
taken away from them, and that they should be afflicted with many calamities.
These words are not so to be taken as they appear at the first sight. In an
other place Christ says also: That which ye have heard in the ear, preach
on the house tops. And yet we never read, that the Apostles stood on the
house tops, when they preached unto the people. Neither assuredly was it
decent to have left the street and temple, and to have spoken from the house
top. The sense was, that those things which they had heard priuatelye, they
should speak openly and manifestlye. The Lord also said: Destroy this
temple, and in three days I will restore it: which is also spoken
figuratively. For he commanded not to overthrow the temple of Solomon (as the
Evangelist himself interprets) but understood that which he spoke, of the
temple of his own body: wherein (as Paul says) corporally dwelled all
divinity.

But to return to the matter, that Luke so meant Chrysostom proves by these
things which follow: That in the son of man should be fulfilled that which
was spoken of him: And he was counted with the ungodly. But the Apostles
understood not Christ: for they thought that he had spoken simplye, and (as
the words sounded) spoken of an outward sword. And so did Boniface utterly
interpreate it. And in that Christ adds: It is enough, he understood that
two swords are sufficient in the Church, so that there ought to be now neither
more nor fewer. But Chrysostom understands it far otherwise. For when
Christ perceived yt the Apostles understood him not, by that answer he declared
that he would omit the thing. And in deed so is a scholemaster wont to say unto
a child which yet understands not that which is taught him: It is enough.
Otherwise undoubtedly two swords were not sufficient against all the adversaries
of Christ. There should moreover have needed coats of male and shieldes.
Wherefore Chrysostom concludes that ye speech was figurative and parabolical.
Farthermore, In the times of the Apostles ye church had not two swoordes.
if Bonifacius exposition be received, we must think that the Church in
the time of the Apostles ought to have had two swords, which is most far from
the truth.

But let us come to that which Christ said unto Peter: Put up thy sword into
thy sheath. Thy sword (says Boniface) not an other man's sword. But what
gathers he by those words? Although Peter have his sword, yet if he be
commanded to put it up, how can he have it drawn? or to what end has he a
sword, if he may not use it? But Boniface will peradventure answer: I have in
deed a sword, but I use it not, but by an other man's hand. Or I use not mine
own sword, but the sword of the Emperor, and other princes. For they ought to
draw the sword at the beck and sufferance of the Church. I would gladly
demand, whither Christ, when he bad Peter to put up his sword, meant this, that
he should in deed use it as he listed and would himself, Every man is said to
do that himself which he does by an other man.
but yet by the labor of an other man? Assuredly that which a man does by an
other, he seems to do it himself. If a man by money or gifts get one to kill
his enemy, although he do it not with his own hand, yet nevertheless he should
be an homicide: otherwise even Princes does not with their own hand kill the
guilty, but command the hangmen to punish them. There is in this answer of
Bonifacius a deceit of equivocation. For we demand whither an ecclesiastical
Minister may bear the office of a civil Magistrate, and use a civil sword: and
they remit us unto the sword of Peter, a man otherwise private.

Bernardus.
Howbeit Bernardus in his.4. book de Consider. ad Eugenium, seems to
interpret the two swords. I grant that Bernard has certain things like
unto this, but yet not utterly the same. But we must remember, in what time
Bernardus lived. He lived at that time, wherein all things were corrupted in
the Church, and if a man read those his books de Consideratione, he shall se
that he grievously complains of the corruption of his time. Eugenius was by
the Romans excluded the City, and peradventure he meditated by violence to
restore himself. Wherefore Bernard exhorted them to preach the Gospel, to
deal aganst the Romans with the word and with Sermons, rather then with the
sword. Eugenius said: what will thou have? That I should feed Serpents and
Dragons and Beasts? Yea rather assail them says Bernard with the word, and
not with iron. And in an other place he says: If thou will have both swords,
thou shall leese both. Neither is it to be thought that Eugenius would by
himself have fought, but peradventure he assayed to move war by other, from
which purpose Bernard dissuaded him. And thus much of him.

But in that Bonifacius adds, that those swords of the church ought to be in
order (namely that the one should be subject unto ye other, and that he proves
by this saying of Paul: Those powers that are, are ordained of God) is
manifestly declared how this man wresteth the scriptures. For this word
ordinatae, that is ordered, is in Greek written (...): which is nothing else,
then instituted or appointed. But be it so, as Bonifacius has expounded it,
what manner of order shall this be at the length? Undoubtedly, it should be
that the Minister should teach, and the civil power should hear and believe.
But this is nothing unto the Pope which teaches nothing.

The lowest things says Dionisius are by means reduced unto the highest.
Wherefore Bonifacius concludes that the outward sword ought to be referred unto
God by the spiritual. Undoubtedly I will easily grant that the sword of the
spirit, that is the word of God, is the mean whereby the other sword, namely
the outward, ought to be tempered and directed unto God. But why does not the
Pope retain this mean? The Pope uses not the swoorde of the word.
Why uses he not the word? Why teaches he not? why preaches he not?
Nndoubtedly princes that stray, are not by him revoked into the right way, yea
rather contrariwise the Pope and bishops of the Church are sometimes rebuked and
justly reproved of princes.

Aaron assuredly, being high priest, It longs to princes sometimes to
admonish and correct Ecclesiastycall men.
fell grievously in making the golden calfe and obeing the foolishnes of the
people. Moses accused him greiuously, whom it is certain that he was a civil
magistrate. For toward the end of Deuteronomy. he is called a king. And when the
priests abused the money which was offered for the mending of the couerings of
the temple, who remedied that, but only Ioas the king? I will not speak of
David and Solomon, and others which divided the lottes of the priest, and
orders of the Levites. And I will not at this time prove these things by any
more examples. For they are manifest enough of them selves. Wherefore I grant
that the civil power may be corrected of the ministers by preaching of the
word. But the Pope uses not this kind of government, but rather an incredible
tirrannye.

They boaste moreover that they themselves are greater in dignitye, for that
they exercise spiritual and heavenly things, where as princes are occupied
only about earthly and civil things. Be it so: for we deny not but that
ministers are occupied about things greater and more divine then magistrates
are. But does the Pope alone minister them? Yea rather he never does it at al.
Wherefore if the dignity of the ministry depend of those things, then will it
follow that many bishops and priests do in dignity far excel the Pope, which
never preaches, and most rarely, and to very few, administreth the Sacraments.

Let us come to tenthes, Of tenthes.
by ye payment whereof Bonifacius laboreth to prove yt al princes ar subject
unto him. This argument seems to have some show, because at the first sight it
agrees with the.7. chap. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, where Paul proves the
dignity of christ to be greater the^ ye dignity of the priesthode of the
Leuits. For thus he gathers: Abraham paid tenthes unto Melchisedech, at which
time Leui was not yet, but was at ye time in the loins of Abraham, and so paid
te^thes in him. And he which pays tenths to an other, by the self same thing
professes himself to be inferior unto him. Christ was priest according to ye
order of Melchisedech. Wherefore the Apostle concludes yt the priesthode of ye
Leuits was much inferior unto the priesthode of Christ. I have opened the
spring from whence Bonifacius derived his argument. The place is very dark, and
needs explication, and moreover Bonifacius does not aptly apply it to his
purpose. First we ought to understand that tenthes in the old time pertayned
unto ceremonies, and that as well in Melchisedech as in the Levites. Both the
priesthode of Leui and also of Melchisedech signified Christ.
For in either priesthode they were referred unto Christ. And either priesthode
was in very deed a figure of Christ: for even as the Leuiticall priest entered
once every year into the Sancta Sanctorum, and that never without blood: So
Christ by his blood entered once into the tabernacle, that is into heaven, and
again Melchisedeche for that he had neither father nor mother, resembled
Christ, which in respect that he was God, had no mother, and in respect that he
was a man, wanted a father.

But what signified the tenthes in either priesthode? Christ was more
playnelye signified by the priesthode of Melchisedech, then by the Leuiticall
priesthode.
Undoubtedly they signified nothing else, then that the elders ought to refer
al their things unto christ. By that ceremony the people worshipped even
Christ. And if a man will confer Melchisedech and the priesthode of Leui
together, although both of them seem to shadow Christ, yet shall he se that he
is more expressedly and manyfestly signified by Melchisedech, as the Epistle to
the Hebrews testifies. Bonifacius says: we receive tenthes of all the lay
men. Ye do take them indede, but now that Christ is come, the paying of tenthes
is no more a ceremony, as it was before the coming of Christ, when by te^thes
men worshipped Christ, which was to come in the flesh, and confessed that they
ought unto him both themselves, and all that they had. After which self same
manner they paid the first fruits of al their things. Te^thes at this day ar
no more ceremonies but rather rewards and stipendes.
But our men do in these days receive tenthes. But by what law? Not
undoubtedly by the ceremonial law, but by the moral law. Forasmuch as it is
mete that the Mynister should be nooryshed of the people. For the laborer is
woorthye of his reward: and he which serves the Gospel, it is meet that he
live of it. Wherefore whither stipeds be paid unto ministers out of lands or out
of houses, either in ready money or in tenths, it skilleth not, so that they be
not maintained filthily, but honestly. Indede these rewards in some places do
retayn the old name of tenthes. But in many places they are not called tenthes,
but stipendes or wages. And assuredly they are in very deed rather rewards,
which are dew unto the labors of the ministers, then tenthes.

Stipendes are paid both to superiors and also to inferiors.
And as touching this foresaid argument, we must understand that such rewards
and stipendes, are things indifferent: because they are sometimes paid unto
inferiors, and sometimes to superiors. For tributes which are given unto kings
and princes, are their stipendes which we give unto them, partly to norish and
sustain them, and partly to confess that we are subject unto them, and
lastly ye they may have wherwithal to defend the public wealth and us. And
sometimes inferiors also do receive stipendes. For princes pay them unto
soldiers, and yet cannot we therefore say that the soldiers are greater
then Kings and Princes. And notwythstandynge I would not have any think,
that I speak these things, to dimynyshe the dygnitye of the Ecclesiastical
ministerye, but that men might understand that their arguments are very
trifling. The church which pays the stipe^d unto the minister is greater then
he Why in the church kings are consecrated Power is given unto princes of god,
and not of bishops.
Neither doubt I to affirm, that the church it self which pays the stipend
unto the minister, is greater then the minister. Wherefore if we speak of
tenthes, as they are at this day given unto ministers, they are no cause that
they should be greater then those that pay them. But in that kings and
Emperors are consecrated and anointed of bishops, and in that they receive the
crown and sword of them, it nothing helps their cause. For if we speak of
the civil power, that is not given of the bishop, but of God. But this thing
is there done, that after the king or Emperor is chosen of god, in such manner
as is agreeable, prayers should be made for him in the assembly of the church,
that god may confirm and strengthen his heart, that he may increase piety in
him, and instill in him a fear of his name, prosper his counsels, and so make
fortunate his actions, that they may prove profitable unto the church, and unto
the public wealth. And the bishop whilst these things are in doing, is the
mouth of the church, and goes before it, in expressing the prayer. And this
function was derived of an old ceremony and custom of the Jews. And ye the
king receaueth not his power of the bishop, but of God, even their own decrees
also do testifye. In the did. 96. chap. Si Imperatur, Gelasius says, that the
Emperor has the priueleges of his power at gods hand. Why then does Bonifacius
arroga^tly claim it unto himself? namely that which longs to God only. For
as Paul says: All power is of god. In the Code de Iure veteri enucleando in
the law first, Iustiniane.
Justinian declares that his power was given him of the divine majesty. And
the Gloss ( in Extrauag. de maioritate and obediencia in the chapter vnam
sanctam toward the end, says, that power is given unto kings of God only, and
that therefore they do indede receive the crown of the bishop, and the sword
from the altar.

But let us more narowly examine Bonifacius argument: I (says he) do give
power unto Emperors. Therefore I am greater then Emperors. Let this most blessed
Thraso answer me, who consecrated him when he was chosen Pope? Undoubtedly
the bishop Hostiensis. Let us conclude therefore that the bishop Hostiensis is
greater then the Pope. And if that follow not, the^ is the argument also of
Bonifacius of no force, because (as I have now showed) it cleaves unto a
broken foundation. For they are not bishops which give power unto kings.
Farther, All emperors were not consecrated of the Pope.
were there not many Emperors which were never consecrated of bishops, and yet
were nevertheless for all that Emperors? Neither were the old Grecian Emperors so
anointed. Wherefore that is a new inue^tio^. But what if I prove that the head
bishop was sometimes consecrated of the civil magistrate? Undoubtedly Moses
consecrated Aaron, when as yet (as it is said) Moses was a civil prince.
Wherefore Bonifacius laboreth in vain about his consecration, because he can
gather nothing thereby.

He boasted moreover of the kayes. Wherein the kayes of the church consyst.
We (says he) have the power of binding and losing. But the power of the kayes
consists herein, that ye should preach the word of god truly. For he which
believes the gospel, is losed: and he which believes not, is bound. But when ye
neither preach, nor teach, neither can ye bind, nor lose. And farther this
subjection which we have granted is spiritual, namely of faith and of
obedience: and not civil, and with dominion.

Afterward was Jeremy objected, unto whom the Lord said: I have appointed thee
over nations and kingdoms, etc. First here I demand what kings Jeremy
dejected, or whom he abrogated of their Empire, and what new kings he
instituted? They can show of none. What therefore signify these words: I set
thee over nations and kingedomes? Undoubtedly nothing else, then that by the
sprite of prophecy and word of god he should foretell what kingdoms god would
overthrow for sins, and what new ones he would institute. Why do not the
Popes so exercise their power? Let them set before kings and princes of the
earth the threatninges of god, Prophets are not the efficie^t causes of the
overthrow of kingdoms. Ministers and prophets are an occasion, but not a just
cause of ruins.
and let them be in this manner over nations and kingdoms. Could Jeremy be
called the cause of the overthrow of kingdoms? He was not properly the
efficient cause, but only a certain occasion. For when he had admonished the
king of Judah, and he believed him not, the prophet by his preachinge was some
occasion that he should be condemned and overthrown. So Paul says: To some
we are the savor of life to life, and to other the savor of death to death:
When as yet the Apostle properlye killed no man, but his preaching after a
sort brought death unto those which would not believe. It is god therefore
that seperateth, overthrows, scatters and planteth. Neither disdaineth he
sometimes to call us his fellow workers.

Bonifacius goes on, the lay power ought to be judged of the Ecclesiastical,
but by what kind of judgment? Undoubtedly by this, that in the church he set
forth the anger of God against sinners, and that they be admonished and
corrected by the holy scriptures. But ye bishops may expel kings and put them
out of their kingdom, where is ye permitted? From whence have they that? what
writings will they bring for it? The Pope ought to be judged of the church.
But that is most intolerable yt the Pope says that he can be judged of no
man. And yet John.23. was in the counsel of Constance put down, and not only
by god, but also by men. So these men plant and replant Canons, and the same
they allow and disalow, as often as they think good. Yea and Emperors have
sometimes thrust out and put down Popes, as it is before said. Paul to the Gal.
says: If an Angel from heaven preach any other gospel, let him be accursed.
If the Pope (which may come to pass, and has already long since come to pass)
obtrude wicked opinions, who shall pronounce him accursed? It is the dewty of
the magistrate to execut the sentence of the church against the pope
Shall he be utterly judged of no man? The church undoubtedly shall give
sentence upon him: and the magistrate (for that he is the chiefest part of the
church) shall not only judge together with it, but also shall execute the
sentence. Farther it longs unto the magistrate to provide that the riches of
the church be not given unto ye enemies of godliness. Wherefore if bishops
become enemies of the church, a faithful magistrate ought not to suffer the
goods of the church to be consumed by them. The Canonists have this oftentimes
in their mouth: That for the office sake is given the benefice. When therefore
they do not their office, ought the magistrate to suffer them to enjoy their
benefices?

But let us hear how Bonifacius proves that he can be judged of no man.
Because he that is spiritual (says he) judges all things, but he himself is
judged of no man. A godly and well applied argument I promise you. But let us se
what kind of judgment Paul writes of in that place. He speaks not
undoubtedly of the common kind of judgment, whereby men are either put to
death or put out of their room. He entreats there only of the
understanding of things divine, and which avail unto salvation. These
things I say properlye belong unto the judgment of the spiritual man: but
concerning common judgments, and knowledge of civil causes, Paul never
thought of them in that place. Which is easily perceived by his words, we
have not received (says he) the sprite of this world: but a sprite, which is
of God. If thou will demand for what use ye sprite is given us: He answers,
that we should know those things yt are given us of God. And because ye sprite
of this world cannot give judgment of things divine, it is added: The
carnal man understands not those things which are of ye sprite of god. The
spiritual man judges al things. What? Does he judge also civil and common
causes? No undoubtedly: but he judges those things which pertayne unto the
salvation of men: he himself is judged of no man. Without doubt both Peter and
Paul were judged by the civil power, whereunto Paul appealed to be judged there,
and yet were they both spiritual.

Peter and Paul were judged by the civil power.
But that place is thus to be understood. He yt is spiritual, in that he is
such a one, cannot in things divine and such as pertain unto salvation, be
rightely judged of any man, which is not endewed with the same sprite that he is.
The wicked and worldly ones count him oftentimes for a sedicious, vnpure, and
infamous fellow: but only God and his sprite looks upon the hearts.

Note.
Lastly Bonifacius concludes, that there is one only chief power which
longs unto the pope, least we should seem with the Maniches to make many
beginninges. We put this one only beginning, and not many.
And he adds: That god in the beginning, and not in the beginnings, created
the world. We also abhor from the Maniches, and do put one only beginning,
and pronounce one only fountain and offspring of all powers, namely, god and
his word, without which can be no power, either civil or Ecclesiastical. For
the foundation of either of them depends of the word of god, and so we make
but one beginning and not two. Farther, if Bonifacius will urge these words of
Genesis: In the beginning god created. etc. there ought to be in the world but
one only king. For when Paul said: One Lord, one faith, one baptism, he
added not one Pope.

A Schism of three Popes.
At the length our Thraso comes so far, that he excludes them from the
hope of salvation, which acknowledge not the Pope for the chief prince and head
of the church. But when there were two or three Popes al at one time (which
thing both happened, and also endured the space of.60. years full) it must
needs be that those were at that time Maniches, and did put two beginnings,
which were of Bonifacius opinion. Moreover, what think they of the Gretians,
of the Persia^s, and Christians which dwell in the East part, for as much as
they acknowledge not the Pope, who yet nevertheless read the scriptures,
believe in our Lord Jesus Christ, and both are, and also ar called christians?
Al them Bonifacius excludes from the hope of salvation. This is the ambicion
and unspeakable tirannye of the Popes.

When we obiecte unto the papists these words of Paul: let every soul be
subject unto the superior powers, they answer: that every soul ought to be
subject unto the superior power, but yet to theyrs, not to other men's power,
otherwise the frenchmen ought to be subject unto the Spaniardes, the Spaniardes
to the Germans, which thing, for that it is absurd, it is concluded, that
every man ought to obey his own Magistrate. But now the clergy acknowledge the
bishops for their power, and ought to be subject unto the^: and the bishops
acknowledge the Archbishoppes and Primates, and they lastly acknowledge the
Pope. After this manner say they, we obey the power, and satisfye Paul. What
have we to do with kings or civil magistrates? But this is nothing else, then
most filthily to abuse the words of Paul. The Papists do re^t into two
parts both the kingdoms and the people.
Do they not see that they divide the public wealth into two bodies, which
ought to be one body only? For when they divide the kingdom of the Clergy,
from the kingedome of the laitye, they make in one kyngedome two peoples, and
do set over either people a Magystrate. And thereby comes to pass, that
the Clergy which are Frenchemen, seem not to be Frenchemen: and the Germans
seem not to be Germans. And this makes not conjunction, but division.

Farther, of what power I pray you speaks Paul? Not undoubtedly of Bishops
or Archebishops, but of that power which bears the swoorde. He does not
without a cause (says he) bear the swoorde. He speaks of that power to whom
tribute is paid. For for this cause (says he) ye pay tribute. But Bishops
neither bear swoorde, nor exact tributes of the people. Wherefore Paul
speaks not of them. And though Germany Bishops bear the swoorde, and do
gather tributes and customs, they do not that in respect that they are
Bishops, but in respect that by accidens they have the civil power adjoined
unto the^: how rightly, let them see to it. But it is manifest that Paul spoke
of the Civil power, unto which he commanded that every soul should obey.
Neither is the interpretation of Origene probable, wherein he affirms, that
Paul said: Every soul, Origene.
and not every spirit. Because (says he) the spiritual man is moved with no
affections, neither possesses he any thing in the world. Wherefore he is not
subject at all unto the outward power. Wherefore Paul commands every soul,
that is, every carnal man to obey the civil power. But what? Was not Christ
spiritual? who was more spiritual? And yet he acknowledged the superior
power, and paid tribute. What say you to the Apostles, were not they
spiritual? And yet they never exempted themselves from the civil power: yea
rather they obeyed and taught others to obey them.

But let us hear what our Bonifacianes answer farther. They say that they
have not this power ordinarily, and by the right of their fruition, but
granted them by privileges and gifts of princes. And why say they is it not
lawful for us to enjoy the privileges and liberality of princes? But we ought
here to have a regard, not what princes have done, but what they ought to have
done. God without all doubt has made subject every soul unto the higher
power. It was never lawful for any prince to break that law. Whether it were
lawful for princes to exempt Ecclesiastical men from their subjection.
Nor humane reason sees not better then the providence of God, what should
become of the affairs of humane kind. And the event it self also sufficiently
has declared how much that remission of princes has profited. For after that
Bishops and false Ecclesiastical men got themselves once from the subjection of
the civil power, they straight way became far worse then they were before,
and made the people which were committed to their charge, nothing the better.
Wherefore let them cease to say that Emperors and kings have given them these
things, let them rather hear ye word of god, wherein they are commanded to
obey princes. But they have not only withdrawn themselves from obedience
toward princes, but also have claymed unto themselves an immunite or
fraunches. What immunity is.

What tribute is.

What custom is. Vlpiane.


And an immunity is a liberty from doing of homages, and bearyng of civil
burdens. And among burdens are numbered tributes, and customs. Tributes are
those which are paid of lands and possessions. Customs are those which are
paid of marchandises, and of those things which are either carried out or
brought in. These things Vlpiane calls ye sinews of the public wealth, as
without which it ca^ not either consist, or be governed. By what right therefore
and reason have these men withdrawe^ themselves from the public commodity?
With what face do they boast of such liberality of princes, which neither
Christ, neither the Apostles, nor the Prophets used? And although they have
this thing as they say, Ministers of the Church ar exempted from personal
burthe^s and from such as are filthy. Vlpianus.
by the gift of kings and Emperors, yet must they take heed, that it be not
hurtful unto the Citezins, and least whilst they are lifted up, other be
above measure burdened. And yet ar they not by privileges and laws of princes
exempted from all burthe^s. In deed they are franchised from personal
burdens: and that not without great reason, which even the Ethnike princes
saw also. In the digestes de Vacatione and excusatione munerum, in the law
Praetor: Vlpianus says: If a man have gotten a benefice, neither can hurt of
conscience be absent from it, he is acquitted. And Constantine the Emperor, in
the Code de Episcopis and Clericis in the law.1. and.2. What personal burdens
are. Filthy burdens.
exempteth them from personal and filthy burdens. Personal burdens are
those which are accomplished by the industry of the mind and labor of the
body. Filthy burdens are those, as to burn lyme, to dig sand, to keep the
cundite, to heat the bath, and such other of like sort. From these burdens
they are woorthily exempted, because the ministry by such filthy excercises
should come in contempt. And they are made free from personal burdens, because
when they should give their minds to holy things, they ought not to be
withdrawe^ to other things. Wherefore princes have ryghtly granted these
things unto Ecclesiastical men, that they should not be absent from the study
of religion, and that they should not be contemned of the common people.

But what if a man claim himself to be a Minister only by his apparel or
garments, and does nothing in the Church, is this freedom also granted unto
him? Iustiniane.
No undoubtedly. Yea Iustiniane in the Code de Episcopis and Clericis in the
law generaliter sancimus, says that he means only of those, which
diligently give themselves to holy things, and not of vagaboundes and idle
persons, which brag only in the name of the Ministry. Moreover Ministers
are not loosed from ordinary charges, although they are exempted from
extraordinary charges. Ordinary charges. Extraordinary charges.
Ordinary charges are those, which are imposed always by the commandment of
the laws. Extraordinary charges, which are exacted only for some present
necessity, and afterward do cease. Wherefore if Ecclesiastical men have manors
and lands, as other Citezins have, for them they ought to pay. Why they are
acquitted from extraordinary charges.
For the Church when it takes lands, takes them with their burdens. But they
are free from extraordinary tributes, because in the old time Ecclesiastical
men were poor, and besides necessary food and apparel had nothing remanyng,
or if peradventure there remained any thing, all the same, whatsoever it were,
was bestowed upon the poor. But now it is clean contrary: for both they
abound in riches, and they bestow very little upon the poor. And yet if any
great necessity happened, They are not exempted from all extraordinary charges.
they were compelled to pay also extraordinary charges. As if there were any
high ways to be mended, and any bridges to be made, any ships to be
edified, for to transporte an host, as it appears in the Code, by the laws
of the Emperor. Neither undoubtedly does brotherly charity suffer, that when
other are burdened, they should lie still aboundyng in wealth and riches.
Neither is it to be suffered, that they should live at ease, and other in
pain.

Yet the Pope in his Decretalles ( de Immunitate Ecclesiae in the chapter. Non
minus, where the words of the Counsel holden at Lateranum are cited. And in
the chapter aduersus Consules) will have the Ecclesiastical men utterly
exempted. And Bonifacius the.8. in his.6. de Immunitate Ecclesiarum, in the
chapter Clericis laicos, permits them not to pay any thing. Yea and he
excommucateth the prince, which takes tribute of a Minister of the Church,
and also the Minister himself which pays it. This law as to cruel, Benedictus
the.11. after a sort mitigateth, in Extrauag. de Immunitate Eccles. in the
chap. Quod olim, yet he permits not ye prince to do any thing without askyng
counsel of ye Bishop of Rome. For he in deed does not excommunicate those
princes which do receive tribute of Ecclesiastical men, but only those that
exact it of them. For he permits not, that princes should exact any thing
by their own right, which thing yet sometimes he permits, namely in an
extreme necessity, as in danger of religion and life, so that first there be
had the consent of the Bishop and clergy, and afterward also the agreement of
the Pope. So long therefore has he decreed that they must tarry. So these men
do exempt themselves from the obedience and tributes of princes and kings,
which (as I have before said out of Vlpiane) are the establishementes and
sinews of the public wealth. A saying of Diocletian.
When I think upon these things, I call to remembrance a profitable saying
of Diocletian: of who^ when a Philosopher desired an immunite: This request
(said he) disagreeth with thy profession. Thou professest (said he) that thou will overcome thy affections, but thou show that thou art overcome of
avarice. So these men profess themselves to be spiritual. But in a spiritual
man is nothing more required the^ charity, which counsels us not to live
franchised and securely, when other are oppressed with cares and burthe^s.
Thomas Aquinas brings a place of Genesis to show that Priests are exempted
from tributes, Thomas Aquinas.
not in deed by the law of GOD, but by a law made by princes, and yet
nevertheless agreing with the law of nature. For Pharao king of Egypt provided,
that the Priests should not pay the fifth part of their fruits for tribute,
when as yet so much was exacted of all the other Egyptians. Wherefore he
concludes that Priests are exempted. This place is diligently to be
considred. First let us note, that the Priests of the Egyptians had their daily
living out of the threasory of the king. They had meat and drink and money
given them to live by. Afterward it came to pass, that when the hunger waxed
great, all the Egyptians sold their lands unto the king, therewith to buy
corn to drive away the hunger. But when that famine was past, the king rendered
the lands unto the old possessors, but yet upon this condition, that every
year they should pay him the fifth part, but of the lands of the Priests
there was no fifth part paid. And no marvel: because they sold not their
lands unto the king when they were kept of the common cost. Yet it is to be
thought that they paid so much tribute of their lands as they were wont to
pay before the famine. Neither undoubtedly can any other thing be gathered out
of that place, but that Priests ought to be noorished of the common cost: but
in that they paid not the fifth part, that happened for an other cause, as we
have now declared.

They bring forth also the.8. chapter of Esdras, where Artaxerxes provided that
when he had laid a tribute upon the Jews, there should be nothing levied of
the Levites in the name of a tribute. But this is not to be meruayled at, seeing
ye Levites had no lands to pay tribute of. For unto them pertayned only
oblations, first fruits, and tenthes. For which cause they were released of
tributes. Also Julius Caesar de bello Gallico says, The Druites paid no
tributes. Plini.
that the Druites which were Priests in Gallia paid no tributes. But Plini in
his.16. book and.44. chapter, writes that the Druites had no lands. And yet
are not these things spoken to this end, that I should think that it is not
lawful for the Magistrate to deal somewhat more gently with them, and
somewhat to bear with the^: It is honest that the ^agistrate deal somewhat
more gently with Ministers.
Because they must always apply themselves to holy things, and study for
nothing else. Whereby it comes to pass, that they can not increase their
substance, yea rather very oftentimes they suffer great loss, neither have
they their stipendes, but during their life. This thing only I dissalowe, that
they claim unto themselves immunity, both real and personal, they utterly
refuse both ordinary and extraordinary charges, and that by tyranny or against
the word of God, and for that the Pope will not suffer princes to exact
tributes of Bishops and Ecclesiastical men, when they will themselves: and
because they will not give them, if they be required. The word of God has
otherwise commanded, when it says, let every soul be subject unto the higher
power. And therefore (says he) ye pay tributes. None is excepted: neither
would Christ himself be exempted. Chrysostom.
Chrysostom upon that place of Paul: It may (says he) seem grievous unto
Christians, for that they being the children of God and appointed for the
kingdom of heaven, are subject unto princes of this world. But he answers:
Whilst we are in this life, our dignity is hidden. For it appears not what
we shall be. Wherefore whilst we live here, let it not be grievous unto us to
rise up to the Magistrate, to give them the way, and to honor them. These
things are full of comelynes and are decently done of the saints. Now that
we are regenerate by the word and the spirit, it might seem that we need no
Magistrate. Wherefore the Jews, because they were the people of God, took it
very grievously that sometime the Babilonians reigned over them, sometimes the
Persians, sometimes the Grecians, sometimes the Romans, Anabaptists and
Libertines.
and other nations which knew not God. The Anabaptists also and Libertines
cry that it is a thing unworthy for a Christian to suffer a Magistrate over
him. The Clergy of the Pope also have shaked of this yoke from themselves. But
the Apostles which foresawe that this thing would come to pass, did very often
inculcate, that the Civil power should be obeyed, which precept is two ways
transgressed: one way is, when men say they will not obey the Magistrate, Sin
committed two manner of ways against the Magistrate.
and sediciously make war against him. The other way is, when they circumuent
him by subtility and guile, that he can not execute his office. For there are
in courts, which flatter in the ears of princes, disprayse and praise whom
they lust, complain of the good, as evil, and commend the evil, as good. So
according as they will, some ar preferred to provinces, and other some ar
displaced. A sentence of Diocletian.
Wherefore Diocletian said: A good, wise, and wary Emperor is ofte^tymes sold
of his subjects. The prince is at home in his palace, they that are familiar
with him accuse and defend before him whom they will. Yea and among the
Romans ye fathers which were called Conscripti, yt is appointed, were
sometimes called Circumscripti, that is deceived or abused. The course of
Justice is by many deceates hindered. Neither skilleth it much whether it be
done by violence or by guile, because both ways the public wealth is hurt,
and the institution of God contemned.

Neither is this to be passed over in this place (which has also ben often
spoken of) that the Magistrate is not to be obeyed, if he commau^d any thing
against the word of God. For when he so does, he is no Magistrate. Because (as
Paul says) he is the Minister of God to good. Wherefore if he command things
contrary unto the word of God, he is not in that part his Minister. But thou will say: Sometimes grievous, molestous, and hard things are commanded:
which yet are not against the word of God. What is to be done in those cases?
We must obey: for we are commanded to obey our Lords, though they be hard,
so that they command nothing against the word of GOD: which thing if they
do, we must answer them with this sentence of Peter, which says: we must
rather obey God then men. Nabucad-Nezar would have had his Image worshipped,
the faithful Hebrews answered: Thy image O king we will not worship.
Antiochus commanded the Hebrew woman to eat swines flesh: but she chused to
dye with together her seven children, rather then to commit any thing against
the law of God. Also the Martin, as well in the old time as also in our time,
suffered most extreme punishments, and most cruel deaths, for that they would
not sin against the law of God.

Eusebius. An example of Consta^tius an Emperor.
Eusebius Casariensis writes that Constantius the father of Constantine feigned
upon a time, that he would put out all the Christians which would abide in
their religion, from their honors and offices. But they which were in very
deed godly, of their own free will gave over their dignity, and chused rather
to give place unto dignityes, then to depart from Christ. But this turned to
good unto the^, for the Emperor embraced the^: and those which had denied
Christ for to keep their dignityes, he utterly removed from himself, saying:
that they also would not be faithful unto him, which had broken their faith
unto God. Constantius afterward the son of Constantine, Constantius the
second an Arrian.
being an Arrian, went about to draw the faithful Bishops into his heresy:
but they chused rather to be banished, Iulianus Apostata.
then to follow that wicked purpose of the Emperor. Afterward Iulianus
Apostata opened the temples of Idols, and labored to drive the Christians to
the Ethnike religion and worshipping, but such as were in deed godly had
greater love and regard to Religion of Christ then to their life. Achilles.
Yea and Achilles in Homere says: I will obey the princes, but yet when they
command things honest and just.

And these things pertayne not only to subjects, but also to inferior
Magistrates. For what, Of inferior powers.
if the superior prince command the inferior Magistrates, to receive the
Mass in their Cities? Undoubtedly they ought not obey. If a man will say:
It is the superior power, therefore it must be obeyed: I will answer: In
things civil and humane let them obey as much as they ought, but nothing
against GOD. We must always run unto that principle: Every thing is such
a thing by reason of an other, wherefore that other shall more be such.
Therefore if we obey the Magistrate for gods sake, much more is GOD
himself to be obeyed. Wherefore the inferior Magistrates ought not in such
things to have a regard what the superior power commands, but what God
himself has commanded.

But there are some which say: Whether the consent of the Church is to be
tarried for in reformyng of religion.

A Similitude.


that before we depart from the obedience of the Magistrates as touching
Religion, we must tarry for the consent of the Church. They which say these
things, must mark that Christ never so commanded: Every manne for himself
is wholly bound unto the law of GOD, whether other consent or dissent. If the
good man of a house have many servants, whom he commands to do his
work in the country, but some of them, when their master is absent will be
idle, Paul tarried not for consent.
ought the rest therefore to be idle, because some consent not to their common
business? Did Paul when he was called to preach Christ, tarry for the consent of
his other brethren. No undoubtedly: but as he writteth unto the Galathians,
when it pleased GOD to reuele unto me his son, that I should preach him
among the Gentiles, I did not strayghtwaye ask counsel of flesh and blood,
neither went I unto the Apostles which were before me, but I went into Arabia.
Wherefore he tarried not for the consent of other, but straightwaye obeyed his
vocation. So also ought we to do: after that GOD has opened unto us his
truth, When we must tarry for consent.
we must not tarry. We must in deed tarry for the consent if the thing be
doubtful and dark. But our cause is manifest and without all obscurenes,
which if we will omit till consent be had, the thing it self is lost, An
act of Tiberius.
and good occasions taken away. Tiberius would have brought Christ into the
number of the gods, but he thought to have the consent of the Senate: but the
Senate would not: and by that means it came to pass, that whylest the
consent was tarried for, Christ could not be numbered among the gods, where
as Tiberius was able to have brought it to pass by himself. But I pray you let
them tell us: For whose consent they will tarry? For the Bishops consent? But
they (no doubt) will never consent: for they are sworn enemies unto the truth.

But let us return unto the inferior Magistrate, of whom we spoke before. We
must remember what God has commanded children concerning their parents:
Honor thy father and thy mother. By which words undoubtedly is also
commanded honor and obeysaunce toward superior powers. For they have the
place of parents toward the inferior Magistrates. But let us see what Christ
has pronounced as touching this matter. He which loves father (says he) or
mother more then me, is not worthy of me. The same thing without doubt must
we think of the Magistrate which is the father of the country. We must
obey him, but yet not above the Lord. Yea if he command any thing against
him, he is both to be hated, and also to be denied. Neither is it lawful for
any manne to profess himself to be a Christian, which will not depart from
the superior Magistrate in these things, which are against the word of
GOD. This were to have a will to serve two Lords, and to halte in two parts.
If GOD be God, let us follow him: and that not by halues, but wholly.

But it is to be feared (say they) least whylest we are against the superior
power, we engender danger to the public wealth. To this will I answer
contraryly to that which Demades in the old time answered unto the Athenienses.
An answer of Demades.
Cassander the Macedonian, which succeeded Alexander the great, entreated with
the Athenienses, to woorshippe Alexander for a GOD. They stayed at it, but
Cassander, unless they would consent, seemed that he would invade them with
battle. Wherefore Demades spoke thus unto the people: That it was to be
feared, least whilst they retained heaven, they lost not earth. So do I
answer these men, but chaungyng the words: That it is to be feared, least
whilst they to much regard and defend an earthely public wealth, they
lose heaven. For although the superior power do fume and threaten, we must
stand valiantly to a good cause. For we must woorshippe GOD holyly and godly,
though all Magistrates and the whole world were against us. And therefore if
that superior power command any thing against the law of God, it is not to
be obeyed.

An example of Naboth.
So did Naboth behave himself, he would not grant unto Achab his vyneyarde
which was his inheritance. Neither had he in that thing a respect unto any
thing else, then that the law of GOD should remain unbroken, wherein it was
commanded that ye tribes and famelyes of the Israelites as touching
possessions should remain distinct and separated. Wherefore by it, it was not
lawful for Naboth to alienate his inheritance for ever. Yet a man being
far endetted might have sold his inheritance, till the year of Iubily.
But after that year it returned unto the old possessor again. GOD would by
this means, that the inheritaunces of the Israelites should not be
confounded. Wherefore Naboth would not sell his ancient inheritance, that
the law of GOD should not be broken, whom Magistrates also ought to follow,
and not to give place in their Cities and dominions unto most vnpure Masses
and Papisticall Idolatrye. The Jews, when they were oppressed under the
Mocedonians, The constancy of the Jews against the Macedonians and Romans.
chused to suffer any thing, rather then that the Image of Jupiter Olimpicus
should abide in the Temple of GOD. And when the Romans bare rule over them,
how great sedition and tumult stirred they up, rather then they would suffer
the Silver Eagle, or the Image of Caligula to be set up in the holy place. Yea
and Valentinian ye Emperor being an Arrian (as both Eusebius writes and also
Ambrose in his Epistles) would have had the Church of Millan delivered unto
him, there with his heretics to have celebrated prayers and holy services.
Ambrose.
But Ambrose would not give place, but rather abode day and night in the
Temple together with the people, that the Emperor should not find it empty and
so possess it. If the Hebrews would not have the Temple of GOD polluted with
Idols, and Ambrose suffered not the Church to be contaminated by heretics,
why do faithful Magistrates permit their Temples to Idolatrers, and vnpure
worshippynges of Papists?

They say that these things pertayne not unto them, and that these Temples
are not in their power. What then? If murder should be committed in those
Temples, or any should there conspire against the public wealth, would
they leave murderers and conspirators unpunished there? And would they say yt
these wicked crimes pertayne nothing unto them? Would they willingly and
wittingly suffer these things? I think not, if they were wise, and if they
would keep and defend the public wealth. If a man should object unto them,
this Temple is not yours, neither makes it any matter unto you what is here
done: yea but they would then answer, for as much as it is in our City, in
that it sufficiently pertayneth unto us. But wicked acts, far more grievous
then murders and conspiracyes, are there committed, Idolatry I say, sacrilege,
and blasphemye. And shall a Magistrate which will be called a Christian,
think that these things pertayne nothing unto him? But, say they, the
superior power has commanded these things to be done. To this I have already
largely answered. Now this thing will I add, if the same power should go
about to destroy the City, or to take away or diminishe the privileges,
they would never suffer that, they would rather run to weapons: but these
things which are far more grievous and cruel, are openly and manifestly
done and suffered. And which is much most grievous of all, those things are
there suffered, where many years the Gospel of Christ has been received.

Now rests (because oftentimes the Magistrate excuses himself, saying ye
Ecclesiastical causes pertayne not unto him) to declare yt to be untrue.
Although it be sufficiently declared by those things which I have already
spoken, yet for ye more easy understanding I think it good to add those
things. First I say yt ye Magistrate is the keeper of the law of God, which
conteyneth not only the latter table, but also the first. Wherefore ye
Magistrate is a keeper as well of the one, as of the other. I add that also
which Augustine says, Augustine.
that not only private men, but also kings ought to serve the Lord. For in
the Psalm it is written: In gatheryng together peoples into one, and kings to
serve the Lord. And in an other place. And now O kings understand, be wise
ye that judge the earth. Serve the Lord in fear, etc. A private man (says
Augustine) serves the Lord if he confess his name, and live uprightly. How
kings ought peculiarly to serve the Lord.
But this is not sufficient for a king and Magistrate. For he by his authority
and power ought so to serve the Lord, that he must punish those that are
against him: which thing unless he do, he seems to assent unto blasphemers
and heretics. For the king, when he sees these men, and suffers them, is
as much in fault, as if he should join himself with them, and mainteyne
their wicked acts. Nebuchad-Nezar as soon as ever he knew GOD, made a decree
that whosoever spoke blasphemy against the GOD of Daniel, should dye. The like
decree made Darius afterward. Wherefore our Magistrates also ought utterly to
take away all Idolatryes, blasphemies, and superstitions, as soon as ever they
find them out.

The Ethnike princes never thought that the care over Religion pertayned not
unto their power. Why was Socrates condemned at Athens? The Ethnike princes had
a regard unto religion.
I do not now demand how holyly or justly: (for as all men in a manner
believe, Anitus and Melitus lied against him) this I speak, for that he was for
no other cause condemned, but only for religion, as though he taught new
gods, and led away the youth from the old, and received worshyppyng of the
gods: and he was by a profane Magistrate condemned. Socrates was for religion
sake condemned of a profane Magistrate.
Wherefore the Athenienses thought that the observance and care of religion
pertayned unto their Magistrate. The law of God commanded that the blasphemer
should be put to death, not I think by every private man, or by the Priests,
but by the Magistrates. The Ethnike Emperors also in those first times did for
no other cause rage against the Christians, but because they thought that
matters of religion pertayned unto their judgment seat. And assuredly as
touching this opinion, they were not deceived: for none (as Chrysostom says)
either Apostle or Prophet reproved the people, Chrysostom.
either Jews or Ethnikes, because they had a care over Religion, but they were
deceived in the knowledge of Religion: because they defended their own
religion as true, and condemned the Christian religion, as ungodly and
blasphemous.

Constantine and Theodosius are praised, and very many other holy princes,
because they took away Idols, and either closed up, or else overthrew their
Temples. But they did not these things, but for that they thought that the
charge of Religion pertayned unto them: otherwise they should have been busy
fellows, and should have put their sicle into an other man's harvest. The
Donatistes took this in very ill part, and grievously complained thereof in
Augustines time, because the Catholic Bishops required aid of the Civil
Magistrate against them. Augustine.
But Augustine confuteth them with the self same arguments, which I have a
little before rehearsed, and adds this moreover: Why did ye accuse Cecilianus
Bishop of Carthage before Constantine, if it be wicked for the Emperor to
determine concerning Religion.

Farther, there is gathered by those things which the same father wrote
against Petilianus, and against Parmenianus, and also in many other his
Epistles, how that the Donatistes accused Cecilianus (as it is said) before
Constantine the Emperor, who first sent the cause to Melchiades Bishop of
Rome. And when by him they were overcome, they appealed again unto the
Emperor, neither rejected he their appealation from him, but committed the
matter unto the Bishop of Orleance: by whom they were again condemned. Neither
rested they so, Constantine decideth a matter of religion.
but again appealed unto ye Emperor, who heard the^, decided their cause,
condemned them, and by his sentence absolved Cecilianus. Where are they now
which so often and so impude^tly cry, that there is no appealyng from the Pope,
and that the causes of Religion pertayne not unto the civil Magistrate?

To whom in the old time pertayned the right of calling general counsels?
Pertayned it not unto the Emperors? Counsels were called by Emperors.
As for the counsel of Nice, the counsel of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and
of Chalcedonia, Emperors called them. Leo. 1. of yt name, prayed the Emperor to
call a counsel in Italy, because he suspected the Gretians of the error of
Eutiches: and yet could he not obtain it, and the Bishops were called together
to Chalcedonia, where at the Emperor also was present, as was Constantine at
the counsel of Nice. Neither do I think yt they were there present, to sit
idle and to do nothing, but rather to put forth unto the Bishops what they
should do, and to urge them to define rightly. Theodoretus tells, that
Constantine admonished the fathers to determine all things by the scriptures
of the Evangelists, Apostles, Prophets, and Canonical scriptures. Justinian
also in the Code, Justinian. Augustine.
wrote many Ecclesiastical laws of Bishops and Priests, and other such
like. Yea and Augustine has taught, that the Magistrate ought after the same
manner to punish Idolatrers and heretics, as he punishes adulterers, for as
much as they commit whoredom against God in mind: which is much more heinous
then to commit whoredom in body. And look by what law murderers are put
to death, by the same also Idolatrers and heretics ought to be punished, for
that by them are killed not the bodies, but the souls: although the common
people be stirred up only against homicides, because they see the blood of the
bodies killed, but see not the death of the souls. Undoubtedly it is
profitable for the Magistrate to take upon him this care, and by his authority
to compel men to come to holy sermons, and to hear the word of God: for by
that means it comes to pass, that by often hearing those things, begin to
please, which before displeased. As Hystoryes teach, that God has oftentimes
with most noble victoryes illustrate godly princes, God has prospered princes
which had a care unto Religion.
which have had a care unto these things.

Farther, it can not be denied, but that it is the dewty of the Magistrates to
defend those Cities and public wealths over which they are gouerners, and
to provide that no hurt happen unto them: wherefore for as much as Idolatry is ye
cause of captivity, pestilence, famine, and overthrowing of public wealths,
shall it not pertain unto the Magistrate to repress it, and to keep the true
sound religion? Lastly Paul teaches fathers to instruct their children in
discipline, and in the fear of God: but a good Magistrate is a father of the
country, wherefore by the rule of the Apostle he ought to provide that
subjects be instructed as common children. But kings and princes, which say
that these things pertayne not unto the^, do in the mean time let, give, and
sell Bishoprikes, Abbacies and benefices, to who^ they think good, neither
think they that to be none of their office: only religion they think they
have nothing to do with, and they neglect to provide that they, whom they
exalte to most ample dignityes, should execute their office rightly. Wherefore
this thing only remains for them, even that GOD himself at the length will
look upon these things, and with most grievous punishment take vengeance of
their negligence. These things have I spoken the more at large by occasion of
our Hystory, which makes mention twice or thrice that euilles happened in
Israel, because they had not a king or lawful Magistrate.

The.xx. Chapter.
1 THen all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation was gathered
together as one man, from Dan even to Beerseba, and from the land of Gilead,
unto the Lord in Mizpa.

2 And the corners of all the people, and all the tribes of Israel, assembled
in the Church of the people of God, four hundredth thousand footmen that drew
sword.

3 And the children of Benjamin heard yt the children of Israel were gone up
unto Mizpa. Then the children of Israel said: How is this wickedness
committed?

4 And the man the Leuite, the woman's husband that was slain, answered and
said: I came unto Gibea which is in Benjamin, with my concubine to lodge.

5 And the men of Gibea arose against me, and beset the house round about upon
me by night, thynking to have slain me. And have forced my concubine that she
is dead.

6 Then I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her thorough out
all the country of the inheritance of Israel. For they have committed
abomination and vilany in Israel.

7 Behold all ye children of Israel, give your advise and Counsel herein.


The congregation of the Israelites was assembled together to judge of the
crime. This Hebrew word Edah signifies a Church or an assembly, The end of
assemblyes or meatynges together.
being derived of this verb Adah, which is to testify: because that it is the
use and end of such assemblyes, that the godly should faithfully testify
before God of those things which are put forth to be consulted of.

From Dan even unto Beerseba. Dan and Beerseba.
In this kind of Paraphrasis is comprehended the whole people of Israel. For
these ar the ends of that kingdom: and Dan is the end toward the North,
whereby ye Jews are neighbors unto the Zidonians, and Beerseba toward the
South.

Even unto Gilead. That land is beyond Iordane, The borders of the region of
the Hebrews.
where the two tribes Ruben and Gad together, with half the tribe of Manasses
dwelled. This was the third end toward the East. And over against that toward
the West lay the sea called mare Mediterraneum. Within these terms and lymites
was contained the region of the Hebrews, which they possessed in the land of
Chanaan.

They came into Mizpa unto the LORD. Where Mizpa was.
Mizpa was a place most apt to have assemblyes in, it was not far from
Jerusalem in the Tribe of Judah. In the first book of the Machabites the
third Chapter, it is thus written: When the people by reason of ye tyranny of
the Macedonians fled out of Jerusalem, they assembled together in Mizpa unto
Judas Machabeus. And it is added that yt place was a house of prayer of
ancient time, and lay situate over against the City of Jerusalem. And in this
book we have before heard, how that when Iiphtah should be ordained Judge over
the people, the people assembled together in Mizpa. In Samuels time also ye
people assembled together twice unto that place: once when they should lead an
army against the Philistines, and an other time when Saul should be created
king. Farther, when all the City was overthrown by Nebuchad-Nezar, all the
people fled to Godolia in Mizpa. Moreover besides the opportunity of the place,
was added a notable benefit of God: because, as we read in the.10. chapter of
Iosuah, there assembled thither against the people of Israel a very great
number of kings, for there were not five or six, but very many kings which
were neighbors, entending utterly to destroy the name of the Jews. Yet God
commanded them to be of a good and valiant courage, because he would give
unto his people the victory over them all. And when that thing happened,
contrary to all man's hope, the Hebrews for a monument of so great a benefit,
built in that place an alter unto God. Wherefore it is probable (as the Rabbines
affirm) that in Mizpa began to be a house of prayer. For the people went not
to the tabernacle or to Jerusalem, so often as they had occasion to pray, Every
City had Synagoges.
but had in Cities and Villages certain Synagoges, wherein they prayed
together unto GOD. But to do Sacrifices it was not after that manner lawful
but only at the tabernacle of Moses, or at Jerusalem, after Solomon had builte
the Temple: although high places were sometimes used. Wherefore the people
assembled thither as well for the opportunity of the place, as also by reason
of the ancient Religion: neither thought they it lawefull to begin any thing
without prayers. Which institution, for that the Papists would somewhat
resemble, they first provide to have a Mass of the holy Ghost, song before
they make any leagues, or rather conspiracyes against Christ.

It is said that they assembled together unto the Lord, to pray together
unto the Lord. D. Kimhi.
Although David Kimhi thinks that this was added: because wheresoever is a
multitude of the godly, there is GOD also present. And to confirm that
sentence, he brings a place put of the Psalm: GOD stood in the Synagoge of
Gods. For Judges which in this place are called Gods, when they give
judgment, ought not to think that they have their own cause in hand, but
Gods cause, as Iosaphat the godly king showed them. I do not dissallowe
this sentence: for it is both godly, and also it makes men to understand,
that when assemblyes are godly had, then do men assemble unto GOD: which
thing if men in these days would consider, great men would handle
public causes with more fear of GOD. Howbeit this is for certain that the
Israelites assembled not in Silo, as some think.

And the corners of all the people assembled. The Hebrewe word is Penoth,
which properly signifies corners: but in this place it is taken for
Capitaines, heads over ten, Ce^turious, Tribunes, and governors of warlike
affairs. For they after a sort are corners, strengthes and stays of an army.
Wherefore the villages of the Holuetians in the Italian toungue are called
Cantones. Wherefore the Hebrews come and assemble in Mizpa, not rashly, but in
their orders. They had not in deed a king, or mighty Magistrates, or Senadrim,
as it is thought, for they were sore decayed and weakened by the Philistines.
Yet they retained among themselves some order and discipline.

Four hundredth thousand footmen. When they went out of Epypte, they were
666000. The number of the Israelites diminishe.
men. It seems that the number was now diminished. And no marvel, because
they had been afflicted with many and grievous calamities. Also the tribe of
Benjamin was away, which peradventure had thirty thousand soldiers. For that
tribe was both ample and also mighty.

And the children of Benjamin heard. The Beniamites would not be present, they
only heard what should be done. David Kimhi
Kimhi admonishes that these words are put in by a parenthesis: for there is
no cause showed why they would not be among them.

And the children of Israel said: Tell how this wicked act was committed. Kimhi
thinks that these things are to be red in ye vocative case, as though it
should have been said: O ye children of Israel, declare the whole matter in
order as it was done: in the mean time it seems that the Beniamites are
noted, because they would not come unto the assembly, neither take away evil
from among them. The people assembled together to understand the cause, that
for as much as there was no Magistrate, the people might publicly give
judgment of so heinous a wicked crime.

The Leuite answered. This is in deed a short accusacion, It is proved that
Concubines were wives
but yet it comprehends al. In the mean time, this is to be noted, that this
Leuite is called the husband of the woman that was slain, which yet is called
his Concubine. Where by is proved the sentence which we have before affirmed,
namelye that lawful wives also are called Concubines.

They intended to kyl me. He speaks modestly and shamefastly, and declares
the wicked act of the Gabaonites. Leui ben Gerson says, that he so spoke,
because he was ready to dye, rather then then he would suffer so great a
villainy.

Behold al ye children of Israel. When he had finished his tale, he byddeth
them to take counsel, what was to be done in this matter. Then follows the
deliberation.

8 Then all the people arose as one man, saying: There shall not a man of us go
to his tent, neither shall any turn into his house.

9 But now this is the thing which we will do to Gibea, against it by lot.

10 And we will take ten men of the hundredth through out all the tribes of
Israel, and an hundredth of the thousand, and a thousand of ten thousand, to
bring vittayle unto the people, that they may do (when they come to Gibea of
Benjamin) according unto all the villainy, that it has done in Israel.

11 So all the men of Israel were gathered against the City, knit together as
one man.

12 And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the Tribe of the children of
Benjamin, saying: What wickedness is this that is committed among you?

13 Now therefore deliver us those wicked men which are in Gibea, that we may
slay them, and take away evil from Israel. But the children of Benjamin would
not obey the voice of their brethren the children of Israel.


They al even to one determined, that so great a villainy should be avenged, if
the Beniamites would not punish the guilty, as it was meet they should. The
sum is: They will not suffer the wicked act to escape unpunished. But how
these things might be rightly and orderly done and ordered, was first to be
considered. For there was a great number of men, namelye.4. hundredth thousand.
Wherefore out of that number they chused some to bring vittayles: and other some
to assail the enemies. But before all things, they sent a message unto the
Beniamites, that if they would deliver the wicked men, they would cease from
war. But some man will say, was it sufficient to deliberate to fight, and
only to hear the accusacion of the Leuite? Undoubtedly it seems that he
ought to have proved that fact, What witnesses the Leuite might have.
both by reasons, and also by witnesses. But it is probable, yt he had his
servant to witness, which was present when those things were done, and
peradventure that old man, to whom he had turned in. For it is to be thought
that he was departed from the Gabaonites, for as much as he could not abide
their wickedness. But howsoever the matter was, the people before they go to
hand strokes, decreed to send messengers unto the Beniamites, that by them they
might excuse their fact, and defend them selves. And by that means the other
part, namely the guilty, was heard.

In the mean time they choose those by lots which should be appointed to
certain offices. This was the peoples doing: and therefore it was done by
choice, that they might know, who should carry vitailes unto the camp, and who
should fight. To cast lots ar most apt for the popular state.
And to cast lot seems to be the most meetest way for the state of the
people: for the people loves equality of laws, and equability, which seems
then to be chiefest, when choice is permitted unto lots. Wherefore where as the
people govern, Magistrates are oftentimes chosen by lots. So is it also in
hosts, yt when soldiers will, they do many things between themselves by
lots. This therefore was the manner thereof, that the tenth man of the whole
people should be had, so that one of ten should by lot be taken, ten of a
hundredth, one hundredth of a thousand, and a thousand also of ten thousand. This
seems to be a very profitable and commodious way. For now oftentimes in
hosts a man shall se more rascals and vitlers, then soldiers. But by this
means or decree, one tended up on nine soldiers, and ten upon ninetye. And
their charge was to provide vyttailes, because they knew not how long that
expedicion should endure. So in Titus Liuius Quintius Cincinnatus, Titus
Liuius.
being created Dictator in a perilous time of the publik wealth, and having a
journey to make by night, straightway commanded, that the youth should gather
together stakes and make ready weapons: but the old men and such as were not
apt for war, should dress vittailes for the rest, as much as should serve
them for five days. Here we see that the Dictator had his choice of them al.
But among the Israelits there was no Dictator: wherefore the matter was put to
lots. In the book of Joshua also in the first chapter, it is written that Joshua
commanded the tribunes to gather an army, and that al of them should have
meat ready dressed to their hands, when they should pass over Iordane. For
they were ignorant what should happen unto them.

As it were one man. They were agreed together, and also of one mind: and
nothing is more profitable prosperously to make war, then the concord of
soldiers.

War when it is not proclaimed, seems theft.
The tribes of Israel sent messengers. The Israelites do appoint nothing rashly
or headlong. This reason was most just, that before they made any invasion by
war, they should proclaim war. For where that is not done, it may seem to
be rather theft, then war. Farther, they would that if any had been
innocent among them, they should not have wrapped them selves together with
those wicked men. Deliver unto us (say they) those which have committed so
great wickedness. That all the people may punish them, if ye will not. And they
bring forth the law of God: That evil may be taken away from among the people.
By evil is understand sin and wickedness: that seems to be taken away, when
it is punished. How evil is taken away.
But if it remain unpunished, then remains that God will take vengeance
thereof. Other do thus expound it: That we may take away evil, that is, that we
may turn away from Israel the calamities, which for that sin seemed to hang
over it. So Jesus in the Gospel healed al diseases and griefs in the people:
when as yet he came not for diseases sake, but for sins. But diseases are
inflicted because of sins. Therefore seeing he took away the cause, namely
sin, he took away also the effects of sin. They sent messengers, not
only to one famely of the tribe of Benjamin, but to all. Schebat in Hebrew is
a tribe, but here it is taken for a famely. And in very deed tribes were nothing
else then famelies, coming of the Patriarchs, namely the children of Jacob.
But the tribe of Benjamin had ten famelies, Benjamin had ten fa^elies. R.
Selomoh.
who took their names of their first Parents. And those ten famelies were so
notable and abundant, that R. Selomoh says, that Rachel after a sort brought
forth twelve tribes, that is, there came out of Benjamin ten famelies, which
might be likened unto ten tribes: Farther, of Joseph were borne Ephraim and
Manasses. Wherefore the Tribe of Benjamin was very populous and mighty. Whereby
also it came to pass that they trusted to much in their own strength, and
thought that they were able to resist al Israel. Wherefore they would neither
deliver the guiltye, nor yet punish them. For they thought it ignominious unto
them, if they should have don either of them. They would not give place to
sound counsels, wherefore they could not deny, but that war was iustlye made
against them, which by honest means they might have avoided. But the rest of
the people are to be praised, because they with so great moderacion took in
hand so great a matter. First, A comparyson between ye people and the
Be^iamites.
they would know the cause, then send messengers, to require that the guiltye
might be put to death: lastly they would assay althinges, rather then they
would make war against their brethren. On the contrary side, the Beniamites
do al things peruerslye, they take no counsel, they neither deny nor excuse
their act, they will not deliver the guilty, but prepare them selves to
defend. And so for the wickedness of a few, they contaminate them selves all.
And as Paul says to the Romans, they do not only evil them selves, but
also consent to them that do evil. Neither could they excuse themselves by
ignorance of the law, which they had so often heard. They acknowledge that the
wicked act was most grievous, which yet they allow in defending the guilty.

14 But the children of Benjamin gathered them selves together out of the
Cities into Gibea, to go out and fight against the children of Israel.

15 And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time.26. thousand men
that drew swoorde, besides the inhabiters of Gibea, which were numbered.vi.
hundredth chosen men.

16 Of all this people there were.7. hundredth chosen men, that were shut in
their right hand: all these could slyng stones at an hear breadth, and not
fail.

17 Also the men of Israel beside Benjamin, were numbered.400. thousand men that
drew sword. Al these were men of war.

18 And they arose up, and went up to Bethel, and asked of God, and the
children of Israel said: which of us shall go up first to fight against the
children of Benjamin? And the Lord said: Judah shall be first.

19 Then the children of Israel rose up earelye, and camped against Gibea.

20 The men of Israel I say went out to battle against Benjamin, and the men
of Israel put them selves in array, to fight against them beside Gibea.

21 And the children of Benjamin came out of Gibea, and slew down to the
ground of the Israelites that day.xxii. thousand me^.

22 And the people the men of Israel plucked up their hearts, and set their
battle again in array, in the place where they put them in a ray the first
day.

23 And the children of Israel went up, and asked the Lord saying: Shall I go
again to battle against the children of Benjamin my brethren? And the Lord
said: Go up against them.

24 Then the children of Israel came near the children of Benjamin the second
day.

25 And the second day Benjamin came forth to meet them out of Gibea, and slew
down to the ground of the children of Israel again.xviii. thousand men. Al
they could handle the sword.


The Beniamites assembled together to Gibea, because they saw all the brunt of
the battle bent thitherwarde. They took out the choice of their soldiers,
wherein were not comprehended the inhabiters of Gibea, which were in number
six hundredth men of war, and men picked out. And it is added for a thing
wonderful, that there were of the Beniamites seven hundredth, which had an
impediment in their right hands, but used slings, and leuened so nigh, yt they
missed not even an hear breadth. What hand is said to be closed
It is said that they had their hands closed, because the sinews were bound,
neither could the spirits have their mouings freely. For which cause they were
unapt to draw swords. The latin translacion has ambi dexteros, because they
could use both hands, as though either hand were the right hand. Leafthanded.
And they which excuse this translacion, do say that they so used the leaft
hand, as if they had had no right hand. I think rather that they were leaft
handed. But in that it is added that they leueled so rightly, that they missed
not a hear breadth, Hyperbole.
I think it be spoken by this figure Hiperbole, whereby their cunning and
industry might the more be commended.

In the Hebrew it is read that the Beniamites had.xxvi. thousand soldiers.
But in the latin interpretacio^ are put only.xxv. thousand, for this cause as
I suppose, because in that last conflict wherein the Beniamites were
overthrown, we read only of.xxv. thousand that were slain. Wherefore if a
man compare the first number with the latter, there are a thousand over, whom
other think that when their host was discomfited, and things past all hope,
they turned back and fled into Europe. D. Kimhi.
But Kimhi thinks more rightlye, that they were myssing, when the Beniamites
got the upper hand in those two first conflictes. For it is not credible that
they so overcame, that they lost none of their soldiers. Wherefore if thou add
them unto the.xxv. thousand, which fell in the third battle, then is the whole
number of.xxvi. thousand explete. These things I know are of small weight:
which yet I thought good to note, because the Rabbines have written many
things of them, and the translacions do differ.

When the soldiers were chosen out, and al things set in an order, the
Israelites send to Bethel, and ask counsel of God. The Ark of the Lord was
at that time in Siloh, Bethel is not always the proper name of a place.
and from thence were given answers. And Bethel in this place is not the name of
a City, but is taken for the house of God, and signifies a place where the
Arc of the covenant remained. Farther, Siloh was not far from Gibea,
wherefore it was no hard matter for the Israelites to send thither to ask
counsel of God. They asked the Lord, which tribe should have the first place in
the battle, for some one tribe must needs be the first. Answer was made, that
this should be given unto the tribe of Judah. That was of all the tribes most
populous and noble, unto which afterward came the kingdom. They enquired not
who should be the captain of the war, but which tribe should begin the
battle first against the enemies.

Why they doubted not of the victory.

Wherein the Israelits sinned.


They nothing doubt of the victory: neither demand they any thing concerning
it. They saw that their quarrel was just. They saw also that they were more
in number and multitude, and that it would be easy to overcome so few:
wherefore they pray not unto God to give them the victory, which was a grievous
sin, as R. Leui ben Gerson affirms. Wherefore God being offended, suffered
them twice to fall before their enemies, and that wonderfullye. For God hates
nothing more then pride, and to much trust in our own strengthes. He will also
have men know, that victory is both to be required, D. Kimhi.
and also to be hoped for at his hands only. But Kimhi says, that other
think that this so great misfortune of war happened, because of the idolatry
of Micha the Israelite. As though God should in this manner have dealt with them:
Ye will avenge the injury done unto a man, being a Leuite, but ye neglect and
wyncke at the contumely which I suffer at the Danites hands, who publicly
worship Idols. Either of these sentences is very likelye, although neither of
them is gathered out of the text. Howbeit this we may affirm, that there were
some certain causes, whereby God was excedinglye provoked of the Israelites. But
what those causes were, though we know not, it is no marvel. For the counsels
of God are hidden and obscure. Order at the length required this, that the
Israelites should first avenge the contumely of God himself, and afterward of
the Leuite. But this is sufficiently declared in the text, What things the
Israelites had omitted,
that they at those two first times came not unto God earnestly enough. They
came in deed: but they neither fasted, nor killed sacrifices, nor made any
prayers, as far as the holy history declares. But at the last, having already
two overthrows, all of them with a lowly and humble mind come unto God, al
pray together and fast. These things seem sufficiently to declare, that they
were not before in the house of the Lord in such manner as they ought to have
been. For if they had had true faith, they would have before also proclaimed
both common prayers, and also fasting. Mourning, fasting, and prayers are the
effects of faith and true repentance. These things for that they had not, it
is probable that therefore they received so great loss at the first and second
conflict. This thing also might be a cause, for that they made war to much
securely and contemptuously, as they which did put their confidence in the
number and strength of their own men. Wherefore they contemned the enemy, The
contempt of enemies hurts very much
then the which nothing is more unprofitable to those yt shall fight. For
contempt of the enemies engenders negligence in the hosts.

26 Then all the children of Israel ascended, and all the people, and they came
into the house of God, and wept, and abode there before the Lord. They fasted
also that day unto the evening, and offered burnt offringes, and peace
offeringes before the Lord.

27 And the children of Israel asked the Lord (for there was the Ark of the Lord in those days.

28 And Pinhas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron stood before it in
those days) saying: Shall I yet go any more to battle against the children of
Benjamin my brethren, or shall I cease? The Lord answered: Go up, for to morrow I
will deliver them into your hand.

29 And Israel set men to lie in wait round about Gibea.

30 And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin the
third day, and put them selves in array against Gibea, as at other times.

31 Then the children of Benjamin coming out to meet the people, were drawn
from their City, and they began to smite and to kyl of the people as at other
times, even by the ways (whereof one goes up to the house of God, and the
other to Gibea) in the field, upon a thirty men of Israel.

32 And the children of Benjamin said: They are fallen before us as at the
first. But the children of Israel said: Let us fly, and pluck them away from
the city, even to the high ways.

33 And when all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put them
selves in array in Baal-Thamar: in the mean while, the men of Israel that lay
in wait, came forth of their place, even out of the meadows of Gibea.

34 And they came over against Gibea, ten thousand chosen men of all Israel,
and the battle was sore: for they knew not that the evil was near them.

35 And the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel, and the children of Israel
destroyed of the Beniamites the same day.xxv. thousand and one hundredth men.
All they could handle the sword.

36 So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten down, for the
children of Israel gave place unto the Beniamites, because they trusted to the
men that lay in wait, which they had laid besides Gibea.

37 And they that lay in wait hasted, and brake forth toward Gibea, and the
embushment drew themselves along, and smote all the City with the edge of the
sword.

38 Also the men of Israel had appointed a certain time with the embushmentes,
that with great speed they should make a great flame and smoke rise out of
the City.

39 And the men of Israel retired in the battle, and Benjamin began to smite
and kill the men of Israel, about.xxx. persons, for they said: Surely they are
stricken down before us, as in the first battle.

40 But when the flame began to arise out of the City, as a pyller of smoke,
the Beniamites looked back, and behold, the flame of the City began to ascend
up to heaven.

41 Then the men of Israel turned again, and the children of Benjamin were
astoyned, for they saw their destruction at hand.

42 Therefore they fled before the men of Israel unto the way of the
wyldernes, but the battle ouertooke them, also they which came out of the
Cities, slew them among them.

43 Thus they compassed the Beniamites about, and chased them at ease, and
ouerran them, eue^ over against Gibea on the East side.

44 And there fell of Benjamin.xviii. thousand men, which were all men of war.

45 And they turned and fled unto the wyldernes, unto the rock Rimmon, and the
Israelites glayned of them by the way.v. thousand men, and pursued after them
unto Gidehon, and slew two thousand men of them.

46 So that all that were slain that day of the Beniamites were 25 thousand men
that drew sword, which were all men of war.

47 But.vi. hundredth men turned and fled to the wyldernes, unto the rock of
Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmo^.4. months.

48 Then the men of Israel returned unto the children of Benjamin, and smote
them with the edge of the sword, from the men of the City unto the beasts,
and all that came to hand, also they set on fire all the Cities that they could
come by.


After that the children of Israel had had the overthrow, they went up unto
the house of God, and wept there. And assuredly somewhat they did that belonged
unto piety, but yet not so much as they ought: for they fasted not, neither
offered they Sacrifices, which are tokens of a full faith and conversion. Why
God had the^ ascend when they should be overthrown.
How beit the Lord byddeth them to ascend, because he would not fear them
away from the battle, which they had in a just cause taken in hand. He did
not strayghtway give the victory, but still permitted them to be afflicted of
their enemies, whereby they might understand their faults, and more earnestly
desire pardon. There perished again.xviii. thousand of them, after which
slaughter it is said that they came all of them humbly unto God. There they
wept, not counterfetlye or lightlye, but bytterly and earnestlye, and that all
the whole day. They fasted, they offered burnt offerynges and peace
offeringes. Burnt offeringes were they which were all whole burnt, but of peace
offeringes a certain part was offered, an other part was given unto the
Priest, and an other part returned unto him which offered it, to eat it with
his friends in the sight of the Lord. The Hebrews being now oppressed with
troubles, do not only pray unto God, and bewail their sins, but also
fast, and after fasting institute a communion among themselves. In that it is
said that the Ark of the Lord was there, we must understand that of Siloh:
for there it continually abode. It is said that the priest stood before the
Lord: and that is nothing else, then that he exercised the holy ministry.

They asked: Shall we ascend, or shall we cease? This is a more full
interrogacion then the first were.
This is a more full interrogacio^ then the first were: for at the first time
they only demanded, which tribe should first assail the enemies. At the
second time, whither God would that they should ascend against their enemies.
But now they demand whither they shall go up, or whither they shall cease? As
though they utterly referred the matter unto the will of God. God answers them
more gently and faith: Go up, to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand. The
things that are now done and set forth, serve to our commodity. We ought to
attempt nothing, whereof we are not before certain, whither it be just or
unjust. For the true knowledge whereof, we must seek for the answer of God out
of the holy scriptures. The Israelites would not wrap the innocents with the
gilty, and therefore they sent messengers at the beginning, which thing at this
day is not observed in making of wars. Our Capitains and Emperors do althinges
without respect, and do no les rage against children, old men, maidens, and
widows, then against those which have chieflye offended. The Beniamites are
worthily to be condemned, because they defended an unjust cause, and thought
that it would be ignominious unto the^, if they should deliver any of theirs to
be punished, which thing we see happens very often times in these days. For
masters defend their servants, they care not by what right or wrong. For if
their servant, although he be gilty, be cast into prison, they think that
thereby comes a great ignominy unto themselves, their famely, and to their
court. But they ought to have justice before their eyes, and not to have a
regard to any thing else, then that the laws should be kept. The Beniamites did
put their confidence in their own strength, and the Israelites in their great
number, and also in the iustnes of their cause. But both of them sinned, for
confidence is not to be put either in the strength of soldiers, or in the
number, or in the justness of the cause, but only in the mercy of God.

Although the cause be good, yet does not the thing always succeed
prosperously. The Beniamites in a most wicked cause got the victory the first
time, the second time, yea and the third time, yet at the last they suffered
punishment, and were overthrown and slain. For God, howsoever he do for a
time wink at the wicked acts of men, yet he suffers them not always to
escape unpunished. For the ungodly, as the holy prophets admonish us,
floorishe for a short time: but if thou a little while pass by and return, he
shall be no where. That the Israelites were so often overcome, Why god would have
the Israelites overcome.
it was the work and counsel of God, not because he would help the wicked men,
but to allure his to true and just repentace.

We may also hereby learn, that in all matters that we take in hand, three
things are chiefly to be required: first that the cause be just which we will
defend. Three things required in every thing that we take in hand.
Farther, that we put not the abilitye of performing the same in our own
strength, but in God: lastly, that we put to our endeavor and diligence.
Otherwise to despise the means, whereby we may attain to our purpose, is
nothing else the^ to te^pt God. It is not enough to say: I have a good cause, I
will commit ye residue unto god. We must also stretch out our strengthes, and
ad to our diligence: Wherefore we may not put our affiance in any cause,
although it be never so just.

Some man will say: what difference then is there between a just cause, and an
unjust? There is great difference between, to have a good cause, and to have an
evil.
Much undoubtedly. For in an unjust cause thou can not call upon God, or trust
that he will be an helper unto thee. For an unjust cause is under ye curse of
God, and to call upon God to help, it is even like as if I should desire help
of a man, to fight against my self. But if the cause be good, every man may
put his confidence in God, and call upon him, but yet not in such manner to put
hope in the equity of the cause, but that thou may hope, that God for his
mercies sake will be an aid unto thee. The success makes not the cause
either good or evil.
If the success be evil, the cause is not therefore straightwaye good.
Nebuchad-Nezar destroyed Iewrye, and led away the nations that were
adjoining captives into Babylon, and yet was not his cause therefore good. Gods
cause in deed was just: for he would by that means take vengeance of a
rebellious people. But Nebuchad-Nezar thought nothing else but to exercise his
tyranny. Joseph, because he would avoid adoultery, was cast into prison, and
yet was not his cause therefore ever a whyt the worse. David was eiected of
Absolon, and yet was not Absolons cause therefore any whyt the better. In our
time Princes that are Protestants have had ill succes in war, and yet is
therefore not the cause of the Gospel to be thought the worse. The Beniamites
now got the victory more then once or twice, in a cause most wicked. The holy
Martirs in our times are most miserably slain of Tyrannes, and that with most
cruel kind of torments, and yet we nothing doubt but that their cause is most
excellent. England had of late, as touching the word of God and truth, a Church
most rightly instituted, which was afterward miserablye disiected and
separated: neither followed it thereby that the cause of religion was evil. But
now thanks be given unto God which has restored it.

From the cause to the effects is a firm argument, where the effect follows
of necessitye the cause.
There may in deed be drawn an argument of the euentes, but not of necessity,
yea scarce probable. For the passage from the effects to the cause, is not
firm, unless the effects and causes be necessary. Wherefore this argument is
of no force: The Israelites have a good cause, therefore they shall not fall in
battle: for it may be, that God will illustrate his glory, yea even with the
slaughter of them. And this argument also is no stronger then that: The
Beniamites overcame, wherefore they had the better cause. These things I have
spoken the more at large, to the end we should not waver in mind, or doubt of
the goodness of our cause, if peradventure the things go not prosperously with
us.

The godli when they have received the overthrow, flee unto God.

The ungodly gave not thanks unto God for the victory.


Farther, in this place is to be noted the nature of godly men: when they have
received the overthrow, they flee unto God. But the ungodly, even when they get
the victory, do not give thanks unto God, as now we read not that the
Beniamites gave thanks unto God for their good successes, we have heard of
none of their prayers, nor of any confidence they put in God: yea rather there
arose so great security and insolencye of some of their successes, that they
brake out of the City, and pursued the enemies, farther then was meet or
convenient. But at the last they received the just fruit of their pride.
Contrarilye the Israelites being afflicted with miseries, got themselves unto
God. Unto who^ god answered, yt he would the next day deliver the Beniamites
into their hands.

In the two first interrogacions, the Israelites seemed to doubt nothing of the
victory: because they had yet a confidence in their own strengthes and number,
but after the second overthrow, they showed in very deed a lowlye and humble
mind. Shall we go up (say they) or shall we cease? As though they should have
said: O Lord Jehovah, all the victory lies in thine hand, therefore we wholly
commit our selves to thy mercy: show thou unto us, what we ought to do. If thou
command us, we are ready to leave of from our enterprise. Leui ben Gerson.
David Kimhi
This is a perfect interrogacion, after the opinion of Leui ben Gerson. Kimhi
has noted many things in this place, not a little profitable for the
understanding of other scriptures, concerning interrogacions and oracles. This
says he, was the manner of asking of God. He which would enquire concerning
any public affair, The manner of asking of God.
or otherwise of any weighty matter, came unto the priest, and he putting on
an Ephod, stood before the Ark of the Lord. In the Ephod, or in the breast
plate were twelve precious stones, wherein were written the names of the twelve
tribes, and there were also set the names of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and in
those stones were all the letters of the Alphabete. The asker ought to turn his
face unto the priest, and to ask, not in deed so apertely that his voice
should be heard, neither yet so softly, that he should only think in mind
the things which he desired, but in such sort, as we read that Hanna prayed
in the first book of Samuel, where it is said that she moved her lips only,
neither spoke she any thing that could be heard. Then was the oracle in this
manner given unto the Priest. By the power of the holy ghost certain letters
appeared above the other in the breast plate, and that either in place or in
brightness, wherein the Priest red the oracle and will of God. And these things
are those Vrim and Thu^mim, which the Priest bare in his breast plate. This is
Kimhies opinion. Unto whom, what faith is to be given, I cannot tell. For it
might be, that the spirit of god did without letters give oracles by the voice of
the high Priest, whose heart he inspired with prophecy.

This Pinhas which is written to have stand now before the Lord, Pinhas.
is not called by his proper name only, but also by the names of his father
and grandfather, are added with all, that is, the names of Eleazar and Aaron:
which is don so much the more diligently, because no man otherwise would believe
that he could have lived so long. Therefore the Readers would have thought that
this had been some other, rather then the son of Eleazar. For if thou will
count the years, Pinhas lived long.
thou shall find that there were no les then.300. years passed, from the time of
that noble act of Pinhas, unto this age whereof we now speak. Wherefore it
might seem incredible that it should be the same man. Howbeit for as much as
the holy scriptures do testify this thing, we ought so to believe. Neither
undoubtedly is it any marvel, though God prolonged his life so long. For
when he had slain the harlot of Midian, and the Prince of the Tribe of Simeon,
even in that their wicked act, God judged that he had employed his labor
excellently well, and that he had done a most notable act. Therefore my covenant
(said he) shall be with h^^ life and peace. By which words was promised unto him
long life and honorable, which he should execute in his priesthood. Of what
tribe Elias was.
There are some which produce his life farther, and say that he was Elias. But
that has no ground of the holy scriptures. Yea rather some think that Elias
came of the tribe of Benjamin, and not of the tribe of Leui, whereof Pinhas came.

Of Merits.
Where as it is said that the Israelites went up, wept, fasted, and did
sacrifice, Against merits
we must not think that by those actions they satisfied the anger of god: for
we have no merits, for as much as we cannot perfectly obey the law of God.
Farther, if there were any merits of ours, they should consist of such works
which we are not of duty bound to do unto God: otherwise if we owe unto God
whatsoever we do, what thing can our merit then be? But both we our selves and
al ours, doings I say, sayings, thoughts, and counsels are due unto god.
Wherefore our merits do utterly perish. Moreover those works whereby we
should merit, ought to be of our selves: which cannot be affirmed, for as
much as it is god which works in us both to will and to perform, and that not
as we will, but according to his good will. Augustine.
Wherefore Augustine was accustomed very well to say, yt God which crowns his
gifts in us. And in his.100. Epistle ad Sixtu^ Presbiterum, Paul (says he)
when he had said: The reward of sin is death, did not straightway add
contrarily: The reward of righteousness is everlasting life. But Grace says
he, is eternal life, for that is not rendered to our merits, but is given
freely. He might in deed have written after the same manner if he would. For
the holy Scripture sometimes so speaks. But for that he was a defender of
grace, he would not give occasion unto his enemies to impugn it. Farther,
our works, how holy so ever they appear, are nevertheless vnpure and
imperfect. Wherefore they are woorthye rather of punishment, then that they
should deserve any good. And without doubt they should be punished, were not
the redemption and justification which we have by Christ our Lord.

There ought also to be some anallogy or proporcion between merits and
rewards, whereof there is none between our works and eternal life. For as
Paul says: The sufferinges of this time, are not worthy of the glory to come,
which shall be revealed in us. This is to be added, that in the holy scriptures
is no where found the name of merit. Some in deed are wont to bring the.xvi.
chap. of Ecclesiasticus, and there they say it is written: All mercy shall make
place unto every one, according to the merits of his works. But they which
object this thing, let him look upon the Greek text, wherein it is thus
written: (...), which is in latin: Deus omni misericordiae faciet locum, and
quisque iuxta opera sua inueniet. Which in english signifies: God will make
place unto al mercy, and every man shall find according unto his works. But
in these words there is no mention made of merit, only this is written,
that whose works are good, they shall be in good case, but yet their works
are not said to be merits or causes of reward. I will not speak how that
book is not in the Canon: because Paul and the Gospels use the same form of
speaking. But of that which is written unto the Hebrews, by such Sacrifices
God is well pleased, I have before spoken: now with one word only will I
briefly touch the thing. This word of deserving is not found in the Greek.
In Greek is read (...), by which word is only signified, that the good
works of the faithful are grateful and acceptable unto God.

Of the word reward.
But as touching this word reward, which some, because they do not well
understand it, do take for merit, we must divide it two manner of ways. For
that is sometimes called a reward, which is given freelye, but yet is
promised, by adding of some work, whereby men should be styrred up to do well.
So eternal life may be called a reward, not yt we deserve the same by our
works, but because by a certain order appointed of God, it follows our good
works. But sometimes a reward is that which is due unto good deeds, Whither
eternal life may be called a reward
and is rendered unto them of duty. After this manner eternal life cannot be
called the reward of our works. Wherefore Paul to the Romans says: Abraham
believed God, and it was imputed unto him for righteousness. But unto him which
woorketh reward, is not imputed according to grace, but according to debt.
Wherefore eternal life, for as much as it is not of right dew, cannot be a
reward, if the word be taken in that signification. But when they thus
reason: there is a reward given, ergo there is a merit. The argument is not
firm, A genere ad species.
because in affirming we may not descend from the general word to the
species. Neither does he rightly conclude which says: It is a living creature,
ergo it is a man. This general word reward has two species: therefore this
argument is not firm, if we say: It is a reward, Ergo it is plain that it
must be given of dewty.

This saying also of Jeremy is to be added: Cursed be every one that puts
his hope in man, and calls flesh his strength. But all our things,
whatsoever they be, are not without flesh. Wherefore it is not lawful for us to
put confidence in them. Jerome.
And Jerome writing upon that place has very well brought in many things,
whereby may be understood that in our works there is no regard of merit.
Yea and the Papists also themselves, which are the patrones of merits, are
sometimes compelled to confess that our merits are nothing at all. For on the
2. Sunday in the Adue^t, thus they pray: Be pacefied O god with the prayers of
our humility, and where help of merits do want, succor us with the aids of of
thy mercy. The fathers, when in their writings they oftentimes inculcate this
word of meriting, do by it signify nothing else, then to get, to obtain, and
to atteine to. And as many of them as have written purelye, the same have
detested the consideration of merits, whereof the papists so much bost.
Wherefore the Israelites were not heard thoroughe the merit of their tears or
prayers, but because by faith in Christ to come they obtained forgeuenes of
sins, and so by his merit only they returned into favor again with god.

They offered sacrifice. What profit the sacrifices of the law had.
Although I have before largely spoken of the sacrifices in the old time, yet
I think it good here also briefly to touch what profit was of them in the old
law. When men are vexed with calamityes, they begin to think upon their sin,
they look upon the law: where when they behold the wrath of god kindled for
sin, they are in heart dejected: in which perturbatio^ there remains no
remedy, but to get them unto Christ, which is the sum and end of all
sacrifices. Him did the fathers, which were godly, embrase by faith: but in the
sacrifices, as often as the sacrifice was slain, so often the death of Christ
was after a sort set before the eyes of those that stood by, by whose death
the sins of the world should be taken away. The sacraments of the olders and
ours at al one, but differ in outward Simboles and signs.
Wherefore they had after this manner a communion among themselves in Christ,
which by sundry notes and signs daily signified to the people in the old time,
wherhe^ce they by faith received unto their salvation both his death and the
fruit thereof as we do. Wherefore Paul says truly unto the Corrinthians: All
did eat of one, and the self same spiritual meat, and all drunk of one, and
the self same spiritual drink. And they drunk of the spiritual rock
following them. And that rock was Christ. Wherefore the elders had their
mysteries and sacraments, whereby they also embrased Christ. And undoubtedly as
touching the thing, they had the same that we have, the difference was only in
the Simboles.

But Augustine notes in the^ certain other differences, Augustine.
Differences between the Sacraments of the elders and ours.
which here to rehearse shall not be unprofitable. First they had many
sacraments, and we but few: the Simboles of our sacraments are water, bread,
and wine: they had oxen calves, sheep, gotes, doves, turtle doves, bread, wine,
oil and such other like. Farther, the condition of our sacraments is diverse
from the equality of theirs: for theyrs were more grievous, but ours are by
Christ made both easier and also lighter. Moreover those simboles that were
given unto them, were contained in one country only, but ours ar common to the
whole world. Farther in them Christ was setforth, as he which should come: but
to us, as he which is now alredye come. But as touching salvation there is no
difference. For the same salvation and the same Christ was offered unto them,
which is settefoorth unto us. This is also to be added, that our Sacraments are
more manifest and excellent, for as much as they have more manifest words of
Christ and his redemption, which make faith more full. And therefore the sprite
is now had more abounda^tly, then it was in that time, if we speak of the
common state of men. For I speak not of persons singularely, neither do I
think that Abraham had less faith and sprite then christian men now have. But
now let us return unto the history.

The hebrews when they were afflicted, fled unto God by Christ, who was set
before them in their sacrifices, and was there apprehended by faith. Therehence
was all the vtility of their sacrifices, to the offering or receiuinge whereof it
was not lawful to come rashly, otherwise they should have been to their hurt,
and should have kindled the wrath of God against them, which thing Paul has
very well admonished us of saying: He which eats or drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks unto himself damnation. What the purifications of the
Elders signified.
Wherefore in the law there were many purifications, sprinkelings, and
washinges, before they came unto the holy services. And these men now repent,
and throw themselves down unto the ground wepinge before the Lord: for they
were touched with the bitterness and greuousnes of their sins.

When god had heard the prayers of the Israelites, and had promised to deliver
the Beniamites into their hands, he ministered also unto them secret and sound
counsels, namely that they should in a convenient place lay an embushme^t, and
making as though they would flee, draw away their enemies from the cities, that
afterward they might oppress them, both before and behind. They had among
them contrary counsels. The counsels of the B^niamits and of the Israelites are
diverse.

The like poletike devise in the book of Iosuah.


The Beniamites said: They flee, let us follow them and oppress them as they
are fleing. The Israelites contrarily said: Let us give place unto the
Beniamites, hat they may follow us more insolently and securely. For we will
stop them of their return into the city. We read of the like policy of
war in the book of Joshua, when the city of Hais was assalted. It is now
written that god himself smote them. For it is said, And god made Benjamin to
fall before the Israelits, least the victory should seem to be attributed,
either unto the strengthes of the Israelites, or to their pollitique deuyse.
The whole su^me of those which were slain, were.25. thousand. The order of this
history might seem somewhat trobulesome, which yet if it be apart considered
perticulerly, shall be the better understood. For at the first conf ict were
slain of the Beniamites 18000. then when they fled into the desert.5000.
lastly when they fled to Gibea.2000. all which sums added together, do make
the full number of.25000.

The city ascended up to heaven. Here is the figure Hiperbole, whereby is
signified either that the smoke of the city ascended up into heaven, or that
else all the riches thereof which were now on fire and turned into smoke,
ascended up into heaven. The Beniamites being in extreme danger, look back
unto the city, as though there they should have found succor and aid. They
recule, but they fall into the hands of the Embushments, and are slain. From
thence they get themselves and flee unto the woods, but in the flight they are
miserably killed. A few which escaped in those overthrows, got them to the
rock Rimmon, as in to a high castle and well fensed, both by nature and
situation. And there a few were saved, as is afterward declared. Whereby we
gather that no might or power can help us, when god will strike. Whatsoever can
be devised or invented of us, it nothing profits against the Lord. In the
hebrew tongue a place of fence is called a rock.


So great and so populous a tribe, as soon as ever god would, perished in a
manner wholly. There remained only.600. men, which got themselves into the
castle of Rimmo^. It is called a rock, because in the holy scritures places of
fence are so called, for that they are in a manner situate upon stony rocks
and high places. But why the.600. men were left on live, there is showed a
cause, Why the.600. men were saved
namely least any one whole tribe should want in Israel. God would not for
their deserts, but for his names sake have a certain few remaining, that the
pub. wealth of the Israelites should be preserved. And those same he left not
whole, but in a manner mained: for they had no wives, neither were there any
women left of that whole tribe, for them to marry: therefore they were compelled
to desire wives of ye other tribes. Wherefore the tribe of Benjamin, The tribe
of Benjamin that remained, consisted also of other tribes. Whither it was
lawful for the Israelites to kill the children.
although otherwise it remained but small, yet howsoever it was, half the part
thereof co^sisted of other tribes. For the Israelites had slain al their wives
and children and cattayle. This severity of the Israelites was great, or rather
it may seem to be cruelty, and also against the law of God, wherein it was
forbidden, that the children should be slain for the sins of the parents.
But it is very likely (which thing the Hebrewe interpreters also affirm) that
the Israelites when they fasted and prayed before the lord, vowed Cherim, that
is the vow of a curse, whereby it was not lawefull to reserve any thing, which
thing they used to do in battle of peril, and in great danger. Yea and in
Deuteronomy. the.13. chapter: God commanded, that if any city of the Israelites fell
unto idolatry, all the tribes should go up and join their powers together and
conquer it, so that they should with sword and fire destroy all things that
they found in it. But the Beniamites defended a manifest wicked act, which
differred not much from idolatry, and it is possible that the city of Gibeah
was idolatrous. Wherefore nothing ought to be reserved in it. In the book of
Iosuah it is written, that when Acham had hidden for himself a certain small
thing of the curse of Jericho, the whole host was afflicted for that cause,
which deceate being afterward found out, not only he himself was killed, but
also his sons and daughters, with his oxen, his asses, his sheep, and his
tente also and all his stuff. Which thing yet we must not think that it was
done by the prescript of the law, but by a certain singular counsel of God.
Civil wars more cruel the^ outward wars
But whither Israel exceded measure in this auengement or no, we shall
afterward see. We may learn also by this history, what sharpness there is in
ciulll wars: for they have far more cruel ends, then outward wars.

Of fasting.
NOw that we are come to the end of the chapter: For as much as it is said
that the Israelites fasted and afflicted themselves before the Lord, I have
occasion given me, somewhat to speak of fasting. And to begin from the
Etimoligy of the word, this Hebrew word Tsum signifies to afflict. Aben Ezra
Wherefore Aben Ezra says, that whersoeuer in the holy scripture is found
affliction of the soul, there is understand fasting. There is a another word
namely Tsama very ny unto this word, and it signifies to thirst: for they
which fast much, ar wont to thyrst, because the humors of the body ar with
hunger and fasting dried up. The Grecians call it (...), of this particle
primative (...), and (...), which is to be strong and firm, because by fasting
the strength of the body is diminished. But because this particle (...) is
rather extensiue, it seems to signify very firm and very strong, because a man
that is fasting, is very firm and constante, so that he had rather suffer
grief, then to go from his purpose. Also the Grecians call fasting by an other
word (...), because they which fast, do beriue themselves of food. For (...)
signifies both corn and meat.

But before I define what fasting is, I think it good first to use a
distinction. A distinction of fastes. Natural fast
For forasmuch as there are sundry kinds of fastings, they serve not all to
our purpose. For there is a certain fast that is natural, which pertayneth
either to the recovering or to the defending of the health of the body.
Wherefore Hipocrates says, that they which are of a full and perfect age, or
also are old, can very well abide to fast: in which place old men are to be
understand as touching the first part and beginning of age. For they which are
very old can no better abide fasting, Civil fast.
then young men or children. There is an other fast which is civil, and is the^
taken in hand, when men are so bent to their things, that by no means they
will intermitte the affairs which they have begone. So Saul when he pursued
the Philistians, and had the victory now in his hands, commanded that no
man should taste of any meat before evening. So also certain Hebrews vowed
that they would neither eat any thing or drink, A fast familiar unto
christians.
before they had killed Saul, as it is written in the acts of the Apostles.
This manner also of fasting pertains not to this present matter. There is an
other kind of fasting, which ought to be familiar unto all Christans, namely
to take meat soberly and temperatly: which thing they shall do, if they neither
eat to often in one day, nor when they do eat, do gorge themselves with to
much meat, or seek for delicates and fine banquetes.

The commodities of christian sobriety.
This manner of living is very much profitable to diminishe lusts, neither
suffers it the mind to be troubled with affections. It makes the mind more
cheerful and ready both to prayers, and also to the actions of the life.
Wherefore Christ said: let not your hearts be oppressed with surfeting or
dronke^nes. Peter also has written: Be ye sober, for your enemy ye devil goes
about like a roaring lion, seking whom he may devour. Paul also wrote of
himself: I chasten my body, and bring it into bondage, least I preaching to
other, should be made a reprobate. Farther there is an other commodity of this
fast, that thereby expenses are spared, not to lay them up couetously, but that
that which is overplus unto us, we may give unto the poor.

There is an other fast which is above man's strength, and is sometimes given of
god meruelously unto some of the saints, Miraculous fast.
to commend their doctrine. Moses in the mountayn fasted.40. days, for God
would by a notable example show, that that law which he setforth, came from
himself, and was not invented of men. Nether went Moses therefore unto the
mountain to fast, but to receive the law of GOD, and to talk with him. Elias
also receued bread and water of the Aungel, and in the strength of that meat
walked.40. days, even unto the mount of god Horeb, that he by this miracle
should be declared to be the true revenger of the law. By this kind of
fasting our Savior commended the preaching of the Gospel, that it should
not seem to be a thing vulgar, but should be proved a thing begone by
God. But these were miracles, neither pertayne they any thing unto us, but
only that we should have them in admiracion, and by such examples be
stirred up with reverence to receive the word of God.

A fast compelled.
There is also an other fast, which lies not in our power. As when we being
destitute of meat, have not whereof to eat. Here is need of patience, and we
must pray unto god, that he would strengthen and encourage us. So the saints
when they wandered about, and preached the Gospel, were compelled sometimes to
hunger. And the disciples when they followed the Lord, were driven by hunger
to pluck the ears of corn, and to rub out the corn. Elias also desired
meat of the widow, and waited at the brook for such meat as the Raven should
bring him. This kind of fasting men do not take upon them of their own free
will, but it is laid upon them by God.

Religious fast.
But omitting all those, as which nothing pertayne unto our disputation, let us
come to our fast which we may call religious. And this fast is an abstine^ce,
Definition.
not only from meat and drink, but also from all other things which may
delight and noorishe the body, contrary to the accustomed manner, as much as
strength will suffer, and it is done of a repentant mind and of a true faith,
by prayers to desire the clemency of God, for miseryes, either already
oppressing us, or very nighe at hand. The form of this definition is
abstinence, An exposition of the causes of true fasting.
and that above the accustomed manner, which yet excedeth not strengthes of
the body. The matter is not only meat and drink, but also all things which
may rejoice the body. The efficient cause is faith and repentance for sins
committed against God. The end is, by prayers to crave the mercy of God, and to
turn away or to diminishe calamityes. Therefore they which fast, Exercises of
those that fast truly.
ought to give themselves to prayers, alms, visitynges of the sick, and to
the holy supper.

When we fervently pray unto the Lord, and do from the heart truly repent us of
the sins which we have committed, and for their causes are earnestly
afflicted, we can not easily think upon meat, drink, and fine delicates. For
who^ such a grief grievously urges, it is more pleasant to the^ to absteyne,
the^ is any other delectation. So David in his.35. Psalm says of his enemies:
When they were sick, I laughed not, but put on sack clothe, and afflicted my
soul with fasting, and earnestly prayed for them. They which deiect and
humble themselves (because they in a manner despair of their things) are wont
to contemn and loath meat and drink, and other delights and pleasures.
Hereby we may understand, Why fastyngs please God. Jerome.
how it comes to pass, that our fastes do please God, not assuredly that
the emptines of the belly pleases God. So Jerome derideth certain, which
fasting to hardly, were made to all purposes all their life long unprofitable.
This pleases God, that we deiect the mind, that we return unto him with
prayers, and casting away other pleasures, do put all our delectation in him
only.

But the fastes whereof we now entreat, Fastes public and private.
are sometimes public and sometimes private. Private fastes we take in hand,
when we are afflicted with proper and domestical miseries: for there is none
which is not vexed sometimes either in himself, or in his famely. Or if it
happen that peradventure he be not grieved with any calamity of his own or any
of his: We must fast sometimes for other men's sakes.
yet sometimes he must mourn for other. For if we be the members of one and
the self same body, we must think yt the disco^modityes of our brethren
pertayn unto us our selves. So David prayed for them which afterward became his
enemies, and which reioysed in his evils. So Jobs frindes, when they saw him
vexed with most grievous plagues, lay seven days full, in dust and ashes, before
they spoke any thing unto him: so much were those men moved with his misery.
Wherefore before they commoned with him, they would by fasting and prayers
desire God to assuage his so great misery. So David when Abner was slain, did
not only mourn at his burial, but also swear that he would yt day taste of
no meat before the sun were set. The same thing did he when he was reproved
of Nathan the Prophet, and when he had received tydinges of the death of the
child. Undoubtedly all the whole time that he was sick, he never took meat.
Nehemias in the.1. chap. when he heard of the afflictions of the Hebrews
which remained in Jerusalem, afflicted himself with fasting, and prayed unto
the Lord. Daniel also when he had red those things which Jeremy wrote of ye
captivity of.70. years, confessed both his own sins, and the sins of the
people, wept also and fasted. Wherefore private fasting ought to be taken in
hand, not only for our selves, but also for others.

But public fasting is two manner of ways commanded: How public fastes are
denounced.
Either of God himself by the law, or of ye Magistrate, or of the Bishop, or
else of a Prophet. And this is to sanctify a fast, which sometimes is red in the
holy scriptures. Of this kind there are many examples, What it is to sanctify a
fast.
and especially that fast which the Israelites in this place imposed upon
themselves. In the.1. book of Samuel, when the Philistines grievously
afflicted the Jews, the whole people at the exhortation of Samuel assembled in
Mizpa, wept, fasted, and threw away their Idols. David also with all his,
fasted, when he heard of the overthrow of the people and death of Saul. The
men also of Iabes Gilead took the carkayses of Saul and Ionathas, and wept, and
also fasted. That also was a public fast which Iosaphat commanded in the.2.
book of Paralip. the.20. chap. Esther the queen being in extreme danger,
commanded by Mardocheus a public fast to be denounced. The Israelites in
their captivity (as it is written in the.7. chap. of Zachary) had a fast both
in the.5 month, and the.7. month, because in the.5. month the spoiling of
the City and desolation of the temple happened, and in the.7. month Godolias
was slain: whereby so many miseryes afterward ensewed. That was also a public
fast which Iezabel proclaimed, a woman otherwise wicked and an Hipocrite. Her
act declares that it was the manner, that when any great wicked crime was
committed, the whole Church should fast, as it were desiryng help against the
common punishment. This fast sometimes also the Prophets required. As Iohel
when he said: Sanctify ye a fast. Esdras also in his, 8. chap. proclaimed a
fast. Wherefore fastes were by certain godly considerations publicly denounced.

Why an yearly fast was instituted among the Hebrews.
God himself also commanded a public fast. For he commanded that every year
the feast Chephurim, that is the feast of expiations, should be celebrated
the.10. day of September with a public fast. For the people committed many
sins thorough out the whole year, neither did they diligently observe the
ceremonies. Wherefore once in a year the tabernacle was purified, and a
public fast was observed. These things in the old Testament, signified as it
were by a certain shadow that the sins of me^ should be by Christ abolished,
of who^ when we take hold by a true and lively faith, The day of fast was a
festival day.
we are losed from sins, and thereof follows the mortification of sins and
carnal delights and pleasures. Neither is this to be passed over, that that
one day of fast was a festival day. For it was not lawful in the public
fast, either to work, or for a man to give him self to his own business, not
that on feastiual days we ought utterly to be idle, but that in those days we
should do good deeds, whereby we may rest in God, and we are commanded only
to absteyne from our own works. But to believe, to pray, to acknowledge
sins, to bewail them with an earnest repe^ta^ce, are the works of God, and
therefore are not forbidden on festival days, but rather commanded.

The Ethnikes acknowledged a Religious fast.
These things have not only the Hebrews learned out of the laws of God, but
also the Ethnikes by the instincte of nature. For when Jonas preached unto the
Ninevites that their City should within.40. days be overthrown, they
dispayred not of the mercy of God, but got themselves to repentance, and every
one of them, even from the king unto the lowest Citezin, with their beasts
also and cattle, fasted. And when they vehemently and with a fervent zeal
cried unto the Lord, Augustine. Porphyrius.
they were heard. Augustine de ciuitate dei, writes that Porphyrius taught,
that abstinence from flesh and gross meats, does purify the minds of men,
whereby they are made the more prompt to things divine, and to familiarity with
good spirits. Plutarche.
Plutarche also in his little book de Iside and Osiride says, that the
Priests of Heliopolis utterly absteyned from all meats, which might noorishe
and augment the wantones of the flesh, and that they never brought wine into
the temple of their God. For they counted it a vilany to drink wine in the day
time in the sight of their God: other men said he, used wine, but not much, and
they had many purifications without wine. The same Plutarche de cohibenda
Iracundia shows, Holy (...)
that among the Athenienses were certain holy sacrifices, which were done only
with water without wine. And this is notable, which is written in the same
book, Empedocles. Titus Liuius.
that Empedocles was wont to say, that a man ought most of all to fast from
malice. Titus Liuius makes mention, that when at Rome there happened many
portentuous things, which seemed to foreshewe some great evil, the decemuiri
were sent to look into the books of the Sibilles, and that there was answer
made, that they should institute a public fast in the honor of Ceres, which
fast should also be repeated again every.5. year. And that by that means the
anger of the gods should be pacified. Wherefore the Ethnikes being smiten with
the fear of the evils, which hoonge over their heads, fled unto the oracles,
fasted, and prayed the gods to turn away their anger. But Christians, not
only seeing so many and so great evils, but also hearing them told from all
parts of the world: yet turn they not unto GOD by prayer, neither are they any
thing moved in mind.

But peradventure some man will say, that Fastes, Fastes are commended in the
new Testament
because they are partly Iewishe, and partly Ethnike, seem to be far from
our Religion. But that it is not so, may easily be proved by the new Testament.
In the Acts of the Apostles the.13. chap. the Church, being admonished by an
oracle that Paul and Barnabas should be chosen to visit the Cities and Towns
where the Gospel had been preached, first decreed a fast: then they laid their
hands upon them. And in the.14. chap. when they after they had accomplished
their matters thorough Iconium, Listria, and Antioche, returned home, they
instituted a fast, and created ministers and Priests in every City. Augustine
in his Epistle to Cassulanus says: Augustine.
When Peter should at Rome have talk with Simon the sorcerer upon the Son day,
the Church of Rome upon the Sabbath day denounced a fast, which custom was
always afterward retained. Jerome.
Jerome in his prologue upon Matthew says, that John being desired of the
Churches to write the Gospel against Ebion and Cerinthus, who denied the
divine nature of Christ, answered that he would so do, if the whole Church
would before indicte a public fast. Which thing Eusebius also in his
Ecclesiastical Hystory testifies. Eusebius.
Paul also in the.1. to the Corinthians the.7. chapter, admonishes those that
are joined together in matrimony, not to separate themselves a sonder, but for
a time, to give themselves to fasting and prayers. In which place I think he
understands public prayers, and also a public fast. For fellowshyp with
the wife nothing lets, but that they may be used privately, but whether he
understood public fastes or private, it skilleth not much.

Farther, Christ being asked of his Apostles, why they could not heal ye do^me
and cast out the devil. He answered: Because of your incredulity. And he added:
This kind of devils is cast out only by fasting and prayer. That place is
somewhat dark, and therefore it shall not be unprofitable briefly to expound
it. Is it to be thought, that by the merit of fasting and prayers (as they use
to speak) devils are cast out by virtue of the work wrought? Not so. What
the^ signified the words of Christ? First he said: Because of your
incredulity: for if ye had faith, even so much as a grain of mustard, and
should say unto this mountain: Take up thy self, and cast thy self into the
sea, it should obey you. And together with a faith, is necessary a vehement and
fervent prayer, and also fasting, because a fixed and earnest prayer which
draws the mind, not only from meat and drink, but also from all other
humane cogitacions and pleasures. Wherefore Christ by the effects describes
the cause, namely, faith by prayers and fasting, and he speaks of those
devils, to whom god gave more liberty, as though he should have said: ye must
not live easily or idely, if ye will cast out this kind of devils. Ye must have
a sure and strong faith which thing he expressed by the effects, by prayers I
say and fastes.

By these reasons and testimonies may fastes also be commended in the new
Testament. But in them are faults to be taken heed of, What vices in fasting
ar to be taken heed of.
which very often are many, and those grievous. First because in the Papacy are
observed fastes upon certain appointed days, without consideration of persons
or occasions, Fast brought in without measure.
as an yearly ceremony, which at this day is utterly of no strength, and is
as if it were Iewishe. Moreover every man has added and heaped up of his own,
whatsoever pleased him, and not that, which calamity of times or fervent
prayers required. For one man brought in Septuagesima, an other Sexagesima, an
other Quinquagesima, another Quadragesima which is Lent, an other Rogatio^
days, an other Imber days, an other ye eue^s of ye Apostles, an other Friday,
an other Saturday, and an other brought in fasting on ye We^sday. But of so
many fastes, what vtility has there at the length followed? Many contentions
and questions concerning fastyngs.
A great many questions and contentions. For a man will scarce believe, how
many questions the elders have had concerning fast. Augustine ad Cassulanum
writes that therefore we must fast on the Wensday, because Christ was sold that
day: and on the Friday, because on that day he was crucified. But of the
Sabbath day he much doubted. For they of Millane and of the East part,
affirmed that on ye day we should not fast, because Christ that day was at
reast in the sepulcher: contraryly the Romans and Affricans, and certain
other, because Christ was dejected even unto ye ignominy of the sepulcher:
therefore contended that the Sabbath should be fasted.

Monica the mother of Augustine.
The mother of Augustine, when she came out of Affrike to Millane, and saw that
the men there fasted not on the Sabbath day, began to marvel at the
unaccustomed manner. Wherefore Augustine which was not yet baptized, came to
Ambrose, and asked in his mothers behalf what was best to be done? Do says
Ambrose that which I do. An answer of Ambrose.
By which words Augustine thought yt he should not fast, because Ambrose fasted
not. But what he meant, he himself more manifestly expressed. I (says he) when
I come to Rome do fast, because the Sabbath day is there fasted: but when I
return to Millane, because here it is not fasted, I fast not. De consecratione
did. 3. chap. De esu carnium, it is decreed that Friday and Wensday should be
fasted, ye Sabbath day is left free. And in the same distinct. ye chap. Sabbato
vero, Innocentius.
Innoce^tius has added: That ye Sabbath also must be fasted. But he brings a
far other cause, then that which before we spoke of. For for because (says
he) the Apostles both upon the Friday, and also upon the Sabbath day were in
great mourning and sorrow, therefore we must fast. In the same did. chap.
Ieiunium: Melchiades decreed, that we must not fast on the Sunday, nor on the
Thursday: and he gives a reason, because the fastes of Christians ought to be
on contrary days, to the fastes both of heretics and of Ethnikes.

Epiphanius.
Epiphanius brings a reason why the Wensday is to be fasted, namely because
Christ was that day taken up to heaven: for it is written, that when the
bridgrome is taken from the^, then they shall fast, and this he affirms to be
the tradition of ye Apostles, when as yet at this day we believe yt the
Ascension happened on the Thursday: We must give ^^le credit to traditions.
wherefore let the Papists take heed, how much credit they will have to be
given unto their traditions. For there are many of them, which even they
themselves can not deny, but that they are ridiculous and vain. I know in
deed there are traditions found which are necessaryly gathered out of the
holy scriptures, and for that cause they ought not to be abrogated. But other
traditions which are indifferent, are not to be augmented in number, least the
Church should be oppressed, neither to be thought so necessary, that they can
not be abolished. And we must beware that in them be not put the worshipping of
GOD. But as for those which are against the word of god, are by no means to
be admitted. In the did. 76. chapter.1. are added Imber days, or the Fastes
four times in the year. Which why they are so divided, scarsely can any man
perceive. They cite Jerome upon Zachary, who makes mention of the fourth
month, fifth, seventh, and tenth. And they seem to be moved with a wicked
zeal to distribute these fastes into four parts of the year. And those
fastes which the Jews received every year for ye calamityes which they had
suffered, Why ye fast of Imber days were invented
the same our men have made yearly. But other have invented an other cause,
namely because in those four times of the year: Bishops are wont to promote
clerks unto the ministry and orders. Wherefore they say that the people ought
then most of all to fast and pray, that GOD would grant them good Pastors.

Fasting and prayers should be had in the ordering of Ministers. But I would
demand of the Bishops why they institute Ministers only at those.iiii. times
of ye year. Undoubtedly, they ca^ render no certain and just reason thereof.
Augustine. Aerius an heretic.
Augustine in his book de Haeresibus, says ye Aerius contemned oblatio^s for
the dead, and also such fast as were appointed, because Christians were not
under ye law but under grace: but he would ye every man should fast at his own
pleasure when he himself would. In deed I allow not Aerius in yt he was an
Arria^, but as touchi^g sacrifices and oblations for ye dead, he judged rightly
and godly. And also concerning appointed fastes, I see no cause why he ought to
be reproved, unless peradventure he thought this, yt fastes could not be
denou^ced of the Magistrate and of ye Church, as ye difficulty of times
required. The reason also which he uses, ye Christians are not under ye law,
but under grace, is weak: for we are not so delivered from the law, yt we are
absolved from all order. Iouinian an heretic.
Augustine also writes yt Iouinia^ contemned abstinences and fastes as things
vain, and unprofitable: where in if he spoke of bare fastes only, and such as
were appointed at certain days and certain times of ye year, he judged not
ill. For unless they be adjoined with faith and repentance, and also with
vehement prayers, they nothing at all profit. In Esaias ye.58. chap. ye people
co^playned: We have fasted, and thou have not looked upon us: which words
show, that fastes with out circumstances requisite, are not acceptable unto
God: but if they be joined with their additions, they are not unprofitable.

By ye decrees of Liberius, who lived in ye time of Co^sta^tius, may be known,
Liberius.
how yt when ye air was vnte^perate, or yt there was any famine, or
pestilence, or war, then they assembled together to denou^ce a fast, whereby
to mitigate ye anger of god. Augustine.
Augustine when he saw his city besieged of ye Vandales, gave himself unto
fasting and prayers, and in that siege died, as Possidonius testifies. And
generally when we attempt any great weighty matter, as when we denou^ce war, or
creat Magistrates, or ordeine Ministers of ye Church, we have need most of al of
fervent prayers, for the ferue^tnes whereof fasting very much avails. Christ
when he should begin his preaching, went into ye wilderness and fasted. A widow
when her husband is dead, is left in a perilous state. Therefore prayers and
fastes are very convenient for her. Anna the daughter of Phanuel led her life
in ye temple, where she gave herself to prayer and fasting. Paul to Tim. says:
A widow which is truly a widow, puts her confidence in the Lord, and day
and night applies herself to prayers and fastes. Cornelius, when he was not
yet sufficiently instructed of Christ, and was heavy and pensive in mind, in
the ninth hour was fasting, and in prayers, to whom the Angel (as it is
written in the Acts of the Apostles) appeared.

But it may be demanded, when fastes are denou^ced of princes and of the
Church, Whether fastes denounced ought to be obeyed.
whether men are bound to obey them or no? Undoubtedly they are bound by the
law of faith, and by obedience. For when fastes are set forth yt are agreeable
unto the word of God, how can he which believes in god detract the^? Assuredly
he ca^ not. Howbeit this is to be understand of those which are of ye state and
condition yt they be able to fast. For if a man be hindered either by age, or
disease, or labors, in ye case this ought to be of force which ye scriptures
say: I will have mercy and not sacrifice. But they which are not hindered, ought
to obey. Consilium Ga^grense.
In ye counsel of Ga^grensis chap. 30. it is ordained, yt if a man obey not ye
fastes which are comanded him of ye Church, howsoever he boast of perfection,
without bodily necessity, and proudly contemns the decrees of the Church, let
him be accursed. The Canones of the Apostles
In the Canones of ye Apostles (although they be Apocripha and conteyne
certain strange things, neither is it sufficiently agreed upon the number of
them) in ye Canon I say.68. it is commanded, yt the Clergy, which fast not,
having no bodily necessity, should be deposed. Let infa^tes in no case be
compelled and driven to fast: for yt should hurt their health. Yet Joel says:
Sanctify a fast, gather together old men and sucking children. And the
Ninevites at the preaching of Jonas, compelled beasts and infa^tes to fast.
These were extraordinary things, neither are they for that end set forth, that
we should imitate them.

Augustine.
As for private fastes most men will have them to be free. Wherefore Augustine ad
Cassulanum: We know (says he) that we must fast when we are commanded, but on
what days we should fast, and what days we should not, we know not, because
that is no where prescribed in the new Testament, therefore fastes are to be
left free: And in his 2. book de Sermon domini in monte (expoundyng these
words: How fastes may be called free or not fre.
Judge not and ye shall not be judged) he writes, that men may two manner of
ways judge rashly. Either if they draw that into the evil part which
might have been done ryghtly: or if when it is manifest that a fact is
plainly evil, they think that he which has done it, can not repent. And of
the first kind he brings an example, as if a man, because he is sick in the
stomach, or is troubled with any other infirmity of ye body, would not fast. An
other which knows not this, will suspect him to be a gloton, and to much
delicate. For here that which is free, and which may well be done, is drawn
into ye worse part. This in deed is Augustines opinion, which yet we ought
prudently and soundly to understand. For if a private man, when he is in misery
or danger, does see that fasting and prayers may help him, he except he fast
does undoubtedly sin. But for as much as fasting after this sort and manner
now declared may profit, we must undoubtedly fast. It is free in deed, because
by ye outward law he can not be condemned which fasteth not. But when our fast
may advance the glory of god, it is no more fre, for as much as we are commanded
to love God withal our heart, with all our soul, and wtal our strength. For
there are many things which of their own nature are free and indifferent. But
when it comes to choice, and we see they may either illustrate or obscure the
glory of God, then are they not free nor indifferent, because all our
strengthes and facultyes are to be applied unto the glory of God.

In true fasti^g we must fast the whole day.
Farther there is an abuse of fastes as touching the space of time: for as much
as the Papists, if they some little while defer their dinner, and then
whatsoever they eat, so that they eat no flesh, they think it sufficient.
But the elders remained fasting all the whole day even to evening, al which time
they were occupied in the word of God, in prayers, and holy occupations. In
Leuit. the.23. God says, The Jews fasted from euenyng to euenyng.
when ye fast, rest from all work, and afflicte your souls: for it is a
Sabbath. And no man doubts but that the Sabbath endures from evening to
evening. So Saul when he had put the Philistines to flight, proclaimed a fast
until night. And David in the death of Abner swear yt he would taste of no
meat till night. Tertulian. Augustine.
Tertullian co^tra Psychicos says, yt the Church produced their fastes even
to euenyng. Augustine de moribus Ecclesiae contra Manicheos: Let accustoned
fastes says he, of the Church be continued even until night: for all the whole
day were celebrated holy assemblyes, were also had public prayers, but at
euenyng they were dismissed, In the Lent.
and did eat meat. But it is a sport, to see how ye Papists illude this
ancient custom: they say their even songs before noone, and then they go to
dinner, at night they institute a drinking, and so boast yt they fast very well.

Thomas Aquinas, Consilium Calcedonense. Which was the ix. hour.
Thomas in secunda secundae says, that in his time fastes were produced even
unto the ninth hour. And he brings the counsel of Chalcedonia, where it is
decreed yt he which eats before the ninth hour, should not be counted to
have fasted. Here by the way we must declare which was the ninth hour. The vi.
hour was at none, in which time we read ye Christ our savior was crucified.
Wherefore the ninth hour must needs be the third hour from noone. The elders
did so divide the time, The distribution of the hours among the elders.
that always from the Sun set to the Sun rising they counted 12. hours,
and again as many from the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof.
Again they divided either time into four spaces, and those they called
watches: And every one of those spaces contained three hours. Wherefore the
third hour from the rising of the Sun is with us either the eight or nynth
hour, as the time of the year requires: For these hours are unequal. The
sixte hour is noone, and the nynth is the third at after noone, and the.xii.
at the sun set. But Thomas obiecteth unto himself, that which we say,
namely, that the elders fasted the whole day. It is ridiculous to hear what he
answers. Because we (says he) are in the state of the day, and the elders
were in the state of the night: therefore we must finishe our fastes in the day
time, when as they ended them in the night time. And he brings this saying of
Paul: The night is past, and the day has drawn nyghe. Which sentence how
much it serves to this present thing, all men see and understand.

An other abuse is, the choice of meats, Of the choice of meats.
wherein now in a manner consists the whole religion of fastes. The elders
used it not: for when they had fasted until even, at supper they did
indifferently eat whatsoever was set before them. But now our me^ do more
severely absteyne from flesh, eggs, and milk, then they in the old time
absteyned from unclean beasts. Paul reproves this superstition, and calls
it a doctrine of devils. But they say, that Paul reproves those only, which
avoided some meats, as evil creatures, and believed that those evil creatures
came from an evil God: but we (say they) do teach no such thing: we only
forbid me^ some kind of meat for one day, or a few days, which afterward we
set at liberty. Montanus an heretic. Tertulian. What choice of meat is to be
followed.
As though Montanus could not after this manner have excused himself, against
whom these places are cited of the fathers. Tertullian accuses Marcio as an
heretic, because he did put some holiness in fish. Wherefore there is no choice
of meat to be suffered, but so much as shall seem to serve to temperance,
which thing if the Papists would so diligently have taken heed of, they
should rather have absteyned from wine, then from flesh. For Salomo^ says,
wine is a thing of excess. And Paul: Absteyne (says he) from wine, wherein is
excess. They should also have absteyned from fish, and especially the
delicater kind of fishes. For there are of them which do no less delight the
taste, Fishes counted among delicates
and no less stir up to lusts, then does flesh. And undoubtedly among the
elders, as well the Grecians as the Romans, fishes were counted among the
chiefest delicates.

Moreover Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History teaches, Socrates the
Hystoriagrapher. So^dry kinds of fastes.
that the elders fasted far otherwise: for in the Lent some fasted two days,
some four days, some.x. some xv. some xx. and other some the whole xl. days.
And when they fasted, some absteyned from all kind of flesh and fish, and did
eat only all manner of pulses. Other absteyned from flesh of four footed, and
lived only on fowls and fishes. For all things were at that time left free in
the Church. For when they had fasted until even, at supper they did eat
moderately whatsoever came to hand: although afterward the thing began by
little and little to decline to superstition. Jerome.
Jerome to Nepotianus says, that there were in his time which absteyned not
only from all kind of meat, but also from bread. They used certain thin
broths, made with spices, neither did they drink them out of a cup, but
supped them out of a shell. Augustine de moribus Ecclesiae and Manichaeorum,
Augustine. A co^pariso^ between a Christian and a Manichite.
brings in a Manichite an elect (for so their called they Ministers) who in
deed did ease no flesh, but in the meantyme used most delicate and fine meats,
and most sweat sawses: wine also they might not touch, but drinks which were
made of fruits, which much rese^bled wine, and far passed it in pleasa^tnes
and taste, of these I say they drank abundantly. On the other part he sets
a true Christian man, who remained fasting until euenyng and then had to
supper a mess of herbs potage sodde with a piece of larde, and a small portion
of salt flesh, and hardened in the smoke, and drank three or iiii. draughtes
of wine: Augustine demau^deth, whether of these seems to have fasted best and
more truly: and he gave judgment on the Catholics side.

The Mo^tanistes so delighted in this choice of meats ye they inverted for
themselves (...) which were meats to dry up nature, and such other like. (...)
of the Montanistes. Tertullian. Jerome.
For (as Tertullia^ affirms) they did eat only bred, salt, and al manner of
pulse, and their dri^ke was water. This kind of fast they used ii. wekes before
Easter. Jerome also adds yt they were wont to fast three Lentes, and for that
cause that they fasted so severely, they were called (...) that is Pure.
Eusebius. Mo^tanus the first that wrote laws of fasti^g
Eusebius in his.5. book and.18. chap. writes that one Appollonius reproved
Montanus, because he was the first that wrote laws of fasting, as though the
Church before him was free. He by laws and prescriptes prescribed what days
men should fast, and what meats they should absteyne from. Such an author
have the Papists of their prescribed fastes and choice of meats. Against the
choice of meats.
This superstition agrees not with the word of God. Christ says: That
which enters into the mouth, defiles not the man. And whatsoever is set
before you, that eat, demau^dyng nothing. And to Titus: All things are clean,
unto the clean, but unto the unclean, nothing is clean. To the Colossians:
Let no man judge you in meat and drink. To the Romans: The kingdom of God
is not meat and drink. To the Corinthians also, are many things written to
confirm this sentence, where he entreats of meats dedicated unto Idols. So
the Scriptures make mention of no choice of meats for Religions sake: yet I
deny not but that meats are to be chosen, either for the avoiding of excess
or sickness, or else for the keeping under of the wantones of the flesh. A
certain choice of meats is to be admitted. Of the institution of Lent.
But that Christians should absteyne from flesh, from eggs, and from milk
for religions sake, is no where prescribed in the Scriptures.

There is an other abuse because they impose such fastes which the strengthes
of men are not able and abide. For they will have the people fast.40. days.
Which thing, if it should be required according to the prescript rule of GOD,
and of the old Church, namely that the fast should be continued until even,
no man in a manner were able to perform that. And that institution some
refer unto Thelesphorus the Pope, other some to a time a little before him.
And undoubtedly therein is nothing else, then a certain mere wicked zeal and
noughty imitation of Christ. For he fasted.40. days: therefore superstitious
then thought it good that Christians should fast so many days every year,
when as yet Christ fasted after this manner, Christ required not of his
Apostles the fast of Lent.
but once in his life time: neither required he at any time any such act of
his Apostles. But these men decree it to be sin, and that a grievous sin,
when such a fast is violated. They ought to have regarded that Christ all ye
time did eat nothing, and in that he could so long endure, ye same to have
pretayned to a miracle, and to the power of God: The holy scriptures no where
command, Chrysostom.
that in that thing we should imitate Christ. Chrysostom in his.47. Homely
upon Mathewe: The Lord (says he) has not commanded thee to fast forty
days, although he might have commanded it. What then commanded he? Learn
(says he) of me, for I am meek and humble in heart. But the manner of these
men is perverse. For they will imitate Christ in that which they are not
commanded: but that which they are commanded, they will not follow. Our
savior when he sent forth his disciples: Go (says he) to all nations,
teaching to observe those things, not whatsoever things I have done, but
whatsoever things I have commanded you. And it is a wonder to see how
superstitiously and subtelly they have decreed of these things in the Counsel
of Martine de Consecratione, Confiliu^ Martini.
in the did. 3. Non licet, and in the Canones of the Counsel of Laodicenum in
the chapter Non oportet, it is commanded, that in the Lent fasting on the
Thursday should not be broken. And in the Counsel of Agathensis it is
commanded, Consiliu^ Agathense.
that in the Lent fasting on the Saturday also should not be broken: because on
the Thursday and Saturday many fasted not. Yea and on the Sondayes also in the
Lent, wherein they fasted not, they would that there should be retained a choice
of meats. And de Consec. in the did. 4. A reason out of Gregorye for the
observing of Lent.

Gregoryes reason confuted.


chap. Denique sacerdotes it is ordained, that ye Priests should begin their
fast from Quinquagesima. And in the same place.5. distinct: chap. Quadragesima.
Gregorius has invented a reason whereby to prove that Lent is to be fasted. We
must says he, give ye tenth part of the whole year unto God. And the.x. part
of ye year consists of.40. days. Wherefore we must fast so many days. A
goodly reason I promise you. Why does this Gregory forget that the Leuiticall
priesthood and ceremonies thereof have now ceased? Wherefore it is not lawful
to bind christian men to tenthes and Iewishe ceremonies. And if for that cause
the time of Lent be to be consecrated to a fast, because it is the tenth part
of the whole year, why did not the Jews in ye old time so fast? Why did not
the Prophets reprove them, because they deceived god of such a kind of tenth?

But why Lent was invented, as much as I can gather I will declare. Why the
fathers instituted Lent.
The fathers when they saw men live very carelessly and negligently, thought it
good yt they should be compelled after a sort to renew godliness in some part of
the year, and somewhat to bridle the fearcenes of the flesh. And for this thing
they thought that the.40. days before Easter were most mete, that men should
so long have their minds both occupied in repentance, and also in remembering
the benefits of God. This invention, although at the first sight it might seem
trim, The institution of Lent is against Christian liberty.
yet it agrees not with Christian liberty. For we must think upon the
benefits of god and of our great ingratitude, and other our most grievous
sins, not only 40. days, but also continually. Farther by this means they
opened a most wide window to live securely and reacheleslye. For if they once
had performed fullye those.40. days, they thought that all the whole year
after they might give themselves wholly to al kind of pleasures and lusts. For
they referred the time of repentance to these.40. days. And although the
elders had a lent, Eusebius. Ireneus
yet (as Eusebius says in his.5. book and.24. chapter) it was left free unto
all men. For Ireneus after this manner entreated with Victor bishop of Rome,
when he would have excommunicated the East church, because in the obseruinge of
Easter it agreed not with the church of Rome. What (said he) can we not live at
concord, although they use their own rites as we use ours? For some fast in
the Lent two days, some.4. days, some ten days, some.15. some.20, and other
some.40. days, and yet is concord nevertheless kept in the Church.

There is an other abuse, Fasting is an exercise and not a holiness.
namely because some put holiness in fasting as though a worshipping of god
consisted in it, where as in very deed fasting is only an exercise, which of
it self has no holiness. They are fools, which in fasting think that for
that cause they have god bound unto them: Jerome.
wherefore we must not rashly give credit unto Jerome when he says, that
fasting is not a virtue, but the foundation of al virtues. For only Christ and
faith in him is the foundation of all virtues. If he had said, that fasting is
a help of certain virtues, he might have been borne with all.

And undoubtedly herein the elders oftentimes err, A fall of the riders.
for that they praise and extol fasting above measure. If so much should be
attributed unto fasting, we must of necessity confess that John Baptist lived
more holily then Christ. For he fasted more then Christ did. For Christ did
eat and drink as temperate and modest men use to do: But it is said that
John did neither eat nor drink. Yea and Paul to Timothy writes, that the
exercise of the body has small vtilitye, but piety is profitable to all
things. If thou will demand what piety is: What piety is.
I will aunsweare, that it is a true worshippinge of God, a soundnes of
doctrine, and a pure life, which things follow hope and faith. In these
things assuredly is very great profit, and the exercise of the body has
indede some profit, but not so great. But we must note that Paul speaks not
of fasting and exercise of the body, which is Hipocriticall and wants faith,
but of the true and christian fasting and exercise of the body. For those
things which want faith and proceed of hipocrisy, are sins, neither do they
any thing profit. Wherefore Esaias says: Fasting is not a part of satisfaction.
Is this the fast which I have chosen? But these our men go farther, and
besides that in fasting they put holiness, they make it also a part of
satisfaction. Forasmuch as ye Scholeme^ in the.4. They extend fastes even to
purgatory. Gracian.
book of se^tences do appoint satisfaction to consiste of prayers, alms, and
fasting. What abrogateth the death of Christ, if this do not? They say also
that by fasts, souls are delivered out of purgatory. And least any should
think that I fayn these things, let him read Gratian in the.13. quest.2.
chapter anima, where he puts the words of Gregory, who says: Souls are
delivered from purgatory, either by the prayers or fasting of their kinsfolks.

There is also an other more grievous abuse, for that some affirm that by
fastes they can satisfye the church, although they cease not from sin.
This kind of fast God himself reproves by express words in Esaye: What
care I (says he) for your fastes? Ye fast contentions and strifes. Is this the
fast which my soul has chose^? Liberius ye Pope decreed, yt all the lent we
must abstein from pleadinges in the law. Liberius.
This is not very wiselye decreed, for the public wealth cannot consiste if
it be so long or ever matters be heard, or judgment given. If fasting should
for a weighty cause be denounced for a day or two, there might for that space
of time be commanded intermission of judgment. But that laws should cease,
so long as Liberius will have them, it is against the Public wealth. Farther
the same Liberius says, that the use of matrimony polluteth the fast of Lent,
wherefore they would have men all that time to abstain from their wives. But
Paul exhorts man and wife more soundly, namely to depart for a time, and
that by their mutual consent, and to return to the same, least they should be
tempted of Satan.

An abuse of shrouetide.
There is also an other abuse, in that every where before Lent all that time,
which they call Srouetide, men do most vntemperately give themselves to
glotonye, excess, dronkennes, and filthye lusts, and that under this
pretense, that they may the easelier fast, as though it were lawful to do
evil, that good may ensew. Neither is this a new kind of vice. For Basil in
his homely of fasting, and Chrysostom upon Genesis do in many places greuouslye
complain of that thing. Basile. Chrysostom.
Some fast for delicatenes. For when they know that they shall not suppe, at
dinner they lade their filthy sink with many and heavy burde^s, so that they
make themselves utterly unprofitable for the whole day. Other on the contrary
part, do utterly wast themselves with fasting, It is not lawefull for a man to
consume him self with to much fasting.
yea and in a manner kill themselves, as Basilius and Nazianzenus did: who being
men excellently well learned, yet by abstinences and fastinges were made utterly
unprofitable unto the Church. They were compelled to keep their bed sometimes
half a year, and sometimes a whole year. Lastly, there are some, which for
that they fast, have a wonderful delight in themselves, and ar proud, and also
despise other me^, as that Pharesy which said: I am not as other men, I fast
twice in the week etc. I could recke^ a great many more of these abuses: but
for this time me thinks these ar sufficient. This one thing only will I add,
that in fasting we see two extremities. The Papists in a manner retain their
superstitious fastes, but we utterly neglect those fastes that are lawful and
good. Wherefore it seems that on either side the thing is to be amended. And
thus far concerning these things.

The.xxi. Chapter.
1 ANd the men of Israel swear in Mizpa saying: There shall not a man of us give
his daughter to any of Benjamin to wife.

2 And ye people came into ye house of god, and abode there til even before
god, and lifted up their voice and wept sore.

3 And they said: O Lord God of Israel, why is this chanced in Israel, that
there should be this day one tribe lacking in Israel?

4 And on the morrow the people rose up, and made there an altar, and offered
burnt offringes and peace offringes.

5 And the children of Israel said: Who are they among all the tribes of
Israel, that came not with the congregation unto the lord? For they had made a
great oath concerning them that came not up to the lord in Mizpah, saying, that
they should surely dye.

6 And the children of Israel had pity on their brother Benjamin, and said:
There is one tribe cut of from Israel this day.

7 What shall we do unto the remnant of them, for to get them wives, for
as much as we have sworn by the Lord, that we will not give them of our
daughters to wives?

8 They said, I say: What ar they of the tribes of Israel, that came not up to
Mizpah unto the lord? And behold there came none of the inhabiters of
Iabes-Gilead unto the congregation.

9 For the people was numbered, and behold there was not one of the inhabiters
of Iabes-Gilead there.

10 And the congregation sent thither.12. thousand men of the stro^gest of
the^, and commanded the^ saying: Go and smite the inhabiters of Iabes-Gilead
with the edge of the sword both women and children.

11 And this is that ye shall do, utterly destroy all the males and all the
women that have lien by men.

12 And they found among the inhabiters of Iabes-Gilead.400. maiden virgins,
that had known no man be lying with any male. And they brought them to the
host in Siloh, which was in the land of Chanaan.

13 And the whole congregation sent and spoke unto the children of Benjamin,
that were in the rock Rimmon, and called peaceably unto the^.


The Israelites, as far as may be gathered by this history, had bound
themselves with a double oath. First, yt no man should give his daughter to
wife to the Beniamites: which was nothing else, but that they were minded
utterly to destroy the tribe of Benjamin. Farther, they swear that if any of
the Israelites had not put to his help against the Beniamites, he should be
slain. Here are very many things worthy to be noted. First, we must consider
that the Isralites were to severe against the Beniamits. For they did not only
slay the men, but also the wives and maidens: wherefore there were no women
left on live for those.600 men which were remaininge, to engender issue of.
But afterward when the same Israelites more diligently considered their act,
they judged it not well done, that a whole tribe should be clean destroyed. Of
which they nothing thought when they were in their great jury and rage.
Wherefore they now accuse their cruelty, and detest their rigorousnes which they
had used.

But that they bound themselves with an oath, yt they would not give their
daughters in matrimony to the Beniamites, it is not in this history mentioned:
but yet it is most likely yt it the^ happened, when they were in Mizpah, and
the Beniamites would not deliver the guilty. Wherefore the Beniamites were
oppressed with great miseries. For either they must take to wives foren and
strange weme^, which thing was prohibited the^ by the law, or else they must
perpetually lead a sole life without wives, and so that tribe should utterly
perish. The Israelites were to cruel against the Be^iamites.
The Israelites in yt they mourn, do suffer punishments for their cruelty. For
it should have been enough for them to have punished the men. What need was
there to slay women and maidens which had nothing offended? Unless peradventure
they had vowed the vow Cherem. But such a vow it was not lawful for them to
vow, but by the authority and commandment of God, which appears not to have
been done in this historye. In reuenginge we must keep a mean: for all are
not to be slain which come into the power of them that overcome. It is
sufficient to punish the guilty. God punishes moderatly.
God slew in Egypt Pharao, also the first begotten, and many other, yet
destroyed he not the whole nation. And when he destroyed Sodom, he saved both
Lot and also his famelye, and delivered from misery the city Zoar, whither Lot
went. And in the flood when he drowned the world with water, yet he would
save on live Noah with his famely. But it seems that these men determined,
utterly to destroy all the Beniamites: which their counsel God allowed not, who
when the Jews were afflicted of the Chaldeians, and they raged more cruellye
against them then was mete, both threatened to punish them, and also did indede
punish them most grievously.

The variety of man's nature.
Now the Israelits repent them of their cruelty: but it is to late. They should
have thought of this thing before. But this is the nature of man, these that
flourish they are angry with, and envy them, and when the same men are
ouerthrown and dejected, Architas Tarentius. Athenodorus
they pity the^. The sword is not rashly to be moved, neither should
punishments be executed with an angry mind. Architas the Tarentine has a very
wise saying unto his servant: If I were not angry I would punish thee.
Athenodorus a Philosopher very well learned when he had gotten leave of Augustus
to depart home, and being desired to leave some notable precept with him,
au^swered very wisely: Before thou give place to anger and execute auengment,
first say over with thy self in order all the letters of the Greek Alphabete,
namely that in that space and detracting of time the violence of the mind may
assuage. The oath of the Israelites being unjust, did not bind them to observe
it.

It was not lawful for daughters to marry without the consent of their parents.




Farther we must note that this oath of the Israelites of not geuinge wives
unto the Beniamites, was neither godly nor lawefull. Wherefore they were not
bound to observe it. Howbeit we understand by this history, yt this was of
force among the people of god, that the daughters should not mary without the
consent of their parents. For if it had been lawful for the^ to have married
against their parents will, a man might have said: Although ye will not give
your daughters unto them, they of their own accord may contract matrimony with
them. This thing is so agreeable unto nature, that the Roman laws also forbid
that matrimony should be firm, except it be contracted by the consent of the
parents, as we have before declared. But that thing which neither God, nor
nature, nor good laws can suffer, the same does the Papisticall superstition
easily admit.

The Israelites come to Siloh for two causes, partly to ask counsel of God
concerning the Beniamites, and partly to give thanks unto God for the victory.
Therefore they burn sacrifices and burnt offringes. And they wept for the
misery of the Beniamites, even until even. Wherefore it appears that they
fasted the whole day, otherwise they could not have wept before the lord until
even.

Why the Israelites erected an altar. David Kimhi
And they erected an alter. But to what end? There was an altar there before.
Some answer that there was an altar there indeed, but it was so old, that
it was half decayed, and therefore it neded to be repaired. But Kimhi says
that it was a custom, that when all the people should publicly ask counsel
of God, there should of new an altar be erected. But this he affirms without
the authority of the word of God. I rather think, when so great a multitude of
people assembled together, there was so great a number of sacrifices, that the
old altar was not sufficient to do holy services upon. Wherefore that the
service of of god should be with more expedition finished, there was erected an
other altar. Which thing also we read Solomon did, when he dedicated the
temple which he had built.

When they had wept, because of the oath whereby they had bound themselves not
to mary their daughters unto the Beniamites, they thought upon the other oath,
whereby they had vowed themselves to slay all those which would not put to
their help to the common war. Neither is their any mention made before of
this latter oath. For many things are ouerpassed in the historye, which are
afterward spoken of, although not in their place. And whilst they are in
hand with these things, with one and the self same labor they both prepare
wives for the Beniamites, and also saved their oath. For they which were absent
from the war, were not bound by the oath. Wherefore they might mary their
daughters unto the Beniamites.

But as touching the first oath for not giving wives to the tribe of Benjamin,
it was not lawful. Wherefore it might have been broken without any violating of
religion: for the cutting of of that tribe, was against the word of god. For
his will was that it should be preserved among the people of Israel. For God by
Jacob the Patriarche gave many and excellent blessings unto the Beniamites,
which blessings also Moses in Deuteronomy. repeated. But although such an oath was
not ratefied, yet the Israelites do wisely in that they labor, both to provide
for the Beniamites, and also not to be counted rashly to violate their oath. An
example of Iosuah.
So Joshua swear that he would save the Gabaonites, when as yet god had
commanded that all the Chananites should be slain. For he found a means that
they should serve in the tabernacle, and so by that means be after a sort
punished with cyuill death. Although he durst not do that, but by the
commandment of god. And he would that the people by his example, should learn
not easily to violate an oath. For example sake even vain oaths are not easily to
be violated. What men the Iabenites were
As touching the Iabanites, in that they are called Galaadites, it manifestly
appears that they pertained unto the tribe of Manasses, and dwelled beyond
Jordan. They because they were not present at this war, are judge of all the
Israelites as enemies, who being destroyed, their maidens which remained on
live, were brought to Siloh, into the land of Chanaan. And it is rightly added
in the land of Chanaan, because Iabes Gilead was not there, but in half the
Tribe of Manasses, beyond Iordane.

This war against the Iabenites was justly and worthily taken in hand, The
Iabenits are worthily invaded.
because they obeyed not the public commandment. The Israelites had bound
them selves by an oath, that whosoever withdrew himself from this war, the
same should be put to death. Therefore they counted the Iabenites as enemies,
least other men by their example should contemn public decrees. The
Beniamites had committed a grievous wicked crime: but these men in that they
refused the common war, and weakened the authority of the public wealth,
seem also to favor their crime. The punishment of Metius Suffecius.
It is not the part of good Citizens in war taken in hand by common counsel,
to withdraw themselves by private counsel. Metius Suffecius captain of
Albany, when he forsook Tullus Hostilius, fighting against the Fidenates, by
the commandment of Tullus was bound to two carts, and so drawn in pieces.
Solon deprived him of al honor and dignity, Solon. A decre of Po^peius.
which in the time of sedicion adjoined himself to neither party. And Pompeius
(as Plutarche affirms) when he fled from Caesar, proclaimed that he would
count all them to be enemies which abode at Rome, and helped not the common
cause. And after this manner are the Iabenites prescribed and counted for
enemies. And no otherwise are they to be counted, which in this our time, when
there is controuersye concerning religion, do dissemble althinges, when as in
the mean time they will neither stand on the Papists side, nor on ours. It is
not lawful for us in religion to be neuters.
They (say they) will stand in the myddest between both, which is nothing else,
then that they will be with the adversaries or enemies. For they halte on
either side, and therefore it may be said that after a sort they favor them.
Farther the cause of religion is far greater and greuouser then the cause of
the public wealth. In the Church no man can excuse himself that he is a
stranger: for no man which professes himself to be a Christian, can be a
stranger from religion: wherefore war is justly proclaimed against the
Iabenites.

Although I think that in this matter also the Isralites were to cruel. For it
seems that it should have been sufficient to have slain the men that were apt
unto war, To much crueltye against the Iabenites.
which had committed the crime of rebellion. But to kill women, old men, and
children, it was to much cruelty. Neither could they say that they had vowed
unto the Lord the vow Cherem, forasmuch as they had saved the maiden virgins.
And undoubtedly so great cruelty turned them to evil: for if they had dealt more
gently with the Iabenites, they had had more women for the Beniamites. Neither
could they have given counsel to have used force to get them selves wives.
But it is good to understand how the Israelites found out that the Iabenites
were absent.

The battle being finished, they al assembled to Siloh, and numbered the
people, among whom when they found none of the Iabenites, they easelye
understood that they were absent from the war. So great was their piety and
religion at that time, that when they had obtained the victory, al of them
assembled together to give thanks unto God. But that thing is contemned now a
days: for how many are there, which when they have gotten the victory, will
acknowledge the benefit of God, and give him thanks. Preachers do out of the
Pulpit admonish the people to pray publicly for sick folks, of which we
either se, or hear of none in a manner, which when they are restored to health,
do publikelye give thanks unto God, for that they have by the prayers of the
Church escaped free.

They proclaimed peace unto them which were in Rimmon. That is, gave them
safeconduct to return home again in safety.

14 And Benjamin returned at that time, and they gave them wives, whom they had
made on live of the women of Iabes Gilead, which yet were not sufficient for
them.

15 And the people had compassion on Benjamin, because the Lord had made a
gappe in the tribes of Israel.

16 And then the Elders of the congregation said: what shall we do for wives
for the rest? For the women of Benjamin are destroyed.

17 And they said: There must be an inheritance for them that be escaped of
Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of Israel.

18 For we cannot give them of our daughters to wives. For the children of
Israel had sworn saying: Cursed be he that gives a wife to Benjamin.

19 Then they said: Behold, there is a feast of a Lord yearelye in Siloh, in
the place which is on the North side of the house of God, and on the East side
of the way that goes from the house of God, unto Sechem, and is South from
Libanon.

20 And they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying: Go and lie in wait
in the vyneyardes.

21 And take heed: For behold, if the daughters of Siloh come out to dance in
a row, then come ye out of the vyneyardes, and catch unto you every man his
wife, of the daughters of Siloh, and get you into the land of Benjamin.

22 And if their fathers or brethren come unto us to complain, we will say
unto them: Have pity on us for them, because we reserved not to each man his
wife in time of war. And because ye have not given unto them, so that ye have
at this time offended.

23 And the children of Benjamin did even so, and took them wives of the
dauncers, according to their number, whom they cought, and went their ways and
returned every man to his inheritance. And repairing their cities they dwelt in
them.

24 And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every man to his
trybe, and to his famelye. And went out from thence every man to his
inheritance.

25 In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that which
seemed right in his own eyes.


They are said to have made on live those maidens, whom they had not slain: for
forasmuch as they had the^ in their power, it seemed yt they might justly have
slain them. But they would preserve them on live: Whereby they understood that
God would save the tribe of Be^iamin.
for that they saw it was not the will of God, that all the Beniamites should
utterly be destroyed, and here by they understood the will of God, because he
had caused six hundredth of them to escape. Wherefore they gave them
safeconduct, and the maidens of the Iabenites to be their wives.

God made a breach in Israel. That which they did themselves, they ascribe
unto God. A breach they call the cutting of of one tribe. Here is expressedlye
set forth the inconstancy of man's mind. In that fury and hot anger they
would have destroyed al, and they desired of God to grant them a full victory:
and when they have obtained it, and finished the matter, they mourn and
afflict themselves. If they had moderatly used the victory, this thing had not
happened unto them. After the same manner they sinned against the Iabenites: for
if they had not slain all the women there, they had had wives enough for the
Beniamites. Now having slain all, they found only.400. maiden virgins: which
not being sufficient, they are compelled to seek other by rapte or stelth.

And the Elders said. So were the Senators or Senadrim called, or else the
Tribunes and Centurions, which were rulers over the warlike affairs. Let their
inheritance be safe. Joshua had appointed unto every tribe his inheritance.
Wherefore the Israelites could not claim unto them selves the lands of the
Beniamites.

Cursed be he which gives his daughter. What moved the Israelites to swear.
Hereby appears the form of the oath: it was an oath of execration. This act
of the Israelites had some show of equity. For godly men ought not to
contract matrimonies with the ungodly. And it is most manifest that the
Beniamites were ungodly, when as they would neither deliver nor punish the
guilty. Besides that, they considered that the Beniamites were now not much
unlike unto the Chananites, for as much as they had committed wicked acts, like
unto their syns. But God had forbidden the Israelits to mary with the
Chananites. Wherefore they counted it a wicked thing to give their daughters in
matrimonye to them. Howbeit they ought not so to have done. For what if they
had repented, The oath of the Israelits was not fyrme.
might they not then have contracted matrimonies with them? That oath was
rashly and without judgment made, neither ought it by any means to have been
kept. Neither, as it is most lykelye, was it observed of their posterity.

A solemnity in Siloh from year to year. It was a yearly solemnity, whereunto
they used publicly to assemble: but for as much as the Jews had many such
feasts, it is uncertain, what manner of solemnity this was, David Kimhi
of which mention is now made. Yet I marvel that Kimhi says, that this feast
seems to have been Kippurim, when as it is written yt they had a famous
dancing, which were absurd to be added in a public fast. The Chaldey
paraphrast.
The Chaldey Paraphrast seems to have a respect unto the feast of the
Cale^des or new Moons, in which feast were thanks given unto God for the
governing of the world, and course of things, as upon the Sabbath day for the
creation of things. But I confess that I am ignorant what manner of feast this
was. How be it I am of that opinion, that I think it was the solemnity of the
tabernacles.

There is a feast day of God in Siloh. This description shows not that it was
the solemnity of the place, but rather of the people of Israel, which assembled
unto the feast: and forasmuch as one City could not hold all the Israelites,
they assembled unto all the parts adjoining unto the City, and to those in
especial which are here described. And the Elders do appoint these places by
name, yt they might there hide them commodiously, and lead away the maidens as
they were dancing. As though they should have said: Unto those places they
will come, out of the hidden places you may break forth, and steal them
away. Hereby we may perceive, It was sin to dance at the solemnity. It is
sin to abuse the feast days.
that the virgins in holy assemblies gave themselves to plays and daunces,
which was to abuse the feast day. It had been better for them to have occupied
them selves about grauer matters. For the feast days were to this end
instituted, that the people should assemble together to hear the word of
God, to be present at the sacrifices, where they should both call upon God, and
communicate together the Sacraments instituted of God. Wherefore it is no
maruail if these maidens were so stolen away.

Where as it is written: And when their Abothem, that is their fathers, shall
come, and again Achihem, that is their brethren, this letter Men is put for
Nun, that is M. for N. namely the masculine gender for the feminine. Which
form of speaking is often used in the holy scriptures.

Have compassion on us for them. The sense of this short and brief prayer is
this: We will say that we were sorrowful and pensive, and that we could no other
way seek and provide wives for the Beniamites. And whatsoever is done, we will
affirm to have been done by our counsel, and that we were the authors thereof.
And so we will desire them, for our sakes to pardon you. Other do easelier
expound it: Gratefy us, and give us your maidens, if you think them unworthy
to have them. We thought that there had been maidens enough of the Iabenites:
but that happened otherwise. Wherefore we were constrained to provide for them
by some other means. And if they will say that they are bound by an oath, and
that they cannot give them: unto that we will answer, that their oath is
satisfied, because they themselves have not given their daughters, but ye have
stolen them. Here we perceive that a public oath is lenefied and mitigated by
the interpretacion of the Elders. And undoubtedly that is their office which
govern a public wealth. Ye (say they) have not given them of your own free
will, wherefore ye are free from the oath. Therefore the Beniamites are provided
for by rapte or stelth. The rapt of the Sabines.
In the Roman historye also it is said that the virgins of Sabine were rapte
or stolen, but yet somewhat after an other sort. For there the virgins which
were rapt, were strangers, neither had Romulus any right over them: but these
maidens were Israelites, and were subject unto the authority of the people.

In that these men interpret and lenefy the oath, it has some show of
equity. For it might seem that the fathers violated not their oath, because
they of their own accord gave not their daughters unto the Beniamites, but
they took them away by violence. But if a man more diligently examine the
thing, he shall find either of those excuses false, The oath is not well
interpreted
because the Beniamites did not of their own private counsel steal the
maidens, but by the persuasion of the Elders. And on the other side it seems
that the Israelites gave their daughters of their own accord, and fraudulently
brake their oath. For the fathers swear yt they would not give their daughters
to the Beniamites. How had they them then? Of the Elders. But they are the
fathers of the country: wherefore this was no upright and simple dealing: They
eschewing one wicked example fall into an other.
neither did guile break their oath, but rather bound it. The Israelites
pretended the religion of an oath: which yet they craftelye violated, and
consented to rapte or stealth, which wicked act is no more remiss then
periurye. They will not give an example of perjury, and they grant to rapte.
Farther they violate an other principal point of the law of God. For in the
last chap. of Numbers it is commanded, that if a maiden be an inheritour, she
should not mary into an other tribe, to the end that inheritances should not
be confounded. What therefore if some of these that were stolen, were
inheritours? Undoubtedly they had against the law of God married out of their
tribe.

If a man will say, they did this with a good mind, and (as they use to say)
for a godly intent, that the whole tribe of Benjamin should not utterly
perish: Answer may be made, it is not sufficient that a thing be done with a
good mind: because also we must see that the thing which is done, be good, be
just, be right, and agreeable unto the word of God. Farther, God forbyddeth
that matrimonies should be ratefied without the consent of the Parents. But
here the maidens are rapte, and married not only without the knowledge of the
Parents, but also against their wyls, against good laws, and authority of
the word of God. Farther, the Magistrate promises to pacefy the Parents, and
to reconcile them unto them, if they chance to be angry: and so they fall from
one wicked act into an other, neither asked they counsel of God in this thing.
They take counsel of themselves, as though in a thing of such perplexity and
obicurenesse they could not err. And that we should not maruayle that these
things so happened, this verse is again repeated: There was no king in Israel.

Now rests to speak apart of Rapte and of Daunces. But as touching an oath,
I will touch only so much, as I think sufficient to this history.

Of Rapte.
This word Rapte in Hebrew is called Cheteph, the Grecians say (...), the
Latins Rapere, which is to take away by violence, not al manner of ways, but
as it were by a certain fury and great violence. What difference is between
theft and rapte
Wherefore Rapte differs from theft: because theft may be committed secretly,
and without violence. Wherefore in the digestes de Iureiurando, in the law
duobus reis it is had: Though a man swear that he has not rapte any thing
away, yet is he not straight way quit of theft. For although that which is done
be not rapte, yet it may be theft. So the civil law seperateth theft from
rapte. But to what things rapte pertayneth, Of what rapte is here entreated.
it is had in the Digestes De condictione triticearia in the law.1. Things
immouable as houses, lands and Farms, are invaded, but things moveable, as
things not having life, beasts and men are rapted. But we here entreat of
the rapte of things moveable, and yet not of althings, but of humane bodies,
which are by violence taken away for lusts sake.

There is an other kind of rapte, but not proper: Augustine.
which Augustine touches in his 19 sermon de verbis Apostoli, and it is had in
the decrees. 14. quest.5. chap. Si quid inuenisti, where he says that things
which are found must be restored. Which thing if thou do not, thou have rapte
them, forasmuch as thou have done what you could, so that if thou had
found more, thou would have rapte more. etc. The Gloser.
There the Gloser very well declares, what is to be done with things that are
found. Either (says he) the same things are counted for things cast away,
as if any owner has cast away any thing, the same thing if a man retain
when he has found it, he commits not theft. But if that thing which is
found be not wyllingly cast away, What is to be done with things found.
neither thought to have been wyllingly lost by the owners (as when a ryng is
found, or a pursse, or any such thing, which is not wont to be cast aside) the
same thing if thou retain, it is theft, unless thou keep it by thee with a will
and mind to restore it again. Wherefore thou must publykelye testefye that thou
have found those things, whereby the owner may come to his own again, as it
is decreed in the Digestes de furtis, in the law Falsus, in the Paragraphe Qui
alienum. But if thou keep it by thee, with the mind not to restore it, it is
theft. Which thing Augustine in the place now alleged reproves.

The same thing is decreed in the Code de thesauro, in the law Nemo. And in the
institucions de Rerum diuisione, where it is ordained, that if a man find
treasure in his house or ground, it shall be his that fyndeth it. But if he
find it in an other man's soil, either he has gotten it by chance, or else he
sought for it, if he have gotten it by chance, let it be divided between the
fynder and the owner: but if he sought for it, the whole must redounde to the
owner. If the place were holy, and the treasure be found by chance, the
fynder shall have it.

It is added, that if a man sought treasure in his own ground, Against magi^
and arts forbidden.
and used thereunto magike and arts forbidden, the thing found ought to be
forfaited to the common treasury. For he which by evil means has sought a
thing, seems unworthy to be possessor thereof. But to return to Augustine,
that which I before said, I affirm that it is not properly rapte, Origene.
if a man hold back a thing that he has found. Which thing Origene plainly
declares in his.4. Homely upon Leuiticus: Some says he, will not restore that
which they have found. For they say that God has given it them. But whatsoever
they say it is a crime like unto rapte. He says not that it is rapt, but a
certain thing like unto it. Although we have out of the civil law made a
difference between theft and rapte, yet may rapte be called theft, but yet so
that there be added violence. In the digestes de furtis, in the law Si
vendidero, it is thus written: A rapter every way commits theft, and is an
open thief. But omitting these things let us return to that kind of rapte
whereof we now entreat.

Some said, that to rapte is nothing else then violentlye to lead away a
maiden from the house of her father, to the end after he has defiled her, to
marye her to his wife. But this definicion is not full nor absolute, although it
be usurped of the Canonistes, in the.36. question.1. chap. Lex illa, Paragraphe
Cum ergo. For in this our history the maidens were rapted, and yet not led away
from their fathers house, but out of the field or vineyardes. Neither is that
true which is added, namely to mary her, or to have her to his wife, when he
has defiled her. For the rapter may either have a will to have her for his
Concubine, or to abuse her for his pleasure, although he take her not to wife.
Farther, this foresaid definicion mencioneth only of maidens, when as yet
nevertheless both married women and wydowes, also free maid servants, and
bondmayd servants, and also young children may sometime be rapted. Wherefore
that crime extends farther then that definicion contains. Only harlots
seem to be exempted. For they are not said properly to be rapted, although
they be led away by violence. And undoubtedly it is then no action of rapt, but
only of injuries. But such persons are understand to be rapted from the
custody either of the parent, or of their Tutor, or Guarden, or Patron, or
Lord, to the end to have unlawful accompanieng together, whyther matrimony do
follow or no.

Of the punishments of rapters.
Now must we declare what punishments are ordained for rapters. In the Code de
raptu virginum et viduarum in the law Vinca, Iustinianus entreats at large of
that matter, and makes the rapte of the persons, which I have before rehearsed,
death, so that also the companions, and they which have helped the rapter, are
comprehended in the same punishment. Neither was that thought to be sufficient,
but there were invented other punishments more grievous then death. For it is
decreed that not only the Judges and Magistrates shall put him to death, but
also if the rapter be taken in the wicked act doing by the parents, brethren,
kinsfolks, tutor, gouerner, lord, patron, or finally by him in whose power
she is that is rapted, they may kyl him, and that without any punishment. It is
also ordained, that they which are present with the rapter, and defend him in
his filthye act, may also be slain without any punishment to him or them that
kills them.

Rapte is sometimes committed against a man's own spouse.
He adds moreover, that rapte is sometime committed against a man's own proper
spouse, as if one by violence take away her, who^ he has not yet married. And
if a man take away an other man's wife, he does not only commit adultery, but
also rapt. If the rapter be not slain in the very wicked act doing, he ought
afterward to be put to death by the Judges or Magistrates, and that in such
sort, that though he appeal unto a superior magistrate, he shall not be heard.
And that thing says Justinian was ordained by the law called Lex Constantinia.
Power to appeal is taken away from rapters.
Undoubtedly it is grievous not to be heard if thou appeal: which thing is
here decreed. So great a matter did the civil laws make of rapte

In freemaid servants, and bondmaid servants the punishment is ended with
death: but if a frewoman be rapted, the goods of the rapter, and those which be
present with him, ^o turn to her use that is rapted. Neither is it any thing
worth for the rapter to give away his goods, or to bequeath them away by will,
but they fall into the hands of her that is rapted, and that not only for a
time, but also for ever, so that she may either sell them, or alienate them, or
give them for a dowry. One thing only is excepted, unless she that is rapted
do marye the rapter, the goods of the rapter are given her on that condition
that she should not mary him. And the reason of the law is added, because in
our public wealth we suffer not, that a man should marye a wife after the
manner of an enemy. For Citizens are wont to mary their wives, and not to rapt
them. But what was done with them, which although they were not present at the
rapt, yet were a counsel thereof, or being wytting thereof, uttered it not, or
afterward received the rapter into their house? Justinian decreed, that they in
deed should not loose their goods, but only be put to death. But if a
bondsman, or bondwoman were taken either in committing or ayding this crime,
they were commanded to be burnt with fire.

But what if a maiden will by her own consent be rapte? None of the punishment
for all that (says Justinian) ought to be diminished, it is utterly al one,
whither the woman will, or will not. And the reason is added, because if the
rapter would abstain from the rapte, it is not very likely that any woman will
offer her self of her own accord to be rapted. Wherefore it seems probable,
that she was won by flattery and deceites. Yea, and the Parents of the maiden,
if they consent to the rapte, are commanded to be banished. These things
Justinian decrees in the Code, who yet afterward in the Authentikes (where is
entreated of women rapted, which mary the rapters) was compelled to make ye law
new, because there were which canelled, that if she that was rapted did consent
unto matrimony, she might posses the goods of the rapter. For so they
interpreted the first law: yt the goods of the rapter ought to come unto her
that was rapted, if she married him, or if he in his will made her his heir: But
we (says Justinian) meant no such thing: for our laws do not appoint rewards
for a wicked crime. Farther, neither can he make any will, for as much as he is
now condemned to dye, neither do our laws suffer any such matrimony to be of
force. And if it be no matrimony, how the^ ca^ she posses ye goods of the
rapter in the name of a dowry? wherefore he decreed that such matrimonies should
not be ratefied. What then shall become of the goods of the rapter? If the
maiden (says he) have parents, which have not thereunto consented, those goods
shall come unto them. But if they have consented as it is already said, they
were banished without any propritye of goods or lands, which kind of
punishment was much more grievous then plain exile. But if the maiden had no
Parents, or had those which consented, the goods of the rapter were confiscate
to the common treasory. By these things appears that in those times rapte
was counted a detestable crime.

Whereunto this thing also I will add, if any daughter had married against the
will of her parents, or otherwise behaved her self wantonly and unchastly, it
was lawful for the parents to disinherite her, as it is had in the Code, De
Inofficioso Testamento, in the law si fileam. This one thing is excepted. If
the father knew that the just time of matrimony was past, and he would not
place his daughter, then has he nothing to say against his daughter, if she
mary without his knowledge, or against his will: yea rather he is compelled to
give her a dowry, as it is had in the Code in the same place, in the law Si
post viginti quinque annos. Whereby it appears that.25. years was the time of
farthest prolo^gacion of matrimonye. The same thing is had in the Digestes, De
ritu nuptiarum, What if a woman rapt a man
in the law qui liberos, Other lawyers determine the same thing, if a woman
rapte a man: although they say that happens rarely.

Now is to be added the opinion of the Canonists, The opinion of the Canonists
and what they bring out of the scriptures. In the.36. q. 1. Gracian brings
that definicion of rapte, which we have before confuted. But this thing he
adds: That in rapte is injury done sometimes to the maiden, and not to the
parants: and sometimes to the parents, and not to the maiden: and sometimes to
both of them. For if the maiden will be rapt of her own free will, there is no
iniurye done unto her, but unto her parents. But if the parents give the man
power to rapte the daughter, because she will not consent to mary him, then is
no injury done unto the^, but unto the daughter. But to both of them is injury
done, when the maiden is led away from her parents, against her will, and aginst
their will, Consilium An reliauense.
and in the same place he brings the counsel of Orleance, in the chap. de
raptoribus, where also he confesses that rapte was wont to be punished with
death. But it is added, that if the rapter come unto the Church, the punishment
of death is escaped. What shall there then be done? If the maiden (says he)
consented unto the rapter, first she shall be taken from him, and be restored
to her parents, but yet being excused, that is, a caution received, that she be
not slain or disinherited. But if she consented not, she is by her self
sufficientlye purged: but the rapter shall be compelled to public penance, as
it is had in the.36. q. 2. chap. Raptores. But what if he will not do penance?
He shall be excommunicated, Co^cilium Chal cedonense and Cabilonense.
according to the counsel of Chalcedonia and Cabilonum. But if he do penance,
he shall be punished by the pursse. And herein they say yt they follow the word
of God, which is written in Deuteronomy. 22. chap. If a man defile a maiden, he shall
give unto her parents.50. sycles, and shall take her to wife. And so he
condemns the rapter to pay a certain sum of money unto the parent of the
maiden. The which sum if he will not pay, or have not wherwithal to pay, he is
driven to serve the father of the maiden for certain years, which the Gloser
contracteth to five, upon this condition, that in the mean time he may redeem
himself if he will.

It is also added: If they consent together, the matrimony is firm, so that
the father agree thereunto. And that these matrimonies may be firm between the
rapter and her that is rapted, it also appears by the decretals de Raptoribus
et incendiariis, Conciliu^ Mel dense.
in the chap. cum causa, and in the chap. following. Which thing without dout
is against the civil laws, and the Canons that are of the better sort. But
the counsel of Meldenu^ has far otherwise decreed. For first it has ordained,
that the rapter, and she that is rapted should do public penance: afterward it
permits matrimony, but yet not between themselves, but with other. And it is
added, that if the husband or wife of either of them die, he which has
committed the rapte, or consented unto the Rapter, cannot contract new
matrimony, except the bishop release him. Farther it is ordained, that by no
means any such matrimony should be firm, no though the Parents consent
thereunto. Yea, and the same Gracian confesses, Consilium Aquisgrauense.
that the same thing was decreed in the Counsel which was had at Aquisgranum.
Yet afterward, both he himself otherwise defines, and also the decretals of
the Popes. What then make they of those Counsels? They answer, that those
Counsels meant this, that it should not be lawful to contract matrimony in that
case, unless open penance be first done, and the consent of the Parents had.

Jerome.
And to prove that sentence. Gracian (in the.36. q. 2. chap. Tria) cites
Jerome, who seems to acknowledge three lawful kinds of matrimony. One, when a
maiden is given in matrimony to a husband by her Parents or Tutors. An other,
if a maiden be oppressed of a man, and her father afterward consent to give
her him in matrimony. The third is, if the father consent not to such marriages,
but give her unto an other man. These three matrimonies he says are lawful in
the holy scriptures. But in the.27. q. 2. chap. Additur, is by the testimonye
of Jerome an other kind of lawful matrimonye added, namely when a widow,
which is not under the power of the Parents, marieth in the Lord. Hereby
Gracian gathers that Jerome acknowledges matrimonye between the Rapter and
her that is rapted. But I perceive that in the.22. chap. of Exodus, is nothing
entreated of rapte, only mention is made of fornication, and not of rapte.
For it is said: If he shall by flatteries allure her to lie with him, then has
he liberty given him, that he may take her to his wife, having the consent of
the Parents. But if a man had rapted a maiden or man child, then he was
judged by the law called Lex Plagii, which is written in Deutronomy, and
testifies that he should be punished with death, whosoever steals a woman
or man in Israel. Wherefore there is nothing written in the holy scripture (as
far as I se) as touching ye establishing and racefieng of such a matrimony

But here some man will object, that Jacob and his sons consented, that Sechem
one of the sons of Demor, Of the rapte of Dina.
should have in matrimony Dina Jacobs daughter, who^ Sechem had rapted, so that
his subjects would suffer themselves to be circumcised. I grant this: but it
was done before the law of Moses was given. Neither do we read that the
Patriarchs had any word of God concerning this thing. Neither can it be
denied that before the law was published, very many things were committed
against it. Jacob, of who^ we now entreat, had the same time.2. sisters in
matrimony. Amra^ had to wise his Aunt, of whom he had Moses, Aaron, and Maria,
which matrimonies, after the law was given, were not lawful. Wherefore the
example now brought, proves nothing.

But if hope of matrimony should be given unto Rapeters, there should be
opened a wide window for furious young men to use raptes. For they will make no
doubt to rapte, if they may hope to mary her whom they have rapted. But all
occasions of evil are to be taken out of the public wealth and the Church.
Farther, forasmuch as Parents are highly to be honored, if matrimonies should
against their wills he contracted between the Rapter and her that is rapted,
they should suffer great co^tumely. This thing also seems to be added, that
Lucius the Pope writes to the bishop of Burgenu^ (as it is had Extra de
Raproribus et Incendiariis, in the chap. Cum causa) that he decrees, that if a
maiden say, that before she was rapted, there were words passed between them
of marriage, it cannot be called properly rapte. What shall then be done? May she
against her Parents will mary the Rapter? Innocentius the.3. in the chap.
following, decrees: If a maiden be rapted against her will, and afterward
consent to mary the Rapter, that marriage is also firm, yea although it be
against the will of her Parents. And he adds that this is done in the honor
of matrimony, when as in deed it apertlye pertayneth to the reproach thereof,
if a man do more deeply weigh the whole matter. In the 27. q. 2. chap. Raptor,
it is had: If a maiden that is rapted, be betrothed unto an other, by the
words of the future tence, she must be restored unto him, so that he will
receaueher. But if he will not, it is free for the maiden which was rapted to
mary an other. But if she were betrothed by the words of the present tence,
and that she can prove that she was rapted against her will, the spouse if he
will not receive her, ought to be compelled.

The schoolemens opinion. Thomas Aquinas.
The schole Deuines write not much disagreing unto this. Thomas Aquinas in.2. 2.
touches this question, when he writes that capte springs of a vehement
lust, whereby the Rapter is so troubled, that he neglects al dangers. And he
will have her that is rapted, to be rendered unto her Spouse, if she have any:
and if she have none, unto her Parents, or if she be without Parents, to them
in whose power she was. And then if they will agree, she may mary the Rapter:
but so, that first be made restitucion, because in all theft and rapte
restitucion is chiefly required: yet says he, rapte before restitucion be
made, lets matrimonye to be contracted, that is, that they sin, if they
contract matrimony: but if it be co^tracted, it breaks not the contract. But
to the Canons which determine against it, be answers, yt they were made in
detestacion of ye crime. But the Pope afterward considered the matter better.
But this was not the part of a holy man to woorship the Pope for God, and so
to flatter him like a bondsclaue. And to the end he might seem to speak
rightlye, he brings the words of Jerome, which are in Gracian concerning
the three kinds of matrimonye. But how that place serves to this present
matter, I have before showed. Lastly, he obiecteth unto himself the Counsel
of Meldenum. But that place he says, is to be understand: If a man shall rapte
her which was married unto an other. As though that were obscure or doubtful.
We need no Canons to understand this. A certain Divine not of the woorste
sort, stronglye sets himself against Thomas concerning this thing, and
where Thomas says, that rapte lets not the matrimony already contracted, he
answers, that many decrees make against that sentence. Farther he brings
a reason, namely that he which is communicate can not receive the sacraments.
And then he adds that the Rapter is excommunicated: wherefore unless he do open
penance and reconcile himself unto the Church, he cannot contract matrimony.

But Caietanus there labors utterly to defend his Thomas, Caitanus.
and denies that he which is excommunicate, cannot receive the Sacraments.
Howbeit this he confesses, that he which is excommunicate, synneth if he
receive the Sacraments. And he adds: If an excommunicate be admitted to
confyrmacion or to holy orders, it cannot be denied but that he has received
the Sacraments, neither is it lawful for him to repeat them again, if he
afterward do penance. Farthermore, he says that the Master of the Sentenses
in the.iiii. where he reckons the impedimentes, which take away matrimonye
contracted, numbreth not rapte at all. Farther, he teaches that the Rapter,
and she that is rapted, are not by the act it self excommunicated, but to be
excommunicated. But because he sees it is in the Canons of the counsel of
Chalcedon and Cabilon: Let the Rapter and her that is rapted be accursed, he
answers that the Gloss enterpreteth that saying to be of the same force, as
if it had been said: Let them be accursed. Moreover he answers to the other
two things concerning restitucion and penance, and he says, that she that
is rapted, ought not to be restored, but it is sufficient, if he satisfy the
father by some means, although she be not rendered unto him into his hand:
even as in theft it is not always necessary that things taken away should be
restored, but sometimes it is sufficient, that the injury be recompensed by a
price or bond. But concerning penance he says: The Rapter, if he contract
without it, does sin in deed, but yet after he has contracted, the
matrimonye is firm. Lastly, he says that the Canons, which decree to the
contrary, are either abrogated, or else do speak of spouses. After this manner
Thomas, Caietanus, the Deuines, Ecclesiastical men, and Canonistes triflle
among them selves, and play the Parasites with the Pope their God.

Now will I declare, what the holy scriptures determine of rapte, The sentence
of the holy scriptures.
and what they judge thereof. The first place is out of the book of Genesis
the.6. chapter, where it is written: The sons of God seeing the daughters of
men that they were fair, took them to wives, such as they lusted them selves.
I know there are brought sundry interpretacions of this place. Some expound
the sons of God to be angels, which being kindled by the beuty of fair
women, had fellowship with them. This exposicion cannot agree: for forasmuch as
angels have no bodies, they cannot burn in such lusts. Others by the sons
of God understand those which came of Seth, and were brought up in the true
worshipping of God, who being overcome with beuty and fayrnes, contracted
matrimonies with the daughters of Cain, that is, with Idolatrers and Infidels.
Whereby nothing now remained sound and perfect, and therefore God sending a
flood, The Chaldey interpreter.
destroyed the whole world. The Chaldey Interpretour says, that the Sons of
God were mighty men, and Magistrates, who when they had taken to wives the
daughters of vile men, all things were filled with vices.

Here I see was committed rapt, which thing the Chaldey Paraphrast has
signified, which paraphrast among the Hebrews is of an incredible authority.
And assuredlye Moses says not that they desired those wives of their Parents,
but only took them whom they lyked best. By that place may easily be noted
the course, and as it were the degree of man's perverseness. For first they saw,
and then they desiced, and at the last they rapted. Neither were they won by
their virtues, but only by the beauty of the body. Wherefore God punished that
sin by a flood. And although there were many other sins in men, yet this
one is expressed with a great emphasis.

Moreover in the.34. chap. of the same book, Sechem the son of Hemor did
rapte Dina the daughter of Jacob. But what end that rapte had, it is not
nedeful now to declare. Curiosity was the cause that Dina was raptes.
But the cause why Dina was rapted, was her curiositye: the maiden would go
forth, and understand the manners of other women. Curiosity did then hurt her,
and also will always hurt women. For if it were hurtful unto the famely of
Jacob, being so great a Patriarche, for a maiden to wander a broad, how much
more dangerous is it for other famelies, which are not so holy nor acceptable
unto god? But the nature of women is much infected with this vice. And
therefore Paul to Titus, admonishes women to love their husbands, to bring up
their children, and to be byders at home. And to Timothe, when he entreats of
wanton and young widows: they wander abroad (says be) and run from house to
house, and at the last go after Satan. Yea, and these virgins, of whom we now
entreat, when they wandered thorough the vyneyardes, and gave themselves idely
unto dauncinges, were taken up by the Beniamites. Some man will say, that the
brethren of Dina oppressed the Hemorhites by guile. It is true in deed, but
when they were reproved of their Father, they said: Ought they to have done
Niblah, that is, a foolish and wicked thing in Israel? And that Dina was rapte
not wyllingly, but against her will, hereby appears, because it is written
that Sichem, after he had oppressed her, spoke unto her heart, which signifies
nothing else, then that he would by flatterye have comforted her.

The Beniamites did not properlye commyt rapte. Vniuckiendes of raptes.
But it may seem marvelous, that these Beniamites were not punished for their
rapte: but we must consider that they did not properlye commit rapte, because
they led away the maidens, not only by their own counsel, but also by the
will of the Elders. Otherwise true and proper rapte has always had an unlucky
end. Io Argus was led away of the Phenicians, Europa of the men of Creta,
Medea of Jason, Helena of Paris, all which raptes styrred up discordes and
wars, and also the ouerthrowinges of public wealths and kingdoms.

Also the women of Saba, being of curiositye desirous to be present at open
spectacles, Titus Liuius. Augustine.
were rapted by the Romans. Whereof followed such wars, that both nations
were almost destroyed, as Titus Liuius and Augustine De ciuitate dei write.
Wherefore forasmuch as God will not have such wicked acts unpunished, it is
meet that from hence forth we avoid such matrimonies. I am not of that
sentence, to deny yt those matrimonies which hitherto have been contracted after
that manner, are matrimonies. For it is not my mind to bring in a confusion of
things. But these two things I affirm, first that in contracting there is
sin, especially if it be done against the will of the Parents. Farther, that
those laws, whereby such matrimonies are permitted, are to be corrected, that
hereafter it be not lawful to do the like. For we see that the order which
God has set, is perverted, when Parents are neglected, by whose counsels
matrimonies should be contracted. And by this means young me^ at encouraged to
raptes, when as they hope yt they may mary the wives who^ they shall rapte.
Farther, that which I speak, is agreeable with ye laws of God, with the law of
nature, and with the civil laws. Wherefore let the Canonistes and Schoolmen
take heed how they judge the contrary. Now rests somewhat to speak of daunces.

Of Daunses.
CHorea that is a daunse, is formed (as Plato says) of this word (...),
which signifies joy, because it is a certain testification of joy. Seruius.
And Seruius (when he interprets this verse of Vergil, Omnis quam chorus and
socii comitantur ouantes, that is, who^ all the daunse and fellows followed
with mirth) says that chorus is the singyng and daunsing of such as be of like
age.

But whence dau^ces had their beginning, there at so^dry opinions. Of the
offryng of Daunses.
Some think that men when they beheld the sundry motions of the wa^dring and
fixed stars, sound out daunsing, whereby ye variety of motions might be
represented. Other think that daunses came rather of religion, because among
the old Ethnikes, there were in a manner no holy services wherein was not
leapyng or daunsing. For they led their daunses from the leaft part of the
alter to the right, whereby to resemble the motion of the heaven from the East
unto the West, afterward they returned from the right to the leaft, to express
the course of the wa^dryng stars. Which thing peradventure Vergil signified
when he said: Virgil.
Instaurantque choros, mixtique altarla circum, that is, and they being mixed
together renewed their daunses compassing about the alters.

Yea and the Priests of Mars which were daunsers, Salii the priests of Mars.
were had in great honor among the Romans. And there are some also which
refer the beginning of dau^sing to Hiero a tyran of Sicilia. For he (they
say) to establish his tyranny, forbad the people to speak one to an other. The
devise of Hiero.
Wherefore men in Sicilia began to express their meaninges and thoughts by
beckes and gestures of the body, and ye thing turned afterward into an use and
custom. But whatsoever this thing was, daunsinges in the old time were not
against Religion: although afterward they were applied to public mirth.

There was also an other kind of daunsing, whereby young me^ were exercised to
warlike affairs. For they were commanded to make gestures and to leap, having
upon the^ their armor, ye afterward they might be the more prompt to fight,
when need for the public wealth should require. Saltatio Pyrrhica.
This kind of daunsing was called saltacio Pyrrhica, and because it was
exercised in armor, it was called (...). Of this dau^sing is mention in ye
civil laws, namely in ye digestes de paenis, in ye law ad da^nu^. And
sometimes young men when they had offended, were not straightway put to death,
but were condemned either to hunte upon a stage, or else to daunse in armor. And
they were called Pirrhicarii. Also there was an other kind of dau^sing, Wanton
daunsyng.
which was instituted only for pleasure and wanto^nes sake, and that was
called of ye Grecians (...) and (...). But of those dau^ses which by gestures
of ye body, expressed the senses of ye mind, writes Lucianus in his book
(...), Lucianus. Athenaeus.
and so does Atheneus. In which kind at the length it came to ye point, yt when
at Rome Demetrius Cynicus derided the daunse called Mimica saltacio, calling it
a thing vain and nothing worth, a noble dau^cer, which the^ was had in honor
at Rome, desired him, yt he would once only behold him daunsing, and
afterward to judge and speak his fansy whatsoever he would. He came unto ye
stage, the daunser called saltator Mimicus began by gestures to rese^ble ye
common fable of Mars, taken in adultery with Venus. In which thing he so
expressed the sun which declared the fact, and Vulcanus knittyng his nets,
and Venus overcome with shame, and Mars humbly destring pardon, A saying of
Demetrius Cynicus.
yt Demetrius being astonished cried out: (...). That is, I hear O man the
things yt thou do, I do not only see the^, for by these thy hands you
seems to me to speak. About ye same time by chance came to Rome ye king of
Pontus, and when he had seen this dau^ser played his gestures on ye stage,
being afterward bidde^ of Nero, to ask what thing he most desired to have
given him, he desired to have ye Mimus. Nero meruailed, forasmuch as he might
have asked other things of much greater price, and asked him the cause of yt
his request. He answered, because I have so^dry nations subject unto me, which
without an interpreter, I cannot understand, and oftentimes it happens that
the interpreters do not faithfully enough tell unto them what I say, nor again
what they say unto me. But this fellow with his gestures will express al
things most faithfully.

Plato.
Plato in his.3. de legibus makes two kinds of daunsings, one (...), which
before we have called Pirrhicum. The other (...), which he calls (...), I
omit to speak of the filthy kind of daunsinge, because it is apertly
condemned by the laws. The Pirrhicall daunsing, and that which is done by
gestures may have place to some uses of the public wealth, but they pertayne
not to our purpose. Wherefore in this place we must speak of (...), how fat it
is lawful, Daunsing by it self and of his own nature is not vicious.
forasmuch as it is excercised for mirth sake. Assuredly I think that this
kind of daunsing is not of his own nature vicious or prohibited, because
nimblenes and agility of the body is the gift of God, and if there be added any
art, namely that the body be moved in order, aptly in number, and with
comelines, I do not se why it ought to be reproved, so that it be done in
time, moderately and without offense. For even as it is lawful to sing, and we
may use singing to give thanks unto god, and to celebrate his praises, so also
by a moderate daunsing we may testify the joy and mitth of the mind. For David
publicly daunsed before the ark of the Lord, and the maidens with daunses and
songs celebrated his victory against Goliath. Maria also the sister of Moses,
when Pharao was overthrown and slain, led daunses with other women, and soong
a song of victory. Wherefore seeing holy men and chaste women have used daunses,
we can not say yt of their own nature they are vicious. Daunsinges used at this
day ar vicious.
But as it is used in these days that men should daunse mingled together with
women, ought not to be suffered, because these things are norishmentes and
prouokers of wantonness and lusts. Maria the sister of Moses daunsed not with
young men, but apart by her self among women. Neither daunsed David with
women, and maidens which celebrated his victory daunsed among themselves, and
not with men.

Moreover they which love God withal their heart, and withal their stengthes,
ought not only to observe his commandments, but also to cut of all
occasions whereby the observing of them might be let.

Reasons against daunses of our times.
But our daunces are most evident occassions of tra^sgressions of the laws of
god. They are snares and offenses, not only unto the dau^sers, but also to ye
beholders: for they stir up and inflame the hearts of men, which are
otherwise evil enough even from their beginning: and that thing which is to be
repressed and kept under with great study and industry, the same is stirred up
by the wanton entisementes of dau^ses. Undoubtedly, if a man will consider
himself, either by experience or by reason, he shall find that in such
spectacles ye lusts of ye mind are not a little kyndled and inflamed, and he
shall perceive ye men return home from those daunses les good then they were,
and women also les chaste then they were. Farther, perils are rather to be
avoided, then to be noorished. For (as Solomon says) he which loves danger,
shall fall therein.

But some will object, that whereas daunses be so against manners, and do kindle
lust, the same comes rashly and by chance: but every thing is to be judged
not of these things, which happen by chance, but of these things which are
in it of it self and by nature. There are some so chaste and vncorrupt, that
they can behold these spectacles with a perfect and chaste mind. Difference of
accidences.
I grant, yt that may sometimes happen, but I add that all accidences are not
of one and self same kind. For there are some which happen very rarely, other
some are called (...), yt is which by their nature may as well be present unto
any thing, as absent. And there are some which are called (...) that is, such
as are wont to happen oftentimes and for the most part. These last accide^ces
ought in every thing to be considered and most diligently weighed: neither must
we take heed, what may be done, but what is wont to be done. Aristippus.
Aristippus dau^sed in purple, and being reproved, he made an excuse, that he
was made never a whit the worse by that dau^sing, but might in ye softenes keep
still his Philosophical mind. But such voices are not to be heard: because as
Demosthenes says, and it is cited of ye lawyers, Demosthenes.
we must not consider what some certain man does at a time, but what is wont
to be done for the most part. Grant that there be some one man so chaste yt he
is nothing moved with such entisementes, how in the mean time is the people
and multitude provided for? Shall we for the perfectnes and integrity of one or
two, suffer all the rest to be in danger?

But so (a man will say) take away sermons also and sacraments, for many hear
the word of God, sometimes to their comdemnation, and many eat and drink the
holy misteryes unto their own judgment. A certain profitable distinction of
things
Here we must know that certain things are profitable to the salvation of me^,
and are commanded by ye word of god, which things ought by no means to be
taken away. And certain things are indifferent, which if we se they tend to
destruction, they are not to be suffered. We have the law of god for hearing of
Sermons, and receiving the Sacraments: but for daunsyng there is no
commandment given. Wherefore these things are not to be compared together. But
by dau^ses and leapinges some say yt very many honest matrimonyes ar brought to
pas. It may be so sometimes, but I was never of ye opinion yt I would have
matrimonyes contracted by these arts, wherein a regard is had only to the
agility and beauty of ye body. There are other means much more honest: let us
use them and leave these as little chaste and shamefast. Let us remember, yt
although honest matrimonyes ar sometimes brought to pas by dau^sings, yet much
more often ar adulteries and fornications wont to follow of those spectacles.
What dau^ses are honest.
We ought to follow the examples of godly fathers, who now and then used
daunses, but yet such as were moderate and chaste, so that the men dau^sed by
themselves, and the women a part by themselves: by such kind of daunses, they
showed forth the gladness of their minds, they sang praises unto God, and gave
him thanks for some notable benefyte which they had received. But we read not
in the holy Scriptures of mingled daunses of men and women together. But our
men say: Who can daunse after that sort? In saying so, they utter themselves,
what they seek for in daunsing.

Moreover let us mark ye effects of dau^sing. It is written in Matthew, The
effects of wicked dau^ses.
yt the daughter of Herodias daunsed at a banquet which the king made: and the
king took pleasure in her, whom he could not openly without shame behold. For
she was a manifest testimony of his unlawful matrimony and of his adultery.
For Herod had married the mother of that maiden being his brothers wife. Of
that daunsing it came to pass, yt John's head was cut of. Many are angry with
us, because we cry against dau^sings, as against things which are of their own
nature evil and prohibited: we on the other side say, that things are not
always to be weighed by their own nature, but by the disposition and abuse of
our flesh: we can not deny but that wine of his own nature is good, which
yet is not given unto one that is in an agew, not that the wine is evil, but
because it agrees not with a body that is in that manner affected. In Exodus,
when the people had made themselves a calfe to worship, they sat down, did
eat, drank, and rose up to play. In which place it seems that to play was
nothing else then to daunse.

But least I should seem this to speak and to judge alone, I will add certain
testimonies of the fathers. Augustine against Petilianus the 6. chap. The
bishops (says he) were always wont to restrain idle and wanto^ dau^sings: but
now a days there are some bishops which are present at daunses, and do daunse
together with women, so far are they of to restrain this vice. The same
Augustine upon the.32. Augustine
Psalm (when he expounds these words, on the Psalter of ten stringes, I
will sing unto thee) makes those ten stringes the ten commandments, and
when he had spoken somewhat of one of them, at the last he comes to the
Sabbath, where of it is writeten: Remember that thou sanctify the Sabbath day.
I say not (says he) to live delicately, as the Jews were wont. For it is
better to dig all the whole day, them to daunse on the Sabbath day.

Chrysostom in his.56. Homely upon Genesis, Chrysostom.
when he entreats of the marriages of Jacob: Ye have heard says he, of
marriages, but not of daunses, which he there calls deuelish: and he has
many things in the same place on our side. And among other he writes: The
bridedome and the bride are corrupted by daunsing, and the whole famely is
defiled. Again in the.48. Homely: Thou see (says he) marriages, but you see
not dau^ses. For at ye time they were not so lascivious as they be now a days.
And he has many mo things on the.14. chap. of Matthew, where he spoke unto the
people of the dau^sing of the daughter of Herodias, and amongst other things
he says: At this day Christians do deliver to destruction not half their
kingdom, not an other man's head, but even their own soul. And he adds
that where as is wanton daunsing, there the devil daunseth together with them.

Co^silium Lao dicenum.
In the counsel of Laodicenum it is written: It is not mete for Christian men to
daunse at their marriages. Let them dyne and suppe grauelye and moderately,
geuyng thanks unto God for the benefit of marriages. In the same counsel also
it is had: Let not the Clergy come unto spectacles either on ye stage, or at
weddinges. They may in deed be present at marriages: but after there come in
(...), that is, singers and players on instruments, which serve for daunsinges,
let the^ rise and go their ways, least by their presence they should seem to
allow that wantonness. In the counsel of Ilerdenum, Consilium Iler dense.
which was had under Symmachus, and Hormisda Popes, and Theodoricus the king,
the same thing is decreed, namely ye Christians should not daunse at marriages.
But in the counsel of Altisiodorenum, which was under the Pope Deus dedit,
Consilium Al ^isiodorense.
this seems to be contracted unto the Clergy. For there it is prohibited,
that any of the Clergy should at a feast either sing or daunse, as though it
were in a sort lawful for other.

Schoolmen.
Of ye same opinion are certain school deuines in the.3. book of sentences,
dis. 37. who refer these prohibitions only unto the holy days. Ricardus de
media villa says that to daunse on the holy days is a sin most grievous, as
though on other days it may be permitted. But the opinion of the fathers, and
sound counsels is far more severe then the opinion of these men, who
perniciously release those things which should be contracted: for as much as
they have ye peril of souls joined with them: and not only peril but all
falls that are most grievously to be lamented. Howbeit it seems that these
me^ borrowed this their sentence (wherein they prohibit daunsing on the holy
days) out of the civil laws. For in the Code, in the title de feriis in the
law dies festos: We release in deed idleness on the feast days, but we will
not have men give themselves to voluptuousnes. Wherefore it shall not be
lawful on the feast days to use daunsinges, whether they be for lust sake, or
whether they be done for pleasure.

But let us see what the Ethnikes opinion was as touching this thing. Emilius
Probus in the life of Epaminonda says: Aemilius Probus. Salust.
That to sing and to daunse was not very honorable among the Romans, when the
Grecia^s had it in great estimacio^. Salust in Cantilinario writes, yt
Sempronia a certain lascivious and unchaste woman was taught to sing and daunse
more elega^tly then became an honest matrone. And there he calls those two
things the instruments of lechery. Cicero.
Cicero in his.3. book of offices writes, yt an honest and good man will not
dau^se in ye market place, although he might by ye means come to great
possessions. And in his oration which he made after his return into ye Senate,
he calls Aulus Gabinius his enemy in reproach saltator calamistratus yt is,
the fine daunser: It was objected to Lucius Murena for a fault, because he had
daunsed in Asia. The same thing also was objected unto the king Deiotarus.
Cicero answers for Murena: No man daunseth being sobre, unless peradventure he
be mad, neither in the wilderness neither yet at a moderate and honest banquet.
The same Cicero in Phillipicas vpbraydeth unto Anthony among other his vices,
daunsyng.

The diuersitye of temperature of the men of the East and of the men of the
West.
But it appears that the nature and disposition of the men of the East and of
the West was not al one and the self same. They are cheareful of mind, and
nimble in body, and for that cause delight in daunsinges. For to omit other
examples, David the king daunsed publicly. And they which come now unto us out
of Siria, do affirm^ that the Christians, which live in those regions, do upon
the Resurrection day and also upon other famous feast days, come into the
temple with harpes and violes, and sing Psalms among themselves, and daunse
together. For their spirits ar more nimble and cheerful, and ours more
heavy. Howbeit they say yt they daunse soberly and modestly, the men a part by
themselves, and the women also by themselves.

Now should remayn, Certain things as touching an oath.
to speak somewhat of an oath: but because to entreat thereof would be long,
therefore I think it good to defer it til an other time. This thing only will I
say for the expou^ding of this place, yt those oaths which are against the word
of god and charity, ar of no strength: neither do they bynd ye men yt sweat.
They sinned in swearyng rashly, but they sinned more grievously in performing
it, for as much as they had made an evil oath. Yet are these elders of Israel
to be praised, who although they saw yt their oath was not firm, yet they
would not seem openly and co^te^ptuously to violate it, least by their example
they should open unto the rude people a window unto periuries, which thing also
it seems yt Joshua did unto ye Gabaonites. For although in very deed they
performed not their oath, yet they would by a certain show seem to perform
it, and to have it in estimation. That which remains to be spoken of this
thyng^, I will defer unto the interpretation of the Hystory of Samuel.

And now I think good to add this, The Israelites erred in yt they asked no^
counsel of god.
yt it is no meruail that ye Israelites swear a foolish oath, and excercised
their sharpenes toward their brethren more cruelly then was mete: and also
admitted and gave counsel to that rapt such as it was, for as much as they
neither asked counsel of god, nor of ye high priest, nor of the Prophet
concerning these things. God in deed had promised the^ the victory, yet had
he not given the^ this commandment clean to destroy the tribe of Benjamin,
and to kill al their women, also to slay all the women of the Iabenites, they
had no commandment out of the word of god. The negligence of the Priests is
to be meruayled at.
But the negligence of ye high Priest and Priests is most of all to be
meruayled at, which did not of their own accord offer themselves, although the
elders asked not counsel of them. But Pinhas (as I suppose) was at this time
sore worn in age, and the other Priests raking all things unto the^, they
cared not how, very coldly regarded things pertaining unto God, for as much as
there was no king in Israel nor stout Magistrate, which should have kept ye
Hebrews in the duty of the law. Wherefore the people not being helped by the
holy ministry so much as need required, committed many things thorough
folishnes and fury, and gathered such fruits of their works as the hystory
rehearses. For they should not have been so outrageous to have slain al ye
maidens of the Beniamites, for as much as the law had prohibited, that children
should be slain for the sins of their pare^tes. Neither ought the Israelites
to have bound themselves by an oath, not to mary their daughters by any means
to ye Beniamites. It was also to cruelly done to destroy all the women of the
Iabenites which were not virgins. Neither ought they to have committed that
kind of rapt to save their oath upright, which was but a vain oath and of no
force.

Neither is this to be passed over, that the virgin maidens, The punishment
of the abuse of religion.
by that rapt were punished for the contempt of religion. For as I have before
said, they abused the rest of ye holy day. Undoubtedly the Israelites were not
commanded to assemble before at certain times of the year in the holy
congregation of the Lord, to the end they should apply themselves to daunses
and plays. The son of God when he was twelve years of age, came unto the
temple, An example of Christ being yet a child.
and there (as it behooved) applied himself to ye business of his father: which
thing if ye maidens of Sylo had done, they had not ben rapted. Wherefore it is
the part of virgins when they came to holy assemblies, religiously to give
themselves to things divine, and to abide nyghe unto their pare^tes, and not to
run about daunsing in the fields, towns, streets and vineyardes. For as
often as they are out of the sight of their parents and kepers, The parents
of the maidens yt were rapted did sin.
they are ready for raptors, and for the impotent fury of young men. This also
is to be considered that the parents of the maidens that were rapted, were
justly punished, because they negligently kept their daughters on the feast
day. For God gives children unto the parents to keep as a pledge, and that
not carelessly but warely.

And ye shall by violence take unto you every man his wife. An argument against
having mo wives the^ one called Polygamia,
The elders do not give Counsel unto the rest of the Beniamites to take mo
wives then one, but they will every man to take his own wife. And a little after
it is added: They took unto them wives according to their number. Undoubtedly
if plurality of wives should have at any time ben admitted for the procreation
of children, here it seemed most of all to have been needful, for as much as
the tribe of Benjamin was in a manner destroyed, and needed a speedy
instauration or renewyng. But the elders although they carefully studied for
the restitution of the Beniamites, yet they thought it not mete to fly unto
the remedy of Polugamia: which is an argument, that in their judgment that
was not allowed.

Every man departed from thence unto his own inheritance. Being (as it is to
be thought moved in their minds with sundry and diverse affections. They partly
reioysed for the victory which they had obtained: partly they pitied the
Beniamites, and were sorry they had made so uncircumspect an oath: and had raged
with to cruel and unadvised a zeal. They lamented also their brethren and
fellow soldiers, whom they had in that expedition lost by two overthrows.
Wherefore let the grievous and horrible punishment of the Beniamites be a warnyng
unto us to avoid and eschew dishonest and filthy lusts, as pernicious
pestilences, as well of the soul as of the body, and also of al good things.

The fruit of the readyng of this hystory.
But for as much as we are by the favor of God come to the end of this book, it
is our part, as it were in a table to set before our eyes this foresaid
hystory, to behold in it the government, whereby God defended and governed
his Church and public wealth, he does in deed punish sins grievously, but
after his fatherly correction he does with an unmeasurable goodness restore the
hurtes and losses, wherein men oftentimes incur by their own error and
fault. In all these things we may see an Image of our times. For we are
infected with the same infirmityes that our fathers were: neither does the
devil and his members with less diligence at this day vex the congregation
of the godly, then he did in the old time.

Wherefore let us pray unto God our most loving father thoroughe his son
Jesus Christ, that even as from the beginning he has helped and noorished his
Church in most great dangers, so also he would now keep and defend it, when
it is almost overwhelmed with evils and calamityes. Let us desire him also,
that even as he from time to time stirred up Judges and deliuerers unto the
Hebrews, by whom he restored both liberty and health: and as in our time he
has given Heroical and most excellent men, namely Luther, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Phillip Melanchton and such like setters forth of the doctrine
of the Gospel, so he would vouchsafe to go forward, and in convenient times
stir up certain lyghtes, by which he may illustrate the minds of his elect,
and kindle their hearts to keep and amplify the Church of Christ, that at
the length he may have it raygning with him in heaven, without spot or wrinkle.
Amen.

The end of the Commentary upon the Book of the Judges.
A diligent Index or table, of the most notable things, matters, and words,
contained in this whole work. Which things ye shall find by the folio
which is on the first side of the leaf, and (b) signifies the second side of
the same leaf
A.
Aaron reproved justly. 53 b Abimeleche Gedeons son. 153. b Abimileches
tira^ni 155 b Abimileches vices. 157. b Abraham married his brothers daughter.
20. Abraham's leage with the Chananites. 99. b Abraham's saying, Sara was his
Sister. 89. Abuses of church music. 103. b Accidences do differ. 286. b
Accusations violate not, but help the laws. 255 Action, one and the same,
may be good and bad. 79 Actions should be both just and justly done. 245
Actions voluntary and natural. 63. b Adam and Eua, whether they were buried in
Hebron. 14. b Adonibezek. 11 Adversity gives occasion of profitable sermons.
113. b Adversity oght to move us to praise and tha^k god as well as prosperiti.
104 Adversities behavior. 6 Aduoutries counted light crimes with Papists.
233 Aduoutries loses her dowry. 81 Adulterers and hooremongers god will
judge. 249 Adultry punished with adultry. 254. b Adultry salued by
reco^ciliatio^. 249 Adultry and rapt joined. 283. b Aesopes fables. 160
Aestimation is not so much to be regarded as truth. 90 Affections are
qualities. 141. b Affections of the body and mind also signified by dreams.
135 Affections ar attributed to God improperly. 176 Affections which are to be
counted godly. 194 Affections whether they be good or evil. 142 Affections
may be joined with obedience. 195. b Afflicted persons think god is not with
them. 114. b Affliction to the afflicted of God, is not to be added. 235. b
Affliction springs of sin. 112 Affliction of the Israelites of forty
years. 200. b Afflictions of the goodlye are not properly punishments. 181. b
Afflictions of this life God sendes to diverse ends. 180 Afflictions great or
small, is no sure argument of the heynousnesse of sins. 171. b Afflictions
final causes. 8 Affricanes are Chananites. 7 Affricanes were Phenitians. 68 Age
good, what. 155. Ain turned by g. 226. b Allegories use. 8. b Allegory taken
out of the holy scripture. 141 Alexander unto Darius. 157 Altar erected. 280.
b Altar is not to be erected, but to God. 69 Altars used why. 122. b
Alteracion is none in God. 175 Ambition handled. 157. b Ambition when it has
place. 183. b Ambition of kings and bishops. 12 Ambrose a Neophyt when he was
made bishop. 184 Ambrose opinion of Iiptah disalowed. 194 Ambrose first used
singyng in the west church. 103 Anabaptists fault. 132. b Anabaptists error.
264. b Anabaptists deny that the old testament pertains to us. 186. b
Anadiplosis. 109. b Anathemata. 30. b Anarchia is destruction of a common
wealth. 139 Ancyrana Synodus. 95 Angel signifies diversely. 59 Angels how they
have their names. 205. b angels why they fell. 15. q angels cannot burn in
lusts. 285 Angels whyther they did eat and drink, 212 angels bodies wherein
they appear are true and human. 211. b Angels what manner of bodies they take
upon them. 209. b angels apparitions. 208 Angels apparitions may be
imagigined..3 manner of ways. 209. b. 211 Angels appearing and Gods do
eeuidently differ. 1^2. b Angels whether they se God. 121. b angels may work
miracles. 126. b Anger of God described. 70 Anger defined by the matter. 73. b
anger assuaged by gentle answer. 141. b anger why Christ forbad. 166. b Anger
an unfit affection to punysh in. 280. b Answer with the Hebrews is to begin to
talk. 244 Anthropomorphites error. 118 Antichrist the pope of Rome. 147. b
Anticipation a common figure in scriptures. 246. b Antiochus begyled. 86
Apelles error. 210. b Apis the ox, was long fatting. 122 b Apollonius
Thyaneus. 211 Apology defined. 159. b Apoplexia. 163. b Apostles how they ar
fou^dacio^s. 149 Apparel prescribed by laws. 111. b Apparitions of angels. 208
appeal from the Pope. 266. b Application of popish sacrifice for quick and
dead. 50 Aquarij heretics. 189. b Arba the builder of Hebron. 15 Arguments
false of Siricius. 94 Arguments from the events to the cause, are not always
firm. 271. b argument against the Pope. 161 Aristocratia. 1. b Aristocratia in
the church. 241 Aristocratia compared with a kingdom. 156 Aristotle deceived.
138 Arc taken. 244. b Arms of noble men. 140. b Arts forbidden. 283
Ascension day whether it was on the wensday or thursday. 276. b Asers
situation. 108 Asking at God, how. 272 Assamonites or Machabites. 259
Assemblies exercises. 65 asses used in Syria 106. b Asses much used in Syria.
25. b Attilius Regulus. 85. b Augustines saying, I would not believe the Gospel
etc. scanned. 5. b Augustine used the latin tongue to preach in. 84 Augustine
and Jerome contend. 60. b Augustine excuses Tertullian. 120 Augustine changed
his opinion for compelling of heretics. 55 Augustines mother. 138. b Aunts why
me^ may not mary. 19 b
B.
BAal-berith. 155 Baal handled. 123. b Baal and Baalim. 68 Balaams praying was
prophesying. 207 Banished men's custom in buylding of Cities. 40 Banishment,
the extremest punishment of the citizens of Rome. 146 b Baptism of Infanes.
75. b Baren mothers have brought forth many excellent men. 200. b Baruch is
Apocripha. 51 Bastard defined. 177 b Bastards have no place in the congregation
of Israel. 177 Bastardes prove wurs then other children. 178 Bastards were not
commanded to be banished by the law. 183 Bawd who acording to the Civil law.
249 Bawdes are the Popes. 232 Bawdry. 232 Beans make troublesome dreams. 137.
b Bearing with others weakness. 52 Beda lived in a corrupt time. 42. b Bearfoote
is Elleborus. 164. b Bees of bullockes dead. 218 Begging disalowed. 203 Behauor
in prosperiti and aduersiti. 6 Benefits, degres and worthiness. 198 Benefits
whether they be to be wtdrawe^ from vntha^ful persons. 198 Benefits of god ar
of.2. sorts. 198 b Benjamin had.x. families. 269 Beniamites worthy to be
condemned. 271 Beniamites, how many of the^ were slain by the Israelites. 273.
b Berdes of Priests. 201. b Bernhards error of angels. 209 Bethabara. 141
Bethel is not always a propper name of a place, but where the ark of the
covenant remained. 269. b Bethlehem.2. of that name. 239. b Betraying handled.
36 b Betraying defined. 37 Betraying, wurs the^ besieging. 37 Betraying lawful.
37. b Betraying examples. 38. b Betrothing in words of the future tence. 284.
b Bezek situate. 11 Bibles preserved by ye Jews. 57 b Bishop of Rome has
nothing common with Peter. 149 Bishops of Rome refused kingdom in the church at
the first. 147 Bishops ambicious. 12 Bishops co^secrating of kings, whether
they be therein greater then kings. 261. b Blabbing a vice most peculiare to
women. 221. b Blasphemies horrible. 235 Bloudshedding justly and rightly,
restrayneth not from the holy ministry. 146. b Boasting what. 87. b Boasting
against God. 132. b Body, what it signifies with Tertulian. 209 Body spiritual
how. 211 Body and blood of Christ, how it is eaten. 212. b Bodies of men
after the flood, whether less then before. 17 Body human cannot consist with
out flesh and bones. 118. Body, remoueth us not from the beholding of God. 117.
b Body is joined to the soul for a help, and not punishment. 208. b Body is
anoyed with dru^ke^nes. 163. b Bodily diseases les grievous then the minds. 247.
b Bona goods. 139. b Bondage first of the Israelits. 77 Bondage more grievous
then loss of goods. 70 Bondage is against the nature of man. 80 Bondage is a
civil death. 36 Bond saruants may not fly from their masters. 227. b
Bonifacius the right. 257. Book de Patientia, none of Augustines. 158. b Book
de Dogmate ecclesiastico is none of saint Augustines. 121 borders of the
Hebrews cou^tri. 267 Bramble a vile plant. 160. b Bread remaining in the
Eucharist. 205 brethren for all manner of kinsfolks. 23 Brothers children are not
forbidden to mary by Gods law.19. but by the law of nature. 21 Brothers wife,
only lawful for the Jews to mary. 21. b Bribery of Abimilech. 158 Burials
of the Hebrews in their own possessions. 66 Burnt offringes. 271 Burdens
personal. 263. b
C.
CAesar touched. 153. b Caiphas the hie priest was no prophet. 137 Calcedonia
Synod. 147. b Calfes made by Aaron and Ieroboa^ were made of a good intent.
48. b Calves of the lyps. 192 Canons of the apostles allow marriage of
Ministers. 94. b Canons latter, corrupt. 215 Canons authority above the Civil
laws. 217. b Cantones, vilages of Heluetia. ^67 Captains over ten, Centurions.
etc why God appointed. 115. b Captains to have Ministers in their camps. 96.
b Captain needful in great dangers. 176. b captives returning or escaping
85 b Carthage inhabited with Sidonians. 243. b Cardinals hoorehunters. 232
Carefulnes contrary to securitye, and yet not always to be praised 247 case
new requires a new help. 88 b Cases of lying to avoid danger. 90 Castles
whether it be lawful to fence. 113 Castles and municions cannot defend from
the anger of God. 112. b Cathecumeni. 42 b Cato burdened with dro^kennes. 163
Caves described. 112. b Cause of sin is not to be laid unto God. 167 Cause
just and unjust differ much 271 Causes first, more to be considered then the
second. 71 Centurions. etc. why God appointed. 115. b Ceremonies complained on.
190. b Ceremonies need not be all a like every where. 54. b Ceremonies of the
law, how long they might be used. 52 Ceremonies of the law, how far Paul
condemned them. 51. b Ceremonies are not good, because they had a good
beginning, but because they be good of their nature. 48 Ceremonies in the
Mass, what they signify, is unknown. 50 Chair of Peter. 149 Chaldry
paraphrast with the Hebrews is of great authority. 285. b Chalebs petigree. 18.
b Chaleb a faithful spy. 18 Chanaan nation discussed. 7 Chanaa^ divided by
Joshua before it was possessed by the Israelits 7. b Chananites, why God would
not by and by destroy them. 8 Chananites expelled by the Israelites, went into
Affricke. 7 Charges extraordinary. 263. b Chariotes for war described. 32.
they can not resist God. 32 b Charity is neglected when we depart from the true
God. 155. b Charity not broken in destroying of Cities. 31 Chance is not with
God. 172 Chance is not without gods will 165 b Change is not in God. 175 Chemos
god of the Amonites. 185 Cherem vows. 192 Ches play. 220 Children many, is an
excellent gift of God. 200 Children fair of foul Parents, how. 4. b Child
of a day old is not pure. 180 Children are more of the father the^ of the
mother. 156. b Children divided for legitimacion. etc. 177. b Childrens
obedience to their Parents. 203. b Childrens duties to their parents, al one
with subjects to their Magistrates. 265 Children, whether they may marye without
consent of their parents. 214 Children when they may disobeye their parents.
253 Children are not punished for their fathers, as touching eternal life. 182
Choice of meats is not to be followed. 278 Christ is man. 211. b Christ is
the universal head. 147. b Christ the head of the church. 241 Christ
dissembled. 89. b Christ, as we read often wept, but never laughed. 63 Christ
how he resembled Melchisedech. 261 Christ is the mediator in making leagues.
73. b Christ refused a kingdom offered 147 Christ is our peace. 122. b Christ's
appearing to the old Fathers, how it may be proved. 119 b Christ how he is
taught by the book of Judges. 2. b Christ had a true body after his
resurrection. 209 Christ's body how it entered the doors shut. 211. b Christ
appeared to Gedion. 115 Christ's body and blood are not included in the simbols
or signs. 212 b Chronicles how they differ from histories. 3 Chrysippus
foolish answer. 147 Church is governed of God, with a singular care. 203 Church
had not two swords in the apostles time. 260. b Church how it may have two
swords. 259. b Church gives not authority to the scriptures, but contrary.
5 Church has three offices touching the word of God. 5 Churches consent, if it
be to be waited for in reformacion of religion. 265 Church ought to entreat for
the reconciliation of the repentant. 250 Church that pays tithes, is greater
then the minister. 261. b Cipria^ resisted the church of Rome 148 Circumstances
make much in every matter. 101 City of Palms, what, 27. b Cities, whether it
be lawful to fence. 113 Cities of refuge belo^ged to the Levites. 18 Citizen
good, who. 150 Civil laws are to be corrected by the word of God. 250 Civil
laws forbid reco^ciliation after adultery. 249 Civil laws permit guile. 85
Civil power how it is subject to the ecclesiastical. 258. b Civil power how
far it extends. 258. Civil rules end. 54. b Civil wars more cruel then
outward. 274 Clemens epistles to James. 149. b Clemency defined. 13 Clemency of
God toward his enemies. 112 Coactio^ God infers not to ma^s will. 167. b
Cohen signifies prince or priest. 28 Comam non nutriant nec barbam. 201. b
Commandments of God are to be kept precisely without al mitigation or
mollefieng with man's invention. 61 Commandments of God more to be regarded
then kynsfolkes. 156. b Commandment les, shall g^ue place to the greater.
203. b Commandments, when one is contrary to an other, the waightier is to
be observed. 184 Common prayer what behauior is required thereat. 207 Common
weal of the Jews described. 1. b Communion has diverse names. 41 b Communion
and Mass compared. 49. b Communication filthy. 159. b Companieng of godly with
ungodly. 44. b Comparatiue decree always requires the positive degree. 39. b
Competentes. 42. b Co^pulsion to right worshipping of God, and use of the
sacraments. 54. b Conciliation of places repugnant. 93 Concilium Gangrense
allowed marriage of ministers. 94. b Concord in the church depends not of
unity or likeness in ceremonies. 279 Concubines having. 154 Concubines of the
Fathers were wives. 248. b Coniurer notable, Appollonius. 211 Coniurations at
the Sepulchers of Saints. etc 130 Conscience when it accuses us, what we shall
answer. 176 Conscience evil, is called sores of the mind. 247. b Co^secrator,
whether he be greater then the consecrated. 261. b Consent of the church
whether it be to be waited for in reformacion. 265 Consent of the children is
requisite in marriage. 215 Conspiracy. 38 Conspiracies of the ungodly are of no
long time. 166. b Conspiracies communicated to many, have seldom good succes.
82. b Constancy true. 194 Constancy of the Jews. 265. b Constantius emperors
slight to try right christian officers. 264. b Constantine decided a matter of
religion. 266. b Contagion is to be avoided. 46. b Contempt defined. 166
Contempt of the enemy in wars engenders negligence. 270 Contencions concerning
fastings. 276. b Co^tractes of matrimony priui. 154 Contracting by words of
the future tence. 284. b Contubernium. 154. b Constantius the emperor. 155. b
Copulation of Angels with women. 16 Correction or amendment ought to begin
first in our own famely, and next kin. 123 Corruption first, after the sin of
Adam, whether it were derived of God or no. 80 Covenants are of as great
efficacy as oaths. 86 Covenant of God two ways to be considered. 59. b
Covenant of god with the Hebrews, concerning the Chananites. 60 Covenant old,
had promises of more then erthly felicity. 75 Counsels of men are so far
fruitful as the predestinacion of god has before appointed. 97. b Counsels
Neocesariensis. 95 Counsels are neither constant nor without error. 152. b
Counsel askyng at God is moral. 242. b Counsel asked of God by the Israelites
three ways. 7 Counsel asked of God or not asked. 6. b Counsels must be
directed by God, else has it no good end, ve st never so justly enterprised.
251 Creatures made Gods. 69 Creed the tradicion of ye church. 43 Crime, where no
crime is ought no man to confess. 90 Cruelty of the Israelites against the
Beniamites. 280 Cruelty displeases God. 12. b Cruelty defined, 12. b Cubit
measure. 16. b Cup of the noble. 110 Curiosity of Dina. 285. b Curs of Jericho.
30. b Cursings commonly used in adversities. 237. b Cursings how they ar
lawful. 109. b Custom handled. 189. Custom defined. 190 Customs when they
prescribe not 189 b Customs defined. 263
D.
DAgon what it was. 234. b Danes put down their king. 91 Danes situation. 108
Danits thieves and sacrilegers. 245. b Daniell how he escaped the furnace. 52
Days end, sun set. 221, b David's dissimulation. 90 Daunces handled. 286
Dancing of the youth on feast days. 282, b Dangers are to be avoided,
rather then nourished. 286. b Danger greatest where securitye is most. 247
Dangers in human actions. 132 b Deades sacrifices and offerings. 277 Death
for truth, edifieth. 52. b Death of three sorts appointed in the law of God
for ill doers. 12. b Deborah was of the Tribe of Ephraim. 107. b Deborah uses
the authority of a Prince. 96 Deceit handled. 84 Deceiving is against justice.
87. b Decree of God what shall be. 72. b Decrees contrary to decrees. 20^ Decres
beter and wurs, which 214. b Degrees of kindred prohibited, why 22 Degrees
prohibited for matrimony. 19. b Delay in God, why. 175. b Deliverance
begins of repentance. 112 Deliverances by the judges. etc, shadows of
Christ's deliverance. 2 b Deliverance from syn shadowed by Gedions victory. 141
Delectation is in the sinoes. 141. b Demades answer. 265. b Dens differ from
caves. 112: b Desperation is the want of hope, and one of the extremes thereof.
246. b Despising defined. 166 Destruction of cities and towns are not always
against charity. 3^ Destructions of cities pertain to the worshipping of God.
30. b Devil moves dreams. 137. b Devil works miracles. 69. Devils can work
miracles. 126. b Devils help to work signs may not we use. 129. Devil without
hope of salvation. 208. b Dictators why they were ordained. 2 Diedes of ours
must both be just and justly done. 245. b Differences between the old
sacraments and ours. 273. Difference between the old league and new. 74. b
Diffinition faulty. 84. Dignity is not to be more cared for then religion. 155.
b Dinaes rapte. 284. b Diocletians sentence of offense against the magistrate.
264. b Dionysius called Areopagite. 44. Disceat God allows not. 36. b. read
deceit. Discipline of war. 111. b Despair in Gods help not lawful, though
delay be much. 92. b Dispensations of the Pope are for gain. 178. b
Dissimulation. 38. Dissimulation of two sorts. 89. b Dissimulation hurtful.
52. Dissimulation in Religion hurtful. 48. b Distrust whence it comes. 125.
b Diversity of speech in one tongue. 199 Diuinacio^ by dreams is hard and
uncertain, it requires two things. 136. b Diuorcement, only aduoutry
causes and difference in religion. 222. b. Divorce never willed by God nor
Christ, but for fornication and diversity in religion. 94. Diseplay condemned.
219. Daughter of Iiphtahs obedience. 192. b Daughters should not mary, with out
consent of their parents. 280 b Daughters for little suburbs. 40. b Dominion,
for it men may violate right. 158. Dooue wherein the holy Ghost appeared. 210.
211. b Doublenes of heart ground of gile 84. Doublenes ever joined with a lie.
88. b Dowry defined. 26. Dowry is not necessary in matrimony. 154. Dowrye out
of the common treasury. 27. Dowry with a woman forbidden. 26 Dowry received by
the husbands of the wives. 25. b Drawing of God, to good and evil do differ.
9^. Dreams entreated of. 134. b Dreams corporal, spiritual and
intellectual. 137. b Dreams are signs of sickness and health. 135. b Dreams,
it is not utterly forbidden to regard them. 138. b Dreams of prophecieng given
by God to the wicked. 134. Dreams some ar sent by God. 137 Drunkenness hurtes.
163. b Drunkenness has. 2. senses. 162. Drunkenness brings all vices to light.
164. b Dwelling of Christians with infidels or godly with ungodly. 44. b
E.
Ear rings. 250. b Eating defined. 212. Ecclesiastical power and Civil.
257. b Ecclesiastical causes pertayne to the Magistrate. 266. Ecclesiastical
power is subject to the civil. 258. b Elect are punished to their salvation.
33. Electors of Princes. 90. b Elements of bread, wine, and water. 134. b Elias
was of the tribe of Benjamin. 272. Elloborus is bearfoote. 164. b Elohim and
Jehovah. 112 b Elohim, whom it is attributed unto. 206. b Emaus called
Nicopolis. 41. Emperors why they were ordained. 2. Emperor subject to the
pope. 257 Emperor corrected of a bishop. 145 Emperors all were not consecrated
of the Pope. 261. b Emulation handled. 141. b Emulation described. 143. b Enak
defined. 15. Enakim. 15. b Endeavor or labor is required to be joined with
faith. 13. b Enemies described. 85. Enemies god destroieth sometimes without the
help of man. 99. England. 271. d Enochs book. 16. Enterprises require three
things. 271. b Envy entreated of. 141. b Envy described, and mother thereof.
143. Envious persons described. 141. b Epha measure. 116. b Ephod, what. 150 b
Ephod, what. 238. b Ephori. 90. b Ephraites more noblethen Manasses. 141. b
Ephramites pride: 197. Epitaphes soong. 102. (...), rejoicing at an other ma^s
hurt. 143: Error very hurtful (...) the church 148. b Errors of fathers.
279. Error of Ambrose. 194. Error of Augustine. 195. b Errors of Grigory.
147. b Error of Grigorye Bishop of Rome. 56. Esaias was married. 94. Esaias death,
what occasioned. 117. b Espials three me^cioned in the scripture. 35. b Essence
of God shall be known of us in the life everlasting. 121 Eternal life fully
given us, is presently possessed only in part. 7. b Eternal life whether it
may be called a reward. 272. Ethniks had better knowledge of God, then the
Papists. 207. b Euensong before noone. 277. b Events, no good trial of lawful
actions. 227. Evils is not to be committed to avoid evil. 253. Evil less is
to be preferred before the greater. 253. Evil how it is taken away. 268. b
Evil not evil, if God command it. 39 Evil in the fight of the Lord. 67. b
Evil works how God may be said to work in the wicked, 7. Evil men sometimes
punished by wurs. 80. b Evil spirit, signifies either the devil, or wicked
affections. 168 Evil things must not only be left, but good things also
put in ure. 176. Euripides sentence. 158. Examples of drunkenness. 163 Examples
profitable. 2. ways. 4 Examples of saints abused. 4 Examples of Gods doings
is not to be reasoned of always by us. 233. b Excommunicate person. 285.
Excommunicate persons how we may keep company with the^. 45. b Exercises of
the bodi have no great vtility, but piety. 140 Exodus what it entreats of. 1.
b Ezechias lived in Romulus time. 3. b Ezechiel was married. 94
F.
FAble defined. 159. b Fable of frogs in Aesop. 160 Face of the mind, as well
as of the body. 121 Fayning is not always lying. 209. Fallacy a secundum quid
ad simpli citer et accidentis. 256. b Faithes efficacy. 98. Faith of three
sorts. 130. b Faith of hospitality. 252. b Faith is to be kept with the
ennemy. 85. b Faith to heretics is to be kept. 86 Faith is not to be kept, to
him that breaks faith. 85. b Faithes beginning. 207. b Faith obtains
promises. 13. b Faith of no force, if it want the word of God. 152. Faith
cannot sufficiently be confirmed by miracles. 129. b Faith justified the
fathers as well as us. 74. b Faith refuses not humain help. 125 Faithes
effects is prayer and fasting. 276. Faith comes not of miracles, but is
confirmed by them. 127. Faith is ye soul of good works. 242 Faith whyther it go
before miracles, or miracles before faith. 130 Faith directs good intent,
cleaves only to the word of God, not to fathers or counsels. 152. b Faith is
the gift of God. 122 Falls of godli me^ and churches. 226 b Fathers sins
whether the son shall bear. 178. b Fathers justified by faith as we. 74. b
Fathers the more ancient, the more sincere. 216 Fathers are not to be excused
in all things. 20 Fathers are neither constant, nor without error. 152. b
Fathers authority ill compared with the scriptures. 152 Fasting handled. 274
Fastes of sundry kinds. 278 Fasting distinguished into common and private. 94.
Fastinges abuses. 279. Fastes denounced of Princes, whither they are to be
obeyed. 277 Fastings upon saints euens. 140 Fault where none is, ought none to
confess. 90 Fear of God contrary to securitye. 246. b Fear comprehends al
manner religion of worshipping. 113. b Fear may not move against justice. 38
Fear godly, drives not a man to parricide. 194. Fear of the enemies once
known, is a good begi^ning of victory. 134 Fear at the sight of God or angel,
how it comes. 117. b Fear evil of two sorts. 247. b Feasts are wont to
have ryddels. 218. b Felicity of the ungodly. 170. b Fellowship of the wicked
is to be fled. 251. b Fellowship of godly with ungodly. 44. b Fellowship of
the godly is profitable. 29 Feeding of the flock was not only Peter's office.
149 Feet washing much used in Syria. 252. b Figurative speeches ar no lies.
111 Filthy burdens defined. 263. b Fish counted among delicates. 278 Finders
of things ought to restore them. 283 Flatterers usage. 84. b Flesh and bone of
any man, is the most conjunction yt may be. 156. b Flesh refreining. 278 Flight
for truth. 52. b Food of angels. 212. b Foot measure. 16. b Forbidding of
things is to some an alluring to the same. 158. b Forgeuenes of sins. 13
Forgiveness of syns may be wyth^out restitucio^ of so happy state as we had
before we sinned. 65. b Forms, why they are more seen sleeping, then waking.
135 Fornication handled. 229 Fornication is hurtful to the common wealth. 130.
b Forswearing is always unlawful. 39. b Fortune rules not things, but the
providence of God. 172 Found things must be restored. 283 Foundation, church
has none but Christ. 149 Foundation of the church is Christ. 241. b Foul
parents, how they shall have fair children. 4. b Foxes plenty in Syria. 223. b
Free men may change their dwellings for just causes. 227. b Free will
confuted. 104. b Free will cannot be gathered of the commandments. 73
fre^dships fou^datio^ is honesty. 166. b Friendship grounded upon profit or
pleasure is weak. 26. b Friends dream often of their friends. 135. b
Fro^wardnes of ours. whence it springs. 167
G
GAbaonites god favored. 36 Gabaonites traitors. ^8. b Gabaonites wickedness
252 Gain more commonly sought for then health. 174 Garments of nedle work
or diverse colors attributed only to princes 111. b Gates and walls of cities
should not be violated 227 Gedeon refused to be king. 2 Gelousy may be in good
men. 204. b General word proved the particular or species does not always
fol. 272. b Genesis book what it entreats of. 1 Gentle answer asswageth
anger. 141. b Gentleness praeposterus 101. b Gedeon of the tribe of Manasses.
114 Gedeon was beautiful. 145. b Gedeon why he had his son kill the kings of
ye Madianites. 146 Gedeon refuses to be king. 147 Gedeons fall. 150 Gedeon
sins ^. ways 151. b Gedeon whether he were saved. 155 Gifts of God are not
bound to the estates or conditions of men. 251 Gifts of God some remain, and
some are taken away after sin. 226. b Gifts of free grace common to the
godly and ungodly. 134 Gifts in way of reward. 188 Gifts may be revoked. 188. b
Gifts when they may only be revoked. 199. b Giving vnhonestlye is unlawful
231. b Gilgal, where it lies. 59. b Gilgal a religious place. 82. b Gilead.
173 Gilty persons, it is not ignominious to slay them. 146 Gyauntes names
inscripture and their original. 15. b Glass of the divine essence. 68. b
Gladness described. 142 Glory may be desired, the matter and end thereof. 97
Glories desire is mother of enuyt. 143 God what he is. 121. b God author of
histories. 3. b God takes tities and surnames of his benefits bestowed. 59. b
God appoints maiestrates. 25^ God rules in other Maiestrates, when. 149. b
God is the distributer of kingdoms 187. b God calling any man to office,
gives him ability to execute the same. 71. b God was king of the Israelites.
1. b. 2. God rejoices not in blood. 194. b God is bound to no man to give his
grace unto him but is free. 167 God is not bound to his laws. 4. b God may do
against his laws when he list. 93 God changes not. 175 God changes not his
mind. 33. b God when he repents is not changed. 72 God whether he be the
cause of sin. 78 God delivered the Israelites to their enemies. 70. b. God
punishes sins by sins. 24. 8. b. Gods operation in bringing sin to light.
166. b God beholds not Idols men's doings, but works together with them.
78. b God instilleth no new malice. 79. b God may we not feel in all things
129 God is to be imitated of Christen men. 249. b God can do many things
that he will not. 97. b God says he will do that he will do, and contrary. 174.
b God, how he intermedleth and uses our corruption, by his government. 167 God
punishes his own, and bears with strangers. 80. b God, whether he be
without a body. 121 God how he may be sen of men. 118 God never fails them
that obey him, following their vocation. 83 b God will be worshipped as he has
commanded. 1. 1. b God sends some dreams, but not all. 138 God forgiueth
sins, but does not by and by restore the things taked away. 65. b Gods help
is not to be dispayred of though it be deferred. 92. b Gods grace is in
degrees. 167. b Gods of the sea worshipped 234. b Godly and ungodly have many
times like succes. 236 Godly to make peace with the ungodly, whether it be
lawful. 99 Godly men fly unto god in overthrows. 271. b Godly to join power
with the ungodly, whether it be lawful. 99. b Golden age of the Israelites. 2.
b Good age, what 155 Good intent. 152 Good works what they require. 153 Good
works are so acceptable to God he rewards them. 72 Good works moral. 72
Good works must not be without faith, no more then a body without a soul. 242
Good works in hope of reward lawful or unlawful. 23. b Goods wast with
dro^ke^nes. 164. b Gospel and law, is the sum of the Scripture. 1 Gospel
promises. 175. b Government of god, whether it be excluded by humane
maiestrates 149. b Grace, god would have it known 182 Grace of God whether we
can resist. 167. b Grace of god why it works not alike always in us. 167. b
Grapes gathering with wantonness. 168 Gregory deceived. 90 Gregory's error. 56
Gregory thought it absurd that the Pope should be above the Emperor. 147. b
Grief described, and divided into his branches. 142 Grosnes often in Princes.
82 Groves to worship Gods in. 77 Groves about Idols. 123 Ground of all impiety,
and folly is security. 246. b Guile or deceit handled. 84 Guile good and bad.
84. b Guile to break an oath. 282. b
H
Habitual intent. 153 Heresy defined. 58. b Heresy of the Marcians. 58. b
Heretics if they may be suffered among christians. 58. b Heretics how they
must be ordered. 61. b Heretics ought men to keep faith with. 86 Hand breadth
measure. 16. b Hand maiden cannot by the Romain laws be a concubine. 154. b
Hangmen Hebrews had none 146 Harlots how dangerous. 228. b Harlot differed
from a concubine. 154 Harlots are not to be suffered in a city. 230. b Harlots
are not rapt, though they they be had away with violence. 283. b Harlots son a
judge in Israel. 176. b Harpers. 102 Heart or mind, and body, or outward
vesture to worship God with. 49 Hate of enemies not permitted to imperfect.
31 Head of the church who. 241 Head of the whole church cannot the bishop of
Rome be, nor none else there. 148. b Heads covered, in token that they have
authority above them. 93 Heads of captains ouercumde cut of, and presented to
the victors. 141 Hear growing or clipping. 201. b Hebrews sinned three ways.
77 Hebrews used the superstition of the Egiptians. 122. b Hebrew words is none
in the Latin church, but such as came by the Greeks. 41. b Hebron called
Kiriath Arba. 14 b Hebron a city of refuge. 18 Helizeus delighted in music.
102. b Help at Infidels hands may not be desired. 99. b Help of God may we
not despair of. 92. b Helps humain are not to be despised. 97 Helping of the
Lord. 110 Health less esteemed then profit. 174 Hems of the Hebrews. 47. b
Hercules praise. 29 Herod eaten of lice. 13 Hesron called also Iephuna. 18. b
Heaviness described. 142 Hypocrates of factors. 274 History defined. 3 History
praised. 3. b Histories fruit. 235. 288. b Holidaies dancing. 287. b
Holidaies bestowing. 288 Holy ghost is iii. ways in me^. 190. b Honor due to
parents. 214. 212. b Honor defined. 157. b. How it is the reward of virtues.
158 Honestye is the sure foundation of amity. 166. b Honest and just things
are to be done, although they be not expressly commanded in the word of God
250 Hooring what it signifies. 151 Hops bitter, become sweet being stiept in
water. 161. b Hope described. 142 Hope is a mean between securitye and
desperation and springs thereof. 246. b Hooredome handled. 229 Hooredome
punished. 4 Hornets of dead Ashes 218 Hospitality. 4 Hospitality praised. 251
Hospitaliti^s laws broken. 100. b more of them. 101 Host cruel Busiris. 252.
b Hours of the day among the Elders. 277. b House of every man is his castle.
252. b Humors abounding in the body, known by dreams. 135 Hus and Jerome of
Prage, traitorously murdered. 39. b Husay traitor. 38. b Husband how he is the
wyfes head. 149 Husbandry not contemned of excellent men. 114 Hye way ought none
to forbid. 186 Hypallage. 14. b Hyperbole is not alwais a lie. 88. b
I
IAbes Gilead, where. 281 Jacob lied. 89 Iahel praised. 110 Iahels guile in
killing Sisara. 100 Iahel traitor. 38. b Idle persons often see dreams. 135. b
Idol defined. 68 Idol of the mind. 69. b Idols taken away. 266 Idols
breakyng not lawful for all sorts of men. 61 Idolaters blindness. 244. b
Idolaters cannot abide to have ungodly worshippings taken away 124. Idolatry
handled 68 Idolatry of ij. sorts. 49. 238 Idolatry committed to Princes. 68. b
Idolatry the common sin of the Israelites. 173. b Idolatrous worshippings
imitate as nie as they can the true worshipping of God. 239 Iebus, an old name
of Jerusalem. 34. b Iebus is Jerusalem, 250. b Iebusites why they were not
driven out of Jerusalem by Judah and Benjamin. 34 b Iehues disceit defended. 85
Iehues fact against his prince is not to be imitated, unless a man have like
commission. 91 Ienunies family. 251. b Jericho, in the territory of Benjamin,
situate in a plain. 30. 27. b Jericho cursed, why. 30. b Jerome upon the
proverbs. 42 Jerome against Augustine. 88. b Ieromes error. 279 Jerome of
Prage. 39. b Ierubbaal a name of Gedeon 124. b Jerusalem called Iebus. 250. b
Jerusalem taken in Iosuas time 14. b Jerusalem commune to Judah and Benjamin
called Iebus. 34. b Jews commonwealth was Aristocratia. 255. b Jews suffered
emonges Christians. 57 It, often in scripture declares an oath 106 Ignatius
alleged for the mass 42 Ignorance of christians is to be reproved. 45. b
Ignorance less sin the^ transgression with knowledge. 20 Ignorant of god,
who. 66. b Iiphtah, son of an harlot. 176. b Iiphtah and Abimilech compared.
183. b Images of saints original. 151. b Images erecting, not always for
divine worshippings. 157. b Images worshipped in the mass. 50. b Images ought
to be taken away but not of private men. 245 Image of the sun not ungodly
used. 66. b Image of God consists holiness. 111 Imber days. 276. b Imitation
of God professed of all christen men. 249. b Imitation of God not lawful in
all things. 129 Imitation of Christ fond. 278. b Imitation superstitious. 202.
b Immunity defined. 263 Impulsions are sins. 180 Incest punished. 4 Incest
has commonly ill end. 20. b Incestuous seed hated of god 80. b Inconstancy of
man's mind. 282 Inconstancy of scholemen. 129 Indifferent things may be kept
sometimes or left. 51. b Indifferent things and necessary 287 Infantes should
not be compelled to fast. 277 Infection is to be avoided. 46. b Ingratitude and
commodities thereof. 155. b Ingratitude to defer thanks to God. 104 Ingratitude
of the Ephramites against Iiphtah. 197 Ingratitudes degrees. 198 Iniquities of
fathers visited upon their children, how. 73 Injuries private should be
forgeuen. 13. b Injuries private we may not revenge. 4 Injury with injury is
not to be put away. 227. b Inquisitors of heretical prauitye. 146. b Instance
and perseverance in calling upon god. 175 Instilling of new malice into us,
god uses not. 97 Intent good 152 Intent godly. 283 Intent ill of ii. kinds.
152. b Intent habitual, without any good mocion of the heart. 153 Interdictious
of the Pope. 246 Interpretors of dreams punished by the Romain laws. 138. b
Interrogatiue speech. 96 Invasion what. 283 Inventions of man to worship god
are to be abiected. 152 Inventions of man are not to be compared with
ceremonies of the law. 52 Inventions of man to serve God with, is Idolatry. 69
Inventions of men lack no defenders. 124 Invocation of the dead saints. 68. b
Invocation of the dead, how it began. 151. b Invocation lawful for things
above man's power, only to God. 129 Ioannes Cassianus. 42 Ioas Gedeons father
no Baalyte. 115 Jobs book. 171. b John the apostle whether he were subject to
Cletus, Liuus, or Clemens. 149. b Ionathas traitor. 38. b Iorneying ought not
to be taken in hand without invocation of God 251 Iosaphat had ill luck for
joining with the king of Israel. 99. b Josephus book of antiquities. 172. b
Joshua, no book of the judges. 6 Joshua when he should die, executed the office
of a good prince. 65. b Iosuas death and burial. 66 Iothans apology. 159. b
Iorneying into far countreies. 29. b Joy moves weeping sometimes. 62. b
Ioynters to wives. 26. b Irony, what. 88 Irony used by god. 174. b
Irregularitye of the Canonistes. 146. b Isaschar the obscurest tribe. 172. b
Ismaelites and Madianites whether they were all one. 150. b Israelites commune
weal governed by judges, how long. 3. b Israelites oppressed in time of the
judges, why. 2. b Israelites why they were so prone to Idolatry. 173. b
Israelites offenses in their expedition against the Beniamites. 288 Israelites
against Benjamin ouerthrown, why. 271. b Israelites cruelty against the
Beniamites. 280 Ithabyreus is thabor. 98. b Itenerarium Petri. 149. b Judges
book is rather an historye then a chronicle. 3 Judges book who wrote it. 4. b
Judges book why it is so called. 1 b Judges book what things it entreats
of. 1 Judges book how it is referred unto Christ. 2. b Judges of the
Israelites chosen by God. 2 Judges how God raised up. 78 Judges of the
Israelites are an example for the papists, in that they were neither kings nor
Lords. 2 Judges and kings compared. 2 Judge is no murderer when he
punishes. 165. b Judging signifies revenging. 93. b Judgments in gates,
why. 106. b Judgment rash ii. ways. 277. b Iulianus Apostata. 45. b
Justification is not of the worthynes of the act of faith, but of the firm
promise of god, which faith embraces. 207. b
K
KAyes of the church, wherein they consist. 262 Kayes given to all the Apostles
alyke. 149 Kenites, children of Moses father in law. 27 Kenites were kinsfolks
by aliance to the Israelites. 101 Killings of men, some please God. 194. b
Killing by chance. 165. b King of Denmarkes guile. 85 King defined. 11. b King
of the Israelites could none appoint but God. 147 Kings end. 157 Kings
letters for a wife. 215. b Kings and great men should not keep oaths, but
merchaunts only. 85. b Kings are vehemently angry. 166. b Kings that reign
unjustly are not to be put down. 91 Kings corrected by their subjects 91
Kings are bound both to serve the Lord, and to see that other do the same. 266
Kingdom compared with Aristocratia. 156 Kingdoms large not profitable 11. b
Kindred is to be contemned for gods words sake. 101. b Kinsfolks how far they
are to be respected. 156. b Kinsfolks of all sorts called brethren. 23
Kinsfolk murderers. 157 Kiriath sepher. 17. b Kison river. 96 Knowledge, the
beginning of four principal affections. 141. b Knowledge of God diverse ways.
118 Knowledge of God in this life is but after a sort not perfectly 121. b
Knowledge of God, certain before things come to pass. 71. b Knowers of god,
who. 66. b
L
Labor must be joined with faith. 13. b Lacedemonia^s forbad peregrinations.
30 Laughing never used of Christ. 63 Lasthenes a traitor. 37 Law and gospel
is the sum of the scripture. 1 Law of God is made for man, not for god. 129 Law
of rendering like for like. 11. b 107 Law and custom how they differ. 189. b
Law is a dum Maiestrate. 255. b Law of Numa Pompilius. 158 Laws against the
Cananites, not to be understood without al mitigation. 36. b Laws of
friendship or other, are to be broken when God commands. 101 Lay power how it
is judged of the Ecclesiastical. 262 League defyned. 73. b League with a
people far distant, is little profitable. 244 League old had promise of more
the^ temporal things. 74. b Lechem, signifies bread or meat universally.
205 Lechery and instruments, singing and dancing. 287. b Lefthanded how it
comes. 81. b Legate of the Romans guile. 86 Lent fast. 278. b Lentes
invention. 279 Lentes institution why. 202. b Leo for the Mass. 42 Letter
opening punished by death. 37 Levites portion. 18 Levites only may make
sacrifices 123. b Liberty chiefest* is to obey the commandments of God. 216.
b Liberty christian is against Lent. 279 Libertines error. 211 Libertines and
papists like. 264. b Lictores. 146 Life is not to be preferred before truth. 90
Lie defined. 87. b Lie in name and not in deed, when men think that they
speak is true. 88. b Lying is not in using figurative speeches. 111 Lie, when
evil and when wurst. 64 Lie in religion most grievous. 88 Lies of papists in
the mass. 50 Lying whether angels use in fayning them to be men. 209 Lying for
humility forbidden. 87. b Lyeng by the spirit of man, and by the motion of god.
89. b Lying to preserve the life of our neighbors. 90 Lies officious or
honest and of saints 39 Lying taught by papists. 257. b Liturgia. 41. b
Logicians rule of difference in fynall causes. 5 b Loss of goods and liberty,
is the doing of God. 70. b Lots dronkennes. 163 Lots, the fittest way for the
people to choose officers by. 268. b Lots are a way to ask counsel at God. 7.
b Lots to deuyde nations. 18 8 Love or hatred of god is not known by prosperity
or aduersitis. 227 Love and hatred of enemies. 31 Lutherians ungentle. 253
M
MAchabets Assamonets. 259 Madianites described. 112 Madianites destroyed. 140
Magike and arts forbidden. 283 Magistrate defyned. 255 Magistrates lack
breeds inconvenience. 238. b Magistrate ill, is better then none 245
Magistrates by whom they are ordained. 256 Magistrates names and titles. 255. b
Magistrates and princes may be called heds of their people. 148. b Magistrate
is the father of the country. 216 Magistrate is Gods vicar and minister. 149.
b Magistrate is the keeper of the law of God. 266 Magistrates authority over
ministers. 258. b Magistrate is much to be made of, for he is the keeper of the
first table as well as the latter. 240. b Magistrates bound to serve god. 54. b
Magistrate godly profits much 66. b Magistrate may not forgive syns. 13
Magistrates duty. 144. b Magistrates duty and commoditye. 66 Magistrates
duty, to see men use their own things well. 219. b Magistrates duty when
papists stir sedition for superstition taking away. 125 Magistrates duty
concerning prohibiting matrimony. 21. b Magistrate how he ought to take away
ungodliness. 123. b Magistrate how far he is to be obeyed. 264. b Magistrate
ought neither sediciously to be risen against, nor circumuented by guile. 264.
b Magistrates office folishly refused 147 Magistrates admonished. 104. b 122. b
Magistrate ought not of all other to be drunk. 164 Magistrates inferior how
far they are bound to obey the superior 55. b Magistrates inferiors duty.
265 Masters unjust defe^dyng of their servant. 271 Making whether it
signifies sacrificing. 205. b Manasses had ii. sons. 108 Man's nature how
froward. 92. b Ma^s imbecility is manifold. 125. b Man's end to set forth the
glory of God. 23. b Married folks who. 94. b Marriage of ministers. 93. b
Marriage after orders. 95 Marriage between brothers children was never forbidden
by gods law. 19 Marying the wife of brother dead, only lawful to the Jews.
21. b Marriage against the will of parents 213. 214 Marriage of maid against the
will of her parents. 284 Marriages secret condemned. 27 Mary compared with
Sampsens mother. 201 Marcionites error. 210 Marks body stolen by the
Venetians. 246 Marcians heresy. 58. b Martyrdomes are like sacrifices. 194. b
Mass of Mishah. 41 Mass cannot be called the supper of the Lord. 49. b Masses
parts. 42. b Mass in none of the ancient writers. 41. b Mass a sacrifice,
why 205. b Mass agrees nothing with the institution of Christ. 49. b Masses
superstitions. 2^6 Mass haunting the badge of Papists. 53. b Massemongers
serve not God but their belly. 240 Matrimony defined. 153. b. 204 Matrimony
lawful of iii. kinds. 284. b Matrimony lawful or otherwise in degrees. 19.
b. 214 Matrimony of brethren and Sisters children. 22 Matrimony of unlike
religion forbidden. 77 Matrimony ought not to be co^tracted in contrary
religion. 21. b Matrimony with consent of the par^ntes. 212. b. 214 Matrimonies
use whether it pollute Lent. 279. b Matrimonial precepts are moral 20
Matrimonies abuse. 213. b Matrimony worthy to be broken. 56. b Meats
diversity to fast with. 278 Melancholic persons often see dreams. 135. b
Melch^sedek, who he was. 37. b Melchisedech more plainly signifies Christ then
Leui. 261 Members why the scriptures attributes them to God. 121 Men in the
scriptures of ii. sorts. 89. b Me^ ar now weaker then of old. 96 Men godly
doubt at the beginning 96. b Mercy defyned. 13. 142 Mercy most acceptable before
God. 64 Mercy preposterous. 101. b Mercy folish. 13 Mercy of God the properties
thereof. 181. b Mercy of God far greater then the mercy of men. 81 Mercy showing
signifies. 155. b Merits handled. 272 Merit is not found in the Scriptures.
172. b Merits have no consideracion in obteining promises of God. 13. b
Merits condemned by the papists themselves. 273 Meriting what it signifies in
the fathers. 273 Merits answered. 251. b Metaphors. 153. b Metaphor of mouth
of the sword. 14. b Meteus Suffecius. 281 Metonymia. 169. b Michas offense in
religion. 246. Midwyues of the Hebrews. 89 Minds diseases more grievous the^
the bodies. 247. b Mind is hurt with dronkennes. 164 Milk induces sleep. 100.
b Millane ouerthrown. 170 Minchah the papists abuse, 206 Ministers called
fathers. 240 Ministers were plenty in the primative curche. 94. b Ministers and
magistrates difference. 255. b Minister is a certain mouth of the church. 207
Ministry is to be had in honor by the law of nature. 239. b Ministers in that
they are men, ar subject to civil power, and also their lands, riches, and
possessions. 258. b Ministers of the church are not exempted from ordinary
power. 257 Ministers are fraunchised from personal burdens. 263 Ministry
ought to be well reported. 248. b Minister may rebuke a prince by gods word,
but not depose him. 259 Minister how he may take away ungodliness. 123. b
Ministers of God are to be heard, when. 96. b Ministers and prophets are an
occasion, but not a just cause of ruins. 262 Ministers with captains in
their camps. 96. b Ministers maraige. 93. b Ministers admonished. 144. b
Ministers how they may be present at marriages. 287. b Minister ill may be
heard of God, though not for his own sake, yet for the peoples whom he prays
for. 207 Ministers to be orderd at imberdayes, why. 277 Miracles handled. 126
Miracles go before faith in them that believe not the preaching which they have
heard. 130 Miracles not sufficient to perswad godlynes. 67 Miracles woorking
makes a man neither better nor wurs. 128. b Miracles of the ungodly god
suffers to prove his by. 243 Miracles may be wrought to defend false doctrine
as well as true. 129 b Miracles whether godly men may desire. 130. b Miracles at
the bodies of dead saints. 69 Mirth of heart allowed of god. 161. b Mirth is
sometimes inconvenient. 162. b Missa for missio. 42. b Mishah original of mass.
41 Miseries common, join men in amitye. 252 Misery is not without fruit. 78
Mizpa, what place it is. 183. b Mizpa where it was. 267 Moabites came of Lot.
80. b monarchs vices in these days. 11 b Money is not so much to be esteemed
as truth. 90 Monica the mother of Augustine. 138. b Montanus for fasting. 278.
b Moral good works. 72 Moses was a civil magistrate. 261 Moses father. 284. b
Motions first, are sins. 180 Motherlye affection for absence of her children.
111 Mother cities or churches. 40. b Mourning for the dead. 202 mourning
sometimes necessari 162 b mournig acceptable before god 63. b Mouth of the
church is the Minister. 207 Munitions help not against gods anger. 112. b
Munkey. 202. b Murder is not to be let unpunished. 145. b Murderers of
kinsfolk. 157 Murder of parents or kinsfolk. 158 Murder of what sort
condemned by Gods word. 165. b Murderers without weapons. 166 Music handled.
102 Music delights both senses and mind. 102. b Musickes abuses. 103. b
Music not commanded to be had in the church. 104
N.
NAama^s example answered. 50 b Nabals denial of vittals like them of Succoth.
144. b Naboths example for obedience. 265 b Naboth excused. 56. b Nathinites.
36. b Nature of ours subject to corruption. 46. b Nazarites vow. 201 Nazarites
abstayned not from marriage. 196 Negligence defyned. 247 Neighbor, who. 31
Nemesis defyned. 142. b Nepthalim. 96 Newters are detestable. 281 Nicolaus the
Deacon. 230. b Nicopolis, called Emaus. 41 Night traueling is dangerous. 250 b
Night divided into.iiii. parts. 139 Ninth hour. 277. b Noah an example to
avoid dronkennes. 162. b Nobility. 173 Noblenes wherein it consists. 197 No^
credere^ Eua^gelio etc. ska^ned 5. b Numa Pompilius law. 158 Numbers reckening
in the scripture. 157
O
OBedience one of our chief works. 64. b Obedience is the principal fruit
of faith. 131. b Obedience to god is to be preferred before civil peace. 124
Obedience to god more then men. 38 Obedience when god requires, he withdraws
not affections. 195. b Obediences limits. 55. b Obedience vowing. 203
Obedience to the magistrate is due how far. 264. b Obedience to the magistrate
broken ii. ways. 264. b Obedience of Iiphtahs daughter. 192. b Oblations
please not God, but for the offerers sake. 206. b Offense avoiding. 52 Offerer
is more acceptable unto God then the sacrifice. 206. b Offers require weying
before they be taken. 150 Offices of both the powers must not be confounded.
259. b Offerings are to be made by Christ. 117 Offerings for the dead. 277 Oils
commendacion. 161. b Old test. pertains nothing to us, say the Anabaptists.
186 Old testament rejected by heretics, why. 17^ Olive tree esteemed of God.
161. b Ophra. ii. places of that name. 114 Oppression gives occasion of
profitable sermons. 113. b Oppression takes his beginning of tyrants. 161
Oppressors shall one day be punyshed. 71. b Oracle of god neglected. 6. b
Oracles, how they should be moved. 272 Oracles answered by dreams. 137 Orders
whether they many be given to bastardes. 178 Ordinary charges. 263. b Origens
folish opinion of Angels and devils. 208. b Oaths assertiue and promissory. 85.
b Oath of execration. 282 Oaths are not easily to be violated 281 Oath first
lawful and afterward unlawful is not to be kept. 86 Oaths against the word
of god and charity, are of no force. 288 Oaths how far they are to be kept. 39.
b Oaths cannot take away ye bond to ye commandments of God. 86 Oath ought not
to be a bond of iniquity. 85. b Oath of the israelits did not bind the^ to
destroy all the Beniamits 280. b Oath joined to threatenings. 71 Othoniels
pedigre. 18. b Outward works without inward godliness nothing worth. 74. b
P.
Patience a necessary virtue. 175 b Palamedes. 139 Papists ascribe more to
creatures then is meet. 69 Papists handle all things supersticiously. Their
hipocrisy. 146. b Papists commit Idolatry to their Pope. 68. b Papists
impudent clayming of authority, is the casting away of Christ. 2 Papists
subtelty of Lechem. 205. Papists compared with the Danites. 246 Papists church
is without a Magistrate. 255 Papists common infection Sodomitry. 254. b
Papists mayntain hooredom. 230. b Papists count aduoutries light crimes. 233
Papists more ignorant of gods will then the Ethnikes. 207. b Papists wiser then
God. 94. b Papists falsely accuse us of sedicion, being sedicious themselves.
197. b Papists cruelty in punishing heretics. 182. b Papists make many lies
in the Mass. 50 Papists offering of Christ in the Mass. 207 Papists are
scolers of Montanus. 278 b Papistry more liked then the truth why. 173. b
Papists how they should be ordered. 61. b Pardon defined. 13 Parents duty
concerning keeping of their children. 288 Parents consent, whether it be
needful in marriage of their children. 214 Parents consent in matrimony. 212. b
Parents obtain for their children some spiritual gifts. 182 Parricide. 158
Patres conscripti. 105. b Paul whether he lied when he said he knew not the hye
priest. 89 P^x defined. 122. b Peace among the Romans never above forty
years. 83. b Peace offringes. 271 Peace is not so much to be sought, as
obedience to God. 124 Peace of the Israelites during. 45 years. 172 Penuel.
145 People always frame them selves to the example of their prince. 66
Peregrinations causes. 29 Perils are to be avoided rather the^ nourished. 286.
b Peripatetikes exposicion of dreams. 135 Peripatetikes opinion of affections.
142 Periurye is diligently to be avoided. 288 Permission. 167 Permission of
God, to excuse his doings. 78. b Persecutions abrogate not ye laws of God. 54
Personals burdens defined. 263. b Peter slain at Rome, a^swered. 149 Pharao
was hardened both of god and of him self. 78. b Philip the Emperor first
christen Prince. 258. b Phineas nephew of Aaron. 59 Phineas lived long. 272.
237 Physician traitor. 37. 39. b Phrantike persons often see dreams 135. b
Piety defined. 279 Pigineians stature. 82 Pithagorians.ij. the one pledge for
the other. 192. b Pithagoras opinion of music. 102. b Pity foolish. 13 Plage
of the church grievous. 92 Plays handled. 218. b Plays and daunces upon feast
days. 282. b Platoes praise. 29 Pleadinges in the law forbidden in the Lent.
279. b Pleasures some delight the mind, some the outward senses also. 102. b
Plinies epistle to Traian. 102 b Plural for the singular. 108 b Plutarches
divine sentence. 180. b Poetries beginning and lawfulnes. 102 Poets. 139 b
Policy, not to make many priuye of thine enterprise. 170. b Policy of war
against the Beniamites. 273. b Policy in fulfilling a man's vocation, God
forbids not. 123. Policies of Gedeon. 139 Poligamia argued against. 288
Pope Antichrist. 231. b Pope has no authority to make laws in a common
wealth. 21. b Pope teaches he must be obeyed upon necessity of salvation.
257. b Pope above all kings and Princes. 257 Pope above emperor absurd 147 b
Pope inferior to many priests in dignity. 261 Popes put down kings and
Emperors, which the prophets never did, nor Christ nor his Apostles. 259 Pope
makes the sword of the emperor subject unto him. 257 Pope whether he may be
judged of no man. 262 Pope claymeth dignity for spiritual things, and never
uses the^. 261 Popes are bawdes. 232 Popes and popish bishops compared to
brambles and briars. 161 Pope overthrown by Iothams apology. 161 Popes ought
to have before their eyes. etc. 148 Pope dissolueth oaths lawful and unlawful.
85. b Pope touched. 150 Popes wickedness in handling degrees of marriage. 21. b
Posteritye whether they may be bound by their elders. 75. b Postliminium. 186
Poverty vowed 203 Power of God absolute and ordinarye. 97. b Powers.ii.
ecclesiastical and civil. 257. b Power is given to princes of god and not of
bishops. 261. b Powers Ecclesiastical and Civil wherein they differ. 259. b
Precepts of the law, when one is contrary to an other, the weightier is to be
observed. 184 Precepts of God of diverse sorts. 203. b Prescription. 38
Prescription handled. 188. b President forbidden to mary a wife in his
province. 21 Preterperfectence expounded by the preterpluperfectence 14 Praying
we help other. 50 Prayers distinguished into public and private. 94 Prayers
without faith avail not. 1^0 Pray only to God, for that which is above the
faculty of man. 129 Pratlers often see dreams. 135. b Preaching of gods word is
not subject to civil power, but the preacher. 258. b Preaching of the word of
god has all men and all states subject unto it. 258 Priests for hooredome
should be deposed. 233 Priests may excel the Pope in dignity. 261 Priesthode
both of Melchisedech and of Leui signified Christ. 261 Pride detested of God.
270 Pride of the Ephramites. 197 Princes are called Deacons and pastors. 255. b
Princes good are diligently to be prayed for. 155 Princes duty to be a father
of his country. 105. b Princes may be called heads of their people. 148. b
Princes evil are the apointment of God. 150 Princes duty in suffering
fellowship of godly and ungodly. 54 Princes duty to be careful for his peoples
good state after his death 65 b Princes have not lawfullye exemte
Ecclesiastical men from their subjection. 263 Priscillanistes. 38 Prisons are
not to be violated. 227 Prisoners condemned, though the party injured by them
forgive them, yet may they not be delivered without the will of the Magistrate.
81, b Private men admonished. 122. b Private man's duty in taking away
ungodliness. 123. b Private man's syn sometimes cause of common calamity. 124
private man suddenly oppressed, is armed by the Magistrate to defend him self.
85 Private men ought not to take away Images. 245 Privy contractes unlawful.
154 Prodition handled. 36. b Prolepsis a comman figure in scriptures. 246. b
Promises how far they be of force. 23 Promis first is ever to be kept, if it be
honest. 86 promis rash of Chaleb. 23 Promises how far they are to be kept.
39. b promises of as much efficacy as an oath. 86 Promises civil how far they
are to be performed. 176. b Promises of the law. 175 Promises of God how they
are to to be understood. 175 Promises of the law and gospel. 13. b Promises
joined commonly to precepts. 96 promises and threatenings why they they be
added to the commandments. 23. b promocion offered godly men, modestly
refused. 161 Pronounce of the first person repeated. 104. b Prophecy in women.
93 Prophets might sacrifice though they were not of the Tribe of Leui. 206
prophets are not the efficient cause of overthrowing of kingdoms. 262
prophets false, by being possessed of an evil spirit. 137. b propiciatory
sacrifice is but one. 64 Prosopographia. 111 Prosperities behavior. 6
Prosperous event shows not the enterprise to be just. 271. b prosperous
succes is no good argument that our doings please the Lord. 243 Proverb, law
and country. 189. b Proverb of the court of Rome. 85. b Providence of God by
light things brings weighty things to pas. 122 Provoking occasion of
destruction given by God. 97 Prudence God forbids not, in fulfilling a man's
vocation. 123 Public prayer, what behavior is required thereat. 207 Public
wealth is more to be regarded then kinsfolk. 156. b Punishment by the purs. 284
Punishments should rather be diminished by Judges, then augmented. 12. b
punishment of the ungodly after. 2. sorts. 11 punishments of this life no man
suffers which he deserves not. 180 Punishments outward used by the
Apostles. 259 Punishment would not be done in anger. 280. b Punishment first
in the Lords house. 234. b Punishments of God is to move repentance. 174
Punishing of fathers in the children, is lawful for God, but not for men. 182
punishments of other ought we consider to our profit. 171. b Purgatory emptied
with fasting. 279. b Purifications of the elders. 273. b
R.
RAhab traitor. 38. b Rapte handled. 283 Rapte has most commonly an unlucky
end. 285 b Reading of an history what it profits. 288 b Reasons humane must
give place to Gods vocation. 115. b Reasoning by the example of god is not
always lawful. 233. b Rechabyts came of the Kenites. 27 b. their praise. 29
Rechabites came of the Kenites. 98 Reconciliation of the husband and the wife
after adultry has been committed. 249 Reformation of Rome and romysh religion
promised. 222 rejoicing at an other ma^s hurt. 143 Religion pure, can we not
long abide in. 72. b Religion pure must be so receued yt we depart from
pernicious Masses and papistical impieties. 123 Religion remaining vnrestored.
nothing can go forward in a public wealth. 122. b Religion has continual need
of repayring and purging. 68 Remedies against fear. 247. b Remista for
remissio. 42. b Remnauntes described. 1^7 Remus, why he was killed of Romulus.
227 Repentance. 174 Repentance true. 176 Repentance consists in two
points. 61. b Repentance is not perfect in us. 175. b Repentance is sometimes
openly to be renewed. 63. b Repentance and amendment is given of God. 73
Repentance brings not always the former good state again. 65. b Repentance
of God, how. 70 Repetition of periodes in the scripture. 105 Repetitions in
speech are to purpose. 109 Reprobate are forsaken of God before they forsake
him. 33 Reprobate why they be tempted 34 Reproving lawful. 37 Resisters of Gods
vocation differ. 1^5. b Reubenites trade and country. 108 Revenging of a man's
own injuries. 31. b Reward handled. 272 b Rewards may lawfully be set for
good deeds. 23. b Rewards may be respected in doing well. 23. b Rhetorike
profitable in war. 36 Riddles in feasts. 218. b Right of war. 186 Rites and
ceremonies need not be al alyke every where. 54. b Riualty. 143. b River
swellyng at the battle of Sisara. 109 Rochesters false argument. 148. b Rock
in the scriptures signifies often a castle or fortres. 273. b Rome builded,
when. 3. b Romes dignity caused the Bishop thereof to be preferred before
other. 148. b Romans in the primative church communicated every day, and yet
were married. 94 Romans never had peace above xl. years at once. 83. b
Romans compelled their Consul. 91 Romans punished their Citizens only by
banishment. 146. b Romish proverb. 85. b Romulus in Ezechias time. 3. b Rule
firm of invocation. 129 Rule of our actions is the word of God. 129 Ruth the
daughter of Eglon. 83
S.
Sabbath day to dance in. 287 Sabbath endures from evening to evening. 277. b
Sacraments of the Elders and ours were all one, and differ in outward simboles
and signs. 273 Sacraments all one in both testamentes. 74 Sacrament and
Sacrifice may be both in one thing. 64 b Sacrament and sacrifice differ. 63. b
Sacraments and miracles are after a sort like. 129. b Sacraments consist by
the word of God. 91. b Sacrifice handled. 206. b Sacrifice defined. 63. b
Sacrifices of the Elders what they signified. 194. b Sacrificing in other
places besides the Tabernacle. 205. b Sacrifices of the law, what profit they
had. 273 Sacrifices kyllyng signified. etc. 6^ Sacrifices of Christians. 207
Sacrifice has two special properties. 64. b Sacrificer is more acceptable
unto God, then the Sacrifice. 206. b Sacrificing belonged only to the
Levites. 123. b Sacrifices for the dead. 277 Sacrifice for quick and dead. 50
Sacrifices of Ethnikes agree more with Gods sacrifices, then the Mass with the
Communion. 50. b Sasconduit. 86. b Saints whether they behold all things in
the glass of the divine essence. 68. b Saints sometimes not to be followed. 4
Salomons syn. 54 Salt sowing. 170 Salvation is the gift of God. 182 Salutacion
of the Hebrews. 114. b Samson had faith. 235. b Samson only appointed a Judge
before his birth. 200. b Samsons mother compared to Mary the virgin. 201 Samuel
of the posteritye of Chore. 182 Sanctified in the womb.. 103. b Sangar. 91
Sapor king of the Persians. 12. b Sassias monstrous lust. 21 Satisfaction for
sins is not by death or martyrdom of men. 195 Satisfaction is not in fasting.
279 Scoffing punished. 144. b School masters should be godly. 45. b
Schoolemaister traitor. 37. 39. b Schoolemens inconstancy. 119 Schisms, what.
197. b Scots matrimony. 20. b Scriptures came from God, and their authority. 5
scriptures, whether Jews have corrupt. 57. b Scriptures verity. 226. b
scriptures diversely divided. 1 Scriptures is rather to be believed, then
miracles. 131 Scriptures term things sometimes according as men use commonly
to speak. 217. b Scriptures never attribute that to God, which in a man is of
it self vice, or of his own nature sin. 142 Sechems situation. 159
Sechemites sins. 157 Secrets reueiled by dro^ke^nes 164 secrets reueiling,
death. 37 Secrets are not rashly to be communicated to a man's wife. 221. b
Secundum quid ad simpliciter. 256. b Security handled. 246. b Security
laudable. 247. b Securitye of the flesh pernicious. 244 Sedicion handled. 197
Sedicions springs often of setting forth of true piety. 124. b sedicious
persons, who. 197. b Seeing of God or angels. 117 Seeing of God by men. 118
Senadrim. 1. b Senses cannot know God. 118 Senses, when they may be received.
209. b Senses are not deceived in seeing of angels. 210. b Se^sible things
distinguished. 209 b Sepulchers of dead men watched. 139. b Sequences and
fained hyms. 103. b Serapions act for Communion under one kind. 190 Sermon of
a Prophet. 113. etc Sermon must be taken out of the scriptures. 61 Serpents of
the carkas of a man. 218 Servants sometimes wyser then their masters. 250. b
Servitude. 80 Seven a number of fulness. 179 Severity of God toward his enemies.
112 Severity to much against the Beniamites. 280 Severity in a man's own cause
not commendable, but in Gods, necessary. 31. b Shadows of the old law are
removed, but the things shadowed remain. 47. b Shaphat interpreted. 1. b
Shauing of heads. 201. b Shepherdes used watches. 139. b Show of ill, how far
it is to be avoided. 38. b Shipwreck, cruellye dealt with in certain regions.
235. b Shrat^tide. 279. b Sibyllas verses. 58 Sicarii. 166 Sicera drunk. 202
Sicles value. 238 Sign desired by Manoah. 204. b Sign required by Gedeon. 116
Sign may be required to strengthen our faith. 126 Signs have the names of the
properties of things often times. 62 Signs are called lies, why. 127 b Silence
enjoined to women in the church. 93 Silla eaten of lice. 13 Siloh was in mount
Ephraim. 252 Simbole or Creed is called the trad^tion of the Church. 43
Similitudes force in reasonyng. 234 Sins in.4. degrees. 179. b Sin entered
by man, and not by God. 167 Sin seperateth us from the familiarity of God.
117. b Sins are not equal. 53 Sins punished by sins. 248. b Sins of
committing and omyttyng. 63 Sins former, by latter sins punished. 79 Sin
cured with sin. 168. b Sins cannot be avoided by us. 73 Sin is not
therefore excused, because it is public. 254. b Sins have their weighte by
the law. 53 Sins are ill and good in diverse respects. 166. b Sin is syn,
because it is against Gods word. 233. b Sin no sin when God commaundes
it. 39 Sin, whether God be the cause thereof. 78 Sins reward is death. 194.
b Sins cause is not to be laid to God. 167 Sin, how it depends of god.
166. b Sin punished with sin. 11 Sin is not to be committed to avoid
sin, 253 Sin is ever to be avoided, let follow what will. 253 Sins of the
Israelites. 40. b Sinners punished by God two manner of ways. 11 Sinners
punished by the same things wherein they transgres. 61 Sinners are not excused
by the working of God. 79 Sinners ought to call upon God 78 Sinners whether God
hear. 207 Single life for Ministers. 94 Singular for plural. 109. b Singing in
the church. 102. b Singing and dancing alike. 286. b Sircius a Romain forbad
marriage of Ministers. 94 Sisera a wicked man. 101 Sisters two may no man
mary. 223 Society of the wicked is to be fled 251. b Socrates refused to escape
out of prison. 227 Socrates condemned for religion. 266 Sodomitry punished. 4
Sodomitry is a horrible syn. 253. b Sodomitry a common infection of papistical
prelates. 254. b Soden flesh in sacrifices. 116. b Sold for naught. 70. b
solitary life how it may be allowed. 19^ Songs of victory. 102. 191. b Sores
of the mind, what. 247. b Sorrow is in the sinowes. 141. b Sorrow is thirsty.
100. b Soldiers sleing their enemies in just wars, are not murderers. 165.
b Soldiers hired. 187. b soldiers faithful. 187 Soldiers not commendable.
156. b soldiers vices. 187. Speeches may have two faults in them. 87
Spieches differences, whence. 199 Spies office. 35. b Spies should be wise men.
141 Spy and Traitor sometimes al one. 37. b Spirit evil signifies. 168
Spirit of God is three ways in men. 190. b Spiritualty of two sorts. 257. b
Spoils dividing. 111. b State present of things should not be changed. 150
Stature of Giauntes. 16. b Stealing made lawful. 4. b Stealyng contains
rapte, fyndyng and not restoryng. etc. 283 Stealyng of maids. 282. b Stipendes
are paid both to superiors and to inferiors. 261. b Stipends are due to an
host. 144. b Stoikes opinion of affections. 142 Strangers interteyning. 251. b
Strange gods can no man worship, but he must cast away the true god. 155. b
Strong and weak god uses alike 92. b Strong men often ouercommed with women.
228. b Subjects whether they may in any case rise against their prince. 90. b
Subjects some are more private and some so inferiors that the higher in a
manner depends of them. 90. b Subjection of ii. kinds. 258 Subiections some
are natural. 80 Submissions of the body outward how they pertain to Idolatrye.
68. b Submission to gods will is true repentance 176 Success is no good trial
of lawful doings. 227 Succes is no sure ground to judge of actions by. 243
Success makes not the cause either good or evil. 271. b Success good and
evil is to be ascribed unto god. 70. b Succothes situation. 144 Succoths and
Nabals churlishnes 144. b Suns ii. the world cannot hold 157 Suns Image
set upon Iosuas Sepulcher. 66 Sun whether he shall bear the iniquity of the
father. 178. b Sun in law, how he should be sought. 23 Sundaies exercise. 44
Supper of the Lord a sacrifice, how 62 Supper of the Lord and the Mass
compared. 49. b Supper of the Lords end. 235 Superstition once taken root,
are wont to have more authority the^ pure woorshipping of god can ever obtain.
123 Superstition must so be forsaken that we embrase pure religion. 123 Supreme
head of the universal church. 147 Surnames taken of fathers among the
Israelites. 19 Swearing defined 183. b Swearing used of God in threatening. 71
Swearing contrary to a man's intent is wicked. 39. b Sweet bread used why. 116.
b Swords ii. interpreted. 260. b Sword is given only to powers. 90. b Sword
is no instrument whereby the minister works, but ye word of God. 258 Sword of
the word, the Pope uses not. 260. b Symbol of Athanasius. 103. b Synecdoche.
111 Synodes ii. in a year. 258. b Syria a dry region. 25. b Syria skant of
water. 106. b Syria has christian religion at this day. 287. b
T
TAble first whosoever breaks will easelye break the second. 237. b Table play
forbidden. 219. b. 220 Talionis lex, or law of rendryng like for like. 11. b
Tears or weeping. 61. b. 62 Tears abused. 63 Tearing of garments. 192
Temperatures diversity, breeds diversity in manners. 287. b Temples for
fortresses. 170. b Temptation defyned. 33. b Tempting whether it be the actio^
of God. 79 Temptation why it is prayed against. 34 Temptation of trial and
deceyte. 79 Temptations final causes. 7. b Temptation grievous. 115 Tempting of
God by desyring miracles. 131 Tenthes paying, to prove dignitye 261 Tenthes in
the old time partained to ceremonies, what they signified. 261 Tenthes at this
day are no more ceremonies but rewards and stipendes. 261 Tenthe soldier
punished for the rest. 181 Tertullian excused by Augustine. 120 Testament old
and new, how they differ. 73. b Testaments old and new, have all one and same
sacraments. 74 Testimonies of most value. 58 Testimonies of thenemies of most
strength. 134 Thabor where Christ was transfigured. 96 Thanks giving for gods
benefits is not to be deferred. 104 Theft how it differs from rapt. 283 Theft
praised. 234 Theft unlawful made lawful. 4. b Theodosius fall. 145
Theraphines. 238. b Thieves ought a man to keep promise withal. 86. b Thirst
caused often by wearines and sorrow. 100. b Therus used in punishments. 145. b
Thracians guile in truce keeping. 86 Threatenings of god depend upon conditions.
175. b Threshing ii. ways. 114 Title good, what. 189 Traditions of papists
have little credit. 279. b Traians godly sentence. 56 Traitors detestable. 37
Transubstantiation is no miracle 126. b Transposing of letters familiar in the
Hebrew tongue. 66. b Transubstantiatio^s subtelty. 209. b Traueling in the night
is dangerous. 250. b Traueling men should no man deceive. 38 Treason debated.
36. b Treason lawful, what cautions it requires. 38. b Treasons law, to
punish children with the father. 182. b Treasure true. 283. Tributes defyned.
263 Tribute defined. 232 Trifles and all things do obey god 222 Tribunes. 90. b
Tribunes centurio^s and captains why god appointed. 115. b Troyes war. 160
Troubles for religion, is not long of the godly. 124. b Trust in our selves god
hates 270 Truth handled. 87 Trybe obscurest. 172. b Tribe of Judah praised. 8
Tribes of Nepthalim and zabulon were of less estimation the^ other tribes. 96
Turks ought not to have Synagoges granted them as Jews have. 58 Turkish
wars why they have not prospered. 70. b Tutor may not mary his pupil. 21
Tyranny is never of long time. 165. b Tyrants are to be obeyed. 255. b
Tyrants not to be feared. 17. b Tyrants live in fear. 247. b Tyrants warned
of cruelty. 12 Tyrants oppress and govern not 161 Tyrant and a true prince
differ. 172. b Tyrauntes inuading may be resisted, when they have obtained
the kingdom, not. 9^ Tyrants killers are not allowed by the scriptures. 91
Tyrants, whether we may curse them or pray against them. 31. b
V
VAlentinian Emperor commended and discomme^ded. 258 Varietye of promise to
sin whence it comes. 79. b Venetians stale S. Marks body. 246 Vengeance
belongs to the Magistrate. 236 Verity of the scriptures. 226. b Virtues
whetstones. 142 Virtues are knitte together, that who so has one, has all,
and contrary. 53 Vices of armies. 187 Victory imperfect of Judah what caused.
33. b Victory is both to be prayed for and hoped for at gods hands only. 270
Victories are given at Gods pleasure. 78 Victory is gods gift whether it be by
many or few. 132. b Victory is with speed to be followed. 141 Victors songs.
102 Vittayles are due to an host. 14. 4. b Vittailers often ill spoken of. 177
Vittaylers women. 226. b Vigils converted into fastings, why 140 Violence
against violence may be used. 85 Violence may be resisted by violence 165. b
Violence acceptable unto god. 43. b Violence or coaction god infers not to
man's will. 167. b Virginity bewailed. 192. b Visions of Angels. 208 Visions
handled. 118 ungodly chastened by ungodly 80. b Ungodly fall into those evils
whereof they be afeard. 224 Unity of citizens where in it consists. 197. b
Unity without agreement in ceremonies. 279 Universal supreme Patriarche and
title refused by bishops of Rome 147 Universality in oaths. 86. b Unleavened
bread used, why 116. b Unthankfulness, look ingratitude Vnumquodque propter
quid, and aliud magis. 5. b Vocation of God is not to be left for revenging
of private injuries, nor for lack of meat and other necessaries. 144. b
Vocation of god, whether we ought to object our infirmity against it. 115. b
Vow defyned. 203. b. 237. b Vow is a promise made to god 214 Vows how they are
to be kept 86 Vow of unjust things is of no force 95. b Vow of Iiphtah handled.
192. b Vows redeming. 192 Vows before ioyni^g in war 190. b Vows of
religious men. 203 Vows for other, as mother for the son. 203 Vows chief
property, to be with a willing mind performed. 193 Vowing to do things. 30. b
Vrim and Thumim. 7 Vsucapio. 189 Usury where it may take place. 85 Usury used
by the Popes. 232
VV.
WValles and gates of Cities ought not to be violated. 227 Wantonness at grape
gatheryng. 168 Wars may be lawful. 76 War is a thing lawful. 156. b Wars
process, to send messengers first to debate the injuries. 185. b War must be
proclaimed. 268. b Wars against the Turks, why they have not prospered. 70. b
War just and unjust, 186. b War right. 186 Wars observations before they begin.
271 War, what is to be reproved therein. 187. b War civil is not all unjust. 199
Warfare allowed of god. 97 Waspes of dead horses. 218 Watches who invented. 139
Water skant in Syria. 106. b Weak and strong God uses alike 92. b Weakness of
others is to be borne with. 52 Weapons be they never so simple may serve when
gods word is added, and contrary. 91. b Wearines is thirsty. 100. b Wepying not
always token of repentance. 62. b Weping god aloweth sometime 61. b Weping not
allowed. 63 West church when it received singing. 103 Whetstones of virtue. 142
Wicked easily agree against the people of God. 80. b Will of God of.ii. sorts,
hid and manifest. 213 Will of God in nature is one, but diverse in respects. 79
Will of God changes not. 33. b Will to murder, though it be disapointed is
to be punished. 166 Wit of man is by nature sluggish. 218. b Woman condemned of
adultry, no man can mary. 249. b Women's entisements are of great force. 228. b
Women are not forbidden to prophecy for the common edification of the church,
but warned to have their heads covered. 93 Woman prophet. 92. b Women
teachers. 93. b Women's vice curiosity. 285. b women easily fall to cursings.
237. b Words defyned. 88. b Words whence they have their significations. 205
Word of God written or vnwritte^ of like authority. 5 Word of god, is the rule
of our actions. 129 Word of god is it ye declares what or who is godly or
ungodly, not succes or prosperity. 227 Word of god known, he will not suffer
to be despised. 80. b Word of god, no custom prescribes against. 189. b. 190
Words of men are so far fruitful as the predestination of God has before
appointed. 97 Words gentle would be used in dangerous corrections. 253 Words
doubling affirm more assuredly. 206 Works much auailable. 14 Works of ours
do not reconcyle god unto us. 72 Works of ours how holy soever they appear
are impure and imperfect. 272. b Works are not good before faith. 152. b
Works, they that trust to much to them, attribute to much to human aides.
132. b Works are not meritorious of eternal life. 152. b Worshipping inward
and outward 49 Worshipping religions of.ii. sorts 68 Worshipping of God fained
or devised by man is naught. 48 Worshipping of god by other wais the^ he has
willed is idolatry 69. b Worshipping ought to lean to the word of God. 202. b
Worshipping of the true god with other worship, the^ he himself has commanded
is Idolatry. 238 Woorshippinge of God instituted without his word is to him
unacceptable. 151. b Worshipping of god consists not in outward things only.
75 Wowing by just means lawful. 23 Wowings by dancing. 287 Wives right use
and abuse. 161. b Wives use and cautions. 165 Wives more then one at once argued
against. 288 Wives many permitted after a sort to the fathers. 153. b Wives
called concubines. 268 Wives duty. 204 Wife helps her husband. 208 Wife of a
minister if she be an adultres sins more grievously then an other. 248. b
Wiuely affections in their husbands absence. 111
X
Xerxes cruel act. 13
Z
ZAbulons tribe 9^ Zeugma. 32
FJNJS.

