A dialoge or co^municacion between the curate or ghostly father: and the
parochiane or ghostly child. For a due preparacion unto howselynge. *

The work for householders with the golden pystle and Alphabete or a crosrowe
called and A. B. C.

INRI

woodcut of Christ on the cross, with Mary, John and Mary Magdalene and others

woodcut of Christ prays before a chalice in the Garden of Gethsemane, while
three of his apostles sleep

Unto the devout reders in our lord god and most sweet savior Jesus, Rychard
whytford your pore bedeman of Syon: Salutacyon.
WHere: in a little work ye of late, we send forth (at the request of devout
persons) unto householders: we did set forth / a breue and short form of
confession / heryng and perceyuyng that ye said work was thankfully and
charitably received and supposing that so devout receyuers ben well exercised
/ and have profyted therein: we have now here (for your fourthere increase of
virtue) put forth unto you a another lesson: how / when you ben disposed and
minded to receive the holy sacrament of ye altar: you should prepare order,
make your self ready, and spiritually apparele your self thereunto. For I
acerteyne you: there is no person in this world can tell you with how great
reverence, how deep devotion, how low and meke heart / with how reuerente
dread how pure and clean conscience with how well adornate, garnyshed and
appereled soul with how firm and steadfast faith, with how high and strong
hope and with how ardente fervent, in flaming and burning charity: any true
Christian should accede approyche, and go unto that honorable meruelouse, and
most high mystery where (doubtless) is present, the very natural body / and
soul, flesh, and blood of our lord, and sauyoure Jesus very god / and very
man in one person very christ his humanytie, and his divinity. The blessed
trinite father sone, and holy ghost and also our blessed lady saint Mary with
in numerable multitude, and nowmbre / of gloryouse angels, and holy saints
ben there also present all (how be it invisible) doing thereunto that holy
sacrement due honor, reverence / and obeysaunce. Hit is therefore much
convenient / and necessary: that due and dilligent preparation / should be made
thereunto when so ever hit be received. Not withsto^dynge I do not require ne
move you, to read and recounte all that here is written / at every time (yet
were it good so to do if you have time) but that hit may like you to read hit
ones over and then to mark out such places as best done like you / and use
the^ or part of them as you have time and leyser and thus fare you well in our
Lord who bless you all.

Amen.
A dialoge or communicacion between the curate or ghostly father, and the
parochiane or ghostly child. For a due preparacion unto how selyng.
The ghostly child. Sir I thank you for the charitable labors you took with me
when I was last with you. And I have (according unto your commandment)
called my household together: and taught them ye same lesson that you, then and
before time. have taught me. And (for the more suerty) I have caused all your
said lessons to be set forth in prynt: yt other persons may have (as we have)
edificacion thereby.


The ghostly father. Good ghostly child, I am right glad of your so devout
mind and good will to profet in virtue, our lord be praised. And I shall be
glad (as my duty) to conforte you therein, and now that you have a good
fundation and grownd thereunto by that form and manner of living and also if you
by fraylte, offend and fall therfrome, by ye remedy of the holy sacrament of
confession I shall show you an order and a good way or mean: how you should
prepare and make your self ready unto the holy sacrament of ye altar, when you
shall be communed or howseled. For saint Poule commanded his disciples to
prove, i. Cor. xi.
and examen well them self in conscience before they should approyche or go
unto this holy sacrament. For who so ever (says he) do receive it unworthily:
does receive hit unto his own judgment, and condempnation. And our savior
him self does show how this holy sacrament should ever be ministered in the
memory and remembrance of him. Luc. xxii.
Saint Paul also how often so ever you receive the sacrament (says he) so
oftymes should you represent and show the death of Christ, i. Cor. xi.
unto the time he come unto the last judgment. By these said auctorites
confirmed by our mother the holy church with many holy doctors: does appear yt
two things shall be convenient and necessary unto every person that shall
receive this holy sacrament. That is to say. First due search of conscience
so yt no manner of sin: unto knoweledge and remembrance remain or be left
therein. The second that the persons so clered in conscience / should order and
appoynte them self unto some manner of memory by meditacyon or contemplacion /
of our lord / and savior Jesus / and of ye acts of our salvation. I would
therefore advise all manner of persons / that when they will accede and approych
unto this holy mystery: they first be confessed, if they conveniently can have
a ghostly father / for although they know not their conscience charged with any
mortal or deedly sin: yet shall ye approbacion of their ghostly father, be
unto them both confortable / and also suerty. And for this part / the form
of confession that we set forth in the other work for householders may serve
you / hit is but little / and of little price / and so may the rather be joined
hereunto, and both bownden to gether and you more redely may have at hand:
that is referred from the tone, unto the the other. For the second part that is
meditation / much necessary for you at this time: I would counseyle you ye of
destinate heart appointed and wylfull purpose: you should first geder
yourselfe, unto your self, that is to say, your soul, heart, mind, and will,
in as much as you may, with all force and diligence, holly and clearly: from all
cures, cares, charges, and busynes of the world and from all bodyly matters
and all cogitatio^s and thoughts, that by any means might let you, and
hinder you in this exercise and so to compel your spirit to labor alone
herin. And then commend your self wholly unto our lord thus. In manus tuas
domine commendo spiritum meu^ redemisti me domine deus veritatis. That is to
say. * good lord god / I commend / byquethe / render / give / and bytake my
spirit / my heart / my mind / and soul / wholly unto thy hands power and
governance. For thou (good lord the very god of truth) haste redeemed and
bought me. And those persons that been learned may say this ympne.


The first verse.
VEni creator spiritus: mentes tuoru^ visita imple superna gratia, q^ tu
creasti pectora. * That is to mean. Come unto us good lord god holy ghost
creator and maker of all the world with the father and the sone. Visit and
comforde the minds of thy people. Replenyshe and fulfill with thy most high
grace: those hearts, and souls that thou thy self haste create, and made.

The second verse.
Qui paracletus diceris donu^ dei altissimi: fons viuus, ignis charitas: et
spiritualis vnctio.

* Come thou holy spirit. That art called, and named the essenciall comforde,
and comforter of all Christians.

The gift and reward of most high god. The quykke and lively founteyn / and
well of life. The mystike fire, that is, the charity divine. And the spiritual
unction, and medicine of all sinners.

The.iii. verse.
Tu septiformis munere: dex tree dei tu digitus: Tu rite promisso patris /
sermon dita^s guttura. That is. * Come holy spirit that unto us by thy
gracious.vii. gifts: art seuenfold bou^tuous, and beneficial, for thou (good
lord) art ye finger of the right hand of god.

* Showing unto us ye right way of all prosperity salvation and goodness,
making our speech rich, and ple^tuous, orderly to speak thy holy word by the
virtue of our sauyoure Jesus the essenciall word / or speech of the father of
heaven promised unto us.

The.iiii verse.
Accende lumen sensibus: Infunde amore^ cordibus: Infirmanti corporis: virtute
firmans perpetim. That is. * Good lord holy ghost we beseech ye acce^de kyndle,
and give light, unto our senses, unto our wits, our feeling, perceyuyng, and
vndstandyng. Infunde good lord ministre shede, and power down thy love unto
our hearts. And by virtue, and ghostly strength, make thou firm, constant and
stable perpetually, and contynually, the infirm, feeble, and frail
disposicions of our body.

The.v. verse.
Hoste^ repellas longius, pa cemque dones protinus: ductore sic te preuio:
vitemus omne noxium. That is. * Come good lord holy ghost. And put from us
far away: our ghostly enemy and forthwith give us contynuall peace. That so
by the, our lodesman, and gyde, we may eschew and avoid all yt should unto us
be noyouse or sinful.

The.vi. verse.
Per te sciamus da patrem: noscamus atque filium: te vtriu: que spiritum:
credamus omni tempore. That is. * Come good lord, holy ghost, and grant us,
that by the / and thy mean: we may know the father of heaven / and also in
likewise we may know his essenciall sone, and that we may at all times
bylyue that thou art the holy spirit of them both, and the same self god.

The.vii. verse.
Sit laus patri cu^ filio / sancto simul paracleto / nobisque mutat filius:
charisma sancti spiritus. That is. * Laud and praise be unto the father, with
the sone, and with the^ both unto the holy ghost. And we beseech and pray, that
the sone (according unto his promise) would vouchsafe to send unto us the
grace of ye holy ghost. Ame^.

The versicle.
* Emitte spiritum tuu^, et creaabuntur.

That is. * Send down (good lord) thy spirit, and all thy people shall be
newly framed and refreshed.

The answer.
Et reneuabis faciem terre. That is. * And so good lord shall thou renew, and
comforde the face countenance and behauyoure of every faithful person.

The prayer.
The collect, oration or prayer.

DEus cui omne cor patet, et omnis volu^tas loquitur / et quem nullu^ latet
secretu^: purifica per infusionem sancti spiritus cogitationes cordis nr^i, vt
te perfect diligere, et digne laudare mereamur. Per Christum dominum nostrum.
Amen.

* That is to mean. Good lord god, unto whom every heart is open and known /
every will does specke and show what is thought and unto whom no secret or
counsel is hyd or unknown, we beseech the / purify and cleanse, by the
infusion of thy holy spirit: all the cogitacions and thoughts of our heart,
that so we may deserve perfectly to love the, and duly, and worthily to laud
and praise the, and this we done axe and desire / by the mean, and in the name
of Chrste our lord and master.

Amen.
An other collect, oracio^ or prayer to be said forthwith under one end.
ACtiones nostras quesumus domine aspira^do preueni, et adiuuando prosequere,
vt cuncta nostra operatio, et a te semper incipiat / et per te cepta, finiatur.
Per Christum dominu^ nostrum. Amen.

That is to mean. * We beseech the good lord that the grace of thy holy
spirit may go before all our works: and the help, and comfort of the same
grace: may also follow and perform the same, so that all our operacion and
workyng may of the always begin, and so begone: may (by the) be finished / and
performed / by ye good lord I mean Christ our master. Amen.

Or if you have but small or short time, you may say these two verses with
the said versycle / and collectes or without at your pleasure.

The first verse.
REx Christ clementissime / tu corda nostra posside: vt tibi lauds debitas,
reddamus oi^ tempore.

That is. * Good lord and savior Christ / most gentell and curteyse king, we
byseche the take, and receive our hearts into thy possession; and governance.
So that we may, in every time, or at all times: render, and yield unto the due
lauds, and praise

The second verse.
Sit laus patri cum filio. etc. as you have before both in latin and English.
These things thus speed: then go forth with your interpryse and matter of
meditacion For saint Augustyne says that meditacion does engender /
Augusti. de spiritu et anima: cap. l.
and bring forth science or knoweledge: and science does bring forth
compunction, and compunction brings forth devotion / and devotion does make
prayer perfect. All these tha^ by order: be very necessary. good / and
conueniente for this purpose. First than bygyn with meditacion. This term
meditacion: is as much to say, or to mean, as a bysy, and much used
cogitacion, or thought, when the mind is applied and does labor curiously /
wisely / diligently / and groundly to search out, and bring to light those
things that be obscure, dark and hard to perceive, or understand, and so to
bring unto knowledge, or remembrance: such things as ben hyd, out of
knowledge, or out of mind. If we than will opteyne and have grace: worthily to
accede and approyche unto this holy mystery of communion: let us first
exercise our hearts and minds in good and fruytfull meditacion. For the holy
spirit of god (says scripture) does avoid and fle from feigned and peynted
holiness, and does withdraw him self from those cogitacio^s and thoughts
that been without understanding good reason and auctoryte. The ghostly child.
Sir wherewith or i^ what manner of meditacions would you we should exercise our
minds specially. again or before such time of houselynge. The ghostly father.
I think (that unto them yt have short time and little leyser) the exercise that
we set forth in the later end of your book for householders: be very good, unto
them that have time convenient: we shall show our poor mind making
protestation that we done not hereby persuade any persons to leave or forsake
their own used exercises, takyn of any good and sufficient auctorite, approved
by their ghostly fathers, or by any other famous person of auctorysed lernyng,
except the spirit of god move them thereunto.

Of your meditacion the first consyderation of the work of creacion.
For the more redynes we have divided this meditacion in.viii. consideracions,
which done follow by order.

The first consyderacion.
First arise and lift up your self, your heart, your mind and soul to have
meditation, and to Hugo de seto^ Victore de operibus trium dierum.
think upon god him self the father, the sone, and the holy ghost, three
destinct persons and one essenciall god, one nature, and one substance. And
here first consider his mighty power, how great and mighty a thing it was to
make any thing of naught, much more than to make so many things in nombre
(unto any mere creature) innumerable the spirits angelical the sterres of the
firmame^te / the gravel or sand of the sea, the dust and powder of the
yerthe, the dropes of rain, with all other such to long to write. And yet
not only to consider the multitude: but also ye magnitude, how great they ben
in quantite, how mighty they ben in virtue, strength and power. Se and behold
the hight of heaven, the depnes of hell, ye great moles and rokkes, or hepes of
mou^teynes, the bredthe and length of the sea, and flodes. The space and
largenes of feldes with such other whereof to marvel you may sone be weary and
feynt but yet so to meruele: is a good werynes / and let this be for the first
consyderacion.

The second co^syderacion of ye wisdom of god. and the work of gouernauns.
TVrne up then, the eye / or sight of your soul, and mind and look upon the
wisdom of god in the ordering of these creatures, consider the heuyns, the
planetes, and sterres, how they ben set in order, and done keep co^tynually
their own proper place and their perpetual course, and mouynges without
change, or stoppage, and likewise of the.iiii. elements, the Fire / the Aer /
the Water / and the yerth, eueryche in their own rowme and proper place.
Consider also the pulcritude, beawte of them and of all creatures under them
and in the^. Se how fair, how goodly how well framed, and fasshoned how well
fygured and well favored they ben, look upon their qualites / and virtues
through: and you shall well thereby perceive the infinite wysdom, and excellent
science and co^nyng of him that thus did order / and does so govern, and
co^tynue them, and you shall delight, have affection, and pleasure therein. So
that with great wonder and merueyle: you shall say / and cry with the prophet.

Psalm. xci
Delectasti me domine in factura tua, etc.

That is to mean. * Thou haste good lord, given to me delectacion, and
pleasure in consyderacio^ of thy facture, and creacion of this world. Psalm.
ciii
For thou (good lord) have made all things in wysdom. And saint Paul says.
Romans xi.
O I merueyle, and wonder much of the riches and abundaunce: of the wisdom,
science / knowledge, and conning of almighty god. And this for the second
consyderacion.

The third consyderacion of bounte and goodness.
YEt go forther / and look well again upon your god / and perceive not only
his most mighty power / and most infinite wisdom: but also his excellent
bounte, and goodness. Hit was a meruelouse liberalite / and most high loving
kyndenes of our lord god that having no need of any creatures (for another he
was the better for them nor the worse without them) that yet not withstondynge:
would (only of his bounty / and goodness) have creatures, for the welthe only
of the same creatures, which self bounty and goodness more evidently may
appear unto you if you consider the vtilite and profyt of the said creatures
how necessary, and needful, how co^modiouse, and profitable, how congruent
and convenient, how pleasant and comfortable they all ben each unto other
and all unto mankind.

For all he made for man, and man for him self to laud / praise / and thank
him therefore, and to be unto him in all things obedient. And thereunto he put
him in a place of all pleasure, called yerthly paradyse. And there having all
creatures unto him obedient: he made him lord / and sovereign of all and put
all unto his frewyll, and liberte: except only on tree whereof or of the which
tree he streytly commanded him (upon determinate pain of life (that he should
not ete ne feed. These things well consydrede: you may perceive a maruelouse
bounty, and most liberal goodenes, and let this be your third
co^syderacion, and so than have you the consyderacion, of the omnipotent / and
almighty power of God appropriate, and most properly applied unto the father
the first person in trinite. And the consyderacion also of the infinite wysdom
of god, appropriate unto the sone, the second person. And thyrdly the
consyderacion of the graciouse bowntie / and abundau^t goodness of god
appropriate unto the holy ghost ye third person. Now yet pass forth in your
meditacion unto.

The forth consyderacion of the work of iustificacion.
YOu may yet consider the singular grace / favor / and love, of all.iii.
persons one God unto mankind in the work of iustificacion.

For when the said man our father Ada^, had by disobedience, lost ye said place
and pleasure of Paradyse and might (by no means of him self) recover ye same
again, ne return thereunto: the whole trinite, father, sone, and holy ghost,
one god: by one assent fell to counsel, and of very love of mankind) decreed,
determined, and appointed yt the sone of god, second person in ye said
trinite, and the same self essenciall god with the father, and the holy ghost:
should entrepryse, and undertake to justify man again / and to bring him
unto his first astate, and above that, that is to say: to be again in as good
case, and better both in ease and pleasure, dignite, and degree: then he was
before his fall / and then ever he should have been: if he had never fallen, ne
trespassed. Qusa gaudium in celo super vno peccatore. etc. Luc. v. ii
So then our loving lord, and sauyoure Christ: descended, and came down
from the bosom of the father of heuyn: into this vale of myserie / and here
took our frail and vile nature, therein to suffer, and bear all manner of
misery, wretchedness: pain, and woo of the same nature convenient for him to
bear and suffer except only sin. And although he never had, ne might have
any sin: yet notwitstandynge, he took upon him all the hole sin of man
that ever was done before, or that should be done after / as though all that
sin had been his sin, and he the doer thereof and only trespasser. So was
prophesied he should do. Esai. liii
* Vere languores nr^os ipse tulit and dolores nr^os ipse portauit / et posuit
dn^s in eo: iniquitate^ oi^m nr^m. that is to say. * Verily he has suffered our
langores, and he has borne our dolours, sorrows, and hurtes, and our lord
has leyde upon him the iniquity / and wykydnes of all us. Here now in this
place: you may bring co^uenyently into your meditacion all the life of our
lord / and savior Jesus after the manner of our said book for householders / or
in some other form of notable auctours, you have many / we have also set ye
same forth, at length but because so many have written therein: we have not
cured to send it forth in prynt. There is also a little work in print ye our
reverend father did put forth / yt for this matter: is much profitable / you
may have it for. i, d. and if you se but only ye tytles you shall like it well
and so is the golden letany with many other / when you come unto ye end of
that holy / and most profitable / and also unto this entrepryse of communion /
most convenient meditacion: and that you have seen / and byholded well in your
soul all ye process of his passion / death / and buryall / then look again /
who he was that did all this and for whom he did so great, and wonderful
things. Remember well he was a great lord, and thyn own propre lord? and for
whom suffered he all this? For the, his seruau^d and bond caytyue, he was not
only a lord: but also, a king, an emperor? king of kings, Apoc. xix.
and lord of lords / and of all that have dominacion and governance. And for
whom did he suffer? For the man his own vile subject. And yet forther he was
not only a king, and lord: but also very God / creator / and maker of all.
And for whom did he thus? For a stynkyng lump of drytty and slyme earth. And
yet se what he was above all this a special friend, and most true lover that
for faithful fre^deshyppe, and very fervent love / and therein excedyng and
passing all love: did all this. And for whom did he so? For a false traitor a
most unkind wretch, his enemy and foo. And yet he most innocent: for ye
most gylty. And yet co^sydre not only how excellent and great ye dignite of
his person was that did all this: but also how great a thing it was that he
did / for so unworthy a person. First where he was esse^ciall god / he made him
self man to make the a god. And where he was in most high honor and he ye
self and same essenciall honor most honorable: he made him self most vile
and spiteful to give the honor and to make the honorable. yet where he was i^
most high liberte, and he him self ye very liberte, and fredom of all
liberties: he made him self bond to give the fredom and to put the at
liberte. And to conclude: he yt was the very self life of all living
creatures: took wylfully / after most peynfull passion: most shameful death /
and all to give the life. Look well now. and se what can be, or who may have
more charity, then one friend to suffer death for an other, and he took that
death (as I said) for his enemy. Now you have thus in your meditacion brought
our savior unto death, now se him buried, after which, death and burial: no
man may (after the course of the world) do more for his friend, but (as is
said) dye for him / yet not withstondyng our savior did more / for where (by
his death) he had left his friends in great sorrow and disconfort: he (sone
after) raised him self (by his godly power) unto life again / and appeared
unto them / which thing among the people of this world had been a
meruelouse joy / and conforte / of their loving friend / and suerly so it was
unto his disciples and friends. But yet consydre a forther kyndnes / that is
that he did not only arise, and appear in the same self body: but also where
that body at his death was all deforme, and as a lepre out of frame, and fasho^:
by reason of most cruel intrety and dealyng: he repared ye same again (unto
the sight / and comfort of his friends) into a more goodly, and more
brawtuouse form: than it was before, with clearty, and bryghtnes unspeakable.
And where that body before: was heavy and dull, and might not (by nature) be
removed from one place unto a another: but in due space of time: he made hit
now of such agilite so quycke, so nimble / so light, and so swyft: that it
might be in two or three and many mo places in a moment / in ye space or time of
the look or twynklynge of an eye. And yet where that body was before his death:
so gross in quantite: that it might not enter but into a due space of mesure
in length and bread according unto the same body: it might now after his
resurrexcion, enter, and go thorough any doors, wyndowes / stone walls, as the
son goes through ye glass. And yet over all this where that body was before
passible and mortal: and might suffer and did suffer pain, passion, and hurt,
or grieve, and also death: now he brought it into such a state and case: that it
is impassible and immortal, that is to say, never may suffer any noyans ne
ever possible to dye again. Romans vi.
This have we showed not only for the order of your meditacion: but also for
the syngular comfort of all sinful souls. Ide^.iiii.
That as our lord Jesus dyed for our sins, and arose again for our
iustificacio^, so every synful soul willing to forsake sin and having the
faith of Christ: may dye, and be buried with our sauyoure in his holy
sacraments baptism, and confession, To. vi.
and so leuyng all deformite of sin: the soul may arayse unto a new manner
and form of living and be more speciouse beawtuouse and more goodely in the
sight of god, Luc.xv.
and more acceptable then ever it was before and more joy shall be made in
heaven for one such a person returned from sin the^ for many other that never
did sin and let this suffice for the fourth consyderacion of your said
meditacio^ that is to say in co^syderyng the work of iustificacio^.

The fyft consyderacion of the work of remuneracion.
Now let us proceed forther unto the work of remuneracion or rewardyng and
all is to move and stere your affection your love and devotion unto our lord.
For although in the sight of this world, it were a maruelouse great kyndnes,
for any friend, to pay, his friends debt and deliver him out of prison and
yet much more kyndnes if he were not his friend, but his enemy, and foo and
also to pay for his det / and delyuerau^ce no small price but his own blood,
and his life also? this I say were a maruelouse benefyte, and an excedyng
kyndnes although he did no more. But our lord, and savior did yet more for
man. For he did not only deliver him fre, and out of danger: but also
rewarded him, made him butyfelowe of all his goods, and heir with him of all
his lands and possessions and brought him unto high honor dignite, and
degree, he brought him unto ye presens of his own natural father and there
after his ascencion he took possession for man / and so made him his brother /
and coenheritor of all yt he had. Look well hereupon and consider how great a
reward this was, and yet shall you se more added hereunto. For many in this
world have been made heirs, and possession taken for the^, and yet did they
never enjoy the same. But our lord, and savior: when he had delivered man in
form before showed, and had also put him in possession thereof: ordained yet a
forther mean to make man surely to enjoy the same, and to have the most
pleasant use thereof, which was in sendyng down the holy ghost which
(according unto his promise) should instruct, Ioh. xvi.
and teache his apostles and disciples, and by them all christianes the very
troth of all manner of things apperteynynge unto man's salvation, and should
also subministre, and put into their hearts / and minds to put the same in
execucion, and how, and under what form they should so do. For (as I suppose)
the apostles after the death of Christ did never put any thing in execucio^ and
use that our sauyoure had before his death or before his ascension committed
unto their power: unto the time they had received the holy ghost. For although
they had commandment and power to preach the gospel and to baptyse, and to
ministre all other sacraments, to remit, or forgive and to withholde and
restrain sin: yet did not they execute, or put in use any thing (but only
when Christ was among them before his passion) unto the time they had received
fully the holy ghost at Pentecoste except only the election of saint Mathie
because the nombre of the apostles might not be imperfect. So then they
received fully the holy ghost, not only for them self: but also for all other
that by the^ should believe unto ye end of the world. The^ did they ministre
the holy sacraments and taught their disciples / and by them all Christianes:
the due form, and manner thereof, which form has ever sithe that time and
ever shall continue in Christ's catholicall church / what so ever theyse new
heretykes say unto the contrary. In which holy sacraments we have not only
the person of our lord, and sauyoure him self: but also ye other two persons,
the father and the holy ghost all one self, and same essenciall god: to
remain, bide, and dwell among us unto the worlds end, and this gift and
reward is much to be noted / and may well suffice for the fyfthe
consyderacion of this entrepryse of the work of remuneracion.

The syxte consyderacion of the work of glorificacion.
YOu may well perceive (good devout christians) by that is said, that our lord
Jesus, has not only redeemed and bought us dear: but also most lyberally, and
graciously rewarded us, and daily does not only forgive our sins and
offenses at the first asking or mouynge: but does also give us great gifts,
for small, and does so multiply here our merits: that we may come yet unto a
greatter gift and reward which is in us his work of glorificacion? For after
this life: he will make us gloriouse, and give us ye same doweres that he has
now in him self: that is to say clarite, or clerenes, agilite, or nimblenes,
subtilite, or sklendernes, and i^mortalite: so that we shall never dye, ne
suffer any damage. This gift and work is so noble and of so high honor,
dignite and degree: that to entreat forther thereof does pass my pore wit and
therefore I pray you be cnotent, for this syxth consyderacion of the work of
glorificacion.

The.vii. cosyderacion of the work of fruicion.
YEt yet as though this were not enough: he will give more. For many in this
world, have full great honor / high dignites, and excellent degrees: and yet
have but little joy therewith but rather have many greues, many displeasures,
many inco^modites, I trow I might well say many necessites and many miseries.
But our lord will give us ye fruicio^ of him self: that is to say, to enjoy
him and to be in his godly presens, and to have the very use of him self at
all liberty, and pleasure and there to se him face to face as he is, i. Corin.
xiii. d
and so in him: to se and know what we will or ca^ desire, and also to have
the full possession of him self and of all his, and this also without any
myxture of evil, grieve, or displeasure.

This gift is above all ye other before rehearsed, and may therefore serve and
content you for this.vii. co^syderacio^ of the work of fruicion.

The eight and last cosyderacion of the work of sure perseueracion and
duraunce.
THese benefytes, rewards, and gifts of our lord ben very great, and many and
excellent gifts. But yet your benygne lord and most loving savior is not
content to leave you without any thing, that he may give, so that you may not
possible ask, desire, think, or ymagyn any thing more to be given, and
therefore he will unto all his other gifts add, and give you the suerte, and
certente of perseueracion and durau^ce. For if a person had as much joy as all
heaven has and were not certain nem suerte to continue therein: that joy were
not fully perfect. For that thing only is perfect: unto the which, no
thing, may be added / or put thereunto, but as long as a person might stand
in feere or doubt to lose that joy, or any part thereof: he were not in full
perfect joy. And therefore will our loving lord for the full perfection of your
said joy: give you there a suer and certain knowledge of all these joys to
perceuer, i^dure, and last without minushynge or mutacion world without end,
unto the which joy, and knowledge: he bring us that bought us our lord god /
and most sweet savior Jesus, unto whom be glory, due laud, and praise / with
the father and ye holy ghost / one god in secula seculorum. Ame^.

An addicion unto this foresaid meditacion.
I Was required of a good devout person to join these said co^syderacions
unto.viii. notable days contained in scripture, that is to say.vi. days of
creacion, and production or bryngyng forth of creatures, the.vii. of rest /
and the.viii. of eternite, and so to show how these works of our lord may
be instruction unto us, which thing I was loath unto, both because I lacked
abilite thereunto, and also because this work: which I intended to be short:
should be thereby enlarged. Notwithstondyng because this work is so divided i^
particles, yt (as we said) every person may take what he will, according unto
his leyser and devotion: therefore we shall sumwhat to satesfye, say our mind.

Of the first cosyderacion, and of the first day of creacio^.
THe first consyderacio^ was of the power of god in creacion and productio^ of
all creatures. Gene. i.
And we read in ye beginning of scripture, that almighty god in the beginning
made heaven, and earth, spiritual, and corporal, or bodyly creatures,
reasonable, and unreasonable creatures.

And yt he made also the light / and dyuided that light from darkness.

And the light he called the day, and the darkness he called the night, and this
was the work of the first day of creacion, which in us may teache us how our
lord has made in every person an heaven and an earth, a spiritual party and
an erthly party, and made in us also the light of understanding and reason /
whereby we should divide in our daily works the spirit from the flesh, the
soul from the body / which is done by contemplacion or meditacio^, after the
form beforesayd. That is to say, that in every day of our live we should
sometime be as well actyue as contemplatyue / and this for the first day.

Of the second co^syderacion / and of the second day of creacion.
THe second consyderacion was of the wysdom of god in orderyng and guydynge of
his creatures. And in the second day of creacion: our lord god made the
fyrmament or the sky, and so dyuided the waters that were under the firmament,
from them that were above the firmament, and called that firmament heuyn. Note
here that almighty god made two heuyns / the tone upon the first day above /
and the the other the second day / and byneth, to divide (as is said) waters.
Look now grou^dely upon this order of the creatures. Some be above / and some
bynethe. The higher heuyn spiritual to rule / order / and guide the lower
heaven temporal, and erthely / And the spiritual creatures, to rule the bodyly
creatures. And so those that be under and bynethe: to be subdued / obedient /
and ordered in all things by the^ that be above. The same order should be kept
in us / not only every person in him self: but also eueryche unto other. For
almighty god made in man / not only (as is said) an heuyn, his soul: but
also an earth / his body.

So that the whole man of soul and body: does bear the towme and place of
this firmament / whose office and duty is to dyuide the water that is bynethe
apperteynynge unto the sensualite: from ye water that is above called aqua
sapientie salutaris, the water of helthfull wysdom and of salvation. Eccl xv A
That is to say that man should ever deuyde and depart vice from virtue, erthly
conuersacio^ from heavenly exercise, vain and void cogitacion, from fructuouse
and profitable meditacion, and this for ye second day.

Of the third consyderacion / and of the third day of creacion.
THe third co^syderacio^ was of the bounty, and goodenes, love, and
liberality of god / which does appear in the utility and profit of the
creatures.

And in the third day of creacio^ / our lord god commanded the waters that
were under the said firmament called heuyn, to gader and hepe them self
together into one place, and that the dry earth yet bareyn: should appear /
and which thing done: ye earth that then was dry and bareyn: he called and
named to be earth tyllable / and apt / or disposed to be tylled. And ye
congregacions and hepes of waters: he called the sea, or sees. And then he
commands the said earth to bring forth fruit. In the utility and profit
whereof did apere the bou^tie and goodness remembered before in this third
consyderacion. But now must we in like manner commau^de by reason all the water
of our voluptuous disposicions and viciouse appetites: to be gathered and heped
into one place, that is ye world, leave all those disposicions unto worldly
persons and unto infidels, viciouse and sinful people. And let our bodyly
works appear synles. And although they be yet baren: yet may they be apt by
the mean of the sacrament of penance to be tylled / and bring forth the
fruitful works of virtue and grace. And thus an end of this third day.

Of the fourth consyderacion / and the fourth day of creacion.
THe fourth co^sideracio^ was of ye work of our iustificacion. And in the
fourth day our lord made the son, and the moon / and the sterres / to dyuide
the day and the night / and the times, hours / days and years / and to give
light unto the earth.

The son does signify our savior Jesus, the very son of justice / and the moon does signify the catholic church of Christ, that takes light of the
said son our savior, and so don the sterres also, by who^ the holy doctors,
preachers and curates ben signified. For these done illumine and give light of
grace unto the erthly and sinful people / that by their ministracion of the
blessed sacraments ben justified and made apt persons unto salvation / and
so is the fourth day applied and sped.

Of the fyft consyderacion and the fyft day of creacion.
THe fyft consyderacion was of ye work of remuneracio^ or reward, which
reward every person shall have according unto his works. And in the fyft day
our lord made fysshes and fowls, ye fysshys to bide in ye see and the fowls
in the air. By the fysshes evil works be^ sygnified, and also evil words
and thoughts. Mathei xii. c
For of them (said our savior) accountes must be rendered and made, and unto
eueryche: due reward given. And these do remain in the sea of the sinful
world / and shall be rewarded there after in pain. And ye good works, words
and thoughts: that been sygnifyed by the birds of the air / done dwell, and
abide in heavenly conversation, and shall be rewarded in joy and bliss, and let
this stand for the fyft day.

Of the syxt consyderacion, and the syxt day of creacion.
THe syxt consyderacion was of ye work of gloryficacio^.

And in the syxte day our lord made man after, and unto his own image /
similitude / and lykenes. And surely that was unto man a great glory and an
excellent honor and dignity / unto the which no man may atteyne and come /
but he only that alone did ascend unto heuyn / our lord and sauyoure Jesus.
Ioh. iii. b
In the which saying you must understand Christ and his me^bres, all
faithful people that been like unto him, and done follow his stepes. And thus
an end of the syxt day of creacion.

Of the seventh consyderacion / and of the seventh day of cessacion, rest, and
pausacion.
THe.vii. consyderacion was of ye werk of fruicio^, that is to say / a joyful
use at full pleasur / holly reioysyng and inioyeng our lord. And in the.vii.
day when our lord had made all things perfect he ceased and rested, and
wrought no more, but sanctified and hallowed that day. And so after our
glorificacion we shall no more merit, but rest in our lord and sanctify him /
laud / praise / and love him / and in him (as is said) have all joy / and
pleasure, i. Cor. ii
above that any eye may se, any ear may hear, any mouth may speak, or any
heart may think.

Of the.viii. consyderacion / and of the.viii. day of eternite.
THe.viii. and last co^syderaon was of perseueracion and duraunce, or suerty of
these joys. And the day of eternite is the day of all perfection, wherein the
end and beginning be joined. For that day was before all creatures / without
beginning, and that day shall continue after all days, without endyng. Amen.

Thus have we (after our poor understanding) performed this devout request,
and yet was not the person content / but yt nedely we should join unto these
two eyghtes: ye third.viii. of the.viii. beatitudes of the gospel, sayng unto
me the reders be not bound but at their pleasure they may (as is said) take
what they will.

Of the.viii. beatitudes or blessed states of perfection.
Math. v
Our lord and savior Jesus did set forth in the gospel viii. perfections,
or.viii. states or fourmes of perfection, which he taught and betoke unto his
disciples and by them unto us. And unto every perfection or state he assigned
and appointed a propre reward, as you shall perceive by order.

Of the first beatitude.
THe first beatitude, that is the first state of perfection of living is in
latyne, thus.

* Beati pauperes spiritu.

The English whereof is. The poor in spirit or of spirit: been blessed.
That is to mean that all such persons as (for the love of god) do little set
by worldly riches as to have any love or trust unto the^, but only as may be
necessary for their state and degree ben blessed. This beatitude or state of
perfection may be referred unto ye first consyderacion of the benefyte of
creacio^, wherein the mighty power of God was considered, which thing well
co^sydered / every person may lyghtely and sone perceive he has no thing of
him self: ne any thing yt he may call properly his own, but yt all things
(as in very property) done apperteyne unto god, and ben here but only lent
unto man, whereof to give accounte, and so may he be reasonably moved, to give
freely unto god that is his own, and to retain no thing in property, but
all to be common in time of need unto the neighbor according unto the will
and commandment of god, and this is called poverty of spirit. In them also
that have riches, as lords, and not servants thereof, and this is the first
and most low degree, or state of perfection / which notwitstondynge does
conteyne many degrees. In the hygest degree whereof: done religiouse persons
live, if they keep their promise, and vow duly. The reward of this beatitude
/ does follow.

Quoniam ipsorum est regnum celorum.

For the realm, and kingdom of heuens: does apperteyne and bylonge unto
the^. They: that is such persons pore in spirit, for god: have here now the
property and possession (as it may be had in this life) of the heuyns, and
after this life they be sure thereof. For (as I said) there ben two heuens, One
above where God and his saints been. And an other bynethe, that is the
firmament, and all things contained theryn. The pore in spirit shall have the
possession of both. For in this life he has all that is needful, provided by
our lord, and a special grace to be content with his ordinance, and after
this miserable life: he shall have the full property and possession of the very
laud of everlasting life.

Amen.
Of the second beatitude.
THe second beatitude and state of perfect life / is.

* Beati mites.

Blessed ben ye mylde. That is to mean / ye such persons as be myld / soft,
sober, curteyse, ge^tyll, restfull, and pacie^t, yt in good can vaynquysh
evil, To. xii. d
and (for the time) can and will give place unto rebuks, checks, wild, rughe,
and cruel behauioure: ben in this state and degree of perfection / which
degree may be referred unto ye second co^syderacion, which was of ye work of
governance ye stands in the consyderacio^ of the wysedom and knowledge of
god / which deply co^sydered: may lyghtely bring down the high proud mind
of any person, so that he shall evidently perceive that (in co^paracion unto
that wysedom) he is but a very fool, and has neither wysedom ne lernyng. And
so shall he begin to bear a low sail, and to be mylde, and to choose rather to
be governed and ruled: than to rule or govern, for that appertaynethe chiefly
unto myldenes. The reward whereof does follow.

Quonia^ ipsi possidebunt terra^. That is, for they shall possede or have
possession of ye earth. This term (the earth) is taken dyuersly. One way, for
the element that bears and brings forth trees, fruytes, and graynes. In an
other manner it is taken for the body of man, whereof was said unto Adam, Gene.
iii.
earth thou art: and to earth shall thou go. In a third way it is taken for
heuyn, the land of life: Psalm. xxvi.
and of all these erthes shall the myld have possession. For the mylde person
desires no more of this world: but the sufficient susttentacio^ of the body,
and so does he order his body by that sufficiently: that he is lord of all ye
passions and mocio^s thereof, and does constrayne the flesh to serve the
spirit, and the body to be duly subject / subdued, and in all obedient unto
the soul. And finally he shall have full and whole possession of the land yt
flowed milk and honey, Exo. iii. b
that is the land of life everlasting.

Amen.
Of the third beatytude.
THe third beatitude or state of perfect living / is.

* Beati qui lugent.

Those persons yt done mourn: ben blessed. This term (mourning) does
betoken a sorrowful behauyour, in co^tenaunce, in words, in array, and such
other like behauyoures. As in sad and sorrowful lokes, chere, and
countenance, in weeping, waylynge / cryenge / complaining / wryngynge of
hands / tearing of hears, or of clothes, change of array / as you may se in
funerales, or buryalles. Sometime caused for the loss of goods. Sometime of
honors / dignities / and degrees. And sometime for the loss or death of
friends. And sometime (although most seldom) for the offense of god and
ieopardy of souls. And also for the fervent desire of heuyn. And this degree
or state does excede both the the other. For as it is necessary for the mylde
person to be poor in spirit: so is it likewise necessary for the person
that mourns for our lord to be both poor and myld. And therefore this
beatitude may be well referred unto the third consyderacion, which was of the
bounty of our lord god, which bounty does apperteyne unto the holy ghost,
ye third person, and conclusion or knot of the holy trinite. The reward of
this beatitude and degree of perfection, is set forth thus.

* Quonia^ ipsi consolabuntur.

That is, for they shall be conforted and have consolacion. Consolacion is a
comfort, had of other persons, specially in words: whereby the waylynge person
is releued of his sorrow, and put in good hope of joy, and ease, or pleasure.
Which consolacion these manner of mourners shall have in two manners. One in
this world, by the assurance of clean conscience, void of all despair. And
after in bliss eterne, among the holy citizens and saints of heuyn.

Amen.
Of the fourth beatitude of perfect living.
THe fourth beatitude and state of perfection, is in ye gospel. * Beati qi
esuriu^t et sitiu^t iusticia^. Blessed be those persons that done hunger and
thurst justice. That is to mean, those persons yt fervently don covet and
desire justice, ben blessed. Justice is a virtue yt does render and give to
every person that is right, and he worthy to have. That is unto god: love and
dread, unto the parents and souerayns: honor and obedience, unto the
neighbor that is friend and beneficial: thanks and kyndnes, and unto ye
enemy that noyeth: patience and sufferance, and every person unto him self:
due guard and keeping of the soul, due correction of the body / and unto both:
the continual exercise of virtue, good manners, and holy conuersacio^. This
beatitude may be referred unto the fourth consyderacio^ which was of the work
of iustificacion. For the person of such hunger, thurst, and fervent desire
of justice, shall be sure to be iustyfyed. That is / to be made (by justice) apt
and mete for the heavenly bliss. The reward of the which beatitude does
follow according.

* Quoniam ipsi saturabuntur.

That is, for they shall be saturate, satiate, full fed, habundantly contented,
and fulfilled here in this life by the visitacion, ordenau^ce / and comfort of
our lord. Psalm. xvi
And after (as the prophet says) when his glory shall appear in joy and
bliss everlasting.

Amen.
Of the fyfte beatitude and state of perfect living.
THe fyfte beatitude and state of perfection is.

* Beati misericordes.

Eccle. xxx. d
That is, the persons merciful ben blessed. Merciful I say unto them self /
by due reformacion of them self. Merciful unto the neighbor by due releuing
of misery / and this beatitude may be referred unto the.v. co^sideracion which
was of the work or benefit of remuneracio^ or reward. For as a great gift
is worse and more than lost upon ye unkind person that does forget it: so is
it well spent upon ye kind that does remember it / and duly does thanks
therefore. And the greatest thank that can be given unto our lord: is to be
merciful / and to releue him in his / for so does he accept that is done for
his sake. Math. xxv.
And therefore the reward does follow. Quonia^ ipsi misericordiam
co^seque^tur. For they shall obtain and get mercy here in this life of all
their sins / and after be rewarded far more and above their deseruynge /
and more tha^ they looked for / or than they could by any mean require or
desire / inioye eterne and everlasting. Amen

The syxte beatitude or state of perfect life
THe.vi. beatitude is * Beati mu^do cord. That is / those persons yt ben of
clean heart be^ blessed. That is to mean / such as don keep their conscience
clean vndefowled / or unspotted / and the soul without sin. For such persons
don here live the life of angels and therefore this beatitude or state may be
referred unto the.vi. co^sideracio^ / which was of ye work of glorificacio^.
And the reward is. Quonia^ ipsi deu^ videbu^t. For they shall se god. The
clean heart and clear conscience does see god here in this life by whole and
full fourmed faith / by strong hope and fervent charity / and he does se him
self by due discuss and by dilligent examinacio^ and search and by due custody
and guard of him self. And he does se his neighbor by love kyndenes / mercy /
and pity. i. Cor. xiii.
And after this life he shall se our lord / face to face as he is and with him be
glorified in soul and body / world without end. Amen

Of the seventh beatitude or state of perfect living.
THe seventh beatitude and state of perfection / is. * Beati pacifici. Blessed
be ye peaceful. That is to mean yt such persons as don make peace / ben
blessed. Our lord and savior made peace betwyxt god and man / and he was very
peace of him self / and he made also peace between man and man. Those persons
tha^ that done make peace bytwyxte god and the^ self by penance and due
reco^siliacio^ and that don make and keep peace in the^ self by due orderyng
of ye body unto the soul and bytwyxte them and their neighbors / by the
exercise of patience / and betwyxte neighbor and neighbor by charitable
kyndenes and neyghbourly love: Those I say be of this beatitude / and their
reward follows. Qm^ filii dei vocabu^tur. For they shall be called ye children
of god. And this beatitude may be referred unto the.vii. consyderacion /
which was of ye work and benefit of fruicion. For in that they be the
children of god, they ben heirs and coheneritours unto our savior, and thereby
shall have the possession of all heuyn: and the full fruicion of the deity and
godhede, to use at pleasure, rejoice, and inioye the same in bliss
everlasting.

Amen.
Of the.viii. beatitude or blessed state of perfect living.
THe eight beatitude is.

* Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iusticiam. That is, those persons
yt don suffer persecucio^ for justice: ben blessed. It is a great perfection
(as before is said) fervently to desire and to love justice, but to fuffre
trouble and to bear danger for justice: is far more perfection. For always to
suffer evil, is of more perfection tha^ is to do good. I mean to suffer evil
for justice and for the love of god, for else many persons may suffer pain and
evil by their own deseruynge and against their will. And many do suffer and
take great pain and labor to do evil. And these ben not blessed: but rather
ye contrary. The reward of this beatitude does follow.

Qm^ ipsorum est regnu^ celoru^. That is, for the kingdom of heuyn is theyrs,
or does apperteyn unto them. This reward is two times named / and assigned /
or appointed in these states or beatitudes, that is to say, first, and last.
And therefore may conveniently be referred unto the.viii. and last
co^syderacion, which was of the sure perseueracion, certaynty, and duraunce of
all the benefytes of our lord. A thing is called perfect wha^ the end and
beginning done frame and mete to gyther, and therefore this reward is twyse
appointed for to show the perfection and excellency thereof, which is also
declared further, after the declaracion of the said persecution, where is
said, Math. v
you shall be blessed when the men of this world done curse you. And when they
do chase you from place to place, and vex and trouble you, and when they shall
speak all evil against you, lyeng or making lesynges upon you. For me and
for my sake / joy you than, and make you gladness, for your hyre and reward is
much ple^tuouse in heuyns. The servants of Christ have here nothing in
suerty, Heb. xiii.
for they have here no city ne dwelling place of suerty to bide in: but done
seek for an other lodgyng, where the shall be (as is said) in full surety and
certaynty / never to change, ne to be mynysshed of their joy in any part: but
ever to remayn in one perfect and most joyful state / blessed ever of our
lord god and most sweet savior Jesus whyder he bring us that bought us. Amen.

Thus have ye an end of your meditacio^. Now you must remebre that before we
showed you yt as the mother does travel and bring forth a child / so (in a
manner) does meditacion (after saint Austin) child and bring forth science,
Vt sup
cunning and knowledge whereof we promised somewhat to speak.

Of science or knowledge, gote^ and brought forth by meditacio^.
ALl manner of science, cunning / and lernyng, is gotten and brought forth by
meditacion. How be it we do not here inte^de to speak of that science / which
learned men say is to know any thing by his cause or causes. Which science
(saint Austin says) as of heavenly and erthly things to know: Vbi supra.
worldly men don much praise and love. But they ben much better men (says
he) that set more by the knowledge of them self. Ibidem.
For that soul (says he) is more laudable and more to be praised / that
knows the self mysery and wretchedness: tha^ is that soul that without that
knowledge does seek and search out the ways of the sterres, and the natures
of other things. The most high and most profitable science (after him) is
self knowledge. Which is (says he) when a person by diligent and often used
meditacion is illumined and lightened unto ye very perceiving and knowledge of
him self. Se than / look well / and perceive that you be a man, and not god: a
man made of naught, conceived in sin / nourisshed in your mothers womb, with
fylthy and lothesum matter, borne in mysery and wretchydnes, and here don live
in pain and labors, and shall dye in fear and dread, sure and certain
thereunto of necessity, inevitable and unavoidable, and yet unsure and
uncertain wha^, where, or how, and in what manner or state you shall dye.
Perceiving than that death does every where and ever more look, gape, and
wait for you. If ye bewyse, tha^ look you again every where, and continually
provide for it, and so shall ye much less fear it. This science and knowledge
is the fruit and profit of your said meditacio^, engendered, opteyned, and
gote^ thereby. if you would know how this science does come of that meditacio^
/ you must (as they say) chowe or chewe your cud again / that is / you must
have resort again unto your said consyderacions.

The.i. co^syderacion.
First than when you consider and look well upon the power of our lord / as in
your syrst consyderacion you shall perceive that he is allmyghty. And than
again lokynge upon your self, you shall know well ye be of little power, or
none at all: but that you be all infirm, feeble, weyke, and sick. And so shall
you accede, approyche / and go unto this holy sacrament: as a sore sick
person unto a sure physician. And when you look forther upon the wisdom of
our lord (as in the.ii consyderacion) you shall conclude he is all wise. And
contrary, lokyng upon your self, you shall grant you be all folysshe, and (as
saint Austin says) inwardely say in your heart and thought, for truth it is
that ye say, and so shall you be wise in approchyng unto this holy sacrament:
as ye ignorant and blind unto the son of justice and unto the true doctor
and teacher of all verity and troth. And yet wha^ you look again upon the
bounty and goodness of our lord, you look well on your self and recount how
often ye have wylfully slypped and fallen down again into the same dangerous
dungeon of sin: you shall lightly co^dempne your self of marvelous great
unkindness, and so shall you tha^ make haste unto this holy sacrament: as a
thief or traitor found gylty to ask forgyuenes and pardon. that nothing
would give / or else for a very bare wretch that nothing had to give / and so
shall you accede and go unto this sacrame^te, as a nedy naked beggar unto the
most rychest and lyberall lord, and he will inspyre and tell you what you may
give him to content him, that is to say, your heart and good will. And yet if
you look further, how above and beyond all these gifts he has made you
honorable, goodly, bright and beautiouse by his work of glorificacion
meruelouse pleasure and joyful gladness he has prepared and ordained for you
in the work of his fruicio^ / unto this holy house and lodgyng of our lord:
as a vagabunde and prodigal or unthrifty child unto the house and home of his
father / there (mercy asked and opteyned) contynually to dwell and bide among
the servants of that house / where (void of all evil) is abu^daunce and
plenty of all manner of things that be good, with sure surety and co^sta^t
certaynty of the same, so to persevere and endure without minushyng or mutacio^,
world without end, which he grant us: yt made and bought us. Amen.

Thus have you eight consyderacions for the knowledge of your self, after and
according unto the three eyghtes that went before, and this eight to be the
fourth eight. And this is the same science / art / craft / or cunning yt I
said is engendered and brought forth by medytacion. And* these four eyghtes:
may be signified by ye four flodes of paradise, Gene. ii.
which done water all the world. For (as saint Austin says) of this science
comes compunction, Vbi supra.
which co^punctio^ (says he) is wha^ the heart by consyderacion, or of the
consyderacion of his own evil and sin, is touched and pricked with inward
sorrow. De summo bono
And saint ysodore says that the compunction of the heart is a mekenes of the
mind with tears weeping, which does spring and arise of the record and
remembrance of sins with dread. Co^punction.
This term compunctio^ is as much to say as a joined pricking or strykyng.
When so ever (than) a person knowing him self (by the science before showed
(does remember any of his offenses, and feeling his heart and conscience pricked
and grudged therewith / does (with inward sorrow and remors) knock upon the
breast, lift up the hands, eyes, or sight, weep or sygh, that is compunction,
and does include contricion. And this compunctio^ (as ye may well perceive) is
begotten and brought forth of the said science. And does (as says saint
Austin) byget, child, and bring forth devotion, which devotion (says he) is.

* Pius et humilis affectus in deum: humilis, De spiritu et anima.
ex conscientia infirmitatis proprie. Pius, ex consideracione divine clementie,

That is to say. Devotion.
Devotion is a religious, faithful and meke affection inwardly, and perfectely
unto god. And that affection (says he) is meke and lowly by the conscience,
and full knowledge of our propre infirmity and feebleness. And it is devout,
relygious, and faithful by the consyderacion of the benynge, piteouse, and
merciful ge^tylnes of our lord. If you would know what this term affection is
here to mean: Affecte or affection.
Saint Austin says it is a certain / free / wylfull lyberall / and sweet or
pleasant inclinacion, and leaning of the mind unto our lord god. And nothing
(says he) does so much inclyne move and styre almighty god unto pytye and
mercy: as does the pure and clean affection and desire of mind.

De modo ora^di.
* Devotion than (as saint Hughe says de sancto Victore) is when the mind of
a person is affrayde of his great and many sins. And than mystrustynge
utterly his own virtue / power / and strength: does turn him self unto our
lord god / and so much the more feruentely does ask and beseech his help
and socoure as he perceyueth and sees well there is no help without him:
wherein he might have confidence and trust. Vt sup^
So concludes saint Austin / that deuocio^ does make the prayer perfect.
Prayer.
For prayer (says he) is nothing else but a deuocio^ of mind / and conversion
and tournynge of the heart and mind inwardely, and perfectely unto god by a
devout religiouse and meke affection, comforted and holden up (says the said
saint Hugh with faith / hope / and charity. Prayer than, Ibidem
without deuocio^ is imperfect and little worth. And deuocio^ (as is said) is
had and gotten of compunction / and compunction: of science: and science, of
meditacion. So yt unto this purpose, that is to say the due receyuynge of ye
sacrament of the altar, all these five be (as we said) good and necessary.
Not so (as often we have said) that any person is bounden unto all of
necessity: but of co^ueniency. And therefore as we have before set forth unto
your election and choice diverse meditacio^s: so have we in like manner done of
prayers, gadered out of diverse ancient auctours.

When ye have than thus sumwhat appareled and disposed your self unto this
journey by these.iiii. yt is / meditacion / self knowledge, compunction / and
devotion, than fall unto prayer, vocal or me^tall, or both at your pleasure.
That is to mean / that you may at will speak and read these prayers, or only
think them in your heart and mind, or both say and think.

The ghostly child. Sir / which is best of these three ways?


The ghostly father. Surely to say or read alone without thought: is little
worth. To think alone is very good: but both is best.


Here don follow many prayers but do you (as is said) read them ones over, and
chose at will.
First than I would advise you to appoynte your self to here one whole mass
/ if ye may co^uenyently before your communion, when so ever you ben disposed
thereunto, and than to read or say this that followed before or sone after the
Confiteor / which is a manner of confession. Not so to be taken as though it
were and might be sufficient for any grievous sins without sacramental
confession (as we said before) if it may be had: but that it may be vaylable
for light offenses, and the more excite and styre up your mind in that you
understand and perceive well what you say or think.

Before, or at the beginning of mass.
O Good lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus, I most miserable wretch of
the world / here before thy divine and godly presence: plainly do confess
and openly knowledge that in all my lewd life, hitherto myspent (by many
miserable and wretched ways of sin) I have offended thy graciouse goodenes,
as well in ye brekyng of thy precepts and commandments: as in commission of
all the seven pryncipall sins, misused my five wits, and not fulfilled
ye.vii. werks of mercy. Which sins and offenses here now wholly and fully to
recou^te and reherce: is unto me (for their multitude) i^possyble. Wherefore
with most humble and lowly heart, and most hearty and desirous will of perfect
contricion: I utterly forsake the^ all. And although nothing of my
deseruynge: yet (good lord) for the honor of thy precious blood, and the
merytes of thy bitter passion and most cruel, most paynfull and most shameful
death: I insta^tly require ask, crave, and most mekely and lowly beseech thy
gracious benignity and goodness of mercy and forgiveness. And that from
hensforthe I may have thy grace (lord) in whole faith strong hope, and
perfect charity / to fle, avoid, and forsake all sin. And in all my
thoughts, words, and deeds / manners / contenau^ces / and behauiours / to
order my self in virtue unto the pleasure and honor of thy grace, the welthe
and salvation of my soul, and unto the edificacio^ of all Christians. And
herunto I beseech our lady saint Mary, thy holy mother, ever virgin / all the
blessed company of heaven / and all faithful persons to pray for me.

Amen.
All these parts of the mass, if you may conveniently, should be herd
standing. That is to say / the office, the kyrie Gloria in excelsis, and
specially the gospel, with due reverence at this word Jesus. The preface also
the Pater noster, and sancte Iohn^s Gospel. At the first collectes and pystle.
Mine own good lord and most sweet savior Jesus I beseech thy goodness to put
away far from me all iniquities and wyckednes / and, of thy merciful
loving kyndenes, kendle in my heart the flamynge fire of thy fervent love. Be
not, sweet lord, displeased with me, ne keep in mind or remembrance the
multitude of mine offenses. For I do not presume, good lord, to make prayer and
peticion here before thy godly presence of any goodness / ryghtwysenes, or any
deseruyng of my self: but only of full hope and trust of thy myseracion and
merciful pytye. Take from me, sweet lord, this hard and stony heart / and
give me, lord, for it a new heart, full of compunction and due contricion. And
give me a stomach kind and loving that may dredfully love the, and louyngly
dread the and that may delight and take pleasure in the, lord, alone / and
wylfully follow the. And at the last may overtake and catch the / fast hold
the, fully possede the. And finally in eterne bliss to se the / and fully to
inioye the.

Amen.
After the pystle.
Most sweet sauyoure and loving lord Jesus / I beseech thy benignity for ye
anguysshe of thy holy heart, in all thy labors / passions / and pains for me
sustained and suffered. And for the effusion and shedyng of thy most holy
sacred blood: and for the virtue of thy most innocent and precyouse death. For
the mystery also of this holy sacrament thy blessed body, and most holy sacred
blood / in the immolacion / offering / and sacrifice whereof: I most vile
sinner am present, and most unworthy wretch do approach. And finally I
beseech the lord, for thine own self: have pytye and mercy upon me, that am
(I know well) the most miserable wretch, and most sinful caytyfe upon
earth. Purify thou (good lord) than / and cleanse my heart and soul from all
unlawful affections. So that in this time and all times I may duly and
worthily do the service. Grant me (good lord) very contricion of all my
sins / the grace also of true co^punction / the fountayn of fruitful tears
/ pure devotion, clear and clean conscience / the continual memory and mind of
thy bitter passion and precious death. And of thy most comfortable love:
perpetual feruor and desire.

Amen.
After the gospel.
O Most benign and merciful lover of mankind, my sweet lord Jesus / I
beseech thy grace, for the dolorous and painful smertyng of all thy wounds,
grant me the grace of patience in all aduersyty, and to despise and set at
naught the love of this world and all the goods and pleasurs thereof, and to be
content with a necessary and mean living. And to keep firmly and constantly,
by due perseueraunce unto my last end, this state and degree that thou haste
put me in. And to follow always, by due obedience, thy forther callynges, daily
to increase and profit in virtue / and ever to have contynually the fervent
desire of mine own country and heavenly home. Grant me forther, good lord, in
all the co^uersacion of my life: to have and keep due discipline, good manner /
and christian behauyoure, unto the auoydyng ever of thy displeasure, and of the
sclaunder, occasion / and offense of my neighbor. And so to have groundely in
my heart and soul very and unfeigned mekenes / true faithful kyndenes, and
meritorious patience unto the pleasure and honor of thy grace / the wealth of
my soul, and unto the edificacion of all persons.

Amen.
In the time of the eleuacio^.
THe great clerck holy saint Thomas of Aquine does set forth this prayer
following, as very convenient to be said in this time of the eleuacion.

*Tu rex glory Christ. Tu patris sempiternus es filius.

And so forth as you have at matyns. The english whereof we have here set
forth with the latyne / for the increase of your devotion. *Tu rex glory
Christ. That is to mean. I believe / confess / and knowledge that thou, good
lord, Jesus christ my savior / being here under the form of bread and wine,
art the king of glory / very god. *Tu patris sempiternus es filius. And that
thou, good lord Jesus, art the essenciall / eterne, and everlasting son of
the father of heaven celestial.

*Tu ad liberandum suscepturus hominem: no^ horruisti virginis vterum.

I believe that thou, good lord, disposynge / and by determinacio^ concludyng to
take the nature of man / and so to redeem and deliver him from the bondage of
sin: dydeste not abhor ne disdain the flesshly womb of the virgyn.

*Tu deuicto mortis aculeo: aperuisti credentibus regna celorum.

I believe yt thou (good lord) the siynge and darte of death, vaynquysshed and
ouercomen: dydest open unto all thy faithful people the realm and kingdom of
heaven.

*Tu ad dexteram dei seeds in gloria patris.

I believe yt thou (good lord) that art here persent in this holy sacrament
doste sit, remain and rest, in the glory of thy father, upon the right hand
of god: or thus, syttest, and doste remain and rest in glory upon the right
hand of god thy father.

*Iudex crederis esse ve^turus.

I believe yt all faithful peopell done believe, that thou shall come again to
judge all the world.

*Te ergo quesumus tuis famulis subueni: quos precioso sanguine redemisti.

Therefore (good lord) we beseech the / help and socoure thy servants whom
thou have redeemed and bought with thy precious blood.

*Eterna fac cum sanctis tuis gloria munerari.

We beseech the also, good lord, make and cause us to be rewarded with thy
holy saints in eterne and everlasting glory and joy.

*Saluum fac populum tuu^ domine / et benedic hereditati tue: et rege eos, et
extolle illos vsque ineternum.

We beseech the (good lord) make thy people saved souls, and give blessing
to thine heneretaunce. And rule, good lord, and govern the^. And excolle,
inhaunce, magnifye, good lord, and make them honorable unto the end of ye
world.

*Per singulos dies bn^dicimus te / et laudamus nome^ tuu^ in sclm in seculum
seculi.

We done, god lord, bliss and honor the every day by day / and done laud and
praise thy holy name from time to time / and from age unto age for evermore.

*Dignare domine die isto: sine peccato nos custodire.

Vouchesafe, good lord, to keep us this day / and all our life time from sin
and trespass.

*Miserere nr^i dn^e, miserere nr^i

Have mercy, good lord, upon us / have mercy.

*Fiat mi^a tua dn^e super nos / quemadmodu^ sperauimus in te.

Let thy mercy / lord / light on us / as we have had ever perfect hope and
trust in the.

*In te domine speraui / non confundar in eternum.

I have always hoped and perfectely trusted inwardly in the. I beseech the lord
I never be confounded, disapoynted, ne deceived. Thus ends that sweet prayer
/ your Te deum.

Prayers unto ye end of mass.
O Most benign lord and savior, most highest priest and very Bysshope Jesus
Christ / that would vouchesafe to offer thine own self, most pure lamb /
most immaculate / most clean, and unspotted host in sacrifice unto the father
of heuyn upon the aultre of the cross, for us wretched sinners. And also that
would give and leave with us perpetually thine own very flesh for our
spiritual fode and thine own precious blood for our spiritual drink / I
beseech the for ye sake of all thy sorrowful wounds, for the effusion and
shedynge of thy most precious blood, and for the virtue of thy most innocent
death, and most specially for that excellent, meruelouse, and unspeakable
charity thou had unto us, whereby thou would vouchsafe to wash us fylthy and
unworthy wrethes in thine own holy sacred blood. I beseech the have mercy and
pytie on me, and forgive me all my sins and neglygences and all offenses, don
either by commission or omissio^, that is to mean, all such offenses as I did
and might not laufully, nor should have don / and also all yt I might or should
have don / and did not. And sithe, good lord, among all thine other great
merciful benefytes you would vouchsafe (only of thy liberal goodness without
any deseruynge of me) to call me unworthy wrethe to the grace of thy faith, and
to be one of thy sort, and now also forther to receive me this mystery and
holy sacrament, I beseech the, lord, teach me and inspyre my soul to order me
self thereunto, with such reverence and dread, and with such fervor and
devotion, and with such love and charity: as may be acceptable to thy grace,
and shall come or byseme my state and degree, and so increace in virtue by the
receiving hereof in the same degree: as may be also to the edificacio^ of all
persons. And I beseech the suffer me never to dout of this holy sacrament: but
evermore to perceive, understand, hold, and believe, think and speak, after
the true faith of thy catholyke church. Let (good lord) thy holy spirit come
unto me, and enter into my heart, and there without words or noise, secretly
speak unto my soul / to instruct, tell and teach me the very truth of all
that high mystery / for I know well it is very profunde and high / and
(except thy graciouse doctrine) far above my capacite and understanding.
Wherefore, sweet savior Jesus, I now here fully and wholly, without any forther
discuss or reasonynge, most lowly submyt my self unto thy mercy: Besechynge
the same / that I may with clean heart and pure conscience accede and approach
(although unworthy) theru^to. And that thou good lord, for the swetenes of thy
holy heart, woldeste vouchesafe to deliver my sinful soul from all doubt and
danger of sin / and to mundify / purge / and cleanse my frail mind from
all vain / all unclean / all noyouse and unfruitful cogitacions and
thoughts. And to conforte and strenght my faint and feeble heart with the grace
of constancy and perseuerau^ce / so yt my soul may be made (in thy love and
charity) the worthy habitacle and dwelling place of thine high majesty, not
only now at this time: but also in all times unto ye end of my life. And
after ever unto the end of the world.

Amen.
O Most sweet lover of all mankind, lord and savior Jesus / I beseech the
for all the whole virtue of thy bitter passion / put away from me the spirit
of elacion, and pride, of envy, and detraction, of ire, wrath, malice, and
impacience, and of all other morbes, diseases, and pestilences of ye soul. And
plant, good lord, and ground in my heart and mind very true mekenes /
charity, and patience, innocence, and the love of poverty / due temperaunce /
and pure chastity / with all such other virtues / medicynes / and
preseruatyues unto the soul. Mortify good lord, and sle in me all libidinouse
and unclean mocions / all carnal desires, and inordinate affections. And
kyndle, lord, and quyken in me ye fervor and love of all virtues, and of the
perpetual excercyse and workynge of them / with constant perseueraunce / so
that in this time and all times, in body and soul purifyed and cle^sed: I may
worthily receive this holy sacrament. Unto the high mystery whereof, I know
well and do so confess / grant / and knowledge here before thy glorious face:
I am unworthy, and very much unworthy, and most unworthy. Not only for my great
habominable sins, and many many neglygences: but also for great dulnes and
want of devotion. But not witstandyng I know as well again, and so do I
believe in heart and mind, and so do knowledge in mouth and word / that thou,
my lord god, art omnipote^t and almighty, and so may therefore (by thy power
infinite if it so please thy grace) make me worthy and acceptable. For thou
alone, good lord, may and can iustifye a sinner, and of the vile and
fylthy wretch: make a clean and pleasant person. Therefore (gracious lord) I
beseech thy worthy majesty, for thine almighty power, which I firmly and
steadfastly believe: and for thine infinite and endless wysedom, which I boldly
confess: and for thine excellent bounty and goodness, wherein I fully hope and
trust: And for all these together as one: frame me, and make me worthy and
acceptable unto thy godly presence, and grant me (thine unworthy and lewd
wretched servant) of all my sins, very true co^tricio^, due co^punction,
pure deuocio^ and the fervent flame of thy love / yt I may now at this time
receive this holy sacrifice of thy blessed body and blood, with puryte of heart
and clenenes of conscience, with the gracious fountain of devout and sweet
tears, with desire and dread with honor and reverence / with mekenes of heart
/ and fervor of love / with spiritual gladness and heavenly joy. And if it may
please thy goodness, lord, let me be somewhat raised up in spirit. I dare not
say unto the very feeling and perceiving: but unto some manner little smake or
taste of the swetenes of thy godly and most pleasant presence, and unto the
devotion of thy holy angels and saints that here be now present about the
same / and that I may with them finally be there present where now they be.

Amen.
O Most gentle lord and merciful savior Jesus / I beseech the for this holy
mystery of thy blessed body and blood wherewith we unworthy wretches ben daily
fed in thy church, and daily washed, cleansed, sanctified, and made hole / and
so parteyners of thy most high divinity and godhed. Grant me lord and give me
the precious garment of innocence, with such garnysshe of other garments
thereunto according, as best may please thy grace. Wherewith apparelled / bawned
/ and dressed: I may (as in my nupciall and wedding clothyng) in good and
clean conscience approach unto thy presence. So that this celestial and
heavenly sacrament ryceyued: may be unto me health and salvation of soul and
body / unto live everlasting.

Amen.
GOod sweet master and most hyghly learned / and best expert physician lord
Jesus my savior, I beseech thy gentle heart to cure and hele my infyrme /
feeble / and syke heart from all manner of langoures / diseases / and sykenesses
/ Palate is the rofe of the mouth
and so to refourme and season the palate of my soul and mind, that I never
sauer, feel, ne taste any manner of swetenes: but only thy self. For thou,
good lord, art the most sweet sauored bred / ye most white / pleasant, and
most noble and best nourisshynge bread / the bread of all breades / the bread
and paynmayne of pleasure, the bread of all fortitude and strength / the bread
of all understanding and knowledge / the bread of all grace and good will /
the bread of life, that have in thy self all manner of delectament and pleasure
/ and gyuest life unto the world: And (of thy most excellent charity) doste
ever contynually refresshe and feed us with thine own self, and yet in thy
self doste nothing waste / minushe / ne faynte / or fail. Let my heart, good
lord, therefore feed upon the / and spiritually eat and drink the / and be so
fed of the / that my soul may be fully saciat and filled of the sweet savior
and taste and of the sauory swetenes of thy divine presence.

GOod sweet lord / I beseech the come thy self / and enter in to my heart, and
make clean mine inward parts from all inquiname^tes / and filthynes of mind,
and of spirit. Enter, good lord, into my soul / and make me whole from all
sinful diseases. Sanctifye and cle^se me now and at al times unto thy self
and for thy self. Be thou (good lord) thy self both the physician and the
medicin / the salve, and the surgeon, the health and conseruacio^ of both my
body and soul. Put away from me, good lord, all the crafty assayles and the
sleyghty wyles of mine enemies, that they have nothing to do with me: but that
you (lord) alone may occupy me wholly unto thy self: so yt nothing else have
(any time) power over me: but that I (always preserved and defended by this
blessed sacrament) may go forth, continue, and profit, perseuerantly in ye
pathe and way of my profession / thy holy christian religion, with due
obseruau^ce, reguler disciplines, christian manners, and all due catholyke
obedience perteynyng unto the same. And yt I never consent ne lene unto any of
them that been contrarious thereunto.

Amen.
Ex cano ne miss.
GOod blessed lord, father omnipotent, eterne, and everlasting god: I most
entierly beseech thy goodness to grant me grace so worthily now to receive this
holy sacred body and blessed blood of my sweet savior Jesus Christ: that I may
thereby deserve to have full remission and forgyuenes of all my sins, and to
be replete and fulfilled with thy holy spirit, and to have thy peace. For thou
alone art my lord, thou only my god / and non other, thou lord the entiere and
inward love of my heart / the true quietude and sure rest of my mind, and the
whole desire of my soul. Whose gloryouse impery and governance remains,
perfectly abides, co^tynueth, and indureth for evermore, world without end.

Amen.
MI sweet lord god, Ex eode^.
father of heuyn, the fountain, well and spryng of all bounty and goodness /
that moved of thy most pyteouse mercy: would vouchesafe that thyn own son
our savior Jesus Christ: should descend and come down (for us and for our
sake) unto this wretched world / and here take flesh and blood of the
blessed virgyn his mother Mary, and therein (for us) to sustain, suffer, and
bear our myseryes, most bitter passion, intolerable and grievous payns, and
most cruel and most shameful death, I beseech the, lord, grant me that
grace that I may daily worshype the, gloryfy the / and with all the intent and
will of my heart: I may laud and praise the. And that thou good lord, never
leave ne forsake me / thy pore and wretched servant: but (of thy deep and great
mercy) thou clearly forgive and forget all my sins. So that in clean heart and
chaste body I may be able to serve the alone / my lord eterne / everlasting /
living / and very God omnipotent. Amen.

Mine own sweet lord and savior Jesus, very essenciall son of almighty God
/ that (of thy profound and deep mercy, by the will of thy eterne father, and
by the workynge of the holy ghost (haste by thy passion and death, quyckened and
redeemed the world. I beseech most lowly thy holy grace / in the honor of this
thy holy sacred body and blessed blood, which I unworthy wretch presume to
receive for the welthe of my soul that you wilt vouchsafe to perdo^ my
boldenes, and to deliver me quyte from all iniquities / offenses / and all
manner of euyls: whereby in any times I have or may any time hereafter offend or
displease thy gracious goodness. And thou (good lord) make me ever obedient unto
thy will and commandment. And yt thou never suffer me (sweet lord) to be
perpetually departed from the my sweet lord and savior Jesus Christ, that with
the father and with the holy ghost lyueste and reygnest very self same
essenciall god / world without end.

Amen.
O Souerayn lord and savior Jesus / although I (most unworthy wretch) now
here do accede, presume and approach unto this worthy sacrament of thy most
precious body and blood: yet I beseech thy mercyful goodenes it never be unto
me condempnacion and judgment: but unto the profit and avail of the eterne
and everlasting salvation and health of both my soul and body.

Amen.
O Most benygne and loving lord, how vile, how wretched, and unworthy am I
to receive so worthy a lord, so royal a prince, so mighty a king, so noble
an Emperor into so pore a coysshe, not worthy to be called an house, and so
far out of good garnysshe and due apparel? Surely much and very much, and
most unworthy am I thereunto. But gracious lord I beseech thy goodness that
perfectly have create and made all this world of naught, and with pain
infinyte repaired our mortalyte. Create and make now in me a new heart, and
repair, or rather new frame again and facion my house, and adorn / appareyll
garnylshe / and dress or fornisshe it so as best may become or beseme thy
majesty / and best may please thy gentle heart. And of thy most large and
lyberall bou^tye: vouchsafe (good lord) to receive my will mind / intent / and
desire, which (as here before thy goodly presence I affirm and confess) is
to receive the worthily and according unto thy will and pleasure / unto the
which I wholly yield / reco^mende / and betake my self heart / mind / and
will / soul, and body. Not only now for this present time: but also for all
times for evermore.

Amen.
A little before your co^mumon / a prayer.
O Lively flesh and blood of my loving lord Jesus / the reuyuer and
quyckener of my death. O precyouse food immortal / the nouryssher and
standerde of my life. O very matter of my beatitude and blessedness. O fulfyller
and whole contentacion of all my desires: I beseech thy goodness so work in me
thy grace: that by the receyuynge of this glorious sacrament I may be
transformed and changed in to the (lord) thy self / and that I may live in
the / repause and rest in the / love the, lord, alone / and that I may think
upon the alone / and thou alone to be sole obiecte spiritual of all my wits
/ ye is to say / that I may have no manner of delectacion nor pleasure to herke^
or here any thing: but only the. Nor any thing to se or behold: but the
alone. Nothing to smell: but only thy spirit / nothing to taste: but only
thy swetenes, ne ever any thing to touch, with pleasure: but the, lord, alone. Be
thou (good lord) alone ye whole book of all my study and learning, and ye table
of all my fode or fedynge. The bed also, or ye couche of all my rest and
slepynge. And be thou (good lord) ye closet, arcke, chest, coffer, and casket
of all my Iuels, treasure and riches. Let, good lord, all my who le faith and
believe be in ye alone. All my full hope and trust in the only. And (in the
also alone) all mine affection, love, and desire. In the, lord, the perfect
tranquilyte and rest of all my heart and mind. And finally, good lord, let the
whole tra^sformacio^ and full exchange of both my soul and body be all in
the. Se ye the more often here (by thy grace) I receive the in this blessed
sacrament: the more fully and surely I may (in everlasting bliss) possede,
and wholly inioye the my sweet lord Jesus, that with god the father, and with the
holy ghost do live and reign very god for evermore. Amen.

* Domine secundum actum meum noli me iudicare. etc.

Good lord, do not judge me after or according unto mine act, workynge, or
deed. For nothing have I done, worthy and acceptable in thy co^specte and
sight. And therefore I most lowly beseech thy majesty that thou lord god
would put away mine iniquite and wyckednes. Wasshe and cleanse me lord god
from hensfort from mine vnryghtwysnes and all defautes, and make me clean from
all my sin and trespass. For I have trespassed and sinned unto the good lord
alone. And therefore, as I said before, I beseech thy majesty that thou very God
wylt put away mine iniquite and wyckednes / and supply, lord, all things yt
might by any means, promote me unto this holy mystery. Amen.

HAyle very god and very man / and blessed ever must thou be, Ex canone
most holy flesh and sacred blod of Christ my savior Jesus / unto me above
all things most high swetenes / most delectable pleasure, and most
syngular comfort. Be, good lord, unto me both gyde and way / fode / and life
unto the remedy of everlasting life. Ame^.

* In nomine patris / et filii * / et spiritus sancti. Amen. And so receive our
lord. *
TAke good head how ye take in the host. For many done full rudely behave
them self therein. Some done catch ye host and snatche it out of the prestes
hand with their tethe hastily, and so gnaw and chewe it as common meat, but
do not you so. Come thereunto reverently and dredefully, and with sobrenes. When
the preeste does put the hooste into your mouth: open it well, and take the
hooste upon your tongue, and hold it still a while, and than it will relent /
and so you may fold it in your mouth with your tongue, and receive it down
with as little brusur of your tethe as you conveniently may. And if by chance
the hooste do stycke and cleue unto the roufe of your mouth: be not troubled
therewith: but take patience, and fuffre a little while, and tha^ may you
lyghtely remove it with your tongue / without any danger. Than with good
deliberacion take the chales and drink after the custom which custume is in
many places to stand up to drink, which thing surely I do praise very much,
for that is done in sign and token that no reverence should be done nor given
unto ye drink, for it is no part of the sacrament. And it is not required
that you should drink any thing at all thereunto, for that drink is taken
only to bring down the hooste wholly and clean into the stomach, and
therefore it forseth not what lycour you drink, but yt the custume is (for the
honor of the sacrament) to drink wine. For ye love of our lord (good devout
christians) I beseech you take no head unto these new heretykes that done move
the simple people to require to have, and to receive the sacrament in both
fourmes and kyndnes, that is to say / of bread and wine as the pressed does. But
good people I pray you believe steadfastly that in the last part that you may
perceive of the hooste sacred: is the very quycke body and soul of our savior
Jesus god and man. And a quycke body (you know well) is not without both quyck
flesh and quyck blood, so that in receyuynge that sacred host or any part
thereof: you verily receive both the body and soul / all the quycke flesh,
and all the quyck blood of our savior Jesus. and the very self same flesh
and blood that was offered upon the cross for our redemption. And so don: you
receive ye same yt the pressed in the mass does receive at the altar and he
none other, neither more or less than you do: but that he does there
consecrate and receive in both the fourmes: because he does there represent
the person of Christ, and does there ministre and make that oblacion
sacrifice and offering not for him self alone: but for all Christianes, as
Christ did. Not witstondyng if the same priest should an other time out of
mass be communed and houseled as you be: he should receive as you do and none
other than you do.

And thus I pray you be content for this matter, and forthwith after your
communion: do not you as many do: run forth and make haste unto brekefaste
or dinner, or unto bodyly recreacio^: but rather give some thanks unto our
lord, as becomes a good Christian.

A prayer to be said immediately after your communion and houselynge.
IN most humble, Ex missale
most lowly and most hearty loving manner / with most due reverence I thank
the good lord most holy father eterne and everlasting God: that by the
bountye of thy merciful grace would vouchsafe thus to refresshe and feed me
with the bread of life, the holy sacred body, and precious blood of thy son
our lord god and savior Jesus Christ. And I beseech thine infinite pyteouse
goodness: that this most high and holy sacrament of our salvation that I most
unworthy wretch and most vile caytife have now received: come never
hereafter in judgment and condempnacion unto me for mine evil merits and
deservings: but rather (good lord) it may come unto the profit and comfort
of my body, and unto the salvation and health of my soul unto the life
everlasting.

Amen.
An other prayer for the same time.
Most sweet lord and savior Jesus, I beseech thy grace for ye virtue and in
the honor of thy most holy body and blessed blood: which (although much
unworthy) I have here now received grant and give me the inward swetenes of
thy charity / whole and unfeigned love of all good persons, spiritual might
and strength in all temptacions, purity of heart, and clennes of conscience,
and in all my conuersacyon of life: such Christian disciplyne / good manners /
and behauyours: as may avoid all actyue sklaunder and occasion given. And also
to be unto all persons example of good edificacio^. So yt by thy gracious
guydynge and governance: I may go forward and increace in thy religion, with
perseuerant constancy, according unto that state and degree that thou (good
lord) haste called me unto.

Amen.
A devout prayer / much used unto this sacrament, with the English after
the Latin. The Antheme.
O Sacrum conuiuium, in quo Christus sumitur, recolitur memoria passionis eius,
men's inpletur gracia. Et future glory nobis pignus datur. Alleluia.

That is to mean
O Meruelouse solemn and holy sacred feast, in yt which feast our lord and
savior Christ is received. The memory and remembrance of his passion: is
renewed and called unto mind. Our soul / heart / and mind is replete and
fulfilled with grace and comfort. And the pledge and ernest token of the glory
ande everlasting joy and bliss to come: is unto us given and delivered.

Alleluya.
This Ebrew word Alleluya of four sillables in sown and speaking: is as
much to mean as though you said in Englyssh: All you people that been here
present laud and praise your creator and maker.

The versicle.
* Panem de celo prestitisti eis.

Thou have given (good lord) unto thy people this bread from heuyn.

The responde or answer.
* Omne delectamentum in se habentem. Alleluya.

And this bread has in it self all delectament and pleasure.

Oremus.
* Pray we or let us pray.

The collecte.
DEus qui nobis sub sacramento mirabili passionis tue memoria^ reliquisti,
tribue quesumus: ita nos corporis and sanguinis tui sacra misteria venerari, vt
redemptionis tue fructum in nobis iugiter sentiamus / qui viuis et regnas deus.
Per omnia secula seculorum.

Amen.
That is to mean.
GOod lord and savior Jesus, ye under this marvelous sacrament have left unto
us the memory and remembrance of thy passion. Grant unto us (we beseech the)
so to honor and worship the holy sacred misteryes of thy blessed body and
blood, that we thereby may co^tynually understand, perceive and feel in us /
the fruit / and effect / the profit / and avail of thy redemptyon lord /
that lyuest and reignest with god the father / in the unity of the holy ghost,
very self same essenciall god, by all worlds of worlds.

Amen.
A lesson for your mass time when you be not communed or houseled.
YOu must now remember: that (as is said before) every priest in the mass,
does represent and use: the person / and office of Christ / and does in the
same mass make oblacio^ and offer the holy sacrament / not for him self alone
/ but also for all faithful Chrystians. And therefore every devout lover of
Christ, in clean live / coveting / desiring / and wysshynge with feruoure of
heart and mind / to receive there with the priest in every mass the same
sacrament: shall (doutles) receive a great effect and virtue thereof.
Wherefore it may be for you much meritoryous / and profitable: so (in the mass
time / and specially toward the Agnus) to prepare / ordeyne / and dyspose your
self / with affection of heart / with desire and deuocio^ of mind, and with ye
charity and love of all your whole soul unto your lord and savior: as
though you should at ye same mass be actually co^muned and houseled with the
priest.

A prayer for the same purpose.
O Most sweet lord and savior Jesus, Oration doctoris Nydar pro communione
spirituali
thou know well that I much do couete, and with all my heart / have great
desire now to receive this blessed sacrament. And would to god that (according
unto my wysshe, and desire) I were (unto thy pleasure and in thy sight) so well
disposed in my soul: yt now at this time / and every day. And (if it might
co^uenie^tly be) many times in the day: I might be able worthily to receive it,
But, lord, Thou know what I am, thou do se and behold my heart / my hole
desire of mind and soul / is openly sprade and known before thy face / yet,
good lord, I beseech the gracyous bounty and infinite goodness, grant me this
one peticyon / that is / that I may (now at this time / and in every mass,
receive spiritually in to my soul / some effect and virtue of this maruelouse
mystery. And so to be parteyner of ye same / that my heart may perceive and
feel the swetenes of thy godly presence. And that my soul: all enflamed and
fyered with desire and devotion / may swetly brene in thy love. And so (without
wastyng) to remain contynually and to bide / rest and dwell / with the and in
the for evermore. For thou alone, good lord, art my lord and my love, my
comforth and health, my lust and my life, my very god, and most sweet
sovereign savior Jesus Christ / that lyuest and reignest with god the father
in the unity of the holy ghost ever with them one god: by all worlds of
worlds.

Amen.
Finis. An end.
IT shall be meritoryous for you to reco^mende your friends quycke and deed unto
your prayers / to have communion, and to be partakers with you / at the will of
god / as you would be with them. And so (in word, or in mind) to recounte them
by order / after such form as we showed you / set forth in the golden pystle.

The ghostly child. Sir I thank you for all your charytable labors with me.
And if it please you, sir, I will put this unto pryntyng as I did your the other
lesson: that moo persons may have comfort thereby.


The ghostly father. Son I pray you so do. And here ben.ii. Alphabetes or
crosserowes, and a pretty pystle: all of my translacio^, I pray you read them
and (if you will) put them forth withal. And our lord god, and most sweet
savior Jesus will reward you who ever bless you, and send you the grace of
perseuerau^ce in his service and holy love,


Amen.
The Crossrowe* or A. B. C. Here done follow two opuscules or small werks of
saint Bonauenture / much necessary and profitable unto all christians
specially unto religyous persons, put in to English by a brother of Syon
Rychard whytforde. Alphabetum religiosorum.
A little work of many pretty and devout lessons / set forth by saint
Bonaue^ture, after the order of the Alphabete / that is to say / after the
letters of the crosrowe / or A. B. C.
Amite.
AMor / in latin / is Amite / or love in English / which is a thing
necessary / not only unto religious persons, but also unto all christianes
and commanded of almygty god: chefely to be had unto him self, and secondary
unto the neighbor / whereupon all law and learning does hand as in the^
comprehended and contained / for by the deep co^syderacio^ thereof every person
may take occasyon to have him self in due guard and warenes, that he do not
offend / and to keep him self sole and closse / without desire of praise or
reputacion / but rather content to be set at naught / wherein shall be more
soul health / than to be in favor of people.

Benignite and beniuolence.
By the foresaid consyderacion / does arise benignite and beniuolence / so yt
the person shall unto all other in god and for him, be gentle / beningne and
curteys / kind / loving and charitable, and unto no person over grievous ne
co^berous.

Custody.
CVstody of heart does than follow that is to say / closse keeping of the mind
from all wauerynge / void and vain thoughts. And lykwyse the mouth from
all void speech and idle words: so also of all the.v. wits herynge / seeing
/ smellyng / tastyng and touching / all to be subdued and governed under the
rygur of discipline and religious behauyour.

Diligence.
Diligence than is much profitable in all manner of outward works / as well in
divine service / as in bodyly labors: never to be idle / but every where to be
occupied / and yet love well solytude to be alone and to keep syle^ce with
grauyte / for so may a person live in quietude and rest / and in most clean
conscience.

Election.
ELectyon here unto is necessary / that is to say, yt a person do elect /
and choose some certain exercise (by side duete) wherein they may be occupied of
continuance / and that always for the common welthe and profit / and not
unto propre, or self advantage or pleasure but rather to affecte and desire
pouerte, to live with a little in scarcyte without murmr or gruge again
them that used plenty.

Flight.
Flight then does well, follow this appointment, that is to say, to fle and
avoid the company of all manner of such persons as should be co^traryous unto
that appointed exercise / for no person may both serve god and the world /
ne be occupied in things transytory and heavenly.

Grauite.
GRauyte is a behauyoure in a person, in words, lokes / countenance, in
gesture, and such other disciplines, which is a mean between lyghtnes,
wa^tones, folysshenes, roughnes, cruelte, rudenes lummyng / lowryng /
eluskyshnes / and such other: for grauite causes ever a person to seem wise /
sad / well manered / constant / and faithful: and much does edyfye the
neighbor / so it persevere and continue as well in prosperity as in aduersyte /
as well in wealth as in woe / in pain as well as in pleasure, and ever to praise
and thank our lord / as well for the one as for the other / knowing and
beleuynge that he according unto right judgment / does always dispense /
mynyster and dispose unto all manner of persons / without parcialite unto the
best.

Humilite.
HVmilite may well be joined unto grauite / for ye meke person (the gospel
to wytnes) Luc. xiiii. et. xviii.
does obtain and get grace and favor both of god and man / and does most
valiauntly chase and put to flight the ghostly enemy / avoid all sin / and
most surely persevere in all manner of virtue.

Intencyon.
Intend well / mean well / purpose well: and you may be sure to be rewarded
well / for every act / work or deed of man / is judged after his intent: for
if ye intencio^ (says the gospel) Mathei. vi. c
be simple and without deceyte in will and knowledge / than is all the work
pleasant and meritoryous. And contrary / if the intent be vycyate and
blemysshed / than is all the work after the same manner: for our lord beholds
/ po^dered and weyeth the intent of the heart and mind, and he loves much the
pure / clean / simple and just persons.

Knowledge.
Know god by right faith / know thy self / by due examinacion / by just
judgment and right condempnacyon / know thy neygbour / by love / kyndnes and
charity. For charity: of every person does ever judge ye best / know thy
friend / and know thy foo: judge no person to be thy foo or enemy / but him
that does consayle (entyce or move the unto synn or else that does flater the
and favor thy defaut. And think thou those persons thy best friends that be
most plain with the / and ready to reform in the that is amysse. And believe thou
that they done most profit the: that done most noye the / oppress and keep
the under / and then if thou savor of the spirit and taste well how sweet
the yoke is of our lord, you shall by that exercise obtain most ghostly
patience and meritoryous profyt.

Labor.
Job. v. b Judith. v. ii. Duo xiiii. d Eccle. xxxiii. d
Labor here must by our life. For man (says scripture) is born to labor,
and the bird to fly. By labor, pain, penance, and by many tribulacions
have all faithful persons passed this life. And by them only / we must enter
the kyngedome of heaven: and contrary ydlenes / ease and pleasure in honor and
delycacy: does teach a man much myscheffe and evil, and brings him at the
last unto the pyt of perdycyon.

Mercy.
Much is ye mercy of our lord / showed unto man in many sundry wise / and
among all other specially unto them that have the spirit of pouerte / that is
to say / a determynate will and mind to be pore for the love of god. And be
void as well of all honors and high rowme and degree: as of riches and
worldely goods / for pouerte brings a person unto me kenes / and the other
bryngethe him (by intycement and suggestio^ of the enemy (to clymbe on hight /
to the intent and end that he may fall far and be sore hurt. Take and
accounte pouerte therefore as a great gift of the mercy of god, and who so
ever duly does give thanks for ye little gifts: shall mercyfully deserve to
have great gifts.

Noyance.
Never should a very christian noye or hurt / ne yet despise any person / but
rather (sithe by the gospel we be bound to love our enemies) Luc. vi. ^
we must be sorry for the noyaunce / hurt and trouble of any person / and
comfort them in all we may / or else shall we be accounted as dysdeyners of
other persons / extollynge or exalting and preferrynge our self.

Oblacyon.
Offer thy heart wholly unto our lord. For that oblacyon is unto him acceptable
and pleasant.

*Da mihi cor tuu^ and sufficit mihi. Give unto me (says he) thine heart /
and that suffyseth / contenteth and is enough for me. Spend therefore thy time
with him in his service / and judge and think nothing more precious then time
/ wherein we may here merit and deserve to be where our tresure is / and our
heart should be that is in bliss. Offer the^ thy self for his sake unto all
persons / gentle / kind, and curteys. And (asmoche as may be convenient)
co^penable / referrynge ever and applyenge all that is good: unto our lord /
and in all things follow counsel with delyberacio^.

Pleasure.
POndre and weye in every thing the pleasure of our lord / that is to mean /
that in every work or deed we should first consydre / and weye in conscience:
whether that deed should please him or no / and than never (for favor ne fere)
to do contrary unto the conscience. And if any doubt be in conscience: we must
then leave the werks, for the time, and resort and have recourse other unto
holy scripture / or else unto the determinacyo^ of the church / or at the least
unto sure / wise and learned counseyle, specially of our prelate or curate. And
never should we trust syngulerly unto our self / ne leyne unto our own
wits / we should accustom our self to seem dumb rather than to speak, and
to be more glad to learn then to teach: to be reformed: then to reform /
and to bide secret as an unknown person: rather than to show our self, and
appear outward after our own propre estymacyon, and of deceyueable opinion.

Quyetude.
QVyetude and rest of mind: is a great forderer of all manner of virtues, we
should therefore study to quench all ire, and to repress all hasty passions: as
well i^ words signs, tokens, countenance and behauyoure, as in outward
deeds. And never should we take upon us to judge, or to be busy, or to meddle
with other folks matters, specially that nothing done apperteyne or bylo^g
unto us. For the common proverb is. Ecclesi. vi. a
In little medlyng is much rest. So tha^ we should never give occasion of
vnreste, but rather study by ientle words: to appese every occasion given for
a sweet and ientle word (says the wise man) slaketh ire, and multiplyeth,
and makethe friends / yet should we not utterly fly and avoyde occasyon of
vnreste given unto us / as rebuke persecucyon, and such other troubles: but
rather should we order our self unto patience, for so (without sin) to
follow the commune manner, and to avoid all syngularite: shall we best edify
and build love and charity, and come unto perfection, and of all things: unto
quyetude of mind: avails much the clennes of conscience. For if we do well
our duty in due time: our conscience shall be the more light, and our heart
careless, and merry, and we so quyete in mind.

Reckoning.
REturning oftymes, and having recourse unto the inward parties of our heart: we
should (at ye lest) ones in the day recount, and make rekenyng with our lord and
co^sydre how we spend ye time: that by the temptacion of the enemy / and by our
own fraylte and neglygency, specially in leaving open our doors and wyndowes,
that is to say, our senses and wits, we royle not about ne wander or walk
among the vain pleasures and varyaunt desires of the world. And that we
suffer not such ghestes to enter by our said wyndowes and doors, into the
chamber of our mind: that should noye us, and by right loath, without vyolence
and extreme labor, to depart. To bide therefore with our lord in the
secrecye of silence, and in precyse contynence of our said wits: is a great
surety and redynes for our said daily reckoning and account. The Enlysshe
proverb says. Often reckoning holds long fellowsheppe.

Sobryete.
SObryete or sobrenes: is proprely a due temperaunce in meat and drink, and
oftymes it is taken for a moderacion, a due mean and discrecyo^ in all other
things, and therefore it is necessary for all christians, specially religyous
perso^es yt must (by their ordinance) ever take in fedyng rather some what to
little, tha^ any thing to much, and also to be moderate, in array, prouydent,
ware, and wise in words, honest in manners, and all behauyoure, sad and
charytable in conseyle. Strong in aduersyte, dredefull in prosperyte, meke,
lowly and pacyent: in contuinely, rebukes and vpbraydes, in sorrow deiectyon
and despectes: cherefull and tractable. And in all works, sobre, dyscrete and
moderate.

Tymorouse.
Tymorate / or as communely is said) tymorouse: is as much to say as dredefull
and ferefull to offend. Job the simple and dredefull person / Job. ix b.
and of high perfectyon was (not withstanding) in all his works dredefull.
How much more than should it become or byseme us that been frail persons: to
be dredefull / and ever in fere to offend our lord in the lest neglyge^cy /
offense or defaut / and never to presume upon any good deed: ne yet to despeyre
for any evil or sinful deed. Prouer. xix c and Eccle. i b Eccle. i. b Prouer.
xv.
The beginning of all wisdom: is the dread of god, and in all our life (after
the wise man) should we be dredefull. For he that dredeth god (says he) shall at
his end have good passage. For the dread of god causethe us to fle and avoid
sin / and much helps and forthereth yt every good deed may be done with
due circumstaunce / and so be meritoryous. The dredeful person will suffer and
take pain to please our lord / and so shall the thing that seamed very hard
in the beginning: wax (in process of time) light / easy and pleasant, for all
pain and trouble: taken and used for the kingdom of heaven / is of great
comfort and gladness.

Vauntage.
VTilyte, profit or vauntage, is to sell or to change a thing of small price,
for a thing of great price. Or contrary, to bye for little, yt is much worth.
The state of perfectyon (in this life) is much worth / but heaven is more
worth. Math. xix. ^
Our lord and savior therefore cou^seyled / and aduysed a person to forsake
and sell all his wordly goods to come here unto the life of perfection. And
after he should also have for them, the treasure of heaven. And if a man have no
goods to sell: yet may he bye heaven for a cup of cold water. Mathei. x. d
An happy bargayn makes he that for love alone: does bye our lord and savior
Jesus, that by his cross, bitter passion and death: bought all the world. Here
you may se much gaynes and great advantage. Who will now forsake this
bargayne: surely none that is wise, happy or gracious, than give thy self man
wholly for him that gave him self wholly for the.

Xp^e. Christ.
Xp^e: is a word of the Greek tongue and written communely in Latin with the
Greek letters: as thus: Xp^s, Christ. For this letter, X, with them, is with
us, Ch and this letter, P, with them: is with us, R, the other letters ben with
us and them in like both in form and sownde. Christ in our tongue is as much
to say, as a person oynted. And because we in our baptism be oynted: we be^
of Christ / called Christianes / so that we should of right: dedycate our life
wholly unto Christ / and he should be our very life and our love. Christ should
be our lesson and our lernyng. Christ also our medytacyon and communycacyo^.
Christ alone our lucre / gaynes, profit and advantage. Christ our treasore /
riches / and our whole desire. Christ all our hope and trust. For if we put
our trust: or any thing desire but Christ, we shall (sure) be deceived /
labor in vain and never find rest. Let christ therefore unto every
christia^e be all and finally his merit / rest and reward.

ymnes
Y Is a letter of the Greek tongue and never wryte^ in Latin / but yet it is
wryte^ in the English tongue and therefore done we write ymnes after the
English manner An ympne or ympnes is as much to say, as song or songs /
laud or praise such songs specially as the church does use in metres to
laud and praise god / and so done the angels and holy saints in heaven. It
becomethe therefore every christyane to laud and praise our lord, and to be
diligent in his service. And to consydre what difference is between the service
of god / and the service of the flesh / ye world and the devil. Who so does
sin, is the bond servant of sin, and so fellow unto the devil / and in
the same state (for the time) with him. Io. viii. d
And those that be^ all worldly ben servants unto the world, that is unto
auaryce, which saint Paul called the bondage and thrall service of ydolles.
Col. iii. a
And the carnal persons ben thralles and bond sernauntes unto the flesh,
and so done they service unto death, for ye flesh is but worms meat the
corrupcion of ye body / and yet more stynkynge / and lothsom than of any brute
beast. It is food of infyrmyte / the life of sin / ye lodging place of
fendes. It is ye enemy of the spirit / and deformyth the soul / desteyneth
and blotteth christia^e disciplyne and all good manner and behauyour hyndreth
and holds back all manner of virtue. And ye flesh is unreasonable / so yt
by no means will it be corrected and vaynquesshed or ouercom: but only by
violence / co^sydre now what it is to do service unto such a sort. And
contrary the service of god is ye health of the body / the quietude and rest of
the mind / the conforte of conscience. The prudence and wysdom of the spirit.
The promoter of virtue. The beauty of the soul / and the life of heavenly
bliss a dulce sweet and pleasant ympne ympne to serve god with / is (with a
loving heart) to laud and praise him in every tribulacyon.

Zachye.
ZAche comes of the Ebrewe tongue and is by interpretacyon as much to say as a
person Innocent / pure / clean and just or ryghtwyse. And after some
auctours: a person justified and making have / and Zache: was the propre name
of a person / that (by the testymonye of the gospel) for the great desire he
had to se our savior: did clymbe in to a tree, because he was of stature very
little, and that with great have and gladness: descended and came down at his
commandment to receive him into his house / where (by our savior) he was
justified and rendered apt unto ye way of salvation. This name Zache than does
well frame and agree unto every faithful christian / that by his professyon
should be Innocent / pure and clean / glad by faith to se and know our lord.
And ready with have and diligence to descend and come down from the hight of
secular science: and of all worldly state. And to receive him in to ye house of
his soul, by true keeping of his word and commandment / for unto such
persons he promised to come with the father of heaven and with the^ to make his
mansyo^ and dwellinge place. And after thereby to bring the^ to his own
celestial paleyse / into the glory of eterne and everlasting bliss.

Amen.
The conclusion.
LEt every faithful person write this Alphabete A. B C. or crosrowe: in the
book of his heart as in the book of life. And every day / by day: look there
upon and use the manners / and effect contained in the same. For here ben but
few words / and short lessons but in misterye they ben great and the very way
and works of perfection / wherewith every person may outwardely be adorned and
garnysshed with christia^e disciplyne / and good and godly behavior. And
inwardly much / in the heart / and in ye mind be quieted and rested /
conveyed and browght or led unto ye ground and beginning of all good
perfection that is / that a person should distruste him self. Forsake him
self. Despise him self. From the which ground: he shall be taken up / and
promoted / profecte / and atteyne to the hight here of conte^placion / and
spiritual felyng of our lord god / and most sweet savior Jesus / which shall
from that point and conclusion bring him unto the full perfectione thereof
(that is) unto his most joyful and blessed presence / whyther he bring us
all ye bought us. Ame^.

An other alphabete. A. B. C. or crosrowe / in meter of the same holy saint
Bonauenture / much praised of many devout persons and therefore put into
english by the same brother of Syon.
A Always love pouerte / with vile things be content.

B Be also in good works: busy and dilygent.

C Covet not much to speak: but rather to keep scylence.

D Deem in every place and time: ye god is in presence.

E Ever love well to fast: and glotony to refrain.

F Feestes for to follow be loathe: and them dysdayne.

G Glad be with the gladfull / With wepers weep in dolor.

H Humbyl be with the meke: thy betters honor.

I In every thing obey / namely unto your prelate.

K Keep charity with all persons after their estate.

L Let your flesh be kept under: brought low by godly dread.

M Mundify your conscience. so that you not excede.

N Never have you propryete: but naked follow Christ.

O Ouerpasse with burden light: this world with all his mist.

P Pyteously remember / the passion of thy lord.

Q Quench only for his sake: the glory of this world.

R Resyste strongly all vice: and pray contynually.

S So receive the sacrament: often and most reverently.

T The mocyons of the mind, repress. Ire mitigate.

V Vain communycacyon: shet clean out of thy gate.

X Xpiste to keep: covet you most much alone to bide.

Y You must (child) then / for his sake: set all this world aside.

Z zele have unto his law / with fervent charity.

and and forgive you your foes all / as you forgyuen would be.

con conceive here.ii. tytles mo. ii. precepts / for ten.

Love god and your neighbor both: so conclude Est.

Amen.
FINIS.
Thus have we rendered the Latin in sentence / after the same meter / in manner
and measure. If you learn perfectely this crosrowe you may the better spell and
do together / and so more redyly read. And finally (by labor) you may the
rather feel / perceive and understand in ye schole of christ / ye duty of a
christyane / which I beseech our lord we may do all.

Amen. Valete. your prayers of charity. * The same wretch of Syon the said
Richard whytforde.

*Thus is ended ye two opuscles / or small warkes of saint Bonaue^ture / and
hereafter follows a goodly treatise: and it is called a notable lesson /
otherwise it is called the golden pystle.

The prologue.
A Good wholesome lesson and profitable unto all christyanes / ascrybed unto
saint Bernarde / and put among his warkes (I think) by some good man yt would
it should thereby have the more authoryte / and the rather be red and better be
borne away. For doubtless, it is a good matter / and edyfycatyue unto all them
that have a zele and cure unto soul health and desire of salvation. It is
called in the title. Notabile documentum: that is to say / a notable lesson.
And some do call it the golden pystle. It follows immedyately after a little
work called: Formula honest vite. The form and manner of an honest life, or
of honest living.

IF you intend to please god / and would obtain grace to fulfill the same:
Two things ben unto you very necessary.

The first you must withdraw your mind from all worldly and transytorye
things / in such manner as though you cared not wether any such things were
in this world or no. The second is / that you give and apply your self so
wholly to god / and have your self in such a wait / that you never do, say /
ne think / that you know / suppose or believe should offend or displease god
/ for by this mean you may sonest and most redely obtain and win his
favor and grace. In all things esteem and acco^pte your self most vile and
simple / and as very naught in respect / and regrade of virtue and think /
suppose and believe that all persons be good / and better than you be / for so
shall you much please our lord. What so ever you se or seem to perceive / in
any person / or yet here of any chrystiane / take you none occasyon therein /
but rather ascrybe and apply you all unto the best / and think or suppose all
is done or said for a good intent or purpose / though it seem contrary. For
man's suppocicyons and light judgments ben soon and lightly deceived or
begyled. Displease no person wyllyngly. Ne ever speak evil of any person /
though it were never so true that ye say. For it is not laufull to show in
confession the vice or defaut of any person / except ye might not otherwise
show and declare your own offense. Speak little or naught unto your propre and
self laud or praise / though it were true / and unto your familyer fellow or
faithful friend. But study to keep secret and pryuey your virtue / rather
tha^ your vice. yet were it a cruel deed for any persons to defame the^
self. Be more glad to give your ear and hearing unto the praise / rather then
unto the disprayse of any person. And ever be ware as well of heryng / as
speaking of detraccyon. And when you speak take good delyberacyon / and have
few words and let those be true and good / sadly set and wisely ordered. If
any words be spoken unto you of vice or vanyte (as soon as ye may) break of
and leave ye talk or co^municacyon. And ever return and apply your self
unto some appointed good and godly occupacion / bodily or ghostly, if any
sudden chance fall or hap unto you or unto any of youres / leyne not
lyghtlye there unto / ne care much therefore. If it be of prosperyte / rejoice
not much therein / ne be ouerglad thereof. If it be aduersite / be not ouercast
or overthrown therewith, ne brought to sorrow or sadness / thank god of all /
and set little thereby. Repute all things tra^sytory: as of little price or
value. Give ever most thought and care unto those things yt may profit and
promote the soul. Fle and avoid the persons and places of much speech / for
better is to keep scyle^ce than to speak. Keep the times and places of scylence
precysely / so that ye speak not without reasonable and unfeigned cause. The
times of scylence in religyon ben these. From collacyon unto the mass be ended
after the hour of terce. From the first grace in the fraytour / unto ye end
of the latter grace. And from the beginning of euensong, unto grace be ended
after souper / or else Benedicite after ye common beuer. The places of scyle^ce
ben ye church and cloustre / the fraytour and the dortour / if you be
sclaundred / and do take occasyon at the defaute or offense of any person /
then look well upon your self / whether you be in the same defaut sometime your
self / and than have compassyon upon your brother or sister. If there be none
such defaut in you / think verily and believe there may be / and than do as
(in like), you would be done unto. And thus (as in a glass) you may se and
behold your self. Grudge not ne complain upon any person for any manner cause
/ except you se and perceive by large conjecture that you may profit and edyfy
thereby. Another deny nor afferme your mind or oppynyon styfly or extremely: but
that your affyrmacyon, denegatio^, or doubt, be ever powdered with salt / that
is to say / wisdom / discrecyon, and pacyence. Use not in any wise to mock /
check or scorn / ne yet to laugh or smyle but right seldom. And that always
to show reverence or loving manner / light countenance or loud behauyour
becomes not a sad person. Let your co^municacyon be short and with few
persons / always of virtue lernyng / or good and chrystyane edyfycacyon / and
ever with such warenes, that no person in things doubtful: may take any
auctoryte of your words or sentence. Let all your pastyme be spended in
bodily labors / good and profitable: or else godly in study / or (that passes
all) in holy and devout prayer. So that the heart and mind be occupied with
the same you speak. And wha^ so ever that you pray for any certain persons /
remember their degree, state, and condicyon. For a form and order of your
prayer / this may be good and a ready way. To follow ye order of the.vi.
grammatycall cases. The nominatyue / the genityue / the datyue / the accusatyue
/ the vocatyue and ablatyue. The nominatyue, that is first to pray for your
felfe / that you may have ghostlye strength and constancye / that you not fall
in to any deedly offense by fraylte. And the ii. that you may have right
knowledge of god by faith, and of your self by due consyderacyon of your
estate and condycyon / and of the laws of god / for your condyte and
contynuaunce. And thyrdly that you may have grace and good will according unto
the same strenthe and knowledge / and that having unto god a reuere^de dread:
you never offe^de him i^ thought / word nor deed but yt ye may ever love him
for him self and all his creatures in due order for him and in him. The
second is the genityue case. Then must you pray for your genitours / your
progenitors and parents / that is to say / your fathers, your mothers
spirytuall and carnal: as your ghostly fathers / or spirytuall soueraynes /
your godfaders / your godmothers / your natural father and mother / your
graundfathers and graundmothers / your brothers and systers / and all your
kynne. In the third place is the datyue case. There must you pray for your
benefactours / good doers of whom you have received any manner of gifts
spirytuall or temporal unto the wealth of your soul and body. In the fourth
place is the accusatyue case where you should pray for your enemies / such
persons as by any means have noyed / hurt or grieved you / either ghostly or
bodily / that is to say / in your soul or manners by any suggestio^ /
intysynge / evil counseyll or evil example. In your fame or good name / by
detraccyon / bacbytynge, or sclau^deryng / or yet by familyer company. For a
person comunely is reputed and supposed to be of such condicyon / as they ben
with, whom he has conuersacyon and company. And for them that have hurt your
body, either by strokes or by any other occasion have hyndred the state and
health thereof. And likewise of your goods or possessyo^s. For all these manner
of enemies must you pray / that our lord god would forgive them, as you do /
and as you forgyuen would be: and that they may come to right charity and
peace. The.v. case is called the vocatyue: that is to say the calling case /
where you conuenyently may call / cry and pray unto our lord for all manner
of persons that been out of the state of grace. Either by infydelyte, as
turks, sarasyns, and such other / or else by error as all manner of heretykes
/ or else by any deedlye sin or offense to god. Pray for all these manner of
persons that they may come to ye right way of their salvation. In the.vi. and
last place, is ye ablatyue case / where you must pray for all them that be
taken out of this life / and that dyed or passed the same life in charity / and
that now have need of prayer. In the which you may keep a form of the same
order that is before / that is to say. Instead of the nominatyue, where you
prayed for your self: you may now pray for all those yt do bide in pain
for any defaulte or offense done by your example or occasyon. And for the
genytyue in the second place / for your parents and all your kynne departed
this life. And in ye.iii. place for the dative / pray for your benefactours
passed. And for ye accusatyue in the iiii. place / you may pray for them that
lie in pain for any occasyon or any example that they gave unto you. And in
the.v. place / for the vocatyue. Pray for all them that have greatest pains,
and least help here by the suffrage of prayers. And for the ablatyue in
the.vi. and last place. Pray you for all souls in general. And that you may be
the more apt to pray / call three things to your remembrance / that is to
say, what you have been / what you be, and what you shall be. First by reason of
your body: you were conceived of the most fylthy abomynable matter of man /
shameful to be spoken / far more vile then the sluch or slyme of the earth /
and after borne a sinful soul / purged only by grace. And now (as unto the
body) you ben a mucke hepe or donghyll more vile then any upon earth / if you
remember what does issue daily and come forth out of the meats, ben yssewes of
your body / and your soul is daily in some sin or (at ye least) full like to
be. What you shall be as unto your body ye may se in experye^ce / worms meat
and earth again. And what shall become of your soul / no man in this world
can assure you. To remember than the joys of heaven, and pains of hell / and
that both be infynyte endless / and without rebate / but both ever encreasynge
and never ceasing / never have ease nor rest / but ever continue and
everlasting. To remember than (I say) these things may greatly move you to
have your self in good a wait / and study how ye may avoid the tone and and
obtain the the other. Remembryng specially how great a loss it is to lose heaven
/ and how vnco^fortable gaynes, to win hell / and how sone and how lightly
either of them may be gotten or lost. Wha^ any thing than of aduersyte / hurt,
or displeasure fortune or fall unto you / think than or ymagyne that if you
were in hell / you should have the same displeasure and many worse And so to
avoid those, you shall here (the better) suffer / and for our lord the more
pacyentlye bear all these that now be present or may come hereafter. And i^
like manner / if any good prosperyte or pleasure hap or come unto you: think
then that if you were in heaven / you should have that pleasure and many more
excellent joys. And so for the fervent desire of those joys / you shall set
little by any worldly comfort or pleasure. A good contemplacyon therefore may
it be unto you in feestes of holy saints (you may in one english Martyloge
breuely se the lives of many saints for every day in the year) to think and
record how great pains they suffered here for ye love of our lord / and how
short they were / and how sone passed / and then again how merueylous
reward they had therefore in joy and bliss everlasting. So the troubles and
torments of good persons ben sone and shortly gone and ended. And the joys
and and pleasures of sinful persons done soon fade and fly for ever. The
good persons for their troubles suffered here upon earth / done get and win
eterne and everlasting glory. Which the evil sinful persons done lose. And
contrary these evil and sinful persons / for their joy and pleasures here /
done obtain by exchau^ge eterne and everlasting shame and rebuke / with pain
and woe vnspeable. When so ever that you ben disposed to sluggysshnes, or to be
drowsye / remysse in prayer or dull in devotion / than take this little work /
or some other good treatise and read therein / and ever note well the contents
thereof, and also what is meant thereby. And if you be not thereby delivered or
eased thereof / than shyfte unto some other work or occupacyon, so yt ever ye
avoid ydlenes and all vain pastymes / which in deed ben lose times. And then
remember that those that now bide in pain, either in hell or yet in any other
place conuenyent / for such times so passed or lost / had lever than all the
world / have such time to redeem their pains by / as you may have if you will.
Time than unto al persons well occupied / is very precious and dear. Beware
well therefore how you spe^de it or pass it. For you can never revoke it nor
call it back / if the time pass you by trouble and vexacyo^ / think they ben
happy and gracyous yt ben past this wretched life / and now in bliss / for
they shall never have any such mysery. And when you feel a confort or
consolacyon spirytual / thank god thereof / and think the dampened souls shall
never have any such pleasure. And thus let this be for your exercise in the
day time. At night when you go to rest / first make a count with your self,
and remember how you have spend or passed ye day and time that was given you
to be used in virtue / and how that you have bestowed your thoughts / your
words and your works. And if you find no great thing amysse: give the whole
laud and praise unto our lord god. And if you perceive contrary / that you
have mispended any part thereof / be sorry therefore and beseech our lord of
mercy and forgyuenes / and promise and verily purpose to make amends the
next day. And if you have oportunite thereupon / it shall be full convenient for
you to be confessed on ye next morrow. And specially if the matter / done /
said / or thought by delyberate consent / do greuouslye wey and work with a
grudge in your conscience / than would I advise you never to eat nor drink /
till you be dyscharged thereof / if you may conuenyentlye get a ghostly father.
Now for a conclusyon of this work put before you / as by case or
ymagynacyon.ii. large cities / one full of trouble / turmoyle and myserye, and
let that be hell. The other city full of joy, gladness, confort and pleasure /
and let that be heaven. Look well on the^ both, for in both be many dwellers
and great company. Then cast and think within your self what thing here
might so please you / that you should choose ye worse city, or what thing
should displease you on ye other party / whereby you should withdraw your
self from the virtue that might convey and bring you unto the other city.
And when you have studied well hereupon, and can nothing find / I dare well
assure you if you keep well the precepts and cou^seyles of this little lesson
/ you shall find the right way / for the holy ghost will instruct and teache
you where you be not suffycye^t of your self / so you endeuoyre and give
dilygence to bear away and to follow that here is taught. Read it every weke
ones or twyse / or oftener if you will. And where you profyt give thanks,
laud and praise unto our lord god and most sswete savior Jesus Christ, who
send you his mercy and grace. Ame^. We have prynted this golden pystle again
/ because the other before, is not of the tra^slacyon nor edicyon of this
auctor.

This was brought unto me in english of an old translacyon / rughe and rude,
and required to amend it. I beseech you to take all unto the best / and pray
for the old wretched brother of Syon Richard Whytforde.

* The ghostly child. Sir I have now done as you commanded, and all is in
prynt.


The ghostly father. YOu have done well child, god reward you. But now shall
you have yet an other lesson most profitable for you, that is / to make you
pressed and ready to dye and depart this life. And how you shall not fear death
/ but have a daily exercise and experyence thereof as follows hereafter.


* Imprynted by me John^ Waylande / at London within the Temple bar / at the
sign of the blewe Garlande. Anno. M.D.xxxvii.

A daily exercise and experyence of death / gathered and set forth, by a
brother of Syon Richard Whytforde.

woodcut of a demon stabbing a man through the heart with a large arrow before
an altar

Unto the devout reders.
IN our lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus salutacyon. This little tretie,
or draght of death, did I write more then.xx. years a go / at the request of the
reuere^de Mother Dame Elizabeth Gybs / whom Jesus perdon / the^ Abbes of Syon.
And by the often calling upon / and remembrance of certain of her devout
systers. And now of late I have been compelled (by the charytable instance and
request of diverse devout persons) to write it again and again. And because
that writing unto me is very tedyouse: I thought better to put it in print /
whereunto I was the rather moved / that I perceived by the prynters: you have
thankfully taken such other poor labors: as we before have send forth. Read
this I pray you ones over and after as you like it is but very short: and
therefore have I not divided it into chapytours: but only into.ii. parts. In
the first part whereof is entreated of the fere / or dread of death to be
excluded, exiled, and utterly put away. In the.ii. part is put forth. The
daily exercise and experyence of death.

Of the daily exercise of death the first part, which is of the fear or dread
of death / to be excluded, exyled and to utterly be put away.
Reverend Mother, and good devout sisters: you have (many and oftentimes with
great instance) required me to write unto you some breue / or short lesson of
death, and how you should prepare and ordeyne your self daily thereunto. This
lesson is very short and plain after saint Augustine: De te^pore sermon. ii. c.
xxxix.
for he says, the lest lesson and the best mean to dye well: is well to live.
For who so well lives (says he) may not evil dye. Then done, we learn to
dye well / when we learn well to live / and that lesson can you teache me better
tha^ I you. For you have longer used the craft: and given more dilyge^ce
thereunto. Notwithstanding somewhat in part to satisfye your devout minds:
somewhat / after our poor understanding: shall we say. But first (as seems
unto me) it is necessary and spedefull that we enforce and give dilygence to
avoid, exclude, exyle, and put far away: that chyldyssh vain and folyssh
fear, and dread of death, that many persons have: for doubtless it is both
vain and folly: to fear and dread that thing: that by no mean, may be
avoided and yet some persons ben so afraid of death / that they shrugge,
tremble and quake, when they here speak thereof: and run or depart out of
company / because they will not here tell of death. And to excuse their folly
they take auctoryte of Aristotle the great Philosophour: iii. Ethicoru^. ca. i.
tra* ii. M. xxvi. d. Mar. iiii. d. L. xxii. T ii. Co. v. a.
that says: that of al terryble things, death is most terryble / and over
that our savior before his passion, was afraid of death, and naturally did
abhor it: for ye pain thereof. Saint Paul says also / yt we would not be
spoiled of our bodies / and yet would we have the clothing of immortalyte upon
which / and upon like auctorytes they conclude that death is peynfull, and
therefore to be feared and dred. For declaracyon hereof: you must understand
that the dread of death may be taken.ii. ways, for.ii. causes / one for the
pain that is in the departing of the soul / and the body by death. And an
other way / or cause: for the vncertente of the hour of death and of the state
of ye person in that hour, or time. This fear and dread of death should every
person have every hour. But as unto the first fear that is for the dread of
ye pain in death, that fear is vain. For in death is no pain, or right little
to be feared / as after we shall show. Arystotle says in deed: Vbi su.
that death is terryble and fearful / but that is unto them alone (says he)
that doubt of any other life after this present life. yet say they: that every
man does abhor and loathe death: Objection.
and does what he can, to avoid death / and to prolonge life / and that is
general in all living things / Answer.
unto that I say, that nature does work / and cause in all things: the
apperyte and desire to be continued and to endure: and last for ever / and
thereunto death infors as much as nature may / other in them self or in their
fruit and kind. But thereof does not follow that any pain is in death: ne any
fear or dread to be takyn therefore. As by example of trees and fruits as well
as of sensyble bestes. The trees when they wexe old, don naturally put forth
new sprynges from the rote: and the fruits: when they be grene and young: will
not depart from the tree: nor the seeds from the herb / or grain, except
vyolence: but when they ben full ripe / then will they naturally of them self
/ and by them self depart without any vyolence. So is it in man: after a like
manner: that when the person is in nature young: grene, lusty, and strong / and
in the body conformyte / and like state of complexcyons: death is then horrible
hugsum, and fearful unto the person because it is then vyolent. But when the
person is full ripe: that is to say / worn by age, or sekenes, unto the point
of death. Then is not death unto that person, any thing loathsome, fearful, ne
peyneful / but rather sweet, pleasant, and desirous: and so says Arystotle in
his book of natural philosophye. Mors senum, Phi. v.
dulcis est. Iuuenum vero: violenta. The death of aged persons (says he) is
sweet and pleasant / but the death of young persons: is vyolent and grievous
/ yet say I: that the fear is not for the pain of death in departing of the
soul. For then is no pain / but all the pain is in the sekenes disease / and
affliccyon before death. For the persons that (as I said) ben worn or wasted
unto the point: done dye, and depart this life: not only without sorrow or
pain: but also with gladness, swetnes, and pleasure. And so says ye same
philosophour Arystotle in an other book. Aristot. de vita and morte. and
Cicero. i. Tusc.
And so does also an other great philosophoure / and learned Tullie. And I
dare well say, that in death is less pain unto such persons: then is in the
prycke of a pynne, or nedyll unto a whole person. The fear than that our
saui-had before his passion / was not for the pain of death: but it was of the
fraylte of our nature in his carnal flesshely part for the pains that he
knew well should precede / and go before death. And ye pain does our
sensualyte / and our carnal part / always abhor / and fear naturally: all
though in some persons more / and some less. For you may se in experyence /
that some persons ben ready to swone or talme / if they se an other person
sore wounded / blede, or put unto great peynes / and some done shake for fear
/ wha^ they here tell how some other persons shall be racked, and streyned.
And some persons will abhor to look upon the instruments, or ingyns of
tourmentrye: as children when they se the rod, or whyppe. Death therefore is
not to be feared / nor dredde for any pain that is therein. Many done dye, and
depart this life: not only (as we said) without pain / but also with desire,
and pleasure. Which thing we have before, Probacyon by reason.
proved by auctoryte / and good reason / will conclude the same. For if pain
be in death / that pain must nedely be / other in the body, or in the soul.
But in the body (at the point of death) is no pain. For than ben all the
senses and wits of the body: whereby he should feale pain or pleasure / gone
and departed: and the body than in such case (as for fealynge pain) as when
it is full deed. And as unto ye soul / death is not peynefull but rather
pleasant, and joyful / as a person that long had been in prison / and then were
suddenly loused and put at lyberte. De bono mortis.
For (as saint Ambrose says. The soul is in prison / while it is in the body,
and therefore is it glad to be delivered by death. And to say trothe, when the
point of death approaches and draws nere both the parts (in manner) ben glad
to deperte in sou^dre / that is to say, Marowse they call in the cou^tr^.ii.
housba^d men that done till their land together
the soul from the body / and the body from the soul / as by example of.ii.
marowes or.ii. such persons that must need labor both to gether unto such
an effect / and purpose / as can not come to pas and be fulfilled by one of
them alone / then at night, or when their purpose is ended, they ben glad,
where the tone is not able theru^to alone with out help
to depart unto their own propre whomes, logynges and places. So is it of the
soul, and the body / that here as.ii. marowse or mates done labor to gether
as in an exyle or strange country (for as saint Paul says) non habemus hic
ciuitatem manentem / we have not here (says he) any city or dwelling place /
and when that labor of them both to gether has fulfilled the course of
nature unto the periode / and point assygned of god / than done they gladly
depart eueryche toward his propre whom / that is, the body unto the earth,
from whens it came. Gene. iii. d.
And the soul unto heuyn / except it be let with any sin, which may never
enter into heaven. Thus have we proved unto you both hy auctoryte and by reason
/ that in death is no pain, and so that no fear should be taken of any, or for
any such pain. yet shall I go forther, and prove ye same by experyence.
Probacyon by experyence
For lady experyence has showed oftymes / unto many persons, that in death is
no pain. For some persons have been in trance / that for the time have had a
large experyence of death / when the body was so desolate of the soul / yt the
body felt nothing ne any thing perceived by any of the senses, or wits /
and yet has the soul (in the same time) seen / and perceived the state of
heaven, hell, or any other place. ii. Cor. xii. a.
Saint Paul was so in such rapte / yt he could not tell him self whether
the soul was in his body, or not. And that was a large and nere experyence of
death / but yet another he, ne any of those so takyn in trau^ce, or rapt / have
made any mencyon of any pain in their rapte: ergo there is no pain in death.
Swonynge also or talmynge / is (in manner) a death / sith the body (for that
time) is destytute / and void of all the wits and some in such swones,
talmes, done expyre, dye, and depart this life. yet those that done suruyue /
recover, and live again / done euydently show what pain they had, or suffered
/ that so departed in their swone, or talme / but they confess / and say
plainly: they felt no manner of pain / but rather a great ease of all peynes:
ergo in death is no pain. Some persons also have expyred and dyed slepynge
(which I doubt not) should have been waked, if a pynne or a nedell had been
thraste, or put through their ears or if fire had brent their finger / ergo no
pain in death. Let us yet go unto a forther experyence of death. Io. xi. d.
Lazare brother to Magdalene and Martha (as the Gospel sheweh) was deed.iiii.
days, and yet raised by our savior (and many have been raised by miracle. I
knew, and spoke with one such my self. But nothing have I herd / or read
of any pain that any of them suffer in death / ergo, no pain in death, and so
does saint Ambrose plainly / affyrm in a book that he wrote of the goodness and
profit of death. Amb. de bonomor it is and.ii. li. de Cain et Abel. cap. x.
The fear (says he) that the frail persons have of death / is rather by ye
opinyon that they conceive of death / then for the self death. Because they have
seen, or herd tell of many great pains, syckenesses, and passions yt many done
suffer before their death / and that causes their frail flesh to abhor,
De bono mortis. cap. viii.
and to loathe death / because of those peynes and greues. And specially such
persons as have a love inordynate unto the vain pleasures of this present
life. And those also, that i^ a whole body, have a sick soul / and foiled
conscience and most done they fear death, that halte and ben faynte in the
faith. And no marvel though such manner of persons do fear, In tusvbi sup.
and dread death. For (as ye learned Cicero says) if their life had nothing
co^myttes ne done / that were to be feared, they should of death have no dread:
wise men done fear sin, which is the act / and deed of quycke, and not of
deed persons. We should (says saint Ambrose) fear and dread our life / the
acts and deeds whereof, De bono mortis. de supra.
done appertain and belong unto our self / and ben i^ our own power and at
our own will / and not fear death yt is another in our will, ne power. For
whether we will or not: that is / will we, nyll we expire / and dye / nedely we
must. De remedis fortuit coru^ and Cice. vbi supra.
Than (as we said before) as the wise man Seneke says / it is great folly to
fear and dread that thing / that by no mean may be escaped ne avoided. And
who so ever will remain in such fear or dread, Cicero vbi sup.
shall never live in quietude and rest of mind. Wise men says Cicero / done
not fear death / but rather done they contemn, dispyse death / and set naught
thereby / which thing doutbles, does much avail, profet, In tusc. vbi sup.
comfort, and strength any person when so ever death shall approach, draw nere,
and hap unto him / specially if he be a feythfull christyane. Cicero vbi sup*
For who so ever not only because death is necessary, and can not be avoided /
but also because that in death is nothing to be feared / does dispyse and set
naught by death / that person / says he / shall for a surete have a great
succoure and help, here to live quietly / and when the time shall come, to
receive death gladly / and after this present life joyfully to live / and
blessedlye. Note here how great courage and conforte this pagane gives men,
to dispyse / and nothing to fear death. Well sir, say you / this is soon
said, or soon spoken. But yet is not death so soon dispysed / ne so lightly
set at naught. For we se, and behold many men / that should have strong
hertes, and more boldness than we women, and such also that been taken, and
supposed for wise and well learned men / that been much affrayde of death. Ah
good systers / you must consydre and call unto mind / that men ben made of
the same metal, that women ben / and yt among them some ben as feynte herted
as women / and therefore take no head unto them. Cicero i^ tuscu. vt supra.
For although a bold and hardye heart do much help unto the contempt, and
dispisynge of death / yet may you by the examples and counsels of holy fathers
/ engender and make in your self a more strong boldness and hardynesse
spirytuall thereunto / and specially by conforte and counsel of holy scripture
/ which, as a phisicyon, does cure ye feynt and feeble hertes, withdraws all
vain and frutles cures and cares / and delyuereth the frail heart / from the
delectable poison of all worldly and flesshely pleasures / and so puts away
all fear and dread. Vbi sup.
Reason also, as they said Cicero says, does not little avail unto the
co^tempte of death, which as it were by certain precepts, or reules does
confirm / and reyseup the feynt cowardouse heart. But above and beyond all
things, whole and pure faith, strong and steadfast hope and perfect fervent
charity / done most help thereunto. For these do not only exyle, exclude,
and put away all fear and dread of death with the most high contempt
thereof / but also done ingendre and get a fervent covetous desire of death.
Philip. i. c.
Saint Paul unto wytnes saying. Cupio dissolui, et essem cu^ Christo / I
covet, says he, and desire / to be dissolved and departed from this life, to
be with Christ / for faith does teache, assure, and give certain knowledge
of an other life to come after this life which shall be more pleasant without
co^paracyon, than this life is. For to say troth in this life is no manner of
pleasure, Amb. lib. ii. de. Cai^ St Abel. Capi. x. Augusti. Catho.
without some manner of passion or pain going before, or following after. And
therefore saint Augustyne sayet / it should rather be called a death than a life
/ and contrary this death should be called life / because it is the end of all
dethes (yt is to say) the end of al myseryes / all sorrows, all syckenesses,
all diseases, all troubles / all pains which in them self ben dethes.
Ambrosi s de b o o mortis. capi-viii. et. Boethius de coosolatione.i. i. Cor. xv
And also because it is not only ye end of all euylles / but also the
beginning of all that is good as of all felicyte, joy, gladites, co^forth,
and pleasure / and of life everlasting. For as by this wretched life is one
passage unto death / so by this death / is our return unto life / for if we
should never expyre and dye / we should never rise to life again. And if we
never rise, we should never be rewarded in our bodies / for ye great miseryes
and pains that we done here suffer in them for the love of god. i. Cor. xv
And if that were true / than were we, as saint Paul says / in more
miserable state, and in wors case than any other people. But our faith does
make us sure and certain of resurrection, where we say. Carnis resurrectionem
/ that is to say, I believe the resurrexion of our flesh and bodies / as in
our commune Creed. Hope also does help much unto the dispysyng of death. For
when a person has full faith that god may and can do all that he will / and
that he is of such goodness that he does love us all: than does hope follow
that faith / and so does verily trust and believe to have (after or in the
said resurrexion) everlasting reward, and that reward shall be good and
pleasant, ioyouse and confortable. It shall be a great reward, as much as
may be desired or given / it shall be all god him self. And this reward than
must nedely cause a great love, that is charity, and very charity / and love
does not only dispyse death / but also causes a fervent desire thereof. Here
some persons done say sir / if we were certain and sure of that reward after
our death / we should set little by death, and be content and glad to depart:
whereunto I say, that all we may be sure thereof, if we will our self. For our
lord has freely given us that grace, Augusti.
that we may will and so willing and disposynge our self thereunto: he may not
of justice / ne will of his goodness withholde it from us. Diuus Thoma. i. sent.
That reward tha^ he ordained and promised unto them that love him / and done
work there after. Well sir say you, it is hard so well to work in this life
/ that we may come unto that reward without pain, after this life: and that
pain is it / that fears us more, than does the pain of death / and causes
us to be so loathe to dye, and depart hens. For we would live longer to amend
our life, and to do penance to avoid or (at the least) to minysshe and make
less that pain. Unto this I say true penance done for the love of god / may
as well in short time as in long, avoid or minysshe that pain / as is
euydent in him that hang by our savior on the cross unto whom he said.
Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso. This day shall thou be with me in paradyse: it is
than another the long time: nor the short: nor yet the penance that does put
away: or make less that pain of it self: but the love of god / for whose
sake that penance is done, and that love may be in a person feruente in
short time as well as in long / and all the penance that is done, Grego.
probatio a mortis.
is nothing but a proof of that love / and so as long as we bide in this
corruptyble sorry body we must love / and ever prove that love by contynuall
penance and good works forsakynge all sin. For else is all the penance and
the works void and lost. But yet follows not thereof that we should desire
long life ne short, but as he will. For to give unto god freely, fully, and
holly our will / so that we have no will but his, is the greattest gift yt we
can give unto god, and the thing yt he chefely requires and desires of us /
for he does not desire our affliction ne penance / but give me says he thine
heart: and that suffyseth me. Than so to give unto him ye thing yt he first
gave freely unto us: that is fre will, is yt thing that may best avoid or make
less that pain. And so to say, think, and will that if he would have us
longer in pain / we should consent and will so to be / and yet forther, we
should rather choose and desire pain perpetual after his will: tha^ joy
everlasting, contrary unto his will. And this will may be had i^ few years and
short time. To will than, Marcu. trismeg. ad Esclo pium.
and to desire to be with god / by long or short pain or without any pain,
as best shall please his gracyous goodness / is the best mean, next remedy
and most sure way to avoid, fle, and to minysshe pain / and in that will
(without fear, and dread of death / or rather dispysynge death) to tarry, bide /
and in every thing to suffer his will and pleasure / ever ready for death, and
lokynge every hour for death, with fervent desire / and wysshe to be with him,
and to abide here / for nothing, but only for him / so yt he be (as saint
Paul says) all our life / and death (for his sake) be unto us lucre, Phil. i.
gaynes, winning and advantage. In Tus.
The pagane Cicero says, that a wise man will never fear death. The reason
why is: that death by reason of uncertain chau^ces, does daily and hourly fall
happy, and suddenly come unto every sort / degree, and manner of ages / and also
because of the shortness of our life, death can not be long absent from us. For
(as saint Ambrose says) we may be in certente: that if we live very long:
yet shall we dye shortly. De bono mortis. ca. 1. and. ix.
For the longest of our lives, is very short / and specially, if we compare it
unto the long life of eternite: than is it nothing not so much: as one mote
unto the whole earth / yet the commune people, when a young person departs
does say: oh alas, Vbi su.
it is pytie that such a person should dye thus, and depart before his time /
but hereunto he does answer. Before the time, says he / what time done they
mean? other that time that they would set and desire: or else that time that
god has determined and appointed? If they mean their time, I will not
dispute ne reason with them. But if they mean gods time / than will I say /
that almyghtye god does not give life unto any person for ever / as his own
thing: but rather does lend it. As debt be paid, wha^ so ever it shall be
axed, and not at any certain day appointed / and as the detter may use the
debt so lent, while he has it / and yet has no wrong, although it be axed
sooner than he would, or yet than he supposed. So in like manner god has lent
every person life, but he poynted no day when he will axe and have it again /
and that he did because he would that man should be always ready to pay, when so
ever he were called upon. How than may any person complain or grudge, wha^ so
ever he is taken by death / sith he received life by that condicyon* yet sir say
they / the credytour and lender is called hard, that calls for the debt
before the borower have any gaynes, or profet thereof / and so done we think
that god deals hardely with the young persons / because he takes their
life, before they have any pleasure thereof. Hereto now (say I) they done
suppose (by error) that is nothing true / that is, that in this life should
be pleasure / which in very deed well considered, is contrary (that is to
say) displeasure, pain, misery, woe, and death. And therefore those persons
that come to death in their youth / ben much bound to thank our lord: that
has delivered the^ from those incommodytes and miseryes, that they should have
had and suffered in longer living. And here the common people suppose an other
great error, that is / yt long life should be good and pleasant, where in
deed long life takes away all manner of goods and pleasures of this life /
that is to say, the goods of fortune / as lands, possessions, gold, silver,
and other good es, and cattle. For age in long life spends all / and
gets nothing. Cicero vbi sup
It takes away also the senses and wits of man / as hearing, sight,
smelling, tastynge, and touching / with the other goods of nature: as youth,
strength, beauty, and agilyte / nymlesse and quickenes. And yet the goods that been more precious and dear than al these: that is to say, memory, and
remembrance / reason and understanding, conning, and knowledge / and makes
many times the will froward. And does render and make whole man, both in
soul and body: full dull in devotion and in all manner of goodness and virtue,
wherefore the wysman said. Ec. vi. b.
Better is he and more happy that dies at the mothers womb forthwith after
his birth / than is he ye lives long. No person therefore of any age has
wrong by death for every person (by ye law of syn^e) is in the first day of
birth, or rather in the first day of life mortal and subdued unto death / and
in the first day of life, every person begins to dye. Augusti.
And therefore is it not again the law for any person to dye at any time,
young or old. Let us therefore (good devout chrystyanes) put clean away and
utterly exyle this frail and falls opinyon of death / and let us think verily,
and believe / that in death is no wrong, but all right: no pain, but great
pleasure, In tus. vbi sup.
all good and nothing evil. For (as the oftsayde Cicero says) how may that
thing be unto any person evil, and hurt? that almighty god has ordained unto
all persons indifferentlye / for their good and profet: and as the end of all
euyles? Good lord, tha^ how curragyously and gladly should that journey and
voyage be interprysed and taken / which ones made and finysshed no care, newoo
/ no thought ne busynes / no turmoyle* ne trouble, no slryfe ne debate / no
pain, ne disease / no vexacyon, ne displeasure may remain ne follow but unto
them that well hope / shall well hap / what time so ever they go. But yet ben
they most happy / and gracious, that (in state of salvation) done dye, and
depart this life, in their youth / and strength. For unto them (immedyately
after their death, must nedely follow one of these twain (that is) that they
must go straight way unto heuyn: or else unto pain. If they go unto pain /
than the sooner they dye / and the shorter time they live: the less there, and
the shorter time shall be their pain. And over that they shall have the
greattest comforde that any creature may have being out of heuyn. For the
which comforde to be had: any faithful person would be glad to suffer any
manner of most cruel and horrible pain or passion (that is to say) surety of
salvation. Sa^ctus Thoma. iiii. sent. di. xv. q..iii. ar. l.
For all ye souls being in pain ben co^munely sure, and certain of their
salvation, that wha^ their penance is paste, and their sins purged / they
know for certente they shall go into heaven unto everlasting joy and comfort.
But remember that I said / they ben communely sure and certain of salvation.
For it may be, yt some one, or few souls have not that knowledge / but that
god (for some special offense / and for a special pain and punysshement
thereof) does hyde, and keep that knowledge from them, as we have in the
reuelacyons of our holy mother saint Byrget. And that pain is more alone,
tha^ all the pains of the other souls. For that sure knowledge of salvation,
Live. vi. c. xxxix. r.
is unto them a synguler confort in all pains, and does cause them to suffer
ye pains with good will in ye charity of our lord: glad to suffer much more
at his gracyous will and pleasure. If those that depart this life, go straight
unto heuyn: than ben they far more happy that from the miseryes of this
wretched world: they be come unto the pleasant possession of so great
unspeakable joy. For you may be sure it is an excellent joy, to be there in
company with the pure virgynes, the holy confessors / the glorious martyrs /
divine apostles, sage patryarches / bright shynynge angels / and the virgyn
mother our blessed Lady, and all these to se and behold with our reverend
lord, and sovereign savior Jesus Christ / And all before the presence of the
blessed Trinyte / father son and holy ghost, there prayenge all for us, and
lowly besechinge ye high mageste eterne, and everlasting god. For all ma^kynd I
think and verily believe yt any faithful christian, would be glad to expire and
suffer death every day newely / if it were possible, and oftimes in ye day, so
he were sure yt he thereby might atteyne and come unto ye pleasure / why tha^
(now I speak with stomach) why for shame, should we as cowardes or children fere
and dread death? specially since death is nothing, but like unto a sleep. For ye
old philosophours said yt sleep was a very image of death: and as one man may
know an other by his image although he had never se ne hi^ before: ii. Mac.
xii. Ioha^. xi. Job.
so may we know what death is by ye image, which is sleep: and so is it called
also i^ scripture i^ diverse places, and our savior him self said: ye lazarus
slept wha^ he was ded / and death also is called a shadow / but your perceive
well and se, yt folks be^ not afraid of a shadow, nor yet of step another. For
oftimes we sleep with our fear or dread, and without any pain or grefe / but
rather with desire and pleasure / why should we than fear death? sith we so
euyde^tly done se and perceive by the image how little death is to be dread /
let us therefore put away this opinyonatyue fear and dread of death / and sith
it does daily approach and wait for us: let us again with glad mind and
redye good will, abide and wait for it, and have thereof a thurst and a desire
/ rather than any fear or dread: how be it (of a suretye) death is than lest
feared, and most desired: when ye life of the person / may (at the time of
death) be of sure and unfeigned godly friends / conforted with the true
testymonye and praise of virtue / wherefore (good devout chrystynes) although
your reason and learning be not sufficyent to cause or to persuade you /
utterly to dispyse death / yet let your well spente life and clear conscience,
perform and so satisfy you that you be persuaded: and verily believe as a
trothe euydent and opyn unto you / that to live longer were more miserye / and
that your life has be verey long or rather ouerlonge. If it had pleased our
lord: before and erste to have called you. Thus now (good Chrystianes) let us
without any care of death, leave the carnal mourning, and waylynge thereof /
unto our suruyuyng friends / that with lamentacyon / and shall inteere and burye
our bodies. And let us take an other manner of care and dilygence / to prepare,
apparel, and to order our self unto that thing yt we know well, no person
shall avoid nor escape / byleuynge and trustyng verily, that he that made us
of naught / and when we were lost, would so derely bye us again / will not
suffer us to dye. But rather (as I said before) to change this wretched life,
for an other more precious and joyful / and only to be desired. All this
hitherto have I said to the intent that you should exyle, exclude, and put
away far from you, the commune fear full fantasye of the odious opinyon of
death / and somewhat to ingendre, and bylde in you a contrary opinyon. A
covetous desire to be with our lord.

Amen.
Now shall follow the second part of this interpryse / of the daily exercise
and experyence of death. Of the exercise and experyence of death. The second
part of this interpryse.
FIrst you must know, what is exercise / and what is experynce / and how by
them you may come unto the knowledge of death. An exercise (than) is an act
deed and an use of workynge or laboring. Than done you exercise virtue,
Defini. of exercice.
when you put it unto use and workyng thereof, and the exercise of death / is the
act and use of the workyng thereof. Defini. of experyence. 1. Meth.
Experyence is a knowledge that without any master or techer is found out and
gotyn, by exercise and use. Ibidem.
And by many experyences says Aristotle art / craft or conning is
engendered and gotyn, so ye experience (as he says) does appertain and by long
proprely unto singular persons and art craft or co^nyng unto al perso^es. And
although that artcraft or connyng yt is called speculatyue may be had by
lerning of a techer, or by dylygent study / yet this art or craft that we
speak of here must nedely be had, by experyence / and experyence, by exercise
and use. So that if you will have the actyue knowledge of death / by the art
and craft thereof, you must begin first at exercise and use. And yet can no
man put a thing unto exercise / without some introduction and leadynge
thereunto / other by techynge, study, or natural disposicyon. you must than
know first what the thing is that you shall put in exercise / and so to have
experyence, and knowledge thereof (yt is to say) you must know what death is /
or what is meant by this term, or word death. For the self term death does
signifye / and is taken dyuersly i^ diverse manners Sometime death is taken, and
called a change of life. So the common people done often use it, as when they
say of a deed person / he is not deed (say they) out he has changed his life
/ and so does saint Ambrose say, as we showed before. De bono mortis.
And yet change of life is called death in diverse other manners. As when a
person does fall by sin from good life unto the state of damnacyon or
contrary / when he does arise by grace from sin unto the state of salvation.
To. vi. ^.
Saint Paul does show both unto the Romans / as wha^ he says that in
our baptysme we ben buried with Christ unto death from sin / and we believe we
shall arise again with Christ unto a new life of grace. Romans i. ^
And for the the other part he says, that occasyon has deceived the frail
person / and so has slain him, and brought him to death. This change of life
is, Augusti.
that spirytuall death / that (as saint Augustyne says) does depart god from
the soul. For god is the life of the soul / and when god than is (by syn^e)
departed there from, the soul is deed. And this is the death only to be feared
and abhorred / as the worste death of all dethes / and yet to say truth,
there is none other death evil / except only that death that must nebely
follow this death / that is to say, the death of both body and soul eterne and
everlasting damnacyon. The other manner of death: that I spoke of / that is: the
change of evil life unto good / and of the which (as I said) saint Paul
wrote unto ye Romans: Romans vi.
is a good death / which you and every faithful person have exercysed and often
put in use, by reason of the holy sacraments. And when need shall require, ben
ready so to do / when I speak here of evil life to be changed: I mean not the
state only of mortal or deedly sin. For many persons, that often done use
the sacraments / done live without any deedly sin / but I mean the life
spotted with any vice or sin. Mercu. trismeg.
For a great clerk says. Omne donu^ nostru^, mixtum est cu^ malo. Every
thing good that is ours / and does appertain unto us, is mixed or myngled with
evil. So that our whole life, is ever mixed, coupled, and cumbred with some
vise and evil / which natwithstandynge may (by the grace of ye sacraments) be
daily purged, and so our life changed / and we thereby have ye exercise, use,
and experyence of this death. But yet is there an other manner of death called of
learned me^, meditatio mortis / that is to mean ye meditacion (that is to say)
the cogytacyon, thought and remembrance / the busynes, tractacyon or
intreatye, mencyon, and disputacyon of death. Tota vita philosophorum,
meditatio mortis est. All the whole life of philosophers: and wise men (say
they) is the co^mentacyon, remembrance, and mencyon or disputacyon of death /
often mencyon, remembrance / often disputacyon, and discussyon of any thing does
cause it to be the better known. Cicero. Macer. libro. i. de somno Sipio^is.
Eras. in Euchr.
And men co^munely will make often mention, speak, and talk often of that thing
whereunto they have desire, love, or have good mind and affection. And
contrary they will not here tell of that thing that they hate, and love not:
and so is it of many persons that will not here speak, ne any mencyon made of
death. And if (by chance) any mencyon be made of death again their minds and
wylles / they will lift up the hand and bless them, or else murmr out
softly: some supersticyous prayers as though they hard speak of the devil /
or of some abhomynable and cruel deed. And certainly it is no marvel though
such persons be affrayde to dye, and loathe thereunto / because they be not
acquoynted with death, nor be exercysed therein. But as (in case) a person yt
long time had layne fetred in prysone / could not for lack of exercise go
fast, ne run when he were newly put unto lyberte / so these manner of
persons, wrapped in the world / and fetred in ye flesh / can not quyckely
and couragyouslye for lack of experyence: walk the way of death, which
natwithsta^dyng they must nedely trede / and pass whether they will or no.
Lack (I say) of exercise use, and experyence / causes these persons to fear
and dread death. As by example, children and some women, or such persons never
had experience ne knowledge of a bugge that is a personage, that in play does
represent the devil at ye first sight / ben much affrayde thereof: in so much
that some persons have been in ieoperdye to lose their wit and reason thereby.
But wha^ they afterward have knowledge what it was and by use have experience
thereof: they ben than nothing affrayde thereof, but rather done take pleasure
there in. So is it of them yt have not the experience of death / because they
will not take, but rather will they fle / and avoid / ye use and exercise
thereof. But and if they knew what / and how great profet there is in ye
exercise / meditacyon and often record: and remembrance of death: they would
not fle nor avoid it: but rather with study and diligence give and apply
them self daily thereunto. Ec. i. d. Psalmus. xxxviii.
The wysema^ says. Fili memorare nouissima tua. etc. In all thy works sone
(says he) remember thy last end / and thou shalt never offend god. The
prophet therefore prayde unto our lord saying. Notum fac mihi domine finem
meum. Good lord (says he) let me have knowledge of my last end, as though
he said. Good lord give me grace that (by the daily exercise, and meditacyo^
of death) I may have an experyence and knowledge of my last end: and evermore
to be ready thereunto / according unto thy will and pleasure. Nothing is more
valiant to expel and put away sin from the soul: nor yet more profitable
to replenyssh and garnysshe the soul with good virtues: then is the daily
exercise, and meditacyon of death. But how to put and apply them self unto
that exercise, all persons can not tell. For many that feign would have and
use the meditacyon and exercise of death: have not the way, ne know any form
or fassyon thereof. And yet ben there diverse fourmes and ways thereof and all
good. For some persons: One manner of exercise of death. Tho.
done go no forther, but to remember and think that death is the pain of syn^e
inflycted, judged and appointed by almyghtye god, unto our first parents: and
therefore due and right unto all their posteryte, folowers, and of spring: so
that no man after them did ever escape death / ne never man shall, unto the day
of general judgment: and therefore sure it is that we must dye: but when or
how we can not tell. To have therefore a daily exercise of death. I shall set
you here.ii. fourmes of this exercise. An other form or manner of the exercise
of death.
The first form is this that in some conuenyent time of the day or night
appointed and chosen for this exercise: you shall ymagyne, call unto
remembrance and so set forth before the eyes and sight of your soul: how you
have seen or herd of a person that has been condemned by judgment, unto
bodily death: as to be brent, hanged, or heded, or such other. Than say or
think unto your self: what and if I were in such case: as that person was I
know well, and knowledge unto our lord: yt I have deserved more cruel death
(for every deedly sin, is worthy more pain / than any worldly pain) or else
if you were in such case as you have dremed in your sleep, or herd of dremyng
/ that you should forthwith go unto the execucyon of death, without remedy:
how than would I do / or how should I then, or were bound to do for the
salvation of my soul / or if ever you have seen or herd of the manner of them
that been nere unto their passage / and lie drawyng upon unto death. And the
people about some weeping and mournyng / some cryenge, and calling upon the
sick / to remember our lord god and our most sweet savior Jesus Christ / our
blessed lady with other holy saints. And remember how yt sick is than
co^bred with syckenes and pain: so yt he can do little for him self / all
weke, feeble, and infirm. And how than, the ghostly enemy the devil would
prese: and come in before you with a foul sort of vgsum soldiers / and
assail you in many so^dry wise / lay before you the multitude of your sins
and all your omyssyons of such good deeds as you might have done / whereof you
were neglygent, and all to bring you unto dispeyre of your salvation: and that
you should leave your faith / and have no hope ne trust of mercy. Tha^
remember what comfort it should be unto you at that time / yt you had prepared
and made ready before hand for all these matters / and how oftymes you had seen
in your soul all this conclusyon: and how often you had reasynge up your
frail heart dispysed death and nothing set thereby / and how you had appointed /
to believe yt i^ death is none evil but great good / and that you tha^ should
make an end of al mysery and shortly come unto a better state. Tha^ begin to
say unto your self. I will now i^ health study, and exercise my self with this
form: and specially how I shall answer ye lothly best yt fe^de. I will now i^
this time p^sent: for ye time of death yt nedely shall come / left up my hands
and heart unto my lord / and beseech him of grace and succor / and tha^ will I
beseech ye good blessed lady mother of mercy: my good angel with my holy patro^s
there namyng such saints as you have in most synguler devotion: and all ye
holy saints of heaven, to be there p^sent with me to aid, confort, and to
strength me again yt cruel best. And as unto my sins say you I have gadred
them al togeder (as far as I can remember) and brought the^ unto ye ston
there to be polysshed, rubbed, and scoured (that stone is the holy sacrament of
penance) that by the merytes of Christ's precious blood / has washed away
my sin. For I know well that one drope alone of that most holy sacred blod,
were sufficyent, and enough / and far more than enough / to wasshe and
cleanse all the sin of the world / and yet shed he all his blood every drope.
And therefore (now at this time for and instead of that time: I put ye
precious blood with his bitter passion and his most cruel / and shameful death
/ between me and all the sins that ever I did in thought, word, or deed, and
betwexe me and his wrath and displeasure. And having full faith and trust unto
his promise (that is) that he will gracyously receive all penytentes unto
mercy: I now for then boldly provoke the and deffye the most cruel and false
fend, and I straytely charge yt in his holy blessed name Jesus: that if you
have any thing to lay unto my charge: show it now: tell it out. For thou
shall another confou^de, ne fear me / nor yet disconforde me therewith / but
rather do me great pleasure to put me in remembrance.

If I have forgoten to confess any thing worthy penance / that I may now
(unto thy confusyon / show it and with the will at the lest) and desire of
perfect contricyon, and with indignacyon: I may cast it at thy face among all
the other sins yt ever I did by any means / which sins I utterly forsake,
as nothing appertaynynge unto me. For I am gracyously bathed, washed, and
cleansed in the precious blood of my sovereign savior Jesus Christ. And therefore
I bequethe and commytte all my sin, unto the cruel best / the auctor and
begynner of all sin: with the to remain from whe^s it came and whether it
shall / in the and with the eternally to be punysshed. And than leauyng him
there: turn unto our lord god, and unto our sweet savior Jesus. And as if you
were than, at the point of death / are him hertely forgyuenes of all your
offenses / and beseech his goodness of mercy and grace, and pray ye saints (as
I said before) to pray for you, and than (if you be going unto rest, which
time is most conuenyent for this exercise) bless you thus In manus tuas
co^mendo spiritu^ meum: redemisti me domine deus veritatis. In nomine patris
and filii, and spiritus sa^cti. Amen. Making a cross with a holy candell if you
have it present, after the manner that you have / i^ your book for householders.
And thus do.iii. times together / and so go unto rest as you should go unto
your grace. This exercise (good devout souls) is not to be dispysed / for by
daily use and custom / it shall inge^dre and bylde in you a great boldness, and
hardynes. So that when so ever natural death shall approach / you shall than,
not as a woman or child, but as a very man / as a strong and mighty champyon
thus surely armed / stand styfly without fear, or dread, and little care / or
rather set naught by death / but utterly dispyse death, as every hour and time
ready thereunto. An other exercise of death.
But now we shall led you forth unto an other exercise of death more high and
excellent tha^ this / and so to have experye^ce of ye death / that more proprely
is called death / whereby you shall not only without fere or dread) dispyse
death, but also (as an hongrye person) you shall have an auidiouse and gredye
appetite to thurst and wyssh for death. And with a fervent mind, and flamynge
desire / you shall langour mourn and long for death. Saying with saint Paul.
Phi. i. ^
Cupio dissolui et esse cum Christo. I couete wysshe, and will, to be dissolved
from this present life, and to be with Christ. In this exercise: you shall not
only have the experience / and the full art, science, connyng, and knowledge
of death / but also the very practyse of death / so that you shall every day
(when you will) be as verily deed / according unto the very definicyon of
death. For death (after all auctours) proprely taken is. The definicio^ and
determinacion of death.
A departing in sondre / of the soul and the body. To depart than the soul
from ye body: and to render and put either unto his propre and natural place /
is the very practyse of death. The propre and natural place or whom of the
soul, is heuyn. Whereof saint Paul says. Heb. xiii. c.
Non habemus hic ciuitatem manentem, sed aliam inquirimus: we have here (says
he) no dwelling place / but we do seek and search for an other place. Genesis iii.
c
And the natural place of the body, is ye earth / for thens it came, and
thither it must again / wha^ so ever than the soul (by dilygent study) is
occupied wholly in heavenly things / and the body left without the senses or
wits / that is without hearing, seeing, smelling, tastynge, and touching /
than is that person as deed. But that a person (for the state of this life) may
be in such case / the philosophours done show and determyne. Tullie says.
Plato. and Cicero in tusc. i. quest.
Fieri potest, vt oculis, et auribus apertis: nihil videamus neque audiamus. It
may come to pass (says he) yt though our eyes and ears be opyn: yet shall
we another se, nor here. Many a holy person (as saint) Katheryne of Seen and
diverse other) has been so deep in contemplacion that the body (for the time)
was with out the senses, so that when they were prycked with pynnes, or nedles,
they nothing felt. So than this exercise, stands al in contemplacyon, which
thing who daily uses shall be so expert, and practysed in death / that when so
ever it shall approach and come, it shall be no new thing unto the person. For
betwyxt natural death, and this death of contemplacyon, is little difference. For
as the person that exspireth and departs this life / does leave and forsake
all this world, and all the care of kynne or friends / as father mother,
sister, and brother, neighbor / and the whole pleasure of all. So does the
person, that is deed in co^templacyon for that time / leave the body as a lump
of claye without any mind, care, or thought thereupon / or upon any other
bodily or worldly thing / wherefore wha^ death comes (as I said before) it
shall another be new, nor strange unto ye person that has been daily exercised
therein / and that had so large experyence thereof, and often practysed the same.
But as you have herd of.ii. marouwse that (for tyllynge of their land) done
labor sore all day together, and at night their labors fynished and ended /
done thankefully, and gladly each depart from other unto their own whomes,
howses, or dwelling places: so doubtless done the body and the soul, when their
labors ben accomplysshed and at an end / and the due time commen / they done
gladly and joyfully depart, each unto his propre whom / the body unto his
natural place the earth. And the soul as a prisoner newly losed and put unto
lyberte / does ren straight forth her redye race / her known course / her tried
and often trodden path, and her well used way unto her propre and natural place
/ that is heuyn. But here now you will are of me / in what manner of
contemplacion you may best put this death in exercise / and so to have the said
experyence / and practyse of death, whereunto I answer that (although you can
teache me that lesson better than I you) I will send you unto ye little work
that I devised unto your co^munyon, or howselynge. For to write and setforth
all that here again, should be superfluous. Specially sith this work is so
little yt you may (with small cost) join or bind it with that work. And
therefore have I caused it to be prynted of ye same volume. And yet because you
shall not find the end of this little work all naked and bare / we shall make
you a breue and short remembrance of these things yt there ben said in
effect, although not after that same order. The order of this death and
co^templacion
First tha^ purposynge at that time to have the very experyence, and practyse
of death / remember depely from whe^s you came. For you were not, ne be of your
self. Than remember that when you had a being / what you were / a filthy
lump of slymy earth / and yet again, when that slymye clay was fourmed and
framed up with your soul / and you a reasonable creature / and thereunto a
creature most noble except angel / yet were you but an hethen hounde / unto
ye time you received ye grace of baptism. Than remember when, where, how, and
of whom / and by whom you had all that you now have and all that you ever
shall have that is or shall be good / and you shall find (by reason) and
perceive that you had never / ne have, or shall have any thing of your self
but evil. For when you were nothing, you had a beginning in your mothers
womb / and that by sinful generacyon with full fylthy and lothesum matter /
thus you se when, where, and how (that is) wha^ you were not, you had being:
where? in your mothers womb / how by sinful concepcyon. Of whom tha^ had
you al, of our lord god alone. And by whom, and what mean? Certainly by the
mean of our lord and savior Jesus Christ, the second person in Trinite very
essencyall god one / and the same self substance, and nature with the father,
and the holy ghost. Se well, behold, and consydre who it is that has done
for you: how excellent the person is. And than for whom he did. For you of
whom he had no need / nor you any thing had or could or might do for him / but
all he did for love, and of mere charity / and that also for his enemy / and
so being in deep prison, never to be delyuerde, but by him alone. Now
consider, and pondre well who this person is / and than look upon your self
make collacyon / and compare both together, although there may in deed, no
co^paryson be made. yet se, and behold how great and mighty a person he is /
how little, and how infyrme and feeble a person you be, how wise, and how well
learned he is / and how little learning and wisdom you have, how rich he is:
and how poor you ben / how excellent and noble he is, and how rustycall a
vyllayne you be / how goodly a person he is, and how vile and fylthy you be:
how kind and loving he is: and how churlysshe, and froward you be. And to
conclude, he most high god / and you a wretched worm of the earth he all:
and you right naught. After this collacio^ perceyuyng what manner of persons
both ben: than pondre and wey, what and how much he did for you. First he
left (in manner) all heuyn for you: and here took upon him your nature / and so
made you a great estate / cosyn and of kynne unto almighty god. And yet did he
serve here for you: not only.vii. years: as Jacob for Rachell: but for a worse
and more lothsum than Lia, all the days of his life / and here begin to
remember that life of our savior. After some such auctours as we have named
in the other works / or at the least under such a short form as we have
set forth in the book of householders. Thus his blessed incarnacyon, his joyful
birth / his paynefull circumsicyon: his honorable epiphanye / his legal
presentacyon / his sorrowful flight into Egypt / his comfortable return and
coming again in to his country / his meruaylous and learned disputyng with
the doctors at.xii. years of age, his lowly obedyence unto his parents, his
educacyon and bringing up unto ye age of nere.xxx. years his baptism his fast
in wyldernes / his temptacyon there of the wicked spirit and his victory. The
calling eleccyon and choosing of his apostles and discyples, prechynge,
techynge, labors, and miracles / and his many wrongful repreues, rebukes /
and infamyes of the jews, and their malicyous awaytes / his solempe soper /
his most meke minystrye / and service in the washing of the fete of his
apostles. The worthy consecracyon of his blessed body and blood in the which
sacrament, all his apostles were made priests / and had the same power, his
most sweet sermon and his tediouse agonye / when he swette water and blood /
his false betrayenge (by Judas) and his taking his presentacyon unto the
bysshoppes Annas and Cayphas. And the cruel dealyng of the rues and the
presentynge of him (by them) unto Pylate, and by him unto Herod by whom mocked
and clothed in a white fools cote / he was send again unto Pylate and by him
examyned, and without cause found: put naked and scourged and arayde with a
purpure garment and crowned with thorns with a read in his hand as a scepter
al i^ mockeage and scorn brought forth before the jews and by their cry,
and request: put again into his own clothes and condemned unto death his
paynefull beryng of the heavy cross / his fatigacyon / and feyntynge under the
same, so that he fell unto the ground / his crucifixon and naylyng upon the
cross and his pytefull hangyng upon the same his death with a loud cry. The
woundynge of his heart after that death his taking down, and buryall, his
glorious resurrection and apperynges / his meruaylous ascencyon into heuyn /
where he took for you possessyon of ye place: yt was prepared and ordained for
you, before ye co^stitucyon and ordinance of ye world. Here you may remember
ye co^modytes of ye place: which in hit self is most hyghly beauteous,
fair, goodly, and pleasant above that can be thought upon earth and of all
things that been in this world, is there plentye and abundance without any
need or want possessyon is there of the land that never shall decay / and
riches that never shall be minisshed or made less. And as unto ye co^modites
of the body and goods of nature there is youth, ever florysshyng fresshe
without age or any miseryes thereof. Beauty and fayrenes, without any deformyte
/ or fading. Might and strength, without debilyte or feebleness health without
syckenes, or disease / all pleasure and never pain. Ever mirth without any
morning, ever gladness: and never sadness. Ever joy, and never sorrow of all
things co^tentacion without any murmr or grudge. Ever love, and never hate.
Ever charity, and never envy, mercy, pitye, and compassyon / without any
crueltye, or unkindness. Ever unity and peace and never varyaunce: ne debate.
Ever troth and fidelite: without any falshed or deceyte. Ever justice equite:
and right / and never oppression / ne wrong. Ever due honor / and reverence
and never dysdayne ne dyspyte. And to conclude there is all that is good / and
never evil. And of all these things: constant durans, i. Cor. ii.
without any mynysshynge, mutabilyte or chaung. And yet ben there mo co^modytes
tha^ ear may here, eye may se, tongue may tell, or any heart may think. which
almighty god has ordained for them that love him. And yet there is unto all
these co^modytes, life immortal, and everlasting. And yet forthermore, you may
co^sydre in what company / and with whom you shall use, and inioye the said
co^modytes. There shall you find your holy patrones / such saints, as you
daily have served / the pure company of virgynes / the co^fessours, and martyrs
/ the innocents, the apostles / ye patryarches and prophets. And ye goodly
bright company of angels / al ready to present you unto our lady the blessed
glorious virgyne Marye / and by her with them to be recommended and committed
unto her dear sone our lord / and most sweet savior Jesus, which will not
disdain to receive you most beningly and gently and so to rep^se^t and offer
you unto ye p^se^ce of his most worthy father which (by him) is also your
father. Se now (good devout soul) behold, and look well and inwardly, perceive
where you now ben / and with whom. With your lord and master / your very
father and brother your governor and gyder / your help and comfort your only
refuge, and succor your inward love: your whole heart and desire, redemer and
savior, your creature and maker, your god and all your good: with all ye holy
saints and angels of heuyn in ye presence / and before ye throne of ye
glorious trinite, ye father ye sone and the holy ghost.iii. distinct persons,
and one nature one substance one essencyall god. Se now (I say) and take heed
where and with whom you be. And here knelynge or rather lyenge down prostrate
upon your face: remain, bide and dwell here still / here expyre and dye stark
deed / and utterly that no soul ne spirit be left or bide in your body /
but all for the time so far departed / not only from all things of the
world, but also from the self body yt there lyenge as a lu^pe of cley be left
without any senses or wits of heryng, seeing, smelling, tastyng, or
touchynges. So done we read (as I said before) of saint Ambrose, Aug. li.
confess.
saint Katheryne of Shene with diverse other. This is now the most high
point of this exercise and practyse of death after the very definicyon of
death. Which (as I sade) is called a departing of the soul from the body.
For in this death (for that time) your soul is departed from your body, so
that you be not than your self: but deed and clean from your self. For as ye
yren lyenge in the fire / is by similytude al fire, so ben you al one with god.
Qui adheret deo / vnus spiritus est. ^. Cor. vi. ^
Who so ever (says saint Paul) does cleue, and stycke fast unto our lord:
is with him one spirit. So ben you than that same thing that you shall be /
with our lord hereafter, that is al one with him / dwelling and abiding in
him, and he in you so al divine and godly. Say now (good devout soul) if you
can think or suppose in conscience, that any faithful christyane using this
exercise: and so having so large experyence and practyse of death / may have,
feel, or perceive, any notable pain in death / sith now in this death, so
oftymes exercysed the body prycked with pynnes or nedyles: feleth no pain at
all. Or how may any horror dread, or fear, troble or move that person / that
is in such place, with such company and in such case as before we have
showed. yet (say you) sir the devil will be present at my death / what than?
say I so peradventure / he will be at this daily exercise. For so done we read
in the lives: and collacyons of the holy fathers / but that has always ben,
and ever shall be unto his co^fusyon / rebuke, and hurt / and unto your
triumph, glory, and praise. But yet you say, that the sight of that greslye
ghost, can not be without great fear: whereunto I say again that although the
sight of him be (of it self) horrible, ugly, and fearful / yet ben there
diverse co^fortes ready at hand to help. One is that may be sure, he can not
hurt you. An other is, Ex t^^. diue Brigit. li. vi. ca. lxxxxiii*
the presence of the holy saints, your said fryndes yt will restrain his
power and malicyous will. For they ben much more valiant and mighty than he
is. And doubt you not they will al be priest, and ready there at ye time about
you / not feyned, but as faithful friends, with whom well acquoynted and
fully known / you ben now and of long time have been very familyer and
whomely. Trust you surely in them, for they will not deceive you. For if they
did, they were not faithful / but rather feyned friends. For a very friend
(says the wyseman) loves at all times and ever is proved in necessyte or
need: and at death is most need. For although good love and faithful
fre^dshyppe / be well proved in all the life time: yet is it better proved at
the time of death / and best of all after death. For than co^munely feyned
fre^des done sone forget. But these friends will never forget you. For as they
now (in your health) done daily conforte and defend you in all temtacyo^s: so
will they at your death deliver you out of all dangers / and afterward will they
deduce, led, co^uey, and carry or bear you up unto the place and company before
rehearsed. And yet have you no marvel though (in ye mean time) they suffer
you to be troubled and grudged with the opinyon of death and with the dread of
ye ugly sight. For they done so suffer for your wealth and merit that you
thereby may be exercised with death: and so to be ever ready for it. For death
only seems evil and only is feared by opinyon and not of any other right
cause. For death of it self is very good and to be looked and waited for, and
received of all persons, specially thus exercysed / not only without fear or
dread of pain / but also, as we said before, with fervent desire great joy and
gladness as the fynall conclusyon and last end of all miseryes, sorrows, and
all euyls, and as the beginning of all welthe and goodness (that is to say) of
everlasting health and salvation in the bliss of heuyn. Whyther he bring us
yt bought us, our lord and most sweet savior Jesus Christ, that lives and
reigns with god the father / and with god the holy ghost world without end.
Amen.

Thus (after our poor abilyte) have made an end of this poor labor of the
daily exercise, experyence and practyse of death. *
When I had written up this little work redye to the pryntyng / it pleased a
wise and well learned man, to take the labor to read it over, and to show his
judgment and mind in diverse things and places. And among other, because I
had made mencyon in it / of raptes or transes (unto the which in bid) very
few persons done duly attain or clymbe, and come so hye / he aduysed me to
warn ye devout reders thereof / that they give not to light credence to all
such persons. For many of them have disceyued many men, that were full holy
and devout. For those may sonest be deceived in such persons, because they
ever suppose the best in every person, without suspicyon of evil in any
person. And they ben most glad to here yt our lord should so visyte and
comfort his people. But yet such persons may also in them self be disceyued
dyuersly. For some such persons that were simple and very devout, have been
disceyued by a wicked spirit / that (to illude and mock them / has
tra^sfygured and showed him self as an angel of light / and has showed unto
the persons many things full good and godly / and some things to come after
ye form of prophecy, yt have truly common to pass in effect: and all to
cause them to give faith and credence unto other things unlawful and false.
But to write here, how such a spirit should be known from an angel or a good
spirit: it should be a long work, and also superfluus, sith, who so ever have
mind to se that matter / may have it well and plainly set forth and declared
in english, by a learned man a bacheler of diuinyte / one of our devout
brethren, lately departed: whom Jesus perdon, master Wyllyam Bond / in his
book called the Pylgremage of perfeccyon in the.vii. chapyter of the second
book and in the third and.iiii. chapyters of the third book, in the.iii.
days journey. Some other persons ben deceived only by the corrupcyon of
fantasye, which causes them to think and believe verily, yt such things as
(by only ymagynacyon) come unto their minds, ben verily spoken unto them / as
some done think that ye crow or other bird, does say or sing certain
words, or that the bell or bellys done ring and say after their ymagynacyon.
And of this sort ben many persons, and much different, according to the
disease of the head / as the fantasye is more or less corrupted. And yet some
of the^ will show many meruaylous things, that they believe verily for true,
which in deed were never true. But these persons done co^munelye show
nothing that is greatly evil: nor yet any great good / but that men may fone
discern and perceive for fantasyes and ymagynacyon / except the persons were
some preuey sinners. And than will the wicked speryte be redye to put him self
in prease / and with that corrupcyo^ to help forth unto illusyon. But yet ben
other deceyuers, though none of this sort / but of a more deuelisshe sort
very ypocrytes, that feyne them self to have reuelacyons, and know well they
have none such, but that (to deceive the people) seem in a transe or rapt /
when they will, as we read of David, i. ^eg. xxi. d.
that feyned him self mad, and in a rage upon a certain time: For a good
purpose to save his self. And so playde his pagyant, that he frothed or fomed
at the mouth / and raged as though he had been furyous and mad in deed. And
so done these wretches the disceyuynge of many persons wilfully and of
purpose. But how to be ware of such wretches and ypocrytes: surely it is very
hard. For as to give ouerlyght credence to such persons, is against wisdom:
so utterly to co^dempne the^, or to dispyse them / is peryllous and against
virtue. Wisdom is therefore, to prove well the spirit before. yet do I now
ymagyn what many persons will say hereunto, that is, that this exercise is a
matter over high / and exceeding the wits and understanding of simple
unlearned people. And so is the the other work also / whereunto I do send them in
this work, that is to say / the disposicyon and ordinance unto co^minyon or
houselynge. Whereunto I say again, that both the works ben so divided into
such parts: that every person may take what he will, according to his state
and condicyon. Read the work ones over, and than chose / for I think there
ben but few persons: but yt they may lightly understand and use one of those
exercyses. And (as a great learned man said of a work that he had send forth)
although this work were so devised: Cicero de orato perfecto.
that few persons might attain to the full heyght and clear understanding
thereof: yet should no person despair, ne be discouraged thereby. For as a
prycke or mark is set in a butte for all men to shute at: although none hytte
the prycke. Those that done shute nere ben not without praise. i. Cor. ix. d.
And saint Paul says, when there is a glayue set up for renners: all or many
done run / but one catches the glayue alone / and yet is it another shame ne
rebuke, to win the second or the third game. But here in our ca^pe, none
that does assaye to run / shall be without a synglar reward. i. Cor. iii. c.
For (as the same apostle says) every person shall receive his propre wages
or reward: acccordyng to his labor and deseruynge. And many times it may here
fortune, and come to pass / that those that come last: shall be first and best
rewarded. Math. xx. b.
So says our savior in the gospel. Erunt primi nouissimi, et nouissimi
primi. In this camp / the first shall be last, and the last shall (in reward)
be first. The respect and weight of this labor: stands not in the bodily
exercise of the outward work / but in the infors and dilygence of the will /
put thereunto your good will and dilygence to do what you can: And though it be
but very very little that you speed or do in this exercise: that little little,
though it be never so little: yet shall it be greatly rewarded. And
peradventure, much more merit and reward shall the dull person have by that
infors, dilyge^ce and good will: than shall the learned and quycke wytted
persons: that more lightly and with less labor done speed in this matter. Let
no person therefore despair ne take discomforte with any dullness. For the
poet says. Labor improbus omnia vincit. Importune labor does ouerco^e all
things. And yet though some persons can (by no means, fall unto the highest
exercise of this lesson: let the^ fall unto prayer / and be sorry that they can
not fly so high, making protestacyon / and call our lord to witness / that
feign and gladly they would do what best might please his goodness / And let
them there committee, recommende, betake, and bequeth them self body and soul
unto his hands at that time: as they intend to do, at the hour of death. And
beseech his grace / that this recommendacyon and bequeste, may stand / and of
him be received for that time / and therewith let them say. In manns tuas. etc.
as is beforesayd. Some persons every year ones at ye least, and some.iiii.
times, that every quarter ones / done make their funeralles / that is / all the
solempnyte of their buryalles, with Dirige and mass / and offer their mass
penny them self. And after that / make a feast and dele alms: as though they
were than deed in deed and buried / also which custom I praise very much. And
if yt were done every month ones or every weke / or yet every day, of them
that have abilyte and time thereunto. I would think and judge it a devout and
meritoryous obseruaunce. For those persons, that by any of these / or like
means, done so prepare and make them self ready to death: may be sure never to
dye suddenly. For many persons ben sore affrayde of soden death / and done full
heartily make prayer, that they never dye suddenly. Let them use this manner / or
some one of these forms and manner of exercyses / and they may be sure of their
prayer / that is, never to dye suddenly. Study therefore good devout souls, to
be ready at every hour / and pray unto our lord, Phi. i. c
that you may have the will that saint Paul had, wha^ he said. I covet and
desire / to be dyssolued, and to depart this life / and to be with Christ.
Whether he bring us all that made us.

Amen. The old wretch your assured beademan of Syon Richard Whytford.

Imprynted by me John^ Waylande / at London within the Temple bar / at the
sign of the blewe Earlande. An. M.D.xxxvii.

The work for householders, now newly corrected and set forth into a dyaloge
between the householder and his household / by a professed brother of Syon
Richard Whytford with an addicyon of pollecye for housholdynge / set forth
also by the same brother.

INRI

woodcut of Christ on the cross wiht Mary, John and Mary Magdalene

woodcut of Christ appearing before a sainted nun writing a book

Certain small works of a brothers of Syon Richard Whytforde.
The contents of this book.
FIrst a dyaloge and co^municacyon, between ye householder and his household. An
other dyaloge between the curate and his ghostly child. Two manners of
alphabetes / crosroes / called. A. b. c. A daily exercise, and experye^ce of
death / all duly corrected by the self auctour, and now prynted trewely. The
said auctour required me instantly that I should not prynte nor join any other
works unto his. Specially of uncertain auctours. For (of late) he found a
work joined in the same volume with his works / and bought and taken for his
work / and was not his. But was put there instead of a work of his. That
before was named among the contents of his book. And yet his work left out
/ as is contained in this preface here unto the reders.
Unto the devout reders, Richard Whytforde a professed brother of Syon /
gretyng in our savior Jesus everlasting.
I Suppose and think verily good devout reders / that when you read these pore
simple works: some of you yt have had mind to read them / will now marvel
to se and perceive that these ben the same works that went forth before, and
nothing changed in substance / but only the title, and some few things
added. Some other will paraduenture judge or fear in me ambicyon that I would
seem to make many works / and yet did send forth but the same, newely
changed or disguysed. To satisfye therefore your devout minds with the trothe
in true conscience / there is none such cause. But yet causes there ben diverse
appartaynynge both unto you and me. One cause is that I trust verily you have
them here in a more perfect lettre than you had before. And also more truly
prynted. For (of a suretye) the the other letter was much vicyous and faultye /
and that in some places, that might seem unto my neglygencye. And also in the
same volume or book / is one of my works left out / which work is nombred
among the contents of the same volume and book. And instead of my work, is
an other heretyke or heretycall work set in place / and the whole book sold
for my work / which thing is the most chief cause of the said mutacyon or
change. For that thing does not only put me unto infamye and sclaunder: but
also does put all the reders in ieopardye of conscience to be infecte and also
in the danger of the kings laws, for the manyfolde erronyous opynyons that been contained in the same book. Now judge you (devout reders) whether these
causes ben not reasonable for the said mutacyon and change. I pray you
therefore of your charity take all unto the best. And by my poor advise / read
not those books that go forth without named auctours. For (doubtless) many of
them that seem very devout and good works: ben full of heresies. And your old
english poet says. There is no poison so peryllous of sharpnes, as that
is: that has of sugre a swetnes. I would gladly ye wealth and not ye ieopardye
of your souls our lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus my judge / who keep
you, and send you ye increase of grace. Ame^.

woodcut of Christ at a table with twelve men

A Dialoge or co^munycacion between the householder and his household.
The spekers.
First speaks the householder and than speaks one of the household for all the
residue.

The householder. GOod chylderne and friends: I had (of late) counsel to call
you all to gether. And (for the discharge of my conscience) to show unto you a
form of living: first therefore let us co^sydre that all we been mortal, as
well the rich as ye poor, the young as the old, there is no difference, none
except, all must needs dye. And though we live very long, yet shall we dye
shortly: for ye lengest life of this world, is very short. And yet have we no
certain, ne yet conjecture of knowledge, wha^ / where / how, or in what state
we shall depart this life. And sure we been, that as we been found at that
time, so shall we be taken, and without respite or delay, forthwith shall we be
presented and brought before ye high judge, that can not be deceived, to make
a count of all our life past, where no man of law may speak for us, ne any
excuse may serve us. Our own conscience shall there speak and tell plain
truth, without craft or dissymulacion, and (in a momente, a twynclynge of an
eye) shall clerly confess all our hole life, and every wryncle and part
thereof: which confession, if our life were good, shall be unto our great honor,
comfort, reioysynge, and joy everlasting. And contrary, if it were evil, it
shall be unto our great shame and rebuke, unto our endless sorrow and pain and woe
everlasting. We have need therefore to be well ware, how we spend our time,
how we pass this life, or rather how this life passes us. And much shall
it auayl and profit unto the health of our souls: often times for to remember
our last end. The wise man says. Ecclesi. vii.
In omnibus operibus tuis, memorare nouissima tua, etc. In all thy works
(says he) remember thine ending day and what things shall come unto the at
thy last end, and thou shalt never do sin, ne co^tynue euerlastyngly
therein.


One of the household. Sir we all byseche you, than, yt you will show and teache
us yt form, and mean our way that you speak of.


The household. The first point therefore of a good Christian, is to entende
and purpose with good heart and constaunte mind, to avoid sin, and dyligently
to study how to fle and beware of the occasyons thereof. And than to appoynte
him self unto some custumable course of good and profitable exercise. Psalmo.
xxxiii.
Diuerte a malo, and fac bonu^. (says the prophet) Turn away thy face,
thy heart, will, and mind, from all evil, and appoynte thy self to work
good works.


The person of ye household. Sir, hit is sone said, Fle evil and do good. But
I pray you show us forther how to do so.


The household. For a form therefore how to follow ye same by co^tinuaunce I
shall show you my poor advise. I speak unto you good simple and devout
souls, yt would feign live well your self, and also comfort all other unto
ye same. First than eueryche begin with your self. And as soon as you do awake
in the morning, to arise for all day. First suddenly turn your mind and
remembrance unto almighty god, and than use (by co^tynuall custom) to make a
cross with your tho^be upon your foreheed or front, in sayng of these words.
In nomine patris: and than an other cross upon your mouth, with these words,
Et filii. And the third cross upon your breast / saying, Et spu^s sancti.
Amen. And if your devotion be thereto, ye may again make one hole cross, from
your heed unto your fete, and from the left shulder to ye right sayng all
together. In no mine patris and filii et spu^s sancti. Amen. That is to mean,
I do bless and mark my self with the^ cognisaunce and badge of Christ, in the
name of the father, and in the name of the sone, and in ye name of the holy
ghost, yt is to say, the holy Trinite.iii. persons and one God. Than say or
think after this form. Good lord god my maker and redemer, here now in thy
presence, I do (for this time and for all the time of my hole life) byqueth and
betake, or rather do freely give my self, soul and body, with all my heart and
mind unto the, good lord, and unto thy hands to be thy bond servant for
ever, according unto ye promise made in my baptysme at the font stone. And
here now I do ratyfye and newly confyrme the same and do fully consent in
heart and mind thereto, never here after, by the help of thy grace, to
contrary the same, but to co^tynue in thy laws, good lord, unto the end of
my life. But where thou know, good lord ye I am a frail person, infyrme,
feeble and weyke, and of my self prone and ready, i^ thought, Genesis* viii.
word and deed unto evil, from the beginning of my life hitherto: I beseech
the good lord god and father of all puysaunce and power, of all might and
stre^ght, that thou will defend me from all mine enemies, and give me
spiritual strenght and power, yt I may / in the / vaynquysshe and overcome,
fle and avoid all such fraylte, light manners or disposicions, as should be
contrary to thy will and pleasure, and that according unto this will of the
spirit, which thy goodness has now freely given unto me, I may destroy the
will of the flesh and so continue unto the end of my life. And yet good
lord, where thou know also that I am but rude and unlearned, without wit
wisdom and due knowledge of the and thy laws, all ignorant and as an ydiote
or fool in all good and spiritual understanding, I byseche the good lord god
that art the essential sone of god the father, and unto whom is appropriate
all wit and wisdom, all science / conning and knowledge, and all right
perceiving and understanding / that thou will grant me the due knowledge of
thy self by right and true faith, and the knowledge of all thy benefytes and
gifts done to me and all mankind / and grace dewly to thank the for them.
And also due knowledge of mine own self, of the state and condition of my life
and co^uersacio^, and specially of my wretchedness with due contricion for all my
sins. And knowledge also of thy laws, will and pleasure / so that by no manner
of ygnoraunce or mysvnderstandyng, I do (at any time) in work or deed / or in
word or thought: any thing contrary unto the same. And thyrdly (good lord)
where you knoweste also that I am often times obstinate of mind, froward and
evil wylled / stubburne of stomach and unkind of heart / dull / neglygent,
and slothful in all manner of goodness, I beseech the good lord god holy ghost
/ that art ye spirit and will of the father / and of the sone, and with the^
ye same self essenciall god, unto whom is appropriate and specially appointed
/ all bou^te / all goodness / all grace and good will, that you would voyche
saffe to give me the grace of good will, so that I never do / say / ne think
that should be contrary to thy will. And having unto the ever a reuere^de
dread, I may love the for thy self, and all other in the (lord) and for the /
so that according unto the spiritual strength and knowledge that thou have
given me, I may apply my will holy unto thy will / so that I have no will
propre unto my self, but ye my will be all thy will, and both (as much as
may be possible) one will. And so I may here in this life order my love, and
come unto such perfection of fervent charity yt (by ye grace) I may attain
unto ye fruicio^ of everlasting charity in thy joyful presence. Ame^. And
good lord god father of heaven, I beseech the take and receive me thus unto thy
grace. and have mercy and pity upon me and all thy people. And thou lord God
blyssed sone of god the father, and savior and redemer of the world / have
pytie and mercy upon me and upon all Christen people. And loving lord god holy
ghost and blessed spirit of god / have mercy and pity upon me and ali^ the
world. Holy and blessed Trinite, one self and same essenciall god / have pity
and mercy upon me and all mine / and upon all thy creatures. Amen. And than
ones again bless the with, In nomine patris: as before, and tha^ go forth
unto your busynes where ye will. Let this be for your morning exercise. And
though you that have great things to do, would think this prayer and
morning exercise over long, because of your busynes I acerteyne you, if it
ones were by use gotten ready and incorporate and prynted in the heart and mind,
it would sone be said or thought / and the person should (I believe) have grace
to speed ye better in other things, and nothing forthynke of the spe^dynge of
the time, but rather accounte it for great gaynes, in so much that we purpose
to set forth in the end a longer exercise, for them that have longer time to
spe^de, but now we shall go forth herin. After ye said morrow exercise I
trust you will be well occupied upon your appointed course of occupacion. For
that was our counseyle in ye beginning, that ye should appoynte your self, by
a co^tynuall course, unto some certain occupacion that may be profitable, and
ever to avoid ydlenes the mother and nourse of all sin and evil. And ever
beware of such occupacions as ben called communly pastymes, that is to say,
all manner of unlawful games / and such disportes as done draw people rather
to vice tha^ to virtue, which more properly may be called lose times than
pastymes. Math. xii. c
For sith / by the affyrmacio^ of our sauyoure, we shall make accoumpte of
every idle word / it must needs follow that we shall make a more strayte
reckoning of every idle or evil work. Let therefore your said appointed
occupacion be always good: virtuous and profitable. Sith tha^ ye must needs
make a reckoning of every work: word and thought (for none of these ca^ be
hyd or kept preuy from your audytour) me thinks it should be a great suretye
for you: to make every day ones your said accou^te by your self. The common
proverb is, that often reckoning holds long fellawshype. I would advise you
therefore to spe^de some time there upon at night after all your occupacio^s,
before your bed, there knele down and there begin to remember wheder ye went
and what ye did i^mediatly after your morrow exercise, and in what company ye
were, and what was there your behavior and demanour, i^ work, word, or
thought, and so go forth unto every place / time and company as brekefaste /
dinner / soupper / or drinking / and where you find or perceive any thing that
was good / virtuous / and profitable / ascribe and apply that unto our lord
god, and give unto him all ye glory, laud and praise thereof / for he alone is
ye gyuer of all goodness / and so over pass that thing lightly. And where ye
remember of any special thing done / said / or thought amysse / stycke and
bide thervpo^ / and bulte it (as they say) and turn it up so down / and try
the weight and danger thereof, with all the manner and circumstaunce of the
same. So may ye know the qua^tytie thereof, that is to say, how great a sin
or how little it is / how be it, none offense cane be little that does
offe^de god, and surely every sin. is offense done unto god, although it seem
to be done unto man. For as ye love of god does begyn^e at ye love of ye
neighbor (For he ye loves not his neighbor) i. Ioh. ii.
who^ he may se with his bodyly eye or sight (says saint John^) how may he love
god (whom he ca^ not so se) so in like manner the offense of the neighbor is
forth with ye offense of god. Consider therefore unto whom the trespass is done,
and so that consyderacion with the other qualyties and quantyties of the sin,
shall bring you unto a bassheme^t thereof, and to be sorry therefore, or (at ye
leest) to will or wysshe that ye had not so done. Tha^ mekely cry god mercy /
and ask him forgyuenes thereof with very purpose and mind to be confessyd
thereof at due time, and to take and do penance therefore. And I dare assure you
that this manner of accoumpte and reckoning (though your sin were never so
great) shall save you from the ieopardy of da^nacio^ / which is no little
grace and goodness of God. Thank him than lowly therefore, and so bless your
self, as you did in the morning / and your bed also / and go thereunto, and
so committee your self all hole body and soul unto the protection / custody
and keeping of our lord, who give you good night and good rest. Amen. It
shallbe right well also that ye call upon such holy saints as you have
special devotion unto, under this form or some other like. Blessed lady Mary
mother of god always vgin, I beseech ye pray for me, and for all Christians.
Holy angel of god, what so ever thou be that art deputed and appointed unto
my custody, I (submyttynge me with most lowly obedience) beseech the to pray
for me and for all the world. Saint Michaell, saint Gabriell, saint Raphaell,
with all holy angels and archa^gels, I beseech you pray for me and for all
people. Saint John^ baptyste and all holy patriarchs and prophets: I beseech
you pray for me and for all christendom. Saint Peter, saint Paul, saint
John^ the euangeliste, and all holy apostles and eua^gelistes, I beseech you
pray for me and for all the world, and you also all disciples of our lord,
and holy Innocents. Saint Stephan, and all holy martyrs. Saint Augustine /
and all holy confessors / all religious persons and heremites. Saint
Katheryne / saint Margarete, saint Barbara, and all holy virgins: I beseech
you pray for me / and for all persons. And finally all you holy saints of
heaven, of every degree and state where you be, I beseech you all in general /
and eueryche in special / pray for me and all mankind. Here may you bring
in ye patrones of your churches or dioces, and such as you have (as I said)
synguler devotion unto. And here an end as unto your self.


The person for the household. Sir / this work is good for religious persons
/ and for such persons as been solytary: and done lie alone by the^ self /
but we done lie.ii. or.iii. sometime together / and yet in one chamber diverse
beds and so many in company / if we should use these things in p^sence of
our fellows, some would laugh us to scorn and moke us.


The householder. O bone Jesus. O good lord Jesus, what here I now? I dar well
say, there been but few persons in England but they would bide some danger
or rebuke for pleasure of their king or prince, and many for their master or
maistres, or their soueraynes and some for their friends and fellows, and
specially where great gaynes should grow thereby unto the^ self. And for the
pleasure of God our father, and of our sweet sauyoure Jesus our brother, should
we be abashed to take danger and bear a poor mock or scorn, that never
shall wound our flesh, ne yet tere our skyn^e for ye pleasure of our pereles
prince king of kings / and lord of all lords? Fie for shame that any
christian should be so cowardous. Ventre upon it, go forth withal. In.ix.
days (as they say) the danger shall be past / fere nothing. Every beginning
is hard and of great diffyculte. Omne principium difficile. Labor i^probus
oi^a vincit.
But i^portune labor does vayn quysshe and overcome all things. I tell you,
this daily exercise by custom and use, shall seem very short and sweet,
profitable and pleasant. Read it or here it over ones or twyse at the leest
before you cast it away. How be it we think it not sufficient nor enough for
us to live well our self, but ye all other christians also live the better for
us and by our example, and specially those yt we have i^ charge and
governance, that is to say: our chylder and servants. And me seems it
should also be a good pastyme and much meritorious: for you that cane read, to
gather your fellows about you on the holy day, specially the young sort and
read to them this pore lesson. For therein be such things as both you and
they been bound to know, or can say: yt is the Pater noster: the Aue maria:
and the Creed / with such other things as done follow. I would therefore you
should begin with them by time in youth as soon as they ca^ speak. For it is
an old saying. Quod noua testa capit: inueterata sapit.
The pot or vessel shall ever savor or smell of ye thing wherewt it is
first seasoned. And your english proverb says / that ye young cock
croweth as he does here and learn of the old. you may in youth teache the^
what ye will / and that shall they lengest keep and remember. We should therefore
above all things, take heed and care in what company our chylderen been
nourysshed and brought up. For educacion and doctrine, yt is to say, bringing
up and learning, done make the manners, with good and virtuous persons (says
the prophet) you shall be good and virtuous. Psalmo. xvii.
And with the evil persons, you shall be also evil. Let our chylder therefore
use and keep good company. The pie, the iay, and other birds, done speak what
they most here by ear. The plouer by sight will follow the gesture and
behauyour of the fowler. And the ape by exercise will work and do as she is
taught / and so will the dog (by violence) contrary to natural disposicion:
learn to dance. The chylder therefore that by reason don far excede other
creatures will bear away what they here spoken, they should therefore be used
unto such company where they should here none evil / but where they may here
godly and Christian words. They will also have in their gestures and
behauyoure such manners as they se and behold in other persons. And as they
been taught / so will they do / and in many things they may be compelled unto
a contynuall custom / which does alter and change natural disposicion.
Unto some crafts or occupacions a certain age is required in chylder / but
virtue and vice may be learned in every age. We must se therefore that in any
wise you use no company but good and virtuous. And as soon as they can speak:
we must also teache our chylder to serve god and say the Pater noster. Aue. and
Creed. as I said before. And not only our chylder, but also se and prove that
all our servants, what age so ever they be of: ca^ say the same. And therefore
don we use daily ye in every mele / dinner or soupper / one person should with
loud voice say thus.


The first peticion.
PAter noster qui es in celis: sanctificet^ nomen tuum. Good lord god, our
holy father ye art in heaven let thy name he sanctified: that is to mean / I
beseech the grant us grace to bless, to honor, to laud and praise thy
holy name.

The second.
Adueniat regnum tuum. Good lord god our father that art in heaven / let thy
kingdom come: that is, I beseech the lord, that all the people of the world
may come unto the grace of baptism, and so be the faithful subjects of thy
realm and kingdom of Christianite.

The third.
Fiat voluntas tua: sicut in celo et in terra. Good lord god our father that
art in heaven, let thy will be wrought in earth as it is wrought in heaven: yt
is to mean I beseech the lord, that all thy christian people here in earth
may perform thy will, and keep thy commandments after their estate and
condition, as thy holy angels and saints done in heaven after their state and
degree.

The fourth.
Panem nostrum cotidianu^ da nobis hodie. Good lord god our holy father yt
art in heaven, give and grant unto us this day our daily bread: that is to
mean, I beseech the good lord grant unto us contynually the spiritual fode
grace and effect of thy holy sacraments. Or thus. Grant unto us the
contynuall grace and effect of thy holy sacraments / which is the daily fode
of our souls, and spiritual suerty of our salvation.

The fyfthe.
Et dimitte nobis debita nostra: sicut et nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris.
Good lord god our holy father that art in heaven, forgive us our dettes, as we
done forgive our detters, that is to mean, I beseech the good lord, forgive
and pardon me and all Christians all manner of offenses and trespaces done
against the and thy laws / likewise as we done forgive all manner of persons
all manner of greues and trespaces done against us.

The.vi.
Et ne nos inducas in te^tationem. Good lord god our holy father that art in
heaven / led us not in to temptacion / that is to mean, I beseech the good
lord, suffer me not, ne any Christian, to be led or brought by any temptation
/ unto the full consent of any sin.

The.vii.
Sed libera nos a malo. But good lord god our holy father that art in heaven,
deliver me and all christians from evil: yt is to mean, I beseech the good
lord / that not only thou keep me and all thy people from all sin and
offense of thy goodness / but also that thou will deliver and make us quyte of
all sins paste / and conserve and keep us continually in the state of grace.
Ame^. So be it: that is to mean / good lord we beseech the that all these
things may come to pass in full effect / according to our peticion and
desire.

This prayer of ye Pater noster / is ye most excellent prayer, because ye our
savior made it him self / and taught it to his disciples.

The Aue Maria, is ye most plesaunte prayer, and of most honor unto our
blessed lady, because one part thereof is the salutacion of ye angel Gabriell,
whereby immediately after her consent, she conceived the sone of god in her
womb. And the other part, was spoken unto her by saint Elizabeth, inspired
and moved thereunto by the spirit of god the holy ghost. And therefore do we set
forth the Aue maria, after such manner as we did the Pater noster.

AVe Maria gratia plena dominus tecum: benedicta tu in mulieribus et benedictus
fructus ventris tui Jesus. Ame^. Hayle Mari full of grace, god is with the.
Blessed be thou among women, and blessed be the fruit of thy womb Jesus
Christ, god and man. Amen. So mote it be.

That first word Aue, which I do English after the commune manner, hayle is a
word of salutacion, as we say in commune co^gresses or metynges together. God
speed you, god save you, god bless you. Good morrow / good eue^, god speed,
god be at your game, god be at your work, god send you, with such other,
after the manner of the country where it is spoken. And the last word Amen, it
is a word of consent or desire, that the matter spoken before should
understand what every word means.

Now does follow the Creed.
The first article.
CRedo in deu^ patrem omnipotentem: Saint Peter.
creatorem celi et terre. I believe upon god the father almighty, maker of heaven
and of earth. This term: In deum / is diversely Englysshed, some done say / in
to god, some: inwardly in god / some: perfytly in god. But the most commune
use of the country of the unlearned people / is to say. I believe upon god and
upon his faith / but all does mean in effect / that the person has perfyte
faith and believe in god / and unto god.

The second article.
Saint Andrew.
Et in Iesum Christum filiu^ eius vnicum dominum nostrum. And I also believe
perfytely upon our lord Jesus Christ his only begote^ sone: yt is to say, ye
only begoten sone of the said father.

The third article.
Saint Johan.
Qui co^ceptus est de spu^ scto^: natus ex maria virgin. And also I believe
perfytly ye our said lord Jesus was conceived of the holy ghost, borne of our
lady saint Mary: she remaynyng and abydyng ever ever a virgin.

The fourth article.
Passus sub pontio Pilato / crucifixus mortuus et sepultus. Saint James: the
more
And also I perfytly believe yt our said lord Jesus did suffer his passion, and
was crucified, deed, and buried, under the power and judgment of a man called
by propre name Poncius / and by his second or surename Pylate.

The fyfth article.
Descendit ad inferna: Saint thomas of Inde.
tertia die resurrexit a mortuis.

And I believe perfytely also / that our said lord Jesus: after his said
passion and death / descended and went down unto ye low places of hell / and
brought forth from thense our first father Adam: and all that were there with
him / and that upon the third day after his death: he did arise from death /
and all the bonds thereof unto life everlasting.

The syxth article.
Saint James / the less.
Ascendit ad celos: sedet ad dexteram dei patris oi^potentis. And also I believe
perfytly: yt our said lord Jesus did ascend and slye up unto the highest
heuens, and there does sit upon the right hand of god the father oi^potent and
almighty.

The seventh article.
Saint Philipe.
Inde ve^turus est iudicare viuos et mortuos. And I also perfytely believe, that
he will come the^se again in to this world, to judge all persons quycke and
deed.

The.viii. article.
Saint Bartelmewe.
Credo in spiritum sanctum. I believe perfytly also upon the holy ghost, the
spirit of ye father and of the sone, and with them both the same self god.

The.ix. article.
Saint Mathewe.
Sanctam ecclesiam catholica^. I also believe that the church of Christ is and
was / and ever more shall be holy and faithful / therefore I do give faith and
crede^ce unto the same, and unto the determinacions thereof.

The.x. article.
Sanctorum communionem: Saint Simon.
remissione^ peccatorum. I believe also ye communion of saints: yt is to say /
I believe that all the works and good deeds of all good and holy persons / ben
and shall be common: so that every faithful Christian has and shall have part
with other. And also I believe the remisson of sins: that is to say / that all
manner of sins may and shall be forgyuen / if forgyuenes be duly desired and
axed.

The.xi. article.
Carnis resurrectionem. Saint Jude: called also saint Tadeus.
I also believe the resurrection of our flesh / that is to say / I believe yt
all manner of persons shall arise at the day of dome in soul and body with
the same flesh, blood and bones that they were borne with and dyed with.

The.xii. article.
Saint Mathie.
Et vitam eternam. Amen. And I also believe everlasting life: that is to say,
that (after ye general resurrection (all manner of persons / as well good as
evil: dampened or saved / shall co^tynue in life everlasting, either in joy
or pain, and never depart therfro^. This word Amen, is declared before in
the end of the Pater noster.

This manner of ye Pater noster, Aue, and Creed, I would have used and read upon
the book at every mele / or at the leeste ones a day with a loud voice (as I
said) that all ye persons present may here it. And yet forther I would
advise and counseyle all other householders to se (as I do) know / and prove /
that every person in their house / and all that been under their governance
and charge (can say the same) and therefore they must take ye labor to here
them them self, and where need is: to teache them. For many yt ben aged and can
not say will be abashed to learn it openly, and yet if they here it daily
read after the manner showed before: they shall by use and custom learn it
very well. And some other persons there been: that can say right well / both
upon the book and without, but yet among them some been dullardes and
slothful and seem negligente and careless / and so done they not say it: but
in time forgete it / as in manner they hade never learned it. I pray you therefore
(good devout householders do as I do) take the pain to here them your self:
at the leeste ones a weke and let none escape you / old nor young. It shall
(believe me) be unto you a great discharge of conscience, and not without merit
and great reward. And charge them straytly under pain of punysshement / that
they say it every day three times at the leest / that is to say / in the
morning / at none or myddaye / and at night. Than must you teache them to know
by order ye precepts or commandments of god, ye names of ye.vii. pri^cipall
sins, and of their.v. wits, as thus. The commandments of god ben.x. in
no^bre. The first
The first that we shall have no strange ne other gods. but one alone: and
him to love, honor and dread above all things. The.ii.
The second we may not take the name of god in vain, and therefore we may not
use to swear. The third, The.iii.
we must keep our holy day with close mind unto god, and reverend devotion,
and therefore we may do no bodily or worldly labors for lucre therein..iiii.
The fourth we must with reverend and due lowly manner do honor unto our
parents, that is to say unto our fathers and mothers, and we shall have (by
the promise of god (long life therefore..v.
The.v. we shall not slay or kill any person, neither in deed: nor yet in will
or mind, nor yet may we hate any person in heart. For who so ever so does: i.
Ioh. iii.
is an homicide and ma^sleer..vi.
The.vi. we may do no lechery..vii.
The.vii. we may do no theft..viii.
The.viii. we may bear no false wytnes, ne make any lie or lesynge..ix.
The.ix. we may not coueyte or desire any wedded or married person..x.
And the.x. we may not coueyte ne desire any other man's goods. These been
ye.x. commandments given and commanded by almighty god / given and ben
divided in two parts, as two tables or books. Exodus xx.
The first apperteyneth and belongs unto almighty god, him self. And in
that part ben contained the three first commandments, and all those three
commandments ben contained in this one commandment of the gospel. Love
god above all things. And in the second part or second table, been the
other seven contained, which done apperteyne and belong unto the neygbour.
And yet all those.vii. ben again contained in this one commandment of
Christ. Love thy neighbor as thy self. I declaracion of the said p^ceptes.
The first.
yet may you go ferther with them / some what to teach them what they mean.
For whane you say that we may have no mo gods but one alone, that is to
mean, yt we should love nothing so well as god. When soever that a person
does sete his heart and mind upon any creature, more than upon god / so that
he would rather displease god and break his laws and ordynaunces, than for to
leave and forbere the affection or pleasure of the creature / than has he a
strange god: a another god, for tha^ that thing is his god / for yt which he
does forsake god, and does contrary unto his will and ordinance. And here
(good and devout christians) be well ware, and warn all yours of these
supersticious wytchecraftes and charms that been much used: and done deceive
many persons, that (for ye unlawful love unto the health of their bodies, or
of their children, or beasts, or other goods lost or stole^) will go seek
wysme^ or wysewome^ (for so they don call ye deuels proctours that done use
such wytchcraftes and charms) the^ do^ they seek I say, and put them self
subject unto the false god the devil and his cerimonyes, to get health
unlawfully by the means of that wytchecrafte forboden by the church, under
pain of cursynge. And yet the simple people, done suppose and wene they do
nothing offend therein. For I have herd them say full often my self. Sir we
mean well / and we done believe well / and we think it a good and charitable
deed to hele a seek person / or a seek be: and troth they say / but yet it
is neither good ne charitable to help ye by unlawful means. And suerly yt
mean is unlawful. For good reason will admit, that no sore sekenes may be
heeled, but either by nature, or by medicine, or by miracle. If a finger be
cut, or small surfeit taken: nature in a while will heel the person. But in
all grievous diseasis, medicine is the common mean of health: but sure ben they
that such charms or wytchcraftes be no medicines. For tha^ should they heel
as well by one person as by a another. And no man byleueth they ben miracles
ergo they must nedely by the deuels craft, that do deceive the simple
persons: does hurt some, and teached yt way unlawfully to bring them in
his danger. For you will grant that he were a fool, that for the health of
his horse leg, would lose one of his own hands, or one of his own eyes /
and yet is he more fool in deed: that for any creature would lose his soul.
But yet some have said to me. Sir / how may this charm be evil or a mys,
wha^ all things be good / as by example. The charmer is a good man or a good
woman, and takes here a piece of white bread, and said over ye bread
nothing: but only the Pater noster, and makes a cross upon the bread /
which things ben all good, tha^ does he nothing else but ley yt piece of bread
unto the toth ye aketh or unto any other sore: tournynge the cross unto the
sore or disease, and so is the person heeled. How may this be evil now say
they? I say again it is evil and dampnable, because the faith and believe of
the hole matter rests in that applycacion of the cross, which has no
natural operacion, but is a cerimony unlawful. For although all other things
here ben good, yet done they nothing avail without yt cerymony, and so is all
a charm and unlawful and naught, which may euydently be known for naught
and unlawful, because the church does condemn and forbede all such, which
thing surely yt learned church of god, guyded ever by ye holy ghost would never
have done, if it were good and lawful. And therefore in any wise, let none of
your folks use any such. The second.
Now for ye second precepte, which is yt no person should take ye name of
god in vain, warn your folks and take good head unto the^ yt they be no
common swerers. For it were less ieopardy for you to have in your house a
thief or a steler, a lecher or vnclen liver, tha^ an usual swerer. For a great
oath accustomed, does provoke ye sodeyne vengeance of god The scripture says
De domo iura^tis non recedet plaga. Ecclesi. xxiii. b.
The customable swerer, shall ever be full of iniquite and sin / and the
plage of ye vengeunace of god shall contynually ha^ge over that house. Ibidem.
Let not thy mouth be used unto swerynge (says ye scripture) For ye customable
swerer shall never be clean purged of syn^e. Wherefore I dare well say yt
swerynge is one of the great causes of all these sodeyne plages among men and
beasts, as pestilence, pockes, swetynges, and moreyns, with such other. And I
believe verily none of you would be glad to keep in his house a lepre, or any
person infected with any of the foresaid plages And yet is a swerer more
peryllous tha^ any of them. For his oath may slay or infecte your child in ye
cradle, or stryke your beasts in ye feeldes, destroy your corn and graynes,
and cause pryuely many myscheues. And yet many persons done think and believe,
that if they swear troth, they do no sin, but they be surely deceived, as by
case. If a person would prynte and coin monye of good silver or good gold,
keeping also the due weyghte and facion, that thing would nothing excuse the
person unto the king or his laws, though also he proved the money were good
and lawful money. For ye kings law is / that no person shall prynte or coin
any money but such as be assygned by him, and that also in the place appointed
thereunto. So in like manner, the law of god is: yt no person shall swear any
oath / except it be at the appoyntemente or commandment of such a person
that has just power to require and to take an oath, and that also must be
done in due place, that is to say, before a lawful judge. And so may the
person lawfully swear, so ever that the swerer do think and believe in true
and unfeigned conscience, that his oath is true. And else that is to say without
these circumstau^ces and such other causes expressed in the law no person
may swear, though it be never so true that he swereth. If than to swear true is
sin, and does provoke ye high displeasure of god, by cause it is contrary
unto his commandment, to swear false must needs be more sin, and more
provoke his vengaunce. Example shall I show here of both, that is to say, how
god is provoked by usual swerynge, and how by forswerynge and false oaths.
This story yt follows I herd at Stondo^ a little vylage.xxv. miles from
London not far from ye high way unto Ca^brydge / where for a time I did
abide in avoiding yt great plage yt both in London and Cambrydge did than
quyckely and sharply reyne, where also this story was open in the knowledge of
all ye country there about, as don but small time before. A gentylman yt was
called master Baryngton whose wife was afterward married in Ca^brydge unto a
gentylman called master Caryngton, so yt there was but one lettre changed in
her name, yt is to say C. for B. And of her also I herd the same story,
although (as she said) she was not present. This said ge^tylma^ Baryngto^ was a
great swerer, and did customably use great oaths: specially by the blood of
our lord, or (as more co^munely they swear) by gods blood. And upon a so^day
or else a feestfull holy day he went forth on hu^tyng or hawkynge: and nothing
spedyng after his mind, he came unto an alehous at a throughfare called
Pulcriche.v. miles from ware in ye high way to Ca^brydge yt one side of yt
which thoroughfare was in ye said parisshe of Sto^do^, where this gentylman
was, and called for drynk: and anon he began to swear after his unhappy
custom saying. By gods blood this day is unhappy. And in a while after in
sweryng so, he bledde at ye nose, and therewith more vexed he begane to rail
and rain god (as they say) in swerynge gods passyo^, gods wounds, gods
flesh, gods nails, and ever his holy and blessed blood, till at the last
he fell ferther to blede at the ears, at ye eyes, at his wrestes, and all the
joints of his hands, and of all his body, at his nauyll and foundemente, and
of other places of his body, meruelouse great qua^tite and stremes of blood,
and shotynge cut his tongue in a marvelous horrible, vgseme and ferefull manner,
as black as pitche so that no person durst come nere him but stead a far
of, and cast holy water toward him / and so he conteynued ever swerynge /
blasphemynge and bledynge / till he expyred and was deed. And the more we after
they laid him in a carte / and carried him to the said church of Stondon, and
ever the body blede till he was burnd in ye way as they came in very great
haboundau^ce. This was a plain toke^ that god was much displeased with that
swerynge, and did openly punysshe the same / in example to all usual swerers.
It may also be a good monicion and warning for such persons that done myse
use the holy day in hawkyng hunting and such other fruytles occupacions or
pastymes. A another example of the same usual sweryng was showed unto me by a
bacheler of divinity called master George wercke / a fellow tha^ where I was
also fellow, of the queen's colege in Cambrydge, and after he was vycare of
Harowe on the hill, which thing he said upon his conscience. He saw him
self in a merchants house in London, which was his special friend, and
sent for him to give counseyle unto the same person, a young man that was
prentyse: or else servant unto the same marchaunte / which yongman did use to
swear for his commune oath / by the bones of god: or by gods bones. And it
came to pass that he was taken with a great marvelous sekenes, so that no
Physyke ne medicine might help ne ease him, but that he lay still in bed so
long, that the flesh and the skin of his arms and fyngers, and of his
legs, thyes, shynnes / fete and toes / did deuyde in sondre / as though they
had been slytte with a knyfe, so that ye bare bones might openly be seen and
feled. And so in the same manner / (after he had with great contricion and open
confession of that swerynge) received the sacraments of the church / he
departed this life unto our lord. Here been now two notable examples of
usual swerynge. The third shall I show you of forswerynge, or false sweryng,
which was showed unto me of an honest priest of my familier acquaintance that
was vycare of Halywell, where saint Wenefredes well is, beside the abbey of
Basyng work in Flynt shyre in the borders of Wales.xiiii. miles from
Weslchester, which thing he said on his conscience he did se him self and
was there present with great multitude of other people thousands. A certain
man was called to be sworn in a great matter between two parties, which said
parties did put the matter holy unto the determination of his oath, and met
both at a certain place where was a crucifixe: a holy rode that did many
miracles, whereupon he should swear, and so did in the sight and herynge of a
great multitude of people gathred on both parties. And his oath given, he laid
both his hands upon the fete of ye rode / and swear false and contrary unto
his conscience, and so was dampnably forsworn, which thing god would have
known. For wha^ he would have taken his hands away to depart, both the
hands cleued and stycked fast unto ye fete of ye rode, as though they had be^
glued or fastened with nails thereunto. And than he would with violence have
pulled them of: and than with sterynge and hasty mouyng to and fro, the step
whereupon he stood: slypped and voyded from him. And than hanged he still by
his hands, and so remained hanging still contynually the space of three days,
and marvelous much people came thither to se and look upon him, of the which
many ben yet lyuyge. So at the last after three days wha^ he had with great
contricion openly confessed his defaute / and received the sacraments of the
church, when ye people supposed and thought verily he should there have
expired and died he was suddenly losed and delivered / and lived many years
after a good and holy life / unto the glory of God and great example of them yt
been swerers. Lib. iiii. cap xviii
* Saint Gregory in his dialoges does show of a child, yt (as he had herd of
other persons) did swear great oaths, and had pleasure therein, and suddenly
when he was swerynge in his fathers lap upon his kne / the devil came and
openly rauysshed and by violence took him from his father / and carried him away
/ that he was never seen after. Here may you perceive the great peril and
ieopardy of sweryng. For ye love of our lord therefore good devout christians,
take good head thereto / as well in your self as in your folks. And yet should
you have no less guard or awayte unto lyeng, or making of lies or lesynges.
For the lie or lesynge is very mother unto both the defautes showed last
before / that is to say, unto perjury or forsweryng, Mendarium.
and unto false wytnes. For eueryche of these daughters / is worse than the
mother. For ye liar cares little to bear false wytnes / and every liar is
co^munely a swerer / for else the lie should not be colored / dubbed and painted
sufficiently to seem true, and specially in a defaute whereof the liar would
feign be excused for dread of punyssheme^t or rebuke, or wha^ a matter should
(by that lie) come to pass / and be brought about unto effect, for profit,
advantage, flatery or pleasure. For wha^ the liar does coueyte most subtelly
to deceive and feign and gladly would be byleued, tha^ does ye liar most
lyberally lasshe out oaths, and sparethe for no cost (as they say) but wha^
such a person does swear most, tha^ will a wise person believe him lest. And
by this does appear, that the commune and besy swerers been suspecte to be
liars. For the liar is combred so in conscience, that he supposes and thinks
he can not be byleued without he swear many oaths, and great oaths. Beware
therefore of liars. For common liars been communely thieves or pyckers, and
unclean lyuers. And (to say the troth) the liar is (...) and disposed unto all
manner ^^^ces, because that all liars (...) chylder of ye devil. For the (...)
was the first liar, and eue^ (...) co^tynue a liar. And as the g^^^^ (...)
says, he is the father of all (...) Now ponder and wey (go^^ (...) ^^uoute
christians) I pray you, if you were required whether you would be co^tente to
keep in your company a thief or pyker, a person yt should enforce and labor
to corrupt your wives / or your daughters / or yet such a person that were
servant or child unto your deedly foo or enemy, I think you will say nay, you
would keep no such. Than say I beware of the liar / for all commune liars ben
the deuyls children, and done follow their father the devil, whose properte and
natural disposicion is to lie. I cane well grant yt you ^^^gyue and pardon
them yt done (...), pyke, or do lechery: for ones (...) ^^vyse, and labor and
look for (...) ^^ery and amendment, but in (...) ^yse can I grant that you
(...) on the liars, but even forth^ (...) you would cure the sodeyne (...)
^lence: so correct and punysshe yt lie. Wherefore I have set out here a p^ty
lesson, which I pray you teache your children, and every child ye comes i^ to
your company you shall (I trust) do much good thereby.

If I lie, backebyte or stele
If I curse, scorn, moke, or swear
If I chyde, fight, strive or threte
Than am I worthy to be beat
Good mother: or maystres mine
If in any of these nine:
I trespass to your knowing
With a new rod and a fine
Erly naked / before I dyne:
Amend me with a scourgynge.
And than I pray you fulfill and perform their peticio^ and request, and
think it not cruelly / but mercifully done. For ye wise man says, Proverb
xiii d
who spares the roode: hates the child. And in a another place. Eccle vii. c
If thou have children (says he) correct them betyme / and hold the^ vnd
while they been young, your daily practyse does show unto you / yt if you
powder your flesh while it is new and sweet / it will continue good meat:
but if it smell before it be powdered, all the salt you have shall never make it
seasonable. Powder your children therefore betyme and than you love them, and
shall have conforte of them. I did appoynte ye correction before unto ye mother
or maystres, for communely they done take the labor of that mynistery and
service. Notwithstanding there may be said father or master, and the staff
or foot of the ryme be all one. But who so ever do ye correction, wheder it be
in lasshes, or in words, let it be done with the charity of our lord / and with
a myld and soft spirit: that ever it be done for the reformacio^ of the
person / rather than for the reuengynge of the defaute, and therefore should
you never do any manner of correction while you be vexed, chafed, troubled,
wroth, or angry for any cause, but rather for that time defer the correction,
and a another time by good delyberacyon take the persons on part / or if the
trespass be openly known, than do it openly, yt all the lokers thereupon may be
warned thereby, and give the^ a good lesson before the correction / and tell
them you do the correction against your mind compelled thereunto by conscience,
and require them to put you no more unto such labor and pain. For if thou do
(say you) you must suffer part of the pain with me / and therefore you shall
now have experience and prove what pain it is to us both. And than pay
truly, and afterward forthwith forgive them clerly and gentelly / so that
they do no more so. And in doing thus correction / you may edyfye and refourme
the persons / and also merit and have thank of our lord. Where if contrary
you chyde brawle, curse, and with ungoodly words rebuke, or stryke with
hastynes to revenge your own cause or appetyte / you shall render the persons
more stubbourne and styffe hearted, and engendre in them an hatered toward you.
And also not only lose your merit, but also deserve pain and the punyssheme^t
of god, where the other correction done by sobrenes, shall cause the perso^es
to have you in a reuere^de dread, and also to love you, and here afterward to
bliss you, and pray for you. I pray you therefore, win and deserve both their
blyssynge and prayer / and also the blyssyng and reward of our lord. But
because that communly all persons done use to swear some oath / in affirmynge
or denyinge / that is in saying ye, as grauntyng, or nay, as denyinge, which
be seldom said nakedly by them self without some addicio^, therefore I would
have you in auoydyng of all vain oaths to teach your children to make their
addicio^s under this form. ye father, nay father: ye mother / nay mother: ye
brother / nay brother: ye sister / nay sister: ye sir / nay sir: ye dame / nay
dame: or unto ye states, master / maistres / and so forth of all such common
terms / as graundfather, graundmother: godfather, godmother: uncle, aunte,
cosyn / and such like / without any other addicion, or any of these found
oaths, as by cock and pie, by my hode of grene, and such other. For Christ
says in the gospel unto his disciples. Math. v
Swear not you at all (says he) in any wise, yt is to mean unlawfully or in
vain. And the prophet says. Psalmo. lxii.
* Laudabuntur oe^s qui iura^t in eo: quia obstructu^ est os loquentium iniqua.
That is those persons that done lawfully swear in god, shall be praised and have
reward therefore, and the mouth of evil spekers shall be stopped / and they put
to shame and rebuke. All this have we spoken for the keeping of the second
precepte or commandment. The third p^cepte.
Now for the third commandment. I pray you give good example in your own
self, and tha^ teache all yours how they should keep duly the holy day, that
is to say (in asmoche as conuenientely may be) to be void of all manner of
worldly and bodyly labors. I said in asmoche as conveniently may be. For
people must have meat and drink / the houses must be appareyled / beasts
must be cured and looked unto. And very unfeigned necessite or need does excuse
in conscience. The holy day is ordained of god and the church, only for the
service of god. The due place of ye service is the church. unto all the^ that
may conveniently come thereunto. And to them that may not / every honest place
of good and lawful occupacion is their church. For God is there present
where he is duly and devoutly served. Take the pain therefore wha^ you may to
go forth your self / and call your folks to follow. And wha^ you ben at ye
church, do nothing else but that you came for, and look often times upon them
that been under your charge, that all they be occupied, like (at the leest)
unto devout christians. Mathei xxi.
For ye church (as our savior says) is a place of prayer, not of claterynge
and talkyng. And charge them also to keep their sight in ye church cloce upon
their books or bedes. And while they ben young / let them use ever to knele /
stand or syte / and never to walk in the church. And let them here the mass
quyckly and deuotly / much part knelynge. But at the gospel / at the preface
/ and at the Pater noster, teache the^ to stand, and to make curtesy at this
word Jesus, as the priest does. Thus in the fore noone let the time be spente
all in the seruys of god. And than in ye after noone, must you appoynte them
their pastyme with great diligence and strayte commandment. First that in no
wise they use such vanities as communely ben used, that is to say /
berebaytynge and bulbaytynge, foteball, tenesplaynge / bowlyng, nor these
unlawful games of cardynge, dycynge, closshynge / with such other unthrifty
pastymes, or rather losetimes: wherein (for a suerty) the holy day may rather
be broken, than if they went to the ploughe or carte upon Ester day, so it were
not done by co^tempte or dispisynge of the commandment of the law, ne for
unreasonable couetyse and love of worldly goods. For sin does always more
defoule and break the holy day than does any bodily work or occupacion.
Therefore let them beware of the tavern and alehouse / for dread of dronkennes,
or of glotony, and of suspecte places / or wanto^ company, for fere of
uncleanness / or lechery / which things been unto youth most peryllous / and
of great danger and ieopardy of corrupcion. Assign you therefore and appoynte
you them the manner of their disportes, honest ever and lawful for a reasonable
recreacio^ / and (asmoche as conuenie^tly may be (let the sexes be departed in
all their disportes, that is to say: the kinds, me^ by them self / and the
women by them self. And also appointe the time or space, that they be not (for
any disportes) from the service of god. Appoynte the^ also the place, that you
may call or send for them when case requires. For if there be a sermon any
time of the day, let them be there present all that been not occupied in
needful and lawful busynes / all other laid a part, let them ever keep the
preachynges, rather tha^ the mass, if (by case) they may not here both. To
bye and sell or bargayne upon the holy day / is unlawful: except it be for
very need. Charity unto the poor and nedy neighbors, does lawfully excuse
bodily or worldly labors upon the holy day. Look well you neither do ne say
wylfully, and by deliberacio^ upon the holy day any thing that you know in
conscience, should be contrary unto the honor of god, and tha^ done you
justly keep your holy day. A very good sure pastyme upon the holy day, is to
read, or to here this book or such other good english books, and gather
thereunto as many persons as you can. For I tell you there should be no time
lost, ne mysspente upon the holy day. Let this poor lesson now co^tente
you for these three commandments of the first table, which (as I said) done
apperteyne and belong unto almighty God him self. A another short lesson
shall we set forth for the commandments of the second table. The.iiii.
precepte.
And first the due reverend honor to be done of ye children unto the
parents, that is to say / unto their fathers and mothers. Teache your children
therefore to ask blessing every night knelynge, before they go to rest under
this form. * Father I beseech you of blessing for charity: or thus. Mother I
beseech you of charity give me your blessing. Than let ye father or mother
hold up both the hands, and ioynyng them both to gether, look up reverently
and devoutly unto the heaven, and say thus. Our lord god bless you child, and
therewith make a cross with the right hand over the child / sayng. In nomine
patris et filii and spu^s sancti. Amen. And if any child be styffe hearted /
stubburne and froward, and will not thus ask blessing, if it be within age,
let it surely be whysked with a good rod, and be compelled thereunto by force.
And if ye persons be of forther age, and paste such correction, and yet will
be obstynate, let the^ have such sharp and grievous punysshement as
conuenyently may be devised, as to fyt at dinner alone and by the^ self at a
stole in the mydle of the hal / with only brown bread and water, and every
person by order / to rebuke them as they would rebuke a thief or a traitor.
Deute. xxi. d.
For in ye old law such children were brought before the hole townshype,
that is to say, the people of the cite, or of that town, and there were they
stoned unto death. And certeynly I would not advise ne counseyle any parents, to
keep such a child in their house, without great affliction and punysshement.
And therefore I think it were much conuenie^te for there pare^tes, often times
to show unto their children what commodyties and profytes, and what perils
and ieopardies done follow the honor and dishonor of the pare^tes,
according unto holy scripture. Some whereof I have here set forth as is
contained in the book of the wise man called Ecclesiasticus, Ecclesi. iii. ^
in the third chapitre. Those persons (says he) that been the children of
Christ / ben also ye children of his church, and all such (as though it were
by natural disposicion) ben given and applied of that godly disposicion unto
obedience and love. All you therefore that been loving children, be ever obedient
unto the judgment and discrecion of your pare^tes. And so be you obedient in
all your works, that you thereby may be the children of salvation, that is to
say, that your obedience be done with the very love of your heart, unfeigned
and without dissymulacion. For god has ordained that the father shall have due
honor among his children, and the mother in like manner with lowly obedience.
Those persons yt done love god, will pray unto him for the forgyuenes of their
sins, and afterward will beware co^teyne and keep them self from them. And
in ye daily prayer they shall graciously be herd. And like as a person for
the surete of his living here does horde up and gather treasure / so done they
ordeyne for the suerte of their salvation that duly done honor their
parents. This word parents does sygnifye both ye father and mother. Who so
ever does duly honor his pare^tes shall have joy, pleasure, and conforte
among his own children. And who so ever is duly obedient unto the father,
does thereby refresshe and much comfort ye mother And these persons that
done due honor unto their pare^tes, shall have long life, and in the day of
their prayer they shall gracyously be herd of our lord, and have their
petycion. Those persons that have a reverend dread unto our lord god, have
in like manner a reverend dread unto their parents / and done duly honor
them, and will do them such service, and in like manner as a bond servant
should do unto his lord and master, as well in work as word, with all patience
and gentylnes. Do therefore to your pare^tes honor and reverence, that the
blessing of God may thereby light upon you, and that blessing shall remain
and endure unto your last end. The blessing of the parents does fyrme and
make stable ye possessions and the kynred of the children. And contrary, the
curse of the parents does eradicate and rotewalt and utterly destroy both.
Child, never take thou pleasure ne pride in the rebuke and disprayse of thy
parents.. For that rebuke is not thy glory, boste, nor praise, but rather thy
confusyon, shame and rebuke. For the glory and praise of every person,
stands in ye honor of the pare^tes. And a great shame and rebuke is it unto
the children, when the parents been without honor and reverence. Good
children take good patience with the age of your parents, and never displease
ne grieve them in all your life. And if they fail i^ wit or understanding,
and thereafter speak or do any thing contrary unto your reason or wit / take
you patience with them, and let ye matter pass. And in no wise do you not
despise the^, because of your own strength or better abilite. For the pity and
compassion that you have unto your pare^tes, shall never be forgoten before
God. For you shall have good and profit of their offense and sin. And in the
justice and right you do unto them shall you be edifyed, and encreace in
virtue. And i^ the time of your trybulacio^, that good deed shall be remembrede.
For as the ice in the frost does melte by the clear son beams, so shall your
sins (by your duty done unto your pare^tes be wasted and clean losed and for
given. That person is of evil name and fame that does forsake the parents in
their need. And those children been accursed of god, that done anger, vex, and
trouble their parents. Child of what state or degree so ever thou be, do ever
thy duty with myldenes, mekenes, and lowlynes, and than shall thou be well by
loved, and praised above other persons. And ye more high estate thou come
unto, ye more meke and lowly be thou in all things, and tha^ shall thou in ye
presence of god have great merit, and increase in grace. For God does look
upon the^ that done render and give due thanks, for the favor and goodness
done unto them before. Ad verbum ferme translata.
All this now is the very text and lettre of the holy scripture in the place
before rehearsed. Where you may se and perceive many great commodytes and graces
that done come unto them that duly don honor their pare^tes. And many great
ieopardyes and peryles, and also the curse of god / that does light upon the^
that will not do their duty of honor and reverence unto their parents. Let
therefore your children use and accustom the^ self, daily to ask their
fathers and mothers blessings. For this dare I say, that although in case the
father or mother were an abhomynable sinner, Er Gre. lib. d* alo. iii. ca. vii.
or excommunycate, accursed / or an heretyke, and though ye child were so
also. yet might that cross of the blessing of that father or mother save that
child from sodeyne myschefe, that else might have come unto that child. And
ye cross may also do flee or chase away evil spirits, that else should have
had power upon that child. The blessing of every good person is good and not
without great virtue, according unto ye power and degree of the persons and
therefore teache the^ also to ask blessyng of every bisshope, abbote and every
priest, and of their godfathers and godmothers, with other devout persons.
And let this suffyse for this fourth commandment. yet go ferther unto the
fyfthe commandment, The fyfthe precepte.
which is to kyl or sle no person. Teache the^ there / that it is not enough
yt they put no person to death by stroke of hand or wepe^, but also that they
hurt no person in name or fame by detraction, backebytyng or sclau^derynge,
or by evil example of living, nor yet that they curse or banne or wysshe
evil unto any person, or yet hate any person in heart. i. Ioh. iii.
For (as scripture says) who so ever does bear in the heart or mind any
hatered, malice, evil will, or stomach against any christian, is an
homicide, that is a mansleer or a manqueller. Many persons will say they ben
in charity, and have no hatered unto any person, and yet will they not speak
one to a another and that is a sign and token that preuy hatered is in the
heart, and yt they do not love their neighbor as the^ self, in the true and
unfeigned charity of our lord. And sure it is, ye who so ever does not holy
and fully love his neyghbore, i. Johan. iiii. d.
whom he may se and behold with his bodyly sight, he cane never love god /
whom he cane not se, nor so behold. This is than the commandment of God:
that who so ever does love god, must also love his neighbor. The.vi.
precepte.
The syxthe commandment is that no lechery be done / which is not mente
only for the unlawful deed, but also for all manner of prouocacion thereunto /
as wanton and light behauyours, in kissing, clyppynge, and unclean touching,
a light look or cast of the syghte, Math. v d.
with a desire and consent of heart unto the deed, does break this
commandment. Much more than does rybauldy break it, and such manner as before
is said. The old proverb says. Who so will none evil do: should do nothing
that longs thereto. The ghostly enemy does deceive many persons by the
pretense and color of matrymony, in pryuate-secrete contractes. Contractes.
For many men when they cane not obtain their unclean desire of the woman,
will promise marriage, and thervpo^ make a contracte promise, and give faith
and troth each unto other saying. Here I take the. N. unto my wife, and thereto
plyght ye my troth. And she again unto him in like manner. And after yt done /
they suppose they may lawfully use their unclean behauyoure / and sometime the
act and deed does follow, unto ye great offense of god and their own souls.
It is a great ieopardy therefore to make any such contractes, specially among
them self secretly alone without records, which must be two at ye leest.
For many times after the unlawful pleasure is paste, discord does fall
between the parties, either because that (as the common proverb says) hot
love is sonecolde, ii. Regu^. xiii. c
or else by the means of their friends, or by some couetyse to have a better
marriage they or one of them done deny the contracte, and so unlawfully done
mary otherwise and live in aduoutry all their life time. And because ye church
cane not openly know ye thing that was spoken and done in priuyte, they been
thought and supposed so to live as lawfully in marriage, where in deed before god
they done live as noughty packes in dampnable aduoutry and unlawful lechery,
and all their children bastardes before God, all though they seem otherwise
unto the world. Warn therefore your folks there be no such blind bargaynes in
your house or governance. The.vii. commandment is, do not theft. Herin
correct your young persons betyme. The.vii. precepte.
For the child that begins to pyke at a pynne or a point, will after pyke
a penny or a pound. And so go forth from an apple unto an ox, and from a pere
to a purse, or an horse, and so from the small things unto the great. When you
take any child therefore with the mayner, be it never so little a thing: pay
truly at the first time, and the second time: and prycke the pynnes or the
points upon the cappe or shulder in open sight, and let all the house wonder
upon the^ and cry all: here is the thief, this is the thief, se se the thief.
And if they me^de not thereby, let the^ be so brought through the open streets
with shame enough, and cruel punysshement. For better is it that ye child
wept in youth, and suffer shame and rebuke, than herafter the father, mother
and friends should weep for sorrow and shame at his hangyng and shamfull death.
And let every person beware of theft For all other sins with contricyon /
confession and penance / may be forgyue^ clearly, but theft and all goods
unlawfully gote^ / can never be forgyue^ unto the time that restitucio^ be made
that is to say, unto the time those goods / or the valor of them be
restored, if the persons (in any wise) may be able thereunto. Let every
person po^der well and wey, what vau^tage it is to stele or pyke, sith (beside
the pain certaynely to be suffered in hell) the same goods (in valor) must be
restored again. Small goods truly gote^, done grow and increase unto the
great conforte of the persones-And contrary, evil gote^ goods lightly come
(as they say) and lightly go, all wast unto naught, with ye disconfort of the
parties / and great combraunce of conscience. Se than yt all goods be well
gotten among you. The.viii precepte.
Of ye.viii. commandment you have before some remembrance in the lessons of
sweryng and lyeng. The.ix. precepte.
The.ix. commandment is that no person shall desire in mind nor wyshe yt
the wedded make of any other person were lawfully their weded make. The.x.
precepte.
And the.x. commandment is in like manner of the goods. For so should the
parties have incommodite, loss, displeasure or disconforte. The deeds of these
two commandments were forboden of god in the.vi. and.vii. commandments,
here now been the wylles and desires forbode^. That thing than that no man
may lawfully will: may no man do lawfully. Let them therefore beware that do
not only will and desire in mind / but also done secretly, pryuely / and
craftily labor to take their neighbors fermes, or his house (as they say)
over his heed, or to entyce and get away their servants, or any other goods
profitable for the parties. For though such things may seem unto the world
lawful, surely they be not without the great offense of god / as contrary unto
his commandments. And thus an end of the.x. commandments. Of the seven
pri^cipall sins.
yet must you have a lesson to teache your folks to beware of the seven
pryncipall sins, which ben co^munely called the.vii. deedly sins, but in
deed they do call them wrong, for they been not always deedly sins. Therefore
they should be called capital or principal sins: and not deedly sins.
These been their names by order, after our division. Pride / Envy / Wrath
Couetyse / Glotony / Sloth / and Lechery. Thus don we order the^ / according
unto our three ghostly enemies / the devil / the world, and the flesh. For
Pride, Envy, and Wrath, done apperteyne and belong unto the devil, as chief
mouer of the^. And couetyse does apperteyne unto the world, as chief mouer
thereof. And glottony / sloth / and lechery, done belong unto ye flesh / as
their chief mouer, which three we done put under this order, because that
glotony is a great occasyon of sloth. For (as the proverb says) When the
belly is full, the bones would have rest. The full fed glotton is apt unto
no good work or labor, but rather all disposed unto sluggysshenes and
sloth. And those two between them done styre and provoke most unto lechery.

The.v. wits.
Teache them also to know ye names of the five wits, and to put the first
finger of the right hand unto the instruments of the same wits, that is to
say unto the ear, the eye, the nose, the mouth, and than to join and clappe
both the hands togeder, saying thus. Herynge, seeing, smelling, tastynge, and
touching.

The.vii. works of mercy.
It shall be also well done to teache the^ the.vii. works of mercy. which you
should (after your power) set forth in work as you teache the^ in voice. That is
to feed ye hu^gry. To give drink unto ye thursty. To cloth ye naked. Herborow
or lodge ye wayfarynge folks / or them that have need of lodging. Visit the
sick. Redeem ye prisoner. And bury the deed. Here is now an end hereof. A
form of confession.
Not wtsta^dyng I think it necessary to show here yet how as I learned of my
gostly father yt taught me all this lesson you should teache your folks to be
ordered unto ye confession of these things. For I have known many come unto
co^fessyo^, yt could not tell how to do, or what to say there. I shall
therefore set forth here a short form and manner thereof. For there ben many
forms of co^fessions in print set out at lengh. First good devout christians I
beseech your give no crede^ce unto the false heretykes, yt done deprave and set
naught by confession, nor by this holy sacrament of penance. For I a certain
you those persons what so ever they be, yt (after their baptyme and
christendom) have done any deedly sin, cane never be in ye state of
salvation without the faith and will of confession. Gene. iii.
For almighty god in every law did require confession and provoke every
trespasser thereunto, as of our first parents Ada^ and Eve in paradyse, which
confessyo^ if they had mekely made, they and we should have suffered the less
pain. Leuit. iiii and. v.
In ye old law special oblacions and sacrifyce was appointed openly by the
prestes to be done for such sins among the people yt were preuy unknown
unto all other persons, except only the self trespassers, whereby it must
needs be troth, that they were confessed thereof unto the prestes. Wha^ any
person also was suspecte of lepry, the judgment and determynacion thereof
remained (by ye ordinance of ye law) unto the priest. Which thing was a
plain figure of the sacrament of penance and confession. Math. v
And our sauyoure said, he came not to break the law: but rather to
accomplish and fulfill the law. And so he did confyrme and ratifye that law,
wha^ he sent the lepres that he cured and heled unto the prestes. Math. viii.
Luc. xvii.
And i^ every cure he did upon the syke persons, he expressed mystycally
co^fessyon, in that he caused them to show their disease before they were
cured. And saint Peter his apostle after his ascension, did require confession
of a man called Ananye, Acto. v.
and of his wife called Saphirye (as appears in holy scripture) of a deedly
sin, which he (by the revelation of god) knew they had done / and because
they would not make confession thereof, they were both stryke^ to death with the
vengeance of god. Our mother holy church therefore has (by the inspiracio^ of
ye holy ghost) ordained that every person yt committee or do any deedly sin
i^ work, word, or by full deliberate co^sente in thougt, must nedely (if they
will be saved) be confessed thereof unto a priest. Sithe than all christian
people have received and used the same so many hundred years, take you that use
and custom for sufficient auctoryte to follow the same and to put all manner of
contrary opinion clean out of mind, and in no wise to here speak or talk
thereof. Now unto our matter. First teache your folks to come reverently unto
the ghostly father with meke and sobre countenance and behauyour. (For it is
no laughing game.) Than knele down at ye place appointed and there make a
cross upon the foreheed or fro^te, with In nomine patris (as before is showed)
and tha^ forth with say thus. Benedicite. And when the priest has answered,
than say (if the person be learned) Confiteor deo, beat Marie, omnibus
sanctis, et vobis, peccaui nimis, cogitatione, locutione, et opere mea culpa.
that is to say for the unlearned, I confess and knowledge my self gylty unto
our lord god, the blessed lady saint Marie, unto all the holy company of heaven
/ and unto you my ghostly father yt I have offended my lord god many times in
my life, and specially sith the last time of my confession, in thought, word,
and deed, in many and diverse ways, mo tha^ I can show, specially in the seven
pryncipall sins. Pride, envy and wrath, couetyse, glotony, sloth, and
lechery. And by them I have broken his commandments-

Pride.
For by ye syn^e of pride I have been presumptuous and disobedient unto god, and
have not loved hi^ above all things, but many times set more by mine own
frail appetyte and sensual desire. For where I should have desired ever the
laud and praise of our lord / and with all mekenes of heart accused my self /
I have contrary bosted my self, or desired and been glade of mine own praise
and been loath to be dispraysed. And when I have been challenged, reproved,
rebuked, or corrected, or yet charitably ben monysshed and warned of, and for
my defautes, I have rebelled there against, and not mekely received it but
rather ben ready to defend or to excuse my self, and sometime with a lie, or a
false oath. And for lack of reverend dread and love of our lord, I have by
presumpcion of pride taken his holy name in vain, and vnlawfuly sworn by god,
by our lady, or ye holy saints by my faith or truth, with such other. And
for very pride and presumption, and for lack also of love and dread: I have
mysvsed the holydaye, in things of pleasure, or profit unto my self, and not
in his service unto his honor. I have also (of high and proud heart or
mind) been disobedient and not done due honor and reverence unto my fathers
and mothers spiritual and carnal, ghostly and bodyly, nor unto mine elders
and betters, but have been many times full obstynate and froward unto them. I
cry God mercy. Thus (by this foul sin of pride) I have broken four of the
principal commandments of our lord, and many other ways have I also
offended therein. I beseech his grace of mercy and forgyuenes.

Envy.
I have also offended my lord god in the sin of envy: for I have not loved
my neighbor as my self, nor ben so charitable, so kind, so loving and
favorable unto all persons: as I would they should have been to me, but rather I
have (by suspicion) thought, iuged, said or herd of other persons, otherwise
than I would they should of me, nor ben so glade of their welthe, ne so sorry
for their hurt as I would have been of mine own. I cry god mercy.

Wrath.
In wrath also I have offended, for lack of due patience, and for light,
slyght. or small occasion, have leyghtly and soon ben styred and moved, wroth
and angry, wha^ any thing has been done or said contrary unto my mind. And
therewith have been ready to revenge the same with froward and ve^geable
countenance and behauyoure / with high, hasty, and ungoodly words, brawlyng,
chydyng, scoldyng, reuylynge, rebukynge, raylynge, vpbraydyng, thretyng,
cursyng, bannyng, sweryng. And if it came thereunto, in stryuyng, fyghtyng, or
(at the lest in will: as god forbede) i^ kyllyng or sleyng. Thus by these two
great sins of envy and wrath I have broken the.v. and the viii. commandment
of our lord, in them both. I beseech his grace of mercy and forgyuenes.

Couetyse.
In couetyse also I have sinned because I have not been content with the
goods, state, and degree of living that god has sent me where it is much
better than I have deserved, or am worthy, but I have coueyted and desired /
wysshed and wylled, studied and labored to have more (if any be unlawfully
gotten or so with holden, make plain co^fessyon thereof as the matter requires.)
Thus by this sin of couetyse have I broken the vii. commandment of our
lord and the tenth and otherwise dyuersly offended in couetyse. I beseech his
grace of mercy and forgyuenes.

Glotony.
I have also sinned in glotony, in taking meat and drink indiscreetly / and
above that nature did require, and have pycked out and chosen (sometime by
sensual appetyte) the delycate sweet and plesaunt meats and drynkes, rather
for pleasure tha^ for need / and taken thereof such superfluyte (at some times)
that I have been thereby sick or diseased, or at the least ben the more dull
both in body and soul, unto all manner of virtue and good exercises (look here
whether you have broken any fastes commanded by the law, or ben drunk, or
taken any notable surfeit) after meat commonly I have been more ready to pass
the time in bodyly disportes and ydlenes tha^ in labors. I cry god mercy.

Sloth.
I have be^ also much slothful and neglygent to serve God, both upon the
holy day and other days also, and I have been yrke weary, and thought ye time of
prayer long, come late thereunto, and make haste therein, and over passed the
service of god, without due reverence, more by course and custom than by any
good remembrance or devotion, and also I have not ben dilige^te to apply my
self unto such bodyly labors as I have had in charge and sometime have not
done the labors at all, or else full sleyghtly done them, and spent the time
after mine own appetyte full vnfruytfully, sometime in wantonness, and sometime
in very ydlenes. I cry god mercy.

Lechery.
By the means of these two foul sins of glotony and sloth / I have been
the more ready unto ye third sin of ye flesh, that is to say lechery, for I
have not been so chaste in soul and body as ye state / degree and manner of my
living does require, not so diligent and ready to put away unclean thoughts
or mocio^s of ye body as I should be / but rather followed the^ at so^tymes
wyllfully, and suffered them to hang upon me, and taken in them delectacion and
pleasure for the time. And when I have been in p^sence of company, I have not
always ordered my self in chaste manner in my lokes or syghtes, countenance and
behauyour, words and deeds, but many times have been full light to take or to
give occasyon. I cry god mercy. Here must you remember suit or prouocacio^
unto uncleanness, done or suffered on your behalf, as i^ words, wrytyngs, signs
tokens, messages, kissing, clyppyng, touching, or other more fylthy and
unlawful behauyoure / done in deed or in full consent. And so show every
thing with ye due circumstances, of ye time, place, and persons, not namynge
the persons, but showing the states or degrees of the^: as whether they he
married or unmarried. etc. Thus by this foul sin of lechery: have I broken
the.vi. and also.ix. commandment of god, and by many other means, as well in
this sin as in all the other of these.vii. pryncipall sins, have I
grievously offended my lord god, broken his commandments, not fulfilled ye
works of mercy unto my power, and mysvsed my five wits, in herynge, seeing,
smellyng, tastynge, and touching. For the which and for all other, as our
lord knows me gylty, and I would confess and knowledge if they came to mind,
I beseech his gracious goodness of mercy and forgyuenes. And you my ghostly
father of penance and absolucion. Et precor sanctam Mariam, omnes sanctos dei,
and vos orare pro me. Which is to mean unto the unlearned. And I beseech the
blessed lady saint Mary, all the holy company of heaven, and you also my
ghostly father to pray for me. And when you have taken your penance, and have been assoyled, than say you unto ye priest. Sir / and it please you, this is my
penance, and than rehearse the same ones or twyse your self / that you may the
more surely bear it in mind. For I assure you, it is ieopardeous (after learned
men) to forget the penance. And thus an end thereof. yet did I promise in the
beginning / to set forth here a forther exercise, which I think should be
good and profitable for all persons. For the common proverb is, that a great
benefyte or gift is worse than lost upon such unkind persons yt done not
remember it, ne give due thanks therefore. It should become therefore every
faithful christian to have ever in mind the great and excellent benefyte of
our salvation. And therefore have I devised here a short table, that does (in
some) conteyne the hole life of our sauyoure Jesus, that such persons as will
can it by heart, and have it ready in mind may lightly order and lay up as it
were treasure in a cheste or cofre, all such matters of the gospel, and that
done appertain unto the acts of our savior, as been preached where they ben
present, or that they don here any good communycacions or redynges. And also
over this / they shall have two great profytes hereby, one is: that no remedy
may better ne sooner chase away all temptacions, and put the ghostly enemies
to flight, than this remembrance. The second is, that nothing in this world
may rather ne more spedefully move a dull heart unto devotion, and unto
contynuau^ce of virtue, than this exercise. I beseech you all therefore, in
visceribus Jesus christi: that is to say, for the tender love of our lord god
and most sweet savior Jesus: give some labor and diligence thereunto, and
daily use the same. It is but short and therefore may it soon be had by heart.
And it is very sweet, pleasant and profitable, and therefore should be received
with god will and diligence.

The self table of remembrance.
when (after the salutacion and gretyng of ye angel Gabriell) our sauyoure was
conceived perfect man and very god, in the womb of our blessed lady Mary, ever
virgin.















dwelled at Nazareth with his blessed mother and with Joseph her husband, ever
occupied after their will and mind unto their conforthe, and ever as he grew
and increased in age and statur, so did he appear and show him self in grace
and virtue.



to be attempted of the devil.











he taught his disciples and apostles secretly by the^ self such mysteries as
apperteyned unto the^ to know and not unto the common people.







his disciples arisynge thereunto from the soupper.





most cruel death that he saw to come / and how little it should be
regarded and set by.















him to be cruelly scourged, so that no place of his body was untorn or
unwounded.





fayntenes) he fell down (as not able to bear it any forther) and tha^ caused
they a another man to bear it for him unto the place / that was the mount of
Caluary.

Lib. iiii. reuelat bte^ Brygide cap. lxx. b
one through the mydle of his right hand, the second through the left hand,
and through either foot one, laynge ye legs on croswyse, the one ouerthwarte
over ye other, and so did they hang him / and by many rebukes mocked him / and
when he co^playned of thurst / they gave him eysell and gall. And when he had
hanged there so paynfully the space of three hours, he with loud cry
commendyng his spirit and soul unto the father of heaven / expired and dyed.
And yet after his departing (to be sure of his death) one of ye sowdyours made
a wound in his side and thraste him unto the heart with a spear.



up. Thus you may perceive he did appear.v. times that same day of his
resurrection.



unto the end of the world. Amen. you now will think this table over long
for a daily exercise, but you must remember that the self table is contained
in the first words of every article, and the resydue is a breue declaracion of
the same, and therefore I shall be content to set it out alone in self words,
which ben in no^mbre.xl.

Thus.
Incarnation / Natiuite / Circumcision / Epyphani / Presentation / Egypt /
Disputacio^ / Humiliacio^ / Educacio^ / Baptysme / Wilderness / Fast,
Te^ptacio^ / Victory / Election / Preaching / Teaching / Labors / Miracles /
Maundy / Ministry / Consecracio^ / Sermon / Agonye / Betraynge / Taking /
Bisshopes / Pylate / Herod / Pylate again / Examinacio^ / Flagellacion /
Coronacion / Condemnation / Fatigation / Crucifixio^ / Sepulture / Resurrection
/ Ascension / Mission.

The end.
Now you may se this table is not long, but may easily be had by heart, and if
it so be, and daily used: I dare well say the persons shall find conforte
therein, both to exclude vice / and also to increase in virtue and grace. And
yet forthermore to co^tynue therein unto their conforte and joy everlasting
whereunto he bring us that bought us our lord god and most sweet savior Jesus,
who guide you and keep you all.

Amen.
The householder. Thus have I now (in dischargynge of my conscience) done and
fulfilled the cownsell and bidding of my ghostly father that taught me this
lesson, which cownsell was, that I should call you all before me: as well my
wife and children, as mine other servants, men / women, and children, and to
teache you this said and same lesson that he taught me. Now I pray you all and
charge you to do your deuoyr and diligence to follow it and use it.


Also he delivered unto me an other pretty lesson, which was not his own
work, but of his translation as follows, and bad me also teache it you.

A breue or short monycio^ or counseyle of the cure and governance of a
household, according unto policy. Taken out of a pystle of a great learned man,
called Bernarde Siluestre, and put among ye works of saint Bernarde for
because that many done judge and think hit was his own work.

Set forth by the same brother.

First good devout christians / take most head, and give most diligence to
order your self and all youres, unto our lord, according unto the poor
lesson that goes before / and than se well unto the substance / and guydyng
of your house / and goods. Se first that peace be in the house / and that you
agree all together / for else all your goods will sone goo to naught. Than
(after the commune proverb) cut your tho^ges: after, or according unto your
ledder. Spend according unto your gaynes / gettings / or re^tes / and not
above. It is also good policy / to have one years rent / or a years gaynes in
store for chau^ces, which is not contrary unto christianite where extreme, or
very streyte need / is not perceived in the neighbor. A negligent or rechles
person may soon set on fire, and destroy great substance. Have therefore a
good eye / and guard unto the diligence of your servants, for under the^ your
goods may soon mynushe / and be wasted before you know / beware or have
knowledge thereof / If your goods begin to waste better is, and less rebuke
for you to absteyne, and withdraw your charges / than to fall in to nedynes /
or danger. An old proverb. Qui plus expe^dit quam reru^ copia tendit. No^
admiretur si paupertate grauetur. That is. * Who so done spend beyond their
faculte / No marvel though with need they grieved be.

It is therefore a great providence, and good foresyght often to count / and
compare your goods, and your gaynes with your expenses. Often to ouerse your
goods, shall be necessary. For your beasts may take hurt for defaute of fode,
all though they nothing ask ne compain. Aristoti. i^ Econo.
The stepp of the husband: makes a fat donghyll. And the eye of the
master: a fat horse. that is to mean. that the presence of the master: in
every corner / is much profitable. Sumptuous and costly weddynges or brydales:
be^ damage / without honor. Expe^ses done upon war: ben more honorable,
than profitable. Better is to suffer some wrong, and to bye peace, than to
make war, or to keep war. Cost made upon prodigal persons? is clearly
lost. Cost made upon kynne, friends? is reasonable. Feed your household
servants: with honest commune fare / without delicates. For ye servant that
is made a gloto^, shall never after mende his manners. Glotony is vile, fylthy,
and stynkyng, and will make the negligent and careless person soon roten and
short lived. Ecclesi. xxxi.
Mean fedyng with scarcite: is unto the diligent person / pleasant and
profitable. upon the holidays and high feasts: give your household plenty of
meat, but seldom and few delicates. For the use of delicate fode / will
soon mar a good servant. Let glotony and thy purse strive, and go to law
together: and beware thou well, which part thou take, but for the most
part always hold with the purse. For glotons, men of law, and witnesses /
done speak all of affection, but the purse brings in plain evidence and
proof, the empte barn and ye empte bag. But if very negardy shut up thy
purse, than art not thou an even judge. For nygardy is a folysshe and nedeles
fere / and ever living in pouerte, and hourdeth and muckereth up: he can not
tell for whom. If you have plenty of corn desire no derth. For those persons
that of covetous mind done procure or desire derth, done procure and desire
the death of ye poor, and shall be accused: as homicides and ma^sleers. Sell thy
corn better chepe unto thy neyghbure (althouhg he were thine enemy) tha^ unto
strangers. For an enemy is sometime sooner vaynquysshed and ouercomen by a
kind deed / than by the sword. Be never at debate with thy neyghbure, but
rather study / and labor to be at one. For you can have none so sure a
castle / or guard of thy life: as is the love and frendshype of thy neghbure.
If thou suspecte the women of thy house: let other persons rather show the /
tha^ you should be over busy to try out ye matter. For though it were of thine
own wife / or the wife of the husband: it were better unknown. For ones
known, it is never cured / ye wound is without remedy. If any remedy be: it
shall be when like chance is herd of other persons. The lest and most easy way
therein: is to dissimule the matter though it were pryuely known / and pretend
ygnorau^ce without any quarrel or co^tenaunce, but rather by a dyscrete ghostly
father let the parties be reformed ye sin be not continued. A noble heart /
and high gentle mind: will never search of wome^s matters. A shrew will sooner
be corrected by smyling or laughing: than by a staff / or strokes. The best
way to keep a woman good: is gentle entreaty, and never to let her know yt
she is suspected / and ever to be counseyled and informed with loving manner. An
old woman unclean of living (if ye law would suffer) should be buried quycke.
Let your clothing or array, Of array.
be in a mean, nor vile ne precious, but always, fair and honest / and of sad:
and not of wanton fasshyon. A costly garme^te beyond: or above the state and
degree of the person: is a sign and toke^ of little wit. For a woman that
has suffyciente array: to desire new / and change: is a sing of little
sadness. * Trust him rather for thy friend, that somewhat does for the: than him
that does offer him self: saying. I am yours in all I can and may. For in
words is great plenty of friends. Proverb xvii. c
* A true friend loves at all times, and never fails at need. There is no
comparyson of riches: unto a faithful friend. Ecclesi. x. b
* Never repute, ne think him thy friend that does praise / or boste the unto
thy face, or in thy presence. When you give counsel unto a friend: say this
seems best unto me, not thus you must nedely do. For you may sooner get
rebuke, or blame for your counsel if it prove not: than thank for your good
counseyle: though it speed well. If mynstreles, iogulers, or gesters, come unto
thy house: say thou haste no lodging for such gestes / you keep neither Inn
nor alestake. For if you take pleasure in their pastymes: you been full like to
have a another wife shortly after, whose name is called pouerte, or beggry. If
you fortune to come where they ben, and begin somewhat to delecte in their
matters: I advise you dissymule and take upon you that you herd the^ not / ne
set any thing thereby. For if they perceue and se you but laugh: they will take
that for an ernest to cry largess / and to have reward. And so importune will
they be / and so sha^fully crave: that you shall be yrke and weary of them, and
peradventure they will fall to rebukynge / braulynge, and scolding, so that
you shall be feign and glade, to give somewhat (for fere) unto those galowe
clappers, worthy in deed to be hanged up. For I tell you, god is not pleased with
that occupacion: except it be (as sca^t tolerable or alowable) among princes,
lords / and high estates.

Now for your servants, if you have a servant of high proud mind and
stubburne stomach, put him away lest after he do you harm, and so do him that
always does praise your manners in all things. For a flaterer is worse than an
enemy: your enemy can not lightly deceive you, but your seruau^ts or your
neighbors yt do praise you been surely about to deceive you. Ecclesi. vii. c.
and xxxiii. d
If you have a basshefull and dredefull servant and find him faithful /
than love him and cherysshe him as your own natural child. Make your
buyldynges rather for need than for pleasure. For ye appetyte of buyldyng for
pleasure shall never have end, till pouerte teache wit: so^what to late. Be
loath to sell your heritage, and if you must need sell? Sell not unto great
persons, but rather for less unto ye lower persons. Better is to sell, tha^
to borow by usury. For usury is like a thief yt would warn you before: what
harm he would do unto you. If you bye or bergayn, be not buty fellow with great
persons. And though he be under you, yet strive not with him lest he put his
part unto your better, or master. In all things keep truly and faithfully
your bond and promise, according unto your couenau^te. Due temperau^ce is a
thing of great honesty in a household, let therefore your drink wine / ale /
or bear / be temperate. Strong drink is more pleasau^te / than wholesome.
Ecclesi xxxi. d
The wise man says, that sobre drink is the hel-the both of soul and body.
Ibidem.
And the wise and learned person will be right well content with little drink:
and that shall not trouble ye stomach / but rather cause sweet and wholesome
sleep: and of the contrary done come many inco^modytes as there does follow.
Who so ever among many and diverse strong drynkes with haboundau^ce thereof: is
sobre / may be called an erthly god, or a god upon earth, wrestle not therewith
if you do my counsel. And if by chance you be in company, and begin to feel
ye drink work: arise and depart: a sleep is more mete for you than any
company. Who so by words would excuse dro^kennes: does openly declare his own
disease. The knowledge and judgment of wynes: does nothing become a young
person. If a physicion or surgio^ use to be drunk, let him not have ye cure
of your disease ne let none of the^ take experience, and learn in you / how to
cure or hele a another. For though they be well learned / and have not
experience: it is no wisdom to let the^ prove their connyng upon you. Great
gaye horses, and little preaty dogs: leave you unto lords and ladies. A byg
labouryng horse, and a mastyfe, or a curre dog: ben good to keep your house.
As for hawks, hounds and hu^tyng dogs do spend more than they done get,
they ben mete and according for states: to set idle servants on work, but
far vnaccordyng ben they, for husbands and ware householders. It is no
wisdom to make your own children stewardes or rulers of your household or
goods. Foles and negligent or careless persons, hail many misfortunes. For
that is their common excuse wha^ any thing is wrong they say tha^, that
chance or misfortune was cause thereof. I say not nay: but yt chance or
mysfortune may fall. But who so does follow wisdom, lernyng, and discrecio^
shall seldom accuse mysfortune. For dilligent warenes, and good head, done
seldom company with mysfortune. But yet more seldom shall you se mysfortune and
sloth or neglyge^ce, departed in sondre, for they do^e co^munely company
together. The sluggard says, god will help him, and so long he trusts
thereunto, till he be brought unto beggry For god by ye wise man does send the
sluggarde (for example) unto the Ant or pysmere, Prouer. vi.
to learn to labor. Job. v.
For man (says Job (is borne unto labor, as a byrd to fly. Keep you
(therefore) but few idle persons or men. And watch you well and take good
head unto every person of your house. And ever po^dre, weye, and co^sydre your
expenses, with your gaynes or gettings. First get and bring in, and tha^ spend.
For it is no good husba^dry to borow. And when you wax aged trust rather unto
god than unto your children or fre^des. That you sede before you, you shall be
sure to find. No cofre, cheste, ne tower may be more sure to keep treasure?
than is heaven. Let not (therefore) the poor pass you. What you give unto the^:
you give unto Christ. And of yt you leave behynd you: appoint unto every
person his part. For better were it for you nothing to leave: tha^ yt strife
and debate should be made conscience blamysshed and god offended for your
goods. Trust them best to do for your soul: not yt done love, or say they
done love your soul, but that you done perceive, and conjecture, done love
their own soul. Make your testamente every year new, and surely sealed by
wytnes. Lay it where (wha^ need is) (...) may be found, no man (...) how to
end his life. The (...) sure way, to dye well, is well to live. Which he
grant us, that bought us, our lord god, and most sweet savior Jesus christ.

Amen. Of your charity pray for ye same old wretch of Syon. Richard
whytforde.

Imprynted by me John^ waylande / At London within temple bar. At the sign
of the blew garlande / From the temple gate not far.

An^. M.CCCCC. and xxxvii.


