THE HOLY exercise of a true Fast, described out of Gods word.

JOEL. 2. 12. 13. Turn you unto me (says the Lord) with all your heart, and
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. And rent your heart, and
not your clothes: and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious, and
merciful, slovve to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the
evil. Seen and allowed.

AT LONDON, Printed for John Harison, and Thomas Man.

AN. 1580.

THE HOLY EXERCISE OF A true Fast, described out of Gods word.
IT IS AN EVIdent declaration, of a marvelous blindness which is in us, to
order our steps toward the kingdom of heaven: that like children new come
into the world, we know not when to eat, and when to forbear eating, no
further then we have our direction out of Gods word. But it is yet more
marvel, that in so small a matter, scarce the hundred person, of those which
profess the name of Christ, know either how to enter into this way, or how
to turn them in it when they are entered, to any glory of God, or profit of
them selves. For to let the Papists go, which through a shameful superstition
in it, rather pine away their souls, then take down their bodies: it is a
shame to speak, how few there are, of those which bear the name of
Gospellers, that have so much as the knowledge of this exercise, so far are
they from any lawful and right practice of it. For a great number as a
needless thing, reject it altogether. For shaking off the Popish yoke, from
their own necks, by using, or rather, abusing their liberty: they suffer
their servants to remain still under it. Which custom, unless it be thorough
infirmity of body, or some other weighty cause: it can hardly escape the hot
and vehement suspicion, either of belly gods, if thinking it religious in their
servants, they them selves will not observe it: or of a covetous mind, if
having no such opinion of it, they do notwithstanding constrain their
servants thereunto. An other sort there be, which being afraid of the reproach
of belly gods, and thinking it, sitting to the Christian profession, to keep
the flesh in some bridle: allow (in deed) of the exercise of fasting, but for
want of knowledge of a better, they stick still in the mire of the Popish
fast. For remedy whereof, there follows a treatise, whereby the true fast
being understood: as well the profane opinion, of those which reject this
exercise, as the foolish superstition of those, which content the^ selves with
a shadow thereof, is laid open.

Fasting therefore, is an abstinence commanded of the Lord: thereby to make
solemn profession of our repentance. Wherein, that which is said of the Lord
commanding it: is to be considered against those, which would thrust this
exercise, out of the doors of Christian Churches. For the repressing of which
error, let that be called to remembrance, which the Lord commanded by Moses:
Leuit. 16. 29, 30, 31, and 23. 27. to 33 Number. 29. 7.
that every soul once a year should humble it self, in fasting before the
Lord, in one of the great assemblies of his people. For although the ceremony
of the day be taken away by the coming of our Savior Christ: yet the thing
it self is no more taken away, then a rest for Gods service is banished,
because the Jews Saboth is abolished. For, when as (no doubt) the
consideration of the fast was, that the wrath of God, should not break out
against them, or being broken out, should be caused to return home again: the
same cause remaining, there is good reason the same effect should continue. And
when it is an hu^bling of a man before his God: was there any degree of casting
down, necessary for that people, which is not necessary for us? either
ought they to have gone down lower into the conceit of their unworthiness,
then we into the conscience of our guiltiness? whose benefits as they are
greater then theirs, so the abuse of them should drive us, to the lowest
humiliation that can be, so it be lawful and warrantable by the word of God.

But if this holy exercise of Fasting, do not clearly enough appear, to be
no fading or shadowing ceremony, by this set and ordinary Fast, because the
like does not agree with the time of the Gospel: yet by other moveable and
uncertain fastes, which were holden upon occasion, the same may be more
strongly strengthened. For where we see the like occasion of fast, that was
then: there we may be assured of the same commandment to fast, that was given
them: commandment I say, least any man thinking it to be a will worship,
taken up at the pleasure of men, might think he had as good (or better) right
to lay it down, the^ they had, to take it up. For proof whereof, that one
place of the Prophet Joel Joel. 2. 12.
shall suffice, which, upon occasion of a great dearth in the land,
commands in the Lords behalf, to sanctify a fast. By which one
commandment, it is evident, that other fastes, which were kept, either by the
Churches publicly, or by some of the faithful privately: were done in
obedience, and not at the randon of man's invention. If this be not sufficient,
to subdue our sturdie affections, to this so holy an exercise: yet at the
least, let them stoop under so manifest, both doctrine and examples hereof, by
the Churches of GOD underneath the Gospel. For when as our Savior Christ,
being charged by the Pharisees Luke 5. 33.
and John's Disciples, that his Disciples fasted not, so answered, that he did
not only not condemn it, but highly also commend it, so it were done
seasonably: It is plain, that the liberty which the Gospel brings, has
not removed the ancient bound of a Christian fast. And if we look into the
practice, whereby the way chalked out by his doctrine, is trodden and beaten
plain unto us by examples: it will soon be seen, how greatly they deceive
them selves, which under the color of greater perfection attained under the
Gospel, cast away the assistance, that the Lord offreth by this exercise. For
if we enquire of the Churches and Apostles fasting, then was it most often,
when they were fullest of the graces of God: that is, after the solemn sending
of the holy Ghost.

If we think then, that this exercise of fast, be too ceremonius, because it
was tied to a certain day: the commandment to hold it without any such
restraint, unto a certain time, ought to correct that thought of ours. If we
stand in fear, that it should be too Jewish: the doctrine of the Gospel is
ready, to pull us out of that fear. If presumption of greater graces, then
those which should need such a supply, do bring this fast out of conceit with
us: the practice of it by the holy Apostles, at the highest top of their
perfection in this world, will easily set up the credit thereof again. But if
fastes, neither standing nor sitting, neither under the law, nor under the
Gospel, neither of the weaker, nor of the stronger, can draw us into love, and
(in love) into practice thereof: it must needs be confessed, that there is a
marvelous poison of rebellion in our natures, which all this triacle of the
Lords high authority, and of such authorized examples of the children of God,
will not cast forth. Howbeit, the Lord leaves us not here, but unto his
Lordly authority, of commanding this exercise of fast, has added fatherly
promises, to allure us unto the same: as toward the end of this treatise,
shall plainly appear.

This exercise therefore of fasting, being both of such authority, and of so
great weight to pull wrath upon us, if it be neglected: let us now see in that
things (especially) it does consist. And they are in number two. The former is
of the outward, and (as the Apostle calls it,) of the bodily exercise: 1.
Tim. 4. 8.
the other is of the inward virtues, helped forward by the bodily exercises.
For the outward ceremony, it is an abstinence for a time, from the commodities
and pleasures of this life, thereby to make us the apter to the inward virtue.
And th^^ outward abstinence is therefore commanded, that we should both feel
and in feeling, profess that we are unworthy either of life, or of any thing
that belongs to the upholding thereof. And albeit, it may appear but a
childish thing to carnal men, and a thing unworthy the wisdom of the
Gospel, to place any thing i^ this bodily exercise, seeing that the Lord is a
spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, and seeing that they being
of their own nature, neither good nor evil, can not make us either better or
worse: yet if we consider that it is the Lords ordinance, who has so
commanded it, w^ can not be but most assured, that the Lord who has so
instituted it, will give it a blessing, and cause it to prosper, to that end
whereunto he has ordained it: if we undertake it in his fear, and in a
conscience of obeying the Lords commandment. Those 1. Cor. 9. 25
which came either to run, or to wrestle for the best game: were wont to
abstain from such things, as might hinder their exercise, or make them less
able to perform the^ with praise. And whatsoever, either pith in their arms,
or swiftness in their legs, they had otherwise: yet as they neglected not
that abstinence, so they found that it greatly profited them, to the better
breathing and other inhabling of them, to their exercises. And shall we think,
that the diet which the Lord him self has appointed, to the fitting of us
toward the spiritual wrestling with our fleshly mind, shall not have a
singular fruit? And if there were no other fruit of this abstinence, but that
the enemies mouth should thus be stopped, which charge the Gospel, to set open
a school to allicentiousnesse of eating, and to give (as it were) a sauce to
provoke men's appetites thereunto, which are otherwise too sharp set of them
selves: it should be no small effect of our abstinence. In deed the Papists
charge upon us, is here the same and no other, then the Pharisees, against
Luke. 5. 33.
the Disciples of our Savior Christ: but why should not we, if we desire that
the Gospel should be well spoken of, take away the occasion of such speches.

But let us see wherein this abstinence does consist, where first of all
comes to be considered, the abstinence from meats and drinks, whereof (as
the principal of the outward 2. Sam. 12. 16. 17. Ezr. 10. 6. Leui. 23. 32.
Judge. 20. 26
observations) the whole exercise took the name. And the word it self with
the practice declare, that it is not only a sober use of meats, which ought to
be continual all the life long, or a more sparing diet then at other times: but
an utter abstinence from evening to evening, from all kind of meats and
drinks. Whereby it appears, that the Popish fast is nothing less, then the
fast which the Scripture teaches: for they break the neck of this
abstinence, both by fullness and by delicacie. By fulness, in that it is lawful
(as other days) at dinner to fill them selves with any thing, flesh only
excepted: at evening and morning to fill them selves with bread and drink. By
delicacie for that, where men on that day, should content them selves with
common and course meats, sufficient only for preservation of health: the
Papists in their abstinence, did either not so much as aim at this mark, or
else they shot grossly wide. For in permitting the use of all things at their
dinner, besides flesh: it is evident, that they left greater dainties, and
greater stirrers of fleshly lusts, then they did cut off. And besides, the
dainties in meats: wine, (then which there is nothing more provoking) was as
usual that day as of others. And at evening, when they would give the clearest
testimony of their abstinence, and when they did light their candels (as it
were) to show their abstinence by: the greatest part of those that were both
able and might find in their hearts, to bestow it of them selves, had their
tables furnished with spice bread, with fruits of this side and beyond the
seas, with Marmelet and Sucket, and such like: then which dealing, what could
be more childish? to deny the tasting, only of one morsel of flesh, and to
permit a fullness of bread: to forbid the courser meats and table, which might
have been furnished for two pence, and to draw in the delicatest meats, which
could not be provided for twenty shillings: to restrain the use of things
bred at home, and to leave the use free of things fetched out of Barbary:
finally to condemn the eating of a piece of smoakie and reastie bakon, and to
justify the banqueting and iunqueting dishes, which are before mentioned. That
I speak nothing of some of the poorer sort, which upon the Thursday at night,
and Friday at dinner, would fill their bellies the fuller, that they might
pass over their abstinence, with less feeling the want of their accustomed
diet. All which things, as we condemn in the Papists: so we must carefully
take heed that they be not found in us: unless we have forgot, that in
iudgeing them we condemn our selves, Romans 2. 1.
when as we do the same things, which we find fault worthy in them.

An other of these corporal exercises is watching, or a cutting short of our
ordinary sleep: which we may apply to the furtherance of this exercise. For
beside that this abstinence, is a removing of ordinary pleasures and
commodities: it appears, that some thing also should be pared from it. For
beside that it is meet that there should be a certain conformity and
sutablenesse of our whole behavior, all the time of the fast: the Prophet Joel
exhorting the Priests Joel. 1. 13.
to this holy exercise of fast, bids them that they should continue in
sackcloth in the night time, extending this exercise (at the least) to some part
of the night. Where notwithstanding it is to be noted, that as well in the
former abstinence from meat, as in this withdrawing of some part of sleep,
that neither is so straightly required of the Lord, but that those whose either
disease, or other infirmity will not bear this abstinence, without hazard of
their health, may use so much liberty, as shall serve for the preservation of
their health: so they take heed they use not this gentle dealing of the Lord,
as a cloak to hide the lusts of their flesh withal. A third kind of
abstinence is in the apparel, that albeit they put not on sackcloth and ashes,
as the holy fathers did in times past, yet that they content them selves with a
common kind of attire, avoiding all such costlinesse and curiosity, whereby in
tricking and trimming up them selves, the flesh may take occasion of being
proud. Thus the lord, when he would have the children of Israel to humble Exodus
33. ^.
them selves before him: spoke to Moses, saying, speak unto the children of
Israel, that for the present time, they lay aside their jewels and ornaments,
that I may know what I shall do with them. And thus far has it been spoken
of the outward exercises, which are general, and to be don of al, which make
this solemn profession of repentance. There is one yet which is more special,
belonging unto married persons alone, which is, that they for the time, should
with consent abstain from the mutual fellowship 1. Cor. 7. 5.
one of an other, which is so straightly required, that even the bridgrome Joel.
2. 16.
and the bride, (which of all other ought to have the greatest privilege in
that point) are bidden at such times, to come out of their cha^bers.

But for as much as, the kingdom Romans 14. 17
of heaven stands not in these things, and the Lord being a spirit, will be
worshipped in spirit and truth: either these exercises must lead us to some
farther thing, or else the same accusation will lie against us, wherewith the
Prophet charged the Israelites, who contenting themselves with the outward
ceremony of Esaias. 58. 30
abstinence, were sent home as empty as they came. And in deed, unless we
bring more with us, the^ this our abstinency, our fastes may be matched with
the beasts fast of Niniuie, for they also both eat nothing, Jonas. 3. 7.
and were covered with sackcloth: yea the beasts fast, may be so much better
then ours, as there be some kinds of beasts, that can longer endure without
meat and sleep then we. Where the Papists fast, which was showed before to
be childishe, may here be proved to be beastly and brutish. For if they did
only abstain from meat, they judged themselves to have bolden a good fast
unto the Lord. There follow the inward virtues helped forward by the bodily
exercise, which in the number * two. ^sdra. 6. 21.
The one is the humbling and casting down of our selves, before the high
majesty of God, with sorrow for our sins: the other, is the assurance that
we have, that with forgiveness of them, we shall obtain the thing that we
stand in need of, and make suit for.

Here therefore, first comes to be considered, our humbling and casting
down, which is a vile esteeming of our selves, aunswering to the outward
exercise. For therefore do we abstain for a time, that we might thereby have a
quicker feeling of our own unworthiness. Therefore we bring down the body,
that the mind may be likewise brought down. Therefore we crucify the flesh,
that the deserved death of the spirit, may be the better known. Therefore we
abstain from our pleasures Mark. 2. 20. Luke 5. 35. Math. 9. 15.
and commodities, that through conscience of sin, and feeling of the wrath of
God, either present, or to come for the same: we might draw our selves to a
greater sorrow. In which respect, the exercise which the other Evangelists
call fasting, Saint Matthew calls mourning. Here-vppon Joel. 2. 17. 1. Sam. 7.
6.
it comes, that weeping which is a witness of our sorrow, is annexed unto
the fast; which the children of God have don so plentifully in this exercise,
that they have been said, 1. Sam. 7. 6.
to have drawn whole bucketes of water: which the depth of the sorrow for
their sins, and the anger of God, against them has ministered. And as these
outward exercises are commanded, to draw us to a feeling of our
unworthiness: so in the feeling thereof, by them we make a solemn confession
of the same. For the Children of God in time past, by their abstinence from
meat and drink, confessed themselves unworthy so much as of a crumme of
bread, or drop of water: by putting on sackcloth, unworthy of the worst
ragge to cover their shame with. So that if common honesty and health would
have suffered, they would have stripped them selves stark naked. The same is
to be understood, of the benefit of sleep, and company of marriage, as also
of all other the commodities of this life: whereof they did not only confess
themselves unworthy, but in that they put dust and ashes upon their heads,
they gave to understand, that they were unworthy of the life it self, and that
they deserved to be as far underneath the ground, as they were above it: yea
if there had been any thing, apter to have set forth their everlasting
condemnation in hell, of that also would they have borne the mark, thereby to
declare their guilt and desert of the same. So that hereby they do justify
the Lord, in that vengeance against them: whereof by this humbling of
themselves, they seek redress. If then we keep a holy fast unto the Lord, we
must thereby be humbled in our selves before the Lord: but if upon confidence
of our fasting, we wax bolder to sin, in a persuation that through Luke 5.
33. Luke 18. 11.
obedience given unto him, in this one point, we may be bolder to be
disobedient in others: or if the use hereof do make us swell against our
brethren, and after the example of the Pharisees, despise them which do not
fast as we do: then is the fast, appointed of the Lord for our medicine,
become our bane and poison.

And therefore here now, we give a new charge upon the Popish fast, a great
deal more hot then the former. For seeing that they with the proud Pharisee,
boast of the merit of their fastes, setting these fastes (as other works) in
the place of the blood of Christ: It is manifest, that their fastes are so
far from humbling them, that through the opinion of them, they rise up
against the Lord, and do their best to set themselves, even in the throne of
God: so that unto the childishness and brutishnes, of their fast above
mentioned, here they have added an horrible and blasphemous sacrilege. To the
co^passing of this true humbling of our sins, is annexed necessarily, an
information and meditation of the filthiness of our sins, and of the just
vengeance of the Lord against them, declared in the threateninges of the law,
and execution of the judgments of God against the wicked, and namely against
our Savior Christ, who putting upon himself our wickedness, suffered hell
pains for it: and specially an information and meditation of those, both
sins and punishments, which the present time and persons do give occasion
of. And thus far touching the first part of the inward virtues in fasting;
standing in the casting down of our selves before the Lord.

There follows the other part, which is a profession of our faith, that we
shall be lifted up as high, through the grace of the Lord our God in Jesus
Christ, as the conscience of our sins does cast us down: and that we shall
obtain, the removing of the evils tending to our destruction, (through the
worthiness of our Savior Christ,) which either presently press us, or hang
over our heads, through our own unworthiness. For as true repentance, casting
us down with one hand, both in sorrow for our sins, and confession of the
same, leaves us not in our downfall, but through faith, reaches us the other
hand, to lift us up again: so this solemn profession of our repentance,
carrying us first to the valley of trouble, afterward brings us back again,
to the gate of hope. In which respest, we always find in the holy Scriptures,
Ezra. 9. 5. Nehem. 1. 4. Dan. 9. 3. Judge. 20. 26 Luke. 5. 33. 1. Cor. 7. 7.
that fasting is joined with prayer, 2. Chron. 20. 6. James. 1. 6. John. 16. 23.
which ca^ never be truly made, without hope of obtaining the grace, that is
prayed for. But for as much as prayer, is a daily and ordinary exercise of
Gods children: it is manifest Jonas. 3. 8. Esaias. 58. 4.
that by the prayer which is coupled with fasting, there is understood a
special or peerless kind of prayer, both in zeal and strength of prayer,
as also in continuance of the same. Whereby appears, that here is an other
use of the outward abstinence, that it might be as it were a wing, wherewith
the prayer, that otherwise through earthly affections, creeps upon the
ground, might the easilier flee up into heaven: and that it might be a
grindestone, to make a point of it, that it may pearce, and to set an edge that
it may cut, both the visible and invisible enemies, which we pray against. And
therefore the outward abstinence that pulls down the body, helps to lift
up the mind, and crucifying the flesh, it quickneth the spirit, and makes it
more lively to this exercise. Where yet again the Popish fast is found
insufficient, which upon the days of their fastes, had no extraordinary
exercises of prayer: more then other days which were not fasted. To the better
performance also of this part, is annexed an informatio^ and meditation, of the
gracious promises of GOD, especially such as may serve for relief of the
present occasions.

Wherein the better to correct our dullness and heaviness to this so holy an
exercise, let us remember, that it is to obtain some special grace at the
hand of the Lord. Whereby it is given us to understand, that upon due holding
of this fast unto the Lord, there be excellent promises and a most singular
reward. Whereof the place of Joel, as it spoke before, for the commandment of
all the fastes, ^oel. 2. 13. ^ 19. 20.
which the people of God used, so will it undertake for the promises, which the
Lord has made, to all those which submit them selves to the obedience
thereof. The truth of which promises is so manifest in the Scriptures: as the
Sun (at noone days) can be no clearer. For let all the fastes of the holy
Churches, and of godly men laid out in Scripture, both of the old and new
Testament be Judge. 20. 23. Ezra. 19. 6* Hest. 4. 16. 2. Chron. 20. 3.
turned over: and it shall be seen, that the end of their fast (which kept it
in any measure of truth and simplicity) was a feast, and the issue of their
mourning, great rejoicing. For, Dan. 9. 20. Jonah. ^. 10*
albeit the ordinary prayers of the faithful, return not empty unto them
again: yet having regard unto these, which are joined with this exercise,
they may worthily seem to be barren, which are otherwise Act. 12. 5. Act. 13. 2.
fruitful, and to be blasted, which otherwise seem full eared. Yea the fast of
the wicked king Achab, joined with 1. Regum. 21* 27.
no true repentance, nor so much as with any true knowledge how to serve the
Lord, but performed in some sort only in keeping of the outward and bodily
ceremonte, went not unrewarded from the Lord. For even by the very shadow of
his exercise, the execution of that judgment, which was awarded against him,
touching his utter rasing from the kingdom of Israel: was differred until his
sons days. Now, if the coming within the shadow of this exercise, does
heal some diseases: what will it do if we come to touch the body thereof?
and if the leaves of it, have some virtue to preserve men from the vengeance of
God: how sovereign is the fruit, to deliver us from the wrath to come? And if
the ordinary obedience of the children of GOD, goes not empty, and
unrewarded from the presence of GOD: this extraordinary obedience and
exercise, in the worship of GOD, must needs receive special, and
extraordinary blessings from his hand. When Benhadab 1. Regum. 20. 29.
the Syrian king, overcome by Achab king of Israel, was out of hope of any
safety, at the length by the advice of his servant, he put him 1. Reg. 20.
31. to 35.
self and his company in sackcloth, with ropes about their necks: thinking
by humbling them selves before the king, to obtain pardon, which came to pass
accordingly. If therefore, men in hope of obtaining pardon, will humble them
selves to them, of whom they have no promise, that they shall obtain any
thing: how much more ought we to do it, which have so sure promises of good
success? and if mercy was obtained of men, in whom there is scanta drop of
that pity and compassion, which is seafull in the Lord: we may be well
assured, that we shall not miss of it at his hand. And if one enemy, can
look for it at the hand of an other: we may with greater assurance, look for
it at the hand of the Lord, to whom we are already reconciled, by the blood
of his son.

T^erefore, if the authority of the Lord should not compel us: yet the most
liberal and certain promises, should allure us to this exercise. Which if we
do not, what remains, but that such as will not fast, with the ch^^dren of
GOD, must eat and drink^ of the furious wrath of GOD, with the wicked: they
that will not weep with the one, must ^owle with the other. And finally, they
that will have no part, in the obedience of the commandment given hereof, to
both the peoples, under the Law and under the Gospel, must have no part in
the promises made to any of them: according as the Lord threateneth, that who
so ever shall not afflict or humble his Leui. 23. 29. Luke. 5. 35.
soul with the rest, that he will destroy them from among his people.

The time of fasting is the time ^f affliction, either for want of some great
benefit needful, or through feeling of some great judgment present, or to
come. Where the Popi^^ fast must pass an other condemnation, which makes no
difference o^ choice of time: but appoints every Friday, and other set euens
yearly, whether the time be prosperous o^ unprosperous, whether it be peace o^
war, health or sickness, dearth o^ plenty. Which is al one, as if the
Physician should now appoint his patien^ this day twenty or fortieyeres hence
to take a purgation, or to be let blood* In which case, either he must be ^
Prophet, rather then a Physician, t^ know that he shall on that day, hau^
need of it: or else he must be a Physician of no value, ignorant, or
unfaithful. As therefore the Physicia^ opens no vain, but with ob^^^uation
where the sign is, gives ^ purgation, without heed taking ^ the time of the
year, whether it ^ spring or fall, whether it be hot ^ cold: so it behooves
the spiritu^^ Physician, to have an eye unto ^e time, when this medicine is in
^^ason. And so much the more, ^re rather then there, as the daun^^r is greater.
For as a new piece ^ cloth added to an old garment, ^^keth something from the
old, ^^d causes the rent to be worse, Luke. 5. 36.
^^en before: so fasting unfitly ap^lied, to the state of those that are
^^ioyned to keep it, makes them ^orse, then they were before the fast. ^ea
that which more is, as the new Luke. 5. 37.
wine put into old vessels, does ^^ only make them worse, but bre^^ them all
to pieces: so this fast thr^^ upon those, which are not, either (...) the time,
or for some other cause (...) for it, does utterly destroy them* Whereby men
may perceive, wh^^ cause we have to make a great conscience of the Popish fast,
as th^^ which is able of it self (if there we^^ no other corruptions amongst
them to drive a man to eternal destruction.

According also to the greatness of the affliction, the time of the fast is
taken, by the discretion o^ Leuit. 23. 27. 28.
those, to whom it belongs, at the least for a whole day. And if the wrath
of the Lord be hotter, then two days or Ester. 4. 16
else three, as it appea^^ by the example of the Jews in ^^ters time and of
Saint Paul. Act. 9. 9.
and this time (what so ever) has ^ nature of a Saboth. For therein Leuit. 23.
30. 31.
^ are bound to abstain from their ^^ly labors, according to the same
^ightnesse, and with the same ex^^ions, that they are bound to ob^^e the
Saboth. And therefore the Joel. 2. 12. Leui. 23. 32.
^phet wills them to sanctify a ^: And the Lord threateneth, that ^ so ever
shall do any work on ^ day, him shall he cut off from a^^gest his people. The
end whereof ^ that men setting them selves a ^ from their daily occupations,
^^t be wholly bestowed in the spi^^^^all exercises above specified. Whereby that
we may know, ^^ there was never a thread in the ^ cloth of the Popish fast,
which ^ not thoroughly infected with the ^^^rituall leprosy, of disobedience v^
the Lord: it is to be noted, ^^ where they ordained many, ^^ wicked and
unnecessary holy day^ this * one (and besides the Sab^^ the only holy day
appointed of ^ Lord) they quite rased out of t^^ Calendar. And of the fast in
ge^^rall thus far.

The kinds or sorts of fastes ^ follow, which are either priuat^ public.

The private fast is that, which undertaken upon some partic^^ calamity, by
the discretion of the ^ against whom the calamity is sent. And it is either
of a particular man ^^ household. In the former whereof it ^^ to be observed,
that for as much as ^he fast is joined with a separation ^^om their daily
occupations: that neither children, nor scholars, nor ^eruantes, nor any other
which be at ^he disposition and government of others, can choose any such day
ap^ointed for common occupations, without the consent of those that have
commandment over them. Without which consent, they must be ^orced to hold
their fastes upon the Lords day, or other days of rest, established in the
places of their abode. For here the Law of the Lord has place, that if the
wife, son, or daughter, vow a vow unto Number. 30. 4.
the Lord: that the husband or father shall have power to break it.

The public fast is that, which is undertaken upon some more general
calamity of the Church, at the appointment of them, which (under Joel. 2. 15.
Christ) have the government of the places, where the fast is holden. In this
fast, because a public assembly is commanded: it follows that the chief
instruction of the foresaid profession of repentance, is to be fetched from the
public preaching of the word.

Now leaving the causes of the private fasts, to the examination of every one,
which ca^ best judge of their own estate: let us consider, what causes there be
of a general fast amongst us. Wherein that it may be seen, that the trumpet
of fasting is blown rather, by the breath of GOD, then by the mouth of man:
let us take a short vewe of the causes, of the fastes mentioned in the
Scripture. The cause of the fast is the wrath of God against the Church, where
is to be considered, that the people of God have not only regarded this wrath,
against them selves particularly, but against others also, of the same society
and fellowshippe in religion that they were of, through a mutual feeling and
compassion which they have one with an other: as in the example of the Church
of Antioch, whose fast Acte^. ^3. 2.
appears to have been taken in hand, rather for the misery of the Church of
Jerusalem, then for them selves. Now the Churches round about us, being fallen
into great decay, partly by the spiritual miseries, as well of the heresies of
Papists, Arrians, Anabaptists, the Family of love etc. as also of the schism
of Lutheranisme daily preuayling, partly by bodily plagues of the pestilence,
almost in all places: of the sword in our neighbor countries, and of the famine
which waits commonly upon the same: it is evident that thereby grows one
cause of hu^bling our selves before our God. And when this wrath is considered,
either in that which is already come, or in that which may be feared shortly
to come: to whether so ever of the causes we look, we shall find, that we have
cause to fast. For what spiritual evil is in any of all their Churches, which
are not altogether in ours? not one of those detestable heresies, but are
lodged amongst us. And although the schism of Lutheranisme be not among us,
yet there is almost a great distraction of minds for the Church government,
beside the diversities of judgments in many other matters. And among bodily
punishments, the plague has indifferently fed, and yet does feed upon us. The
sword has been shaked at us both in the North by traitors, and in the South by
disordered wicked persons. And should it not strik us that her majesty was of
late in danger of her life by a shot. Which that it was not meant toward
her, ought not to abate our care for her majesty, but rather increase it: as
that which was more nerely directed against her of the Lord, to make both her
and us to cry for his grauous cover and protection over her. And if we
consider the wrath that hangs over our heads, the notes thereof are taken by
the example of the people of God, and first of Ezra, Ezra. 9. 3.
who understanding that the people had married strange women, fasted:
whereupon we have this note of the wrath to come, that considering how that
sin is committed openly in the land in diverse sorts, that therefore anger
is at hand. Here may be handled with godly and discrete wisdom the sins of
the land.

The second note to know the tempest to come, is taken from the Ninevites
fast. Whereupon we gather, Jonas. 3. 5.
that for so much as we are grievously threatened, as well by the ministers and
servants of the Lord, that speak in his name unto us, as also by his late
shaking of the earth: that sharp judgment (without repentance) must spedily
come upon us. The third is taken from signs of the wrath of god, which may
break out against us: as in Hester, where Hester. 4. 6
it was concluded at the request of Hamon, of the destruction of the whole
Church, wherewith may fitly be compared the holy league (as they say) and
decree of the late counsel of Trent, against the whole church and against ours
particularly. An other sign, is the preparation made against the Church, or an
endeavor to execute their malice, which drove Io ^. Paral. 20.
saphat and other more to a fast. Here the lofty countenaunces, and vndewtifull
demeanor of the Papists, may be considered, with their rebellious attempts in
Ireland; as also the Spanish navy, and great preparation made amongst them of
the holy league, with the present troubles in Scotland, and like accidents,
sufficient to procure the practice of this holy exercise.

A GENERAL CONFESSION OF Sins, to be made at the exercise of fasting: the
more particular confession being taken according to the estate of the several
Churches, by the good discretion of the minister, upon the knowledge thereof.
O Lord which art glorious in power and holiness, we being but dust and ashes,
with the casting of our selves down, at the foot of thy high Majesty:
confess that me are most vile sinners, conceived and borne in sin, and that
we are by nature nothing else, but a lump of all. wickedness, whose natural
property is, to grow in sin, as we grow in years, and to wax strong in
wickedness, as the powers of our minds and bodies receive strength. There is
in us, no wholesome nor sound knowledge how to obey: there is no manner of good
will or affection to please thee: finally there dwells no good thing in our
flesh. And although our cursed estate, does herein greatly appear, yet our
sin is made out of measure sinful, through the exceeding grace which thou
offrest by the Gospel of thy dear son; whereby we are so far from
profiting, that of our selves we should wax worse and worse. For the more
light of knowledge is showed, the blinder would we remain: the greater
obedience is taught, the frowarder and stubberner would we become, if thou by
the mighty working of thy holy spirit, should not cause it to be
fruitful. And although we have this natural corruption in common, with the
whole rotten race of Adam: yet we confess, that in us it has budded, and
shot forth so much more then in others, as we have had more means to kill
it, and to cause it to wither, the^ others have had. Where first of all, the
gracious offer of the treasure of thy holy gospel unto us, makes us guilty
many ways. For where passing by many other nations, thou have trusted our
^ation withal: yet with a number of us, has it found as small entertain^ent,
and felt as great resistaunce, as amongst them, at whose gates it never
knocked. For a great portion of the land, partly never yelding the^ selves to
the obedience thereof, and partly falling from it, after they had once yielded:
stand proudly as it were at the staves end with thee. The rest which make
profession of their submittaunce unto it, do it not accordingly. For first,
there be heaps of our people, which either through anyrckesomnesse of the iron
yoke of the Popish religion, or through a wicked opinion which they nourish, of
embracing any religion set forth: so cast aside the former popery, as they
still abide in an utter ignorance of the truth it self: in such sort, (that
through want of Preaching) they are as raw in the knowledge of the true
service of thee, as they were expert before in the service of the devil. And
where knowledge is, to any such sufficiency as is requisite, for the
inheritours of the kingdom of heaven: there is it (for a great part) joined
with such hypocrisy, as makes them more detestable before thee, (which
searchest the very raines,) then if they had still continued in their
ignorance. Now, for the remnant of us, which through grace have truly, and
faithfully believed, it is with so great weakness of faith, and so small
reformation of manners: That our glorious profession of the Gospel, supported
and borne out with so small show of the the fruits, which the excellency
thereof does require, makes not only the enemies to condemn us, but our
selves to suspect one an other, whether we belong unto thee or no. Wherein O
Lord, we acknowledge that to be our great and horrible sin, that being put in
trust with this unspeakable treasure of thy holy Gospel, and preferred to our
neighbors, professors about us; yet we are in thankeful obedience unto thee,
behind them all: first in knowledge, last in zeal; before them in the
doctrine of thy holy Gospel, behind the^ in the discipline of the same. The
yoke of the slavery of our bodies, which the Popish religion laid upon us,
we willingly shake off: but the holy bands of thy law, whereby our ^iotous
life and affections, should be brought into bondage, we do hardly, and
heavily admit. The Gospel which brought a freer use of our lawful honors,
pleasures and com^odities, was welcome unto us: but the same Gospel, which
restrains the unlawful licentiousness of our ambition, intemperancie and
covetousness, is not so. Finally so much of the Gospel, as does more nearly
respect our salvation, we seem to have some care to retain: but so much of
it as does more directly respect thy glory, and the profit one of an other,
(those especially which are not of the same land with us) we make small
account off. And seeing the naked treasure of the holy Gospel, had been a
rich reward of a most serviceable subjection: it coming unto us not alone,
but accompanied with so long a peace, with so great a wealth, so plentiful
abundance of all things, as this land has never or seldom used, other lands
about us have long looked after: makes our guilt a great deal more, because
that in thy so great a largis toward us, we have been so ungracious toward
thee again. Here therefore is another stayer, whereby our sin climeth
higher. For that we, in the commodities of this life, surmounting our
ancestors of the same profession of the Gospel, in king Henry and king
Edwardes time: are, for the fruits that such a liberality asks at our
hands, a great deal worse then they: and going beyond other lands in these
outward blessings, are outrunne of them, even in the very outward testimonies
and tokens of our obedience toward thee. And besides this huge heap, and (as
it were) reeke, of our general and common sins, we have to confess (at the
bar of thy judgment seat) the particular sins that we have kocked up in
our several estates. For our governors, O LORD, for the most part, being
more mindful of the fulfilling of their affections, then either of thy
glory, or of their good estate, which are committed unto them, have not held
so steady a hand as they ought to have done, either for the stablishing of the
laws, by which (under thee,) they should have ruled us, and we by them should
have been governed of thee, or for the thorough execution of so many, and so
far forth as they have been well established. Our Judges and other
ministers of justice likewise, have either ignorantly, or corruptly declyned
from righteous judgment: or giving sentence for the truth, they have done it
(diverse of them) with no conscience of thy true fear, or love of truth, but
for respect, either of vain glory, or of persons. The Ministers, which should
have been lights unto all estates, have for the most part, no light in
themselves: and their estate, in whose good constitution and sound health, the
rest should have recovered their health, is of all other the most sick unto
death. For if the whole number be surueyed, scarce the hundred will be found,
to be in the lotte of a faithful ministry. For ah alas, how many are there,
which occupying the place of Ambassadors, either for want of ability, or for
that they love ease and sleep, carry no tolerable embassage at all: how many
which carrying the light of the Gospel in their mouths, carry also in their
hands, the filthy water of ambition and covetousness to quench it with. And
those which by thy grace, are for their might and will in some good measure
justifiable: notwithstanding, for the most part, bear it with such
infirmity, through slippes, as well in a sound and substanctall manner of
teaching, as also in an even life answering thereunto, that if thy blessinge
were not merueilous upon their labors, we should not need to fear, the
quenching of this fire of the holy Gospel, kindled among us, by the enemies:
as that which having so small attendaunce of blowing, would die of it self.
Finally, the people bear so small love unto their governors of all sorts, in
love so small reverence, and in them both so little willing obedience: that it
may be (not vneasely) seen, that all the parts of the Church and common
wealth, have conspired to provoke thee Lord against them. These our great and
ouergrowen sins, albeit they are gotten above our heads, yet rest they not
here. For where thou have by thy holy servants, the Ministers of thy blessed
word, sharply chidden with us, and in a severe denouncing of thy judgments
due unto them, fearfully threatened us for them: yet have we not trembled at
thy voice, at which the Mountains do melte, and the rocks do rent a sunder.
A strange thing, that the Lion should roar, and the weak Lambs should not
be affraide: that the Lord of Hoastes should proclaim war against us, and
we should not go forth and meet him, for entreaty of peace. Nay, his wrath
(as has been showed) has been and yet is kindled amongst us: and yet is
senseless men, and as dead flesh, we are not moved. We are pricked, and we
feel it not. We are wounded, and we do not so much as ask, who has stricken
us. The tempest that is coming toward us, threateneth our utter drowning: and
yet as a drunken man, we lie sleeping in the very top of the mast. Whereby
it is evident against our selves, that unto the multitude of our sins, we
have added an other degree of wickedness, which is, the continuance in them:
unto our disobedience, we have joined stubbornes, and the biles and botches of
our rebellion being ougly in thy sight, do through the putrefaction and
festrednesse of them cast out such stincke, as the earth which we tread upon,
the waters which we drink, and the air which we breath, are tainted and
poisoned with the infection of them. Yea Lord, taught by the wonderful
justice of thy righteous law, we charge upon our heads all the sins of our
fathers and graundfathers, to the uttermost of our generations which are past:
as those whereunto we are iuster inheritours, then unto any lands or goods
that they have left us. Whereby it falls out against us, that our sins
touch the clouds, yea, break into the heavens of thy majesty's own residence:
whose measure being already (as it seems) filled, there remains nothing,
but that it should be turned upon our heads. Whereupon we make against our
selves an other confession, that we are unworthy of all the benefits of this
life, or of the life to come: both those which we either have, or yet hope to
enjoy, from the greatest to the smallest, from the kingdom of heaven, to one
only drop of Water. That we are worthy of all the plagues, which either have
heretofore ceased, or been yet possessed of us. Yea if thou should ransacke
all the hid, and secret treasures of thy fearful judgments, which in thy
law thou threatenest against the breakers thereof, not only to the rasing and
sweeping us, from the face of the earth, but also to the throwing of us
headlong into the bottomless pit of hell: yet would we therein also
acknowledge thy righteous judgments: for unto us belongs shame and
confusion of faces, but unto thee glory and righteousness. All which both guilt
of sin, and desert of punishment, notwithstanding, (O father of mercies, and
God of all comfort) we trusting unto the promises which thou have made us in
Jesus Christ, are bold through him, humbly to call for the performance of them.
And first we humbly desire thee, to forgive us all our sins. Thou have said,
that if we confess our sins thou art faithful to forgive us them. We
acknowledge the debte, cancel therefore the obligation: let not the multitude
of them prevail against us, but where our sin, has abou^ded, let thy grace
more abound, and as we have multiplied our sins, so we pray thee to multiply
thy mercies: and although we have by continuance in them, so soked our
selves, that thereby we are not only lightly stained, but also have gotten as
it were the scarlet and purple die of them: yet let them all (we pray thee,)
being washed in the blod of thy dear son, be made as white, as the snow in
Salmon, and as the wolle of the sheep which come from washing. And ^o conclude,
as our sins have magnified themselves in an infinite length, ^readth, depth
and height: so let thy ^ercies (which pass all vnderstan^ing) of all sides,
and all assayes out ^eache them. Therefore also we most ^umbly desire thee O
Lord, that the ^inne being pardoned, thy wrath which is already declared, may
be appeased toward all the Churches of our profession, and especially toward
us, that the manifold breaches of the Churches and common wealths may be made
up, that those being received into the bosom of the Church, which belong to
thy election: the rest of the Papists and heretics may be utterly rooted out,
and that the enemies in religion, being slain, we may to the uttermost think
all one thing in the honest and peaceable government of the common wealth.
Upon which uniting of us in all truth and honesty, the curses of the plague,
and barrenness being removed, a way may be made to thy blessings, which (as
the hills do the valleis) may make our land holesomely fruitful. And that not
only the wrath which is already kindled may be quenched, but that which has
been lately threatened, may be caused to retire. For the grant whereof unto
us, we beseech thee to remember, that how unworthy soever, yet are we thy
people, and the Sheep of thy pasture, whom thou have redeemed with thy most
precious blood, watched over with a careful ^ye, defended with a mighty hand:
^espise not therefore O Lord, the wor^es of thy hands. And seeing thou have ^^ued
us, when we hated thee, visited us, when we desired thee not, then acknowledged
us, when we knew not thee: now that there be a number of us, which love thee,
desire thine aboade, and acknowledge thee: hold on thy love still, depart not
from us, deny us not, O thou God of truth, which art the God that chaungest
not. And if thou would or could forget us, calling upon thee: yet what
should become of thy great name, which is called upon by us? And therefore for
thy glories sake, and for thy blessed names sake, which in our destruction
should b^ rent and run through, spare v^spare us good Lord, according to the
usual dealing, which thou have ever kept with those, which in prayer have had
recourse unto thee, and according to the old and unchangeable nature, of a
merciful, kind, sparing, and long suffering God. Which mercy we do not, (O
Lord) desire, to the end that we should tumble and wallowe our selves in our
accustomed neglect, and contempt of thy holy word: but together with mercy
for our sins, and the reward of them, we most humbly crave upon the knees
of our hearts: that for the time to come, (how long, or how short soever) we
with denial and detestation of our selves, and of our wicked lusts, may ^^er
up unto thee in Jesus Christ, ^^r selves, our bodies and souls to ^^e
servants at thy holy commaun^ement in that reasonable service, which the high
reason of thy holy ^orde does prescribe: and to be wea^ons, or instruments of
righteousness, and holiness, as they have been here^ofore of the contrary. All
which ^hinges, as whatsoever thou know ^o be further needful for us, or
for any of the Churches, we pray thee, as our savior has taught. etc.

A CONFESSION OF sins, with faith and repentance.
O Merciful and heavenly Father, we thy servants do humbly prostrate our
selves before thy Ma^estie, acknowledging here in thy ^ight our heinous
offenses committed against thy Majesty, seeing and beholding thy heavy wrath
against them: we feel our selves laden (O Lord our God) with a huge company of
horrible sins, whereof even the very least, (being but conceived in
thought,) is sufficient in judgment, to throw us down to the everlasting
burning Lake. Our own consciences, O Lord, do bear witness against us, of
our manifold transgressions of thy blessed law, of our security and
senseless blindness, running headlong to destruction, committing sin after
sin, although not notorious to the world, yet horrible before thine eye. The
thoughts of our hearts rise up in judgment against us: the vanity of our
talk before thy majesty condemns us: the wickedness of our deeds from thy
sight rejects us: all our wicked thoughts, words and deeds, with the inward
corruption of our nature, do altogether as it were a whole lump and load of
sin, lie heavy upon us, and with their intolerable weight do even press
us down to Hell.

We do daily groan under the burden of them, inwardly lamenting our own
folly, so greedily running into them. In heaven, earth, or hell, we see none
able to sustain the weight of them, but even thy dearly beloved son Jesus
Christ, who in mercy infinite, and compassion endless, has sustained and
overcome that endless punishment due unto them: in him therefore, in him most
merciful Father, and through him, we come to thee, being fully assured
according to thy promise, that thou will accept and take that full recompense,
which he thy dear son has made for us, as a just ransom for all the sins
of all those, who with a true faith take hold on him. In him therefore we see
thine anger toward us appesed, thy wrath satisfied, and our debts paid.

Increase in us, (good Lord,) we beseech thee, this lively and feeling faith,
for we feel it oftentimes in us very weak, and troubled with many doubts:
increase it in us (O Lord) that we may through thy holy spirit be assured,
that the punishment of our sins is fully in thy son discharged. Make us, O
Lord our God, to feel this same in our souls and consciences, that Jesus
Christ is ours, and all that he has done: that we are grafted into his body,
and made one with him, and therefore fellow heirs with him of everlasting
life. Let us not only have these words in our mouths (good Lord) but through
thy holy spirit, let us feel the comfort of them in our hearts fully sealed
and settled in us: that we feeling our selves inwardly before thy judgment
seat discharged, and our consciences toward thee appeased: may be swallowed
up with an unfeigned love toward thy heavenly Majesty, and toward our
brethren for thy sake. Make sin to dye in us daily more and more, that we may
hate, detest, and utterly abhor all sin and wickedness in all men, but
especially in our selves: that we may strongly (through thy holy spirit) set
our selves in open war and defiance against all sin and wickedness: that we
please not our selves in our sins, but straightly examining sin by the just
rule of thy holy laws, we may utterly from the bottom of our hearts condemn
even the least sin in our selves, having our whole joy, comfort, and
consolation, upon those things which be agreeable to thy blessed will, always
being afraid to do any thing contrary to the same: that we may even from the
bottom of our hearts, examine and try our thoughts, before thy presence,
that they be upright and unfeigned, not hypochriticall in outward show only,
and appearance, but that even all corners of our hearts being opened and
disclosed before thee, we may even as though it were openly before the face of
the whole world, bring them in show, knowing that a double heart is detestable
in thy sight: and that we may walk always as before thine eyes, not only
before the eyes of man, being more careful to walk circumspectly, in this
respect, that we have thee to be a viewer of our doings, a thousand fold more
then the eyes of man: that thus we may walk as becomes thy children, not
only in outward show, but also in sincerity of heart, abhorring even the
least sin in our selves, striving, resisting, and fighting against sin, not
delighting our selves in sin, nor nourishing the same in our breast, but
earnestly embracing, and studiously seeking after those things which be
pleasant in thine eyes: that neither the fear of man, nor loss of goods,
life, lands, possessions or friends, draw us away from thee, to do any the
lest thing contrary to thy will and pleasure: neither the favor or friendship
of man, nor yet the flattering enticements of this world, nor the vain
promotions of the same, do move us any whit from the true and endless joy,
delight and pleasure which we ought to have in those things which be agreeable
to thy will, and the constant performance of the same: but that always to the
end of our life we may continue in thy paths, growing and increasing from
faith to faith, from strength to strength, till at the length we shall come to
thy everlasting rest. Amen.

A Prayer for the Queen.
O Gracious Lord, and most merciful Father, we acknowledge thee the Lord of
Lords, and the King of Kings, creating at the beginning, and ruling all
things evermore in heaven and earth, according to thy wonderful wisdom and
power: and our selves to be thy poor servants, the work of thy hands, and
the sheep of thy pasture, subjected to thy Maiestic, and depending upon thy
fatherly providence for all things. Nevertheless, seeing thou in thy wisdom
annoyntest Kings and Queens, appointing them to rule over thy people, to sit
as Lieuetenants in thy seat, to minister justice, and most of all, as Fathers
and Nurses to maintain and cherish thy Church: commanding us not only to obey
and honor them: but moreover to pray for them, as watching over us for our
good. We therefore beseech thee for thy great mercies sake, and for Jesus
Christ's sake, to show thy mercy to all Kings and Princes, that maintain thy
glorious Gospel: but especially we pray thee to bless our gracious Queen, in
all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, and in all temporal blessings,
according to thy good pleasure, that in the great measures of thy effectual
love, she may more and more find great increase of virtue, and wisdom, and
strength in Christ Jesus, to the faithful and happy discharge of her duty,
that her holiness, and joy, and zeal of thy house may be multiplied and
everlasting.

And seeing it has pleased thee, of thy singular mercy, to give her this
special honor, first to suffer for thy glorious truth, and afterward
miraculously delivering her out of the hands of her enemies, to set a crown
upon her head, and to make her the instrument to advance thy glory and
Gospel, for which she suffered, and to bring it out of darkness into light,
out of persecution into this great and long peace. As we give thee most hearty
thanks for this singular benefit, so we be seech thee to make her and us
evermore thankful for it, and in thy good pleasure still to preserve her for
the continuance of these blessings toward us, with all increase from time to
time, to thy glory, the benefit of the Church, and her infinite peace in
Christ Jesus, the prince of peace. And further more, we pray thee for her, and
the estate, that such as be enemies of the Gospel, and her enemies also, for
the defense thereof, may not despise the peace offered the^ to repentance, but
that they may account thy long suffering, and her peaceable and unbloody
government, an occasion of salvation to their souls, and unfeigned love to the
truth, and their merciful sovereign. Otherwise of they still remain
disobedient to the truth, disobedient to her highness, and dangerous to the
state, then (O God of our Salvation) as thou have discovered them, so discover
them still, as thou have prevented them, so prevent them still, and let their
eyes wax weary with looking, and their hearts faint with waiting for the
coming of that, which yet comes not, neither let it come (O Lord) we
beseech thee, but a blessed, and a long reign to her, and peace to Sion for
evermore. Also (dear father) so bless, so love, so in thy spirit sanctify
and keep her, that she may in the spirit of counsel and fortitude so rule that
other sister also, namely this her common wealth, that they may flourish
together, and grow up together as palm trees, in beauty, and in strength,
giving aid and help one to an other, that in the Church the glory of God may
appear, as the Sun in his brightness, and that the land may flow with
Milk and Honey, and true peace abound therein, as in the triumphant reign of
Debora.

These graces (O Lord) are great, and we miserable sinners, unworthy of the
least of them: therefore look not to us, but to thy self, not to our
iniquities, but to thy great mercies, accepting the death and passion of thy
Son, as a full ransom for all our offenses: throwing them into the bottom
of the Sea, and making his cross and resurrection effectual in us to all
obedience and godliness, as becomes thy Saints: that to all other thy good
blessings toward our gracious Sovereign, this may be added, that she
governs blessedly, over a blessed people, a people blessed of the Lord, and
beloved of the Lord, and that thy graces may abound as the waters of the Sea,
in the Prince and in the people, in the Church, and in the Common wealth, from
day to day, till the day of our translation into thy kingdom, where justice
inhabiteth, where also we shall inhabit and reign with thee, according to thy
promise for ever. Grant these things (O merciful Father) ^or thy dear Son
our Lord Jesus Christ his sake, in whose name we crave them at thy merciful
hand, praying furthermore for them, as he has taught us to pray. Our Father
which are in heaven, etc.

FINIS.

