The Court and Country, OR A brief Discourse Dialogue-wise set down between
a Courtier and a Countryman: Containing the manner and condition of their
lives, with many Delectable and Pithy Sayings worthy observation.

Also, necessary Notes for a COVRTIER.

Written by N. B. Gent.

The Countryman.
The Courtier.


LONDON, Printed by G. E LD for John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Sign of the Bible without Newgate. 1618.

To the Worshipful and worthy Knight, the favorer of all good Virtues and
Studies, Sir STEPHEN POLL, of Blackmoore in Essex; and to his worthy Lady,
Health, Honor, and eternal Happiness.
Worthy KNIGHT,

BEing well acquainted with your true knowledge of the Honor of the Court, and
the Pleasure of the Country: your judicial Observation in your Travels
abroad, and your sweet retired Life at home: Finding my Service indebted to
many of your undeserved bountiful Favors, and willing, in some fruits of my
Labor, to show the thankfulness of my Love, I have adventured to present
your Patience with a short Discourse, in the manner of a Dialogue, between a
Courtier and a Countriman, touching the Lives of either: What Matter of worth
is in it I will leave to your discretion to consider of, with my bounden
Service to the honor of your Command, hoping that either here or in the
Country it will be a pretty passage of idle time, with some matter of mirth to
remove melancholy. And so in Prayer for your health, and your good Ladies, to
whom, with your self, Dedicating this short Dialogue, I rest

Yours, humbly devoted to be Commanded NICH. BRETON.

To the READER.
AMong many Passages that I have met with in the world, it was my hap of late
to light on a kind Controuerfie between two Kinsmen, a Courtier and a
Countryman, who meeting together upon a time, fell to persuading one another
from their courses of Life; the Courtier would feign have drawn the Countryman
to the Court, and the Countryman the Courtier to the Country. The reasons for
their delights, and love to their manner of lives, I have set down as I found
them; but whatsoever they alleged for their contentments, it seemed they were
resolved upon their Courses, for in the end they left where they begun, every
man to his own humor, and so brake off. Now what Profit or Pleasure may arise
by the reading of them, I refer to their discretion that can best make use of
them. Matter of state is not here meddled with; scurrillity here is none: no
taxing of any Person, nor offense justly to any whosoever: But passages of
wit, without the malice of any evil mind. And in sum, matter of good
substance, and mirth enough to drive away a great deal of melancholy: and so
leaving it to your Patience to read, and to your Pleasure to esteem of as you
see cause: both to Courtiers and Countrymen that are kind and honest men, I
rest, to wish content in the course of a happy life, and so remain

Your well wishing Countryman N. B.

The COVRTIER AND The COVNTRYMAN.
COVRTIER. COUSIN, Well met; I see you are still for the Country, your habit,
your countenance, your footing, and your carriage do all plainly show you are
no changeling, but every day alike, one, and the same.


COVNTRY-MAN, I am so indeed, and wish that you were so too; for then should
you not be so great an eyesore to your friends, nor such an enemy to your
self: for, I fear the place you live in is more costly then profitable;
where, for one that goes up the weather, a number go down the wind, and
perhaps the place not so truly full of delight as the passage through a meaner
compass.


COURT. Oh Cousin, you cannot but confess that blind men can judge no
colors, and you that live plodding to purchase a pudding, cannot but distaste
any meat that may compare with it, though in many degrees of goodness it exceed
it: for, should I tell you truly what I know of it, you would soon after your
opinion to a point of better judgment. Oh, the gallant life of the Court, where
so many are the choices of contentment, as if on earth it were the Paradise of
the world, the majesty of the Sovereign, the wisdom of the Council, the
honor of the Lords, the beauty of the Ladies, the care of the Officers, the
courtsey of the Gentlemen, the divine Service in the Morning and Evening, the
witty, learned, noble, and pleasant discourses all day, the variety of wits,
with the depth of judgments, the dainty fare, sweetly dressed and neatly
served, the delicate wines and rare fruits, with excellent Music and
admirable Voices, Maskes and Plays Dancing and Riding; deuersity of games,
delightful to the Gamsters purposes; and Riddles, Questions and Answers;
Poems, Histories, and strange Inventions of Wit, to startle the Brain of a
good understanding: rich Apparel, precious Jewels, fine proportions, and high
Spirits, Princely Coaches, stately Horses, royal Buildings and rare
Architecture, sweet Creatures and civil Behavior: and in the course of Love
such carriage of content, as so luls the Spirit in the lap of pleasure, that if
I should talk of the praise of it all day, I should be short of the worth of
it at night.


COUNT. And there withal you wak't: or else you are like a Musician that only
plays upon one string: but, touch the Basse, with the Treble, the Mean, with
the Counter Tenor, and then see how the strings will agree together, and
whether the Voices do not rather feign then sing plain, for fear the Ditty
may disgrace the Note, and so the Music be not worth the hearing: But if all
be as you say, yet take the Evening with the Morning, and all the week with
the holyday, the sower with the sweet, and the cost with the pleasure, and tell
me then if once in seven years, when your state is weakened and your Land
wasted, your Woods vntimberd, your Pastures vnstored, and your Houses decayed;
then tell me whether you find the proverb true, of the Courtier young and old:
though sometime a Bell-weether may be fat, when many a better sheep cannot
hit on so good a feeding. But since you speak so scornefully of the Country
life, if you were or could be so happy as to apprehend the true content in the
course of it, you would shake the head, and sigh from the heart to be so long
from the knowledge of it, and never be at rest till you were gotten to it. Oh,
the sweet of the Country life, in which are so many and so true varieties of
pleasures as keeps the spirit ever waking, and the senses ever working for the
full content of the whole Creature, in so*much that if there may be a similie
of heaven upon earth, it is only in the precinct of the Country passage, where
both nature and reason behold and envy that satiety of pleasure that is not
easily to be expressed. And to answer directly to some of your points of
praise, let me tell you, though we see not our Sovereign every day, yet we
pray for him every hour; and holding ourselves unworthy of his presence, are
glad when we may get a sight of his Majesty.

Now, for Counselors of State, we reverence their persons, and pray for their
lives in their labors for our peace. And for your Lords, we have Landlords
that agree best with our minds, whom using with due reverence, paying them
their rent, and now and then for some small remembrances we can have friendly
talk withal, and learn good lessons of them for many things to be looked
into: And upon the Bench at a Quarter Sesions, when they give a charge, hear
them speak so wisely, that it would do ones heart good to hear them: and
sometime in the holidays, when they keep good houses, make many a good meals
meat with them. And in the time of the year when the harvest is in, go a
hunting, and hauking, coursing and fishing with them: and sometime to continue
good neighborhood, meet, and make matches for shooting and bowling with
them, when we exercise the body in plain dealing, and not the brain in
subtle device.

Now for your Ladies, we have pretty Wenches, that, though they be not proud,
yet they think their penny good silver, and if they be fair it is natural,
and having their mothers wit they will do well enough for their fathers
understanding. And for your Gentlemen, we have good Yeomen that use more,
courtesey or at least kindness then curiosity, more friendship then
complements, and more truth then eloquence: and perhaps I may tell you, I
think we have more ancient and true Gentlemen that hold the plough in the
field, then you have in great places that wait with a trencher at a Table; and
I have heard my father say, that I believe to be true, that a true Gentleman
will be better known by his inside then his outside, for (as he said) a true
Gentleman will be like himself, sober, but not proud; liberal, and yet
thrifty; wise, but not full of words; and better seen in the Law, then be too
busy with the laws; one that fears God, will be true to his King, and well
knows how to live in the world, and whatsoever God sends, has the grace to be
content with it, loves his wife and his children, is careful for his family,
is a friend to his neighbor, and no enemy to himself: and this (said my
father) is indeed the true Gentleman; and for his qualities, if he can speak
well, and ride well, and shoot well, and bowl well, we desire no more of
him: but for kissing of the hand, as if he were licking of his fingers,
bending down the head, as if his neck were out of joint; or scratching by the
foot, as if he were a Corne-cutter; or leering aside, like a wench after her
sweete-heart; or winking with one eye, as though he were leuying at a
Woodcocke; and such Apish tricks, as came out of the Land of Petito, where a
Monkey and a Baboone make an Vrchin Generation: And for telling of tales of the
aduenturous Knight and the strange Lady; and for writing in rhyme, or talking in
prose, with more tongues then teeth in his head, and with that which he brought
from beyond the Seas, which he cannot be rid of at home, for swearing and
brauing, scoffing and stabbing, with such tricks of the devils teaching, we
allow none of that learning. Now, if you have any such where you live I know
not, I hope with us there are none of them, but I am sure, if they come amongst
us, we desire to be rid of them.

We have good husbands and honest widows, pure Virgins and chaste Bachelors,
learned Church men, and civil Towns men, wholesome fare, full dishes, white
bread, and hearty drink, clean platters and fair linen, good company,
friendly talk, plain music, and a merry song: and so when God is praised
and the people pleased, I think there is no course where a man may be better
contented. Now, if it be true (but hope it is not) that I have heard, that in
some such places as you live in: in the world, a great way hence beyond the
Sea, there be certain people that have brazen faces, Serpents tongues, and
Eagles claws, that will intrude into companies, and persuade wickedness, and
flatter follies, and catch hold of whatsoever they can light on for the service
of lewdnes, either money, lands, or leases, or apparel, and ever cramming, and
yet ever craving: they are carriers of letters between lust and wantonness,
tellers of old wives tales, and singers of wenching Ballads; swear and
forswear, drink and gull, laugh, and be fat, and for a little pleasure on
earth go to the Devil for ever: Now, these in the old time (but now a days I
hope are out of use) were called Parasites and Panders, Ieasters, or Iuglers,
much of the nature of Gypsies, cunning as the Devil to diue into a pocket, or
to pick out the bottom of a purse; but I hope they are all dead, or at least
you have few of them about you: if you have, I know not what use you can make
of them, but I I am sure we cannot away with them among us. I have heard
moreover that you have among you certain Eues-droppers, that are tale carriers,
that come among the rooles of Knaves: But for our howses in the Cnuntry, they
are so far one from another, that if we catch any of them about us, we should
carry him before the Constable for a Thief.

But now leaving to speak more of these things: for pleasures, believe it, we
will put you down a world of steps; for, first of all we rise with the Lark
and go to bed with the Lamb, so that we have the break of the day and the
brightness of the Sun to cheer our Spirits in our going to our labors, which
many of you bar your selves of, by making day of the night and night of the
day, by sleeping after wearines upon the labor of wantonness, if not of
wickedness, as they which work all day to bring the Devil into hell at night,
and labor all night for damnation in the morning: such I have heard of beyond
Sea, I pray God you have none about you: but for us in the Country, I assure
you we can abide no such doings: Now for the delight of our eyes, we have the
May-painting of the earth, with diverse flowers of dainty colors and delicate
sweets, we have the berryes, the cherries, the pease and the beans, the plums
and the codlings, in the month of June: in July, the pears and the apples, the
wheat, the rye, the barley and the oats, the beauty of the wide fields, and the
labors with delight and mirth, and merry cheer at the coming home of the
Harvest cart: We have again in our woods, the birds singing; in the pastures
the Cow lowing, the Eve bleating, and the Foale neighing, which with profit
and pleasure makes us better music then an idle note and a worse ditty,
though I highly do commend music, when it is in a right key. Again, we have
young Rabbets that in a sunny morning sit washing of their faces, while as I
have heard beyond the seas there are certain old Conies, that in their beds
sit painting of their faces: we have besides Tumblers for our Conies, and
Greyhounds for our courses, Hounds for our chases. Hawks of all kind for the
field, and the river, and the wood: so that what can reason conceive, that
nature can desire? but for the delight of both the Country does afford us.

Furthermore, at our meetings on the holidays between our Lads and the
Wenches, such true mirth at honest meetings, such dancing on the green, in
the market house, or about the May-poole, where the young folks smiling kiss
at every turning, and the old folks checking with laughing at their Children,
when dancing for the Garland, playing at stooleball for a Tansie and a banquet
of Cords and Cream, with a cup of old napyy Ale, matter of small charge, with
a little reward of the Piper, after casting of sheep eyes, and faith and
troth for a bargain, clapping of hands, are seals to the truth of hearts,
when a pair of Gloves and a handkerchiffe, are as good as the best obligation,
with a cappe and a courtsey, hie ye home maids to milking, and so merrily goes
the day away. Again, we have hay in the barn, horses in the stable, oxen in
the stall, sheep in the pen hogs in the stie, corn in the garner, cheese in
the loft, milk in the dairy, cream in the pot, butter in the dish, ale in the
tub, and Aqua vitae in the bottle beef in the brine, brawne in the sowce, and
bacon in the roof, herbs in the garden, and water at our doors, whole cloths
to our backs, and some money in our cophers, and having all this, if we serve
God withal, what in Gods name can we desire to have more?

Now, for some of you, a man may take you many times in the nature of
blind-men, that you can scarcely see a penny in your purse, and your lands
grown so light, that you bear them all on your backs, and your houses so
empty that in the cold of winter all the smoke goes out at one chimney, when,
if Brag were not a good dog, I know not how he would hold up his tail: Oh,
the fine excuses of wit, or rather folly, late business over night makes you
keep your beds in the morning, when indeed it is for lack of meat to dinner,
and perhaps no great banquet at Supper, when a Crust and an Orange, a Sallad
and a cup of Sack makes a feast for a Brauo: then after all, a strech, and
a^yaune, and a pipe of Tobacco, wear boots for want of shoes, or else that
the garters and the roses are at pawn. Now these are no Courtiers, but hangers
on upon those that sometimes in great places have an humor to fatten fleas.

Now for us in the Country, we run no such courses, but are content with
that we have, and keep somewhat for a rainy day: love neither to borrow nor
lend, but keep the stake still upright, spend as we may spare, and look to
the maine at the years end: our meetings are for mirth, and not mischief: and
for quarrels we have none, except the oil of the malt work up into the head
and so distemper the brain, that the tongue run out of order, when a fit of
fisticuffes will soon make an end of all matters; so that we have pleasure
with profit, mirth without madness, and love without dissembling, when the
peace of Conscience is an inward Paradise. Now if you can show any better Cards
for the maintayning of your oppinion, I pray you heartily let me hear it.


COURT. Oh Cousin, I am sorry to see your simplicity, what a deal of ado you
have made about nothing? but I see the proverb holds true in you, He that
lives always at home sees nothing but the same, and your education being but
according to your disposition, somewhat of the meanest manner of good fashion,
your wit rather being all in Coppy-hold then in Capite, and your learning but
to spell and put together, it were hard for you that never studied Astronomy to
speak of the nature of the Stars; and therefore I can the better bear with
your humor, because it is more natural then artificial, yet could I wish you
would not so clownifie your wit, as to bury your understanding all under a clod
of earth: What? is man but as a beast, bred like a fore-horse, to go always
right on, and rather draw in a cart, then trot in a better compass? fie upon
baseness, it is the badge of a Beggar: No, let me tell you, if you were or
could be acquainted with the life of a Courtier, you would find such
bewitching objects to the eyes, and rauishing delights of the heart, that you
would hold the world as a wilderness to the Palace of a Prince, and life but as
a death that has no taste of Court comforts.

Oh Cousin, we have learning in such reverence, wisdom in such admiration,
virtue in such honor, valor in such esteem, truth in such love, and love in
so rare account, that there does almost nothing pass in perfection, yt is not
followed, with great observation, where the favor of a Prince maks a Beggar a
petty King, the countenance of a Lord makes a clown a Gentleman, and the look
of a Lady makes a groom a gay fellow. Oh Cousin, advancement and contentment
are the fruits of Court service, and the steps of hope to the state of honor:
furthermore, for knowledge, we have the due confideration of occurrents, the
disciphering of Characters, enditing of letters, hearing of orations,
delivering of messages, congratulating of Princes, and the form of ambassages,
all which are such delights of the Spirit, as makes a shadow of that man, that
has not a mind from the multitude to look into the nature of the Spirits
honor.

Furthermore, we have in Court Officers of care, Orders of discretion, eyes of
brightness, ears of clearenesse, hearts of pureness, brainesof wisdom
tongues of truth, minds of nobleness, and Spirits of goodness, which though
they be not in all, yet are they examples for all, and in the worthiest of
all. Oh Cousin, to hear a King or Prince speak like a Prophet, a Queen like
an Angel, a Councellor like an Oracle, a Lord like a Councellor, a Lady like a
Queen, a Preacher like an Apostle, and a Courtier like a Preacher: and then to
note the majesty of the greatest, the reverence of the wisest, the honor of
the worthiest, and the love of the best, to receive grace from the one,
instruction from the other; favor from one, countenance from another; honor
from one, and bouuty from an other; kindness from one, and comfort from another,
where, for the good all, love goes through all, where exercises of wix are but
trials of understanding, and the properties of speech are the proofs of
judgment: where peace is the practice of power, justice the grace of wisdom,
and mercy the glory of justice: where time is fitted to his use, and reason is
the governor of nature, where privileges are protections for the unwilling
offendant, and sanctuaries are the fafety of the unhappily distressed: where
the name of want has no note, baseness no regard, wantonness no grace, nor
wickedness entertainment, except the Devil like an Angel of light come
unseen to the world: where the qualities of virtue are the grace of honor,
and the breath of wisdom is the beauty of greatness, where art has reward
of labor service the regard of duty, nature the affect of reason, and reason
the respect of judgment: where idleness is hated, foolishnes derided,
wilfulness restrained, and wickedness vanished: where wits refined, brains
settled, bodies purged, and spirits purified make a consort of such Creatures as
come near unto heavenly natures.

Believe me Cousin, there is no comparison between the Court and the Country
for the sweet of conceit in an understanding spirit, which can truly
apprehend the true natures both of pleasures and profit: Alas, let the Cow
low after her Calfe, and the Eve bleat after her Lamb, the Ass bray, the
Owl sing, and the Dog bark; What music is in this medley? let ignorance be
an enemy to wit, and experience be the Mistress of fools, the Stocks stand at
the Constables door, and the Gallows stand hard by the high way, What is all
this to matter of worth? to see Laddes lift up leaden heels, and Wenches leare
after their Lubbers; to see old folks play the fools to laugh at the birds of
their own breed, and the young Colts wighie at their parting with their
Fillies, when Madge must home to milking, and Simon must go serve the beasts:
What conceit is in all these courses? but to trouble a good spirit with
spending time in idleness.

Oh Cousin, if thou were once well entered into the life of a Courtier, thou
would never more be in love with the Country, but use it as a clean shirt,
sometime for a refreshing, though it be far courser for wearing, and little
cleaner then that which you put off. I could say more that might easily
persuade you to change your opinion, and alter your affection from the Country
to the Court; but I hope this shall suffice, If not, I pray you let me hear
you speak to some purpose.


COUNTRY. Say, quoth you, Let me tell you, that all that you hauesaid, or I
think you can say, does, nor will work any more with my wit to incline my
humor to your will, then a Pill that lies in the Stomach, and more offends
nature, then purges humor: for, where there is no corruption Physic has
nothing to work upon, except by the trouble of nature, to bring health into
sickness: Do you think so much of your strength as to remove a Mil-stone with
your little finger; or are you so persuaded of your wit, that with a word of
your mouth you can take away the strength of understanding? No such matter, no
have but good: I pray you give me leave a little, and if I speak not to your
purpose, I will speak to mine own: and I will say as one Dante, an Italian
Poet once said in an obscure Book of his, Understand me that can, I understand
my self: And though my Country book be written in a rough hand, yet I can
read it and pick such matter out of it as shall serve the turn for my
instruction. What is here to do in persuading you know not what? to talk you
care not how? Is this Court eloquence? Is not the Clownyfying of wit the
Fooltfying of understanding? home spunne cloth is not worth the wearing, water
is a cold drink, and simpleness is but baseness, and a Clown is but a rich
Beggar. Now truly Cousin, you are quite out; for, let me tell you that good
words and good deeds are the best trials of good minds, and make the best
passages among the best people: and so much for this matter.

Now to answer your proverbs, and as I can remember, most points of your
discourses: First, let me tell you, that I hold it better to see something of
mine own at home, then travel so far that I see nothing of mine own
abroad, for I have heard that roling stones gather no moss: And for my
education, if it has been simple, and my disposition not subtle, If I be not
fashioned according to the world, I shall be the fitter for heaven: And for my
wit, to deal truly with you, I had rather hold it in a Copy of a good
Tenure, then by the title of an idle brain, to keep a fools head in
Freehold. Now for my learning, I hold it better to spell and put together,
then to spoil and put asunder: but there are some that in their Childhood are
so long in their horn book, that do what they can, they will smell of the
Baby till they cannot see to read. Now we in the Country begin and go
forward with our reading in this manner, Christ's Cross be my speed, and the
Holy Ghost: for fear the Devil should be in the letters of the Alphabet, as
he is too often when he teaches od fellows play tricks with their
Creditors, who in stead of payments, write IOV. and so scoff many an honest
man out of his goods.

And again, when he teaches trauellors that have taken a surfeit in the
Low Countries to set down H and O. to express the nature of their grief, and
to jest out the time with B and R. or to bite men's good names with those
letters to avoid actions of slander, and when they write you R. and they B. Oh
fine knackes of more wit then honesty: But I hope there are none of these among
you. But I have heard my father say, that when he was young, he saw many such
in such places as you live in, but it was a great way hence beyond the salt
water.

Now for Astronomy, I think it be fallen from the height that it was in former
time, for Stars were wont to be in the heavens, now Gallants hang them upon
their heels, so bright in their Spurs as if they were all young Phaetons,
that would ride Phoebus horses, while the folly of pride should sit in the
Chair of ruin: but let them sit fast when they are up, least they break
their necks in their falls.

Now for your Nature and Art, I think better of a natural Art, then an
artificial Nature. And for your Fore-horse pace right on, I hope he is better
then a resty Jade that will not stir out of the Stable, or a kicking Curtall
that will set his Ryder beside the Saddle: and better draw soundly in a cart
then be lamed in a coach, or be sick in a Foote-cloth: and better a true trot
then a fidling amble: But let these humors pass.

Now for your bewitching objects, I doubt they will make abiects of Subjects,
and therefore I love no such devilish devises, when women's eyes will bewitch
men's hearts, and the breath of Tongues will poison a man's wits. And for your
rauishing delights, it is a word that I well understand not, or at least, as I
have heard, this rauishing is a word that signifies robbing of wenches of the
inner lining of their linen against their wills, and if it be so, it is a
perilous delight that brings a man to the Gallows, if not to the Devil for a
little fit of pleasure: but if there be any better sense in it, I would be glad
to understand it, though at this time I care not to be troubled with it.

Now for Princes Palaces, they are too high buildings for our Brickes, plain
people are content with Cottages, and had rather pay tributes to their
maintenance, then have them too much in our view, for blinding of our eyes with
their golden brightness. Now for life and death, he that lives at quiet and
will not be contented, may change for the worse and repent it, when he cannot
help it. Oh Cousin, I have heard my father say, that it is better to sit fast,
then to rise and fall, and a great wise man that know the world to a hair,
would say, that the mean was sure: better be in the middle room, then either
in the Garret or the Sellor: and an other of an excellent worlds wit, that
ran the ring with him in the walk of the world, would say, that honor was
but ancient riches, and in high places, where frowns are deadly, and favors
are uncertain, there was more fear of the one, then hope of the other; and a
laborious weeks wages well paid was better then a years hope in paper: and
therefore, he that would leave possessions for promises, and assurances for
hope, were more full of wit then understanding, and of conceit then judgment,
for though there is no service to the King, nor no fishing to the Sea, yet
there are so many suitors for rewards, and so many beaters of the water, that
delays may be cold comforts of long hopes to the one, and the other angle all
day and catch a Gudgion at night: and therefore, though the world be like a
Well with two Buckets, that when one falls another rises, yet the fall is
much swifter then the rising, and good reason, because the one goes down empty
and the other comes up laden. But to be plain, I have so long been used to a
quiet life, that I would not leave it for a world.

Now for your notes of worth that you have set down in your Court
commendations; I allow that all may be true, and they that thrive in it may
think well of it, and hold it a kind of heaven upon earth: but for my self, I
remember certain notes that I read in a Book of my Fathers own writing that
shall go with me to my grave; there were not many but in my mind to good
purpose: as first for greatness, My mind to me a Kingdom is: so that the quiet
of the mind is a greater matter then perhaps many great men possess: Then for
wealth, Godliness is great riches to him that is content with that he has,
which many great men sometime perhaps have less then meaner people. Then for a
good rule of life; Fear God, and obey the King: which perhaps some do not so
well in the Court as the Country. Then for the course of the Law, Love God
above all, and thy neighbor as thy self: which if you do in the Court as we
do in the Country, Envy would work no hatred, nor malice mischief; but love
in all persons would make a palace, a Paradise, which in the best is more
evident, then in the meanest apprehended: but God, whose love is the life of
all, breed such love in the lives of all, that peace may ever live among all.

Now for learning, what your need is thereof I know not, but with us, this is
all we go to school for: to read common Prayers at Church, and set down
common prises at Markets, write a Letter, and make a Bond, set down the day of
our Births, our Marriage day, and make our Wills when we are sick, for the
disposing of our goods when we are dead: these are the chief matters that we
meddle with, and we find enough to trouble our heads withal; for if the
fathers know their own children, wives their own husbands from other men,
maidens keep their by your leaves from subtle batchelors; Farmers know their
cattle by the heads, and Sheepheards know their sheep by the brand, What more
learning have we need of, but that experienee will teach us without book? We
can learn to plough and harrow, sow and reap, plant and prune, thrash and
fan, winnow and grind, brue and bake, and all without book, and these are
our chief business in the Country: except we be Iury-men to hang a thief, or
speak truth in a man's right, which conscience and experience will teach us with
a little learning, then what should we study for, except it were to talk with
the man in the Moon about the course of the Stars? No, Astronomy is too high
a reach for our reason: we will rather sit under a shady tree in the Sun to
take the benefit of the cold air, then lie and stare upon the Stars to mark
their walk in the Heavens, while we loose our wits in the Clouds: and yet we
reverence learning as well in the Parson of our parish, as our Schoolmaster,
but chiefly, in our Justices of peace, for under God and the King they bear
great sway in the Country: But for great learning, in great matters, and in
great places, we leave it to great men: If we live within the compass of the
Law, serve God and obey our King, and as good Subjects ought to do, in our
duties and our prayers daily remember him, What need we more learning?

Now for wisdom, I heard our Parson in our Church read it in the holy Book of
God, That the wisdom of the world is but foolishnes before God: And why then
should a man seek to befoole himself before God, with more wit then is
necessary for the knowledge of the world, the wise man must dye as well as the
fool, and when all are the Sons of Adam, we have a fair warning to be too
busy with tasting of the Tree of too much knowledge: I have read in the Book
of the best wisdom, that the fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, and
surely, he that begins his lesson there may continue his learneng the better,
and come to be a good Scholar at last. Solomon, the wisest man that ever was,
said, that all was vanity and vexation of the Spirit: and why then should a man
vex his spirit with seeking to be as wise as a Woodcocke, in beating his
brains to get the possession of vanity? And yet I must confess, that least
vanity turn to villainy, it is good that the authority of wisdom have power
to bridle the folly of self will: But for the great wisdom of Counselors of
State, Judges of Laws, Governors of Cities, Generals of Armies, or such
great People in such great places, they go so far beyond our wits, that we
had rather be obedient to their wills, then enter into the depth of their
discretions, and content our selves with that wisdom which is most necessary
for us, to love God above all, and our neighbors as our selves, to rise with
the day rays, and go to bed with a candle, to eat when we are hungry, drink
when we are thirsty, travel when we are lusty, and rest when we are weary:
fear God, be true to the Crown, keep the laws, pay scot and lot, breed no
quarrels, do no wrongs, and labor all we may to have peace, both with God and
man, speak truth and shame the Devil, pitch and pay, say and hold, try and
trust, believe no lies, tell no news; deceive not an enemy, nor abuse a
friend, make much of a little and more as it may increase: These are the points
of wisdom that we run the course of our Card by.

Now for valor, it is seen best in the best quarrels, and Saint Paul said,
that he had fought the good fight, to fight for the preservation of a state,
the person of a King or Prince, to keep my house from thieues, my children
from dogs, and my family from famine, and my faith from fainting in the word of
God, this hold we the good fight, and the true valor: not to stand upon
puntos, not to endure a lie without death, challenge for a frown, and kill for
a foul word, adventure all for nothing, or perhaps worse then nothing, loose
lands, goods, life and soul and all in a murder or a bloody bargain, to
please a Punke, and to be counted a Captain of the Devils army, or a Gallant of
the damned crew, except some few hours before his end, while the worm of
Conscience bites him at the heart, a spark of grace enter into his soul, and
make him at the Gallows make a repentant rehearsal of a lewd life, and leave
a fair example at his death to all behoulders, perhaps with these good words
at his departing, All ye that here be take example to be hanged by me.

Oh brave valor that makes many a weeping eye, when my mother for my son and
my sister for my brother, or my wife for my husband, or my father for my
daughter, or mine uncle for mine aunt sit and howl like dogs to see the works
of the Devil, in the wicked of the world. Such kind of valor I have heard my
father say that he has marked in some places where he has trauel'd, I know
not where, a great way hence when he was young, where he found among a hellish
company of accursed spirits, they were called valliant fellows, that durst say
any thing, do any thing, or be any thing, till they were worse then nothing;
durst quarrel with any man, abuse any man, strike any man, kill any man, and
care for no man, durst prate, lie, swear and forswear, scoff and swagger,
drink and dice, drab and stab, durst be hanged and damned for a horrible fit
of a frantic humor, and this was their valor: I pray God there be none such
among ye where you keep, I am sure there keep none such among us.

Now for truth, I hope there are more true hearts in the Country then there are
tongues in the City in many places, yea, and in greater places then I will
speak of, but where they be God bless them, and where they are not, God send
them, and that is all that I say to them: But for ought I see there is so much
falsehood in the world that I fear there is littletruth on the earth: and in
great places where protestations are without performances, and excuses are
better then lies; Where is either truth of love or love of truth? but a little
I think, I would there were more: But with us, truth is so beloved, that a
Liar is held little better then a thief, and it is a lesson we learn our
little Children, speak truth, tell truth, take heed you lie not, the Devil is
the father of lies, and little better be his Children, deal truly with all
men, let your tongues and your hearts go together, Christ is truth, in his
holy name be true, ever tell truth and shame the Devil, be true to God in your
belief and obedience to his word, be true to your King in the loyalty of your
hearts, be true to your wives in the honesty of your bodies, and be true to
your friends in performing your promises: this is the love we have to truth, if
you have it so, it is a good blessing of God and makes a happy people.

And for love, if it be in the world, I think it is in the Country, for where
envy, pride, and malice, and Jealousy makes buzzes in men's brains, what love
can be in their hearts, howsoever it slip from their tongues? No, no; our
Turtles ever fly together; our Swannes ever swim together, and our lovers
live and die together. Now if such love be among you, it is worthy to be much
made of; but if you like to day and loath to morrow, if you fawn to day and
frown to morrow; if all your love be to laugh and lie down, or to hope of
gain or reward; that is none of our love: we love all goodness and only for
goodness: first God, then our selves, then our wives and children, then our
family, and then our friends: and so has love his course in our lives: and
therefore if there be any observation in affection, I pray you, let it be
rather in the Country then in any place, where faith is not so fast but fancy
can alter love upon a little humor of dislike.

Now for your favor, when one Beggar grows rich by it, how many rich grow
beggars through the hope of fortune: and therefore in my mind, better be Lord
over a little of a man's own, then to follow a Lord for the bare name of a
Gentleman, and better with a little to be counted a good man, then with gaping
after Gudgions to be thought, I know not what: Truly Cousin, I think every
thing is best in his own nature, as one is bred so let him be: for as a
Courtier cannot hold the plough, but he will be soon seen to be no workman,
so a Countryman cannot court it, but he will show in somewhat from whence he
comes.

And for a Ladies look, I think we have wenches in the Country that have as
fair eyes as finer creatures, who when they list to look kindly, will make
many glad though few gay fellows. And for apparel, plain russet is our
wearing, while pied coats among us we account players or fools, except they be
better men then the best of our parish, except our Landlord.

Now for preferment and advancement, they be encouragements, to some Spirits
that are borne under the climing climate, but for mine own part I love not to
play the fly with a Candle, for fear of burning my wings but will leave the
ladder of honor to him that best knows how to clim be, and to sit fast when
he is up. Now for your Occurrents, what are they? but news, sometime true and
sometime false, which when they come to us they are commonly more costly then
comfortable, and therefore we desire not to trouble our selves. Now for
disciphering of Characters, I have heard my father say in the old time, that
they were accounted little better then coniurations, in which were written the
names of Devils that the College of Hell used to conjure up in the world, and
belonged only to the study of Sorcerers, Witches, Wisards, and such wicked
wretches, as not caring for the plain word of God, go with scratehes of the
Devils claws into hell: but how true it is God knows: but that this is true
every man knows that it was a devise of the Devil at the first, to put into
the head of a deceiving heart that having no true nor plain meaning in
conscience, would write so, that no man should understand him but himself, or
like himself, and only to hoodwinke the world for looking into his
wickedness: But what is the end of all wily beguily? seeking to deceive other,
deceived himself most of all: Now letters of darkness devised by the Devil
for the followers of his designs in the courses of his deceit: honest men in
the Country love to meddle with no such matters, but so far as may be to Gods
glory and the good of a State, to find out the plots, and to prevent the
mischief of a villainy, being done in Gods holy name and by his grace, I hold
it a fine quality to discipher a Character, and lay open a knave: But for us in
the Country, we love no such braine-labours as may bring our wits into such a
wood, that we know not how to get out of it. Now for enditing of Letters: Alas,
what need we much ado about a little matter? If we can write, we commonly
begin and end much after one manner: Trusting in God you are in good health,
with all our friends: and so to the matter, either to borrow, or to pay, or to
know the prise of your Cattle, or for a merry meeting, or I thank you for my
good cheer. And so with my hearty commendations, I commit you to God. From my
house such a day. Your loving friend to his power. And then seal up the paper,
and write on the outside: To my loving Cousin, Neighbor, or Friend, at his
house in such a place, with speed, if the time require, and so no more ado:
Except it be a Love Letter, and then a few idle words of

Sweet heart, I commend me unto you, and have been as good as my promise, and
have sent you a pair of gloves by Meg your Brothers best beloved, and upon
Friday (God willing) I will meet you at the Market, and we will be merry, and
talk further of the matter, and if you be as I am, say and hold, I know my
portion, and when yours is put to it we shall live the better: And so, keeping
your Handkerchiffe near my heart: till I see you, I rest

Yours during life in true love W. T.


Now for your Styles of honor and worship to this Lord and that Lady on the
outside, and a deal of humility and ceremony on the inside, me thinks it is a
wearying of the mind before you come to the matter: And as I remember a great
wise man that would dispatch many matters in little time, would thus ever read
Letters, in the beginning two words for the Style, and other two at the end for
the conclusion, so noting the treble above, and the base beneath, he would
soon in the midst find the substance of the Music: and to tell truth, few
words and plain, and to the purpose, is better for our understanding, then to
go about with words to tell a long tale to little end.

Now if woe cannot write, we have the Clerk of the church, or the Schoolmaster
of the town to help us, who for our plain matters will serve our turns well
enough, and therefore what need we trouble our heads with enditing of Letters?

Now, for Orations, they are fittest for Scholars to allure an audience to
attendance: but for us, we have more use of our hands to work for our
livings, then of our ears to hear the sound of a little breath, yet I allow
it among you in such places, as you live in: but where truth is the best
eloquence, we make but two words to a bargain, and therefore for your long
discourses, we desire not to be wearied with them, but will leave them to you
that have more use of them, and have time to hearken to them.

Now for your Messages, alas, cannot we give a Cap and make a Leg to our
betters, and deliver our minds in few words, without we learn to look down
as though we were seeking of a Rabbets nest, or that we had committed some such
fault that we were ashamed to show our faces, or make a long congie as though
we were making preparation to a Galliard, when if a foot slip we may have a
disgrace in the fall; and if a word be misplaced, it is half a marring to all
the matter: and therefore for messages, our matters being not great, small
instructions will serve our turns for the delivery of our minds.

Now for congratulating of Princes, God bless them, they are too great men for
us, more then to pray for them; and their matters too high for our reason to
reach after: it is enough for us to give a Cake for a Pudding, and a pint of
Wine for a pottle of Beer: and when we kill Hogs to send our Children to our
neighbors with these messages, My Father and my Mother have sent you a Pudding
and a Chine, and desires you when you kill your hogs you will send him as
good again. Now for great folks, they have such great choice of presents, and
of such great charge, and such great care in the delivery of them, that (Lord
have mercy upon us) we in the country cannot tell what to say unto them, but,
God bless them that have them, and much good may they do them.

Now for Ambassages and Ambassadors, we know not what the word means, and
therefore little care to be troubled with the men; for when we hear of any man
that comes from a strange Country, we say, I pray God he comes for good, and
then he is the better welcome: Tush, talk to us of a Basket or a
Basket-maker, and not of an Ambassador nor Ambassages; but make your selves,
that best know the meaning of them, the best use you can of them; for us, we
care not to look after them, more then to pray for them, that as they do, or
as they mean, so God bless them.

Now for your Officers, their charge is so great, that we desire not their
places, for we hold a private quiet better then a public trouble; and a clean
conscience worth a world of wealth: Now for your Orders, perhaps your need of
them is great, where disorders may be grievous: for us in the Country, we have
few, but in the Churches for our Seats, and at our meetings for our places,
where, when Master Justice, and the high Constables are set, honest men, like
good fellows will sit togeither; except at a Sessions, or an Assise we be
called upon a Jury, then as it pleases the Clerk of the Peace, set one before
another: and therefore for orders what need we trouble our selves with other
then we are vsd unto? I remember I have heard my father tell of a world of
orders he had seen in diverse places, where he had traueld, where right good
Gentlemen, that had followed great Lords and Ladies had enough to do to study
orders in their Service: a Trencher must not be laid, nor a Napkin folded out
of order; a dish set down out of order, A Capon carved, nor a Rabbet unlaced
out of order; a Goose broken up, nor a Pasty cut up out of order; a Glass
filled, nor a Cup uncovered nor delivered out of order; you must not stand,
speak, nor look out of order: which were such a business for us to go about,
that we should be all out of time ere we should get into any good order: but in
that there is difference of places, and every one must have their due, it is
meets for good manners to keep the rules of good orders: But how much more at
rest are we in the Country that are not troubled with these duties?

Now for your eyes of brightness, I fear you are not troubled with too many
of them; late sitting up, long watching, and night business, as writings,
readings, casting up of accounts, long watchings, and such like other business;
besides gaming, playing at Cards, Tables, and Dice, or such sports as spend
time, are all dangerous for weak sights, and make a world of sore eyes: But as
you said, some of the best sort are wiser in their actions, and more temperate
in their motions, and therefore keep their sights in more perfection; which may
be examples to others, if they have the grace to follow them: But for our eyes,
if we do not hurt them with a stripe of a twig in the wood, a flyo in the air,
or a mote in the Sun, our eyes are as bright as crystal, so that we can se
the least thing that may do us good; and if we can see the Sun in the
morning and the Moon an night, see our Cattle in our pastures, our sheep in
the Common, our Corn in the fields, our houses in repair, and our money in
our purses, our meat on our tables, and our wines with our Children, and look
up to heaven, and give God thanks for all, we seek no better sight.

Now for the cleannes of your hands, I fear that now and then some of ye have
your hands so troubled with an itch, that you must have them nointed with the
oil of gold, before you can fall to any good work: and some of yes, that
though your wits have good inventions, yet you cannot write without a golden
pen, which indeed, best fits a sine hand. But for us in the Country, when we
have washed our hands, after no foul work, nor handling any unwholesome
thing, we need no little Forks to make hay with our mouths, to throw our meat
into them.

Now for the pureness of your hearts; except Kings, Queens and Princes, and
such great persons, make no comparison with Country people, where yea and nay
are our words of truth; faith and troth are our bonds of love, plain dealing,
passages of honesty; and kind thanks continues good neighborhood: A liar is
hated, a scoffer scorned, a spend-thrift derided, and a miser not beloved: a
Swaggerer imprisoned, a Drunkard punished, and a Iugler whipped, and a Thief
hanged, for our hearts will harbor no such Guests: And for love, two eyes and
one heart, two hands and one body, two lovers and one love ties a knot of such
truth as naught but death can undo.

Now for brains of Wisdom, I think he is wiser that keeps his own, and
spends no more then needs, then he that spends much in hope of a little, and
yet may hay loose that too at last. Now for tongues of truth, let me tell you,
fair words make fools feign, and Court holy water will scarce wash a foul
shirt clean, except it come from such a Fountain, as every man must not dip
his finger in: But Cousin, when hearts and hands go together, words and deeds
go together; these are the tongues that will not faulter in their tales, but
tell truth in the face of the wide world; and therefore excepting the best that
may be examples to the rest, I think, if truth be any where, she is in the
Country.

Now for the nobleness of minds; it fitteth the persons in their places: but
for us in the Country, we had rather have old Nobles in our purses, then a
bare name of noble without Nobles: the reason may be that we do not know the
nature of noblenes so well as we do of Nobles, and therefore we hear only
so much of the cost of it, that we have no heart to look after it; but where
it is truly we honor it, and say, God bless them that have it; and if they be
worthy of it well may they keep it, and that is all that I say to it.

Now to spirits of goodness, alas, there is not one in the world; Christ Jesus
our Savior said so, There is none good but God: and if there be any on the
earth, I think a good belief and a good life does best express the nature of
it.

To conclude with Virtue, in which you lay up all the treasures of life, I
doubt not it is in the best, I would it were so in all with you, but be it
where it pleases God to send it once, I verily believe it to be as truly in
the Country as in places of higher compass: and by your leave, let me tell you
of a Riddle of my fathers one writing, touching that rare and precious Jewel.

There is a secret few do know,
And does in special places grow,
A rich man's praise, a poor man's wealth,
A weak man's strength, a sick man's health;
A Ladies beauty, a Lords bliss,
A matchless Jewel where it is:
And makes where it is truly seen,
A gracious King, and glorious Queen.
And this said he, is virtue, which though he understood in the Court, yet he
made use of it in the Country. Now therefore good Cousin, be content with your
humor, and let me alone with mine, I think I have answered all your
positions: and let me tell you, whatsoever you say, I verily believe that ere
you die, I shall find you rather in the roole of peace in the Country, then in
the trial of patience in the Court, except the heavens highest Grace, and
under heaven our earths highest Honor, make you happier in their favors then
the whole world else can make you. And now, what say you further unto me.


COURT. I say this to you, kind Cousin, that your Fathers lessons have made you
better learned then I looked for, but yet let me tell you, had you seen but
one of our shows in our Triumphs heard one of our Songs on our solemn days,
and tasted one of our dishes, in our solemn feasts, you would never look more
on a May Game, listen more to a louzy Ballad, nor ever be in love with beef
and pudding.


COUNT. Oh Cousin stay the Bells, I think you are deceived, for it may be that
at one of these Shows, I might see the fruits of my labors and my poor
Neighbors, flong away in gaudes and feathers; and perhaps have a proud humor,
wish to be as wise as they that were no wiser then they should be: and
therefore I think, better tarry at home then travel abroad to no better
purpose.

Now for Songs, a plain ditty well expressed, is better with us, then a fine
conceit, as feigned in the voice as the matter. Now for your dishes of meat. I
will tell you, I heard my father once report it for a truth, that a great man
who lived where you live, sent him for a great dainty a Porpose Pie or two
cold: which taking very thankfully, and causing the Messenger to stay dinner
with him, he cut one of them up, and very nicely taking out a piece of it, gave
it to my Mother, which she no sooner had in her mouth, but it had like to have
marred all with her stomach, but she quickly conveyed it all under board,
which my Father seeing, said, why how now wife? What? do you love no good
meat? yes (quoth she) but I pray you taste of it your self: which he no sooner
did, but he made as much have out of his mouth with it as she did, then did the
Children likewise the same, and the Servants being by, their Master offered each
one a piece of it, no sooner tasted of it, but they did so spit and spatter, as
if they had been poisoned; then he gave a piece to his Dog, which smelt to
it, and left it: by and by after came in a Miller and his Dog, to whom my
Father inlike manner offered a piece, but neither man nor dog would eat of it:
whereupon my Father heartily laughing, with thanks to his great Lord for his
kind token, sent one of them back again to him with this message, Commend
me, I pray you, to my good Lord, and tell him I heartily thank his honor, and
tell him, if either my self, or my wife, or my children, or my servants, or my
dog, or the Miller, or his dog, would have eaten of it, I would never have
sent one bit back again to him of it: but it may be that it is more
wholesome then toothsome, and he may make a better friend with it: so, paying
the messenger for his pains, sent him away with his message, which was no
sooner delivered, but his Lord heartily laughed at it: This was one of your
fine dishes. Another, a great Lady sent him, which was a little Barrel of
Cauiary, which was no sooner opened and taued, but quickly made up again, was
sent back with this message. Commend me to my good Lady, and thank her
honor, and tell her we have black Soap enough already; but if it be any
better thing, I beseech her Ladyship to bestow it upon a better friend, that
can better tell how to use it. Now if such be your fine dishes, I pray you let
me alone with my Country fare. And now, what say you else unto me.


COURT. I say this, that Nature is no votcher, and there is no washing of a
black Moore, except it be from a little durty sweat: the Ox will wear no
Socks, howsoever his feet carry their savor: and Diogenes would be a Dog,
though Alexander would give him a kingdom: and therefore though you are my
kinsman, I see it is more in name then in nature: thy breath smells all of
Garlike, and thy meat tastes all of mammaday pudding, which breaking at both
ends, the stuffing runs about the Pot: And since I see thou art like a
Millstone that will not easily be stirred, I will leave thee to thy folly till
I find thee in a better humor, for I see the Music of thy mind hangs all
upon the base string. Farewell.


COUNT. Nay soft a while, let me not be in your debt, for an ill word or two: I
see truth is no liar; all in the Court are not Courtiers, nor every man that
has wit is not truly wise; for then no man would spend breath to no purpose:
an Oxes foot may be sweeter then a Cods head, when Sockes may be but
saueguards for bare tooes in broken stockings: Garlike has been in more grace
then Tobacco, and is yet in the Country, with them that love meat better then
smoke. Diogenes is dead, and Alexander is in his grave; and better be a
manish Dog then a dogged man: And if your good will be to your good words,
you are more like a stranger then a kinseman. And for my pudding, I believe it
will prove better then a Tobacco pipe: so, rather desirous to be a Millstone,
not to stir at every motion, then a feather in a Weathercocke, to turn with
every gayle of wind, I will pray for your better wit, then you have shown in
a self wild humor, and so till I find you in more patience and less
passion, I will leave you till we meet again, hoping that you will be as I
am, and will be a friend, to forget all ill humors, and ready to requite all
kindnesses.


COVRTIER, So will I, and so, Farewell.

Thus they parted for that time, but what fell out at their next meeting; as
you like of this, you shall hear more hereafter.


FINIS.


Necessary Notes for a Courtier
Question.
WHat is a Courtier?

Answer. An Attendant upon Majesty, a companion of Nobility, a friend to
Virtue, and a hope of honor.

Quest. What things are chiefly to be required in a Courtier?
A. Two.

Q. What are they?
A. A good body, and a good mind.

Q. How are they to be used?
A. In humillity and ciuillity.

Q. To whom?
A. The first unto God, the second to man.

Q. What are the proofs of a good mind?
A. Love of goodness, and fear of greatness.

Q. What are the tokens of a good body?
A. Ability and agility.

Q. What preserues a good mind in goodness?
A. Prayer and Charity.

Q. And what keeps the body in strength?
A. Continence and exercise.

Q. What is the chief grace of a Courtier?
A. The fear of God, and the favor of a King.

Q. What is the Honor of a Courtier?
A. The love of virtue.

Q. What is the wealth of a Courtier?
A. The love a King.

Q. What is the charge of a Courtier?
A. Truth in Religion, care in his Service, love to his Master, and secrecy in
his trust.

Q. What is the care of a Courtier?
A. To deserve well, to keep well, to live well, and to dye well.

Q. What qualities are chiefly required in a Courtier?
A. Wisdom, Valor, Learning, and Bounty.

Q. What learning is most fit for a Courtier?
A. Divinity, Philosophy, Policy, and History.

Q. What are the Ornaments of a Courtier?
A. Variety of Languages observation of Travels, experience of Natures, and the
use of Understanding.

Q. What is a Courtier most to take heed of?
A. Envious Ambition, malicious Faction, palpable Flattery, and base Pandarisme.

Q. What is a Courtier chiefly to take note of?
A. The disposition of the best, the words of the wisest, the actions of the
noblest, and the carriage of the fairest.

Q. What things chiefly is a Courtier to be charie of?
A. His tongue and his hand, his purse and his middle finger.

Q. What conversation is fittest for a Courtier?
A. Wise wits, noble spirits, fair eyes, and true hearts.

Q. How should a Courtier hope of advancement?
A. With prayer to God, diligence in his service, respect of persons, and
judgment in affections.

Q. What discourses are fittest for a Courtier?
A. Admiration of wisdom, defert of honor, truth of valor, and life of love.

Q. What friends are fittest for a Courtier?
A. The wise and the wealthy, the valiant and the honest.

Q. What servants are fittest for a Courtier?
A. The expert, the faithful, the diligent and the careful.

Q. What is the true valor in a Courtier?
A. To fear no fortune, to be patient in adversity, to master affections, and
to forgive offenders.

Q. What are the follies in a Courtier?
A. Vain discourses, idle complements, apish fancies, and superfluous expenses.

Q. What are most dangerous in a Courtier?
A. To be inquisitiue of Occurrents, to reveal Secrets, to scorn Counsel,
and to murmur at Superiority.

Q. What things are most profitable to a Courtier?
A. A sharp wit and a quick apprehension, a smoth speech, and a sound memory.

Q. What should a Courtier chiefly observe in a King?
A. His wisdom, his valor, his disposition, and affection.

Q. What in a Councellor?
A. His religion, his reason, his care, and his judgment.

Q. What in a Lord?
A. His title, his worthiness, his spirit, and his carriage.

Q. What in a Lady?
A. Her beauty, her portion, her parentage, and her disposition.

Q. What in an Officer?
A. His knowledge, his care, his diligence, and his conscience.

Q. What time is best spent in a Courtier?
A. In prayer, in study, in grave discourse, and in good exercise.

Q. And what time is worse spent?
A. In devising of fashions, in fitting of fancies, in faining of Love, and in
honoring unworthiness.

Q. What is commendable in a Courtier?
A. Concealing of discontentments, mitigating of passions, affability in
speech, and courtesy in behavior,

Q. What most delights a Ladies eye in a Courtier?
A. Neat apparel, wise speech, to manage a Horse well, to dance well.

Q. What most contenteth a King in a Courtier?
A. Religious valor, reverent audacity, humble love, and faithful service.

Q. What is most troublesome to the mind of a Courtier?
A. Conscience and patience, continence and abstinence.

Q. What are most grievous to a Courtier?
A. The frown of a King, the displeasure of a Lady, the fall of honor, and
the want of wealth.

Q. What friend shall a Courtier most rely upon?
A. His God, his King, his wit, and his purse.

Q. What foes should a Courtier most stand in fear of?
A. Wanton eyes, glib tongues, hollow hearts, and irreligious spirits.

Q. What things are necessary for a Courtier to have ever in memory?
A. Temperate speeches, moderate actions, deliberate inventions, and discreet
resolutions.

Q. What delights are most fit for a Courtier?
A. Riding and Tilting, hunting and hauking.

Q. What is most comely in a Courtier?
A. A stayed eye, a fair hand, a straight body, and a good leg.

Q. What should be hated of a Courtier?
A. Rudenes and baseness, sloathfulnesse and slouenlinesse.

Q What special servants of name are most fit for a Courtier?
A. A Harbor for his Chamber, a Tailor for his Wardrobe, a Groom for his
Stable, and a Foote-man for his Message.

Q. What is the happiness of a Courtier?
A. To fear God, to have the favor of a King, to be able to lend, and to have
no need to borrow.

Q. What is the shame of a Courtier?
A. To take much and give nothing, to borrow much and lend nothing, to promise
much and perform nothing, and to owe much and pay nothing.

Q. What should a Courtier be always jealous of?
A. In sinuating spirits, intruding wits, alluring eyes, and illuding tongues.

Q. What is the life of a Courtier?
A. The labor of pleasure, the aspiring to greatness, the ease of nature, and
the command of reason.

Q. What is the same of a Courtier?
A. A clear conscience, and a free spirit, an (...) heart, and a bountiful
hand.

FINIS.

