The true and lively histoRYKE PVRTREATVRES OF THE VVOLL BIBLE.

QVOD TIBI FIERI NON VIS, ALTERI NE FACERIS


AT LIONS, BY IEAN OF TOVRNES. M.D.LIII.

TO THE RIGTH WORSHIPFVLL AND most vvorthie, Master Pikeling, ambassador of
the king of England, Peter derendel peace, and felicity.
I Know, mi most discret and virtuous Master, that some among other shall be
fond, ready to blame this work, bringinge for them, that no need it was of
such purtreatures, since we have at liberty theself stories, wherein we may
much better know the pure truth reding the wholl, then to stay at a thing
uncertain and drawn at pleasure: Some other shall be (know I well) wiche
shall endeuer themselves to sai, that it is a thing openly forbiden be the
law of God, and allthought the strong and faithful may without any danger
behold them, using thereof after their own good discretion, that
nevertheless, being sen of the weak and simple, it may be unto them occasion
of fall: Other lickwise that, since the hearing above all our five natural
wits most divine is allone nedfull to salvation, wherewith we, as with an
instrument mete, must take and receive the promesses of God offered and
presented unto us in the holy scriptures, contenting ourselves we should red
them, with understanding thereto required, and undertake no further. To whom
we, willing most feign them satisfy, answer: that, all be it the letter well
understood gives plain and perfette knowledge of the things,
neuerbethelesse the true and lyuelye purtreatures and representations thereof
may be, and (to sai better) are good and profitable means, wherbe we may
shirtlie and with ease, kippe and grave in mind the wholl meaning of it, wiche
otherwise without often reding, and with much werines of wit might easily
be forgotten being unto us instead of true, clear, and manifest arguments of
the wholl subject. For what a mean more shirt, sure, and with no little
pleasure easy might any man find, to teach his childerne, and such as are
not sen in the Bible withal, then to show them, the stories well drawn, and
lively pourteated nothing laking thereto, but all things therein set out
entierelie, afterward declaring them hollie that, wiche they represente? Or
what greater a pleasure, and recreation of mind might a studious man have,
knowing all ready the stories, and being well used, and sen therein, the 2 to se
presently before his eyes the things self, wiche he had red to be passed
long before, the figure and the letter coming, and agreing so well, that they
seem properly to be none other, but one self thing, disagreing only in this,
that the story tells things all ready passed, the wiche the figure as
calling back to the present, shows plainly with all euidencie to the eye.
Now as for that wiche the other might sai, that to draw and pourtreate is
forbidden unto us be the law and commandment of God, I grant that, for to
worship it, if then the weacke and simple (as they sai) do fall, that is to
be imputed to them, not the figures: since so much lack that they bring and
prouocke to idolatry, that rather they turn clean away from it, putting
before the eyes the sore punisshementes and pains, wherewith the childerne of
Israel were punisshed, when they committed such an abominable deed: As fore
the rest, they may se therein, but all exemples of good and holy living, that
is to wite, how god has all ways ben ready to healpe, and bear favor to
such as did walk rigthlie in his paths and ways: contrariewise greuouslie
to punisshe them, wiche rebel unto him would none other, but follow their own
will, and wicked mind: to be shirt they may learn eurie where therein to fly,
and eschew sin, and with good adresse to follow virtue. As for the third,
truth is that be the hearing needs we must receive the faith: iet nevertheless
in her degree the sight is greatly required, and nedfull, therewith to know
Gods glory and magnificencie in his works, considered in the beginning he
mad heaven and earth, with other visible works, acording our capacity
showing, and manifesting himself unto us, to the end, that be this mean we
might come to the knowledge of him, and seeing plain, that such his works were
fare more then of man, might know lickewise that it behooved the worckman
thereof to be without any compareson mor excellent then any man was. If
therefore be the means of the eye we come to so a high and divine knowledge, I
can think non other, but that in this it be good and profitable so that we
will not abuse thereof, the wiche thing might also hap of the hearing. For
who cold let any man, that should hear tell or red some story never so
godly or should tell or red it himself, to imagine some idolatry in his
mind? and that is liekwise against the law and commandment of God, being
not only exterior, but also interior. If theniwil so bring and call back
things passed, red and heard in the true, and holy stories of the old
Testament, that the eye may also enioie thereof, of a truth the intention and
mind, nor the end also, may be but good, and godly. The wiche things with
miself right well considered, I have thought it mete to endeuer miself to
translate the argument of each figure in English meter, being lickewise put
in six other languages, to the intent that the country, wherein I had been
nourrisshed and brought up, should in no wise remain bastard allone, his tongue
kipping her place among other, ready to bring him lick comoditie. This
therefore be me undertaken and ended, kipping eurie wherlicke measure, the third
person active of the Present, with the Aoriste, lickewise the Participle
passive of the preterite at discretion, as comonlie in the speech is used, the
contractions also of the tongue observed, morouer in the Orthographye leaving y
to the greek words, using of our own, as I thought it mete and conuentent, I
being of the Frenshe nation, for mi sauegarde and the works, have fond none
more sure, then iou mi virtuous master presupposed that ie borne in the
country, to the wiche naturally am affectionat, are at this time Ambassador
toward the King of mi natural land, douting no wise, but if iou will
vouchesaue to take in band to kippe it a little and defend, under the buckler
of iour favor, that without any lost, or damage shall remain woll, and
harmless. For I know right well, that iour good judgment is in so great a
reputation with eurie one, that witherwar die shall draw, all without any
withstanding will follow iou. Truth is, that the work is unworthy to compeere
before iour Master ship, so much laketh that iou ought to receive it,
neuerhethlesse it shall plense iou, to look a little upon the good affection,
and mind wherewith it is presented: and so doing ie shall encorage me to give
meself herafter to that thing, wiche, may be, shall be better worth, to the
service of iour Mastershippe, whose lowly and humble servant I am, and shall
be.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
THE affection mine all ways toward the hartlie ernest, loving reader, being
co^tinuallie commanded of the duty of mi profession, may not but daily go
about to satisfy the in this, wiche thou desire and look for in mi
vacation, the wiche, to may please the, I would it were to mi mind so f^e acd
licentiouse streched at large, as it is be the mishappe of the time restrained.
Restrained it is truly, not of it self, but for the diversity of the brains
of this dai, some tender and delicat, the other to rude, and gross, and the
last to straungelie different from them both, scrupulouse, and obstinate: so
that without danger, or scandale, i may not delecte the with the same things
wiche for the are more required, to the contentation of the part harder to be
contended, as the mor tickeling, wiche is the sprit. For whose delectation I
may not but confess, that the holy scripture is the chief of all the other.
And because that in this part, wiche therewith may edify us, I may not (as I
said) well reioisse the, I did look to please the with the other, that brings
up, which is the representation of the holy Bible, to the end that, if tow
maiest^ot enioi the letter so frelie, as thou would this^f, thou may
tapisse sure the chambres of thy mi^de and remembrance with the figures
thereof, and mor honestly, after us, then thou do the chanbres, and halles
of thy house with ethnike stores, thus evil becoming the faithful. And when
it were but for a witness, and to bring the to mnde, that all the old
testament was but the image, and figure of this, wiche we hold, I have would
feign figure it the here: to the intent also, that, having often before thin
eyes, the story of the holy Patriarchs living, tow may so well conform
thine at their exemple, that it may be to the fulfilling of gods will, and
thy salvation, So be it.

GENESIS I.


God the heaven mad in the beginning,
The earth and sea withal in perfitnes,
The moon and son in the sky bright shining,
Adam after mad to his one licknes.
GENESIS II.


With living ghoast god mad Adam to live,
Permitting him to maintain in his breath:
To eat of all except the fruit of live,
Wiche did forbid under the pain of death.
GENESIS II.


A heavy sleep (...) Adam god did cast,
Then from his sid a ribbe of his plucking:
Therewith lightly Eve his wif formed chaste,
And before him laid her at his waking.
GENESIS III.


To Eve is come the serpent maliciouse
Full quick, and so right busy about here,
Soon worcked, that (of their good enuiouse)
The fruit forbide they eat both togethere.
GENESIS III.


This fruit anon their both eyes clear opened:
Wherefore a shame so to show their nature,
A figgers leaves plucking nigh them joined
To their bodies, making so couerture.
GENESIS III.


God then knowing such crastie deception,
Adam called roughly and sore chidding:
His curse them gave and his malediction,
For dispising of his holy bidding.
GENESIS III.


God each of them with a garment of skin
Clothed, drives out the fair place of pleasure:
Then of the fruit the waikipech Cherubin:
Wherefore with death pursued are anon sure.
GENESIS III.


With much droping and sweat of his visage,
Eats Adam his bread new and modern:
Eve in sorrow and care of her menage,
Gives out great cries bringing fourth of childerne.
GENESIS IIII.


Cain cursed first of man's blood sheder,
Therewith sicking his one malediction,
Of envy full smitting slaieth his brother:
Wherefore leeseth all hope of redemption.
GENESIS VI. and VII.


God the deluge to Noe does forsai^
Commanding him the arche to build and do:
Then to get in with his such as does sai:
For all mankind with waters wills undo.
GENESIS VII.


Of the sky scluses let all their waters skippe,
And lift in air the arche to the clouds plain,
Five mothes and more on their waves do her kippe:
Then whence they came they go all straight again.
GENESIS VIII.


The arche comes on Armenies the hill:
Perished is all trough the wholl world ronde,
Noe allone with his alive rests still,
Wiche dead backward finds euri thing sterke dronde.
GENESIS VIII.


A land come down an altar builds to pray,
With pure cattle he makes immolation:
God does promise that never of live day,
No man se shall such other mondation.
GENESIS IX.


Sealing this peace god in the sky does lay,
The rain bow his, and that token them give:
Then all blissed forbideth them to slaie,
In any wise no man that is alive.
GENESIS IX.


Cham cursed is of Noe his father,
Wiche droncke leaves him vncoured frowardlie:
Sem then sorry with laphet his brother,
Cover him go straight there where he does lie.
GENESIS XI.


Nembroth the strong to make speak of his name,
Babel the toure builds with great estages:
But god breacking and dissiping the same,
Confounded all his men in their languages.
GENESIS XII.


From his country Abraham does him part.
God bidding him with all felicity,
To go away to Chanaan the part,
Wiche does promise to his posterity.
GENESIS XIII.


Cattle and gooddes so much Abraham have,
And Loath also on the earth feeding there:
That there sheepherdes do their best and do brave,
To make sore war among them togethere.
GENESIS XIII.


Wherefore leaving the place of Chanaan,
Loath be counsel separeth him shirtlie:
With all his gooddes there leaving Abraham
Comes to dwell in Sodom willingly.
GENESIS XIIII.


Melchisedech the high priest and good king,
Bread wine brings him then his benediction:
Of the boties wiche Abraham does bring,
To him he gives the decimes in portion.
GENESIS XVI.


Abraham then Agar without faintise
Knows in deed, be Saras own counsel:
Great that she is here mastresse does despise:
Wherefore great so must fly with much trauaill.
GENESIS XVII.


God his Angel within the wilderness
Sends, telling her go theself humilie
Agar before thy dame and good mastres:
For thy childerne I will sure multiply.
GENESIS XVII.


God Abraham plainly does certify,
To have a son with him great possession:
To begette kings in his own progeny:
Then him commands do the circoncision.
GENESIS XVIII.


Of Sodomis the three Angels forsai,
To Abraham the fearful euersion:
For their strange vice he does unto god prai:
Whereof he has pity nor compassion.
GENESIS XIX.


The Sodomites, the Angels to take still,
The door of loath will break also down trow:
But disloging with loath punish their will,
And false desire, causing them overthrow.
GENESIS XIX.


The Angels straight led loath out of Sodom,
His wif also and daughters far of sight
Of heavens fire that Sodomites consomme:
Of salt lothes wif becomes statu bright.
GENESIS XIX.


Lothis daughters to save his seed withal,
Within a holl mad him drunk purposedlie:
Wiche to his blood taking no heed atall,
With each of them medleth most pleasantly.
GENESIS XX.


Abimelech wills be force detain,
From Abraham his dear and weded wif:
But god him does to restore here again,
Threatening of him to end the wicked lif.
GENESIS XXI.


Sara complains of Ismael sporting
With her dear son Isaac eurie day:
But Abraham strif and noise eschewing,
Agar anon with her child drives away.
GENESIS XXI.


Agar her son, in the wild wooddes weping
Under a tree lays, of thirst willing die:
Godis Angel of them the voice hearing,
Shows her a weall her child to satisfy.
GENESIS XXII.


Abraham wills for to please gods highness,
Of his dear son to make immolation:
But god knowing his wount true righteousness,
Makes him to leave such an execution.
GENESIS XXIII.


In Hebrom land Sara ends her last dai:
Abraham paieth the sepulcher truly
To Ephron ionge wherein does her right lai
The good old man mourning most bitterly.
GENESIS XXIIII.


Here bucket fair up Rebecca does hold,
The servant drinks therein all with his ease:
Rebecca then iet to water is bold
His tene camels the better him to please.
GENESIS XXIIII.


As in the filde Isaac walks loocking,
Comes Rebecca from Mesopotamie:
On his camels the servant does her bring,
Of Isaac to be the wif semie.
GENESIS XXV.


Full of long days the own debt of nature
Paieth Abraham, and dies very swetlie:
His good childerne within the sepulture
Nigh be Sara do lay him for to lie.
GENESIS XXV.


Of Rebecca ar borne all together
The twines mamed Esau and Jacob:
The wicke holds be the foot his brother,
When they brought fourth in have do waill and sob.
GENESIS XXV.


From the filde comes Esau a honger,
And his brother Jacob sells and makes sure,
For certain meat that he eats a sonder.
(Wherefore repents his) primogeniture.
GENESIS XXVI.


To Palestins Isaac does him say
His wines brother out of his own nation:
Abimelech seeing them both to play
Through a window, blames the said fiction.
GENESIS XXVI.


Isaac does (whill the dearth is) remain
In Palestine, his flocks make good increase:
Wherefore envied Abimelech taket pain,
Stried his waters, to drive him out with ease.
GENESIS XXVI.


Abimelech of Isaac has mind,
Seeing that god favors him greatly,
And peace with him with an oath he does bind,
Allthought he has handled him most roughly.
GENESIS XXVII.


Esau leeseth his dear benediction,
Be Rebecca counsel his own mother:
Wiche does so well led the simulation,
That to Jacob does give it his father.
GENESIS XXVIII.


Alader sees Jacob from earth allone
Touching the sky, Angels thereon passing,
Slombring that whill the head upon a stone:
God then apeereth to him much promising.
GENESIS XXIX.


Rachel leading here sheep to the water,
Jacob the weall does uncover upon
Then here kissing, and does so woorcke aster.
That her he wedeth with her sister anon.
GENESIS XXX.


Baren Rachel a long time does remain:
Often therefore to Jacob makes her moan:
But god mighty setteh her out of this pain,
For she brings fourth Joseph child of her own.
GENESIS XXXI.


Jacob leaving Laban soon comes away,
Rachel softly her idol takes with her:
Laban after goes and cerche them that dai:
But finds nothing wherefore kisseth them both there.
GENESIS XXXII.


Considering their ancient strif and old,
Jacob seeing Esau in doubt comes,
Assuring him the Aurgell with him bold,
Wrestleth plain, wherefore crepell becomes.
GENESIS XXXIIII.


But of Jacob the childerne it permit
Will not Sichem witout circoncision,
And without doubt their father do promitte,
To fulfill it for their last conclusion.
GENESIS XXXVII.


Joseph the child to his brother does tell
All the dreams his, wherefore they without rest
Envious are, and to se him do swell,
Of their father knowing him loved best.
GENESIS XXXVII.


Ruben tells them that he wills not defill
Hands, with the blood of non of his brethren:
But if it pleases, that his clothes taket hei will,
And so cast him into the old cisterne.
GENESIS XXXVI.


To slaie him quite Judas does not consent,
But to sell him to merchants wills obei:
To whom passing that wai they all content
Do sell him straight, for good ready monei.
GENESIS XXXVII.


Jacob seeing sent to him from the filde,
Of his dear son so beraied the garment:
Thinking to be, with some of the beasts wild,
All deuoored, sore does mourn and lament.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


Judas away goes se his sheep to sheare,
Thamar knows it, wiche him deceive would sor,
Disguising her, fair clothes on her does wear,
And leaves mourning then goes him tarry for.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


Judas mad her of a fate kidde promise
To lie with her, and of him gage she hilde:
Then of Phares unknown the crastines,
And of Zaram, in wai gate her with child.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


Of all his flock a fair fate kidde milking
Binds Judas, and to her does it send,
His man find her iet in the filde thinking:
But fond is not there about at the end.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


For to burn her Judas did pursue on
After Thamar, knowing her sure with child:
Then is forced straight to leave her allone:
When she showing the gage plain he behilde.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


Judas away goes se his sheep to sheare,
Thamar knows it, wiche him deceive would sor,
Disguising her, fair clothes on her does wear,
And leaves mourning then goes him tarry for.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


Judas mad her of a fate kidde promise
To lie with her, and of him gage she hilde:
Then of Phares unknown the crastines,
And of Zaram, in wai gate her with child.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


Of all his flock a fair fate kidde milking
Binds Judas, and to her does it send,
His man find her iet in the filde thinking:
But fond is not there about at the end.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


For to burn her Judas did pursue on
After Thamar, knowing her sure with child:
Then is forced straight to leave her allone:
When she showing the gage plain he behilde.
GENESIS XXXVIII.


Be the merchants in to Egypt is brought
The good Joseph, detained be envy:
Wiche for monei of Phutifar is bought,
Of Pharaon chief of gendarmerie.
GENESIS XXXIX.


Be his chaste clock his mastres does him draw
To lay with him, Joseph wills not consent:
Wherefore criing said, when so fast him saw,
Joseph it was, that with force take her meant.
GENESIS XXXIX.


Wherefore (hard of Phutifar, this saiing
That she maintains in liing veritable)
All in a rage of rest takes nothing,
Till that he be prisonner miserable.
GENESIS XL.


Tow prisonners their dreams all did declare:
The meaning told Joseph as came to pas,
Within three days that the geollers of care
Deliured one, the other hanged was.
GENESIS XLI.


Pharaon wills, that is dream be exponde:
The southsaiers and augures of his land
Hold all peace, none that can speak is fond:
Joseph therefore from prison they demand.
GENESIS XLI.


Joseph declare does the darcke dreams so right
Of Pharaon, that with his deliuring,
Of this rich king, is then fond in the sight
Worthy, to have of Egypt the ruling.
GENESIS XLI.


Of all iowels Pharaon abonding,
To be clothed Joseph causes and araied,
Him of the world savior be name calling,
Makes him of his to be woorshipped and prayed.
GENESIS XLI.


To seven ieres of honger to pouruai,
Joseph having of god the providence,
Plenty of wheat, and meal apart does lai,
In seven ieres that be of abondance.
GENESIS XLI.


Be Pharaon Joseph is in marriage:
Tow childerne fair he has anon aster,
One Manasses, in the floor of his aage,
Then Ephraim, wiche followed the other,
GENESIS XLII.


They do find in putting out their forment,
All their monei, wherefore their fear is more:
For good Joseph Jacob is in tourment,
For Simeon, and Benjamin mourns sore.
GENESIS XLIII.


Joseph does them the steward recomaunde,
When Benjamin beholds before his eiene:
Of a banquet then the meat does comaunde,
For at none dai he wills with them dine.
GENESIS XLIIII.


Within their sackes, Joseph iet ones again,
All their silver and monei causes to lay:
Within the same of Benjamin bids plain
His great cup set, and then sends them away.
GENESIS XLV.


Beniamins neck about both arms does reche,
And kisseth them all with a love amiable,
On them weping, recover does the speech:
Then Pharaon makes joy inestimable.
GENESIS XLVII.


The Egiptiens citizens with other,
Sell their gooddes all to Joseph, and knowledge,
Some corn to have, but the priests asonder
Do kippe all theirs, be kingly privilege.
GENESIS XLIX.


His towelue childerne Joseph mad all there come:
Then to them all gave his precious blissing,
Ready to die, and all their time to come
Did them reuele, be high prophetising.
GENESIS L.


Now his father Joseph brings to Ebron,
The wiche is dead, for to bury him there:
Jacob living had prayed so to be don,
The good old man, and thereto mad him swear.
GENESIS L.


Of Pharaon in the territory
Jacob childerne fare abroad there do dwell:
Dead in Egipte Joseph all they bury
Well imbaumed, in a little cornell.
END.
EXODI I.


A new king then, Joseph no wise knowing,
Israel all did sore vex, and tourment,
Therewith shirtlie them all undo thinking:
But them he mad mor increase, and augment.
EXODI I.


Wherefore for spitte he comaundeth all midwiues,
All put to death childerne male, that are borne:
But fearing god these piteable, and good wives
Lest them alive, and slain to be them sworn.
EXODI I.


Pharaon then comaundeth then to be drond
Shirtlie with speed, full of vnpaciencie:
All the folk then, that tears to poor is fond,
Goes to drond them, in their innocence.
EXODI II.


Moses mother of him then a bed brought,
His dear father a whill him kept and hid
For his beauty, then him russhes among sought
In water lai, to do as the king bid.
EXODI II.


The kings daughter fond him in great pity
The russhes among, wiche to him favorable,
As god did please, him to save thought worthy,
His own mother giving him for nource able.
EXODI II.


A brother his Moses sees outraged,
Be maliciouse an Egiptien damnable:
This wrong seen, is so well avenged,
That wond to death, he hides him in sable.
EXODI II.


Of the Hebreus tow chidding most roughly,
Moses comes them to rebucke, and take:
One outrageous tells him stubburlie,
Willt thou slaughter mor on me undertake?
EXODI II.


Pharaon bids to seek as manslaughter
Moses abroad, straight to him kill, and slaie:
But god wills that he leaves that quarter,
The kings fury better eschew to may.
EXODI II.


Their beasts coming at the weall to water
Daughters seven, of Madian the priest,
Of the sheepheardes Moses was the master,
To will grieve them, refrening all their list.
EXODI II.


Ietro after be his daughter him fette
Sent to that place, seeing the personage,
Receaueth of him the promise with joy great,
To give to him, his daughter in marriage.
EXODI II.


Dead Pharaon, Israel does him mourn,
Even as wonded, with extreme affliction:
His voice of god is hard plain at that turn,
Wiche for his pains had great a compassion.
EXODI III.


God to Moses shows him in Oreb mount
There in a shroobe, as flamme that does strenght lack:
Wiche coming nigh the holy place as wont,
The shoes on feet, god makes him to go back.
EXODI III. and IIII.


Moses is mad of Israel captain,
Be his hands god wills his works show strange,
Promising him be his might high, and plain,
To an ader his rod at will to change.
EXODI IIII.


Aaron comes speak in the wilderness,
As god wills, to Moses his brother:
Wiche blissing him bids him in readiness,
To Pharaon go tell all together.
EXODI IIII.


With tokens three they showed manifest,
Of Israel that god them thither sent,
To bring them out, seeing them worthy best:
Israel all thanketh god to serve him bent.
EXODI V.


For Israel of his pains to soulage
Comes Aaron, with his brother Moses,
Desire the king, not so grieve them nor charge:
But mor for this the people does oppres.
EXODI VII.


Aaron lays before this wicked king
This his rod down, wiche changes to ader:
The Same also be inchaunters making:
But deuooring the first kills the other.
EXODI VIII.


Nevertheless Pharaon bursteth for spitte:
God knowing then that other wills not do,
Makes spring out many frogs in Egipte,
To infest there, the meat and drink unto.
EXODI VIII.


So forced then does permit sacrifice
To Israel, cessing him do wrong:
Moses ready apeasing the justice
Of god mighty, makes die the vermin spronge.
EXODI VIII.


Even as before he shows them naughty face,
Swells with wrath, takes his false obiectes:
God changes the dust to dogs flies in that place,
Wiche do prick kim, beasts, also his subjects.
EXODI IX.


He does repent, and falseth his promise,
Even as before gods people does moleste:
God causes die, to refrain his hardness,
Beasts eurie one, in his country with peste.
EXODI IX.


This heavy strocke sostned his stubburne heart,
Caused him know God, showing himself a fear:
Moses makes cesse tempesting eurie part,
Apeasing god wiche is for in anger.
EXODI X.


Pharaon then does himself humilie,
Finding at taste to bitter his own sin:
The arms in air Moses god prays humbly,
The grasshoppers to drive the red sea in.
EXODI X.


Using allwaies these his aunswers terrible
Pharaon, so the lord God does prouocke,
That in his land a darcknes most horrible
Is be three days, all troubling without mock.
EXODI XII.


Now Israel eats the lamb spotles,
As god thereof has mad the ordonnaunce:
Wiche the passage wills so be known doutles,
In wiche he took of Egiptiens vengeance.
EXODI XII.


All the first borne of man, both and of best
Goddis angel kills quite out of hand,
For the sore sins of the king manifest:
Wherefore cries out all the people of his land,
EXODI XII.


The Egiptiens leave vnderfull richesse
To Israel, from Egipte him sending:
God makes it bring with them be crastinesse,
Of that spoilling them, for their deserving.
EXODI XIII.


Moses to God first borne does sanctify:
Wherefore with beasts makes immolation,
Wiche does redeem man's blood, and purify,
Receiving death, be their decollation.
EXODI XIII.


Marching be dai, God for their good adresse
Them of a cloud a colonne sends away,
Wiche guides them still in the wilderness,
Coing before in air be eurie wai.
EXODI XIIII. and XV.


The Egiptiens with death are apeased,
Upon the banckes of the red sea ar laid:
Of Israel the childerne ar pleased:
Then praising god, a fair cantique is said.
EXODI XV.


Marie Moses, and Aaron sister
With a tabrette, begins allone to plait
Women singing follow her glad after,
For together their god to praise, and prai.
EXODI XV.


Israel maieth nomor forbear the thirste,
In sur desert the water is bitter:
Their suddenly begins to murmur first:
Moses tourneth it then to swetnes after.
EXODI XV.


In Helim place most pleasant to the eye,
Finds Israel twelve fair, and good fountains
To him pleasing, with palms seventy,
Campeth him self there, to forgette his pains.
EXODI XVI.


Israel meat in Sin hongrie does lack.
Aaron there, and Moses does dispitte,
Saiing leauer to have be remained back
With Egiptiens, and have died in Egipte.
EXODI XVI.


God at the need never forgetting his,
Causes him fly of fat quailles a great sight,
For to show him that of gooddes the spring is,
And in the camp lodges and tents down to light.
EXODI XVI.


The mighty God of his people loving,
Be forty ieres from the sky mad to rain
Manne, of the taste of honnie sauouring,
Floor of forment, mad as coriander plain.
EXODI XVI.


It pleases God his manne ordinary,
A dai only to Israel to last:
Wiche keeping it tow, to the contrary,
Finds it in woormes, and stinche wiche they must cast.
EXODI XVI.


Hallowed is of god the creator
The seventh dai, in the wiche he did rest:
Of his bidding the people zelatour,
Sabbatizing does no woorck man, nor best,
EXODI XVI.


Aaron lays the manne in tabernacle,
For to be showed to the posterity:
That they maise how their god be miracle,
Fed Israel in a desert hongrie.
EXODI XVII.


In Raphidim no water maieth be fond:
Moses fears less to death be stoned:
The god of healde bids him strike the rock sonde,
Wiche much water pooreth well seasoned.
EXODI XVII.


To Israel Amalech war does make,
Thinking his camp with arms all to undo:
The swerd in hand Iosue puts him back,
Moses the hands lifting the air unto.
EXODI XVIII.


Ietro comes se Moses in wilderness,
Wiche receaueth him as well he does deserve:
Of Pharaon then tells the wickedness,
And the tourment, wherewith he did them serve.
EXODI XVIII.


Moses the causes of the people does hear,
Ietro sees well, that he takes to much pains:
He causes make that healpe to him they bear,
Good and faithful Judges, with righteous captains.
EXODI XIX.


All Israel campeth himself in the plain
Nigh be Sina, whence he wills go away:
Moses allone goes up to the mountain,
For to his god, wiche calls him speak, and prai.
EXODI XIX.


God wills that his peopell understand:
Moses comes then him to sanctify,
That be this mean against death he maieth stand.
And his garments causes him purify.
EXODI XIX.


The smocking hill the great trompette did blaw:
The people hard the voice of god in fire,
Wiche with great noise to Moses gives his law,
Wherein shows him his zeal, and good desire.
EXODI XXXII.


On God living Israel does not pass,
Seeing Moses long in the mount remain:
Makes in Oreb cast a calf in a mass,
Then as his god does him prai and retain.
EXODI XXXII.


Before this calfe is offering immoled
Be Israel, that his god does forgette:
And so his faith most holy violed,
Lightly sinning be idolatry great.
EXODI XXXII.


Being therefore nomor of god mindful,
His wholl mind is thereto set, that he must
Eat still, and danse, for his body sinful,
Far from his god, wills live at his lust.
EXODI XXXII.


Moses does se Israel him self mar,
And to his god wickedlie do wrong:
Wherefore angry, the tables breaks with great care
Of his swet laws, wiche first in his heart spronge.
EXODI XXXII.


The calfe has mad to burn anon after:
To Israel childerne gave it to drink,
Puluerised, dissolved in water,
That of their sin the taste might deper sincke.
EXODI XXXII. and XXXIII.


God speacketh roughly against Israel all,
Moses thereof is in heavy tourmentes:
Israel then does weping prai, and call,
And clothe himself, with his mourning garments.
EXODI XXXIII.


Moses him self puts in the tabernacle:
God speaks to him in a colonne fiery:
The people then shamefast at the oracle,
Does him woorshippe, seeing the mystery.
EXODI XXXIII.


Almighty god before Moses does pass
Puts his hand, on his eyes and visage:
Showing therbe that no man sees his face,
But that of death pass he must the passage.
EXODI XXXIIII.


With God Moses fasting ends without pain
Of nights forty, and forty days ever.
The holy law is in tables putted again,
The wiche with fear they must kippe, and reuere.
EXODI XXXIIII.


Moses comes from Sinai the mount,
The princes are come se him at his coming:
Aaron is with them wondering not wount,
To se from fare his face with horns shining.
EXODI XXXIIII.


Speaking to them this godly personage,
Seeing they have lack of strenght in their eyes,
For to se him, does cover his visage,
That so they may better hear the words his.
EXODI XXXVI. and XXV.


It is ended with all fine browderie,
On great pillars with art well measured:
At hoopes of gold hangs the tapisserie,
With golden woorcke all the pieces figured.
EXODI XXXVII. and XXV.


The praiing place is as god has bidded:
Towe Cherubins of an work excellent,
Under the arche with a rich crown girded,
To lay therein the laws of testament.
EXODI XXXVII. and XXV.


Of the same are all the vases, and the table
Wherein the bread is of proposition:
Even so as god of the work admirable,
From point to point mad clear declaration.
EXODI XXXVII. and XXV.


The candellstycke of pure gold is hanged,
There for to light in the sanctuary,
Wiche with five branches to their rich stock ioned,
Seven tapers hold for luminarie.
EXODI XXXVII. and XXX.


An altar mad (coured with gold) four squarre,
Towise mor high kiping good proportion:
Allwaies smocking upon sweet perfumes are,
Whereof god makes the right composition.
EXODI XXXVIII. and XXVII.


The altar then is mad of sacrifice,
With brass coured, in pieces thin and small:
All instruments to that meet, and propice,
As pottes, gredirons, brandirons, caudrons withal.
EXODI XXXIX. and XXVIII.


Of Aaron the garment the high priest
Is finisshed, acording gods bidding:
And so well mad that non fairer may list,
For to show plain, that it is gods finding.
EXODI XL.


Moses makes the holy hallowing,
With all deacking of the Sanctuary:
With oil makes the godly anointing,
For gods bidding it is ordinary.
EXODI XL.


Being ended of the Sanctuary
The work, then there goddis highness does light
In ronde about, and above does tarry
Be dai couring it, a cloud fair in sight,
EXODI XL.


Ended the dai, anon it does become
In shining fire, and a light most goodly:
Wiche missing not even as the night is come,
Burning sparcleth, about the place holy,
EXODI XL.


When Israel sees the cloud away move,
And that leaving the holy place does part:
Suddenly thence does vncampe and remove,
And follow it, wether it goes the part.
END.
LEVITICI IX.


A fire coming from god and sky above,
The sacrifice utterly does deuoore:
Israel this seeing falls down with love
Praises his god, and woorshippeth at that hoore.
LEVITICI X.


Nadab with him Abiu a fire strange,
To the lord god against his will do offer:
Wherefore angry does ield them both their change:
For painful death with heavens fire do suffer
LEVITICI X.


Their both bodies dead (most fearful spestacle)
Moses causes be men in readiness
To be cast out, fare from the tabernacle,
For so to be an exempell sport les.
LEVITICI XXIIII.


Moses causes to be stoned a ionge man,
With false witness proved a blasphemer:
Fare from their camp the people to him ran,
To kippe the law of their dear redemer.
DEVTERON. XXXIIII.


God shows then the good prophet Moses,
Fortelling him of his live the passage,
All the cornels of the land be promise:
Wiche he does se from Nebo mount at large.
IVDICVM III.


For Israel to put in his fredome,
Eioth Eglon slaied, king full of richesse:
Be this Moab the burden in his rome
Of Israel bearing, does him oppress.
IVDICVM IIII.


Towentie ieres wholl Sisure prouoker stout,
Sor Israel did pursue, and assaill:
But him hydding ones not sure, and in doubt,
Iahel his head came to perce with a naill.
IVDICVM VII.


When Gedeon behilde throw the waters,
Three hundred full of his men to be drond,
In their hands laid trompettes, both and tapers:
So victory on his enmies he fond.
IVDICVM IX.


Having killed his brethren on a stone,
Abimelech was forced ielde the ghoast:
For besieging with sor war Thebes, anon
A strocke he had, of a woman with lost.
IVDICVM XV.


Be Sanson strong at some foxes tailles were tied
Fagettes burning, whereof troubled did star
The Phijistins, left away go untied
Be such a mean, that all corn they did mar.
IVDICVM XV.


A thousand men with a chickebone did kill
Of a dead ass Sanson, wiche from the same
Sees spring water, whereof he drinks his fill,
When to his help god calls him, and his name.
RVTH II.


Of Booz wheat Ruth began to gather,
And nigh to him is she so bold to come:
The good Booz vittals bid to give her:
Then she so wife, wills his wif become.
I. REGVM XVI.


The wicked sprit entering in the body
Of king Saul, for sor him to tourment:
David plaing, with sweet a melody
Diuinlie mad him away to absent.
I. REGVM XIX.


Micol David to be killed fearing,
Faineth sickness a bed keep him, and bind:
Then an image all hearie there laing,
Thinks to change of the king the same mind.
I. REGVM XXIIII.


David wills not, avenge him of his king,
Allthought it lays in his power utterly:
Only on him the great danger hanging,
Of him in care, shows him faithfully.
I. REGVM XXXI.


Saul seeing his three childerne beslain,
His warriars all, and the bataill be lost,
Being wonded, fears prisonner remain:
Wherefore his lif, with his hand did him cost.
II. REGVM XIII.


Ammon forced Thamar his one sister:
Absalon then, for the ded detestable
Mad a banquet, where he coming after,
Was there then slaied, of his men, at his table.
II. REGVM XVII.


Of treason shows the false talking coured
Achitophel, that David innocent
Absalon takes, but all is discoured:
Wherefore for fear, straight to hang himself went.
II. REGVM XVIII.


Absalon is for his wickedness paid:
For god permits, willing nomor forbear,
That be the hears hanged remaining stayed,
Ioab causes him die, with strockes of spear.
II. REGVM XX.


Ioab before the strong town of Abele,
The dwellers in did sum, and warn them last,
To ielde to him Siba false, and rebel:
Whose head anon, to them in he did cast.
III. REGVM II.


Solomon knows Ioab vnfaithfullnes:
Wherefore angry, with his mouth does comande,
To death bitter to be put, with cruelnes,
Allthought touching goddis altar does stand,
III. REGVM X.


The queen comes from Saba, for to hear
Solomon king, and his divine conning:
Wiche being hard, wonderful did apeare:
Presents therefore rich mad, him favoring.
III. REGVM XIII.


Obeissing man, mor then his god above,
Fed his body a prophet in Bethel:
But in the way, when thence he did remove,
Was put to death, with a wild beast cruel.
III. REGVM XVI.


Therse being rond about besieged,
Zambri maing not no wise away turn,
Durst assaut none suffer, sor affliged:
Wherefore himself in his palaice does burn.
III. REGVM XVII.


When on the earth, no rain god did release,
In the torrent of Carith drancke Helie
With tow rauans, as to god it did please,
Were bread and win, to him brought faithfully.
III. REGVM XVII.


Praing his god Helie mad to reliue
Be divine power the child of his hostess:
Wiche beholding, her child to be alive,
A holy man him to be, did confess.
III. REGVM XIX.


In wilderness Helie sees an Angel,
Water, and bread showing him, in that whill:
Be whose virtue, after he has eat well,
Comes to the top of Oreb goddis hill.
IIII. REGVM IIII.


Helise did the people pacify,
When honger sor did him vex, and moleste:
With little bread did him so satisfy,
That increasing, thereof had some of rest.
IIII. REGVM VI.


The Siriens brought Helise all blinded
Of god into Samarie, then hartlesse:
Then do we se how god would, and minded
That left they were go, together harmless.
IIII. REGVM IX.


Iehu seeing Iezabel be kepth fast
Within a towr, broken of her high mind,
Her body down caused thence to be cast:
Where deuoored was, of dogs, in her kind.
IIII. REGVM XIII.


To be buried is laid a man sterke dead,
Within the tomb of Helise prophet:
Wiche as the bones he touches lists his head,
And reliued, rises straight on his feet.
IIII. REGVM XVII.


Israel is kept fast in Assirie:
But the wicked, wiche on god no trust set.
On Israel holding all Samarie,
Ar put to death, with leons fires, without let.
IIII. REGVM XIX.


The Assiriens, thinking be their great deeds,
Jerusalem to force, with mighty hand:
The Angel did, being then at their sides,
Slain a hundred, five and fifty thousand.
IIII. REGVM XIX.


Of the Hebreus the great persecutour
Sennacherib, worshipping his Idol
Slain was, without other executour,
But his childerne, drawn into monopole.
IIII. REGVM XX.


Ezechias sick a bed in great smart,
Was be Esaie warned of death so strong:
Then he prayed god fearful, with all his heart,
Wiche healed him, and his lif did prolonge.
IIII. REGVM XXII.


The holy law, in the boocke conserved,
Red is before Josias king of might,
Wiche wills sure, that it be observed:
So minds walk fautles in his gods sight.
IIII. REGVM XXV.


All wicked deeds are then away turned,
When Josias walks in holiness:
On the altars the false priests are burned:
For what god hates, he sees with werines.
TOBIAE I.


Keeping Tobie prisonner men wicked,
Nevertheless his god bears in mind
So fervently, that in his heart sticked,
Woorckes of mercy to show of eurie kind.
TOBIAE VI.


The child Tobie holds fast in his hand
This so great fisshe, putting him in surtie:
Then him clensing wisely he does demand
Of Raphael, his own true property.
TOBIAE VIII.


Tobie puts of the same fisshe the gall
The colles upon, and to god does trust sure:
Wherefore Sara to his wifletting fall,
Bond the Angel, the enmie of nature.
TOBIAE XI.


His good father reioissing very old,
With a good zeal Tobie at his coming,
A will the gall on his eyes he does hold
Of this his fisshe, thence his sight restoring.
IVDITH XIII.


Holophernes with Judith is in love,
But she anon paid him for his folly:
For as he was droncke, that he cold not move,
She killed him, deliuring Bethulie.
HESTHER VII. and VIII.


With Assuere Hester in favor come,
Saved from death all the people Ie wisshe:
Mad hang Aman, wicke would hang in his rome
Good Mardoche, most wicked and piuisshe.
JOB II.


Yet that Satan with leave and licencie
Of god stracke Job, with extreme affliction:
Nevertheless his manly paciencie
Mad to apeere his divine perfection.
EZECH. XXXVII.


Ezechiel in the fildes disioined
Saw bones many, wiche as his mind did give,
Were all anon each to other joined
With strong sinous, full of flesh, and of live.
DANIELIS III.


The three childerne woorshippe not the Idol:
Wherefore a live ar thrust in the furnace:
Down the Angel comes that does them console,
Harmless from fire, keeping them in that place.
DANIELIS V.


Balthazar sees a hand and does behold,
Upon a wall writting his mishappe:
For he drinking in the temples vases to bold,
To leese anon his kingdom does not scappe.
DANIELIS XIIII.


In Babilone worshipped the dragon,
Of Daniel is with means sure mete withal:
For a morsel, wiche to deuoore is gone,
Casting to him, bursted, and dead did fall.
DANIELIS XIIII.


From the leons deane is Daniel save brought out,
God permitting him receive no outrage:
His enmies all in a sore fear be put,
And in his sted devoured, with great rage.
IONAE II.


Jonas thinking from his God for to fly,
On sea sailling, there came such a tempest,
That the shippmen him did cast in boldly:
Wherefore anon the water was in rest.
IONAE II. and III.


Days and nights three in her body the whall
Jonas did keep, and then coost him to land:
Where of his god hear did the voice to call,
Wiche him go preshe, to Niniue dit command,
IONAE III.


Criing Jonas that god wills subvert
Niniue, then they do penitencie make:
Kings, and subjects men se them to convert,
To god mighty, wiche his vengeance keeps back.
II. MACHAB. III.


Wonderful is the heavy punition,
Wiche from the sky comes stricke Geliadore:
When the treasure to robe takes commission
Wiche gods temple does both deacke, and decore.
II. MACHAB. VII.


Seven brethren ar put to death bitter,
Keeping the law of god, with devotion:
So is with them their godly dear mother,
Wiche brings them, to the execution.

