Good Reader read the Preface, or else read nothing.

THE TRAVELS OF certain Englishmen into Africa, Asia, Troy, Bythinia, Thracia,
and to the Black Sea.

AND into Syria, Cilicia, Pisidia, Mesopotamia, Damascus, Canaan, Galile,
Samaria, Judea, Palestina, Jerusalem, Jericho, and to the Red Sea: and to
sundry other places.

Begun in the year of Iubile 1600. and by some of them finished this year
1608. The others not yet returned.

Very profitable for the help of Travelers, and no less delightful to all
persons who take pleasure to hear of the Manners, Government, Religion, and
Customs of Foreign and Heathen Countries.

LONDON. Printed by Th. Haueland, for W. Aspley, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Parrot. 1609.

THE PREFACE TO the READER.
I Find (gentle Reader) in Histories commended unto us* the painful travels
of some (both by Sea and by Land) which visited far countries, that they
might be made more wise and learned. For this purpose Pythagoras traveled
into Egypt to hear the M^^^phiticall Poets. plato leaving Athens, where he
taught with great commendation (...) into Italy to Archit^^ of ^arentum, that
he might learn somewhat of that Philosopher and Disciple of Pythag^^as.)
Apollonius (with no less labor than danger and cost) passed and iourneied to
the furthest par^^ of (...) to the Philosophers there, that he might hear
Hierarchs, sitting in a throne of gold, and drinking of the Well of Tantalus,
disputing amongst a few Scholars, of Nature, of Manners, of the course of
(...) and Statres* from thence, returning by the Elamites, Babylonians,
Chalda^ns, Medes, Assyrians, Palestines; he came to Alexandria: and from thence
to Aethiopia, that he might see the Philosophers in India, which went always
naked, and the Table of the Sun, which was famous throughout the world. Solon
went from Graecia to Egypt for a like purpose. All these traveled to get
wisdom and learning.

It is written of Hierome, that he went from Dalmatia to Rome; from thence to
Germany; then to Constantinople; then to Alexandria; then to Jerusalem; only
to see and hear famous men, that he might always go forward in wisdom.

Jacob in his old age traveled into Egypt, partly constrained by necessity,
and partly for love of Joseph. The Queen of the South, a woman (whom Aristotle
calls imperfect creatures) traveled far to hear the wisdom of Sol^mon.

Amongst us there have been (and are still) sundry Travelers of great name,
which have enterprised and taken in hand great Voyages, and dangerous iournies;
Some to Venice, some to Rome, some to Constantinople, some to Jerusalem, some
to Syria, some to Persia, some to the Turk, some to the Barbarians: And these
have traveled upon diverse respects: Some for pleasure, some for profit, some
to see their manners, some to learn their languages, some to get experience,
some to get wisdom and knowledge; not sparing any cost, fearing any danger,
nor refusing any pains. Others would travel, but are loath to be at any
charges. Others would be at the cost, but fear to expose themselves to
dangers by Sea and by Land. It is good (say they) to sleep in a whole skin.
They cannot abide to be tossed and tumbled like tennis-bals on the turbulent
and tempestuous seas, as Ovid in his exile complained he was, when he said,
Eleg. 2.

Me miserum, quanti montes voluuntur aquarum,
Iamiam tacturos ^idera summa putes.
Quanta diducto subsidunt a^quore valles,
^amiam tacturas Tartara nigra putes.
That is,

What boisterous billows now (O wretch!)
Amidst the waves we spy,
As I forthwith should have been heau'd
To touch the Azure sky?
What vacant valleys be there set
In swallowing Seas so wrought,
As presently thou look I should
To drery hell be brought?
Aeneas was tossed with a like tempest, as Virgil finely describes it, Aeneid.
1. which place is well known to all young scholars. And these fresh water
soldiers discourage themselves from travel, and say, It was one of the three
things which Cato repented, to travel by Sea when he might have gone by Land:
And a charge that Antigonus gave his sons (when they were tossed with a
tempest) Remember (my sons) and warn your posterity of it, that they never
hazard themselves upon such adventures. For Sailers and Adventurers (as one
says very well) are neither amongst the living, nor amongst the dead: they
hang between both, ready to offer up their souls to every flaw of wind and
billow of water wherewith they are assaulted, especially to every stormy wind,
and huge sea. And it is more safe (say they) to stand upon the shore, and to
see the raging of the waters from the sea banks, than to be tossed thereupon,
and endangered thereby.

Wherefore (albeit I be no great traveler my self) yet to set forth the
praise of the one, who have been at the cost, hazarded the danger, and
returned with credit; and to help the pusillanimitie of others who fear to
undertake the travel in regard of the danger; and to relieve the misery of
others, who are loath to be at the cost though they delight to hear and see
strange countries, people, and manners: I have thought good to publish the
travels of others, which lately (by good chance) is come unto my hands, after
the death of Master Bezaliell Biddulph a learned and religious gentleman, to
whom they were first written. In whose study (amongst his letters and loose
papers) was found first of all a Copy of a voyage to Jerusalem by Land, from
Aleppo in Syria Comagena, not long since undertaken and performed by five
Englishmen there soiourning, viz Master William Biddulph (Preacher to the
Company of English Merchants resident in Aleppo) Master Ieffrey Kirbie
Merchant, Master Edward Abbot Merchant, Master John Elkin gentleman, and Jasper
Tyon Ieweller.

This vo^age was well penned, and generally well liked of all that saw it, who
craved copies thereof, by which means at length it came to my hands: which I
thoroughly perusing; and finding therein mention made of former Letters,
concerning other voyages by one of these five travelers formerly performed,
directed to the said Gentleman Bezaliel Biddulph: I could not satisfy my self
until (by the means of friends) I came to the sight of the rest also, which
were many in number, at least twenty letters, besides the voyage to Jerusalem,
all directed unto one man: Some by the Preacher above named, master William
Biddulph: and some by his brother Peter Biddulph Lapidarie and Diamond cutter
in those Countries. Out of all which Letters I have gathered the matter therein
contained, (leaving out only some salutations and private matters) and have
thought good (for the help of Travelers and delight of others) to make one
body of them, and (without the consent of either of them) to put them in print.
For the one of these two brethren is yet beyond the Seas; the other (after ten
years travel) is lately arrived into England, and has sundry times been
requested (by diverse of his good friends) to publish his travels, but he could
never be persuaded so to do, but answered* that he knew how to spend his time
better, and that he was not ignorant of the incredulity of others in such
cases, who will hardly believe any thing but that which they themselves have
seen; and when they hear any thing that seems strange unto them, they
reply, that travelers may lie by authority: but they are liers themselves
which say so; for travelers have no more authority to lie than others, neither
will they arrogate unto themselves more liberty to lie than others, especially
being men that fear God, as they (of all others) should be, who go down to
the Sea in ships, and see the works of the Lord both by Sea and by Land, and
his wonders in the deep.

In regard whereof, he has been so far from printing his travels, that he
(being a very modest man) takes no delight to speak thereof, except it be
unto some familiar friend. But for that old acquaintance which I have had with
him (having been his scholar) and that mutual love betwixt us of long
continuance; I was so bold to make known unto him, that I had seen all the
letters which both he and his brother Peter Biddulph had written to their
friend Bezaliel Biddulph, (wherein they discoursed of all their travels) and
what pains I had taken to gather them together for mine own delight, and
direction in my travels, which I purposed shortly to undertake. Whereupon he
requested me to keep them secret to my self, which I told him I had done,
forasmuch as I had read in one of his letters to Mr. Bezaliel Biddulph, the
like request, which he made unto him in these words: I pray you keep my
Letters to your self, lest whiles to give content unto you in writing what you
would, I receive discontent my self in hearing what I would not.

Hereby I found him very affable, and willing to confer with me of his
travels, and to give me direction for mine, and to resolve me in any thing I
desired, concealing my purpose of imprinting them, when (by conference with him
and other travelers into those parts) I had perfected them. Yet, forasmuch as
a public good is to be preferred before a private, I could not but impart unto
others that which I my self had learned of others: For that which Persius
speaks interrogatiuely, in this case I understand positiuely:

Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter: That is,

It is nothing for thee a good thing to know,
Unless thou impart it toothers also.
And who knows what good may redounde unto others, by reading of this
discourse of other Countries? For hereby all men may see how God has blessed
our Country above others, and be stirred up to thankfulness.

Hereby subjects may learn to love, honor, and obey their good and gracious
King, when they shall read of the tyrannous government of other Countries,
and of the merciful government of theirs.

Hereby hearers may learn to love and reverence their Pastors, and to thank
God for the inestimable benefit of the preaching of the word amongst them; when
they shall read in what blindness and palpable ignorance other nations live,
not knowing the right hand from the left in matters that concern the kingdom
of Heaven, and yet reverence and honor their blind guids and superstitious
Churchmen like Angels, and provide for their maintenance roially.

Here wives may learn to love their husbands, when they shall read in what
slavery women live in other Contries, and in what awe and subjection to their
husbands, and what liberty and freedom they themselves enjoy.

Hereby servants may be taught to be faithful and dutiful to their Masters,
when they shall read of the brutish and barbarous immanitie in other Countries
of masters toward their servants; who not only beat them like dogs, but sell
them at their pleasure, and sometimes kill them for small offenses.

Here rich men may learn to be thankful to God, not only for their
liberty and freedom of their Conscience and persons; but of their goods also:
when they shall read, how in other contries no man is master of his own, but
as the fattest ox is nearest unto the slaughter, so the richest men are
nearest unto death.

Here poor men may learn to be thankful to God for their benefactors, and
not to be repining and impatient beggars (as many of them are) when they shall
read how in other countries the poor live like brute beasts, on grass and
water, the rich having no more mercy on them, then the rich glutton had of
Lazarus.

Here they that travel in England may learn what a benefit it is to have the
refuge of Innes in their travel, and be content to pay well for it, where
they are well used: whereas in other countries they lodge without doors all
night and carry their provision with them.

And the publishing hereof without the Authors consent may perhaps be an
inducement unto him to enlarge this discourse, by adding thereunto the
diversities of Religions in those countries, and what conference and
disputation he has had with Jews, Jesuits, and people of sundry other
countries: and by perfiting any thing which herein shall be thought imperfect.

And yet I have had conference with one of the Authors, and showed his Letters
unto many other travelers of good judgment, who have been in those parts,
and all of them subscribe unto the truth of every thing therein contained. And
of my self I have set down nothing but what I either have found in the
Letters of these two brethren (master William Biddulph, and Peter Biddulph) or
else (by conference with one of them and sundry other travelers of credit)
heard spoken and delivered for truth.

Only in two things (I confess) I have been somewhat bold with mine Authors.
First, in the number of their: letters for whereas they wrote very many
letters, and his companions went thither only as travelers to see the Holy
Land.

Again, if it were his own doing, he being both wise and Religious (as he is
accounted) would never be so simple to publish his own disgrace in Printe, in
going to Mass, and observing many other ceremonies as are mentioned in that
book which goes forth under his name.

In the voyage of the five Englishmen from Syria to Iudaea, (which is the last
letter) I have written only of their travels thither, and such things as they
saw there, but nothing of their return, for I could not meet with any letter
wherein my Author had written thereof, neither could I learn it of him by
conference with him, for when I spoke unto him thereof, desiring him to set it
down in writing for my further direction, I could have no other answer of him
but this which Aeneas spoke to Queen Dido, as Vigil. sets it down Aeneid.
lib. 2.

Infandum regina iubes renouare dolorem. that is,

A doleful work me to renew
(Dear friend) you crave, wherefore adieu.
Whereby I perceived he took no pleasure to talk of it, and less to write of
it. The reason, I understood by others; because it was more dangerous,
troublesome, and tedious to him then all the rest of his voyage: for many
nights they slept in the open fields, when it rained all night exceeding fast,
and in the day time they were often dangered by thieves, and oftentimes in the
night they were glad to hire a guard to watch whiles they slept, for fear lest
their throats should be cut whiles they were asleep: and many other miseries
they were subject unto, as hunger and thirst, heat in the day, cold (being
harborles) in the night.

And besides many miseries which he has endured by land; he has very
narrowly escaped many extreme dangers by Sea, whereof I will mention only one,
which I have heard, not only from his own mouth (with grateful memory unto
God for his miraculous and unexpected preservation) but also from others who
were in the same danger with him. In relation whereof they all agree in one,
that it was on this manner.

Ann. Dom. 1605 Febr. 9. He, with some other Englishmen, viz. Sampson Newport,
and his brother Edward Newport, Edward Concke, Martin Kentish, William Welsh,
Thomas Mania^d, and others: having occasion to travel from Constantinople to
Zante (for want of an English ship) embarked themselves in a Raguzean ship
which was bound thither. Wherein they sailed safely, until they came amongst
the Cyclades, or the 53. Isles in the Arches, where they were a while becalmed
over against Milo, where they were minded to touch.

But suddenly this calm was turned to a storm, which speedily drove them out
of the sight of Milo, and Amimilo, and so confounded the Raguzean Mariners
(being no skillful Nauigators) that they knew not where they were, (an
uncomfortable case in such a dangerous place, amongst so many Islands so thick
together.) Before them they saw land in three places, yet none of them knew
whether it were the maine land, or some Island, and therefore were ignorant what
course to take. The providence of God so directed, that they passed so near
the I Will Serigotta, as seldom or never any ship did, and not rush upon the
rocks.

When they were past this Island, they were out of the Arches or Cyclades, and
had sea-roome enough, which was some comfort.

But the ignorance of the Mariners, The violence of the storm, The weakness of
the ship, and the profaneness of the company with whom he was shipped, were
great causes of discomfort.

The Mariners were ignorant, not accustomed to sail by compass or cunding of
the ship, but by the eye and view, and to be still in sight of land, The storm
still increased more vehemently, and continued three days and three nights
together; during which time, they could neither eat nor drink, nor sleep.
The ship was weak and half full of water, ready to be split in pieces with
every blast of wind, or to be devoured by every wave of the Sea.

The boat which the ship towed after her, was cut off, and let go at random
without hope of ever seeing it again, lest it should be full of water, and
sink, and draw the ship also under water. The company as they were of diverse
nations, so of diverse natures: and as they differed in religion, so likewise in
their conversation and carriage, during the continuance of this tempest. For the
storm increased, the air thundered, the winds blustered, the Sea raged, and
the waves thereof arising like mighty mountains, tossed up the ship (to use
the Poets Hyperbole) sometimes as high as heaven, and by and by tumbled her
down again as low as hell; so that (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 107. 27.)
They were tossed to and fro, and staggered like drunken men, and all their
cunning being gone, every man called upon his god (like the Mariners in Jonas
ship.) The Raguzeans and Italians called upon all the gods and goddesses, the
He Saints, and She Saints, and cast Grand Benedicta into the sea, to assuage
the madness thereof. Which nothing prevailing, the master of the ship called
master Samson Newport (an English Merchant) and told him in Italian that he
understood that the Signior Reuerendo Dot^ore Inglese: that is, That the
reverend English Doctor (who was in his ship) had bin at Jerusalem, and
requested him to speak unto him, if he had any holy relics in his chest
which he brought from Jerusalem, to give him some to throw into the Sea, to
pacify the rage thereof. M. Newport made answer, that he knew that their
English Preacher had no such Relics as he desired.

Then there was nothing amongst the superstitious Papists, but weeping and
wringing of hands; some preparing boards ready to cast themselves into the Sea,
looking at every blast when the ship would be disiointed and shaken asunder:
Others pattering on beads, and making large vows to Madonna de Lauretta, if
she would deliver them; and to this Saint and that Saint, if they escaped.

The Master of the ship, called Andrea, and his brother Stephano, (being both
owners of the ship) said, that surely the English Doctor was a Coniurer, for
they never saw him without a book in his hand, but still reading, until (by
his learning) he had raised a storm upon them; and thought it best to make a
Jonas of him, and to cast both him and his books into the Sea: which they had
done indeed, if God (in mercy toward him) had not prevented them; for our
Englishmen (like good Christians) having learned out of the Scriptures (Psalm.
46. 1.) That God is a pre^ent help in time of trouble, and has promised to
deliver them that call upon him in time of trouble, gave themselves both
jointly and severally to prayer, and all the time of this tempest cried unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he brought them out of their distress. He
turned the storm to calm, so that the waves thereof were still. And so (at
length) by the providence of God, they came all safely to their desired Port,
where they heard of many ships (as some reported, fifty) which were cast away
in that storm, out of which they were delivered. Many such desperate plunges
has he escaped in his ten years travel, which I have heard of, but forbear
(for breuities sake) to speak of.

These things considered, I thought it not meet to press him any further
therewith, lest the remembrance of former miseries, should be a cause of fresh
sorrows, knowing that he has endured much hardness both by sea and by land,
and so much as may seem admirable, yea, almost incredible that such a spare
lean man, and of such a weak body (as he seemed to be of) should endure in
ten years tedious travel together. And yet notwithstanding his continual
dangers both by sea and by land, he has continued still to preach the Gospel
constantly and boldly (in Heathen countries) both by sea and by land; received
great honor amongst them; and is now at length (by the providence of God)
returned into his native country in health and safety to preach the Gospel
wheresoever it shall please God to call him: and is at this day the greatest
traveler (of a man of his calling, that I know) in all England both by sea and
land.

By land, he has traveled further then Jacob, and the same way that Jacob did
from Hebron to Padan Aram, and has had as hard lodging in his travel as Jacob
had, viz. the ground to his bed, a stone for his pillow, the sky for his
covering, and sometimes the air for his supper.

By Sea, farther then S. Paul, then Aeneas, or Ulysses have done, and all the
whole way that they all have traveled, and further.

Wherefore (gentle Reader) if thou take in good part these his travels, and my
pains and labor in collecting them together, it may perhaps encourage him to
enlarge them, and me to procure them, and to add thereunto his conference and
disputations with Jews, Jesuits, and sundry other nations (which I understand
he has had with them) and such arguments as have been used on both sides,
and letters in sundry languages which have been written on both sides from one
to another.

In the mean time, I leave him (with his four fellow travelers) soiourning
at the earthly Jerusalem; and thee (gentle Reader) traveling toward the
heavenly Jerusalem: where God grant at length we may all ariue, JESUS CHRIST
being our Pilot and Ienisary to conduct us thereunto, AMEN.

Thine ever in the Lord, THEOPHILUS LAVENDER.

The Travels of certain Englishmen into Heathen Countries, set forth by
their Letters: the Contents whereof are here set down, as follows. (*)
THe first Letter was written from Constantinople, the Primate and Metropolitan
City in all Thracia, wherein the Author cert^fi^th his friend of his voyage
from England thither, and of such famous places, and memorable matters as he
saw and observed in the way thither. page 1. II. The second was seat from the
same renowned City, wherein he describes Constantinople from the beginning
hitherto, showing the first building, destruction, reedifying, and government
of the same unto this present day, and what Antiquities are to be seen therein
page 17. III. The third was written from Aleppo in Syria Comagena, wherein the
Author most iudiciously and learnedly discourses of his voyage from
Constantinople thither; and describes both generally the whole Country of
Syria, and particularly the City of Aleppo, the chiefest City (for traffic)
therein: and shows, that Aleppo is inhabited by people of sundry Countries;
with the Religion, Government, Manners, and Customs of every Nation there
dwelling or soiourning, which is of all the rest most pleasant to read, for the
variety of matters therein contained. page 31. IIII. The fourth and last
letter was written from Jerusalem, wherein he makes relation of his travel by
Land, together with four other Englishmen, from the City of Aleppo in Syria
Comagena, to Jerusalem, by the Sea of Galile or Tyberias, and Lake of
Genezareth, and so through the whole Land of Canaan, which way was never
traveled by any Englishman before, neither possibly can be traveled again at
this day, in regard of the turbulent and troublesome estate of those Countries,
which is like every day to grow worse rather than better. And this journey may
be called Jacobs journey, because all the whole way which they traveled
thither, is the way which Jacob traveled from Bethel or Beershebah, to his
uncle Labans house at Padan Aram in Mesopotamia. page 86.
And this may serve partly for a Confirmation of M. Henry Tymberley his voyage
from Grand Cayro in Egypt (formerly called Memphis) to Jerusalem, performed the
self same year, and at the self same time, for all of them met together at
Jerusalem.

And partly it may serve for a correction of some false things therein
contained, w^erein (being printed without his consent) they have done him
wrong, as in the Preface to the Reader you may see plainly.

But chiefly it may serve for a direction to others who are minded hereafter
to travel into those Oriental Countries, or East parts of the world, either
to further them by the good directions herein contained, or to hinder them in
regard of the imminent dangers.

A LETTER SENT from Constantinople, to a learned Gentleman in England, wherein
the Author discourses of his voyage from England thither, and of such famous
places, and memorable matters as he saw in the way thither.
Worshipful, and my worthy good friend, in most kind and courteous manner I
salute you: wishing unto you all joys internal, external, and Eternal.
Being now (by the providence of God) after long and tedious travel, arrived in
safety at Constantinople: and calling to mind your continual kindness toward
me since our first acquaintance, and your earnest request unto me at my
departure out of England, which was, to acquaint you with such occurrences as
in my voyage should offer themselves unto my view; I could not without some
note of ingratitude (which I would not willingly incur) refuse to impart unto
you what memorable matters and famous places I have seen and observed in my
voyage.

May it please you therefore to understand, that after our departure from the
coast of England, we saw no land until we came near unto the coast of
Spain: and then appeared first of all in sight unto us a town in Spain
called Territh or Tenerith, which was discerned first by a red sandy path on a
mountain near unto it. And shortly after, we saw lubraltore on Europe side,
and Abshi^ (commonly called Ape hill) on Africa side, betwixt which 2. places
we entered in at the straights mouth, with a swift current and a good wind,
commonly called the straights of leubraltore, betwixt which place and Porungal,
we saw many Whales in the bay or G^lph of Portingal. And in three days
sailing from the straights, Argier.
we arrived at Argier in Barbary, where we stayed three days, and were kindly
entreated both by Ally Bashaw king of Argier, Raise, signifies a Captain.
and also by Amurath Raise, commonly called Morat Raise. This city is in form
like unto a top-saile, broad below, and narrow above. It is situated on the
side of an hill, walled about, and a strong Castle near unto the water side.
It was first called Mesgana, secondly, Iol, the royal seat of IVBA, the noble
king of Mauritania. who in the time of the civil war betwixt Caesar and
Pompey, valiantly defended Pompeyes part. By the Moors and Turks at this day
it is called Iezaier, but by the Spaniards it is called Algier. The people of
this place, and the Spaniards are bitter enemies, and annoy one another
oftentimes.

About 300. leagues from Argier we saw Teddel, a city in Africa, and cape
Bonne, which was formerly called Hyppo, where S. Augustine was Bishop, and
Tunis, near whereunto the ancient city Carthage stood, built by Queen Dido,
whereof some rumes are yet to be seen.

Tunis is in Libia, and Morocus and Fesse in Numidia.

About these parts we saw flying fishes, Flying Fishes.
as big an Hearing, with two great sins like unto wings before, and two less
behind; who being chased by Dolphines and Bonitaes, fly as long as their wings
are wet, which is not far, but often agables length. Porpisces and many other
strange and deformed fishes we saw in our voyage, the names whereof we knew
not. We saw also sword fishes and threshers: which two kind of fishes are
deadly enemies unto the Whale. The sword fish swimmeth under him and pricketh
him up, and then the Thresher, when he has him up, belaboureth him with his
flayle or extraordinary long tail, and makes him roar.

On the other side, over against Barbary in the Spanish sea, we saw two Isles
called Baleares, which are also called Ma^orque Minorque, thirty miles distant
the one from the other. And other 2. Isles in the Balearique sea, called Ieuis
and Ebusus between Sardinia and Africa, the earth whereof will suffer no
venomous thing to live: we saw also an I Will called now Pantalarea, but of old it
was called Paconia. It is very full of hills and rocks: there grows great
quantity of Cotton, Capers, Figs, Melons and Reisings. The Island is full of
cesternes. They say, that not only the men of that Island, but the women also
are naturally good swimmers, but whether they be all so or not, I know not: but
sure I am, we saw one woman come swimming from thence to our ship (being
becalmed) with a basket of fruit to sell. The I Will is but thirty miles in
length, and ten miles in breadth.

The day following, we saw Sicilia, a famous Island in the Tyrrhen sea, Sicilia.
618. miles about. The Island is most pleasant, and no less fertile. In this
Island is Aetna, an high hill, burning continnally with brimstone: it is now
called Mons Gibelli; out of this hill rises most horrible smoke, and flames
of fire, and sometimes burning stones in great number. I have heard that in
this I Will there is a water whereinto if a dog be cast, he will die presently,
but being taken out and cast into another water near unto it, he lives
again, but this I have not seen, and therefore refer it to others which
have seen it. Messana, commonly called Missina, is the chiefest city in
Sicilie, near the Promontory Pelorus. In the sea near unto this Island, there
is a dangerous rock called Scylla, and over against this dangerous rock,
there is a gulf of the sea called Charibdis, commonly at this day called the
Kirbies. It is a very dangerous place, by reason of streams flowing contrary
each to other. It is over against Scylla: Mariners which sail betwixt these
two, are careful to keep an even course, lest, whiles they seek to shun the
one, they rush upon the other, according to that verse,

Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charib dim.
that is,

Seeking to avoid one danger, they fall into another.
And in the Terrhen sea by Sicilie there is another I Will called Strongyle or
Stromboly, which burns in like sort as Aetna does, it is over against
Naples. Sicilia is 50. leagues in length, that is 150. miles, accounting three
leagues to a mile.

Over against cape Passera (which is a mark for Mariners at the Eastward end
of Sicilia) there is an Island called Malta, Malta.
where (upon some occasion) we touched. It is that Island mentioned Act. 28. 1,
2. where the viper came on Paul's hand. It was then called Melita, but now
Malta. The inhabitants were then Barbarians, yet showed Paul no little
kindness, for they kindled a fire, and received him and his company, because
of the present cold, etc. But now they are such Barbarous people which inhabit
it, that rather then they will receive Paul and his companions (I mean
Protestants or any good Christians) to the fire in kindness to warm them, they
will rather in cruelty cast them into the fire to burn them. Then a viper
came on Paul's hand, and he shook him off without hurt: but now there are so
many viperous people there, who use so strict Inquistion when strangers come,
that it is impossible for a good man to shake them off without harm either to
his soul, if he dissemble, Renegadoes of denying the faith.
or to his body, if he profess the truth. The inhabitants are Renegadoes and
Bandidoes of sundry nations, Bandidoes are banished men
especially, Greeks, Italians, Spaniards, Moors and Maltezes: There are many
Soldiers there, who are in pay under the Spaniards, and their Captains are
called Knights of Malta. The common sort wear no other clothing (because of
the extreamitie of the heat) then a linen or white shirt girded under their
breasts, and over the same a fine white woollen mantle, called by the Moors a
Barnuse. There are in this Island 60. Castles, and as many villages, all well
inhabited. There grows great store of Cottons, Pomegranates, Cytrons,
Orenges, Melons, and other exellent fruits; but for wheat and wine, they do
furnish themselves out of Sicilia.

Tripoly in Barbary is a City situated on the maine land, upon the coast of the
Mediterranian Sea. It was builded by the Romans, and afterward subdued by the
Goths, which possessed the same unto the time of Homer.

The next places of any note, which we saw, Zephalonia.
were two Islands in Graecia, namely, Zephalonia and Zante, betwixt which two
our Ship passed. Both of them are inhabited by Greeks, but governed by the
Signiory of Venice, who every third year send Prouidores with other Officers
to rule there. They are both very fruitful Islands, yielding great store of
currance, olives, pomecitrons, oringes, and lemmons, but small store of corn,
which they continually fetch from other Countries. If through extremity of
wether, or danger of Pirates, or cursares, corn be not duly brought unto them,
in short time they are ready to famish.

Zephalonia was of old called Ithaca, where Ulysses the son of Laertes was
King, who excelled all other Greeks in eloquence and subtilty of wit. He is
commended by ancient Writers, for a famous Traveler: but if he were living in
these days, his travels would be counted nothing, in respect of the travels of
many other now living: for he traveled but betwixt Venice and Egypt which is
now a common voyage.

Zante, Zante*
of old was called Zacynthus, it was sometimes a woody I Will in the sea Ionium,
on the West of Peloponesus. But there is now very little wood in it. It is
hilly round about, but the middle of it is a plain and fruitful valley,
yielding great store of Currance, which are brought from thence into England.
The Greeks wonder what we use to do with so many Currance, and ask sometimes
whether we use to dye with them, or feed Hogs with them. They were a very
poor kind of people, when our English Merchants used traffic there first:
but now they are grown rich and proud.

There is also a city in that I Will called Zante by the name of the Island, which
city was built by Zacynthus son to Dardanus, who reigned there. We stayed
ten days in the rode of this city before we could get Pratticke, that is:
leave to come amongst them, or to use traffic with them, for their custom is
not to give present Pratticke unto any strangers, unless they bring a letter
of health from the place whence they come, which we had not. And therefore some
of our company who had business there, we sent to the Lazaretta, which is a
place like unto the pest house in More-fields, where, though they be in health,
yet there they must stay so long as it pleases the Signiors of health, which
is sometime twenty, and sometimes forty days: and in the mean time, if any of
their company fall sick, though it be at the end of forty days, yet must
they stay forty days longer. So long as they are kept without Pratticke, they
have a Guardian set to watch them that they come into no company, neither any
man into theirs: yet may their friends come to visit them, and standing far
off, may speak with them, but if they come too near them, the Guardian will
cry out unto them, Alargo, alargo, that is: Stand back. And whosoever comes
so near them as to touch them, loses his own Pratticke, and must keep them
company during their continuance there. If they bring any letters for any
Merchants in the City, the Guardia^ will open them and air them at the fice
before he will deliver them. But if the letter be sowed (or if there be any
thread about them) they must not be delivered until they that brought them
have Prattick. And this they do under pretense of avoiding sickness: but they
have a further meaning therein, viz. partly to get money and bribes; and partly
to be acquainted with the business of all comers, and what commodities they
bring. And whosoever presumes to come on shore without Pratticke, is in
danger of hanging, or having the strappado. And though they have a certificate
that there is health in the place from whence they came, yet must they not come
on shore before they have showed their Feed, or Neat patent unto three
officers, called Signiors of health.

Zante is very much subject unto earthquakes. There is no year passes without
many earthquakes, especially in the months of September and October, in which
months I have known two or three earthquakes in one week. In regard whereof
they build houses very low, lest they should be overthrown by earthquakes.
And when they feel the earthquakes begin (whether it be by day or by night)
the Greeks use presently to ring their bells to stir up the people unto Prayer.

In Zante there is a very strong Castle standing on an high hill, it is also
very large, half as big as the City of Zante, and therein dwells the
Prouidatore who governs the Island, and many other: and there is the place of
judgment where all causes both Criminal and Judicial are decided by the
Prouidatore and his Counselliers: over which place these two Lattin verses are
written on the wall in letters of gold.

Hic locus odit, amat, punit, conseruat, honorat:
Nequitiam, pacem, crimina, iura, probos.
which may be Englished thus,

This place does hate vnthrif^ines,
Love peace, and punish wickedness;
Maintains right and equity,
And honors good men worthily.
Over against Zante is the maine land of Graecia, called now Morea, but of old
Peloponnesus, almost environed with the sea, having on the West and South, the
sea Adriaticum; on the east the sea of Creete: And in the middle of
Peloponnesus is a Country called Arcadia, so called of Arcas son to Jupiter
by Calistho, who reigned there. Arcadia is famous for shepherds: There are
great store of sheep continually feeding, and good pasture for them. In the
narrow strait, going into Peloponnesus, was Corinth, that famous City in
Achaia, situated, but now utterly destroyed.

From Zante we set sail toward Venice, and touched by the way at many
places; and first of all, at a Port near unto Corphu, called Madonn^ de
Gazopo, where there is a Church dedicated unto the Virgin Mary, whereunto there
is great resort of such as have escaped dangers by sea, or sickness, or other
dangers by land, to offer something to Madonna de Gazopo, for their
deliverance. And amongst many others, it was told us by our consort the master
of a Venice ship in our company, that an Italian ship being in great distress
by extremity of wether in the gulf of Venice, when all hope of help by
worldly means was past, every man fell to prayer (like the Mariners in Jonas
ship) and every man called upon his god, some to Neptune, some to S. Nicolas,
some to one Saint, some to another: But the master of the ship prayed to
Madonna de Gazopo, in this manner: O blessed Virgin, deliver me out of this
danger, and J will offer unto thee (if I come safely to Gazopo) a candle as
big as the maine maste of my ship. One of his mates hearing him, plucked him
by the shoulders, and said, O master, what do you mean to dally with our
blessed Lady in this extremity? For it is impossible you should perform it.
Whereunto he replied, Hold thy peace fool, it concerns us to speak fair
now we are in danger, and to make large promises: but if she deliver us, I will
make her content with a candle of seven or eight in the pound. Not much unlike
unto another desperate Mariner whom I have heard of, who in a dangerous storm,
seeing every man fall to his prayers, and prepare themselves to die, he fell on
his knees, and prayed in this manner: O Lord, I am no common beggar; I do not
trouble thee every day; for I never prayed to thee before; and if it please
thee to deliver me this once, I will never pray to thee again as long as I
live. So true is that old saying, Qui nescit orare, discat nauigare: that is,
He that knows not how to pray, let him go down to sea. For great dangers by
sea do drive them to prayer who never prayed before, though none pray
effectually, but the faithful who pray fervently.

From Madonna de Gazopo we sailed along by Albania, and were driven with a
cross wind to Ottronto in Calabria, at the entrance into the gulf of Venice,
where we stayed two days. And then we had a good wind, which brought us to
Ragouza, an ancient City in Dalmatia, which is a part of Jllyrium, or Illyricum
(as others call it) bordering upon Liburnia Eastward. But at this day, that
which of old was called Illyris or Illyricum, is now called Sclauonia or
Wendenlande; having on the North, Pannonia; on the West, Jstria; on the East,
Mysia superior; on the South, the Adriaticke Sea. It was so called of Illyrius
son to Polyphemus. From thence we sailed along the Illyrian shore in the gulf
of Venice, and came to an haven town in Istria called Rauina over against
Rauenna on the coast of Calabria: which Rauenna is an ancient City in Italy,
by the Adri^tticke Sea. At Rauina we took in a Pilot to direct us to Venice.
Istria is a part of Italy joining to Illyricum, and is now called Sclauonia.

From Rauina in one days sailing we arrived at Leo near unto Venice, Venice.
which is a most famous City, so well known unto all men by report, that I
need not to spend any time in describing it, lest I should rather obscure it,
then any way (by my barren style) illustrate the same, only this I note, that
there is both a country called Venetia, and a City called also by the same
name.

The country of Venice joins to the Adriaticke Sea on the one side, and has
the Alps on the other side. Therein are these Cities, Verona, Vincentia,
Patauium, and Venice the head city of the rest.

Patauium is the City and University of Padua by Padus. This Padus is the
river Po in Italy, which rises out of Vesulus, the highest hill of the Alps,
and runs by the marches of Liguria, into the Adriaticke Sea. One arm of
Padus called Padusa stretches to Rauenna.

The City Venice stands in the Adriatticke sea, not far from the country of
Venice. We stayed in Venice 17. days, and having ended our business there,
we returned to Zante, where, after we had stayed three days, we set sail for
Constantinople.

The chiefest places of note which we saw betwixt Zante and Constantinople, are
these: First, not far from Zante, we passed by two Isles on the West side of
Peloponnesus, in the sea Jonium, called of old Strophades or Plotae, but
vulgarly at this day, Striuales, whereof one of them is uninhabited, the other
inhabited only by certain of their religious men, whom they call Coloires,
about thirty in number, who wear long hair, and never eat flesh, and very
seldom fish, but at certain seasons of the year, but live of herbs,
olives, oil, and wine, and such like things. They never come out of that I Will,
neither ever, upon any occasion admit any women to come amongst them: for they
may not marry, but live single and solitary all the days of their life. A
Coloire has his etymology of (...) and (...)* calos hiereus, that is, bonus
Sacerdos, a good Priest.

From thence we sailed along in sight of the maine land of Graecia, which
amongst all other Countries in Europe, has been accounted the most noble and
most famous. It was first called Helles, of one of the sons of Deucalion and
Pyrrha, And afterward it was called Graecia, of a King whose name was Graecus.

Peloponnesus is a Province in Greece, now called Morea. Macedonia is also a
large Country in Europe, or Province in Graecia, now called Romnelli: It has
on the East, the Sea Aegaeum; on the West, the Sea Ionium; on the South,
Epirus; on the North, Dalmatia. It was first called Emathia, of Emathias, who
was King thereof. Afterward, Macedonia, of Macedon the son of Deucalion. The
Macedonians descended of Sethim, son of Iaon. The Provinces of Macedonia are
these: first, Thessalia; secondly, Hellade; thirdly, Myrmidone: By reason
whereof, Homer gave three sundry names unto the Thessalians, vz. Myrmadons,
Helenes, and Achees. But at the last it was called Thessalia, of Thessale which
possessed that Kingdom. The principal City in Macedonia is Thessalonica,
which at this day is called Salonica by corruption. In this part of Graecia is
Parnassus, a mountain having two tops, whereon the nine Muses did dwell.

Athens is still inhabited: it is situated between Macedonia and Achaia on the
sea coast; first built by Cecrops, and called Cecropia; lastly called Athens,
of Minerua, who in Greece was called Athene. This City was the mother and nurce
of all liberal Arts and Sciences: but now there is nothing but Atheism and
Barbarism there: for it is governed by Turks, and inhabited by ignorant
Greeks. Some ruins of ancient buildings are there yet to be seen. Thebes was
a famous City in Macedonia; but now a small Castle of little account.

After we came as high as the Island Creta, which is now called Candie, we left
the way toward Egypt, and entered into the Arches (called Archipellago) betwixt
Cerigo and Cerigotta. Cerigo is an Island at the entrance into the Arches,
subject to the Venetians, but inhabited by Greeks. This I Will was first called
Scothera, and after (as Aristotle says) Porpheris for the beautiful marbles
which are there. Pliny, and diverse others do call it Citherea, by the name of
Cithere the son of Phaenis, and is now called Cerigo* where Venus made her
first habitation, and therein is a Temple erected for her. The ruins of that
Temple of Venus are to be seen there to this day. A little below this Temple
of Venus, upon the same mountain, was the Castle of Menalaus husband to
Helene, who was king of Sparta. and Lord of this I Will. Departing from Cerigo, we
came amongst the Cyclades, which are 53. Isles in the sea Aegaeum, called also
by some Sporades, but vulgerly, the Arches or Archipelago. But more properly
C^clade, and not unfitly Sparades, although Sporades are taken especially for
certain scattered Islands in the Carpathian Sea, about Creete or Candia, which
is not far from the Cyclades, or Isles in the Arches. Only this is the
difference, that all the Islands betwixt Cic^^^, and Candia are in the Ionian
sea. But Cerigo and all the Islands in Archipellago are in the Aegean sea. On a
clear day a man may see twenty Islands at one time in these Arches. It is a
dangerous place for shipping in a storm, by reason that the Islands are so
near together, whereof some are inhabited, and some not.

About twenty leagues from Cerigo, we touched at an Island called at this day
Milo, Milo.
but of old, Miletum, mentioned in S. Paul's voyage, Act. 20. 15. This I Will is
inhabited by Greeks, and yields great store of milstones and dymmety, which
are there both good and good cheap. Whiles our ship stayed at Milo, we took
boat to sail to see another Island not far from Milo, called of old, Delos,
where sometimes was the famous Temple and Oracle of Apollo: But at this day it
is called Sdiles, and is a very small and poor Island.

About twenty miles from Delos there is another I Will called of old, Delos.
Seriphus, by an inhabitant whereof Themistocles was vpbraided, that the
commendation and fame he gat, was for his Countries sake, because he was borne
an Atheman. But Themistocles answered the Seriphian, that neither had himself
been worse, if he had been borne in Seirphus, nor the other better, if he
had been borne at Athens. But this Island commonly is called Serigo.

But the most famous and fruitful Island in all the Arches at this day is Chios
(as it was formerly called, Chios.
Act. 20. 15.) so called, because it resembles the Greek letter Chi in form
and fashion: As also Delta, an I Will by Nilus, not far from Alexandria is so
called, because it represents the figure of the letter Delta. But Chios is
now called commonly Syo. Chios is an Island in the sea Aegeum, betwixt Lesbos
and Samos. It is distant from Delos an hundred miles: it is in circuit nine
hundred furlongs. It was first called Ethalie by Ephodore. But by Methrodorus,
Chio, of the Nymph Chione; and (as others say) Macrine or Pythiosa; but at this
day called Syo.

This Island is inhabited chiefly by Greeks, but governed by Turks. It is full
of gardens, oringes, lemmons, citrons, figs, pears, apples, pruans, apricocks,
dates, and olives: and likewise of all sorts of herbs, sweet flowers, good
and wholesome waters. There is also great store of mastick in this Island, which
is gathered of certain trees like unto Lentiscos trees, in this manner: About
the beginning of the months of July and August, the husbandmen with a sharp
pointed iron, do rent and cut the bark of the trees in diverse places, and out
of these incisions and cuts proceeds the masticke by drops, as it were gum,
which they gather in the month of September following.

In this Island are also great store of Partriges, which both in color and
quality do much differ from ours. Their color is somewhat red, and they are
as tame as though they were chickens or hens. In certain villages of this
Island, the country people do feed them by great flocks, driving them in the
day time to grase in the mountains; and toward night, the boys or girls
(which do keep them) do call them together by a whistle or song. And these
Partriges being accustomed to such calls, presently every flock (which
sometimes are two or three hundred) gather to their conducter, which brings
them home to their village and dwelling, as though they were hens, or tame
geese. They go also a feeding by small flocks in the streets of the City.

This Island is one of the seven which contended for Homers birth. And they say
that Homer was buried in this Island, and that his sepulcher is to be seen to
this day upon the Mount Helias, within an old Castle in this Island, but I have
not seen it.

The maine land of Asia is in sight over against Chios, and therein Smyrna,
Ephesus, and Thyatira, called now Tyria, with the rest of the seven Churches of
Asia, to whom S. John wrote, which are mentioned Revel. 1. 11. And Pathmos the
I Will where John was put into a hot tun of oil, Revel. 1. 9.

After we had stayed ten days in Chios, which (as I have said) is now vulgarly
called Sio or Scio, we sailed toward Constantinople, by Mitilene an Island in
the Aegean sea. It was first called, Lesbos; secondly, Issa; thirdly, Pelasgie;
fourthly, Mitilene and Mytais; and lastly, Metelyn, of Milet the son of
Phoebus, which builded the City, and named it Mytelene. Of this City was
Pythagoras, Alceus the Poet, and his brother Antimenides, Theophrastus, and
Phanius, and Arion that skillful plaier on the harp, and Tersander that famous
Musician. Sapho a woman well learned in Poetry, was also a Lesbian, being
called the tenth Muse. She invented the verses which (after her name) were
called Saphicke Verses.

This Mytilenes was formerly called Bythinia, which is a Country in Asia,
opposite to Thracia, near Troy. It was first called Bebricia; after, Mygdonia;
and then Bythinia: but at this day it is called Lesbos, near unto Lemnos, from
whence comes the terra sigillata, otherwise called terra Lemnia, which is
said to be a remedy against poison, the bloody flixe, and the plague.

From Mittelyn we sailed by Tenedos, Tenedos.
an I Will betwixt Lesbos and Hellespont, near Troy, whereof Virgill speaks,
Aeneid. 2.

Est in conspectu Tenedos, notissima fama
Insula, etc.
There is an I Will in sight of Troy,
And Tenedos it hight:
A wealthy land while Priamus state
And kingdom stood upright.
The best and most excellent wines in all Graecia are made at Chios and
Tenedos. There is also a City in the same I Will called Tenedos, built by Tenes.
In this Island was the Temple of Neptune.

Over against Tenedos is Troy, which is also called Troas or Troada, Troy.
whereof I can speak no more but this that has been long since written:

Iam seges est vbi Troia fuit:
That is,

Waste lie the walls that were so good,
And corn now grows where Troy town stood.
And again, as Virgill speaks:

-- fuit Ilium, and ingens
Gloria Teucrorum. --
That is,

The City of Troy ( called Ilium, of Ilus who enlarged the same) did flourish,
and the glory of the Trojans was great. And finally,

O iam periere ruinae:
The very ruins of it are come to ruin.
The Sea between Moeotis and Tenedos is called Pontus.

A little beyond Troy, we entered the strait of Hellespont, which is a narrow
sea, called Hellespontus, of Hell. It lies between the Aegean Sea and
Propontis, and parts Europe from Asia, It is not now called by the name of
Hellespont, but it is called now The Castles; for there are still two Castles,
which were of old called Sestos and Abydos, one on the one side of the
Helispont, the other on the other side, erected in memory of the love of
Leander and Hera, over which narrow sea he often swomme unto her, and was in
the end drowned. The river Scamander runs by the Castles.

Mayto is still a town over against Abydos, Mayto.
but on the same side as Seste. There is made great store of good wine, which
is red in color, and in taste like claret wine and sugar, and yet they put no
sugar into it, for it is pleasant of it self. Here our Merchants ships
usually take in wine for their provision. There are very many wind milles
there, having ten wings a piece.

The strength of Constantinople consistet chiefly in these two Castles; for
these Castles are well fortified with munition, and are to examine all ships
that pass by, from whence they came, and whither they would: and there they
are to pay a tribute to the King. If any Ships refuse to stay from the Castles,
they will shoot them through. But if these Castles were battered down,
Constantinople and all the country thereabouts might be easily won.
Notwithstanding, these Castles, a small flight to keep the narrow seas betwixt
Chios and the Castles, might in short time famish all that country, for the
greatest part of their provision, for Rice and other Corn, comes from
Alexandria, and those parts, with the Gazenda of the great Turk: but I leave
this to martial men, and mariners.

Gallipolis is a great and ancient City 20. miles distant from the Castles
(which are at this day called the Castles of Gallipoly, in the way to
Constantinople situated upon Cherenes of Thracia, at the point which looks
toward Propontis, which is all the sea from the straites of Hellespont to
Bosphorus Thraicus. Some hold opinion that it was built by Caius Caligula. And
others say that it was in times past inhabited by French men, for that this
word Gallipoly* signifies the City of the Gauls or Frenchmen, and for that
the French men do dwell in Gaul, as Nicopolis and Phillipopolis signify the
City of Nicolas and Philip.

Not far from Gallipoly was that famous City Nice, where the General Council
was held in Bythinia. And near unto Constantinople is C^alcedon or Chalcedonia
over against Byzantium, which was a famous City in Bythinia, where another
General Council was held. But it is now no City, but only a plain field,
having here and there an house yet standing. At the point of Chalcedon we
first beheld the prospect of Constan^inople. Constantinople.
which is most pleasant to behold, being like unto a City in a wood, or a wood
in a City, having fur trees, Cyprus trees, and other pleasant trees in
gardens adioining to their houses. It is also adorned with many stately Towers,
Churches, and high Steeples. The form of the City is like unto a Triangle,
whereof two squares are by the water side, the other adioineth to the Land.
After our Ship had saluted the Port, we went over to the other side, and
anchored at Fundac^ee, and went on shore at Gallata, to salute the honorable
Sir Henry Lello, Lord Ambassador for Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, and
to visit our English Merchants resident there.

Our ship having discharged her goods at Fundacle, removed from thence, and
anchored further from shore, betwixt Tapanau and Bezetash, expecting a good
wind to depart. Constantiople is on the other side the water in Thracia, which
is also called the country Romania in Europe, having on the west, Macedonia,
on the North, Isther, on the East, Pontus, on the South, the Sea Aegeum.

As yet, I have not been far in Constantinople, wherefore I forbear to
write any thing thereof at this time, purposing hereafter when I have thoroughly
viewed it, to describe it unto you at large. In this Interim I humbly take my
leave, and leave you to him, who never leaves his.

Your Worships ever in the Lord wholly to be commanded. WILLIAM BIDDVLPH.

A description of the famous City of Constantinople, as it is now under SVLTAN
ACHOMET, the 15. Grand-Chan of the line of OTTOMAN.
Salutem in Authore salutis, etc.
SInce the writing of my former letters, I having often been at
Constantinople, and thoroughly viewed the same, according to promise, I have
thought good to write something unto you thereof.

May it please you therefore to understand, that Constantinopolis is a City in
Thracia, so called of Constantine the Emperor, because he enlarged the same.
It was before called Byzantium. Strabo entitled it Illustre, and Pliny and
Iustine called it most Noble, being one of the most fertile in all Europe. It
is situted in Thracia, upon the gulf Ponthus, which separateth Asia from
Europe. The form thereof is three square, whereof the two sides are washed by
the sea, and the third joins unto the firm land. The soil thereof is very
delectable, bringing forth all kinds of good fruits, necessary for
sustenance of humane life. The situation thereof is so well devised and
ordered, that no Ship can enter, nor go forth but with leave from the head
Vizeir: for the Turk is master of the Sea Pontike, which having 2. mouths, the
one coming from Propontidis, and the other from the Sea Euxinum, (which is the
Black sea) is by Ovid called the Port of two Seas, for the distance from
Constantinople to Calcedon is but 14. furlongs. And the place which by the
ancients is called Phane, situated in Asia (whereas Jason returning from
Calchos sacrificed unto the 12. gods) has in breadth but 10. furlongs. But for
as much as many great rivers of Asia, and many more of Europe, do fall into
the Euxine sea, commonly called the black sea; it comes to pass, that being
full, she gusheth out through the mouth of her with great violence, into the
sea Pontique, and from thence through the straight of Hellespont (being not
much broader then three furlongs) into the Aegean Sea.

This city (according to the saying of many ancient Authors) The time of the
building and repairing of Constantinople.
was first builded by the Lacedaemonians under the conduct of their Captain
Pausanias, which was about the year of the world 3292. and before the birth of
Jesus Christ 663. years; which, after they had consulted with Apollo, where
they should plant and settle their abode and dwelling place, they were by an
oracle answered, that they should do it, even hard by the blind, Why the Me
garians are called blind.
which were the Megarians, for that, after they were sailed into Thracia,
leaving the good and fruitful coast (where since Byzantium was builded)
unadvisedly went and planted themselves, (either for y^ opposition) in the most
fruitful ground of Asia, or for the vain hope they had for the fishing; they
builded there a City, which was called Calcedon. But they found themselves
greatly deceived. Calcedon was builded by the Megarians.
For, the fishes being carried by the violence of the flood and tide of the
Euxine Sea into Propontis, approaching near unto the Banks of Calcedon, being
afraid, through the whiteness of the rocks, do retire straight ways to the
side of Bizantium, which gave occasion unto the valiant Paulanias, to fortify
the City with good walls and rampires, changing the first name thereof, which
as Pliny says, was Ligos, and called the same Bizantium.

Notwithstanding, Diodorus and Polybius do contrarily say, that it was called
Byzantium, by the name of a Captain, which was the first founder thereof.
Pausanias (as Zonoras writes) possessed the same seven years: during which
time, (Fortune showing her self an enemy unto his magnificence) stuffed the
hearts of the Athenians with such an insatiable ambition, that they having
brought thither their forces, after a long siege, and diverse assaults, did
bear away the victory, which the Lacede monians seeing could not abide, but
with their whole puissance took their weapons in hand with such pertinacy,
that the adventure thereof on the one side and on the other, was very
dangereous and variable. And being sometimes taken again by her first
founders, and afterward by her aggressors, became in the end a pray unto both
the armies. Byzanti^m ruined by Seuerus the Emperor.
And after that, Seuerus succeeding in the R^mane Empire, the tyrant
Pissininus, her mortal enemy being in possession, Byzantium suborned the
Emperor to lay siege unto the same: who, not having sufficient power to
overcome the same by assaults, kept them besieged the space of three whole
years, and in the end, through extreme famine, constained them to yield
themselves unto the mercy of the Romans, which was such, that after they had
put to the sword all the men of war that were within it, and killed the
Maiestrates thereof, ruined and cast down to the ground the walls of the
City: and Seuerus afterward (to satisfy his cruelty) spoiled the Citizens
of all their rights, franchises and liberties; giving moreover the Land and
possessions unto the Perinthians. And thus, this most famous City remained in
miserable calamity, until such time as Constantine the great Emperor
removing from Rome, did reedifie the same.

But before I write any thing of the reedifyigns of Byzantium The cause
wherefore Constantine removed from Rome.
of Constantine the great: give me leave to show you the cause wherefore
Constantine removed from Rome.

2. Thessal. 2. 7. S. Paul prophesying of the revealing of Antichrist, says
thus: Ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed in his time, etc.
Which hinderance was the Roman Emperous, which were first to depart from Rome,
and give place to the Popes, because, both Emperors and Popes could not reign
together in one City. And that hinderance was taken away long since, when
Constantine the great translated his imperial Seat to Constantinople, and
endowed the Popes with the City of Rome, and a great part of Italy lying about
it.

The Emperors then being far off, and (by reason of continual wars with
Saracens and enemies in the East) notable to maintain their own right in the
West, the Popes incroached upon them too far, and usurped so much authority,
that they discarded them clean in Italy, and at their pleasure set up other
Emperors in the West, but such as would take an oath to be subject to the
Apostolic See of Rome, and acknowledge the Popes to be universal Bishops. So
the hinderance was taken away when Constantine removed to Constantinople, and
Antichrist was manifestly disclosed not long after when Boniface the third
obtained the title of Universal Bishop, which was 900. years ago, for (as
Gregory says) none but Antichrist would assume unto him such a title.

But yet Constantine had no regard to any prophecy, when he removed at first
from Rome to Byzantium, and there settled his Imperial palace: but he
respected only a more commodious government of those matters and kingdoms of
his that lay Eastward, which at that time were miserably disquieted by the
Parthians and Persians. For Constantinople did seem to be so situated (whereas
otherwise Constantine had once thought to have settled elsewhere) as that it was
(as you would say,) the nauel or midst unto the whole Roman jurisdiction,
which, as we know, spread it self far and near: and yet it could not
possibly otherwise fall out, because that so the Roman Empire might become
double headed, and have those two horns which God before had revealed. So the
providence of God guided this whole enterprise of Constantine, and so fulfilled
what himself had decreed.

Hereby you may perceive two causes wherefore Constantine removed from Rome.

1. The first more secret in the providence of God, that the prophecy of the
Apostle Paul, 2. Thessal. 2* 7. might be fulfilled.

2. The second more public and better known to all, viz. that Constantine the
great Emperor of the Romans, seeking to resist the courses and robberies
which the Parthes daily used toward the Romans, deliberated to transport the
Empire into the East parts, and there to build a large City: which first he
minded to have builded in Sardique, and afterward in Troyada a country of
high Pmygia near unto the cape Sige^, in the place where sometime stood the
City of Troy, which he began to reedifie, and to repair the foundations
thereof. But being by a Revelation in the night inspired to change the place,
caused to be recommenced the works of Calcedon, where certain Eagles (as
Zo^arus writes) being flowen thither, took in their bills the masons lines,
and crossing the street, let them fall near unto Byzantium* whereof the
Emperor being advertised, taking the same for a good sign and divine
instruction, after he had taken view of the place, called back the masters of
his works from Calcedon, caused the City to be repaired and amplifyed, which,
according to his name, he called Constantinople, notwithstanding that at the
first he had called the same new Rome. Whereupon it came to pass, that both in
general Counsels, and in the decrees of Emperors, mention is made of two
Romes: one, the old, which is the true Rome, built by Romulus; the other, the
new, which is Constantinople, which also began to hold up the head, by virtue
of the privileges and prerogatives of old Rome. Constantinople is called by
the Turks Stambolda.


Constantinople was likewise called Ethuse and Antonie, but by the Grecians
Stimboli, and of the Turks Stambolda, which in their language signifies a
large City, and so it is called by them at this day.

The Emperor now seeing his City builded and sufficiently peopled, compassed
the same with walls, towers and ditches, building therein many sumptuous
Temples, adorning it with many magnifique buildings, and necessary works as
well publik as private.

And afterward for the more beautifying thereof, caused to be brought from
Rome diverse Antiquities worthy of memory, and amongst others the Palladium of
ancient Troy, that is, the image of P^llas in Troy, which he caused to be set
in the place of Placote the great column of Porphyre which was set up in the
same place. Near unto which he caused to be erected a Statue of brass, to the
likeness of Apollo, of a maruailous bigness, in which place he ordained his
name to ve set up. But in the time of the Emperor Al^xis Comine this Statue,
through a great and impetuous tempest, was cast down to the ground, and broken
all to pieces.

This Emperor lived there many years most prosperously in happy estate, as
likewise did many of his successors, but not altogether exempted from
persecutions, as well by wars, fires, pestilence, earthquakes, as sundry other
calamities, until such time as God purposing to punish the people for their
sins, through negligence of Emperors, stirred up Mahomet the second of that
name, and the eighth Emperor unto the Turks, who being moved with an earnest
desire to bring the Christians unto decay, and thereby to augment his Empire,
being beyond measure jealous to see this noble City so flourish before his eyes,
went with a marvelous power both by sea and by land, to give a furious siege
unto the City: The end and issue whereof was such, that after a long siege,
battery, and diverse assaults, the Jnfidels having gotten the walls, with a great
hurlyburly and fury entered into the city: where at the first entry they made
The death of Constantine the Emperor.
a maruellou slaughter of the poor assieged Christians, without sparing any
age or degree. The Emperor Constantine they killed in the prease, as he though
to have saved himself; and after that they had cut off his head, in derision
and ignominy, they carried the same upon the point of a spear, round about the
Camp and City. And afterward Mahomet not contenting himself with the
violating and deflouring of the Emperors wife, daughters, and other Ladies of
honor, by a savage cruelty, caused them in his presence to be dismembered and
cut in pieces. During the time of the sacking (which continued three days)
there was no kind of fornication, Sodometry, sacrilege, nor cruelty, by them
left unexecuted.

They spoiled the incomparable Temple of S. Sophia (which was built by the
Emperor Justinian) of all ornaments and hallowed vessels, The Temple of S.
Sophia was made a stews.
and made thereof a stable, and a brodell for buggerers and whores.

This lamentable loss of Constantinople, being chief of the Oriental Empire,
and likewise of the City of Perah, by the Turks called Gallata, being the seat
of trade of the Geneuoises, lying hard by Constantinople, upon the other side
of the Channel, was in the year of our Savior 1453. March 29. (some do say
of April, and others of May) after it had remained under the dominion of the
Christians 1198. years.

But this is a marvelous thing, and worthy to be noted, that Constantinople
being reedified and new set up by Constantine the son of S. Helene (whom some
report to have been an Englishwoman borne at Cholchester) after the proportion
and likeness of Rome, was by another Constantine, son of another Helene,
taken, sacked, and brought into the hands of the Turks, which forever is like
to be (in the judgment of man) an irreparable damage unto al Christendom.
Yet the Turks have a Prophecy, that as the Empire was gotten by Mahomet, so by
another of that name Mahomet it shall be lost again.

Mahomet, after he had thus taken the City, The policy of Mahomet.
resolving to keep there the seat of his Empire, caused (with all diligence)
the walls to be new made, and certain other ruinated places to be repaired. And
in stead of the great number of the people that were there slain and carried
away as prisoners, he caused to be brought thither, out of all the Provinces
and Cities by him conquered, a certain number of men, women, and children,
with their faculties and riches, whom he permitted there to live according to
the institutions and precepts of such Religion as it pleased them to observe,
and to exercise with all safety, their handicrafts and merchandises; which
ministered an occasion unto an infinite multitude of Jews and Marannes, driven
out of Spain, for to come and dwell there: By means whereof, in very short
time the City began to increase in traffic, riches, and abundance of people.

This Mahomet was the first founder of the great Seralia (where the great Turk
now usually dwells) which he builded at the entry of the channel, about one
of the corners of the City, upon the Promontorie Chrisoseras, which afterward
by the great Turks which successively have dwelled there, has been greatly
beautified and augmented.

He sounded likewise upon one of the Mounts of the same City, a sumptuous
Muskia or Church, with an Amarathe and College, enduing them all with great
yearly reuennues: which is not to be marvelled at, for fortune was so
favorable unto him, that after he had ruinated the Empire of Constantinople
and Trapezonde, he took from the Christians 12. Kingdoms, and 200. Cities; so
that, by reason of his great prowesses and Conquests, the name and title of
[Great] was given unto him, and to this day remains unto the house of the
Ottomans: As the Turk who died about four years since, was called Sultan
Mahomet, the Grand Chan of Turkey, and the fourteenth of the Line of Ottoman.
And his son which now reigns (being not yet above twenty years of age) is
called Sultan Achomet the fifteenth Grand Chan of the Line of Ottoman: and
writes himself also (as his Predecessors have done) King of the black and
white Seas, and of the holy Cities Mecha and Jerusalem: Proijcit ampullas and
sesquipedalia verba:
Lofty words he casts out,
And arrogant titles sends about.


Over against Constantinople about the Seralia point, Perah or Gallata.
on the other side the water, there is another City called Gallata or Perah,
which (in ancient time) was called Cornubizantij. It is a City of great
antiquity, builded by the Genoezes. It is called by the Greeks vulgarly Perah,
which is a Greek word, signifying beyond, because it is situated beyond the
Canall. But by the Turks it is called Gallata.

Of fearful fires and terrible Earthquakes, which have happened within
Constantinople.
ZOnoras the Constantinopolitan Historian makes mention in his Histories, of
two fearful fires which happened unto Constantinople, whereof the first was in
the time and Empire of Leon the great, spreading it self from the North unto
the South, along by Bosphorus, to wit, the length of one of the Seas to the
other, and was so horrible and furious for the space of four days, that it
devoured and brought to ashes the whole beauty of the City, namely, the place
where the Senate and Citizens (chosen to deliberate upon common affairs) did
assemble. There was also burned another princely house, and a Palace joining
unto the cave or den called Nymphee, and diverse other Churches and private
houses.

The second fire which was in the time and reign of the Emperor Basil,
lightened in such sort, that it compassed the market of Copper, and consumed to
ashes the houses and streets thereabouts with y^ Palace, within which was a
Library of 120000. volumes of Books, and the Stature of a Dragon of the
length of 120. foot, which was written in letters of gold; the Jlliads, and the
Odisse of Homer. And moreover, burned the most renowned simulachres of Juno, of
Samos, of Minerua, of Lynde, of Venus, and of Guide; and finally devoured the
most pleasant places of the City.

Heereunto may I add a third fire which befell the same City Anno Dom. 1607.
October 14. wherein were burned 3000. houses together under Sultan Achomet, the
15. Grand-Chan of the line of Ottoman, who now reigns.

Of two fearful Earthquakes which happened to CONSTANTINOPLE.
THE said Zonoras recites, that during the reign of Anastasius chosen unto
the Empire of the East parts, there happened such a great earthquake, that it
ruined even to the foundations, a great number of buildings, not only at
Constantinople, but likewise in Bythinia, and other places thereabout.

But the last (whereof diverse worthy Authors have written, namely Munster in
his Geographie) was so strange and fearful for the space of 18. days
continually, that with horrible fearfulness and damage, it cast down to the
ground the walls of the City, and all the buildings toward the sea side, and
overthrew all the ditches. It did also cast down the Tower where the Turk kept
his munition, with five others more. The house of Tribute which stood near
unto the wall, was overthrown even to the foundation into the sea, with the
Leadings of the waters and conduits, which, with incredible expenses had been
made to lead the waters out of the Danube into the City, were for the most
part broken and bruised. And the channel which is betwixt Constantinople and
Perah was so moved, that by great surges it cast the water over the walls of
both the Cities.

But the worst of all was, that more then 13000. persons remained dead on an
heap. This great Earthquake happened in the month of September, in the year
of grace 1509. in the reign of Baiazeth the second of that name, and the 9.
Emperor unto the Turks (which succeeded Mahomet the second) who, with all
diligence caused the walls of the City to be repaired.

The rest of the noble Antiquities which presently are to be found at
Constantinople, are the Hippodrome, which the Turks do call Atmaiden, which
is the place where in times past the Emperors made the horses to run for the
pleasure and delectation of the people, which beheld the same upon a stage or
theater, which now is altogether ruined. In the midst of this place, was set
up upon four bowls of fine marble, a fair Obelisquie of colored stone, all
of one piece, 50. cubits high, beset with letters Hieroglificke; and near to
it is a great column, in the which are carved by histories the things
memorable, which have been done in this Hippodrome.

There is also another great column near unto it of marble, and one of
brass, made by singular art, in form of three serpents, wroonge one within
another. And diverse other Antiquities which are dispersed in diverse places of
the Cities; as, the Palace of Constantine the great, her first restorer, which
joins unto the walls near unto the corner which is toward the West. The
Sepulcher of Constantine, of Porphyre.
The Sepulcher of the same Constantine, which is madeall of Porphyre, being in
a corner of a street, the most filthiest in all the City.

And going toward the gate of Seliuree, is to be seen a great Column of
marble, historied after the manner of those of Antonie and Adrian which are at
Rome.

Moreover, there are Conduit pipes, and diverse Cesternes vaulted, supported,
some by vaults, and other some by a great number of pillars, and diverse other
fragments of Antiquities.

There are also two places in Constantinople at this day, Bezestan.
like unto the Exchange in London, called the Bezestan, distinguished by these
names, The old Bezestan, and, The new Bezestan, wherein all sorts of
commodities are to be bought, as in the Royal Exchange in London, and greater
variety, as veluets, silks, and sattins, and waste-coats ready made of all
sorts of silk, finely quilted and curiously wrought, with curious
handkerchiefes of exquisite work, and many other commodities, which were too
long to set down. But these Bezestans are not open all the day, but at
certain hours, vz. from nine of the clock in the morning, to three or four
in the afternoon; and not every day neither, but on certain days in the
week.

There is also a usual market in Constantinople, Markets of men.
wherein they sell men and women of all ages as ordinarily as we do cattle in
England, which are (for the most part) Christians, such as the Turks take
captives in Hungary or other places where they overcome: Their custom is to
make slaves of all they can take alive, and (at their return) to sell them in
the open market. If Christians be moved in compassion to buy them, because they
are Christians, the Turks will sell them exceeding dear to them, but cheap
to a Musslelman (as they call themselves) that is, true believers. But if they
cannot get their own price for them, they will enforce them to turn Turks,
and to serve them in all servile labors as the Israelites did the Egyptians.

Upon the corner of the City, Of the seven Towers.
which stretches toward Gall^poly, near unto the sea side, there is a very
strong Castle compassed with 7. great towers, and environed with high and
strong walls, well furnished with artillery; which Castle is by the Turks
called Iadicule, but commonly, The seven Towers. For the keeping whereof, there
is a Captain called Disdaragla, a man of great revenues and Authority, which
ordinarily has under him 500. dead pays, called Assarelies, which have all
been Ienesaries, and have every one of them for their wages 5000. Aspers by the
year. And there the great Turk keeps such Guard, for that he and other
Emperors Turks, his predecessors, have always there kept the Treasures, and
yet the Grand-Sig^ior comes thither very seldom. This Castle also with seven
Towers (commonly called The seven Towers) is a Prison for great men, like unto
the Tower of London.

There are also two other strong Castles which I have seen toward the Black
Sea (called Mare Euxinum) wherinto they put prisoners of whom they make great
account, and for whom they expect great ransom.

At the Black sea we saw Pompeis Pillar of marble, erected one a rocky Island,
near unto the shore, whereon some of our company wrote their names, viz.
master Robert Young, Gentleman (who also there wrote the name of our noble
Prince HENRY) Nathaniel Persiuall. John Milwarde. Thomas Marson, and others.


And on the shore near unto the Black Sea, there is a Lantern as high as
steeple, and on the top thereof a great pan of liquor, in dark nights
continually burning to give warning to ships how near they approach unto the
shore. For it is a very dangerous shore, and it is therefore called the
Black Sea, not because the waters thereof are any whit blacker then others,
but from the dangerous events, because in black and dark nights many ships
are cast away, rushing either upon rocks or sands: as the Red Sea also in
Egypt is not therefore called the Red Sea, because the waters thereof are
redder than others, but (as some think) because the waters were turned into
blood when Moses wrought miracles before Pharaoh. But this reason I do not so
well approve, because we do not read that the sea was turned into blood, but
the Rivers, so that they could not drink of the Rivers, nor the Fish live
therein. But I like better of their judgment who say it is called the Red Sea,
because of the red gravel and red bull-rushes which still grow in great
abundance by the shore thereof.

The Black sea is not far from Constantinople; for we took boat from thence
in the morning, and were at the Black Sea before noone, and having seen
Pompeis pillar, we went on shore, and took wine and other victuals with us up
into the Lanthorn and there dined, and returned to Constantinople by Supper
time.

My brother Peter Biddulph in right humble manner saluteth you, and that
virtuous Gentlewoman your wife. I understand by a Letter which I lately
received from him dated at Anchona, that he had been at Rome, in the year of
Iubile: but at this present he is either in Venice or in some other principal
City in Italy, where he cutteth Diamonds, Rubies, Saphiers, Emrods, and all
other sorts of precious stones. I wrote for him to come unto me to Aleppo in
Syria, to be factor for a worshipful Merchant of our Company: but he answered
me that he had learned not to be another man's man so long as he could be his
own, according to that versicle.

Alterius non sit, qui suus esse potest.
that is:

Let not him a man's servants be,
Who can live well, and may be free.
Whereby I perceived that his purpose was to follow the trade of a Lapidarie,
and buying and selling precious stones, which he buyeth rough and rouged: and
when he has smoothed them, and curiously wrought them, then he sells them
again. Yet I expect his coming hither before many years be expired: for I
understand he has a purpose to travel to Spahan in Persia, and to other of
the chiefest Cities there to buy precious stones, which are brought thither
from India and other places. And his direct way thither is to travel through
Siria, and from thence to Babylon in Assyria; wherefore I make account he will
visit me in his journey thither. And I doubt not but he will salute you with
many letters before his departure out of Christendom; for he writes unto me
that you by your kindness have bound him unto you in bond of perpetual
gratefulness; which, though he be unable to requite, yet he is not unwilling
to record. He has been in most of the chiefest Cities in Italy, Germany, and
the low Countries, and in Geneua, Sauoy, Spain, and in all the chief Cities
of France; and is better able to acquaint you with the state of those Countries
then I am; to whom I refer you for satisfaction of your expectation therein.

Many other matters I have to acquaint you withal, concerning the manners,
government, Religion and discipline of the Inhabitants in these Countries: but
fearing to be ouerfedious unto you by interrupting your serious affairs with
over prolire and superfluous writings, I surcease (for present) any further to
sillicite you. Of the rest, hereafter (if God permit.) If you write hereafter
unto me, direct your letters to Aleppo in Syria, for there I hope to be
before your letters can come; and from thence shall you hear from me.

Interim vale. Sum tuu^, esto meus, saluet vtrum^ Deus. GVILIELMVS BIDDVLPHVS.

A LETTER WRITTEN from Aleppo in Syria Comagena, wherein is discoursed of a
voyage from Constantinople to Syria, with such memorable matters as were
observed in the way, and of the Religion, Government, Manners, Life, and
Customs, of the Turks, Moors, Arabians, Greeks, and other Nations there
dwelling of soiourning. (* * * *) ()
Salutem in Christo, etc.
ALbeit (dear friend) since my coming into Syria (which is now 2. years fully
expired) I have not as yet saluted you with any letters (notwithstanding your
often provoking of me by your letters to more diligence in writing) yet I pray
you impute it not unto me for ungratefulness or forgetfulness: for no
continuance of time, or distance of place, shall make me forget you. For
although I am now many thousand miles distant from you, yet I have changed but
the air, I remain still the same man, and of the same mind, according to
that old verse, though spoken in another sense,

Coelum, non animos mutant qui trans mare currunt.
That is,

They that over the sea from place to place do pass,
Change but the air, their mind is as it was.
And God forbid I should forget you: for I have learned, that he who has
deserved well, ought not to be forgotten, but with all duties of love and
kindness remembered and regarded. And that foul vice of ingratitude I have
always abhorred; yea the very suspicion thereof I have ever detested, as a
vice most odious and detestable both to God and all good men. Wherefore if all
love require love again, I were most unkind if I would not requite your love
toward me, with mutual love and grateful memory. But the cause of my long
silence has been, rather a desire to see you in presence, than to salute you
in absence: for I am weary of this uncomfortable Country, and did think of
have repaired toward my native Country long before this time, which I desire
as earnestly to see, as Ulysses did to see the smoke of his Country before he
died; and pray with the banished man in his Exile, Sedibus in patrijs det mihi
posse mori.
God grant I may die in my own Country.
Yet when I remember how the Heathen man could comfort himself in his
calamities, Ovid.
and say, Dabit Deus his quo^ finem: God will give an end to these miseries:
Aeneas.
And again, Forsan and haec olim meminisse tuuabit; Perhaps it will delight us
to remember it hereafter: I, a poor Christian, living amongst Heathen men,
do comfort my self with this confidence, that he which brought Jacob from
Padan Aram in Mesopotamia to his own country in safety, after twenty years
service; and Naomi after ten years soiourning in idolatrous Moab, to Bethlehem
Ephrata her own Country; the same God, in his good time, will bring me from
this Heathenish Babylon, to Israel his people, and English Sion, where, with
the true Israelites, the remembrance of Babylon will make me sing more sweetly
in Sion. In the mean time, though I want the sweet society, comfort and
conference of you and other my kind friends (whose remembrance is comfortable
unto me) yet I will not cease by writing to supply that duty which I cannot
perform by speaking, hoping and expecting the like from you; for nothing can
be more comfortable to me in this strange country, than often to hear from my
friends, and by mutual writing to be acquainted with the affairs of each
other.

The doleful and lamentable beginning of your last letter made me exceeding
sorrowful; Queen Elizabeth was famous throghout the whole world, and her
death bewa^led by heathen people.
for therein you acquainted me with the death of blessed Queen Elizabeth, of
late and famous memory; at the hearing whereof not only I and our English
Nation mourned, but many other Christians who were never in Christendom, but
borne and brought up in Heathen countries, wept to hear of her death, and said
she was the most famous Queen that ever they heard or read of since the world
began.

But the ending of your letter comforted us again, and mitigated our mourning,
and gave us occasion to use that verse of Sybill concerning the branch of the
holy tree, Virg. Aenid li. 6. Primo au^lso non deficit alter
Aureus, and simila frondescit virga metallo:
When one bough broken is,
Another springs as fresh in sight,
Of gold, and twigs are ever like,
With buds of metal bright.


And (as my duty was) I appointed one day to be kept holy, which we spent in
prayer, and preaching, and thanksgiving unto God for the happy advancement of
so noble, wise, learned, and religious a King over us. And in sign of joy, we
feasted and triumphed in such sort, that the very Heathen people were partakers
with us of our joy. And I beseech God continue such joyful days unto our Land
so long as the Sun and Moon endures. Amen.

Now, because the nature of man is desirous of news, and (as it is said) the
first question of an Englishman, What news? I know you expect from me to hear
of such news as this country affoordeth. Wherefore (in some measure to
satisfy your expectation) as in my former letters directed to you from
Constantinople, I acquainted you with my voyage thither, and such Antiquities
and memorable matters as I saw and observed there, so the Subject of this
present letter shall be my Voyage from Thracia to Syria, with such obseruable
circumstances as I have noted there since my coming into this country.

And first of all I give you to understand, that after my departure from
Constantinople, the first place we touched at, was the 2. Castles at the
Hellespont, about 220. miles distant from Constantinople, where the order is,
for all ships to stay three days, to the end that if any slaves be run away
from their masters, or thieves have stolen away any thing, they may thither be
pursued in three days, before the ships pass: And then at three days end,
That is, good forbidden.
the ship must be searched for goods contra bando, and the Grand-signiors Pass
showed for all the passengers in the ship; and then (their usual duties paid)
they may set sail and away. Yet if the master of the ship pay extraordinarily,
they may more speedily be dispatched: and many give very liberally (when they
have a good wind) rather than they will be stayed many hours.

From thence we sailed between Moeotis and Tenedos, Pontus.
in the sea called Pontus. For although sometime in the Poets, every sea be
called Pontus (as Ovid in his Book De Tristibus speaks,

Omnia Pontus erant, deerant quoque litt^ra Ponto:
That is,

All was sea on every side,
And no firm land could be espide.
And again,

Nil nisi Pontus and aer;
I see nothing but the air above, and the sea beneath:)
Yet in this place there is a proper sea called Pontus, and a country also
ioining to the same sea, called Pontus, mentioned Act. 2. 9. which country
Pontus contains these countries, C^ppadocia, Cholchis, Arm^nia, with others:
and especially Cholchis (whence lason with the Argonautes, by the help of
Medeas skill, did fetch the golden fleece) is most conspicuous on Asi^ side, to
them that sail through the sea Pontus. From thence we came to Ch^os, where we
stayed a few days.

From Chios we set sail with a very good wind, which brought us amongst the
53. I^es in the Arches called Cy^l^des or Sporades: And then, by a contrary
wind, we we^e driven to Samos, which is an I Will before Ionia, over against
Ephe^us, where we ancored until we had a good wind, and then sailed by Andros
an He, one of the Cyclades, and had a very good wind until we came to
Rhodos, Rhode.
commonly called Rhodes, which is an I Will in the Carpathian sea, near Caria,
where we were becalmed. It is called the Carpathian sea, of Carpathus, an I Will
in the midst betwixt Rhodes and Creet.

From Rhodes we came to Cyprus, Cyprus.
a famous and fruitful Island in the sea Carpathium. between Cilicia and
Syria, which was once conquered by Richard the First, King of England. In this
I Will Venus was greatly honored. There is still a City therein called Paphia.
built by Paphus, who dedicated it to Venus. But the chiefest Cities in Cyprus
are Famogusta and Nicosia. There is great store of cotten-woollgrowing in this
Island, and exceeding good wine made here, and the best dimetey, with other
good commodities. From hence a French Gentleman (who came in our ship from
Constantinople) embarked himself for Ioppa, Ioppa
with a purpose to go to Jerusalem. Ioppa is not two days sailing from Cyprus
with a good wind: and Ioppa is but thirty miles from Jerusalem by land. Cyprus
was under the government of the Signiory of Venice; but now it is inhabited by
Greeks, and governed by Turks.

But our Ship from Cyprus went to Tripoly in Syria, Tripoly in Syria.
a City on the maine land of Syria, near unto Mount Lybanus, which is a
mountain of three days journey in length, reaching from Tripoly near to
Damascus. Whilst our ship stayed in the rode at Tripoly, Lybanus
I and some others rode up to Mount Lybanus to see the Cedartrees there, and
lodged the first night at the Bishops house of Eden, who used us very kindly.
It is but a little village, and called by the Turks, Anchora, but most usually
by the Christians there dwelling it is called Eden, not the garden of Eden,
(which place is unknown unto this day) but because it is a pleasant place,
resembling in some sort the garden of Eden (as the simple inhabitants thereof
suppose) therefore it is called Eden. This Bishop was borne in the same parish,
but brought up at Rome: his name was Franciscus Amyra, by whom I understood,
that the Pope of Rome many years since sent unto the Christians inhabiting
Mount Lybanus, to persuade them to embrace the Romish Religion, and yield
themselves to the Church of Rome, making large promises unto them if they would
so do: whereof they deliberated long, but in the end yielded, upon condition
they might have liberty to use their own Liturgy, and Ceremonies, and Lents
(for they strictly observe four Lents in the year) and other customs. Ever
since which time, the Pope has and does maintain some of their children at
Rome. These Christians which dwell upon Mount Lybanus, are called Maronites:
they are very simple and ignorant people, yet civil, kind, and courteous to
strangers. There are also many Turks dwelling on the same mountain, and an
Emeer or great Lord, called Emeer Vseph, who governs all the rest, both
Christians and Turks, being himself a Mohammedan, yet one who holds the
government of Mount Lybanus in despite of the great Turk, and has done a
long time.

From Eden we rode ten miles further up the mountain, Cedars were plentiful
in Solomans time, but none very ^are.
to see certain Cedar trees, where we saw 24. tall Cedar trees growing
together, as big as the greatest oaks, with diverse rows of branches one
over another, stretching straight out, as though they were kept by Art.
Although we read of great store of Cedars which have grown on Mount Lybanus,
yet now there are very few, for we saw none but these 24. neither heard of any
other but in one place more. At these Cedars many Nostranes met us, and led us
to their villages.

From these Cedars we returned toward Tripoly another way, descending by the
side of the Mount toward a village of the Maroniticall Christians, called
Hatcheeth, where (as we were descending down the side of the Mountain) all
the men, women, and children, came out of their houses to behold us: And when
we were yet far off riding toward them, they gave a ioifull shout all
together jointly, to express their joy for our coming. And when we came
near, their women with chaffingdishes of coals burnt incense in our way, and
their Casseeses, that is, their Churchmen (with blew shashes about their heads)
made crosses with their fingers toward us (as their manner is in sign of
welcome) and blessed us, giving God thanks that he had brought Christian
Frankes (that is, freemen) of such far countries as they understood we were
of, to come to visit them.

So soon as we were dismounted from our horses, Shch, signifies an ancient
man.
the chief Sheh, with all the rest of their ancientest men, came and brought
us to the chief house of the parish, called the Townehouse or Church-house,
and there spread carpets and table-cloathes on the ground (as their manner is)
and made us all sit down; and every one that was able, brought flaskets of
such good cheer as they had, to welcome us, which was many bottles or
ingesters of exceeding good wine, with olives, sallets, eggs, and such like
things, as on the sudden they had ready, and set them before us; and both by
the cheerfulness of their countenances, gestures of their bodies, and
presents of such present things as they had, expressed their gladness for our
coming; and would also have prepared hens, kids, and other good cheer, but we
would not suffer them. This was about 11. or 12. of the clock. They would have
had us continue with them all night, and with great importunity craved it; but
we understanding that the Patriarch was but three miles off, at a village
called Sharry, we went to salute him, who hearing of our coming (albeit he
were at a feast amongst all his neighbors) came to meet us, and saluted us,
and brought us all in amongst his neighbors into a room fouresquare, and
round about beset with carpets and table-cloathes on the ground, and such
cheer as the season of the year did afford, set thereon, and made us all sit
down, and conferred with us of our country, and many other matters, saving
matters of Religion, for the poor man had no Latin, and little learning in
any other Language; only he had the Syriac (which was his natural language)
with the Turkish and Arabian t^ngue. After we had spent one hour with him, we
left him with his neighbors at Sharry, where we found him, for he could not
conveniently come from them: for their manner is, when they feast, to sit from
midday until midnight, and sometimes all night, never all together rising from
their good cheer, but now and then one by intercourses, as occasion requires,
returning again speedily. Yet he sent with us three men to bring us to his own
house near unto a village (four miles distant from Sharry) called Boloza, but
vulga^ly Blouza, from whence we descended down the side of another part of the
mountain, and in the middle of the descending of this mountain was the
Patriarchs house, called Kanobeen kadischa Mir-iam in the Syria^ tongue, but in
Latin, Coenobium sanctae Mariae; that is, The Monastery of Saint Mary. Over
against the Patriarchs house is an high steepy mountain, from whence the water
runs down into a deep valley betwixt the Patriarchs house and the hill,
and in the fall, the water makes an exceeding great noise, like unto that
Catadupa in Aethiopia, where the fall of Nilus makes such a noise, that the
people are made deaf therewith that dwell near it. This place is somewhat
like unto it in fall, but not in effect: for this water being not so great as
Nilus, makes not the like noise, neither works the like effect. There is
also an extraordinary Echo thereabout.

One side of the Patriarchs house is a natural rock, the other of hewn
stones and squared timber: a very strong house, but not very large, nor
spetious to behold. So are also many of their houses, in most of their
villages, built against a rock, as a wall unto one side of it, That is, Lord
Joseph.
especially Emeer Vseph his house, the greatest part thereof being hewed out of
the lively rock, and the passage or descending unto it so narrow and
dangerous, that it is counted invincible, which makes him to hold out against
the Turk, and to domineere in this mountain, will he, nill he.

It is a most intricate mountain with hills and valleys, woods and rivers,
and fruitful pastures, olives, vines, and figtrees, goats, sheep, and other
cattle. It is also exceeding high, having snow on the top all the year long.

At this Monastery of S. Mary (which is the Patriarchs house) we lodged all
night, and both on Saturday at Evening Prayer, and on Sunday of morning Prayer,
we both heard and saw the manner of their Service in the Syriac tongue, both
read and sung very reverently, with Confessions, Prayers, Thankesgiuings, the
Psalms of David sung, and Chapters both out of the old Testament and the new
distinctly read. It rejoiced me greatly to see their order: and I observed in
these ancient Christians called Nazarites, the antiquity of using set forms
of Prayers in Churches, and also the necessity thereof, that the people might
have something to say Amen unto, being read in their mother tongue, that they
may learn to pray privately by those Prayers which they daily hear read
publicly. This is too much neglected in England, God grant reformation thereof.

There is no place in all the world but four parishes or villages on this
mountain where they speak the Syriac tongue naturally at this day. But 4.
Parishes in all the world which speak Syriac.
And these are these four villages, which I named before; at all which places
we had kind entertainment, viz. 1. Eden, called by the Turks Anchora. 2.
Hatcheeth. 3, Sharry. 4. Boloza, called vulgerly Blouza. And these people are
called Nostranes quasi Nazaritans, as it were Nazarites, and none but they. But
more generally they are called Maronites, but this name is common to them with
others.

There are dwelling on one side of mount Lybanus toward the foot of the
mountain (and in some other places in that Contrie) a kind of Christians
called Drusies, Drusies.
who came into the contrie with king Baldwyne and Godfrey of Bullin, when they
conquered that country, (whose predecessors or ancestors are thought to have
been Frenchmen) and afterward when the Sarac n^ recovered it again, these
men (whom they now call Drusies) fled into the mountains to save themselves;
and there dwelling long, in the end their posterity forgot all Christianity,
yet used still Baptism, and retained still the names of Christians, whom the
T^^rcomen call Rafties, that is, Infidels, because they eat swines fle^h,
which is forbidden by the Turk^s law.

These (...) are kind, and simple people, Turcomanny,
dwelling alwas (...) in the fields, following their (...), borne and brought
up, living and dying (...) feats, and (...) there ^^ocks and herds remove,
then all their men, women and children remove with their household stuff, and
houses too, which are but tents made to remove, after the manner of the ancient
Israelites: and where they find good pasture, there they pitch their tents;
the men following their flocks of sheep and herds of Cattle; the women keep
their tents, and spend their time in spinning, or carding, or knitting, or some
household huswifery, not spending their time in gossipping and gadding abroad
from place to place, and from house to house, from alehouse to wine tavern,
as many idle huswies in England do.

Yet sometimes are these simple souls abused by Ianisaries, Ianisaries, are
soldiers.
who in travailing by them take from them perforce victuals for themselves and
for their horses, and give them nothing but sore stripes if they but murmr
against them. But when Christian Merchants pass by them, they will (of their
own accord) kindly present them.

We returned from mount Lybanus to Tripoly by such an intricate way, that if we
had not had a guide with us, we should have lost our selves.

Near unto Tripoly there is a plain at least one mile in length, full of
Olive trees and Fig trees.

At the foot of this mountain, near unto Tripoly, A mountain of sand.
there is a sandy mount which has arisen (in the memory of some old men there
yet living) where there was none before; and it grows still bigger and
bigger, and there is a prophecy of it, that in time it shall ouerwhelme the
town.

Tripoly has the Etimologie (as some say) of two Greek words, viz. (...) and
(...) because the City has been thrice built.

First, on a rocky Island where it was overwhelmed with water.

Secondly, on the Marine near unto the sea, where it was often sacked by
Cursares.

And now thirdly, a mile from the sea, where it is annoyed with sand.

Our ship being not ready to set sail at our return from the mount, but
staying partly to dispatch their business, and partly for a good wind; we
travailed by land two days journey, Tyrus and Sidon.
to see Tyrus and Sidon, hard by the sea. And at Sidon we saw the Tomb of
Zabulon the son of Jacob, held in great estimation, and reverent account at
this present day.

Tyrus is now called (by the Turks) Sur, because there begins the land of
Siria, which they call Sur; Tyrus is destroyed, and no such City now standing,
only the name of the place remains, and the place is still known where it
stood. Eight miles from Tyrus toward the East is the City Sarepta* of the
Sidonians, where the Prophet Elias raised the Widows son from death to life.

We saw also Baruta, where sometimes was a great trade for Merchants, but from
thence they removed it to Damascus, and from Damascus to Tripoly, and of late,
from Tripoly to Sidon. Ioppa is not far from these parts, oftentimes Barks
come from the one to the other.

At our return we went aboard, Scanderon.
and presently set sail for Scanderone, (as it is now called by Turks:)
otherwise called Alexandretta by the Christians, which is the very bottom and
utmost border of all the straights. The air is very corrupt, and infecteth the
bodies, and corrupts the blood of such as continue there many days, partly
by reason of the dregs of the sea, which are driven thither: and partly by
reason of two high mountains which keep a way the sun from it a great part
of the day. And it is very dangerous for strangers to come on shore before the
sun be two hours high, and have dried up the vapors of the ground, or to
stay on shore after sun setting. The waters also near unto the town are
very unwholesome, coming from a moorish ground; but at the fountain, a mile
off, there is exceeding good water to drink. It is far more healthful to
sleep aboard then on the shore.

Scanderone is in Cilicia, and Cilicia is the country Caramonia, (as it is now
called) in the lesser Asia, and is divided into two parts, viz. Trocher and
Campestris. It has on the East, the hill Amanus: on the North, Taurus: on the
West, Pamphila: on the South, the Cilician sea.

Scanderone is the port for Aleppo, where all our Merchants land their goods,
and send them up to Aleppo, upon Cammels. The Carauans usually make three days
journey betwixt Scanderone and Aleppo. Whiles our Cammels were preparing, we
took boat and went to an ancient town by the sea side, called at this day
Byas, Tarsius in Cilicia.
but of old, Tarsus, a City in Cilicia where S. Paul was borne, mentioned Act.
22. 3. which town is arched about (as many of their Cities are) to keep away
the heat of the sun, which Arches they call Bazars.

At the gardens near Tarsus (and likewise at other gardens within three miles
of Scanderone) we saw great store of Silkewormes, which at the first be but
little grains like unto Mustardseed: but by the bearing of them in women's
bosoms, they do gather an heat, whereby they come unto life, and so prove
worms; they keep them in tents made of reeds with one loft over another full
of them, and feed them with leaves of Mulbery trees; these worms (by natural
instinct) do fast often, (as some report) every third day.

Here we stayed certain days to avoid the infection of Scanderone. The
mountains which obscure Scanderone, and make it more unhealthful, I take to
be a part of Taurus, which is a great and famous Mountain, beginning at the
Indian Sea, and rising into the North, passes by Asia unto Moeotis, bordering
upon many Countries, and is called by many names. Sometimes it is called
Caucasus, which is the highest hill in all Asia, which parts Jndia from
Scythia, and is part of the hill Taurus. Sometimes it is called Amanus, which
hill parts Syria from Cilicia. And sometimes it is called by other names,
according unto the sea coasts along which it extends.

About Scanderone there are many ravenous beasts about the bigness of a For,
commonly called there Iackalles, engendered (as they say) of a Fox and a
Woolfe, which in the night make a great crying, and come to the graves, and if
there have been any corse buried the day before, (if the grave be not well
filled, with many great stones upon it) many of them together, with their feet,
do scrape up the earth, and pull up the corpse and eat it.

At our return from Tharsus, Edward Rose our Factor marine provided us horses
to ride to Aleppo, and a Ienesary called Parauan Bashaw with two Iimmoglans to
guard us, with necessary victuals for our selves to spend by the way, for there
are no Innes nor victualing houses in that country, but travelers take
victuals for themselves, and prouender for their horses with them.

Our Merchants and passengers making haste to be gone from this contagious and
pestiferous place Scanderone (which one very well called, Malims are chief
Carriers.
The bane of Franks) left their goods with the Factor Marine to be sent after
them, because the Malims and Muckremen (as they call the Carriers) were not yet
come down with their Cammels to carry them up: Muckremen set horses to hire.
but we met them at the fountain of fishes near unto Scanderone.

About eight miles from Scanderone, we came to a town called Bylan, Bylan.
where there lies buried an English Gentleman, named Henry Morison, who died
there coming down from Aleppo in company with his brother master Phines
Morison, who left his Arms in that country with these verses under written.

To thee dear HENRY MORISON,
Thy brother PHINES here left alone:
Has left this fading memory,
For monuments, and all must die.
From Bylan we came to the plain of Antioch, and went over the River Orontes
by boat, Orontes.
which River parts Antiochia and Syria. Antioch plain is very long and
large, at least 10. miles in length. Antiochia in Pisidia.
We lodged the first night at Antiochia in Pisidia, an ancient town about 25.
miles from Scanderone, mentioned Act. 11. 26. where the Disciples were first
called Christians. Here we lodged in an house, but on the bare ground, having
nothing to sleep on, or to cover us, but what we brought with us, viz. a
pillow, and a quilt at the most, and that was lodging for a Lord.

This Antioch has been, as a famous, so an exceeding strong Town, situated
by the Sea, and almost compassed (at the least on both sides) with exceeding
high and strong rocks. The Inhabitants at this day are Greeks, but under the
government of the Turk, but for matters of Religion, ordered and ruled by
their Patriarchs, for the Greeks have four Patriarchs to this present day,
viz. The Patriarch of Antioch, the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Patriarch of
Alexandria, the Patriarch of Constantinople, who rules all the rest. Yet as
the Jews, so also the Greeks to this day are without a king, and both they,
and their Patriarks are but slaves to the great Turk.

And although their Patriarch of Constantinople be counted their chief
Patriarch: yet I have known one Milesius (a learned man indeed) who was first
Patriarch of Constantinople, preferred to the place by master Edward Barton, an
English Gentleman, and Lord Ambassador for Queen Elizabeth, of famous
memory, (and the mirror of all Ambassadors that ever came to Constantinople)
who for his wisdom, good government, policy, and Christian carriage has left
an immortal fame behind him in those Countries, to this present day, and lies
buried at an Island of the Greeks, Bartons Island.
within twelve miles of Constantinople called Bartons Island to this day.

After whose death, this good man Milesius was by the Greeks displaced from
being Patriarch of Constantinople: (which they durst not do whiles master
Barton was living) because, being a man of knowledge, he labored to reform
the Greeks from many of their superstitious customs. Whereupon (presently
after the death of master Barton) they said their Patriarch was an Englishman,
and no Greek, and therefore Manzulled him, that is: displaced him. Yet bearing
some reverence toward him for his learning, made him Patriarch of Alexandria.
And being there Patriarch, he excommunicated the Patriarch of Antiochia,
because he accepted of relief at the Popes hand; and made him come to
Alexandria, to humble himself unto him, and acknowledge his fault before he
would suffer him to execute his Patriarchs office.

Master Henry Lello (a learned, wise, and religious English gentleman, sometime
student in Oxford, and afterward at the Innes of the Court) succeeded Master
Barton in his place, and in many things exceeded him, especially in his
religious carriage and unspotted life: and had not the times been more
troublesome in his regiment, than in the time of his predecessor Master Barton;
he would every way have gone beyond him. He first of all reformed his family,
and afterward so ordered himself in his whole carriage, that he credited our
Country: and after ten years government of the English Nation there, he
returned into his Country with the tears of many, and with general good
report of al Nations there dwelling or soiourning; and is worthily by his
excellent Majesty rewarded with Knighthood for his good service.

If Milesius had lived, this good gentleman would have restored him to
Constantinople, as he placed many other Archbishops both at Salonica, (of old
called Thessalonica) and elsewhere.

In the Mountains betwixt Scanderone and Aleppo, Coords.
there are dwelling a certain kind of people called at this day Coords,
coming of the race of the ancient Parthians, who worship the Devil, and
allege for their reason in so doing, that God is a good man, and will do no
man harm, but that the Devil is bad, and must be pleased lest he hurt them.
There was one of our Carriers a Muccre man and Malim, named Abdell Phat, who
was said to be of that Race and Religion.

There is also, Archills^s.
although not in the direct way, (yet for safety and pleasantness of the way,
it is sometimes taken in the way to Aleppo) an ancient City called Achilles,
where one Asan Bashaw rules like a King (paying duties to the Turks)
successively from his predecessors, coming of the house of Sanballat, who
hindered the building of the Temple of Jerusalem, who is called to this day,
Nehe. 4. 1.
Eben Sumbolac, that is, the son of Sanballat: and all his kindred call one
another, Ammiogli, that is, Brother Ammonite; for they account themselves of
the race of the Ammonites. This Asan Bashaw is now old, and (for the most part)
refers all matters of government to his kinsman Vseph Bege, that is, Lord
Joseph.

The second night, in our travel from Scanderone, we lodged at a place called
The gardens, in the open fields, having the ground to our bed, a stone to our
pillow (as Jacob in his travel had) and the sky to our covering. And many
poor travelers in these parts (who come unprovided) have nothing else but the
air for their supper, except they can meet with the fruits of trees, or herbs
of the fields. We met in some places with villages of Tents, where our
Ienesarie Parauan Bashaw (being partly feared and partly loved amongst them)
brought unto us from them, bread and water often times. Their bread is made all
in cakes, after the ancient manner, as Abraham entertained Angels with hearth
cakes. At one place we had also presented to us very good sweet goats milk,
and also good sour milk, turned by art, which is the most common dish in
those hot Countries.

The day following, Hauadan.
we came about noone to a village called Hanadan, eight miles on this side
Aleppo, over against which village, on the right hand, on the top of the hill,
there is (as the Jews report) the sepulcher of the Prophet Jeremy. At this
village Hanadan there are many pigion houses, whereof the poor people make
much profit, bringing them to Aleppo to sell. At this village we dined with
Musmelons, Sambouses are little pasties.
Sambouses, and a Muclebite. And after dinner we slept an hour or two (as the
custom of the Country is) and then rode forwards toward Aleppo, Muclebite, a
dish made of eggs and herbs.
whither we came by five of the clock, and were kindly entertained at Cane
Burgol by the worshipful Richard Colthurst Esquire, Consul for the English
Nation there.

Syria is in Asia, A description of Syria.
having on the East, Euphrates: on the West, Egypt; on the North, Cilicia; on
the South, Arabia.

Assyria ioineth unto Syria, and has on the East, Media; on the West,
Mesopotamia; on the North, Armenia Minor; on the South, Susiana. About sixty
miles from Aleppo, the river Euphrates and Tygris meet, at a place called
vulgarly Beer or Birha, but of old it was called Mesopotamia, Mesopotamia
where Laban dwelt at Padan Aram. And there is yet a heap of stones (within
half a days iourny of Aleppo, near unto Taedith, inhabited by Jews) where
Laban following after Jacob, made covenant with him, which Laban called
Iegar-sahadutha, that is, An heap of Witnesses. But Jacob called it Galeed,
that is, A Watch Tower, as we read, Genesis 31. 47.

The City Niniue was in Assyria, Nineue.
situated by Tygris, whereof now there is no memorial left. But in the place
where Nineveh stood, there is a little town called Muscla, from whence the
inhabitants of that place bring a kind of linen cloth called Muslina, to
Aleppo, to sell to Merchants there. At B^^ha, by the River Euphrates, they that
go Babylon, usually take boat, but stay until their boats be made, and then
buy them, and go down the River Euphrates with a swift current, but cannot
come back again by water.

Babylon is now called by the Turks, Babylon is called Badg^t
Bagdat. It is also governed by Turks. It bordereth upon Persia. A great part
of Mesopotamia and Assyria is also called Babylonia, of the City Babylon. Also
there is a City in Egypt called Babylon, not far from the I Will Delta, built by
certain Babylonians.

Betwixt Aleppo and Babylon, Merchants travel often over the desert of Arabia,
and every quarter of the year Carauans come from thence with many hundred
Camels laden with merchandise. And their custom has been, Pigions carrying
letters.
and is still sometimes, when they have occasion to send some sudden news from
Babylon to fasten some brief writing to one of the wings of a Bagdat or
Babylonian pigeon, or about her neck, in such sort that it may not hinder her
flying, and to send her therewith to bring news to Aleppo, which is at the
least ten days journey off: which when I heard at the first, it seemed to me
wonderful strange, and almost incredible: but after I understood how they
train them to it, the strangeness thereof was diminished. For when the hen
dove sits, or has young ones, they take the cock pigeon and put him in a
cage, and when the Carriers go with their camels, they set the pigeon in an
open cage on a camels back, and when they are a days journey or two from
home, set her at liberty, who presently mounteth up aloft, and beholding her
way, never cease flying until she come to her mate; which any of the house
perceiving, look for some paper fastened about her, and so in post haste
understand speedy news. And so by degrees they train them further and
further to the places of their traffic. This I have known put in practice,
and performed by an English Merchant of Aleppo, who in such sort sent a Bagdat
pigeon to Scanderone, three days journey from Aleppo, and by her return,
understood when ships arrived thither, and departed from thence: which seems
not unto me so strange as that which we read of, performed by a Cobbler of
Rome, who taught a dawe to speak, and to salute the Emperor, as he passed by,
with these words, Salve Caesar; which the Emperor hearing, gave unto the
Cobbler a good reward, and bought his dawe: which another poor man in Rome
perceiving, hoping to get the like reward, took upon him to teach another daw,
the same lesson; and day and night as he sat at his work used still to prattle
unto his daw, and bid him say, Salve Caesar: and when he perceived he could not
make his daw once frame himself to pronounce those words, he chafing, rapped
him on the bill, and said, Operam and oleum perdidi; that is, I have lost my
labor in vain: yet still continued his diligent endeavor, and by often
repeating both Salve Caesar, and Operam and oleum perdidi, in the end his daw
had learned both the one and the other, and when the Emperor passed by, said,
Salve Caesar; the Emperor answered, Tales habeo domi salutatores; that is, J
have such saluters inow at home: whereupon the daw replied, Operam and oleum
perdidi: which the Emperor hearing, bought this daw also, because he had one
lesson more than the other, and rewarded the poor man well for his labor.

I am bold to write unto you in absence as pleasantly as I was wont to speak
unto you in presence, whereby you may perceive I am still the same man, and of
the same mind, and as merry out of England as ever I was in England.

But to proceed in my discourse and description of Syria: A description of
Syria.
All Syria of old was called Aram, and the Syrians, Aramites. But especially I
do read of three of the chiefest Cities in Syria called by the name Aram: The
first was Aram Naharaim, which was Mesopotamia; for Nahar in Hebrew signifies
a River, and Naharaim is the duall number thereof, signifying two Rivers, which
were Euphrates and Tygris. Mesopotamia the Greek word signifies the same,
coming of two Greek words, viz. (...), which signifies the middle, and
(...), which signifies a River: and therefore was it called Mesopotamia,
because it was situated between two Rivers, that is, Euphrates and Tygris.

The second was Aram Damasek, that is, Damascus, which is still the chiefest
City in all Syria.

The third was called Aram Sobah, which some think to have been that City
which is now called Aleppo. And of this Aram Sobah I find mention made, 2. Sam
8. 3. 4. 5. And also in the title of the sixty Psalm, where mention is made of
the salt valley which is but half a days journey from Aleppo, which is a very
great plain, without grass growing on it, the very sand whereof is good salt
naturally: after rain, being dried again by the sun, they gather it. There
is also a little Island or mountain in the midst thereof, plain on the top,
which yields the best salt.

Some Jews there dwelling, do also say, that Aleppo was the City Sepheruaim:
but I think it to be a latter City, which some say was called Apollonius: but
I know no reason for it, except it were built by one of that name. Howsoever,
it should seem this City Aleppo has often changed her name, and that, if it
were not Aram Sobah, yet to be built not far from the place where Aram Sobah
stood. But the Turks (changing the names of all places where they come) call
Aleppo at this day, Halep, which signifies Milk, because it yields great
store of milk.

Aleppo is inhabited by Turks, Moors, Arabians, Jews, Greeks, Armenians,
Chelfalines, Nostranes, and people of sundry other Nations.

The Turks come of Magog the son (...) Iapheth. For (as we read, Genesis 10.
1.) Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham, and Iapheth.

Shem and his posterity dwelt in Syria, in Chaldaea, and in Persia, being the
East parts of the world, whence came the Syrians, the Aramites, the Chaldeans,
and the Persians. The sons of Shem are named, Genesis 10. 22. to be these, Elam,
Ashur, Lud, and Aram. Of Elam came the Elamites or Persians; of Ashur, the
Assyrians; of Lud, the Lydians; of Aram, the Aramites or Syrians. These sons
of Shem, with their posterity, are cast out of the holy Line, who were deadly
enemies to their kindred, Genesis 10. 22. 23.

Ham with his seed went into Canaan, being the South part of the world, of whom
came the Cananites, the Egyptians, Ethiopians, and the Arabians. The sons of
Ham are set down, Genesis 10. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. etc. to be these, Cush, Mizraim,
Put, and Canaan.

Of Cush came Nimrod a mighty hunter, the builder of Babel.

Of Mizraim came the Egyptians, who in Hebrew are called Mizraims.

Of Put came the Blacke-Moores.

Of Canaan the Cananites: And so forth, as you may read, Genesis 10.

Iapheth went with his seed into the Western and Northern parts of the world:
Of whom came the Greeks, the Medes, the Simbrians, the Germans, the
Scythians, the Turks, and the Thratitians.

The Isles of the Gentiles came of Iapheth and his sons.

The sons of Iapheth are set down, Genesis 10. 2. 5. to be these, Gomer,
Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tuball, Mesech, Tiras, etc.

Of Gomer came the Tartarians.

Of Magog the Turks and Scythians.

Of Madai, the Medes.

Of Iauan, the people of Asia and Graecia.

And what people proceeded of the rest, you may read Ezech. 27. 1. 13. Ezech.
38. 1. 2. etc. Ezech. 39. 2. unto which places I refer you for the rest: for
I desire to be brief, lest by over prolixnesse in writing, I be over tedious
to you in reading.

I promised you in my last letters, Religion of the Turks.
to write unto you by the next, of the Religion, Government, Manners, and
Customs of the Turks, and other Nations there dwelling or soiourning.
Wherefore, that I may the better make known unto you their Religion, I will
begin with the first Author thereof, which was (no doubt) the Devil, who used
that false Prophet Mahomet as his instrument to broach it abroad.

Diverse Prophets have foretold of the wickedness and tyranny of the Turks:
but I will only recite the Prophecy of Daniell, chap. 7. 7. which is very
notable, and agrees especially unto the time when this impiety and tyranny did
begin. After this ( says Daniel) I saw in the visions by night, and behold,
the fourth beast was fearful, and terrible, and very strong. It had great
iron teeth; It devoured, and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue under his
feet; and it was unlike to the beasts that were before it, for it had ten
horns. Hitherto spoke Daniel of the fourth, that is, the Roman Empire, and of
the cruelty of the same, and of the ten Kings in subjection thereunto.

Now follows the Prophecy of the Turkish Kingdom, in these words, Dan. 7.
8. As I considered the horns, behold, there came up among them another little
horn, before whom there were three of the first horns plucked away. And
behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking
presumptuous things.

And afterward, verse 23. The fourth beast shall be the fourth Kingdom in the
earth, which shall be unlike to all the Kingdoms, and shall devour the whole
earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces. And the ten horns
out of this Kingdom, are ten Kings that shall rise; and another shall rise
after them, and he shall be unlike to the first, and he shall subdue three
Kings, and shall speak words against the most high, and think that he may
change times and laws. Hitherto Daniell, whose Prophecy the event has
proved to be true. Mahomets birth and parentage.
For Anno Dom. 591. ( Mauritius then Emperor of the Romans and raining in
Constantinople) was Mahomet borne in Arabia, in a base village called
Itraripia. His parents were of diverse Nations, and different in Religion. His
father Abdallas was an Arabian: His mother Cadige a Jew both by birth and
profession. His parentage (according to most Histories) was so mean and base,
that both his birth and infancy remained obscure, and of no reckoning, till
that his riper years (bewraying in him a most subtle and crafty nature and
disposition) did argue some likelihood, that the sharpness and dexterity of
his wit would in time abolish the baseness and obscurity of his birth. And
soon did he make show and proof thereof: for being trained up of a boy in the
service of a rich and wealthy Merchant, by his great industry and diligence, he
so insinuated and wrought himself into the good favor and liking both of his
master and mistress, that when his master died, and had leaft all his wealth
and riches unto his wife, she made choice of her servant Mahomet for her
husband, making him Lord and Master both of her person, and of her substance.
The man being thus raised from base and low degree, to great wealth and
possessions, and having a working and aspiring head, did from thencefoorth plot
and imagine how he might raise himself in honor and reputation; presuming
that the greatness of his wealth would be a fit mean to work his higher
fortunes. Neither was he deceived in the expectation of his hope: For
consorting himself with one Sergius a fugitive Monk, a notable Heretic of
the Arrian Sect (whom he had made bounden unto him by his great liberality)
there grew so strict a league of amity and secret familiarity between them,
that they had many times private conference, how and by what means Mahomet
might make himself way to rise in honor and estimation. After much consulting
and debating of the matter, the best course which they conceived to effect
their purpose, was to coin a new kind of Doctrine and Religion, under color
whereof (the times then being troublesome, the people full of simplicity and
ignorance, Religion also waring cold, and neglected) they thought it an easy
matter to draw many followers unto them, and by that means to grow great in
the eye and opinion of the world. Hereupon these two helhounds (one of them
being an Arch enemy unto Christ and the truth of his Religion, and the other
seeming a mere Atheist or profane person, neither perfect Jew, nor perfect
Christian) patched up a particular doctrine unto themselves out of the old and
new Testament, deprauing the sense of both of them, and framing their opinions
according to their own corrupt and wicked affections; they brought forth a
monstrous and most devilish Religion, sauouring partly of Judaisme, partly of
Christianity, and partly of Arrianisme, as I will show you more particularly in
that which follows: But first mark (I pray you) how Daniels Prophecy
(before set down) is proved true.

Anno Dom. 623. Herachius being Emperor, Mahomet moved sedition, and
forthwith the Saracens or Arabians joined together these three dominions,
Egypt, Syria and Aphrica, which are the three horns plucked from those ten
horns of the fourth beast: and Daniel ascribes to this little horn, that is:
to the Turkish Empire, three notes whereby it may be known.

1. The first whereof is a new Law contrary to the Law of God. For the eyes do
signify a law subtly invented.

2. The second mark is, Blasphemy against the most high, which is Christ. For
the mouth speaking words against the true God, signifies blasphemies against
the Son of God.

3. The third note is Cruelty toward the Church; And he shall consume (says
he) the Saints of the most high.

4. The fourth is, an endeavor to Abolish the Gospel and the Church. He
shall think (says he) that he may change times and laws.

God would have this prophecy to be extant for a strengthening of the godly
against the cruelty of Turks, that when they should see the event to answer
to the prophecy, they might not be offended at the stumbling block of so
great persecution, and of such reuolting from the true Church. And therefore
being thus forewarned by the Prophet, let us take heart to our selves against
this Turkish tyranny and wickedness, especially seeing how the event has
answered to the prophecy. For there have four Monarchies been one after an
other. And now reigns a people which are enemies to God, that openly does
abolish the Prophetical and Apostolical Scriptures. Thus you may see how
fully Daniels prophecy is fulfilled.

I will now proceed to show more plainly how the Turks began, How the Turks
began.
multiplied, and increased.

Mahomet in his youth, by reason of his poverty, lived by theft and robbery.
Afterward having heaped much riches together, he was a soldier among his
country men the Arabians, under Heraclius. In the war he found occasion of
principality and power. For when the Arabians being offended with Heraclius for
denying them their pay, and for his religion had severed themselves from him,
Mahomet joined himself to the angried soldiers, and stirred up their minds
against their Emperor, and encouraged them in their defection. Whereupon, by a
certain company of Soldiers, he was chosen to be their Captain (as they
commonly are extolled in every commotion, which favor the wicked enterprise of
the rebellious people, and set upon the mighty, and governors.)

In this new Captain many could not abide the baseness of his birth, nor the
odiousness of his former life, especially, they loathed him for a disease he
had, which was the falling sickness. He therefore to redeem himself from this
contempt (which is an easy matter among the foolish common people) pretended a
divinity in his doings, faining himself to enter communication with God, and
so when he talked with him, to be ravished out of himself, and seemed like
unto one afflicted with the falling sickness. And therefore he said plainly
(but untruly) how he was no more a Captain, and Prince elected through the
favor of Soldiers, but a Prophet, and a messenger of Almighty God, that under
the show of Divinity, he might have all men the more obedient unto his words.

But, for as much as he was rude altogether and unlearned, he adjoined unto
himself two masters and counselors that were Christians: the one whereof was
Sergi^s an Arrian, and the other John Nestorius, to whom there came a third who
was a Jew, a Talmudist. Of which three, every one of them defended his several
sect.

Whereupon Mahomet supposing that he should not only gratify his companions,
but also the more easily allure all nations unto himself, received all, that
is: The pertinacie of Arius, the error of Nestorius, and the vain inventions
of the Thalmudist. And therefore he received from the Jew Circumcision; from
the Christians sundry washings, as it were Baptismes. And with Sergius he
denied the Divinity of Christ. Now some worshipped Idols, others were Baptized
and somewhat instructed in Christianity, who, as soon as they had left the
Roman Emperor for the hatred they bare against him, renounced forthwith the
Religion which he defended, even after the example of those ten tribes of
Israel, which reuolting from the house of David unto Jeroboam, 1. King. 12.
despised the laws of their Fathers, and went from the service of the only
true God, unto the innocation of devils.

Mahomets manner to enlarge and establish his kingdom was this, How the Turks
increased.
(which also his masters taught him.)

He said how God at the first, to mankind sent Moses; after him, Jesus Christ;
who were indewed with the power to work miracles. But men gave small heed to
them. Therefore he determined to send Mahomet, a warrier without miracles, that
whom miracles had not moved, weapons might compel.

He said, how he was the last messenger, and that after him none should come;
how Christ in the Gospel had prophesied of him, and how tidings was of him
through a wonderful light, which passed from Eua by succession of kind through
all women, even to his very mother.

See the subtlety of this dissembler and deceiuer Mahomet, who knowing that
he was destitue altogether of the heavenly gift to work miracles; he fained
that he was sent with the sword. But this Armed man at the length was
vanquished, and received a soar wound in his mouth, whereby he lost some of
his cheek teeth, and was thrown into a ditch, and pu^^o a shameful foil,
and that, the very day before he had (from the oracle of God) promised
victory to him and his. Yea, and while he was yet a common thief, he was
oftentimes beaten sore of the Drianites, whose Cammels he set upon returning
from Mecha.

And that City which has him now in honor, sometime adjudged him unto death,
as a very hurtful thief, and appointed a reward if any could bring him unto
them, either quick or dead.

This champion first a thief, afterward a seditious soldier, then a
runnagate, after that a Captain of a rebellious host, persuades light heads,
enemies to the true Religion, how he is the messenger of God; whereby we may
gather how great the power of Satan is in them, which embrace not the truth.
Whereof it is, that at this day that adversary of God defends his
blasphemies against God, by Turkish and Mahometicall force, according to the
prophecy of Daniel.

Of Mahomets laws and eight Commandments.
AND for the better broaching abroad of his deuilish religions he has
prescribed certain laws or Commandments, and fortified the same by Policy.

His laws are in number eight, which are partly Political and party
Ceremonial.

The first, concerning God: which is this.

1. God is a great God, and one only God, and Mahomet is the Prophet of God.

In this Commandment they acknowledge a God; and also Christ they acknowledge
to be a great Prophet: but deny him to be the Son of God, for God (say they)
had no wife, and therefore could have no son. But Mahomet they hold to be a
greater Prophet then Christ, and the last Prophet of all.

For it is a common saying amongst them, that Abraham was the friend of God,
Moses the messenger of God, Christ the breath of God, and that Mahomet was the
Prophet of God. They speak reverently of them all four, and punish as well
those that blaspheme Christ, as those that speak evil of Mahomet. Yea, they
acknowledge Christ to be the Son of the Virgin Mary, but not to have been
borne according to the common course of nature, but to have proceeded from her
breasts. And as for his conception by the holy Ghost, they know not what it
means; neither do they know whether there be any holy Ghost or not. But in
their prayers they often reiterate these words together, hu, hu, hu, that is:
he, he, he. In despite of all the Christians there is but one God; he, he, he,
alone is God. For they hold, because we acknowledge three persons, that
therefore we worship three Gods, and they acknowledge but one God, and are
altogether ignorant of the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity.

The second Commandment is, concerning their duty toward their Parents, in
these words.

2. Obey thy parents, and do nothing to displease them, either in word or deed.

How badly this duty is performed among them, I know by experience: for I did
never read or hear of more disobedient children to their parents, either in
word or deed.

The third is concerning their Neighbors, which is this:

3. Do unto others as thou would be done unto thy self.

Some of them are just in their dealings one with another: but most of them
unjust and deceitful in their proceedings with strangers, some few shopkeepers
only excepted.

The fourth is concerning prayer, wherein is required,

4. That every man five times a day repair to their Churches, to make public
prayer unto Mahomet.

The Turks have no bells, but very fair Churches, and high Steeples; and at
the hours of their public prayer they are called to Church by the voice of
Criers, who go up into their steeples, and cry with a loud voice, Come now and
worship the great God. And sometimes also thus: La Illa Eillala, Mahomet
Resullala: that is, God is a great God, and Mahomet is his Prophet. And
sometimes no more but thus: Ollah hethbar: that is, God is alone: that is,
There is but one God. And oftentimes there is but one Crier in one steeple. But
on their Sabbath day (which is friday) and at sundry other times, there are
many men crying and bauling in every steeple, like a kennell of hounds when
they have started their game.

The first meeting at public prayer every day, is before the rising of the
sun.

The second is about noone or midday, and on their Sabbath day two hours
sooner, and again at noone, so that they pray five times every day, and on
their Sabbath day, six times.

The third time for public prayer every day, is at the tenth hour of the day,
called by the Turks, Kindi; by the Moors, Assera, about three or four of the
clock after noone.

The fourth meeting is about sun setting.

The fifth and last hour of prayer, is two hours within night, before they
go to sleep.

Before they come to prayer, they prepare themselves thereunto by outward
washings of themselves, in token of reverence, and suffer no women to come to
their Churches, lest the sight of them should withdraw their minds from
prayer. And though they do not come to Church, yet when they hear the voice
of the Criers, they will pray wheresoever they be, and fall down and kiss the
ground three times.

Oftentimes also these Criers walk about the steeples in the euenings, and
sing (after their rude manner) David's Psalms in the Arabicke tongue. And when
rich men hear them sing well, and with clear voices, they are so delighted
therewith, that they use to send them money.

Their fifth Commandment is concerning fasting, viz.

5. That one Moon in the year, every one (of any reasonable age) spend the
whole time in fasting.

They have but one Lent in the year, and then they fast generally in this
manner: When the new moon changes, which they call Romadan, then during all
that moon, they fast all the day long betwixt sun rising and sun setting,
and neither eat nor drink any thing at all. But when the sun sets, then
the crier calls them to Church, and after they have prayed, then they may eat
what kind of meat they will (saving swines flesh, which is forbidden by their
Law) and as often as they will, until sun rising: so that their Lent is but a
changing of day into night. During this moon Romadan, they observe this kind
of abstinence very strictly. And so soon as the next moon changes, which
they call Byram, then their Lent ends, and they hold a feast for three days
space together. At which time (they say) Mahomet delivered unto them their law.

Their sixth Commandment is concerning Almesdeeds.

6. Let every man, out of his store, give unto the poor, liberally, freely,
and voluntarily.

Their Alms is either public or private.

Their public Alms is a sacrifice or offering of some beast for a sacrifice
unto Mahomet once every year: which being killed, it is cut into small pieces,
and given all to the poor.

Their private Alms (notwithstanding their Law) is much neglected; for I have
heard of many poor people who have died amongst them for want of relief: and
in the way as I have traveled, I have found some dead for hunger and cold. And
though a man be never so poor, yet if he be not able to pay his Head money to
the King yearly, they are beaten, and their women and children sold to pay it.
I^ our murmuring and impatient poor were here but a short time, they would
learn to be more thankful to God and man, and how to esteem of a benefit
bestowed on them, and not curse and revile (as many of them do) if any one
that passes by them do not give unto them. The Turks are more merciful to
birds, cats, and dogs, than to the poor.

Their seventh Commandment is concerning Marriage.

7. That every man must of necessity marry, to increase and multiply the Sect
and Religion of Mahomet.

Their custom is to buy their wives of their parents, and never to see them
until they come to be married: and their marriage is nothing but enrolling in
the Cadies book. And it is lawful for them to take as many wives as they
will, or as many as they are able to keep. And whenever he disliketh any one
of them, it is their use to sell them or give them to any of their men-slaues.
And although they love their women never so well, yet they never sit at table
with men, no not with their husbands, but wait at table and serve him, and when
he has dined, they dine in secret by themselves, admitting no man or mankind
amongst them, if he be above twelve years of age. And they never go abroad
without leave of their husbands, which is very seldom, except it be either to
the Bannio or hot Bath, or once a week to weep at the graves of the dead,
which is usually on Thursday, being the Ene before their Sabbath, which is
Friday, and the Jews Sabbath on Saturday, and the Christians on Sunday, three
Sabbath days together in one Country. If their husbands have been abroad, at
his entrance into the house, if any one of their women be sitting on a stool,
she rises up, and boweth herself to her husband, and kisseth his hand, and
sets the same stool for him, whereon they sat, and stand so long as he is
in presence.

If the like order were in England, women would be more dutiful and faithful
to their husbands than many of them are: and especially, if there were the like
punishment for whores, there would be less whoredom: for there, if a man have
an hundred women, if any one of them prostitute herself to any man but her
own husband, he has authority to bind her, hands and feet, and cast her
into the river with a stone about her neck, and drown her. And this is a
common punishment amongst them; but it is usually done in the night. And the
man, if he be taken, is dismembered.

But the daughters and sisters of the great Turk are more free than all other
men and women. For when their brethren die, they live: and when they come to
years of marriage, their father (if he be living) or brother (if he be King)
will give unto them, for their husbands, the greatest Bashawes or Viziers whom
they shall affect, and say unto them, Daughter, or sister, I give thee this man
to be thy slave and bedfellow: and if he be not loving, dutiful, and obedient
unto thee, here, I give thee a Canzhare (that is, a dagger) to cut off his
head. And always after, those daughters or sisters of the King wear a broad
and sharp dagger: and whenever their husbands (which are given unto them by
the King to be their slaves) displease them, they may and do cut off their
heads.

They exempt no calling from marriage, but hold it a blessing from God to have
many children: and the desire of many children makes them take many wives. The
Great Turk has many hundred, yea (as I have heard) a thousand women only for
his own use. And yet, as Augustus Caesar spoke of Herod, when he killed his
own two sons Alexander and Aristobulus, with the infants of Bethlem, rather
than he would fail of his purpose in killing Christ, It is better to be
Herod's hog than his son; for his hogs lived, but his sons died: So it
is better to be the Great Turks hog than his son: for they (being
forbidden by their Law to eat swines flesh, kill no hogs, but all the sons
of the Great Turk are strangled to death by their eldest brother (after the
death of their father) to avoid treason.

A devilish policy, Hatto.
and like unto that of Hatto a Bishop of Mentz or Magunce in Germany, who (as
the Cronicles mention) 500. years ago, in time of a great dearth, called all
the poor people in all the whole Country, into a great barn, pretending to
make a great dole: But having them sure enough, he fired the barn, and burnt
them all up, saying, These be the Rats and Mice which devour up the corn.
This was his policy to make bread better cheap. But for this unmerciful
mercy, God made him an example for all unmerciful men, to the worlds end. For
a multitude of Rats came and devoured him, in such terrible sort, that where
his name was written in windows, walls, or hangings, they never ceased till
it were razed out; and drove him from house to house to save his life. And
where he had a strong Tower in the midst of the great River of Rhene, which
yet stands there to be seen in the midst of the River, he thought himself
sure if he could fly thither: Notwithstanding, the Rats swamme after him
thither, and there devoured him: And it is called the Rats tower to this day,
as Travelers know, and I my self have seen this present year 1608. July 7.
It stands on a little Jland in the midst of the River of Ryne, betwixt the
Cities Mentz and Cullyn, or Colonia, near unto a Town called Bingam on the
one side of the River, and another Town called Baccara, on the other side the
River, where is made the best Rhenish wine in all Almania. Not far from
Sanquer, where there is a choler of iron fastened to a wall, whereinto all
fresh Travelers are enforced, by their company, to put in their necks, to make
them free, and are enhansed at Bobar usually, or at Sanquer, if they lodge
there.

SVLTAN Mahomet (this great Turks father) when he came to the Crown, put to
death 19. of his brethren (according to the custom of his predecessors) as a
wicked policy to prevent treason.

The Persians are yet somewhat better, (although too bad) where the eldest
son is king after the death of his father, and all the rest of their brethren
have their eyes put out, yet live.

Other Turks have three wives, and have as many womenslaues as they can keep,
whom they use as wives, and esteem them equal with their wives.

The manner of their marriage is this. First, if a man like a young woman, he
buyeth her of her father, and gives a great summne of money for her, and then
enrolleth her in the Cadies book, that he has bought her of her Father for
his wife, and then the friends feast and banquet together, and this is all they
perform in marriage. Only the father of the young woman gives great store of
household stuff with her, and this is carried openly by particulars through the
streets of the city on horses or Cammels, and sometime by men and women, the
parties newly married going before with music playing before them.

Their eight Commandment is the same with our sixth.

8. Thou shall not kill.

In their Alcoran it is written that God hates murder. And they say, that it
is the second sin which crept into the world after the creation, being first
committed by cursed Cain, who killed his brother Abel. And their belief is,
that this sin of wilful murder is impardonable. But if it be by mere
chance, or in their own defense, or else in lawful wars, or in cases of
justice by the Maiestrate they hold it lawful.

Often have I heard Turks brawle one with another, and in words most vilely
revile one another; but never did I see or hear of two Turks in their private
quarrels strike one another, neither dare they strike one another, for if they
do, they are presently brought before the Maiestrate, and severely punished.
Yea, if one do but lift up his hand to strike another, he is cast into
prison, and kept in irons, until he have paid some great fine, or received
some other punishment. But they will strike Jews and Christians oftentimes,
who dare not strike them again. If a man in secret be killed and found dead,
either openly in the street, or privately in an house, the master of the
house, or the parish where he dwells must find out the murderer, otherwise
he himself shall be accused of murder, and both he, and the whole Contrado
where he dwells must pay unto the Subbashaw so many hundred Dollers as shall
be required at their hands.

And therefore the Subbashaws oftentimes being wicked men, do hire some
desperate person to kill a man in the night, that thereby he may take occasion
to eat of the whole Contrado. William Matrin. Anno Dom. 1603. Sept. 18.
We had an English man, not long since, who sleeping on the Tarras, (that is,
on the top of the house) in the night, (as the custom of the contrie is in the
heat of Summer) who had his throat cut being asleep in bed, by two or three
wicked men, who came from the street by a ladder to the top of the house; and
after they had committed this murder, being discried by the barking of a dog,
and seen also by the master of the house through his chamber windowwhere he
slept, (but not plainly discerned being somewhat dark) they made haste down
again, and were never known. leames Sapers.
But on the morrow after, the master of the house (an English man also) was in
trouble himself, because he could not find out the murderers, and it cost him
an hundredth Dollers at the least before he could be freed, and the whole
Contrado or Parish, was also fined.

In like sort, if an house be robbed, he who is robbed, must either find out
the thief, or else he himself shall be troubled for it, and put to a great
fine.

If an house be but endangered by fire either by the burning of a chimney, or
any other small part thereof without great harm, yet they will lay to his
charge, who dwells therein, that he would have burnt the whole City; and
take from him all that he has, and imprison him as long as they please. Such
secret murderers, thieves, and violent oppressors are they; though their laws
forbid murder and theft, and they themselves know those to be guiltless whom
they Turks call that eating, which we call oppression or extortion.
eat upon, and imprison.

Yea, Mahomet himself allows to his contrimen the Arabians, that is, to
poor men, accustomed to live upon the spoil, he allows theft, and sets a
law of reuengement. Hurt him (says he) which hurts you. He says also, He
that either kills his enemy or is killed by his enemy, enters into
Paradise.

And it is (...) unusual thing amongst them, specially for lenesaries, to kill
their servants as Butchers kill Calves, and throw them into a ditch when they
have done: and oftentimes for small offenses lay them down on their ha^ks and
(...) up their heels, and bind their feet together and (...) a coul staff,
and with a great cudgel give them two or three hundred blows on the soles of
their feet: after which punishment they are not able to stand on their feet
for the space of many days, and some of them go lame always after.

Servants there are as usually bought and sold in the market with them, as
brute beasts amongst us, whom they use as slaves in all kind of drudgerie. It
it better to be a servant in England, then a master over many servants in
Turkey.

These are the eight Commandments of Mahomet.

But the two chiefest points forbidden in the Alcoran, are, the eating of
swines flesh, and the drinking of wine. Yet many of them drink wine until
they be drunken: but I never heard of any Turks would eat swines flesh.

The things considered, being so fond and rediculous, it may seem strange,
that men of courage in Turkey, do not forsake this deceiuer and deluder of
mankind.

But it is the less strange if we consider how he has fortified his law with
four bulwarks or strong defenses.

1. First, he commands to kill them which speak against the Alcoran. And
therefore no man dare gainesay or deny any thing contained in their Alcoran:
but whosoever shall dare either to dispute against that book, or to doubt of
any Article therein written, he shall be sure, either to have his tongue pulled
out of his head, or else his body to be burnt and consumed with fire.

2. Secondly, he forbids conference to be had with men of a contrary sect or
religion.

3. Thirdly, he forbids credit to be given to any beside the Alcoran.

4. Fourthly, he commands them to separate themselves altogether from other
men, and to say, Let me have my law, and take you yours: ye are free from, that
which I do, and I likewise from that which you do. And herein I hold it
better for Merchants and other Christians to soiourne and to use trade and
traffic amongst Turks then Papists; for, the Turk gives liberty of
conscience to all men, and likes well of every man that is forward and zealous
in his own religion.

But among the Papists no man can buy and sell, Unless he bear the marks of
the beast as S. John foretold, Revelation 13. 17.

Moreover, to drive away all fear of damnation from the minds of his
Disciples, Mahomet tells them, that every man shall be saved by his own
Religion (he only excepted which reuolteth from the Alchoran unto another Law)
The jews by the Law of Moses; Christians by the Law of the Gospel; and the
Saracens by the Law of Mahomet. And they hold, that at the day of judgment all
shall appear under three banners; The Jews under the banner of Moses, and
Christians under the banner of Christ, and Turks and other Mahometans under
Mahomets banner, and under their conduct enter into Paradise, which they
describe after an earthly, sensual, and brutish manner; affirming, Mahomets
paradise.
That the ground of Paradise is of golD, which is distinguished with precious
stones, and sweet flowers set thick together, planted with all fruitful
trees, the pleasant rivers running through the green fields, whereof some power
out milk, others white honey, others the purest wine; and that there they
shall be clothed with all sorts of colors, except black. And therefore the
Turks to this day wear no black; but when they see a man clothed in black,
many of them will go back, and say they will fly from him who shall never
enter into Paradise. Yet whosoever will live in quiet amongst them, must A note
for travelers.
neither meddle with their Law, their Women, nor their slaves.

Mahomets coming to judgment was expected 20. years since; for their belief
was, that Mahomet would come again at the end of 1000. years (as he promised
them) and bring them to Paradise: which time expiring, and he not coming, they
have dealt more favorably with him, and given him longer time; for they say he
was extremely sick when he was asked of the time of his coming, and that he
answered them with such a low voice, that he could not well be understood: and
that they which reported that he would return at the end of 1000. years,
mistook him, for that he meant 2000. years. At which time, if he do not come
(according to promise) they will look for him no longer, nor belacute;eve in
him any more, but become Christians.

The Moors are more ancient dwellers in Aleppo than Turks, and more forward
and zealous in Mahometisme than Turks: yea all the Churchmen amongst the
Turks are Moors, whom the Turks count a base people (in regard of
themselves) and call them Tots. Yet their Churchmen they have in great
reverence; and not only theirs, but they reverence Churchmen of all nations,
and call them holy men, Saints, and men of God.

I my self have had great experience hereof both in the place of my abode at
Aleppo, and in my journey toward Jerusalem, and in other places. In Aleppo as
I have walked in the streets, both Turks, and Moors, and other Nations, would
very reverently salute me after the manner of their Country: yea their very
soldiers, as I have walked in the fields, with many other of our Nation,
without a Ienesarie to guard us, though they have been many hundreds together,
yet have they not offered either me or any of my company wrong, for my sake,
but have said one to another, Hadah Cassies; that is, This is a Churchman, and
therefore take heed what you do unto him, for he is a good man, etc.

At Jerusalem many strangers of sundry Nations understanding that I was an
English Preacher, came and kissed my hand, and called me the English Patriarch.
Yea in all my ten years travels, I never received, neither was offered wrong
by any Nation but mine own Countrymen, and by them chiefly whom it chiefly
concerned to protect me from wrongs: yet have I found them most forward to
offer me wrong only for doing my duty, and following the order of our Church of
England: knowing that I had none of the Reverend Fathers of our Church to
defend me. So would it be in England, if we had not the Reverend Fathers in God
the Lord Bishops of our Church to protect us. All other Nations, both Heathen
and Christian, go before us herein, in reuerencing and providing for their
Churchmen. The Turks honor their Muftie (which is their chief Ruler in
Ecclesiastical matters, next under the Grand Signior) as an Angel: The
Nostranes, Greeks, Armenians, Chelfalines, and Christians of all other
Nations, perform double honor unto them: only in England, where there is a
more learned Ministry (I speak by experience) than in any Nation in the
world, they are least of all regarded: Which makes our Adversaries, the
Papists, say, (as I have heard some of them speak in my hearing, many thousand
miles from England) that if we our selves were persuaded of the truth of our
Religion, we would reverence our Churchmen as they do, and not scorn them and
contemn them as we do.

They also account fools, dumb men, and mad men, Santones, that is, Saints.
And whatsoever such mad men say or do, though they take any thing out of their
house, or stricke them, and wound them, yet they take it in good part, and say,
that they shall have good luck after it. And when such mad men die, they
Canonize them for Saints, and erect stately Monuments over their graves, as we
have here many examples, especially of one who (being mad) went always naked,
whose name was Sheh Boubac, Sheh Boubac.
at whose death they bestowed great cost on his funeral, and erected an house
over his grave, where (to this day) there are Lamps burning night and day, and
many idle fellows (whom they call Daruises) there maintained to look unto his
sepulcher, and to receive the offerings of such as come to offer to Sheh
Boubac, which they take to themselves, and there is no week but many come out
of the City of Aleppo and other places, to offer. For this sepulcher is built
on an hill, three miles from Aleppo, between the Kings garden and the
fountain of fishes. If any be sick, or in danger, they vow that if they
recover or escape, they will offer so much money, or this or that good thing to
Sneh Boubac.

There is also such another Bedlam Saint in Aleppo yet living, Sheh Mahammet a
naked Santone.
whom they call Sheh Mahammet a Santone, who goes always naked, with a spit
on his shoulders; and as he goes through the streets, the shopkeepers will
offer him their rings; and if he thrust his spit through their rings, they take
it for a favor, and sign of good success: The like account they make if he
take any thing from their shop boards, or bor them or any of their house: yea
they are yet more mad upon this mad man than so, for both men and women will
come unto him, and kiss his hand, or any other part, sometimes his thighs, and
ask him counsel, for they hold that mad men's souls are in heaven talking
with God, and that he reuealeth secrets unto them. In regard whereof, the
Bashawes themselves oftentimes, and chief Captains will come unto him with
some present, and kiss some part of his naked body, and ask him whether they
shall go to battle or not, and what success they shall have in war: And
look whatsoever he says, they hold it for an Oracle.

Not long since, the Turks had a victory against the Christians; and at their
return, they reported that this naked Santone Sheh Mahammet of Aleppo was
seen naked in the field fighting against their enemies, and that by his help
they overcame them, although he were not near them by many thousand miles.
Whereby you may see how the Devil does delude them still, as he did their
forefathers at the first by Mahomets Machiaucilian devices.

Their Daruises also they have in such reputation, Daruises.
that often times great Bashawes, when they are in dissauour with the King, and
fear either loss of life, or goods, or both, to avoid danger, will turn
Daruises, and then they account themselves priuileged persons from the rigor
of their Law.

The witness of a Daruise or of a Churchman, will pass better than any man's
witness besides, yea better than Shereffes whom they account of Mahomets
kindred, and they are known from others by their green Shashes, which no man
else may wear: for green, they account Mahomets color, and if they seeany
Christian wearing a garment of that color, they will cut it from his back,
and beat him, and ask him how he dare presume to wear Mahomets color, and
whether he be kine to God or not?. This I have known put in practice upon
Christians (not acquainted with the customs of the country) since my coming:
one for having but green shooestrings, had his shoes taken away. Another
wearing green breeches under his Gown (being espied) had his breeches cut
off, and he reviled and beaten.

We of more knowledge come far behind them in reuerencing the Preachers of the
truth, and providing for them; and it is to be feared that they shall rise up
at the day of judgment and condemn us herein.

The Turks have no Printing amongst them, but all their Law and their Religion
is written in the Morisco tongue, that is the Arabicke tongue. And he is
accounted a learned man amongst them, that can write and read. And as for the
Latin tongue, he is a rare man amongst them that can speak it. Some few amongst
them have the Italian tongue: and many (especally in and about Constantinople)
speak the vulgar Greek, that is Romeica tongue. For in Constantinople there
are as many Grecians and Hebrews, as Turks.

The poor, amongst the Moors and Turks at Aleppo, beg oftentimes Syntana
Fissa.
in the streets in the name and for the sake of Syntana Fissa, who was (as they
say) a whore of charity, and would prostitue her self to any man Bacshese (as
they say in the Arabicke tongue) that is gratis freely.

The Diet of the Turks is not very sumptuous, Diet of the Turks. Pilawe.
for the most common dish is Pilaw, which is good sauory meat made of Rise, and
small morsels of Mutton boiled therein, and sometimes roasted Buckones, (that
is, small bits or morsels of flesh.) Their more costly fare is Sambouses and
Muclebites. Sambouses are made of paste like a great round Pastie with variety
of herbs and meats therein, not minced but in Buckones. A Muclebite is a
dish made of Eggs and herbs. Their smaller Sambouses are more common, not so
big as a man's hand, like a square Pastie, with minsed meat therein. They have
also variety of Helloway, that is, sweet meats compounded in such sort as are
not to be seen elsewhere. The poorer sort feed on herbs and fruits of the
trees. Coffa.
Their most common drink is Coffa, which is a black kind of drink made of a
kind of Pulse like Pease, called Coaua; which being grownd in the mill, and
boiled in water, they drink it as hot as they can suffer it; which they find
to agree very well with them against their crudities and feeding on herbs and
rawemeates.

Other compound drinks they have called Sherbet, made of water and Sugar, or
honey, with snow therein to make it cool; for although the country be hot,
yet they keep snow all the year long to cool their drink.

It is accounted a great courtesy amongst them to give unto their friends when
they come to visit them, a Fin-ion or Scudella of Coffa, which is more wholesome
than toothsome, for it causes good concoction, and drives away drowsinesse.
Some of them will also drink Bersh or Opium, which makes them forget
themselves, and talk idly of Castles in the air, as though they saw visions,
and heard Revelations.

Their Coffa houses are more common than Alehouses in England; but they use
not so much to sit in the houses as on benches on both sides the streets near
unto a Coffa house, every man with his Fin-ion full; which being smoking hot,
they use to put it to their noses and ears, and then sup it off by leisure,
being full of idle and Alehouse talk whiles they are amongst themselves
drinking of it; if there be any news, it is talked of there. They have also
excellent good fountain waters in most places of that country, which is a
common drink amongst them, especially in Summer time, and in their travels at
all times of the year.

Some of our Merchants have weighed their water and ours in England when they
have come home, and have found their water lighter then ours by four ounces in
the pound; and the lighter the water is, the more pleasant it is to drink, and
goes down more delectably, as if it were milk rather than water.

In great Cities where the fountains are either far off, or not so
plentiful, there are certain poor men which go about the streets from
morning to night with a Bears skin full of water, sowed up and fastened
about his stoulders like a Tinkers budget, with a bole of brass in his hand,
and offreth water freely to them that pass by, except they give them any thing
in courtesy, (some seldom times.)

The greatest part of them are very courteous people amongst Salutations of the
Turks.
themselves, saluting one another at their meetingwith their hand on their
breast (for they never uncover their head) with these words: Salam Alike
Sultanum: that is, peace be unto you Sir. Whereunto the other replieth, Alekem
Salam, that is: Peace be to you also. And sometime thus: Elph Marhabba ianum.
Or in Turkish thus: Hosh Geldanos, Sophi Geldanos: that is: Welcome my dear
friend. And in the morning, Subalkier Sultanum, that is, good morrow Sir: and
in the evening thus. Misalker Sultanum, that is: good even Sir.

And when friends and acquaintance meet, who have not seen one another many
days before, they salute one another in Turkish, thus: Neder halen? that is:
how do you? In Arabic thus, Ish halac Seedi? that is: How do you Sir? And
Ish babtac? that is: how does thy Gate? (meaning all within his gate) And so
proceed by particulers to ask how does thy Child, slave, horse, cat, dog,
ass, etc. and every thing in the house, except his wife; for that is held a
very unkind question, and not usual amongst them. And if a man come to their
houses, and at the door enquire of the children for their father, they will
answer him: but if he enquire for the mother, they will throw stones at him
and revile him.

Their women (as has been showed before) have little liberty to come abroad,
except it be on the Eve before their Sabbath, (which is Thursday) to weep at
the graves of the dead, or to the Bannios or hot Bathes to wash themselves (as
the use of the contry is.) And when they come abroad, they are always masked;
for it is accounted a shame for a woman to be seen barefaced: yea, they are
so jealous and suspicious over them, that fathers will not suffer their own
sons, after they come to fourteen years of age, to see their mothers.

These be their common salutations one to another.

Their more special salutations to great personages are these.

When a man comes to salute the great Turk, or Grand Signior himself (into
whose presence few are admitted except Ambassadors and great Personages) they
are led between two by the arms, for fear of a stab, by which means one of
their Grand Signiors was once killed, and when they return, they go
backwards; for it is accounted a disgrace to turn their back-parts to a great
man. In like manner they salute their Bashawes and other great men, (but not
led by the arms) but with their hands on the breast, bowing down their heads
to kiss the skirt of his garment, pronouncing these words, Ollah towal omrac
Seedi. That is: God prolong your days Sir. And so long as they talk with a
Bashaw they stand with their hands on their breast maiden-like, and bow low at
their departure, and go backward. They never uncover their heads unto any man,
no not to the King himself; yea, it is a word of reproach amongst them to say
when they mislike a matter, I had as live thou shewedst me thy bare head.

They call one another diversely, and not always by their names, but sometimes
by their fathers Calling, trade, or degree: as Eben Sultan, that is, The son
of a King: Eben Terzi, The son of a Tailor.

And sometimes by their father qualities, as Eben Sacran, that is, The son of
a Drunkard.

And sometimes by their marks, as Colac cis, that is, A man without ears:
Cowsi Sepher, that is Sepher with the thin beard.

And sometimes by their Stature, as Tow-ill, that is, A tall man: Sgire
rugiall, that is, A little man.

And sometimes by their Offices, as I-asgee, that is, A Secretary: Nibe, that
is, A Clerk, etc.

And sometimes by their humors, as Chiplac, that is, A naked man; Or, One who
was of a humor to wear no clothes but breeches.

But their common word of courtesy either to strangers, or such whose names
they know not, or whom they purpose to reverence, is Chillabee, that is,
Gentleman. And there is no man amongst them of any degree, will refuse to
answer to any of these names. But if nature have marked them either with gogle
eyes, bunch backs, lame legs, or any other infirmity or deformity, as they
are known by it, so they are content to be called by it.

But they that have gone on pilgrimage to their holy City Mecha, where their
Prophet Mahomet was buried, at their return are called Hogies, that is,
Pilgrims, as Hogie Tahar, Hogie Mahammet, etc. which is counted a word of
great grace and credit amongst them. And the witness of an Hogie will be taken
before any other.

Of the Arabians.
TThere are also many Arabians in Aleppo, called vulgarly, Arabs or Bedweens.
They call themselves Saracens, of Sara; but they are rather Ishmalites, of
Ishmael Abraham's son by Hagar, and therefore also called Hagarens. But some
take them to be of the race of the Sabaeans, which were wild and savage
people, of Sabaea, a Country in the middle of Arabia, toward the East,
environed with great Rocks, where is great store of Cynnomon and Casia,
Frankincense and Myrrh, which people came of Sheba, nephew to Ketura and
Abraham. Their native Country was Arabia, a Country in Asia, between Iudaea
and Egypt, so called of Arabus the son of Apollo. It is divided into three
Regions, which are these, Arabia Petrea, Arabia Deserta, and Arabia Foelix. But
at this day they have no certain Country or place of abode, but wander up and
down thorowout all Syria, Assyria, Gallely, Iudaea, Palestina, and Egypt. And
as in Jobs tune they lived by theft and robbery and spoil of men, so do they
also to this present day. They have two Kings at this day, viz. Dandan and
Aborisha; the one their lawful King, the other an Usurper; and some follow the
one, and some the other, and are bitter enemies one to another; yet have I
seldom heard of any great wars betwixt them, for they seldom meet. They never
come into any walled Towns or Cities, for fear of treason: but live in tents,
and are here to day, and many hundred miles off within few days after.

They are a base, beggarly, and rogish people; wandering up and down, and
living by spoil, which they account no sin, because they are Mahomets
Countrymen, and he allowed them liberty to live by theft. Yet their Kings do
no great harm, but take toule or tribute of the Carauans as they pass by,
which if they pay willingly, they pass quietly, and are not robbed, but a
little exacted upon.

One of their Kings has often times pitched his tents near unto the City of
Aleppo, and many Merchants being desirous to see them and their order, took
occasion to present him with some small present or other, which he took very
kindly, and admitted them to his table, and gave them a tent to lodge in all
night: on the morrow for breakfast one of them made him a minsed pie, and set
it before him hot as it came out of the oven: But as Diogines accustomed to
feed on roots, having a piece of a tart given him to eat, and as he was eating
it, being asked what it was, answered that it was bread; and when he was
laughed at for his answer, he said again, Either it is bread of a very good
making, or bread very well handled in the baking: So this Synicall or
Diogenicall King accustomed to feed grossly, having never seen a pie or pastie
before, marvelled what it was: And when he saw it cut up and opened, and
perceived smoke to come out of it, shrunk back, fearing it had been some
engine to destroy him, and that the fire would follow after the smoke. But when
he perceived no fire followed the smoke, he was content to taste of it, and
highly commended it, as the daintiest dish that ever he tasted of in his life.

These Arabian Kings never keep any money in their purses, but spend it as
fast as they find it, and when they want, with their sword they seek a new
purchase. Some are soldiers, fighting faithfully on any side that will give
them pay. Some of this rogish Arabian race follow neither of their Kings, but
wander from place to place in caves and rocks, and live by their sword, not
only robbing, but killing such as they can overcome. Others of them (of a
better mind) soiourne in Cities of trade and traffic, and make themselves
servants to any Nation that will set them on work, and well reward them. Some
of them are horse-keepers, some Bastages, that is, Porters, and some
vnder-cookes in kitchins, and are very serviceable. But for the most part their
lodgings are on some dunghill or other, or odd corner of the City, with some
silly tent over their heads. Their wives wear rings in their noses, either of
silver or brass, fastened to the middle gristle of their nose, and color their
lips blew with Indico, and go always bare legged and (...), with (...) or
rings of brass aboe their ancles and bracelets of brass about their hands.
They are people which can and do (...) go at (...) and misery, both for diet
and lodging. Their women are skillful in mourning and crying by art, and
therefore they are hired to cry at the funerals of Turks and Moors
oftentimes, tearing their hair, and making all their face blew with Indico;
The chiefest thing that I have observed in them, worth praise, is this, that
they retain the use of speaking their natural tongue to this day, speaking
the Arabicke naturally, which is a far more learned language than the
Turkish: for as the Turks Religion is a mixed Religion, compounded of many
Religions; so is their language also a medly language, or (as I may justly call
it) a link wolfie Religion and language, compounded of many other languages,
wherein nothing is written. But the Arabian tongue is a learned language,
wherein Aui^en and many learned Physicians have written much, and to this day
the Turks Alcoran and all their Law and Religion is written in the Arabicke
tongue, which is one of those Oriental Languages which depend on the Hebrew
tongue, wherein because you have some knowledge, and are studious in the
tongues, (according to your request in your last letters) I will acquaint you
what languages are here spoken, and which languages are most common and
commendable to travelers to go furthest withal. There are here spoken so
many several languages as there are several Nations here dwelling or
soiourning, every Nation (amongst themselves) speaking their own language. And
here are of most Nations in the world some, who either come with their
Merchandise to sell or by commodities, or soiourne here as strangers, or else
have access, and recesse to this City as travelers. But of all Christian
languages, the Italian tongue is most used, and therewithal a man may travel
furthest. But of all the Orientoll tongues, these four are most spoken in
these parts, Arabicke, Turkish, Armenian, and Persian, or Agimesco: Of every
one of which languages (that you may see how they differ) I will show you how
they number from one to twenty, to satisfy your expectation.

The manner of numbering in four Oriental tongues
Arabicke, or Morisco.
1 Wheheed. One. And so they proceed from twenty to a thousand, as for
example thus. 2 Tenteene. Two. 3 Telate. Three. 4 Arbah. Four. 5 Camse. Five.
6 Site. Six. 7 Sebbah. Seven. Whehed Ashrine. 21 8 Temene. Eight. Telatine. 30
9 Tissa. Nine. 10 Ashera. Ten. Arbine. 40 11 Edash. Eleven. Camseen. 50 12
Tentash. Twelve. Se^teen. 60 13 Telatash. Thirteen. Sebbain. 70 14 Arbatash.
Fourteen. 15 Camsetash. Fifteen. Temenin. 80 16 Sittash. Sixteen. Tissaine.
90 17 Sebbatash Seventeen. Me. 100 18 Tementash. Eighteen. Me teene. 200 19
Tissatash. Nineteen. 20 Ashreen. Twenty. Elph. 1000

Turkish Armenian 1 Beer. One. 1 Mecke. 2 Echee. Two. 2 Ergucke. 3 Euch. Three.
3 Ericke. 4 Dirt. Four. 4 Chouers. 5 Besch. Five. 5 Hincke. 6 Altee. Six. 6
Vites. 7 Yeadee. Seven. 7 Yeota. 8 Sechees. Eight. 8 Outa. 9 Dochees. Nine. 9
Vina. 10 Ontemaunt. Ten. 10 Danomecke. 11 Onbeer. Eleven. 11 Dastegucke. 12
Onechee. Twelve. 12 Daswericke. 13 Onuch. Thirteen. 13 Dasnochouers. 14
Ondurt. Fourteen. 14 Daswincke. 15 Onbesh. Fifteen. 15 Dasno^uites. 16
Onaltee. Sixteen. 16 Dasnuota. 17 Onedee. Seventeen. 17 Dasnouta. 18
Onsechees. Eighteen. 18 Dasuonine. 19 Ondocouz. Nineteen. 19 Exan. 20 Egreme.
Twenty. 20 Exsan on mecke.

Persian or Agimesc^.
1 Euck. 12 Couandesdak. 2 Du. 13 Sisdah. 3 See. 14 Choucdah. 4 Chohac. 15
Pounsdah. 5 Panche. 16 Shemisdah. 6 Sh^ch. 17 Hesktah. 7 Haste. 18 H^shtittah.
8 Hastit. 19 Noados 9 Nou. 20 Bist. 10 Dah. 21 Bist Euck. etc. 11 Yeandesdah.

Of the Jews.
BEsides all these Mahometans (which I have already named) there are many Jews
in Constantinople, Aleppo, Damascus, Babylon, Grand Cayro, and every great
City and place of Merchandise throughout all the Turks dominions, who are
known by their hatts: for they were accustomed to wear red hatts without
br^^mes at my first coming: But lately (the head Vizier being their enemy)
they are constrained to wear hatts of blewe cloth, because red was accounted
too stately and princelike a color for them to wear.

They are called by three names, which were given to them of old. First, they
are called Hebrews, (as some suppose) of Heber the fourth from Noah, in whom
the hebrew tongue remained at the confusion of tongues, whence he had his name.
But S. Augustine and other fathers affirm, that they were first called
Hebreweof Abraham, with the alteration of a few letters, Hebraei quasi
Abrahaei, that is, Hebrews as it were Abrahites.

Secondly they were called Israelites from Jacob surnamed Israel, whose
grandfathers Abraham was.

Thirdly, they were called Jews, after that Juda and Benjamin (which for the
unity of minds were (as it were one Tribe) following Rehoboam the son of
Solomon of the tribe of Judah, made the kingdom of Judah. The other ten betaking
them to Jeroboam of the tribe of Ephraim, set up the kingdom of the Ephramites
or Israel. And what became of those ten tribes, the Jews acknowledge
themselves to be ignorant. Only some of their Rabbis think them to be in
Tarracia: the only reason which I have heard them allege for their opinion is
this, because they often understand by Tartarians who came from thence to use
merchandise in Aleppo and else where, that there are many amongst them called
by Hebrew names to this day. Of these three names whereby they are known, the
most common name whereby they are called at this day is, the name of Jews. One
and the same people thrice changed their names, and often the place of their
abode: And to this day they have no king nor country proper to themselves, but
are dispersed throughout the whole world, and in every place where they come,
they are contemptible and of base account, Matthew. 27. 25.
according to the cry of those crucifiers. His blood be upon us and our
children, which is fulfilled this day in our ears and eyes. They are of more
vile account in the sight of Turks then Christians; in so much that if a Jew
would turn Turk, he must first turn Christian before they will admit him to
be a Turk. Yea, it is a word of reproach amongst the Turks, and a usual
protestation amongst them, when they are falsely accused of any crime, to clear
themselves they use to protest in this manner, If this be true; then God grant
I may die a Jew, And the Jews in like cases use to say, If this be not a
false accusation, then God grant I may dye a Christian, praying better for
themselves then they believe, and as all of them must be that shall be saved.
And the poor Christians soiourning and dwelling in these parts do hate them
very uncharitably and irreligiously: (in that we read Romans 11. many arguments
proving that they shall be converted again.) for on good friday in many
places (especially at Zante) they throw stones at them, insomuch that they dare
not come out of their houses all that day, and yet are scarce in safety in
their houses, for they use to throw stones at their windows and doors, and on
the roof of their houses. On thrusday about noone, the Jews begin to keep
within doors, and continue there with their doors shut until saturday about
noone, for if they come forth before that time they are sure to be stoned, but
after noone on Easter eve if they come abroad, they may pass as quietly as
ever they did. These in their blind zeal think to be revenged on them for
whom Christ prayed saying, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

And some ignorant Christians refuse to eat of their meat or bread: their
reason is, because the Jews refuse to eat or drink with Christians to this
day, or to eat any meat that Christians kill. But it is not unusual amongst
Christians of better knowledge, to eat of the Jews meat, which ordinarily they
buy of them: for the Jews to this day eat not of the hinderpart of any beast,
but only of the former parts, and sell the hinder quarters of their beef,
mutton, kids, goats, etc. to Christians.

They observe still all their old Ceremonies and feasts, Sacrifices only
excepted, which the Turks will not suffer them to do: for they were wont
amongst them to sacrifice children, but dare not now for fear of the Turks.
Yet some of them have confessed, that their Physicians kill some Christian
patient or other, whom they have under their hands at that time, in stead of a
sacrifice.

If a man die without children, the next brother takes his wife, and raises
up seed unto his brother: and they still marry in their own kindred. Many of
them are rich Merchants: some of them Drogomen, and some Brokers. Most of them
are very crafty and deceitful people. They have no beggars amongst them, but
many thieves, and some who steal for necessity, because they dare not beg.

They are also very great Usurers, and therein the Turks ecell them: for
although there be Usurers amongst them, yet they allow it not: for if a
Christian or any man borrow money of a Turk (though he promise him interest)
yet if he pay the principal, he dares not molest him for interest, nor
complain of him, being against their law.

The Jews Sabbath is on Saturday, which they observe so strictly, that they
will not travel upon any occasion on that day, nor receive money, nor handle a
pen to write, (as I have known by experience in a Doctor of Physic:) but on
the morrow he would take double fees of his Patient.

They read their law in the Hebrew tongue, written in Phylacteries or long
roles of parchment. And the Old Testament is also read in the Hebrew. But their
Cakams and Cohens preach in the Spanish tongue. All matters of controversy
betwixt themselves are brought before their Cakam to decide, who is their
chief Churchman. Cakam in Hebrew is as much as Sapiens in Latin, that is, a
wise man: and Cohen in Hebrew is as much as Sacerdos in Latin, that is, a
Priest.

Most of the Jews can read Hebrew, but few of them speak it, except it be in
two places in Turkey, and that is at Salonica, formerly called Thessalonica, a
City in Macedonia by the gulf Thermaicus; and at Safetta in the Holy Land,
near unto the sea of Galile: Which two places are as it were Vwersities or
Schools of learning amongst them, and there ( honoris grati^) they speak
Hebrew.

I have sundry times had conference with many of them; and some of them, yea
the greatest part of them, are blasphemous wretches, who (when they are pressed
with an argument which they cannot answer) break out into opprobrious
speeches, and say Christ was a false Prophet, and that his Disciples stole him
out of his grave whiles the soldiers (who watched him) slept: and that their
forefathers did deservedly crucify him; and that if he were now living, they
would use him worse than ever then forefathers did.

Of Christians of sundry sorts soiourning in Aleppo.
Besides these Turks, Moors, and Arabians, (which are all Mahometans) and
Jews (which are Talmudists) there are also sundry sorts of Christians in this
Country, which are of two sorts, either such as were borne, brought up, and
dwelled in the Country, or such as were borne in Christendom, and only
soiourne here for a time to exercise merchandises.

The first sort who were borne in this Heathen Country, and dwell there, are
either Armenians, Maronites, Iacobites, Georgians, Chelfalines, or Greeks;
which are all governed by their Patriarchs for Ecclesiastical matters. But for
civil government, both they and their Patriarchs are subject to Turkish Laws,
yea they are all slaves unto the great Turk, whom they call their Grand Signior.

Of the Nostranes or Nazaritans.
Amongst all these sorts of Christians, there is amongst the M^ronites an
ancient / company of Christians, called vulgarly Nostranes, quasi Nazaritans,
of the Sect of the Nazarites, more civil and harmless people than any of the
rest. Their Country is Mount Lybanus (as I wrote unto you heretofore) but many
of them dwell at Aleppo, whereof some of them are Cassises, that is, Churchmen;
some of them are Cooks, and servants unto English Merchants and others; some
Artificers: All of them live somewhat poorly, but they are more honest and
true in their conversation than any of the rest, especially at their first
coming from Mount Lybanus to dwell in Aleppo; and many during their
continuance there, if they be not corrupted by other wicked Nations there
dwelling: in whom I observed more by experience than I heard of them, or noted
in them when I was amongst them at Mount Lybanus. And especially for the manner
of their marriage, and how they honor the same.

They buy their wives of their fathers (as others there dwelling, do) but
never see them until they come to be married, nor then neither until the
marriage be solemnized betwixt them: for there is a partition in the place where
they meet to be married, and the man and his friends stand on the one side, and
the young woman and her friends on the other side, where they may hear, but
not see one another, until the Cassies bid the young man put his hand through
an hole in the wall, and take his wife by the hand. And whiles they have hand
in hand, the mother of the maid comes with some sharp instrument made for
the purpose, and all to bepricketh the new married man's hand, and makes it
bleed. And if he let her hand go when he feels his hand smart, they hold it
for a sign that he will not love her: But if he hold fast (notwithstanding the
smart) and wring her hard by the hand until she cry, rather than he will once
shrink, then he is counted a loving man, and her friends are glad that they
have bestowed her on him.

And how they honor marriage above others, I observed by the naming of their
first manchilde. For as amongst us the women, when they are married, lose their
Surnames, and are surnamed by the husbands surname, and children likewise; so
amongst them the father loses his name, and is called by the name of his
eldest son, in this manner. I have known a Nostrane whose name was Mou-se,
that is, Moses, who having a manchilde, named him Vseph, that is, Joseph, and
then was the father no more called Mou^e, Mo^es, but Abou Vseph, that is, the
father of Joseph. Another whose name was Vseph, named his eldest son
Pher-iolla, after which he was no more called V^eph, but Abou Ph^r-iolla, the
father of Pher-iolla. Another man called Iubraell, that is, Gabriell, his son
at the time of Baptism being named Mouse, he always after was called Abou
Mouse, that is, the father of Moses: such an honor do they account it to be
father of a manchilde.

These Nostranes reverence their Cassises greatly, and kiss their hand
wheresoever they meet them: yet are most of them altogether unlearned, having
only the knowledge of the Syriac tongue, wherein their Liturgy is read.

They keep their Feasts at the same time as we do, viz. Christmasse, Easter,
and Whitsuntide: and at Christmasse on the Twelfth day in the morning, called
Epiphanie, their young men have a custom (betimes in the morning) to leap
naked into the water: I could never hear any reason of their so doing, but
Vzansa de prease, the Custom of their Country. And though it be then very
cold, yet they persuade themselves and others, that then it is hotter than at
any other time, and that the water then has an extraordinary virtue to wash
away their sins.

On Monday in Easter week and Whitsun week, these Nostranes go with their
Cassises to the graves of the dead, and there kneel down, and burn incense,
and pray at every grave.

Of the Chelfalines.
THe Chelfalines are Christians, dwelling upon the borders of Persia, between
Mesopotamia and Persia, at a place called Chelsa. These bring silk to Aleppo
to sell. They are plai^^ dealing people. If a man pay them money, and (by
ouer-reckoning himself) give them more than their due, though there be but one
piece over, so soon as they perceive it, though it be many days after, they
will bring it back again, and restore it, and think they shall never return
safely into their Country, if they should not make restitution thereof. These
people persuade themselves, and report unto others, that they dwell in that
place which was called Eden, whereinto Adam was put to keep it and dress it.
But some hold that this pleasant garden Eden did extend over all the earth. But
by the second chapter of Genesis it appears manifestly, that this garden
wherein man was placed, which we call Paradise, was a certain place on earth,
not spreading over all, but only a part thereof, containing a convenient
portion of the Country called Eden, bounding upon the River Euphrates* which
River is divided into four streams, and runs (or at leastwise did then
flow) in manner as it is described, Genesis 2. 10. etc. And Eden is the name of a
Country, so called for the pleasantness of it. For Hadan in Hebrew, is in
English to delight. From hence also the Greeks call pleasure, (...).

And howsoever it besomewhat probable, that these Chelphalines dwell now in
that Country which was called Eden, yet Plato, and Aristo^le, and Lactantius,
and others, do constantly affirm (as they have received of ancient monuments)
that Mountains, and Rivers, and Islands, and Countries, have received much
alteration in this kind. Sicilia is said to have been divided from Italy,
Cyprus from Syria, England from France, by the violence of the Sea, whereas
before they were joined, as Pelo^onne^us is to the rest of Grecia, or as the
town of Rye (at an high water) seems to be to the rest of England: So that
no certainty can be given either by reading, or traveling, of the place where
Eden was, because these Rivers run in other streams: forasmuch as Cyrus, at
the taking of Babylon, is affirmed to have restrained the maine channel of this
very river Euphrates, unto an unwonted course; and to have divided the river
Gindes (which is next unto it in greatness) into 360. streams. Besides, the
Country of Mesopotamia, by which these rivers pass, being partly dry and
sandy, and seldom watered with the showers of heaven; and on the other part,
exceeding fruitful by the nature of the soil; is (by the industry of the
inhabitants) so nourished with waters, by cutting out channels and ditches out
of the maine streams, as the same is amended, where it is barren, of the same
unfruitfulness; and corrected again of his ouerrich increase, where it is
over fertile. No marvel therefore if these rivers are not fully agreed upon by
Writers, having lost perhaps their ancient streams, together with their names,
as Paradise, and the whole earth besides hash lost her ancient fruitfulness.

And these Chelphalines are ignorant people, and have no reason to prove that
they now dwell in the place which was called Eden, whereinto Adam was put to
keep it and to dress it, but that the river Euphrates, and other rivers
(mentioned Genesis 2. 10. 11. 12.) run by their Country.

Others of them say, that they have received it by Tradition from their Elders,
from time to time. But that which God has concealed, I will not search out.
But (notwithstanding all that I have read, heard, or seen in my travels) I
resolve my self, that no man living can demonstrate the place, which God (for
the sins of Adam) accursed; and ever since, the place is unknown.

Of the Greeks.
THe Greeks are a very superstitious, subtle, and deceitful people, insomuch
that it is grown to a proverb amongst the Italians,

Chi fida in Grego* sara intrego: That is,

He that trusts to a Greek,
Shall be int^eaged, and still to seek.
They hate the Papists, and yet in many things agree with them, as in Auricular
Confession, Transubstantiation, and some other opinions. But their Liturgy is
read in the vulgar Tongue.

The Greek in Aleppo are very poor, for they are there (for the most p^rt)
but Brokers or Bastages, that is, Porters* and many of their women as light as
water, maintaining their husbands, themselves and their families, by
prostituting their bodies to others. And their own husbands are often times
their Pandars or procurers to bring them Cust^mers.

But the Greeks that live at Constantinople are many of them great Merchants,
and very rich; but exceeding proud, and sumptuous in apparel, even the basest
of them, and especially their women, who though they be but Cobblers wives, or
poor Artificers wives, yet they go in gowns of satin, and taffery, yea of
cloth of silver and gold, adorned with precious stones, and many gemmes and
jewels about their necks and hands. They care not how they pinch their bellies,
so that they may have fine apparel on their backs. And at the time of their
marriage, the women condition with their husbands to find them decent
apparel, and con^enient diet, and bring them before their Patriarch of
Constantinople to confirm it; which, if it be not performed accordingly, if
they complain to their Patriarch, they are divorced presently, and she takes
an other man to her husband, better able to maintain her: and he may marry an
other woman if he please.

One only instance hereof will I give you in a matter notoriously known to
all nations soiourning or dwelling in or about Constantinople.

In Pera or Gallata (on the other fide the water) there is a most famous (or
rather infamous) Greek whore called Charatza Sophia, that is, Mistress
Sophia, (the daughter of a poor Greek widow who lives by laundry) who being
married unto a Geeke, because he kept her not fine enough, she complaned of him
to the Patriarch, and was divorced from him; and presently thereupon took
another man, who was a Christian in name, but no Greek, but one who was (as is
reported of him) borne in no land in the world, but by sea, and brought up in
Polonia until he were thirteen or fourteen neeres of age, and then came to
Constantinople, and served many masters there, at the first in the basest
services, both in the stable, and in the kitchen, and afterward in better
services than he deserved, being both unlearned and irreligious.

This man had many children by this infamous woman Sophia: yet after many
yee^es (arising to higher fortunes) turned her away, and married another woman:
And (to dawbe up the matter somewhat smoothly) procured a Greek Tailor to marry
with this Sophia and gave many hundred Dolers with her to her marriage. But
this Charatza could not content her self long with this Greek Tailor, but
admitted daily other men into her company, whereupon the poor Tailor ran away
with his money, and left this light huswife to the mercy of her former lovers,
having three husbands living, yet she her self living with none of them. This
is common in every man's mouth thereabouts, and talked of many thousand miles
off, to the disgrace of his Country, and slander of Christianity.

And both at Constantinople, Aleppo, and other places of Turkey where there is
traffiking and trading of Merchants, it is no rare matter for popish Christians
of sundry other Countries, to Cut Cabine, (as they call it) that is: to take
any woman of that contrie where they soiourne, (Turkish women only excepted,
for it is death for a Christian to meddle with them) and when they have bought
them, and enroled them in the Cadies book, to use them as wives so long as
they soiourne in that country, and maintain them gallantly, to the consuming
of their wealth, diminishing of their health, and endangering of their own
souls. And when they depart out of that Country, they shake off these their
sweet-hearts, and leave them to shift for themselves and their children. And
this they account no sin, or at least wise such a sin as may be washed away
with a little holy water.

And these are the virtues which many Christians learn by soiourning long in
Heathen Countries: which is not to be marvelled at; for if Joseph (a good man)
living in Pharaoh his Court, had learned to swear by the life of Pharaoh; and
Peter (a great Apostle) being in the high Priests hall but once, denied Christ
thrice; we may well think that they which dwell long in wicked Countries, and
converse with wicked men, are somewhat tainted with their sins, if not
altogether sowred with the leaven of their ungodliness.

Of those whom they call Franks or Freemen, soiourning in Aleppo.
THE other sorts of Christians living in Aleppo are such as are borne in other
parts of Christendom, and only soiourne there for a time to use traffic and
trade in merchandise, and these are Englishmen, Italians, Frenchmen, Dutchmen,
and others, whom they call by a general name Frangi, that is, Franks, or
Freemen. For all the rest, even from the greatest Bashaw or Vizier unto the
poorest peasant, are slaves unto the Grand Signiour, who only is free; and all
the ^est are borne, brought up, live and die his slaves: for the Grand Signiour
can command the head of any one of them at his pleasure.

Yea, if some great Vizier or Bashawe to whom he has committed the government
of some City or country, fall into his disfavor, if he send but a Cappagie,
that is, a Pur^e^an^ to him with his writing, with a black seal in a black
box, none of them all dare withstand him, but suffer this base C^^ppagie to
strangle him: though it be in the house before his wives, children and
servants, yet none dare lift up their hands against him.

There was a Bashawe of Aleppo, who governed the City and Country adjoining,
who was in the disfavor of the King, and the King sent a Cappagie to strangle
him, who inquiring for the Bashaws house at A^eppo. and understanding he was at
his Garden four miles from the City, he rode and met him in the way, and
opened his black box and showed him his commission to strangle him, whereat his
countenance changed, and he only craved this favor, that he might have
liberty to say his Prayers before he died: which performed, he yields his
head and was strangled, sitting on his horse before all his followers, which
were at the least 10^. men, and no man durst speak one word against it, much
less offer to resist him, but said, it was Gods will it should be so.

And not only the great Turk does thus tyrannize over his slaves, but every
Bashaw who has government over others in a City or Country, tyrannise over
those which are under their regiment, and sometimes strangled, sometimes
beheaded, and sometines put unto terrible tortures those who offend. Yea,
oftentimes without offense; only because they are rich and have fair houses
the Bashaw will lay to their charge such things as he himself knows to be
untrue, and put them to death that he may seize upon his goods.

There was a Sheriff or a Green-headin Aleppo, whom they account Mahomets
kindred, who offending the Bashaw and brauing him in terms as though he durst
not punish him, he caused one of his officers to go with him home, and when
he came before his own door, openly in the street to break both his legs and
arms, and there let him lie, and no man durst find fault, or give him food;
or Physician, or Surgeon come to him; or wife or servants take him into
house, but there he lay all day, and should so have continued until he had
died for hunger, or dogs eaten him, had not his friends given money to the
Bashaw to have his throat cut to rid him out of his pain. And this is a common
punishment amonst them.

And sometimes for small offenses, they will lay a man down on his back, and
hoyse up his feet, and with a cudgel give them 300. or 400. blows on the
soles of their feet, whereby many are lamed.

And some they set on a sharp stake naked, which comes from his fundament up
to his mouth, if he find not favor to have his throat cut sooner.

And some are ganched in this manner; they are drawn up by a rope fastened
about their arms to the top of a Gazouke or Gibbet full of hooks, and let
downwards again, and on what part soever any hook takes hold, by that they
hang until they die for hunger.

And some in like sort are drawn over a Gibbet, and they being compassed about
the naked waste with a small coard, the coard is drawn by 2. men to make them
draw up their breath, and still pulled straiter and straiter, until they be
so narow in the waste, that they may easily be cut off by the middle at one
blow, and then the upper part is let down on a hot grid-iron and there seared
up, to keep them in sense and feeling of pain so long as is possible, and the
nether part is thrown to the dogs, etc.

Unspeakable is their tyranny to those that fall into their hands, not unlike
the tyranny of the Spaniards toward the poor Indians who never offend them.

They, whom they call Franks or Freemen, live in greater security amongst them
then their own people, by reason that they are governed by Consuls of their
own nation, and those Consuls also are backed by Ambassadors for the same
nations which are always Leige^s at Constantinople: and when their Consuls
abroad are offered wrong, they write unto the Ambassadors, how, and by whom
they are wronged: and then the Ambassador procures from the great Turk
commandments to the Bashaw of Aleppo to redress their wrongs, and punish such
as offend them. Otherwise there were no dwelling for Franks amongst them, but
they should be used like slaves by every slave.

And notwithstanding their Consuls and Ambassadors too, yet they are
oftentimes abused by Turks both in words and deeds.

In words they revile them as the Egyptians did the Israelites, and call them
Gours, that is, Infidels: and Cupec, that is, dog: and Canzier, that is, Hog:
and by many other odious and reproachful names. And though they strike them,
yet dare they not strike again lest they loose their hand, or be worse used.

They also oftentimes make Auenias of them, that is, false accusations; and
suborne false witnesses to confirm it to be true: and no Christians word will
be take against a Turk, for they account us infidels, and call themselves
Musselmen, that is, True believers.

This misery abroad will make bs love our own Contrie the better when we
come thither. And that is the best lesson which I have learned in my travels,
Mundi contemptum, that is, The contempt of the world. And S. Paul's lesson,
Phil. 4. 11. In whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content.

Oh how happy are you in England if you knew your own happiness? But as the
prodigal son until he was pinched with penury abroad, never considered the
plenty of his fathers house: So many in England know not their own felicity,
because they do not know the miseries of others.

But if they were here in this heathen Country, they would know what it is to
live in a Christian common wealth, under the government of a godly king, who
rules by Law and not by lust; where there is plenty and peace, and preaching
of the Gospel, and many other godly blessings, which others want.

And God long continue his mercies to our noble King James, and his whole
Realms, and give us grace as far to excel other Nations in thankfulness as
we do in happiness.

And thus for present I commend you to the most gracious protection of the
Almighty JEHOVAH, beseeching him, (if it be his will) to send us a joyful
meeting, both in this world, and in the world to come. Amen.

Tuus (...), GVILIELMVS BIDDVLPHVS.

A LETTER SENT from Jerusalem into England, wherein relation is made of the
voyage of five Englishmen from Aleppo in Syria Comagena to Jerusalem, and what
famous Places, and memorable Matters they saw in the way thither, and at
Jerusalem. * * * *
Salutem (ex animo) in Authore salutis, etc.
Worshipful and my singular good friend, I being now (by the providence of
God) at Jerusalem, Captus amore tui, raptus honor loci, for the love I bear
to you, and delight I conceive in this famous place, where our sweet Savior
Christ vouchsafed once his blessed bodily presence; I could not but remember
you with some salutation from hence, having such choice of messengers (by
reason of the great concourse of people unto this place at this present, from
sundry places of Christendom) to transport my Letters unto you: Nothing
doubting but that as my former letters (which I have heretofore written unto
you both from Aleppo and other places) concerning my former voyages, and such
things as (by diligent observation) I noted in my travels, were acceptable unto
you; so that this shall be much more acceptable, both in regard of the Place
from whence it came, as also of the Matter subject herein contained; being my
voyage from Aleppo in Syria Comagena to Jerusalem, undertaken this present
year 1600. not moved as Pilgrims with any superstitious devotion to see
Relikes, or worship such places as they account holy; but as Travelers and
Merchants, occasioned by dearth and sickness, pestilence and famine in the
City where we soiourne: which two are such followlike companions, that the
Graecians distinguish them but by one letter, calling the pestilence (...), and
the famine (...): By reason whereof all traffic was hindered, and those
Merchants whom they call Frankes or Freemen, either removed to other places;
or such as stayed in the City, caused their gates to be shut up, and came not
abroad until Sol entered into Leo, which is usually the twelfth or thirteenth
day of July, at which time the plague still cease in this place, though it be
never so great, and all that are then sick, amend; and such as then come
abroad, need not fear any danger. The Turks, Moors, Arabians, and other
Mahometans, never remove for fear of any sickness, nor refuse any man's
company infected therewith; for they say every man's fortune is written in his
forehead, and that they shall not die before their time; not knowing what it is
to tempt God, and to refuse ordinary means. But in this interim, from the
beginning of this sickness (which was in March) until the expected and
undoubted end, when the Sun enters into Leo, we whose names are subscribed
(for causes above mentioned) took our voyage from Aleppo toward Jerusalem,
having letters of commendation from Clarissimo Imo the Venice Consul, and
sundry others of the chiefs Italian Merchants, to their Padres at Jerusalem,
for our kind usage there, with liberty of conscience.

Anno Dom. 1600. March 9. after dinner we set forth, guarded with Ienesaries,
and accompanied with sundry English, Italian, and French Merchants, who in
kindness rode with us seven or eight miles, to bring us on the way, and then
returned to Aleppo. But most of our English Merchants brought us to Cane Toman,
Cane Toman.
ten miles from Aleppo, where we made merry with such good cheer as we
brought with us. For there was nothing to be had for money but goats milk,
whereof we had as much as we would. Here we purposed to have slept all night,
but having no other beds but the hard ground, with Jacobs pillow (a good hard
stone) under our heads, unaccustomed to such Down beds, we could not sleep,
but spent the time in honest mirth until it was past midnight, and then our
friends took their leave of us, and returned toward Aleppo, and we proceeded
in our journey toward Jerusalem. The night being dark, and the way dangerous
and theeuish, our Ienesarie, Byram Bashaw, willed us every one to take a match
lighted in our hands, and to whirle it about, that the fire might be seen the
further, to terrify the thieves, lest they should surprise us on the sudden.
And when we came to suspicious places (as caves, rocks, barnes, or odd
Cottages in the way) our Ienesarie used to ride before; and as fowlers beat
upon bushes for birds, so he (with his lance) would strike and beat upon such
places, lest wild Arabs (which lie lurking in such places) should steal upon
us on the sudden.

When the day appeared, Saracoope.
our way was pleasant and comfortable unto us, until we came to a village
called Saracoope, whither we came about noone, March. 10. And because our
Seisenars or sumptor horses (which carried provision for man and horse, as the
custom of the Country is) were tired, and we our selves also (for want of
sleep the night past) wearied and hungry, we were constrained to lodge there
all night on the hard ground by our horse heels, in an old Cane distant from
Cane Toman 28. miles.

March. 11. betimes in the morning we departed from Saracoop, and came betimes
in the afternoon to a fine Village called Marrah, Marrah.
where there is a very fair new Cane builded by Amrath (commonly called Morat)
Chillabee, sometimes Defterdare, that is, Treasurer of Aleppo, and afterward
of Damascus, who for the refuge of travelers, and their protection against
thieves, built a stately strong Cane like unto Leaden Hall in London, or rather
the Exchance in London, where there are fair upper rooms for great men in
their travels, and the nether rooms are for ordinary travelers and their
horses, but in hot wether the best make choice to sleep on the ground in low
rooms, rather then in their chambers. The founder hereof also ordained that
all Travelers that way should have their entertainment there of his cost. He
allows them Bread, Pilaw and Mutton, which our Ienesaries accepted off; but
we scorning relief from Tu^kes without money, sent unto the village, where
(besides our own provision which we brought with us) we had also other good
things for money. Marrah is distant from Saracoope 24. miles.

March 12. Lacmine.
was a very rainy day, yet we traveled all the forenoone until we came to a
village called Lacmine, which a far off made show of a very fair village;
but when we came thither, we found it so ruinous, that there was not one house
able to shroude us from the extremity of the shower: the inhabitants thereof
having forsaken it and fled into the mountains to dwell, for fear of the
Ienesaries of Damascus, who traveling that way used to take from them, not
only victuals for themselves, and prouender for their horses without money,
but whatsoever things else they found in their houses. Only there was a little
Church or Chapel there in good preparation, whereinto (for a little money) we
obtained leave to enter, our selves with our horses and carriage, and there we
brought out our victuals, and refreshed our selves, and baited our horses, and
rested until it left raining. After the shower, while our horses were
preparing, we walked into the fields near unto the Church, and saw many poor
people gathering Mallas and three leafed grass, and asked them what they did
with it: and they answered, that it was all their food; and that they boiled
it, and did eat it: then we took pity on them, and gave them bread, which
they received very joyfully, and blessed God that there was bread in the world,
and said: they had not seen any bread the space of many months. We also gave
unto them small pieces of silver to relieve their necessity, which they
received gratefully, and wished that their Country were in the hands of
Christians again.

The shower ceasing, we rode from this Chapel and village of Lack money (I
should have said Lacmin, but might say, lack men and money too) and rode
forward until we came unto a village or town called Tyaba, where (because it
was near night) we desired to lodge, but could not be admitted into any house
for any money, whereupon our chief Ienesarie Byram B^shaw went into an house,
and offered to pull man, woman, and child out of the house, that we might bring
in our horses, and lodge there our selves. But when we saw what pitiful
lamentation they made, we entreated our Ienesarie either to persuade them for
money, or to let them alone. And understanding that there was a fair City in
our way, ten miles off, we five, with our Ienesarie being well horsed, rode
thither, and left our carriage with the rest of our company at Tyaba, to come
to us betimes in the morning.

This City is now commonly called Aman, but of old it was called H^mat^, 2.
King 17. Here we lodged in a fair Cane, but on the cold ground, and upon the
hard stones, and thought our selves well provided for, that we had an house
over our heads to keep us day. Here we met with victuals for money, and
prouender for our horses. On the morrow, the rest of our company came unto us
from Tyaba, and one of our horses being lame, we stayed there all that day to
buy another, and met there that day another swaggering Ienesarie of Damascus,
of our old acquaintance at Aleppo, called Mahomet Bashaw, who came from
Jerusalem with Italian Merchants, whom he had guarded thither. These gave us
good directions for our voyage, and told us what dangers they had escaped.
Hamath is from Marrah about five and thirty miles.

On the fourteenth of March we traveled from Hamath, Hemse.
a pleasant way, and a short days journey, to a fine town called vulgarly
Hems^, but formerly Hus, distant from Hamath but twenty miles. This is said to
have been the City where Job dwelt, and is to this day called by the
Christians (...) biting in those borders, Jobs City. And there is a fruitful
valley near unto it, called the v^lley of H^s* and a C^stle not f^rre off, in
the way to ^^^poly, H^s.
called Hu^ Castle to this day. But I make some doubt whether Job were ever at
this place, for Job is said to have dwelt amongst the Edomites or wicked
Idumaeans: and Idumae^ bordered upon Arabia Foelix, and not near Syria, where
this City called Hus stands, whence the Sabaeans came, which with violence
took away Jobs Oxen and Asses. And Job is said to come of the posterity of
Esaias. And some think him to have been the son of Abram by Ketura. Yet might
this City, now called Hemse or Hus, be the Land of one called by name Hus: for
I do find in the Genealogies of the holy Scripture, three men of that name
Hus:

One was Arams son, nephew to Noah, Genesis 10. 23.

A second was Nachors, Abrams brothers son by Milchah, Genesis 22. 21.

The third was of the posterity and kindred of Esau, as appears in his
Genealogy, Genesis 3^. 28. Whence some gather, that Job was an Idumaean, of the
posterity of Esau. But others affirm him to have been the son of Abram by
Ketura. And not unlikely that some one of these three might have dwelt at this
place in Syria, called Hus, which by corruption of time was called Hemse.

On the fifteenth day of March we went from Hus toward Damascus, which is
four days journey off, and all the way (until we came within ten miles of
Damascus) is a desert, uninhabited, and a theeuish way; only there are erected
in the way certain Canes to lodge in. But if they bring not provision with
them both for man and horse, and some quilt or pillow to sleep on, the hard
stones must be their bed, and the air their supper: for some of their Canes
are nothing but stone walls to keep out thieves. In Cities they have very
stately Canes, but not for Travelers, but for themselves to dwell in; for
every rich man calls his house a Cane. But the Canes that stand in high
ways, are in charity erected by great men, for the protection of Travelers;
but most of them are very badly kept, and are worse than stables. Our first
days journey from Hus was a very uncomfortable and dangerous desert: we saw no
house all the way until we came unto a village called Hassia, where we lodged
in an old Castle distant from Hus 22. Hassia.
miles.

March 16. From Hassia, we rode to an ancient Christian Town called Charrah,
Cha^rah.
where our provision being spent, we made supply thereof, and bought bread and
wine of the Christians there dwelling. It is inhabited by Greeks and Turks,
but governed by Turks only. There is but one Church in the Town, which is
dedicated to S. Nicolas, by the Christians, who first builded it. But both
Christians and Turks pray therein: the Christians on the one side or I Will of
the Church, and the Turks on the other. But the Christians are over ruled by
the Turks, and constrained to find them oil to their lamps in the Church.
For the Turks not only burn lamps in their Churches every night, but during
the whole time of their Lent they beset the battlements of their steeples round
about with lamps. But when their Lent is ended, they burn lamps in their
steeples only once a week, and that is on Thursday at night, which is the Eve
before their Sabbath. After we had refreshed our selves here, half the day
being not yet spent, we rode from hence to a poor village called Nebecke,
Nebeck.
or (as they pronounce it) Nebhkeh, where we lodged in an old Cane, distant
from Hassio 27. miles.

And understanding at this place, that the way that we were to pass on the
morrow, was full of Arabs, and that two days before, many men were found in
the way killed by them, we feared to go any further. Yet meeting with company
contrary to expectation (March 17.) we went forwards, and saw no house nor
company all the day long besides our selves, until we came to a village called
Cotifey, Cotifey.
where we lodged in a very stately new Cane, built by Synan Bashaw; and not
altogether finished. This Cane does far exceed that at Marrah (before
mentioned) for herunto is adjoined a fair new Church and a Bazar, that is a
Market place where travelers may buy many good things. Here is also meat for
travelers, and prouender for their horses to be had of the founders cost. And
in the middle of this Cane, there is a fair large fountain of water, of hewed
stones four square, wherein there is exceeding good water for Travelers to
drink, and chambers for their lodging: but if they will have any beds, they
must bring them with them, or sleep on the hard ground, as most men that
travel that way are wont to do.

March 18. From Cotifey we had not much more than 20. miles to Dama^cus. The
first ten miles was a desert and dangerous way, and we hardly escaped danger;
for an A^a^ian horsman seeing us come, stood as a spy in our way, to view our
strength, and marked every one of us very narrowly, and what weapons we had;
and then rode up an high mountain as fast as if it had been plain ground, ^o
acquaint his companions what a prey he had found for them. Whereupon our
Ienesarie cast aside his upper garment, being a gambe^looke, and bad us all
make ready our weapons, and he himself rode before us with his lance on his
shoulders, expecting there coming upon us suddenly: but they having esp^ed
(from the top of the mountain) fifty Ienesarie, of Dama^cus at the least, with
their I^mmoglans coming after us, came not, and so by the providence of God we
escaped their hands.

The other part of our way to Damascus was a pleasant plain of ten miles in
length, having many fruitful oillages, fine rivers, and pleasant gardens
thereon. At our entrance into this plain or valley, riding down an hill, we
beheld the prospect of Damascus ten miles off, Damascus.
whither we came about two of the clock in the afternoon, and took up our
lodging in the middle of the City, at a Cane called in Mou^^^co, Cane Nebbe,
that is, the Cane of the Prophet; but by the Turks, Cane Haramin, where we
hired three chambers for our money, and our servants bought our meat, and
dressed it themselves, as they did also all the rest of the way where we could
get any thing. To this end we took a Cook with us, and other servants from
A^eppo, to dress our meat, and to look to our horses. Here we met with
Frenchmen, and other Christians, staying for company to go to Ierus^lem.

At Damascus many Jewish Merchants, and Greeks, and others, knew some of us,
and came to salute us, and present us with (...) good things as they had, both
wine, and bread, and (...), and fruit, etc. and lent us very good beds, with
sheets and (...) surm^^^e, (...) wellou^ w^^rie^ bod^es.

March 19. and 20. we stayed at Damascus to rest our selves, and see the City.

Of Damascus.
DAmascus is a most ancient City, and as Esaias spoke of it in his time, The head
of Aram is Damascus: Isa. 7. 8. so Damascus is the chiefest City of Syria to
this day. The situation thereof is most pleasant, being built on a plain
ground, strongly walled about, and a strong Castle therein, with many fine
rivers running on every side of it, especially Abanah and Pharpar, mentioned 2.
King. 5. which now are divided into many heads.

The Turks say, that their Prophet Mahomet was once at Damascus, and that when
he saw the pleasant situation of it, and beheld the stately prospect of it,
excelling all others that ever he saw before; refused to enter into the City,
lest the pleasantness thereof should ravish him, and move him there to settle
an earthly Paradise, and hinder his desire of the heavenly Paradise.

It has also many pleasant Orchards and gardens round about the City, and
some ways for the space of a mile and more about the city there are many
Orchards, and great variety of fruits: some called Adam, apples, and Ad^ms
figs, and sundry other strange fruits. Damascus is called by the Turks Sham,
and they call it the garden of Turkey, because there is no place in all the
Turks dominions (especially in Syria, that yields such abundance of fruit.
Here we stated two days and three nights to rest our selves, and see the
City. And having a Greek to our guide, he ^ hewed us first a stately Muskia,
or Turkish Church erected in the place where the Temple of Ry^mon stood,
mentioned 2 King. 5. And two other memorable matters, mentioned Act. 9. 25.
viz. the place where the Disciples let down (...) the night through the wall
in a basket, whereof the Christ (...) Keep an eract memorial; taking upon the
^^to demo: strate the very place of the wall; which we (...) bek^ing, they
confirmed it with this reason, that Damascus was never overcome; and that there
have been Christians dwelling there ever since the time of Paul, and therefore
might keep a memorial of the very place: But to let the place pass, the
thing it self we know to be true.

He showed us also the house of Ananias, which is under the ground, whereinto
we were led, down a pair of stairs from the street, as it were into a
Celler; and the door being unlocked, we entered with candels into the place,
where we saw two dark chambers, where a man cannot see to read in the day
time without candels; here they say, he lived in secret for fear of the Jews.
Many Christians coming thither to see that place, with a coal write their
names on the wall, and there are so many names there already, that there is
scarce room for any other to set his name.

Some of them report Damascus to be built in the place where Kain killed his
brother Abel. And some say it is near it, and offered to bring us to the
place; but we refused.

They take upon them also at Damascus to demonstrate the place where S. George
was buried, so they do likewise at Aleppo, but I think the one to be as true
as the other.

There is a fine town near unto Damascus, about two or three miles distant on
the side of an hill, Salhia.
called Salhia, from whence a man may behold the prospect of the City of
Damascus most pleasantly, with the gardens and pleasant places about it.

At Damascus we met many thousand Turks going on Pilgrimage toward Mecha in
Arabia to visit Mahomets sepulcher, as they usually do every year about their
Byram time; for they hold that whosoever once in his life time shall not go on
Pilgrimage to Mecha, to see the sepulcher of their Prophet, shall never enter
into Paradise. And therefore some of them go thither often in their life time,
partly for devotion, and partly to buy merchandise. For there are brought
thither at that time of the year, great store of commodities from India,
Persia, and other places; and none may by or sell there but Mahome^ans. And it
is forbidden to all Christians upon pain of death to come near Mecha within
five miles: partly, lest they should mar their markets; but chiefly, lest
they should see their folly or rather madness in worshipping an iron
sepulcher, after the sight whereof, many of their old men (which think never
to come thither again) use to pull out both their eyes, after they have seen
so holy a sight (as they accout it) as their Prophets sepulcher, and think
thereby to inherit heaven.

Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum.
that is:

In such shameful sort themselves to deface,
Their Religion mooues them for want of grace:
And whosoever (say they) dies in his pilgrimage thither, or returning from
thence, is sure to go to Heaven presently. And they that have been there but
once, are always after called Hogies, Hogies.
that is, Pilgrims: and are called by that name in this manner.

If his name before were Mahomet, he is at his return called Hogie Mahomet. If
before Mustapha, he is always after called Hogie Mustapha, etc. And they that
have been often at Mecha and return again, are called great Hogies. And
every year when the Carauan of Pilgrims returns from Mecha, he that has
been there oftnest is called The great Hogie: and is greatly honored of them
all, for he rides before them all in more stately apparel then they, with
flowers and garlands about his horse, and when they come near any great City,
the chiefest men in the city ride forth to meet him, and bring him into the
City with great solemnity.

They falsely affirm that this their Temple at Mecha in Arabia was built by
Abraham, and they prepare themselves with greater care to go to worship there,
then many Christians do when they come to the Lords Supper; for they disburden
their hearts of all hatred and malice, and reconcile themselves one to another,
etc. Otherwise they hold that all their labor is lost, and that they shall be
never a whit the better for their Pilgrimage. But if they forgive one another,
and repent them for their former sins, they think there to obtain full
remission of all their sins, and that at their return they are pure and
without spot.

March 21. We departed from the City of Damascus, and about five or six miles
from the City, passed by a village called Daria, Daria.
near unto which we saw a great multitude of men, women, and children on their
knees in the high way: and by that tune they had ended their devotion, we drew
so near as to salute them; and asking what they were, it was told us that they
were all Christians of sundry Nations, viz. Armenians, Greeks, Chelfalmes,
Nostranes, and sundry others, who went to Jerusalem to visit and worship the
holy places there. We asked further, what they meant to fall on their knees in
that place: they answered us, that it was the place where Mucro, furor Sauh,
liber est conue^sio Pauli.
Paul was converted, and that it was their custom when they traveled that
way, to fall on their knees, and pray unto God to convert them. They were in
number at the least four or five hundred people. There was a Greek Patriarch,
and an Armenian Bishop in their company. Many of them knew us, (having seen us
in Alepp^) and saluted us by our names. We rode a while in company together,
and lodged all together that night at a Cane called Sassa, Sassa.
distant from Dama^cus 26. miles.

March 22. We rode before the rest of the company. Our way that we traveled
all this day was exceeding bad, rocky, watrish, Arabia Petr^a.
and barren, called Arabia Pet^ea, where our horses often times stuck fast in
the puddles and miry places, and sometimes ready to break their own legs, and
their Riders necks among rocks and stones. It was neither pleasant going on
foot, nor riding this way, for there was no path nor even ground, but huge
stones and rocks so near together, that our horses could go but a foot pace,
and often times met with such marshes and quagmires, that we were constrained
to go far about before we could find better ways to pass over. It is also
exceeding cold in this place always (in respect of other places in that
Country) for there are neither trees, nor houses, nor high hills to keep away
the violence and force of the winds. The Carauans that travel usually that way
betwixt Damascus and Egypt, say that this days journey troubles them more
than all the rest, and that they never pass by that way, but they leave two or
three of their Cammels behind them, some misfortune or other befalling unto
them. We saw also in sundry places this way, the carcases of many dead cammels
which have miscarried amongst the rocks. It is also a very theeuish way, full
of wild Arabs: yet (by the providence of God) we came safely that day to
Conetra, where we lodged in a good Cane, distant from Sassa 28. miles.

After our tedious travel to Conetra, finding the place pleasant at our
coming thither, we walked about to solace our selves in beholding the green
pastures and running rivers nere unto it, and in viewing the order of sundry
Nations there assembled together from sundry places. Some coming from Egypt,
and bound to Damascus, pitched their tents without the Cane, near unto the
river. Others coming from Damascus, and bound to Jerusalem, accommodated
themselves (in such sort as they could) within the Cane. But especially in a
Bazar (like unto a cloister) adioining to the Cane, we took pleasure to walk
up and down some few turns, which the Turks beholding, wondered at us: (for it
is not their custom in those hot Countries to walk up and down as we do in
cold Countries, but to sit still on the ground like brute beasts) and one of
them came unto us, and asked us what we meant to walk up and down in such
sort, and whether we were out of our way, or out of our wits. If your way (said
he) lies toward the upper end of the cloister, why come you downwards? And if
at the netherend, why go you back again? We answered him, For our pleasure.
He replied, that it was greater pleasure to sit still, than to walk up and
down when we need not. But their brutish sitting still on the ground was as
strange unto us, as our walking up and down was to them.

It seemed no less strange unto them to see a Christian with a cut dublet: and
they called him fool, and asked him what he meant to make holes in his coat:
for they neither cut nor pinke any of their garments, but wear them all
plain, sparing for no cost to guard them with lace of silver and gold if they
be able.

And such as wear long hair on their heads, the Turks call slouens, and
account them savage beasts; for they themselves wear no hair on their heads
at all, but shave them every week once, and keep them warm with a Turbant of
white shash made of cotton woole, which they never uncover in their salutations
to any man, but bow their heads, with their hands on their breasts.

But if a man have a fair long beard, they reverence him, and say he is a wise
man, and an honorable personage. But if they have no beards at all, they call
them (if they be young) Bardasses, that is Sodomiticall boys. But if they be
men grown, and have no beards, they call them fools, and men of no credit;
and some of them refuse to buy or sell with such, and say they have no wit, and
that they will not believe them, etc.

March 23. We had a more pleasant way; for the first ten miles we rode through
the fields and a very pleasant Park. But when we came out of this Park or
Forest, we were somewhat troubled, partly by reason of the bad way, and
partly by bad people in the way. The way was stony and rockie (as the former
days journey was) but yet dry, and not long, for it was but the descending
down a rockie hill, where though the way were dangerous under our feet, yet it
was pleasant before our faces, for we beheld the prospect of part of the holy
Land, viz. Galile.

But at our desending down this mountain, the people did more trouble us then
the way; for there sat amongst the rocks in our way many Turks and Arabs, with
maces of Iron and other weapons, who stayed us and demanded Caphar or tole
money; we were glad to give them content that we might pass safely by them,
as Jacob was glad to send his brother Esau gifts, for a Ne noceat (as the
Lawyers speak) that is, for fear of danger.

But the Carauan of Christians, who came after us, though they were many
hundreds, yet some of them being not able, some not willing to pay so much money
as they demanded, were shrewdly beaten with their iron mases. There was a
Jesuit in their company, who escaped not without stripes, whereat (as I have
heard) he reioiced, and counted it meritorious, in that he suffered such misery
in so holy a voyage. And in my hearing, at Jerusalem one of his companions told
him, that he merited much to sustain such travel and labor, and be at so
great cost and charges, and suffer so many stripes for Christ's sake: But I
know, had it not been more for love of his purse than for love of Christ, he
might have escaped without stripes, yea with these kind speeches, Marhabbah
Ianum, that is, Welcome my friend or sweetheart.

At another place in my travels I heard a Friar bragging of his good works,
and saying, that he had done so many good works, that if he should kill three
men, his good works would make satisfaction, and merit remission for them all.
To whom one in my company answered, that by his murder he might merit indeed a
double reward, viz. death in this life, and damnation in the life to come, for
blood will have blood; For whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his
blood be shed. But to let pass these Jesuitical Iebusites, or Iebusiticall
Jesuits: In that these travelers were thus beaten for sparing their purses,
and though they were many hundreds, durst not strike them again, An admonition
for Travelers.
here I may fitly take occasion to teach those that purpose to travel into
Turkey, how to behave themselves. If they be set upon by thieves, they may
defend themselves in their travels, if they be strong enough; but if they be
poling officers (as these were) they must not be contradicted. But neither in
their Cities, nor in their travels, may they strike again though they be
abused and beaten by any man (except they be thieves and robbers) for if they
do, they shall either be put to death, or have their hand cut off. Neither if
a man receive a box on the ear at any of their hands, must he give one bad
word, or look frowningly upon him that smote him: for then he will strike him
again, and say, What, Goure? Do thou curse me, and wish that the Devil had
me? But he must kiss his beard, or the skirt of his garment, and smile upon
him, and then he will let him pass.

Wherefore, travelers into those parts must look upon the picture of a
servant as of old he was wont to be painted, that thereby they may learn how
to behave themselves in travel.

I read, that of old they were wont to paint the picture of a servant at the
doors of their houses, that their servants might see how they should behave
themselves. And he was painted on this manner; With the snout of a Swine, the
ears of an Ass, the feet of an Heart, with hands open, with his garments
cleanly, and on his head a bonnet, having on his back a coulestaffe, with two
vessels, the one having in it fire, the other water.

This description, though it be rude and homely, yet it teaches plainly
servants and travelers their duties.

The Swines snout declares that they must not be dainty mouthed, but must be
content with any meat which God has provided for man.

The Asses ears, that they must patiently hear the sharp speeches of their
Masters, without answering again.

The Hearts feet, that they must be swift in doing their business.

Their Hands wide open, that they must be faithful, not deceitful: They must
do nothing closely or secretly: They must have their chests, their hands,
their hearts open to their Masters eye and commandment, when it pleases him
to call them to account.

Their garments comely and honest, which their bonnet declares, that they must
not be slouenly, but handsome and seemly apparelled, and yet not proudly above
their degrees.

The coulestaffe on their shoulder, that they must not refuse to do any work,
no not to carry water.

And the fire and water, the one before them, and the other behind, shows
their discretion in their business: They must not mingle fire and water
together.

Most of these qualities are required in Travelers. In diet they must not be
dainty, but eat what they can get. Their ears must not be nice, for they shall
hear speeches enough to offend them. Their feet must be swift to fly from
dangers: Their hands wide open to give liberally: Their apparel also must be
neat in Cities where they soiourne, for their credit: But when they travel
abroad, it must be simple, for their safety: for the baser their apparel is,
the better shall they pass: for if they wear good apparel, their throats
will be cut for their apparel, and hope of much money: for those that go brave
they account rich. And whereas in servants it is commendable to have asses
ears; in travelers it is needful to have asses backs also, to bear all
abuses in good part, and rather to bear an hundredth abuses then to offer one.

Wherefore servants and travelers must always remember this Distichon, or
couple of verses following.

Nobile vincendi genus est patientia, vincit
Qui patitur: sivis vincere, discepati:
that is,

A noble kind of conquering
is patience to see and hear:
He which forbeareth, conquereth,
If thou will conquer, learn to bear.
But to leave these matters, and to proceed to my voyage. At the foot of this
mountain there is an old Cane where usually travelers lodge: but it being
not yet noone, we resolved to travel 18 miles further, to the Sea of Galile.
At the foot of this stony hill, hard by this Cane, there runs a pleasant
river, which divides Siria from Galile. And over this river there is a fair
bridge, the one end whereof is out of the holy land, the other in it. This
river is called Iordane, Jordan.
the head whereof comes from Mount Libanus, and makes three Seas.

The first is the waters of Maron which we left on our right hand, about ten
miles off. The other on the left hand, which lay in our way as we should
travel.

The second is the sea of Galile, or Tiberias, or lake of Genezereth.

The third is the Sea of Sodom, called Mare mortuum, where the river Jordan
ends.

The bridge that crosses this River Jordan at the entrance into the holy land,
is called Jacobs bridge; for two causes.

First, it is said that there Jacob met his brother Esau.

Secondly, that there Jacob wrestled with an Angel.

A description of the Holy Land.
THE whole Holy Land of old was called Chanaan, and it was divided into three
parts, viz. Galile, Judea and Pale^tina. Later writers have called all by the
name of Palestina. The first part of Canaan called Galile, Jacobs bridge.
begins at this bridge, and to this day it is a very pleasant and fruitful
Country. After we were entered into Galile about 2. miles from the bridge, our
Ienesarie asked us whether we would go up to a mountain, and so to Saphetta
near unto mount Carmel, which is a place of leaning for Jews; or keep the
lower way, and go by the sea of Galile, which is the pleasanter way: and
thereof we made choice; and took Saphetta in our way afterward.

About seven miles from Jacobs bridge, our guide brought us to a well, adorned
with marble pillars, and covered with stone, which he said to have been the
pit whereinto Joseph was put when his brethren sold him to the Ishmalites. But
it seemed to us incredible: first, because that was a dry pit, and this is full
of sweet water.

Again, Jacob dwelt at Hebron twelve miles beyond Jerusalem, and his sons
kept sheep in Shechem. And that dry pit whereinto they put Joseph was at
Dothan (which we saw afterward) And this pit which they showed us with marble
pillars, was in Galile; not near Dothan nor Shechem where Joseph's brethren
kept their fathers sheep.

But by others of better judgment we understood that this also was called
Ioseps pit, or well, because it was built by one Iosph, not Joseph the son of
Jacob, but some other. But the ignorant people which travel that way, are apt
to believe any things that is told them. About ten miles from this well, we
came to a Cane called by the Moors Minium, but by the Turks Missia, hard by
the sea of Galile, where we lodged all night, having traveled that day by
computation 36. miles.

The four and twentieth of March we rode along by the Sea of Galile, which,
John 6. 1. is called by two mames, viz. the Sea of Galile or Tiberias. Galile,
Galile.
because it is in Galile: and Tiberias, because the City Tiberias was built by
it, and Bethsaida an other ancient City; of both which we saw some ruinous
Walls. And it is said in that Chapter ( John 6. 1.) that Jesus went over the Sea
of Galile: and in an other place that he went beyond the Lake. And Luke 9. 10.
It is said, that he went into a slitary place, near unto a City called
Bethsaida, which place of John I learned to understand better by seeing it,
then ever I could before by reading of it. For, seeing that Tiberias and
Bethsaida were both Cities on the same side of the Sea, and Christ went from
Tiberias too, or near unto Bethsaida; I gather thereby that our Savior Christ
went not over the length or breadth of that Sea; but over some Arm, bosom or
reach thereof, viz. so far as Tiberias was distant from Bethsaida; which is
also confirmed in that it is said elsewhere, A great multitude followed him on
foot thither; which they could not have done if he had gone quite over the Sea,
to the other side among the Gergelens, which is out of the holy Land. And
therefore this Sea of Galile, is also called the Lake of Genesereth, because the
Country of the Cergesens is on the other side the Lake, from whence the Swine
ran headlong into the Sea and were choked therein: and as that place was out
of the holy Land; so the people which then inhabited it, were as far from
holiness, when they requested our savior Christ to depart out of their Coasts.
And such like holy people inhabit there still, viz. wild Arabs, and Turks,
etc. We saw also (near unto this Sea) the place where that Town (mentioned
John 2. 1. called Cana of Galile stood, where our Savior Christ at a marriage
turned water into wine; in place whereof there stands now a poor village
inhabited by Turks.

This sea of Galile is (by computation) in length 8. leagues, and in breadth 5.
leagues, and every league is three miles; and then it encloseth it self into a
narrow compass, carrying but the breadth of an ordinary river until it come
to Sodom, where it ends, which is called mare mortuum, that is, The dead Sea.

After we had rode about seven miles by the sea of Galile, we left it on our
left hand, and ascended up a mountain on the right hand.

This mountain was not very steepie, but exceeding pleasant and fertile, for
(being the springtime) it was so beset with such variety of flowers among the
green grass, that they seemed to flire in our faces, and to laugh and sing
(as the Psalmist speaks) as we went. Psalm. 65. 13.

This is said to be that mountain mentioned John 6. 9. where our Savior
Christ wrought a miracle in feeding 5000. men with five Barley loaves, and two
fishes.

When we came to the top of the mountain, we saw Saphetta on the right hand, a
University of the Jews where they speak Hebrew, and have their Synagogues
there. The City Saphet^a is situated on a very high hill with three tops, and
so the City h^th three parts; one part is inhabited by Jews, the other two by
Tu^kes. We asked some Jews whom we knew formerly to have been Merchants of
Aleppo, what they meant to leave their trade and to live there: They answered,
they were now old and came thither to die, that they might be nearer to
heaven: we told them, that howsoever they might seem there to be nearer to
heaven whiles they lined, because they dwelt on an high mountain, yet that
they should not be nearer unto heaven when they died, unless they repented
and believed in Christ, etc. The Jews have here more liberty then in any part
of the holy land. They dare not come to Jerusalem for fear lest the Christians
there dwelling, stone them.

Whiles we were at Saphetta, many Turks departed from thence toward Mecha in
Arabia. And the same morning they went, we saw many women playing with Tymbrels
as they went along the street, and made a yelling or scriking noise as though
they cried. We asked what they meant in so doing? It was answered us, that they
mourned for the departure of their husbands, who were gone that morning on
^ilgrimage to Mecha, and they feared that they should never see them again,
because it was a long way and dangerous, and many died there every year. It
seemed strange to us, that they should mourn with music about the streets,
for music is used in other places at times of mirth, and not at times of
mourning. But they did it but Paruae consuetudmis causa. For a little customs
sake. And I doubt not but many of them were glad for their departure, and would
be glader if they would never come again, they use them so kindly.

And under pretense of devotion, many travel to Mecha to buy their Indian and
Persian commodities: for many of them see their palpaple ignorance, and in
secret speak against it to those with whom they may be bold, and say, their
religion is naught, yet (being merchants) to avoid poverty they travel
thither amongst the rest. So true is that common and commendable saying:

Impiger, ex tremos, currit mercator ad Indos:
Per mare, pauperiem fugiens, per saxa, per ignes.
that is,

The Merchant man though slow of soote,
To th'Indian shore does run:
By sea, by land, by fire, by sword,
That poverty he may shun.
Yea there was one of their chief learned men in Constantinople, Anno Dom.
1604. spoke against their Alcoran, which is the book of all their religion,
but he lost his head for his labor, which he willingly and cheerfully yielded
unto them.

All the way which we traveled this day, was very pleasant; and all the ground
both hills and dales very fruitful, according as it is described by Moses.
Deuteronomy. 8. 7. 8. and Deuteronomy. 11. 10 and, 11. And we came that day, about two of the
clock in the afternoon to a village called in the Arabic tongue J-nel Tiger,
I-nel Tiger.
that is (by interpretation) The Marehants eye, wherein there are two very
fair Castles for travelers to lodge in from danger of wild Arabs, which
abound in those parts: we took up our lodging in the nearest castle which is
the fairest.

After we had refreshed our selves, Tabor.
and slept a while: being hard by mount Tabor, we desired to ascend to the top
of it, and so much the rather because I had read that the Papists to prove the
primacie, or supremacy of Peter above the rest of the Apostles, allege this
for one argument, after that Christ was transfigured upon mount Tabor (as we
read Matthew. 17. 1. 2. etc.) and there appeared to them, Moses, and Elias,
talking with him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, It is good for us to be here,
Let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one
for Elias. Which (say they,) at his request was done, and remain there to this
day: which to make trial of, we took Ally (one of our Ienesaries,) and rode
toward the mountain. But understanding that it was very dangerous by reason
of wild Arabs which lodged in caves and rocks and bushes about the mountain,
Mount Tabor
we hired some of the principal Arabs to go with us and guard us from the
rest. And as we went, we beheld the prospect of the mountain to be very
pleasant, somewhat steepy, but not very high (in respect of some other
mountains thereabout) nor very large, but a comely round mountain, beset with
trees and thick bushes, which at that time of the year flourished green: we
rode so far as we could for steepinesse and then left some of our servants at
the foot of the mountain to keep our horses, and took upon us to clamber up
on foot, which we should never have been able to have done, had there not been
very high grass, sprigs, and bushes to hold by.

One of our Arabs went up before us, as fast as if it had been even ground, but
we came very slowly after, which he perceiving, would look back, and often
use these words to cheer us, Gel, Gel, Gel, that is, come, come, come: And
sometimes these, Ish halac Seeach; How do you masters. We were almost al out of
breath, and one of our company cried, For the love of God let us return, for I
can go no further, Oh I shall die, I shall die. Whereupon one of us being
nearer the top than he himself supposed, (to cheer the rest) said, Come
cheerfully; I am on the top; which somewhat hartued the rest: otherwise they
had all gone down again.

Being on the top, we rested a while to take breath; and then we walked up and
down the top of the Mount, and saw only one house, or rather low cottage,
uninhabited, having only two dark rooms in it, meet for foxes or iackals to
lodge in, and saw no sign of any other tavern or tabernacle. Only we
understood that (many years since) there was a Monastery there inhabited by
Popish Friars, but being molested by the Arabs, took away the holiness with
them, and left the mountain behind them; yet still they call this mount Tabor
in Italian Monte Santo, that is, the holy mountain: as if there were some
inherent holiness in the mountain.

And two days after we had been there, came a Jesuit and two Friars with a
young Gentleman of Parris in France, who was a Protestant; and some other
company with them, Conference betwixt a Jesuit and a Protestant.
who had a desire to ascend to the top of this holy mountain, and went all
together until they were weary which was at the foot of the mountain, and
in the heat of the day: wherefore the French Gentleman said, he would stay for
them there until they returned, but was himself already weary and would go
no higher; the Jesuit and Friars reproved him, and called him fool, and told
him he did not know what he might merit by going to the top of that holy
mountain. Merit-mongers.
Merit, (said the Gentleman) what may I merit? Thou may merit (said they)
50. years pardon. The Gentleman, to break a jest with them, asked them
whether he might merit fifty years pardon for the time past, or for the time
to come: If (said he) for the time past, I am not so old (for he was but twenty
two years of age) if for the time to come, he did not think he should live
so long. They answered him, if he did not live so long, he might give the
years which remained to his friends. Yet could they not persuade him to go up
any higher.

The same Jesuit called this French Gentleman, Heretic, because he did not
profess himself a Romanist: He denied his argument; and although he was not
able to dispute with him Scholar-like, yet he answered him Christian-like, and
told him that he did abhor the name of Rome, and the nature more: The Jesuit
said, Thou scarce know the name, much less the nature of Rome. The
Gentleman replied, I have read of both. And that Rome had a name according to
her nature, he showed by these verses following:

Roma quid est? Quod te docuit praeposterus ordo.
Quid docuit? Iung as versa elementa, scies.
Roma amor est: Amor est? Qualis? Praeposterus. Vnde hoc?
Roma mares. Noli dicore plara: Scio.
The same in English:

Rome what is? A Love. A love? What love?
Contrary unto kind.
How so? Rome loves men. No more.
Cease speech. I know thy mind.
He further told him, that he had been at Rome, and both seen and heard there
the manner of life which he and his fellow Jesuits lead, and that he was not
ignorant how odious they were even unto other Papists, amongst whom one of them
gave him a Hymn made (by a Papist at Rome) against Jesuits, a copy whereof he
gave unto me, which I have thought good here to set down, that the world may
see that unity both in Religion and Conversation amongst them, whereof they
make such boast, when as one sect of Papists makes Rythmes and Hymns to the
disgrace of another, in such ridiculous manner as follows:

Hymnus hic est modus vitae, Quo vtuntur Iesuitae.
O Pulentes civitates,
Vbi sunt commoditates,
Semper quaerunt isti Patres.
Bonum panem, melius vinum,
Non recipient peregrinum,
Neque surgunt ad matutinum.
Carne pingui vitulina,
Per quam exul est vaccina,
Plena est horum coquina.
Indij Galli atque pauones,
Quorum cibus sunt An Italian word, signifying grain, wherewith they feed
their Poultry sat.
macherones,
Horum patrum sunt An Italian word, signifying bits, or morsels.
buccones.
Crocum, piper, cum amomo,
Et quae nullus sanctus homo
Habuit, habent isti in domo.
Quando vocant carcerati,
Bonis omnibus priuati,
Dicunt, Sumus occupati.
Sed sivocant potentes,
Diuitijs affluentes,
Rogant Deum and omnes gentes.
Diuitumque patrimonia,
Magnatumque matrimonia,
Ficta tractant sanctimonia.
Si quis dives infirmatur,
Pro eius morte Deus rogatur,
Quando hareditas speratur.
O lupinam feritatem,
Praedicando charitatem,
Nostram rapiunt haereditatem.
Habent opes Venetorum,
Grauitatem Hispanorum,
Et potenttam Romanorum.
Si quis quaerat regia officia,
Ecclesiastica beneficia,
Horum dantur amicitia.
Dominantur temporale,
Dominantur spirituale,
Dominantur omne: and vale.
The same in English:

This Hymn the usual form does give, In which the Jesuits do live.
TO wealthiest Cities, where the rather
They most commodities may gather,
Flies every Iesuitish Father.
Best wine they drink, and eat good bread,
With which no stranger sees them fed,
Nor notes how long they lie in bed.
With gross beef they will never deal,
But (for it) fat and tender veale;
To their full kitchins still they steal.
Jndian Cocks and Turkeies great,
Fed always with the purest wheat,
Are those bits that these Fathers eat.
Saffron, pepper, nourish them,
And roses of Jerusalem,
Of which no holy man does dream.
When prisoners for their charity call,
They say, We are deprived of all,
And must to our devotion fall.
But when their mighty friends, and rich,
Require their helps, they God beseech
For them, and through all Nations preach.
Th'inheritances of rich heirs,
And Princes nuptial affairs,
Disposes this feigned zeal of theirs.
When rich lie sick, and these men gape,
To have their riches feed their rape,
They pray God they may never escape.
O wild and woluish Cheuisance,
That when they charity advance,
They ravish our inheritance.
Venetian wealth they still apply,
Affect the Spanish gravity,
And build on Romes authority.
If princely offices be sought,
By Jesuits they must be wrought,
And with rich spiritual livings bought.
In temporal state they bear the bell,
In spiritual state as much excel,
In all states they command. Farewell.
We our selves, when we had seen enough this Mount, returned again to the
Castle with good stomachs to our supper, and wearied bodies, desiring rest.
Tabor is distant from Galile not much above twenty miles.

March 25. being the Feast of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary, and
(according to the computation of our Church of England) the first day of the
year 1601. we traveled over very pleasant fields all the way, the fields of
Basan, not far from the Mount Basan, Mount Basan.
where there was exceeding good pasture, and fat cattle: only we wanted good
water to drink, and our wine was spent, and the day exceeding hot.

We saw in our way some remnants of that old Tower or Fortress mentioned 2.
King. 5. 24. where Gehazi the servant of Elisha ouertooke Naaman, and took of
him two tallents of silver, and two change of garments. We saw also many other
places worthy observation, but (for want of a good guide) we knew not the names
thereof, for the Turks inhabiting those Countries, have given new names to
most places. This was the pleasantest days journey we had in our whole
travel. I never saw more fertile ground and pleasant fields, and so much
together, all the whole day from Mount Tabor to a village called vulgarly
Ienine, but of old En-gannim, En-gannim.
whereof we read Josh. 15. 34. Near unto this village is the place where Joel
beheaded Sisera, mentioned Judge. 4. 21.

En-gannim is distant from Mount Tabor twenty two miles. It is a very pleasant
place, En gannim.
having fine gardens, and orchards, and waters about it. We stayed here all
the day ( March 26,) because (the Turks Romadan, which is their Lent, being
ended) on this day began their Feast called Byram; and our Jenesarie was loath
to travel on that day, being their Feast day, and so much the rather, because
his name also was Byram.

March 27. Riding from En-gannim, we were endangered twice: First, by certain
thieves dwelling near unto En-gannim, who made us pay Caphar or pole money
twice, once at En-gannim. And when we departed from thence, they pursued us
with bows and arrows, and other weapons: we withstood them long in parley; at
length every man prepared his instruments of death ready for battle. Our
Ienesaries kinsman Fa^olla had his musket ready, and being about to give fire,
was stayed by our Ienesarie, who saw not only these Arabs present very
desperate, with their bows and arrows ready drawn, but messengers also sent
to raise up all the whole rabblement thereabout upon us: he told us we were
best give them content or else we were all but dead men: wherefore to avoid
further danger, we gave them their own desire, upon condition, they would
pursue us no further, nor suffer any of their company to molest us: the
chiefest of them answered, Stopherlo, Stopherlo, that is, God forbid, God
forbid we should do you any harm, if you pay us what we demand; which we did
with all speed, and rode away from them being glad we were rid of them.

About ten miles from them we rode through a wood, (a very fit place to harbor
thieves, who had killed certain men traveling that way the day before, and
took away both a man and horse from the Carauan which followed after; and a
woman also riding on an ass with their carriage) and (as our guide told us) he
never traveled that way but he saw some men killed: and therefore bade us all
charge our pieces and shoot off when he bade us, though we saw no body, lest
the wild Arabs should set upon us on the sudden, lying in ambush, which we
also did in a place most dangerous, to daunte the enemies before we saw each
other. But before we came unto the most dangerous place, there ouertooke us
many Turks well armed, who dwelt in Jerusalem, and were glad of our company
thither. And shortly after we had discharged every man his piece, we saw a
great company of Arabs on an high mountain near unto our way, yet out of the
reach of our shot, who perceiving us to be too strong for them, durst not set
upon us.

And so (by the providence of God) we came that night to an ancient and famous
City, Samaria.
(situated in a fruitful valley betwixt two mountains) called Sychar, a City
in Samaria, mentioned John 4. Near whereunto we saw Jacobs Well, where our
Savior Christ asked water of the woman of Samaria. Sychar.
We came thither in good time, for we were exceeding thirsty, Jacobs Well.
and drunk thereof liberally and freely. The water thereof goes down very
pleasantly, like unto milk.

From Jacobs Well we went into the City, and lodged in a very ancient and
stately Cane, but very badly kept. It had been better for us to have slept by
Jacobs Well, as others did; for here we slept on the hard stones near unto a
Chapel in the middle of the Cane, under two or three great fig trees and
mulberry trees, where we were scarce safe from thieves; for we had some things
stolen from us in the night, whiles we slept under the trees on fair broad
stones, whereunto we ascended by a fair stone pair of stairs, six or seven
steps from the ground. Sychar is distant from En-gannim 27. miles.

March 28. We stayed at this City in Samaria, called of old Sychar, Napolis.
but at this day commonly, Napolis; for the Holy Land having been often
conquered, has had new names imposed unto all the chief Cities, and most
other towns and villages also: partly by God^rey of Bullome, who conquered
that country in the year 1098. But chiefly by the Turks, who conquering the
Holy Land and all the Country about it, have changed the names of places, to
root out all memorial of revenge in the hearts of posterity (as they
supposed.) Yet the chiefest Cities are still known by their ancient names,
though other names have been given thereunto. As for example, Dam^s^^s which
was so called of old, is still known by that name, though the Tucks call it
Sha^. And Ieru^alem which they call Cu^, or rather Kuds, coming (as I suppose)
of the Hebrew word (...), Kadasch* which signifies to sanctify or to be holy:
or of Kadosch, which signifies holy. And (as they themselves say) the word
Cuts or Kuds (whereby they call it) signifies a holy City in their language.

The cause of our staying this day at Sychar, was this, it was told us that 2.
Emeers or great Lords in our way to Jerusalem were up in arms one against an
other, and therefore it seemed good to our Ienesary that we should stay for
the Carauan, that we might be the stronger and pass safer. But when the
Carauan came, they pitched their tents by Jacobs well, and purposed to stay
there two or three days at the least. We were loath to stay so long being now
but thirty miles from Jerusalem, and therefore resolved to proceed in our
journey without any longer expectation for company which was uncertain.

March. 29. We departed from Samaria to Jerusalem, and met many soldiers in
several companies by the way, who knowing our Ienesary and other Turks in our
company, let us pass by them quietly, and gave us the salam alick, that is
peace be unto you.

The first part of this days journey was somewhat pleasant; but, the nearer we
came to Jerusalem, the more barren and tedious our way was. About ten of the
clock we came to a great forest or wilderness full of trees and mountains.
When we were on the top of this mountain, we saw the maine sea on our right
hand, and small Ships sailing toward Ioppa.

About three or four of the clock, we came to a ruinous village called Beer,
Beer,
but of old (as it is reported) Beersheba, which in former times was a great
City: And it is said to be the place where Joseph and Mary coming from
Jerusalem (the feast being ended) missed the child Jesus, and sought him
sorrowing; and returning to Jerusalem, found him in the Temple amidst the
Doctors, hearing them and posing them. Our purpose was to lodge here all night,
being all of us weary and hungry, and all our provision spent. But finding
nothing here to be had for money either for man or horse; and understanding
that Jerusalem was but ten miles off, we went on in our way somewhat faintly
five or six miles, Jerusalem.
and then beholding the prospect of the City, we were somewhat cheered and
revived, and solaced our selves with singing of Psalms, until we came near
unto the City.

Many Greeks dwelling in Jerusalem, seeing us a far off, came to meet us,
supposing their Patriarch had been in our company, who came two or three days
after us.

We dismounted from our horses at the west gate of the City Ioppa gate.
called Ioppa gate, or the Castle gate; which is a very strong gate of iron,
with thirteen pieces of brass ordinance planted on the wall about the gate.
We stayed in the porch of this gate, and might not be admitted into the City,
until we were searched by an officer (as the manner is.) In the mean time
there came to us two Italian Friars, viz. Padre Angelo, and Padre Aurel^o and
kissed our hands, and bade us welcome, and told us that two other Englishmen
were at their house, viz. master Timberley, and master Borell.

When we were searched without the gate by a Turkish officer, and delivered up
our weapons to the porter to keep for us in the gate house until our return
(because no Christian may enter into Jerusalem with weapons) these two Padres
led us to their Monastery; at the gate whereof we were searched again by
another Turkish officer before we might enter into the house. For the office
of the former searcher at the gate of the City was only to receive the
weapons of all Christians, and deliver them safe to them again at their
departure. But this searcher went further and searched all our carriage which he
caused to be opened, to see whether we had any gunpowder or any other engines
there. For they are very suspicious of all Christians, fearing, lest for
devotion to the place, they should work treason; therefore they suffer not
Christians to enter into the City weaponed, lest they make insurrection against
them when they are many together, and conquer the City, as heretofore they
have done,

To this end also is the City walled about with strong walls, and fortified
with four strong gates and a Castle, (built by Sultan Soliman) and every gate
well planted with ordinance for fear of Christians. And partly for hope have
they environed this City with such strong walls, that Christians for devotion to
the place, might come and build within the walls and be subject to the Turk.
For though their walls be large and strong, yet there is great room within
the walls to build more houses then are there, for there are fields of Corn
within the walls of the City; and the houses stand very thin, scattered, and
dispersed, here one and there two or three together; there is not one fair
street in all Jerusalem as it now is.

After they had thus narrowly searched al our carriage, even to our Cases of
Bottles, we were admitted into the Monastery; at the entrance whereinto, met us
master Timberley and master Boreel, and then Signior Franciscus Mannerba the
Padre Guardian of the monastery, and all the rest in order, and bade us
welcome, and led us into a fair parler and set good cheer before us, and
served us themselves.

After supper we delivered them our letters which we had brought from the
Venice Consul of Aleppo and other Italian Merchants there in our behalf.
Which when they had read, the Guardian said, our custom is, when stangers come
to us, to call them the first night to Mass, and to Confession, and to give
every man a candle to hold in his hand at Mass time; and at night to wash
their feet and to bring them to bed, and to many other ceremonies during the
whole time of their continuance there.

But as for us, they understood by letters what we were; and told us that we
were so highly commended by their Patrones and Benefactors, the Venice Consul,
and Merchants of Aleppo, that if they should show us half the favor which was
required at their hands, they should themselves lie without doors, and suffer
us to rule and dominier at our pleasures. And that therefore they would not urge
us to any thing against our consciences, but give free liberty both of persons
and consciences as if we were in England, or in our own houses elsewhere: and
so much the rather because they understood our Merchants were rich, and hoped
to gain by us. In regard whereof, although it were Lent, wherein they eat no
flesh, yet offered us Hens, Eggs, Milk: any thing that was there to be had for
money, they requested us to command it.

And during the time of our continuance there, he commanded one Padre Aurelio
to attend upon us, and see that we wanted nothing; and another of his brethren,
one Padre Angelo, to be our guide abroad and to show us al ancient Monuments
and places worth seeing either in the City or out of the City.

These kind speeches being used, they brought us to our chambers where we
should lodge all night, and provided for uery man severally a good neat bed
with fair sheets and all things very wholesome and handsome, where we slept
sweetly, and refreshed our wearied bodies all that night very comfortably.

But although they dealt thus kindly with us (at the instance of their
benefactors) in giving us liberty of conscience, yet they deal not so with
others. For some I do know who have been there, and made no conscience to do
as they have done, according to those verses:

Cum fueris Romae, Romano vi^ito more:
Cum fueris alibi, viuito more loci.
That is,

When they are at Rome, they do what there is done:
When they are elsewhere, they do as they do there.
But they should rather remember that which Baptista Mantuanus (an Italian)
writes of Rome:

Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedite: Romae
Omnia quum liceant, non licet esse pium.
The same in English:

Would thou live well? depart from Rome:
All things there lawful be,
Except to be a godly man,
Which thing is rare to see.
The same Baptista Mantuanus writes of them thus:

Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignes, Thura, Praeces, Coelum est venale, Deusque
The same in English;

Rome felleth Temples, Priests, and Altars,
Fires, Frankincense, and Prayers.
Yea Heaven, and God himself, for gold,
At Rome is to be bought and sold.
Wherefore, An admonition to such a^ travel to Jerusalem.
I admonish those who have a desire to travel to Jerusalem hereafter, to take
heed to themselves, that they make not shipwreck of conscience; for if they
come not well commended, or well monied, or both, there is no being for them,
except they partake with them in their idolatrous services.

True it is, that the Turks give liberty of conscience unto all that come
thither; but they give not entertainment unto any Christians in their houses.
And the Greek Patriarchs are poor, and not able to protect such as come unto
them for refuge. These Padres, though they be Papists, yet have they rich
benefactors, and want nothing, and (for the most part) very kind and courteous
to strangers in all things, liberty of conscience only excepted, wherein they
seek to make other like unto themselves, and to seduce them from their faith,
and to win them to the Church of Rome: and offer unto them who have money in
their purses, to make them Knights of the Sepulcher; but no good English
Subject will accept of that order of Knighthood; for at the receiving thereof,
they swear to be true to the Pope, and to the King of Spain, and to other
things, which no man can do with a good conscience.

And this kindness and liberty of conscience, which we found amongst them, we
imputed not so much to the men, as to our own money; for it cost us charo,
viz. 100. duccats for our entertainment: for we knew them to be of the Court of
Rome, and were not ignorant that,

Curia Romana non captat ouem sine lana.
that is,

The Court of Rome no sheep does receive,
Unless to them her fleece she leave.
And as one John a Monk wrote of them,

Curia vult mar^as, bursas exhaurit and arcas;
Si bursae parcas, fuge Papas and Patriarchas.
Si dederis marcas, and eis impleueris arcas,
Culpa solueris, quaque ligatus eris,
Intus quis? Tu quis? Ego sum. Quid quaeris? Vt intrem.
Fers aliquid? non. Sta foris. Fero quo^ satis, Intra.
The same in English:

The Court of Rome does aim at marks;
It sucks the purse, and soakes the arkes.
If that you mind to spare your arkes,
Come not at Popes nor Patriarchs.
But if you frankly give them marks,
And with good gold stuff up their Arkes,
I warrant then you shall be free
From any kind of penalty.
Who Is within? Whose there? I per se I.
Why, what would ye? Come in.
Bring you ought? No. Stand still.
But I do. Go ye then in.
The same Monk writes, that Rome being founded by thieves, retains still
somewhat of her old qualities. For (says he) she is called Roma, quod rodat
manum, of greasing the hand:

Roma manus rodit; Quod rodere non valet, odit.
Dantes exaudit, non dantibus ostia claudit.
Curia curarum genetrix, nutrixque malorum.
Ignotos notis, inhonestis in aequat honestos.
The same in English:

Rome is a raker, and spightfull hater of the empty hand:
She hears the giver, but others never, but lets them stand.
Her Court a cage of cares; of mischiefs eke the mother;
She uses knaves like honest men, and strangers like a brother.
Well, though we were fleeced amongst them, yet had we liberty of conscience;
and safety of persons, and had no way any wrong offered us by them, either in
word or deed; but by two or three Jesuitical Iebusites (who were strangers
there as well as we) some unkindness was offered us behind our backs (for
they durst not any way deal with us to our faces) in railing upon us and our
Religion, as it was told us at our departure by one who heard them: Especially
by a Jesuit named (but undeservedly) Benedictus, and yet he could neither
benedicere nor benefacere, neither say well nor do well, by any that were not
of their sect and sort: And therefore deserved not to be called Benedictus,
(but per Antiphrafin.) but rather Maledictus, a maledicendo, as one of our
company wrote unto him in this manner, in meeter, although barbarously: truly,
although not poetically:

Audi, tace, lege, benedic* benefac, Benedicte:
Aut haec peruerte, maledic, malefac, Maledicte.
The same in English:

O Benedict, hear, hold thy peace,
Do well, say well (O Scorner)
Else let thy name be Meledict,
Perverting all the former.
After we had rested one night in Jerusalem, the first day we walked about the
City our selves without our guide, only to view the City, not inquiring of any
place what it was, because on the morrow after, and every day during our
continuance, (which was about fourteen days) our guide either walked on foot,
Resolution of a doubt concerning Peter's warming himself in the high Priests
hall.
or rode with us, to see all things worthy observation. Only one thing I
observed and duly considered the first day I came, which was this; that where
as we read in the Gospel, that when our Savior Christ was betrayed, and
brought into the High Priests Hall, Peter following him, stood by the fire, and
warmed himself; the reason is there yielded, because it was cold. And the
memorial neereof we observe in March or April. We being there at the same
season of the year, found it exceeding hot, and hotter than it is usually at
midsommer in England: It seemed strange unto me, how it should then be so cold,
that Peter should creep to the fire, and now (at the same season) so hot that
we could not endure the heat of the Sun. And on the sudden I knew not whether
the season were altered, or the passion of Christ might be referred to some
colder season of the year. But after I had been there a few days, the very
place resolved that doubt: For there fall great dewes, and before the Sun
have dried it up, it is cold, and in the night season (about that time of the
year) somewhat cold, as I felt by experience when I slept in the fields all
night. And Peter having watched with Christ in the night, might well be cold in
the morning, before the heat of the Sun had expelled cold.

And yet another reason (in my judgment) more effectual than the former, 2.
Reason.
may be yielded for this matter, taken a simili, that as the same night that
Christ was borne, there was great light at midnight, in token of comfort; And
at the time of his death, great darkness at noone day, in token of sorrow (for
the Sun put on his mourning garment, and was ashamed to look upon that
cruelty which the sons of men were not afraid to commit) So at the time of
his betraying there might be extraordinary cold wether, in that an
extraordinary person suffered, and an extraordinary work was in hand. And
extraordinary things happened about the time of his passion, as we read in the
Gospel, viz. How the graves did open: The dead bodies of Saints (which slept)
arose: The veil of the Temple did rent in twain from the top of the bottom:
The earth did tremble, and the stones did cleave asunder. These things declared
that a notable person suffered. The like alteration might be in the coldness
of the air, and alteration of wether. And although we read it not in express
words, yet (since I have seen Jerusalem) it seems to me, that it may be
gathered from that place of the Gospel, where it is said, Simon Peter warmed
himself.

For (if we truly calculate the time) the season of the year was hot
ordinarily; and Simon Peter at that season of the year was so cold, that he
was driven to the fire, and therefore it should seem to be unseasonable
wether, and extraordinarily cold. These considerations have satisfied my self
(howeuer they satisfy others) until I hear or read some more sufficient
reason.

Jerusalem is in Palestina. Antiquity of Jerusalem.
It was the goodliest City that ever was in the East parts of the world. It was
first called Moria, where Adam was created of the red earth of Moriah, a Mount
in Jerusalem: which Moriah was one of the heads of Sion Hill, where Isaac was
offered, as a figure of Christ, the holy of holiest, Genesis 22. 2. Which place
was afterward called Salem, where Sem or Melchisedech dwelt, where afterward
Isaac was offered, and upon his offering it was called Jerusalem, Genesis 14. 18.
where was the threshing place of Araunah the Iebusite. and of old Jerusalem was
also called Iebus. 2. Sam. 24. 16. Where Solomon was commanded to build the
Temple. 2. Chron. 3. 1. And it was called Hieron Solomonis, that is to say,
Solomon's Temple. And after by corruption Hierosolyma.

A particular declaration of such thing as we saw at Jerusalem, divided into
three parts.
AFter we had rested one day at Jerusalem, or walked for our pleasure up and
down: All the rest of the days of our continuance there, we had our guide
with us, who had dwelt there fourteen years, and showed us all such places as
are worthy viewing or visiting, both in Jerusalem, and many miles round about
Jerusalem: and we gave him the hearing of all, but did not believe all, for
they seemed to me to be of three sorts. viz.

1 Either apparent Truths.

2 Manifest Untruths.

3 Or things Doubtful.

Those I account apparent Truths, which I could either confirm by reading,
orie^son. The ch^e^est whereof I will briefly set down (for it were too tedicus
to write ^ll) referring the rest to me next letters, or conference at our good
meeting, which I hope in good time God will grant us.

Apparent Truths.
And first of al it seems to me a manifest truth, that Jerusalem (that now
it) stands in the same place where the old Jerusalem did: not in every
respect for length b breadth, but with some difference: for whereas we read in
the Gospel, that they crucified our Savior Christ at Golgotha* without the
City, near whereunto there was a new Sepulcher wherein never man lay, and
therein they laid his blessed body. Now both Mount Caluari^ where Golgotha
(that is, The place of dead men's skuls was) and the Sepulcher (at least wise
the place where the Sepulcher was) are all enclosed within the walls of the
City, which were built by Sultan Solomon, or Sultan Selim. So that, although
some difference there be; yet it is not so great but that a man may boldly
affirm, that part of this City is now in the same place where the old
Jerusalem stood; and a part thereof somewhat removed.

Yet some (who have never been there) have presumed to affirm, that no man
knows the place where old Jerusalem stood, and that no sign of the City is
to be seen. But that the place is still the same, it is manifest by the
situation thereof, which is described in the Scripture to have been near unto
these mountains, Moriah, Syon, Caluarie, Mount Oliuet, Bethan^a, and Be^^p
^age; and not far^e from Bethl^hem: which Mountains and places are there still
to be seen, and called still by the same names.

And whereas they say no sign of the City is to be seen, grounding their
assertion upon a place of Scripture falsely applied, and say that Christ
promised to destroy Jerusalem, and not to leave one (...) upon another that
should not be overthrown: If they read the place Luke 21. 6. they shall find
that spoken of the Temple which they apply unto the City. And I do verily
pe^swade nay self, that even in Jerusalem that now is, there are stones upon
stones yet leaft, which we^e never overthrown since the first building of the
City: for on the foundation of the walls in many places (especially toward
Mount Oliue^) there are yet stones to be seen, which both for quantity and
quality may be thought to have been there ever since the beginning: for they
are of huge length and breadth, and of a black color; like whereunto I never
saw any in any other place of all my travels. And over these old stones, the
upper part of the walls are a new building, differing both in color and
quantity from the foundation stones.

But of the Temple it is true which our savior Christ spoke Luke 21. 6. For
when as the Prophets denounced Gods judgments unto the Jews, unless they
repented, they flattered themselves in their sins, and cried, Templum Domini,
Templum Domini, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of thy Lord. But through
their profanation, they made the Temple of the Lord a Den of Thieves. They
cried, Lord, Lord, but they did not his will on whom they cried. For sweet
grapes, they yielded sour; for hearty and sincere service, hypocritical and
painted shows of Religion. Their glory was in the external beauty of their
material Temple: They wondered at the stones and goodly buildings, at the
gorgeous furniture and precious gifts, wherewith it was both outwardly and
inwardly adorned and enriched. Whereupon our Savior (to take away the cause of
this vain hope, and foolish joy) took occasion thus to Prophecy of that
glorious Temple: Are these the things that you look upon? The days will come
wherein there shall not be left a stone upon a stone, which shall not be
destroyed. This Prophecy was as evidently accomplished as it was made: for
thirty eight years after they had crucified Christ, their promised Messiah,
the Lord of glory; God raised up the servants of his wr^th Vespatian and Titus,
Emperors of Rome, who beseeged, conquered, and razed their Jerusalem, made
havoc of the people as of dogs, murdered eleven hundred thousand, man,
woman, and child, of that cursed Nation. Then was fulfilled they cry of those
crucifiers, His blood be upon our heads, and upon our children. It has been,
and shall be for ever.

Yea the violence of the Romans proceeded further, and pulled down the Temple,
and laid it flat with the ground, insomuch that (according to the express
words of our Saviors Prophecy) they left not one stone upon another. The
Jews sundry times, having obtained leave of Julian the Apostata, attempted to
build it up again, but it would not be; for what their hand builded in the
day, the hand of the Lord (most miraculously) hurled down, and burnt with
lightning by night, the foundation thereof being shaken with earthquakes. And
at this present day there is built in the place thereof a Muskia or Turkish
Church, whereunto no Christian may have access. It is not in the form of
Salomons Temple, but after the manner of their Turkish buildings: Not for the
service of the true God, but of the false Prophet Mahomet.

Unto the truth also of sundry other particulars (which they (...).
showed us) do I subscribe. And first of all, that at Beth-lehem, six miles
from Jerusalem, is the very place where our Savior Christ was borne: although
now ( honoris gratia) they have made it more beautiful, being built of marble,
at the cost of Queen Helena the mother of Constantine, (whom some report to
have been an English woman, borne at Colechester) who has there also erected
a stately Church, which to this day is very well kept. They told us also that
S. Hierome dwelt there, which cannot be denied.

From Beth-lehem we rode seven miles further, Ziph.
to the desert of Ziph or wilderness of Judah, where David hid himself when
he was persecuted be Saul. We went also to the hill Country of Judea, where
the virgin Mary saluted Elizabeth the wife of Zacharias, Judea.
mother of John Baptist being great with child, and at her salutation the babe
sprung in her belly.

From thence we rode further to the wilderness of Iudaea, where John Baptist
preached; and in the middle of the descending of a mountain, they showed us a
chamber hewn out of a lively rock four square, with a door and a window, and
a place for his bed and table, by which place there issues a fine spring of
water out of the rock, at which place we drank of the water.

From thence returning to Jerusalem, they showed us (in the way to Gaza) the
water where Philip Baptized the Eunuch, Act. 8. 38.

At our return to Jerusalem, they brought us to mount Oliuet, from whence our
Savior Christ ascended into Heaven, being from Jerusalem a Sabbath days
journey, not two miles.

From the mount of Olives, we went to Bethania and Bethphage, which are now
ruinous villages. There are many fig trees still growing about these two
villages, and many Olive trees about the mount of Olives: we cut off some of
the branches and carried some sprigs with us.

Nearer Jerusalem, they showed us mount Sion and the mount Mo^^^h, on which
Abraham offered his son Isaac; we saw also the valley of Iehosaphat, and the
valley of Iehinnom and the brook Cedron which is now in the Summer time a dry
channel. Some part of the tower of Sylo and the poole Syloam, and the potters
field bought with the thirty pieces of silver which Judas had for betraying
his master Christ; called Acheldama: which to this day is a place to bury
strangers in.

Ascending up Acheldama, we entered into a porch, and looked down into a vault,
where we saw many dead bodies; covered only with their winding sheet knit at
the head and foot, without any coffin: and some of their sheets were so white,
that they seemed to us to have been buried but few days before we came.

The valley betwixt Acheldama and mount Syon, is called the vale of Iehinnom.

The valley of Iehosaphat is three miles in length, reaching from the vale of
Ieh^^nom to a place without the City; which they call the Sepulcher of the
Kings.

Lastly, they brought us to mount Caluarie, to the place where Christ was
crucified, over which there is now erected a stately building with many Isles,
Chancels, or little Chapels, in it for sundry Nations, which were al there at
that present time as we were, and lodged there on Saturday at night before
Palm Sunday.

We entered into this Temple to see the Sepulcher on Saturday after dinner, and
came not forth until Monday about eleven of the clock, for there are
lodgings adioining unto it, into which we entered through the highest Chancell
or Chapel.

Before we were admitted hereunto, every man paid nine Shekines to see the
Sepulcher, which money the Syniacke: or chief Ruler of the city has, who is
a Turk. Into the Sepulcher we went but one at a time with our guide; the
entrance thereinto is low and narrow. The place it self is but the length of
an ordinary Sepulcher, it is now as high as an Altar or table, of fair marble
stone, and there are lamps continually burning night and day.

That this Sepulcher stands in the same place as the Sepulcher did wherein
the body of our Savior Christ was laid, we made no doubt, because it was
agreeable to the circumstances of Scripture whereby the place is described.

But I asked our guide whether any part of the selfsame sepulcher wherein the
blessed body of our Savior was laid, were to be seen there? He answered me,
that some part of it was at Rome, and some other part of it lay enclosed under
that Altar; but not to be seen.

And further he told me, that at the first, after the resurrection of our
Savior Christ, all the whole Sepulcher was to be seen for many years space,
until strangers (who came to visit it) began to break off pieces and to carry
them away: then it was enclosed with bars, and to be seen through the
bars, but not to be touched, as some Sepulchers in Saint Paul's Church in
London are.

Yet they saw inconveniences herein, in that many used to cast into it the
first hair of their children, and some candles, and other things as an
offering thereunto; so that the place could not be keep neat. Wherefore Queen
Helena caused it to be enclosed in such sort as it now is, and covered it with
Marble.

But whether any part of the self same Sepulcher were underneath the same or
not; it gave me content that I had seen the self same place where the
Sepulcher of our blessed Savior was; as I in heart did then, and do still
persuade my self it is.

Many superstitious Papists exept on their knees to the Sepulcher, mumbling up
their prayers upon heads as they went, according to the definition of Popery,
which is rightly defined by Baptista Mantuanus, to be a Religion: Quae filo
insertis numerat sua murmura baccis.
Popery is a religion which uses to patter,
Aue Mar^ upon beads, and the Pater noster.


Not far from thence is the Sepulcher of Godfroy of Bul^oyn^ and King Baldewyn,
who conquered that country in the year 1098. And both of them lie there
buried, with the whole proportion of their bodies in stone, with these Epitaphs
about them.

An ^nscription written about the Sepulcher of Godfroy of Bulloyne at Jerusalem.

Hic iacet inclytus Godfridus de Bul'ion, qui totam hanc terram acquisi^it
cultui diuino, cuius anima requiescat in pace. Amen. That is,

Here lies famous GOD^ROY of Bulloine, who got all this Land to the worship
of God, whose soul rests in peace. Amen. And near unto it, about King
Baldwines Tomb, these verses are written:

Rex Baldewinus Judas alter Machabaeus,
Spes patriae, vigor Ecclesiae, virtus vtriusque,
Quem formidabant, cui dona, tributa ferebant,
Caesar Aegypti Dan, ac homicida Damascus;
Proh dolor, in modico clauditur hoc Tumulo*
The same in English:

Another Judas Machabaeus
(King Baldwyn) here does rest,
His Countries hope, the Churches strength,
The virtue both possessed:
Whom murtherous Damascus feared,
Egyptian Caesar Dan,
Brought gifts and tribute: yet (alas!)
This small Tomb holds this man.
This Godfrey of Bulloine was the first proclaimed Christian King of Jerusalem,
who refused to be crowned there, saying, that it was unfit that the servants
head should there be crowned with gold, where the Masters head had been
crowned with thorns.

Jerusalem is governed by Turks, but inhabited by Christians of sundry
Nations, whereof some come only to visit and superstitiously to worship there,
and so return into their countries. Others come thither to dwell, and exercise
their manual arts, with a purpose there to die, thinking that they shall
sooner go to heaven if they die there, than in any other place.

There were at Jerusalem (when we were there) Christians of sundry Nations,
especially Armenians, whereof some are called Georgians, and some Iacobites.
Their Patriarch was not there, but least sick, at Aleppo; but in his place he
sent an Armenian Bishop.

There were also many Greeks, Chel^alines, Nostranes o^ Nazaritans, Cofties,
and Abassens or Aethiopians of Prestar John's Country, whereof some of them
dwelt near unto Catadupa, which is a place in Aethiopia, where the fall of the
river Nilus makes such a noise, that the people are made deaf therewith that
dwell near it: Besides many Italians, Frenchmen, Dutchmen, and us five
Englishmen.

Many Turks also visited the Sepulcher of Christ; for they both think and
speak very reverently of Christ. And though they do not believe to be saved
by Christ, yet they say he was a great Prophet, but that Mahomet was greater.
And usually when they have ended their Ceremonies at Meccha, at their return
they visit the Sepulcher of Christ at Jerusalem. For they have an opinion, that
unless they visit the Sepulcher of Christ, and the Holy Land, as well as the
Sepulcher of Mahomet, their pilgrimage to Mecha were to no purpose, nor
acceptable to God.

But I saw not one Jew in all Jerusalem; for they are so hateful to the
Christians there, that they seldom come thither.

Manifest untruths.
BEsides these and many other matters which we there saw and heard, which I
account manifest truths, because there is Scripture or reason for them, or
both; they showed and told unto us, and especially unto others who would
believe them, many things which were false and ridiculous, whereof (to avoid
tediousness) I will name only some few, referring the rest to next Letters,
or to our good meeting, which it may please God in good time to grant us.

At Beth-lehem they brought us into the place which at Christ's birth was a
Stable for Oxen and Asses, but now a beautiful place built of stone, and
adorned with a manger of marble, and a crach over it, with an Ox and an Ass
of marble stone, and the blessed babe in the midst, and the Virgin Mary sitting
by.

And looking up to the roof of the house, they showed us a hole made of
purpose in the very top of the house, and told us, that through that hole the
Star fell down, which directed the three Kings of Collen of Christ: Wherein
they delivered three Untruths.

1 In saying that the star fell down into the room, whereas the Scripture
says, not that it fell down, but stood over the place where the babe was,
Matthew. 2. 9.

2. Secondly, they err in saying that they were three Kings of Colyn or
Colonia Agrippina (as it is called) whereas the Text says, There came wise men
from the East to Jerusalem. Colonia is not East from Jerusalem.

3. Thirdly, they err in setting down the number of them to be three, because
they brought three gifts, which is not so to be taken, but only that they which
came, presented unto him the chiefest commodities of their Country.

Yet at Colonia they persuade themselves to this day, that three Kings went
from thence to Jerusalem at the time of Christ's birth, to worship him. For I
having occasion to travel through Germany, stayed at Colonia Agrippina one day,
and went into the chief Church of the City, where I saw these verses written
on the wall:

Tres Reges Regi Regum tria dona ferebant,
Myrrha homini, vncto Aurum, Thura dedere Dea.
Tu tria fac itidem dones pia munera Christo,
Muneribus gratus si cupis esse tuis.
Pro Myrrha, lachrymas; Auro cor porrige purum;
Pro Thure, humili pectore funde preces.
The same in English:

Three Kings unto the Kings of Kings
Three gifts at once presented;
Which were Myrrh, Gold, and Frankincense,
Gold, as he was anointed;
Myrrh to him as he was a man.
And Frankincense as God:
So by thee in like sort must be
Three zealous gifts bestowed.
For Gold, present a per^ect heart;
For Myrrh, admit him tears;
For Frankincense, power from thy breast
A ^ume of humble prayers.
I had conference there with some, who would be counted learned, and they
understood that place, of three Kings who went from their City Colonia to
Beth-lehem, to worship Christ at the time of his birth, and very obstinately
and absurdly defended it.

In the way betwixt Jerusalem and Beth-lehem, they take upon them to show the
place (to ignorant travelers) where the Angel took up Abackuck the Prophet by
the hair of the head, to carry meat to Daniel in the Lions den: but they might
do well first to prove that there was such a thing done, before they
demonstrate the place where it was done.

Another matters of like sort they demonstrate in the way betwixt Jerusalem and
Beth-lehem, which is the Terebinth or Turpentine tree, under which the Virgin
Mary sat when she gave her child suck, traveling on foot betwixt those two
Cities.

And yet another in the same way as absurd as the rest, which is this. In the
high way or lane betwixt Jerusalem and Beth-lehem, they show a great broad
stone immovable, and euenwith the ground, (being a natural rock) where the
Prophet Elias in his travels was wont to sleep: and shame not to say that he
slept so often upon that stone, that the very impression of his body remains
in that stone to be seen to this day.

Truth it is indeed that there are in a stone that way, some hollow places, but
no formal proportion of a man; and who is so simple to think that it may not
rather come by the often falling of the rain upon it, then by often sleeping
on it? according to that verse,

Gutta cauat lapidem, non vi, sed saepe cadendo.
that is,

The drops of rain make hollow the stone,
By often falling thereupon.
Yea, they not only told us these false and frivolous matters, but also read
unto us as vain and fabulous matters as the^e. For whiles we were at table at
dinner in Beth-lehem in company with many Friars, one of them read a Chapter
out of their golden Legend in Latin, until the Guardian of Beth-lehem
(perceiving that we gave no ear thereunto, but confounded the parts of their
meal) enjoined him silence.

For it is their custom to divide their meals into three parts.

The first is Altum silentium, A method in (...)
that is, Deep silence; which is not only whiles they are saying grace, but
whiles one of them reads a Chapter out of their Legend of Lies, which they
call Legendarium aureum, the golden Legende; and say, that it excels all
other books, (yea the Bible it self) as far as gold excels other
metals. But why that book should be called a golden Legende (says Viues) I
do not know, since it was written by a man of an iron mouth and a leaden heart.

The second is Stridor dentium, that is, Chapping and Chewing; grinding and
grating their meat with their teeth.

The third is Rumor gentium, that is, Chatting and Prating, talking and telling
of news.

But we being weary of walking four miles on foot from Beth-lehem to
Solomon's Fish Ponds, and the fountain enclosed under the earth: at our return
to Beth-lehem we were weary and hungry, and were no sooner set at table, but
after some short Silentium, we fell to Stridor dentium. And whiles the rest of
the Friars were at their Altum silentium, giving ear to the fables read out of
their Legende; we were at the third part of our meal, viz. Rumor gentium;
talking both of foreign and domestical matters.

At Jerusalem on mount Caluarie in the house erected over the Sepulcher, they
show unto strangers a marble pillar whereunto, they say, our Savior was bound
when he was whipped for our sakes: but who is so simple to think that there was
any marble pillar erected without the City for such a purpose to punish
offenders (as they accounted our Savior Christ) at that day?

Or who knows the particular place where he was imprisoned at this day? Yet,
say they, this is the place where Christ was imprisoned whiles they were making
his Cross.

And this is the place where (the Cross being laid a long) our Savior was
fastened or nailed unto it.

And this is the place where the Cross stood: and have made there two holes
in sign of it, as though the nether part of his Cross consisted of two parts
or pillars.

And near unto the tower of Sylo they show a water coming from under a rock,
which they call the poole Syloam: and there (say they) did the Virgin Mary
wash the child's clouts.

And near unto the Sepulcher there is a great stone, cloven with hammers, and
set one piece a foot from another: and this (say they) is the veil of the
Temple which rent in sunder at the time of Christ's suffering, which is most
rediculous.

And although it be true (as we read Luke 19. 29. 30, etc.) that Christ rode on
that Ass which his two Disciples brought from the village over against mount
Oliuet, called Bethania or Bethphage, (for they are both together) and as he
rode from the mount of Olives to Jerusalem, the people cried Hosanna, and
spread their garments in the way, and cut down branches from the trees, and
strawed them in the way.

Yet it is a rediculous matter, and a superstitious custom for their chief
Friar called Padre Guardian, every Palm Sunday in the morning to send two of
his Friars from the mount of Olives to Betha^ia to fetch the Colt of an Ass,
and from thence (in an apish imitation of Christ) the great one rides on the
little one toward Jerusalem, and the rest spread their garment on the Ass, and
in the way; and cut down branches from the trees, and straw them in the way.

Wiser are the Turks herein then they, who although they suffer them to come
with their Ass to the gates of Jerusalem; yet admit them not to enter into the
gates in such manner.

And that Turk was to be commended, who (when the Friars followed their
Guardian in such sort riding on an Ass) seeing a simple Christian woman strip
her self so far, as in modesty she might, and spread her garments in the
way; took a cudgel and all to belabored her therewith, saying, Thou fool, art
thou so mad to think that this is Christ?

I, with the rest of my companions was at Jerusalem on Palm Sunday, but
neither saw this, no heard of it until it was done; for it seemed that they
were ashamed that any man of knowledge should behold such an absurd sight. But
the Frenchmen and Dutchmen, and many others of other nations followed them, but
not one Englishman, who could not patiently endure to see their Savior Christ
so dishonored.

At Bethania and Bethphage are many fig trees growing, and on this fig tree
(say they) Zacheus (being a man of worship in a famous City) like a boy climed
up to see Christ as he passed by. Luke 19. 2, 3.

And at Jerusalem they take upon them to show the place where Christ made the
Pater noster, and where the Apostles made the Creed, and where S. Stephen was
stoned, and where Judas hanged himself. Pilats house. Peter's prison. The
garden where he was betrayed. Where the Virgin Mary was in an agony. Where
Christ said to his mother, Ecce homo, and she said unto him, Ecce mulier.

On mount Oliuet there is a little Chapel, and therein a stone, whereon (say
they) our Savior Christ trod when he ascended into heaven; and the print of
his toes remain to be seen in that stone to this day. There is indeed a dint
in a stone, like unto the former part of a man's foot, but that it is the print
or impression of our Saviors feet, who will believe that he trod so hard to
leave any impression of his foot, or tipping of his toes behind?

At the foot of mount Oliuet, they showed us the valley of Iehosapha; and there
(say they) shall be set a throne at the day of Judgment, wherein Christ shall
sit and keep his last judgment, and all nations shall appear before him,
even in this very place, say they: as though any man could demonstrate the very
particular place.

The ground of this opinion they fetch from Joel 3. 2. where God says, I will
g^ther all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Iehosaphat,
etc. which place they do not, or will not understand. For it is to be
understood, either by the way of alluding, as having regard to the valley where
God miraculously slew the enemies of Jehosaphat: and so it may signify the
valley of destruction prepared for the wicked.

Or the Lord has respect unto the word Iehosaphat, which signifies pleading
or judgment: because God would in the day of Christ judge the enemies of the
Church, as then he did in the valley of Jehosaphat. Wherefore, it is not to
be understood of the material Josaphat, but of Josaphat so termed, because
the judgment which here shall be pronounced, shall resemble that which there
was executed upon the Moabites and Amonites and the inhabitants of Seir.

For what is Iosaphat (if you interpret it) but the judgment of the Lord? And
what is the valley, but the depth of that judgment? Into which Solomon does
assure the young man, that God will bring him after all the iollity of his
youth, after he has cheered himself in the days of his youth, and walked in
the way of his heart, and in his sight, Eccl. 11. 9.

After conference had with their Padre Vicatio (who was accounted the best
learned amongst them) having told him thus much in effect as I have here
written, he asked me a reason why the Prophet should specify this place, if he
meant not literally to teach the Church, that here this Judge was to be
expected?

My answer was: Two reasons had he to make choice of it, by allusion to which
he might shadow to the Jews the day of Judgment.

One was the freshness of that famous deliverances memory which the Lord had
wrought in it for them.

Another, the great resemblance that will be between the general, and that
particular judgment of his.

For from the time of this Prophet, yet had there not a man's age passed, since
(without stroke of theirs) the Lord had in this valley, within the sight of
this City, dispatched three whole armies, which had joined forces to beleager
them: And further, in such sort, as in that general judgment he will dispatch
the wicked. For as here, though the Moabite, the Amonite, and the inhabitant
of Seir, bound themselves against Judah, and yet could not prevail; so there,
though the Moabitish flesh, the Amonitish world, the savage inhabitant of Seir
the Devil, enter a league against the elect, yet shall they have no hand at
them. As theirs had, so shall these and their accomplices have, swords of their
own consciences accusing them, to turn into their own bowels.

And as the same place was to them a valley of judgment, which to the Jews
was a valley of blessing; so shall that great day be to the wicked a day of
judgment, for they shall receive that heavy doom, Go you cursed; which to
the godly shall be a day of blessing, for they shall hear that ioifull voice,
Come you blessed, etc.

This Friar was not satisfied with this answer, but persisted obstinate in his
error, and therefore I leaft him as I found him, referring him to the trial
thereof at the day of judgment.

They say also, that the stairs of the High Priests Hall, whereupon our
Savior trod when he went to be judged, are at Rome, and the nails which
nailed him to his Cross. But the Ecclesiastical History reports, that
Constantine made of those nails, when his mother had found them in the Mount
where Christ was crucified, a bridle and an helmet for his own use. So big
were the nails, and such wide wounds they made in his blessed hands and feet,
that they were rather dug than pierced: which also David foreshewed by these
words, Psalm. 22. 16. Foderunt manus meas and pedes meos.

And in the way from that which they call the High Priests Hall, or the
judgment Hall, toward Mount Caluery, at the end of the Lane, on the right
hand: Here (say they) they met Simon of Cyren, and compelled him to help
Christ to bear his Cross when he fainted.

And going down another Lane on the left hand, they pointed unto an house, and
said, Here the rich glutton dwelt, who refused to relieve Lazarus, which is a
Parable, and not an History. And though it were a true History, yet who can
point with the finger at the particular place where the house stood, Jerusalem
having been so often altered and transformed?

From thence turning up toward Mount Caluarie, on the right hand, Veronica.
they show (unto such as they think will believe them) the house where a woman
called Veronica dwelt, who seeing our Savior Christ pass by her door toward
Mount Caluarie, and all in a sweat, she brought forth a Sudarium, that is, a
napkin or handkerchiefe to wipe his face, which he received, and having wipt
his face therewith, gave it to her again: and therein (say they) remained the
print of his face, and is to be seen at S. Peter's house at Rome to this
present day.

There is also a City in Spain which braggeth of the same handkerchiefe: and
the one is as like to be true as the other, but both cannot be true. If they
have it at Rome, it cannot be at Spain: If at Spain, not at Rome, if there
were any such matter. For if both should be true, to which of them should that
prayer be said, which John the 22. Pope of that name published? and granted ten
thousand days indulgence to them that devoutly say this prayer following,
beholding either the picture of Veronica, or the handkerchiefe, which (as they
say) Christ gave unto her with the print of his face therein:

Salve sancta facies nostri redemptoris,
In qua nitet species diuini splendoris,
Impressa panniculo niuei candoris,
Dataque Veronicae signum ob amoris.
Salve decus seculi, speculum Sanctorum,
Quod videre cupiunt spiritus coelorum;
Nos ab omni macula purga vitiorum,
Atque nos consortio iunge beatorum.
Salve vultus Domini imag^ beata,
Ex aeterno munere mire decorata:
Lumen funde cordibus ex vi tibi data,
Et a nostris sensibus toll colligata.
Salve robur fidei nostra Christiana,
Destruens haereticos qui sunt mentis vanae*
Horum auge meritum qui te credunt sane,
Illius effigy qui Rex fit ex pane.
Salve nostrum gandium in hac vita dura,
Labili, and fragili, cito peritura:
Nos deduc ad propria, o FELIXFIGVRA,
Ad videndam faciem quae est Christi pura.
The same in English:

God save thee HOLY FACE of our Savior,
Wherein the form of divine light does shine,
Fixed in a little clout of snowy color,
Left on the Vernicle as thy loves sign.
God save thee WORLDS REPVTE, Mirror of Saints,
Which the celestial spirits desire to see:
Cleanse us from every spot of vices taints,
And range us in their Rank that blessed be.
Of our Lords FACE God save thee Image blessed,
Decked wonderously with the eternal bless,
With power given to thee, lighten thou our breast,
And free our senses from in comberances.
God save thee FORTRESS of our Christian Creed,
Who Heretics destroist, with minds misled:
Of those believing thee, augment the meed,
By The Image of thee made a King of Bread.
Preserve our joy in griefs life, which is this,
Sliding, and frail, soon gone, and most unsure:
O happy FIGVRE, lead us to thy bliss,
To see thy face (O Christ) which is so pure.
They take upon them also to show the place where Christ appeared unto Mary,
and said, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father, Ioh. 20. 15.
which place (say they) is the Center or middle part of the whole world. And the
place where Mary and Martha met Christ sitting on a stone, and said unto him,
Master, if thou had been here, my brother had not died. Also, the Castle
of Lazarus, and many such like things.

Sic perhibent qui de magnis maiora loquuntur.
That is,

So they report which of mole-hils
Would make a mountain by their wills.
And with such lying wonders do these lazy Friars bring silly strangers into
a wonder and admiration.

And these are the men which every third year are sent from Rome to soiourne
in Jerusalem, by fifty or sixty at a time, and are royally maintained by the
Pope and other Catholics. And when their regiment of three years is expired,
then others succeed them, and they return home, and are preferred, some to be
Bishops, and some to other Offices, because they have been at the holy City of
Jerusalem, and return from thence as holy as they went thither, according to
that old verse (with a little inuersion:)

Iudeae multi veniunt, redeunt quoque stulti:
That is,

To Jury bad men have recourse;
And go from thence as bad or worse.
These and many other false and frivolous matters, do they show and persuade
simple travelers to believe. And too many there are which give credit
thereunto, and publish the same to others for truth. It were better for such
credulous persons to stay at home and learn the truth, then to come abroad and
believe vntruts as many do.

Doubtful things.
BEsides these things already set down, whereof some are true, some most
untrue: Other things there are which they shall does see and hear whereof a
man may suspend his judgment whether they be true or false, until he either
see them, or receive further confirmation by reading, than he can by the
affirmation of some few superstitious persons. Of which sort are these
following.

About a mile distant from the City, they brought us to a rockey place, where
there is a vault under the ground as it were a large, porch, from whence we
entered into other intricate rooms as it were into a Laberinth, by a great
door of stone hewn out of the same place, having neither iron work or timber
work about it; but in the same place where it grew, there it is squared, and
made to turn about by the skilful Art of cunning Masons, and it is of a huge
thickness and greatness. So soon as we had passed that door, we crept very
low, as it were into an Oven mouth, every man with a Candle in his hand; and
so came into a dark room four square, with Benches round about of stone,
hollow, like unto Mangers, and therein (they say) some of the noble famely of
the Kings and Queens of Israel and Judah were buried.

From thence they brought us into another room of like sort, and for like use;
and so from one to another, that (without a guide) it was impossible to find
the way out. How many such rooms there are, I know not: but we were in six or
seven, and they offered to bring us into more, but being almost stifled for
want of light and air, we desired to return.

I make no qustion, but they were places of burial; for in the hollow benches
of stone we saw bones of men: but whether they were the sepulchers of the
kings of Israel and Judah or not, is my doubt.

At the entrance in the Temple where the Sepulcher is to be seen, the first
thing which they show unto strangers, is a fair marble stone, even with the
ground; and there (say they) the body of our Savior Christ was laid (when it
was taken down from the Cross) whiles it was preparing to be laid in the
Sepulcher. And here I saw many simple people (both men and women) kneeling
round about that stone, wringing their hands weeping, and crying, as if they
had seen the dead body of our Savior Christ there present before their eyes.
And they all to be-kissed that stone. Yea, more then kissed it, for some of
them rubbed their lips up and down upon that stone very often, until they had
rubbed off the skin and made their lips bleed. And some of them rubbed their
beads upon it, that some inherent holiness might come out of that stone, and
rest upon their beads. I censure this superstition of theirs over favorably,
in numbering this stone among doubtful things, which I might rather have
reckoned amongst manifest vntruts. For if there had been any such stone, it
would have been either carried away by pieces, or removed whole to Rome as other
relics have been. But this stone is too new to be of any such Antiquity.

At Bethania they brought us into a Celler under the ground, Bethania.
over which there was no house, where Lazarus lay dead when Christ raised him
up to life.

And at Bethphage they showed us the ruins of Simon the Bethphage.
Phariseis house, where Christ sitting at dinner, Mary Magdalene came and
powered ointment on his head, and washed his feet with her tears, and dried
them with the hair of her head. For although no man denies but that such
things were done, yet a man may make doubt whether those were the particular
places where they were done.

In Jerusalem they showed us Porta aurea, Porta aurea.
that is, The golden gate; (or place where it stood) called in former times,
The beautiful gate of the Temple: which the Turks have walled up with stones,
because of a prophecy, viz. that the City was once won there, and shall be
again won at the same place.

Walking betwixt the valley of Gehinnom and the walls of the City, our guide
showed us a dark Chapel under the ground without windows, wherein (he told
us) the idolatrous Jews did offer and sacrifice their children unto a brazen
Image, called Moloch, which, being made hot, they enclosed them in the
hollownesse thereof, and so slew them. And lest their crying should move any to
compassion toward them, they made a hideous noise with Tabrets and Drums.
Whereupon the place was called Tophet. Iere. 7. 31.

On the top of mount Oliuet, Sodom.
they showed us thirty miles off the lake of Sodom, which unto us appeared to
be very near. And they told us thereof many strange matters. Not only that
which the wiseman Solomon reported of it in his days. Wisd. 10. 7. that it
smoaketh, (as if hell had there found a chinmey whereout to vent his smoke)
and that the trees bear fruit that never comes to ripeness: but further,
that it neither breeds nor preserves any living creature. It is commonly
called Mare mortuum, that is, The dead sea; being so contagious, as if a bird
but fly over it, she is presently dampt, and falls down dead into it. And as
S. Jerome says: If by the swelling of Jordan, the fishes but flow over into
it, they die straight and flote above the waters.

Yea, they further reported unto us of their own knowledge, having (as shey
said) seen the same, that it casts out continual filthy vapors, by whose
stinches and breath the mountains and valleys many miles about, are (as it
were) scorched, blasted, and made utterly barren: besides many ugly shapes and
shows of terror in it: besides apples of goodly color growing by it, which
being touched turn all to smoke and ashes.

They also told us that the pillar of salt whereinto Lots wif^ was turned is
yet standing.

But of these and many other things which they showed us, and told us, I make
doubt; either because I have not seen them my self, or having seen them, do
not believe them.

When I shall with mine eyes behold them, I will more boldly make report of
them, and of other matters which offer themselves unto my sight in my return,
but which way to return we have not yet determined.

And thus being loath to interrupt your serious domestical affairs with
foreign and frivolous matters, I humbly take my leave: and leave you to him,
who never leaves his.

From Jerusalem. Anno Dom. 160^. April 7. Dominationi^ tuae obseruantissimus,
GVILI^LMVS BIDDVLPHVS.
Witnesses hereof our companions in travel, William Biddulph. Ieffrey Kirbie.
Edward Abbot. John Elkin. Jasper Tyon.




LECTOR I.
Miraris (Lector) doctus cum dormit Homerus,
Conni^ere aliquo tempore Chaleograph^s?
Quae sunt maiores naui, mea penna notauit;
Ipse tua lima corrige (quaeso) leaves.
To the Reader.
Do thou marvel (gentle Reader)
That some errors pass in printing:
When as sometimes learned Homer
Slips and sleeps for all his learning?
My pen has mended greatest faults,
Which herein are neglected:
Good Reader, let the lesser faults
With thy pen be corrected.
Faults escaped in printing.
Page 6. lin. 5. for we, read were. Page 14. lin. 1. for Priamus, read Priam's.
Page 38. lin. 30. for Domineere read Dominier. Page 39. lin. 35. for These read
They. Page 65. lin. 20. for (...) read rice. Page 72. lin. 27. for Tarrcia read
Tartaria. Page 84. lin. 7. for offend read offended. Page 103. lin. 5. for
leaning read learning. Page 104. lin. 13. for Cergesens read Gergesens.


