THE VNRIGHTEOVS IVDGE: OR, JVDEX CRETENSIS, The Judge of CRETE. A SERMON
PREACHED within the Jurisdiction of the Arch-Deaconry of Norwich, at a General
Court, in April last past, 16. 1621. By Mr. YOUNGER of South-Walsham.

Dat Rosa mel Apibus, quasugit Aranea virus. LONDON, Printed by G. ELD, for
Henry Fetherstone, and are to be sold by Christofer Puntar of Norwich
Booke-seller. 1621.

The Unrighteous IVDGE.
LVKE 18.2. There was a Judge in a certain City, who feared not God, nor
regardsd man.


I Must open my mouth in a Parable, and declare some hard sentences; that it is
a Parable the Evangelist makes it plain: (Alas! (if it be a true story) that
any Judge should be so wicked.) Christ spoke also a Parable unto them, that
under the figure and similitude thereof, we should be stirred up, always to
pray, and not to wax faint.

The subject or matter of the Parable runs upon a discourse of a Judge and a
Widow. For the widow at this time I meddle not with, she comes not within the
verge and compass of my Text: All my business must lie about the Judge. And I
find him here so ill, as I think I could not have lighted upon a worse: for,
he feared not God. And though he had never been so graceless and debausht,
that neither he had cared for God, nor God for him; yet (me thinks) he might
have had the good word and applause of men, or given them some esteem. No, the
Text says, he was at a point with them too, for as he feared not the one, so
he respected not the other, he regarded not man.

All this while you see he is a very ill Judge, and I will promise ere we
part, he shall fare as ill at my hands. But I will gather and girt up my self
more closely to the words.

The parts of the Text are apparently two. Parts,


1. You see the Person. 2. The Qualities of the Person.
The Person for his Office is a Judge. Genesis 31.11.
And he comes here attended, as Judges use to do. Yea, Behold a company
comes: for he is waited upon in the text, with many followers, complements,
accoutrements, circumstances if you will. 1. Of the Time, which is not of the
present, but of that which is past. For Christ does not say, There is: no, it
seems they had a change, and their hap was better: great pity had it been,
so vile a man should have holden his place still; it is the likliest he was put
off; he was Iudex quondam; we see what Christ here says, erat; non est, there
is not; but, there was.

2. The word (...), in the Greek, is attended with the Article (...), as with
a little Page, and so it is (...), A certain Judge: He was but some one; and
(...), In a certain City. He was singular from all example, both for person
and place. A certain Judge, in a certain City. He was (...), A certain
Judge, as if he should say, it is not ordinary for men to be so wicked, and
(...), in a certain City, as if he should say, it is not ordinary in Cities to
have such Judges.

3. It is worth the noting, that the Article is (...) and not (...), he was but
a certain Judge; He was not (...) the only Judge, but a Judge of some
subordinate and inferior place; and whether he were a Temporal Judge or an
Ecclesiastical, we cannot tell, they had both in former times, as we have now.
And we know the widows cause comes as well before the Ecclesiastical Judge,
as before the Temporal.

4. Observe the place, he was in a City. But Christ does not say in Jerusalem.
No! that was the City of God, and it is likeliest there were Judges that feared
God: Nor in Samaria, yet there had been Judges wicked enough. Nay I do not
think, he was in any one City in all Israel or Judah, for Notus in Judea Deus;
God is well known in Iewry, His Name is great in Israel. It might be therefore
some certain City amongst the Gentiles. And we may as well suppose it, to be
some one City in the Isle of Creet, as any other where: The Apostle tells us,
from their own Poets, the Cretians are evil beasts, and if there were a
fowler beast then this, I have much maruayle. I pray see his qualities; they
are two.

1. Ex part Dei, He feared not God. 2. Ex part hominis, He regarded not Man.
It seems he had neither Religion, nor good manners. For first, where as in
each of these qualities, as about the skirt of Aarons robe, there was a Bell
and a Pomegranate, a Bell and a Pomegranate, Exodus 39.15. So here a quality and
the object, a quality and the object; as in the first member ex part Dei, the
quality is fear, and the proper obect is God. And in the second member ex
part hominis, the quality is regard, and the proper object is Man: and these
are positiuely, and really in every good man; yet here is a nullity, a
privation of them, as appears by the two negatiues, he feared not God. he
regarded not man; he was wanting in the one, he was wanting in the other.

Secondly, he was totus deficiens, wholly wanting; for whereas there are many
duties which belong unto God, yet this quality of fear includes them all; and
many duties and offices to be done to man, yet this quality of regard
comprehends them all; now because he wanted fear he wanted all the rest, and
so performed no duty unto God, and because he wanted regard, he wanted all the
rest, and so performed no good office unto man: He was void of all grace,
either to God or man.

Thus you see how this Judge is deciphered, and his Arms blasoned in the Text,
according to the words: But now let us go to the matter.

There was a Judge, and first of all, let it not seem strange that Christ in
this Parable, compares Almighty God, to this unrighteous Judge: for he does
not compare things that are equal, but the less with the greater: Thus; if a
man get his right by importunity, at the hands of a most unrighteous Judge,;
how much more shall the continual prayers of the godly pressing the ears of
God prevail with God. Besides, we know in Scripture that sometimes comparisons
to good purpose, are taken from things that are evil: as the coming of Christ
to judgment, is compared to the coming of a Thief in the night, 2. Pet.
3.10. Neither do Parables serve to prove, or approve every thing by their
circumstances; for then should diverse foul and gross absurdities arise. As in
that of the Rich man and Lazarus, Luke 16. For thence it should appear, that
the souls of the damned in hell should have material and fleshy tongues; as
also that in hell there should be water to cool, both which are ridiculous.
Again, that the damned ghosts should be zealous of Gods glory, in the
furtherance of man's salvation upon the earth: For Abraham is entreated by the
Rich man, that Lazarus might be sent to admonish his five brethren, and to
work their conversion, that so they might avoid those insufferable torments.
Saint Augustine therefore gives a good rule whereby to interpret Parables; not
according to the letter, but according to the sense. The scope and intent of
Parables, is wholly to be regarded. As in that of the Rich man and Lazarus, the
intent is to set forth the several and diverse estates of two men in this life,
and their several and diverse estates in the life to come, by reciprocal
proportion. So this Parable holds not in all, but in the scope and intent
whereunto it was uttered, as before is declared.

But for the Person, There was a Judge.
whose office was a Judge; There was a Judge, and thus far I like it very well;
yea, and that he should be in a City too, for an eminent place is fit for an
eminent person.

The Office of a Judge is of great Honor, of long Antiquity, of great
Necessity. First of Honor, because they are Gods deputies, ordained of him,
upon earth to be next under him: Judges and Magistrates shall thou make in all
thy Cities throughout thy Tribes, says God to Moses, Deuteronomy. 16.18. There is no
power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.2. God
assumeth unto himself the title of a Judge, else would not Abraham have been
so bold, Shall not the Judge of the whole world do right? Genesis 18.25. God
sits on their bench and judges amongst them, Psalm. 82.1. Their honor must
needs be great when he lays upon them his own name, God stands in the
assembly of gods: and he avouches it with his own mouth, Ego dixi, dii
estis; I have said ye are gods. Moses is called Pharaohs god: and Constantine
called his Bishops gods. Christ expounding that place of the Psalm before
rehearsed, says, He called them gods to whom the word of God was, John 10.34.
which is not to be understood of the general doctrine, directed to all the
sons of God, sed de speciali dominandi mandato, as Calvin well interprets it,
of the special charge of government, whether it be Civil or Ecclesiastical.
And they are so called, Ne quid admittant quod eos dedeceat, qui loco Dei
sedent: that they might do nothing injuriously, basely, or otherwise
unbeseeming, because they sit in his place, and are gods under God.

2. Their Antiquity appears partly by that which I have said before, they are
as ancient as Moses, who was both a Temporal Judge and an Ecclesiastical, and
so continued, till after he resigned his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to Aaron.
And after the death of Moses and Iosuah, the Governors over Israel for many
years together, were called Judges, of whom Samuel was the last. The Ephori
among the Lacedaemonians, and the Areopagitae among the Athenians, were Judges,
and these long since determined weighty matters, concerning their government,
and punished offenders.

3. The Necessity of their office appears many ways, but especially two:
First, in that Paul says, They are the Ministers of God for our wealth, Romans
13.4. For where good Judges and Magistrates are, there commonly good causes
thrive and prosper, Godly laws are conscionably administered, the glory of God
is advanced, and the kingdom of God is enlarged: and such have special right
and due interest in their places. Secondly, necessary, for they are the
Ministers of God to take vengeance on them that do evil, to bridle and
repress the corruptions and misdemeanors of wicked men, to punish the
looseness and exorbitancy of their lives, to suppress their insolences, root
up their vices, and righten the wrongs of the oppressed. And there are three
several species or kinds of punishment, which they may inflict, as Plato sets
them down: Either, first, to punish them in their bodies; or secondly, to
punish them in their purses; or thirdly, (...), to put to open shame.

Now as God places them in their seats of Justice, which are called the Seats
of the Mighty, but not that they should be over mighty in their seats,
obstreperous and combersome, and allows them also Princely or priestly
Roabes, ad gloriam and ornatum, Exodus 28.2. not so much for their own
carcasses, which are but earthly and mortal, as for the honor of their
places. As Seneca wrote to the wife of Nero the Emperor, Indue te delicate,
non propter te, sed propter honorem imperij: So God also has ordained and
required that they should be adorned, not only regijs vestibus, sed and regijs
and egregijs virtutibus, which according to Iethro's advice to Moses are these:

1. To be men of courage, to go through their affairs with a wise and a stout
resolution. For I do not think that Iethro's meaning was only that they
should be pollentes armis, but valentes ingenio, industrious, and able to
expedite causes with good dexterity and wit; and so they shall be sure to do
nothing, either incaute or inconsulte, rashly, or unadvisedly.

2. They must fear God which is both the beginning of wisdom, and the
foundation of all virtue, and they are woeful Magistrates and Judges, in whom
this fear of God is wanting.

3. They must be men of Truth, not only speculatiue, in knowing, discerning,
and judging, but also practice, in following a right judgment, and observing
the rules of truth. For there is as well veritas vitae, the truth of life, when
the conversation is framed according to the rule of truth; as veritas
iustitiae, the truth of Justice, in discerning right from wrong.

4 They must hate Covetousness: For that will quench and destroy all good
virtues in them. Paul says, it is the root of all evil; as that which gives
sap and nourishment to all other sin. And where this grows to the height, it
bears down all: yea, this detestable and accursed hunger of gold, what does
it not effect? nay, whom does it not affect? The Poets feign of Venus, that she
commits adultery in chains; but I am out of doubt, much wrong and wickedness
may Judges do in their places, who are either drawn on, or fast bound with
the golden chain of Covetousness. Hence it is that they are long-handed after
bribes, which Father Latimer calls a Princely kind of Theenery. Sure, it was
not for nothing, that as in old time, the Judges of Thebes were painted or
carved out sitting, which argued a settled moderation, a treatable, deliberate,
gentle proceeding; (for they should not be like evil Spirits in their places,
only to vex and torment:) and with eyes shut, or turned another way; as
having no respect of persons: So also were they portrayed without hands, vt a
donis essent alieni, that they should not reach after gifts and bribes, which
blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the ways of the just. They must have
an honest and conscionable intent to advance the glory of God, and punish vice;
and not be Aucupes Nummorum, coursing up and down in their Circuits and
Jurisdictions abirding after money: yet is this the maine disease of many,
(...). Other virtues are required in a Judge, (...).
as wisdom, and understanding, Deuteronomy. 1.15. but neither these, nor any other
before rehearsed, were in this Judge: yet was it very fit they should, for he
was in a place of eminency, he was in a City.

In a certain City.] In a certain City.
Which is not only to be taken for the fabric, position, situation,
habitation, charters, liberties, all which make a City: but for the people and
inhabitants, as 1 Samuel 14. When news came to Shilo that Hophni and Phinehas
were slain, and the Ark of God taken, All the City, that is, all the
inhabitants of the City, cried out. Nay thirdly, a City also is taken for the
whole body of a Country, as Marlorate upon that place of the Psalm, The Lord
keeps the City, he speaks there says he, de Reipublicae statu and
politia, of the policy and state of the Commonwealth. Take the word City here,
in any of these senses, I am sure it notes thus much, that Cities are the
speciallest and most remarkable places of a Country, and most commonly
contain under their jurisdiction the Villages thereabout. 2. They are the
seats of great men, and of great offices, and men in them preferred to office
and dignity, are the more eminent and conspicuous. 3. They are the ciuilest
places, and fullest of knowledge and good manners. 4. which is not the least,
they are the most religious too. Now all these, makes against this Judge, that
having his residency and abode in a City, a place of eminency, a place of
ciuility and good manners a religious place, and where perhaps, he needed have
gone but a few steps to his Temple to have worshipped; yet that he should be
so irreligious as not to fear God; or have so little ciuility or good manners,
as not to regard man. And so I come to his Qualities.

1 Ex part Dei. He feared not God.

But before I go further, I pray do but note. This is a very strange
Testimony that Christ here gives of a Judge, There was a Judge in a certain
City who feared not God, neither regarded man. I should rather have thought it
had been a good Testimony, to have been given of an Usurer or a Drunkard. And
if Christ had said, There was an Usurer in a certain City, or, There was a
Drunkard in a certain City, and either of these, neither fearing God, or
regarding man, this had been somewhat; nay, very probable. But to speak thus
of a Judge, who bears an office of Honor, of Antiquity, of Necessity: one who
sits in the room of God, to execute his Judgments; horresco referens, I
tremble to speak it. O thou blessed Son of God, the eternal Wisdom of thy
Father I that (...), Heauen-dropping dew, whose words are as Aples of gold with
pictures of silver, inwardly rich, inwardly precious, evermore to singular and
special purpose, whatsoever thou did, whatsoever thou spakest was for our
instruction. For surely, hereby he would teach us, that 1. whatsoever their
persons or their places be, if they be wicked and do wickedly, let it not be
concealed, but declared, spoken of, and spoken of so, that posterity may take
notice of it. For to this end are the sins of good men and bad men too in
Scripture recorded and related. Let their faces be made ashamed, who knows,
whether the diuulging and publishing of their faults may bring them to
repentance, as being humbled and stricken through with sorrow and contrition.
Excellent is the speech of that Heathen man, Sireprche^di fers aegre,
reprehende^da ne feceris; If they think much to hear of their wickedness,
let them abhor to do it. Yea let others hear and fear by their example.
Why should the Scholar be spared for hope of his learning, or the Gentleman
for his birth, or the Doctor for his dignity, or the Judge for his authority,
if they be shameless or exorbitant? And if we may not spare our right eye or
our right hand, if they be causes of offense; why should we then spare the
offenses of others, who should be eyes and hands to ouersee, order, and settle
us in a good course, by their discipline and example. I confess greatness
thinks it self much privileged; and the sin of a great man, like mount
Sinai may not be touched. Yet are the Prophets commanded to cry aloud and not
to spare; and the Minister of God he must be veronensis, and not placentinus.
As Gedeons Soldiers had in one hand a Lamp, in another hand a Trumpet: so
we must have a comfortable shine to enlighten some, a shrill and warlike sound
to rouse up others. Yea let every good Minister know, that he is as the Arc,
wherein was as well the rod of Correction, as the Manna of Consolation.

2. He speaks this to let us see, that sometimes wicked and vile men, men void
of Gods fear and of all goodness, are promoted to places of office and
dignity. And this is as great a plague as may be; dishonorable to God,
disgraceful to the place, impatible and grievous unto the people. What a
storm of dreadful imprecations does the Prophet call for from heaven, Psalm.
109. like a rain almost of fire and brimstone, a very tempest of evils, upon
wife, children, posterity, goods, or what else were more dear, smiting all
these as with the stings of Scorpions? The first of them all that leads the
dance, as Judas lead the cursed band of Soldiers, is, Set thou a wicked man
to be ruler over them. I think there could not be a wickeder then He this,
for first,

He feared not God.] Who feared not God.
And here I pray consider, first, the Quality, fear; which in Scripture is
taken many ways, especially two.

1. For the worship and service of God, as Psalm. 33.11. I will teach you the
fear of the Lord, that is, I will instruct you rightly concerning the true
worship of God. And Esaias. 29.13. Their fear (says God) toward me was taught
by the precepts of men: that is, their religion, and manner of worship was
learned by man's doctrine, and not by my Word. And our Savior Christ, Mat. 15.
interprets this place after the same manner, In vain do they worship me,
teaching for doctrine the precepts of men. The oath that Jacob took Genesis
31.42. was by the fear of his father Isaak. As if he should say, I swear by
that God whom my father worships. For God is sometime called by names
effectiue, as when he is called Our health, our strength, our salvation.
Sometime obiectiue, as when he is called Our joy, our hope, our fear, because
he is the object of all these, and the scope and end of all our worship and
service.

2. Fear is taken for an awful dread and reverence of God, whereby we make
conscience of all our actions and words, as standing in his presence. Elias
thought that Ahab would have supposed him but an idle fellow, when he told
him, that neither dew nor rain should fall in Israel of three years, 1
Kings 17. and therefore adds, that he stood in the presence of God, whom
because he feared with an awful regard, it behooued him to make conscience of
what he spoke. It was the speech of the Thief, unto his fellow Thief upon the
Cross, Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same condemnation? as if
he should say, Do thou not consider the place, and case, wherein thou art?
Stand thou in no fear of him who now takes vengeance on thee for thy
forepassed iniquities? And do thou still persist to revile, and rail upon
this righteous man? Fear thou not God? This kind of Fear is expressed by
David, Psalm. 4.4. Stand in awe. Nay, take Fear in this place which way you
will, this Judge feared not.

Again, consider the object of this fear. God; And him either as he is
absolute and entire of himself, his most lively and perfect essence; (...);
Ens ille; Ille qui essentiam suam a seipso habet; the perfection of whose
nature, is the absolute constitution thereof, as wholly complete within it
self: Or, secondly, consider him in his Attributes and properties, wherein he
is, the same with himself; For, Quicquid est in Deo, Deus est, according to
the Schoolemens rule: the Lord of Hosts strong and mighty great and glorious,
the strength of Israel, yea of the whole world; clothed with unspeakable
Majesty as with a garment: The glory of his Face far more glorious then all
the glorious lights of Heaven: the whole beauty of Nature, but a spark of that
beauty wherewith he is beautified. Especially consider him in his Justice; a
dreadful God, a God of vengeance, pouring out his wrath like fire, and
reserving it for thousands: He looks upon the Angels and they tremble; He
faceth the Heavens and they melt; touches the mountains and they smoke;
shakes the Earth, and her pillars fail; distempereth the Seas, dries up the
rivers, rendeth the Rocks in sunder like a thread of flax. Bashan is wasted,
and Carmel, and the flower of Libanon is wasted. The Lords way is in the
whirlewind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet. Thou,
thou O God art to be feared, for who can stand before thee when thou art angry?
Smoke goes out of his nostrils, and a flame of fire out of his mouth, coals
are kindled thereat. Moses could not endure the sight of his presence, for he
was afraid to look upon God: nor the people endure to hear him, O let not God
speak unto us, lest we dye.

Or in the second place. Take God in the sweetest propriety of his Nature.
Love, mercy, sauing-health, light of his countenance, patience,
long-sufferance, liberality, his amiablest disposition, favor, grace,
abundance of his goodness, graciously interpreting our offenses, setting by
his Justice, as the steward in the Gospel set by his accounts, and when the
debt is an hundred, sets down but fifty; Nay utterly cancelling our
indictments, blotting all our wickedness out his remembrance: I say, take God
either simply as he is of himself; or in regard of his properties, and those
the most eminent and conspicuous; as he just, and a God of vengeance, or as he
merciful and a God of patience; All is one with this Troyan horse, this
Cyclops that warreth against heaven, and cares neither for Jupiter nor his
Thunderbolts, respecting not his dreadfullest looks, no, nor yet his sweetest
and pleasantest nature of mercy, I say all is one; He feared not God.

We have had too much of him in this. Nor regarded Man.
But now we are come to the second quality, He regarded not man: and yet
surely Man in many respects deserves some regard. The perfection of nature, the
sweetest, compleatest model of all his works; the very centrum and epitome of
all his creatures. He, who rightly deserves to be styled OMNIS CREATVRA, The
Philosopher says that Man is miraculorum omnium miraculum maximum: a miracle
of miracles. And David acknowledges himself, and in himself all others, to
be maruelously made, Psalm. 139.

The Stoics made him to consist of soul and body as we do. But the
Platonicks who were a diuiner sect, made man a diuiner thing; and said, that
he was wholly soul or spirit, only compact and tied up together, with
certain fleshly and earthly ligaments. Indeed David says, he was lower then
God, and but a little; a little lower then God, Psa. 8.3. a very remarkable
creature sure, and deserving some regard.

Again, God at his creation spoke not of him, as of other creatures, fiat lux,
let there be light, and so of the rest, but, faciamus hominem, let us make man.
By which manner of speech, God intended, not any assistance, either of the
Elements, or Angels, to be co-workers with him in man's creation; or that he
spoke in the plural number for state, after the manner of the Princes of the
earth. But God almighty partly foreseeing there would be heretics afterward,
denying the Trinity, but especially, for the honor of this his exactest piece,
or workmanship, he speaks of the whole Trinity, as if the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost were in consultation together about the creation of Man: A creature
therefore of some regard.

Again, he was made into the Image of God; which though it be diversely
interpreted, and Augustine has many conceits, much ado about it; placing
this Image sometime in one thing, and sometime in another: and yet, that good
Father I am sure, not ignorant of that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.24. Col. 3.10.
where we may see how we are to understand this Image of God in man. I say even
this redoundeth much to his honor and regard, that by the right of his
creation, his very nature was conformable to the nature of God; Holy as he is
holy, righteous as he is righteous; I say for the Quality, though not for the
Equality, as having the same holiness in nature, though not in the same
measure. This Image was broken in pieces in the fall, and yet is repaired and
renewed again, through Christ (who is the substance of the covenant of Grace,)
in all those who have put off the old man, and put on the new: and some
parcells or remnants of those broken pieces yet remain (as the shattered
ruins of a demolished palace,) even in those, that are uncalled; as certain
notions in the mind concerning God, of the power of God, of good and evil, of
reward and punishment, which have no other use, but to leave men without excuse
in the day of vengeance.

Again, almighty God made many creatures in the world besides, as the Behemoth
by Land, and that Prince of the Ocean, the Leuiathan by Sea. Both which we
know Job notably discribeth. Of the latter he says, Job 41. I will not keep
silence of his power, of his parts, and of his comely proportion. The Lord God
made many others, diverse in nature, different in kind, infinite in number, and
has given to every one a several life, and several degrees of life, from the
Angel to the Emmet. But he made them not so much for himself, as for man, who
is (...) the very end and perfection of all these. To this purpose Christostome
speaks sweetly, Animalia fecit Deus propter hominem, hominem vero propter
seipsum; He made all the creatures for man, but he made man for himself only.
And he adds, that if God so graciously ministers unto the creatures for man's
sake, how much more does he minister unto man, for his own sake? And therefore
a creature of some regard.

Yet further, there is a special relation, alliance, affinity betwixt God and
man, as if he were bone of his bone: For we are also of his generation, Act.
17.21. It may be, says Calvin upon that place, that Aratus the Poet thought
there were some parcells of the divinity in men's minds, as the Maniches did
say, that the souls of men were of the nature of God. But the meaning is, that
man by the excellency of his nature, resembles some divine thing, and proceeds
as a special Beam, from that heavenly and divine nature; a creature sure of
some regard.

Nay further yet, God has made man animalsociale, a sociable creature, and
has given him a face of a very gracious and amiable aspect, a hand to
congratulate, an arm to embrace, a bosom to endeare, the very seat of
kindness, complacency and love; reason also, and speech, two singular and rare
prerogatives, beyond all earthly creatures. All, all complements of humanity,
as he said in the comedy, Homosum, humani nihil a me alienum puto: I am a man,
and I imagine no part of humanity, impertinent unto me. In that Theater, no
doubt, it is very probable, as in others of the like, were great store of
fools and vulgar persons, yet did this speech so naturally touch the
affections of them all, that Saint Augustine says, Epist. 52.
They all gave an admirable applause unto it. By all which it appears, that
man is a creature of some regard.

Yet this Animal bestiale, Animal obscoenum et olens, as one spoke of the
Scarab fly; this Heterogenian, whelpe of another kind, a very Misanthropos, an
hater of his own kind, a Tymon, demon, I say not the son of Belial, but
Belial himself: he has no more regard or humanity in him, then if the Rocks
had fathered him, the she-Wolfe had brought him forth, or that he had drawn
his milk from the Dragons in the wilderness. He regarded not man. (...).


The word here in the original used for regard, signifies more then curare,
or, curam habere, and yet that argues a manifestation of it in outward action;
but pudore, or verecundia afficere, or reuereri, an inward affection of
reverence: and so by consequence, an open, respective, gracious deportment and
carriage toward man. Here also is an Heterosis, or an Enallage numeri, which is
the surrogation of the singular number for the plural, usual in the
Scripture. Therefore to express it rightly Beza does well translate it, nec
quenquam reuerebatur, as who should say, It was not so much this man or that
man, but all were alike to him, He reverenced not any, He regarded not man.

What should I say to this uncivil Judge? we know the Gentiles (as Paul spoke
of the men of Athens,) were in all things too superstitious. Some of them
worshipped the Sun at his rising up, and regarded not his going down. Others
worshipped him at his going down, but respected not his rising up. If this
Iudex bellicosus, Theanthropomastix, If he had feared God, though he had not
regarded man, or if he had regarded man, though he had not feared God, this
testimony of him had not been so foul. But he was Totus in maligno positus:
He was wicked (...), a front et a tergo. For he neither feared God, who was
before him, nor regarded man, who came behind him, wicked a dextris et a
sinistris, He neither feared God, who was at his right hand, nor regarded man,
who was at his left: wicked, sursum et deorsum. He neither feared God, who was
above, nor regarded man, who was below. He feared not God, he regarded not man.

I pray tell me, what think ye, might become of him. For my part, I think
long to be rid of him, and so happly did that jurisdiction likewise, where he
had to do. And blessed, ever blessed be he, whosoever he were, that gave the
change; which was as gracious and welcome no doubt as a shower of the latter
rain. His people might have said of him, as they spoke in the Psalm; O when
shall he dye, and his Name perish? What became of him I know not; but sure I
am, he deserved no better doom then that of Laodicea, to be spued out of Gods
mouth: or else that which God spoke and threatened to Iehoiakim, Ier. 22.19.
They should not lament for him, or say, ah my Lord; alas, thy glory; but as a
dead Ass drawn and thrown without the gates of that City: though formerly he
had sat on his Bench, as an Ipse inter primos, -- now it might be spoken of
him, as it was said of Labienus, -- Nunc transfuga vilis.

Pliny writes of the Crocodile, Not. Hist.
lib. 8.25. that being well stuffed with his prey, and wallowing with his paunch
upon the banks of Nilus, he falls into a sleep, and in his sleep he gapes;
mean while the bird Trochylus pickes his teeth, and cleanses them one after
another, and goes his way; But then comes the Ichneumon, as perilous a Serpent
in Egypt as something else in England, and gets through into his bowels, tears
them a pieces, and so he dies. It is many times the just judgment of God upon
such men, who having greedy appetites, which are never of the best disgestion,
that being well stuffed with riches and wealth, either by the confluence of their
offices, or bribery of their places, fortifying themselves against Heaven,
wallowing in their abundance, to be secure: yet God meets with them at one
time or other; that though their inmost consciences be cauterized and seared
up, yet something, sub nomine pacis, works their shame and dishonor. What
should God else mean, Amos 4.2. when he threatens the wicked Judges of
Samaria, that he would take them away with fishookes, but that they should
swallow down somewhat into their throat, that should turn to their bane?

I have now done; Application.
And have been all this time in a Parable; I have gone through the Text, and
have showed you one point after another: Adhuc est paruulum, There is yet a
little thing behind, something to be further spoken by way of Application. And
as Christ in the former Chapter gives an Item for Lots wife, remember Lots
wife; so say I, Remember this unrighteous Judge. And though we might speak of
him, as God spoke of Amelech, Deleatur memoria Amelech sub coelo: Let the
memory of Amelech be blotted out from under Heaven; And though unworthy he is,
that any mention of him should come within my lips; yet a little remembrance
will not do amiss, for that, he has laid himself forth as an example.

And first of all, a Judge he was; A Judge.
it is Gods ordinance to set some above in place to rule, and others beneath in
places to obey, and as Iuuenal calls Eagles the servants of Jupiter, so such are
the servants and Ministers of God, by an honorable prerogative, in being his
deputies and vicegerents: And surely, had this man honored God in his place,
God would have honored him again: For, they that honor me, I will honor.
And let them further know that whom he aduanceth to such offices and
dignities, he expects they should walk worthy of their places, and not be
carried away, with sundry lusts of intemperancy, injustice, covetousness, and
the like, to the dishonor of God, and the irreuerence of their own persons.
It is very incongruous and unbeseeming, that he who by reason of his calling,
comes near unto God, there is none further from him.

Neither is this only for the Judge, but for all superintendents of what rank
soever they be; Especially Pastors and Ministers of the Church, (who have an
eminency of place, over the souls of men,) that they adorn the Gospel of
Christ Jesus, with soundness of Doctrine and integrity of life. The walls of
Jericho were beaten down, but by no other means then the Trumpets of the
Priests; and the strong holds of Satan are only battered down, with the
Doctrine of sound teachers. Their good example also of life, is of great force,
Nuga in secularibus, in sacerdotibus blasphemae, says Bernard, That which is
but a trifle, and as a matter of nothing in a Layman, is as ill as blasphemy,
or the sin against the Holy Ghost almost, in a Churchman, and therefore not
to demean our selves, as one spoke of the Monks of old time;

-- Qui praeter amictum
Nil aliud verae Relligionis habent.
Cut but the hair from the eye-brow, says S. Augustine, and how disfigured
will the face look, there is but a small thing taken from the body, but a
great matter from the beauty. Honor God therefore in thy place, by thy doctrine
and conversation, and whatsoever thy former frailties and escapes have been,
yet recompense thy forepassed sin, with a sanctified obedience, And let me
add this more, if thou have gifts of learning and knowledge, let them not be
smothered up and kept as concealed land, but return them to the right owner,
and improve thy Talent thou art trusted with to thy masters advantage; it will
be hereafter thine exceeding joy and comfort, though nothing in the world
comfort thee beside. And herein are many of us faulty, who are lazy and
negligent, making our Sermons as misers do their feasts, rare and seldom, but
then farced and furnished with such varieties, as tend to surfeit rather then to
profit. The flock of Christ should be fed and fed and fed, John 21. which
argues a continual feeding, yet some of us take liberty to do it when we list;
yea, it is almost a miracle to hear some of us speak: I would be more earnest
in this, but our Lay men do befriend us, and are quit with us in this kind,
for we cannot be so dumb as they are deaf; deaf at any thing that should
profit them in the matter of Salvation, and as deaf at any thing that makes
for our profit. In either of these like David's Adder, who refused to hear the
voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. But howsoever, let as well the
Pastor as the Judge make conscience of his duty. Compensat ille qui dispensat.
He that sets us to our task, gives us our pay; when our chief Shepherd shall
appear, we shall be recompensed for all our pains, Cum ad opus piger es,
quare ad mercedem festinas? How shall we think either to have joy or peace of
conscience in this life, or eternal happiness in the life to come, when we
are slothful to the work? What a blessed voice shall that be, when we hear
that blessed voice in the Gospel, Well done thou good and faithful servant:
thou have been faithful in a little, not a little faithful, no, that will
not serve the turn; but faithful in a little, that is, little was thy
learning or knowledge, to that which others have, in the deep things of God;
few thy gifts and ornaments, little perhaps, thy cure and charge, but because
thou were faithful in a little, I will make thee ruler over much, enter thou
into thy masters joy.

2. I may not omit this also, There was.
that Christ here says not There is, but There was, which implies, that
whatsoever the pride and insolency of this man was, either not to fear God, or
dis-regard man; yet he was either taken away by death, for evil things have
their periods as well as good; or which is likliest, secluded from his place,
through some accident disasterous, and so for an earthly punishment, became as
current and conversant a byword for matter of reproach as once was Daedalus in
omni fabula. Were he excoriate as once a Judge in Athens, and his skin hung
up in terrorem: Or were he expelled the City where he lived, and the gates
closed upon him: Or were he shut out of the camp and company of the Host,
because he was unclean, I cannot say, only Christ says here, there was,
there is not. I would ever have a Judge to remember three things. First, that
they are men, as himself is over whom he has his authority. Secondly, these
men he must govern according to a prescribed law, and not according to the
lawless affections of his own heart. Thirdly, he shall not always govern,
but as others have given place to him, so must he to others. In the mean time
therefore whilst he is in place, to demean himself in the fear of God, and
with due regard to man: In these striving to excel all that went before, and
to be a president to as many as shall succeed; wisdom, knowledge, gravity,
zeal, diligence, uprightness of heart, in his proceedings, are notable
ornaments in a Judge, especially to sanctify his person and his place, by
frequent invocation and prayer unto God. To have a pure and vncorrupt heart,
this, this will make him a star at the right hand of God; and that he shine
out amongst others of his rank, with that transparency and beauty, like
Mercury himself betwixt those radiant Orbs of Venus and the Moon.

Nor yet is this to be ouerpassed, In a certain City.
that Christ here says he was in a City. It was no marvel sure, his manners
were so good I think the basest village in all the Isle had been good enough.
It was the manner of the Cretians to boast of the number of their Cities, I am
sure they needed not so have done, of the goodness of their Judges. He this,
was in a City. And not unlike neither, but he had engrossed for himself a
fair house with gardens and orchyards; but I doubt he kept his Gates as fast
barred, as that purple Churl in the Gospel; and that he was none of the best
to the poor, because the Text says, he regarded not man. But this I am sure
of, that in this City where he dwelt, lay his authority and Jurisdiction,
because in the next verse, the widow that came to him for Justice, dwelt in the
same City. A great dishonor was he no doubt unto it. For in such populous
places as Cities are, where men converse within a wall, as several and diverse
almost in their conditions and manners, as in their trades and callings, the
decent, orderly and examplary life of the Judge and Magistrate who lives
amongst them, is of great consequence. For it stands as a looking glass before
the peoples eyes. And his good example is of better persuasion then the power
of his place: Else such Cities are as ill incombred, as that of Alexandria in
Egypt, of which Diodorus the Sicilian writes, that they nourished that great
bird Ibis to devour the garbage and offall of their City, and to cleanse their
streets, but he left of his own filth and beastliness more noisome behind
him. So such a one, by the institution of his calling is very profitable, to
purge and cleanse the places where his power lies, from enormities and
corruptions, which if his discipline were not, would grow noisome and
abhorring; yet when it comes to this, that he grows irregular and inordinate,
through his lusts and intemperancies; and has not ventrem been moratum, a
mannerly belly, Epist. 132.
as Seneca speaks, surely he leaves more stench and filth behind him, through
his bad example, then the good which he pretends to do, by virtue of his
place, can recompense or repair. Hence is it requisite that great care be had
of the choice of such. That face is but uncomely, wherein the eyes are bleare,
and full of humors; so it is but a corrupt and disfigured government, where
men of authority are aspersed and besmeared with the gross and odious
imputations, either of Luxury or injustice: Yea, to be thankful to God with
David, Psalm. 109.30. With great thanks, and to praise him amongst the
multitude, when he displaceth such, and places better in their rooms, for he
evermore stands at the right hand of the poor, to save his soul from
unrighteous Judges.

Thirdly, concerning his Qualities, Who neither feared God.
he is here noted with a black cole, that he feared not God. But we that
expect to receive the white stone, and in that stone a new name written, which
no man knows, but he that receives it, in what calling or place soever we be,
let us practice the contrary. For, first in a Judge, the want of this fear is
a wonderful debaushment; it will make him as proud as Herod, as cruel as
Nero, as profane as Julian, as unjust as Pilate, as sensual and beastly as
Heliogabalus, as covetous, dogged, churlish as Nabal, and perhaps as drunk
too; as dissolute as Baltasar, swilling and carousing wine before thousands,
prauncing over his cups, and calling to the seruitour, for the fullest measure,
and purest liquor, Ho!

Minister veteris puer Falerni,
Ingere mi Calices alacriores.
In the mean time, regardlesse of the judgments of God. The want of this
fear in a Paster or Minister, will make him as worldly as Demas, as ambitious
as Diotrephes, as carnal as an Epicure, as licentious as a Libertine, as false
hearted to his Cure, as Judas was to Christ.

The want of this fear in a Layman, will make him run into any disorder, even
to the shipwreck of his conscience: and here are many of you present, this day,
who I fear, unless His fear possess you, will launch out into a fearful
deep; rather then you will duly and truly present according to your oath;
daubing over faults, defaults, yea the gross sins of others, with the
untempered mortar of favor and conniuency: These things are in the ears of
the Lord of Hosts; when men shall come in open Court, present their bodies
before the Judge, their bodies and souls before God, who shall be their latest
and fearefullest Judge; and in the presence of them both, and all the blessed
Angels of Heaven, take a solemn oath, binding over themselves actually to
eternal vengeance, if they fail in their legal charge, and yet account no
more of the oath thus ministered, then if the wind had blown upon them, whereas
there goes a secret and unseen virtue out of the oath, as there did out of
Christ's vesture, either to justify or condemn them; I say again, These
things are in the ears (yea and in the eyes too) of the Lord of Hosts.

Generally in all men the want of this fear, is the foundation of all evil,
Holy and faithful Abraham, shifting for himself before King Abimilech, Genesis
20.11. for saying that Sarah was his sister, whereas indeed she was his wife,
and being demanded the cause why he did so, answered modestly and religiously
for himself, I thought thus, surely the fear of God was not in this place,
therefore they will slay me for my wives sake; giving us to understand, that
where the fear of God is not, no conscience is made of any sin whatsoever.
Hence arises all those gross and abominable sins of murders, adulteries,
drunkenness, profaning of the Lords Sabbaths, blasphemous oaths, deceitful
bargains, accursed vsuries, wherewith the land groneth, and I know not what!
And let men be reproved, and these sins smitten with therod of our lips, like
gunpowder (being scalt) they fly back in our faces, and offer to ouer-master
us. As insensible are they as Plinies Bears; vix vulneribus excitari possunt;
they stir not with many stabs, or like that Fencer at the ganies of Caesar,
whom Aulus Gellius mentions, that when his wounds were gashed and launced by
Surgeons, used to laugh at them: Or like those Celtes that Aristotle speaks
of, who were so mad and without passion, that neither by thunders nor
earthquakes, or the noise of fearful inundations, they would ever be moved,
or removed: Or like those old Italians, of whom I have read, that in the forest
tempests of Thunders and lightnings, they would shoot off their greatest
ordinance, and ring out their deepest bells, that the noise of the one, might
mitigate, the horror of the other; So insensible are men, and without remorse,
that they will audaciously contest, confront, oppose, and improve their
incorrigible wickedness to the height, against our loud and powerful
reprehensions; their hearts as fat Brawne, their souls impenetrable, even like
Jericho, shut up and enclosed. Hence is the cause of all, with this
Antesignanus Nequitiae, this Theomachus; they fear not God, or as Job says,
men have forgotten the fear of the Almighty.

Lastly, this Judge is here taxed with inciuility, Nor regarded man.
or want of good manners, he regarded not man: I wonder then if there were any
man regarded him, or gave him a good word, any good report. A good name, says
Solomon, is better then a precious ointment; yet with many, a precious ointment
is better then a good name: I have seen men outwardly smell of sweet perfumes,
but inwardly they have had an ill savor of all vices: yet men in high place,
above all things, are to respect this; carefully to avoid infamy, and ill
report, which quickly spreades out, and inlargeth it self, as we know in a
troubled water, one circle begets another, (...): and therefore the Poet said
well,

Fama malum, quo non aliud velocius vllum:
Mobilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo.
Few in high place but much regard this; howsoever this slow bellied,
swilbellied Cretian, wallowing in his stink and sink of iniquity, as Lot in
his drunkenness, commits abominable incest, with his two daughters, the elder
and the younger, sin and shame.

Secondly, He offended in the Negative, but let us carefully practice the
affirmative, namely to reverence and regard man. Yea I say man, cuiuscunque
conditionis, as Augustus spoke to that Roman Pollio, of what condition soever
he be. Though he be much thine inferior, he is made into the same Image
with thy self, endued with the same shape, and lives under the same
government and providence of the Creator, and (as thou ought in charity to
think,) within the compass of Gods Election. He is a man, Give him a civil
reverence and regard. The whole Law is reduced into two maine parts, The love
of GOD, and the Love of our Neighbor; the one begets the other: and he that
loves not his brother whom he has seen, can never love God whom he has not
seen, 1 John 4.20.

This love shows it self amongst other things by a civil and courteous
behavior toward man: Peter amongst other duties, 1 Pet. 3. requires this, Be
courteous to all men: and in the 3. of Titus 2. Put them in remembrance that
they be courteous. How courteous and respectfull were the sons of Heth to
Abraham, Genesis 23.6. being in a strange country, and put to it for a burial
place for his wife: In the chiefest of our Sepulchers bury thy dead? And
because they would show their regard the more, they add words enough, and
words good enough: None of us shall forbid thee his Sepulcher, but thou may
bury thy dead therein. It is the commendation of Gedeon, Judges 8.3. He spoke
courteously to the men of Ephraim. But it must not be such courtesy as David
speaks of Psalm. 28.3. To speak friendly to their neighbors, but imagine
mischief in their hearts: To be foris Cato, and intus Nero; of an outward
plausible countenance, and of inward malicious intendments. It was forbidden in
the Law to wear linsey woolsey; and I am sure they break the Law of God, who
wear garments wouen of simplicity and subtilty together. Once men saluted
hand in hand, says one, but now we cast arm in arm: But an handful of that
old friendship is worth a whole arm full of this new courtesy. Nay further,
we must be courteous, and give regard even to wicked men: So Paul behaved
himself before Festus, and called him noble. We must respect them not as they
are wicked, but as they are men; love their persons, loath their vices. A
wicked man may be of our acquaintance, and we may use him courteously, yet let
him never be our companion, to be used entirely. Be at peace with all men, but
at war with their vices. Again, there be, who will regard men, and use them
regardfully, but no further then they serve their turn; as Jeroboam sent his
wife to Ahijah the Prophet, and bade her carry him a present of bread, and
wafers, and honey, which Jeroboam would have scorned to do, but that he
thought the Prophet could benefit him by his advice. And such is the condition
of many in this age, who will regard a Minister, when they see they must make
use of him, either to be visited in their sickness, or that they might be
graced with a Sermon at the burial of their friends, or at their marriage, or
upon some other high occasion; otherwise we may go long enough ere we be
regarded or looked after.

But howsoever, this Judge was wonderful faulty, he gave no regard, whereas
our duty is to regard man, though he be a stranger, though he be an inferior.
What a special favor was that which God did to Moses, to call him by his
proper name. The Angel saluted Gedeon, The Lord be with thee thou valiant
man. But if he be set in place above thee, if a Father, if a Master, if a
Magistrate, or instead of any of these; give him that reverence and regard that
is due unto him. Which condemns the saucy malepartnesse of children, servants,
people; who will dishonor their Parents, despise their Masters, and contest
with their Rulers and men in authority, and brave them to their face: Both
Peter and Jude complain of these, 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8. I wish they were not so
ordinary as they are.

Yet further, if he be thy spiritual Father, thy Pastor and Minister, give
unto him a double honor, as well of countenance, as of maintenance, Regard him
as a man, but much more as a man of God, set over to instruct thee, and to
guide thy soul aright to the Kingdom of glory. How faulty are many of our ill
nurtured Laity in this kind; who look over us as high as Caedars; supercilious
and lofty like the Jews? They took no knowledge of Christ, that he was their
King, or of his Royal descent, or that he was the Redeemer of the world, and
should dye for the salvation of man: of all this they took no notice. They
knew him for a Carpenter, and a Carpenters son, and such to be his brothers,
and such to be his sisters. So we, we shall be readily known by the meannesse
of our birth and kindred, the leanness of means and living, the poorness of
our stipends, or what else may add to our disgrace; but not of the dignity
and excellency of our Calling, maintenance for our service, countenance to our
Persons; like flies they leave the sound parts, to suck at a botch; Let a man
so esteem of us as the Ministers of Christ, and the disposers of the secrets
of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. Obey them that have the oversight of you, for they watch
for your souls, as they which must give an account. I admonish that you have
them in singular love for their works sake. Carnal men and the common sort,
when they hear us thus to speak, they think we preach to extol our selves,
and to gain reputation. No, we say with David in the humility of our souls,
Non nobis Domine, non nobis, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name
give the praise: If we have regard and esteem at the hands of men, we have but
our due. But (mean while) let God have the Honor, by your obedience to his
truth, love to his word, by your care and conscience to practice those
doctrines which faithfully we teach: this shall be our joy, our crown, our
recompense sufficient; otherwise, none of his glory shall cleave to our fingers.

Finally, Conclusion.
All of us, whether we be in place to rule, or in place to obey; in place to
teach, or in place to hear; let us in the reverence and fear of GOD, so carry
and demean our selves to God and Man, That God even our own God may give us
his blessing, that he may bless and sanctify our government, sanctify our
obedience, sanctify our teaching, sanctify our hearing, and all good duties
of our life beside. I will conclude therefore with that prayer of the Apostle:
Now the God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that all our
hearts and souls may be kept blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. AMEN.

FINIS.

