Lord have Mercy upon Us. The World, A Sea, A Pesthouse. The one full of
Storms, and dangers, the other full of Soars and Diseases.

The observance from These, (though especially accomodated to the times of this
heavy Contagion,) fitted for all times.

For all Men, and all Times are sick, of the Cause of this Sicknese.

LORD have mercy upon us.

Imprinted at London for Henry Gosson. 1636.

To the Reader.
Punishment is the Companion of Sin: and although (like a man and his mate)
they do not go cheek by joule, like a man and his shadow they do: for like
that shadow, it is still the associate of Sin, and dogs his most private
retyrements though as seldom thought on as we think of our worthless shadow.

That it is thus, we see; though not, till we see it, to repent it: so
bedazeled we are with the beauty, luster and splendour that is spread by the
World over sin, and highhanded offenses. While on the other side, it dimmes,
and obfus^^tes that, that were it visible, (Virtue) in his self has beauty
enough to attract, (as the Adamant the Iron) all hearts to admire, and desire
it. That we may see this, and that, that is, Virtue, and Vice as we should do,
let us in this Picture of the World, presented as a Sea, and a Pesthouse,
endeavor so to see, as to know them; and knowing them, from thence learn to
love, and loath, as we should do.

This Lesson made perfect among us, we shall not so misplace our affections: so
follow the World, (the corrupt estate and condition, that followed the fall of
our first Parents, Adam, and Eve:) Nor do^te on he^ painted visor: for she
drinke^ her most bitter potion to them, that make her their porti^n. Bu^ lest I
too long keep the sight of her vanities from you, desiring GOD to purge our
Souls from her pl^gues, and our Bodies from the stroke of this Angel, I
conclude.

The. Brevv.

LORD have Mercy upon us, The World A Sea, A Pesthouse.
Compared to the Sea, in these many Reasons, Respects, and Resemblances
following.
1. By reason of the Motion, and Instability of it. 2. By reason of Ejection,
or Casting out. 3. By reason of the Creatures that are in it. and that in their
hourly devouring. 4. By reason of it is Term or bounds. 5. By reason of the
Multiplicity, or Multitude of Eminent and Imminent dangers. 6. By reason of the
many and Monstrous Shapes that are in it. 7. By reason of the Non-abiding, or
present and speedy passage. 8. By reason of the uncertainty of it. 9. By the
reason of the Sapor, Taste, or Relish of it. 10. By reason of the Voracity, and
Insatiability of it.
Of the First.
The Motion and Instability of it.

THe Sea is ever flowing and ebbing: now Elevated; now Deprest: Continually
swelling and falling.

So the world: it is never still, ^rat qu^et: now l^tting up; another while
casting down: Nay many times, working these con^raries; that is: of
E^altation, and Depres^^on, upon one, and the same in an instant.

I have seen the ungodly exalted, and Flourish, as a green Bay Tree: yet he
passed away; lo ^e was gone; I sought him, and her could not be found.
Psalm. 37. 35, 36.

Man shoots forth, as a Flower, and is cut down: He vanishes as a shadow
and continues not. Job. 14. 2.

Our delights are like Io^^'s Gou^d: Now spread, now dead. While they are, they
rejoice us; as that Go^^d did that good old Prophet: But gone like that (which
suddenly was, and was not) the pri^ation as much torments us. ^ona. 4. 6, 7.

M^^danc prosperity is a staff of a Cane, (...) Reed: it may seem to be solid
and firm, but he that shall rest upon it, or put any trust unto it, shall
find what it is, when it breaks: when it hurts, w^^r^ it seemed to help: and
pierces through that part it supported. Isa. 36 6.

Among the waves of this Sea, thus do we Rise, thus fall: upon this Billow,
we Swim; under the next, we ^^nke: Now Flourish; now perish, as a game that
the world delights in.

Lord have Mercy upon us.
The Second Resemblance,
Eiection, or casting out.

THe Sea casts out her dead to the Shore: so the world, those that are dead to
the world: that is, those that delight not in her sinful delights, and
pleasures: That know her delights, to be lightness, and her pleasures, a path
to anguish. Attend to that of Saint Pa^l.

We are evil spoken of, we are made as the filth of the World, the
off-^^ow^ing of all things, even unto this time. 1. Co. 4 13

Thus to the world, and worldings are those that neglect the world: Re^roach'd;
Reuil'd and Slaunder'd: her Language the language of Hell: and with such do
such Hell^ ^ounds pursue them.

If you were of the world, the world would love you: but because you are not of
the world, the world hates you. Ioh. 15. 19.

How unhappy are men so Beloved?
How happy are men so Reproved?
Moreover, spiritual men are not only cast out of the World, (from her
Titles, preferments and Glories) but suffer withal, many grievous and great
persecutions. The Servant is not better than his Master: they have persecuted
CHRIST, and the Christian must endure persecution.

Lord have Mercy upon us.
The Third Resemblance.
As from the Sea, so from the Creatures within it, and that in their hourly
Devouring.

IN the Sea among Fishes, the greater devour the lesser: In the World among
men, the Richer de^^ur the poorer.

They entertain not the poor into their houses, but the houses of thepoore,
entertain to their own possessions.

They Cloth not the poor, but unclothe them: they feed not the poor, but
upon them.

God has given them, that they might give; and do good: but with that they
should do good, they do evil. Not knowing that in Saint Luke, 16. 22.

The Rich man dyed, and was buried: but the Poor man dyed, and was carried,
Whither? into Abraham's Bosom. By whom? By Angels.

Oh Happy, and thrice happy Beggars:
Oh wretched, and thrice wretched oppressors.
Lord have Mercy upon us.

Wherefore do thou look upon the transgressor, and hold thy tongue, when
the wicked devoureth the man that is more Righteous than he; and make them as
the Fishes of the Sea? Habba. 1. 14.

Yet in this vast Sea, the Righteous man shall not perish; but live, though the
wicked devour him

Even as Jonas, who though swallowed, yet lived in the belly, into which he was
greedily swallowed.

As dying behold we live, as chastned and yet not killed. 2 Cor. 6. 9.

Lord have Mercy upon us.
The Fourth Resemblance,
And that from the Term, or Bounds of the Sea, are the Sands, which we know to
be Barren and weighty.

SO the Term or Bounds of this world (the end of our mortal being) is
unfruitful and weighty in the burden of our sins and offenses.

What Fruit had ye of those things, of which ye ^^e now ashamed? Romans 6. 21.

What has man of all the Labor and Toil that he suffers under the Sun?
Eccl. 1. 3.

Man finds nothing in death, but his works; and those he must carry with him.
Reu. 14. 13.

The whole World lies in wickedness. Ioh. 1. 19.

As unapt to the doing, or bringing forth any good work, as the Thorn to
bring forth Figgs, or the Thistle to bring forth Grapes.

In the confines of Life (which is death,) the wicked man finds nothing, but
the weight of his sins committed, and his hopes and desires prevented.

An Example of this, our Blessed Savior gives us, in the Glutton, attired in
Purple: who in the midst of the unutterable Tortures he had to torment him,
could not purchase a Drop, one drop of cold water to ease him.

Lord have Mercy upon us.
The fifth Resemblance.
In the multiplicity, or Multitude of Eminent and Imminent dangers.

IN the Sea, (we all know) there be marvelous and manifold dangers by Winds,
by Rocks, by Shelues, by Pirates, and the like.

They that sail over the Sea, tell of the perils thereof; and when we hear
of it with our ears, we marvel thereat. Eccle. 23. 24.

And so for the world; which how full of strange Perils, and Dangers, the
Apostle Saint Paul informs us, In Iorneying, I was often in perils of Water,
in perils of Robbers, in perils of the Sea, in perils among false Brethren.
2 Cor 11.

Periculum probat, Transeuntium raritas; ^t pereuntium multitude, B^rn.

The Rar^^y of those that pass safe; and the multitude of those that perish,
proves the peril of this dangerous passage: The number of the first very
small: the number of the last very great. Love the world, and it shall swallow
thee, her lovers she knows better how to devour, then secure: for him with
whom the ^a^es, the betrays.

Where be the Giants? where be the Potentates? the Eminent and Famous men of
all the precedent Ages? Gone. All gone through this World, through a world of
Perils and Dangers.

Lord have Mercy upon us.
The Sixth Resemblance.
In the Multitude of Monstrous shapes that are in it.

IN the Sea there are many Monsters: many Fishes of strange, of Admirable
shapes and proportions.

So in the world, there be men in their nature, condition, and actions so
strange, so preposterous, and monstrous, they are monsters rather than men.

There have bin found in the Sea, Fishes, that in all points are proportioned
to a Soldier armed on Horseback: And like unto those on the Land, are our
Roarers, ou^ swearing and swaggering Companions always armed to do Murders
and mischie^e.

Others you shall find, which have the face in the place of their feet and
their feet in the place of the head. And like those, are our coue^ou^ ^oorders;
our greedy, (...)ritious gripers; and grinders of the face of the needy: who
have always this earth in their eye, and Heaven at their heel: seeing to
kick at Heaven, and the Heavenly counsel of our Holy A^^stle, saying: Seek
those things that are above, etc. minding only these things below. For his
God, and his Heaven, are his Gold and his Coffers; and to these he looks, and
no farther.

Lord have Mercy upon us.

Others you shall find, that have ^ Tongues: And like those, are many of our
Advocates; of our Fawners and flattering companions, who have one thing in
their words, and another in their wills: those Devils Choristers, that sing
sweetly, but their Notes are honey and poison.

The words of the double tongued man may appear ^e be plain, and simple, but
they are not so: They pierce through, even unto the bowels. Pr. 18. 8.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Others you shall find, that have swords in their mouths, or the likeness
and resemblance of swords: and so many men that have tongues in their mouths
like swords, with which they are still wounding the same and good name of their
Neighbors.

Behold they brag in their talk, and swords are in their lips. Psalm 59. 7.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Another kind of Fish you shall find, that has many ^eads: And such are such
men as are subject to many ^^^es: for so many vices, so many heads; nay, so
many Lords and Commanders. Covetousness is the Lord of the covetous: Luxury
the Lord of the luxurious: Pride the Lord of the proud: and E^vie the Lord
^^t^^ e^vious.

The evil and ungodly man serves so many Lords, as vices.

Lord have mercy upon us.
The seventh Resemblance.
In the non-abiding, or present and speedy passage.

THe Sea is no place of abiding, no place to inhabit, ordwell in, but the path
of a speedy passa^e, of a swift and violent travel: So this World; we have
here no place of abiding: the Apostle to the Hebrews 13. 14 saying, We have
here no continuing City, but we seek for one to come. We do, or we should
do; for that place to come is our Country.

We are here but lodgers and strangers, and like to such, we should not forget
our Country, and delight to inhabit strange places, but delight in the path
to that, and keeps it, till we come to our City.

What this world is, or the time of this present life, Saint Augustine tells
us: Nihil nisi cursus ad mo^tem, Nothing but a race to Death: In which no man
can make any stand, neither is it permitted to any one to go either swifter,
or ^^^wer than another: The Race may be shorter, or longer, but the pace is to
all men equal.

Lord have mercy upon us.
The Eighth Resemblance.
In uncertainty.

IT is not in the power of any man that enters himself on the Sea, to keep in
the course he proposes, and arrive at the place he wishes: but many times, by
cross and contrary winds he is carried to that place to which he would not
be carried: neither in that ^^eane, or manner can he came to the Port that he
would do. So in this World: it is not in the will of man, but in the will and
pleasure of the ever blessed Spirit, directing to arrive at the ^ort of
Salvation, or sail to the Haven, Heaven. It is not in him that wills,
neither in him that runs: but in GOD that shows mercy. Romans 9. 16.

And therefore we ought to pray continually, that God would be pleased to guide
us in the way that may lead us to him. It is the counsel of holy Tobit. 4. 9.
Bless the Lord always, and desire him to direct thy ways.

Lord have mercy upon us.
The Ninth Resemblance.
In the Sapor, Taste, or relish of it.

VAlde amarum est Mare, The Sea is exceeding bitter, and yet to the Fish that
are in it, that there have their increase and nourishment, that bitterness is
not bitter, but exceeding sweet, and delightful: So the World in the direct
and very plain truth of it, is exceeding bitter, and distasteful: yet to the
worldling the taste is delightful, and pleasant: Nay, in such a plenitude,
such a measure, and height delightful, that he can have no sense, no touch, or
conceit of the contrary: That bitterness is only sweet, and in the things of
this world flow all the delights that may be. Mistast, or mistake in the taste,
proceeds, and arises from the corruption and default of the palate.

The men of this World have corrupt and mistaking palats, like th^se that are
sick of a Fever, to whom such things as in themselves are sweet, seem
bitter, and things that are bitter, sweet.

To the sound and well disposed pallat, that bread is sweet, that to the
unsound, and indisposed palate is uns^voury. Woe be to those that call evil,
good, and Aug.
that which is good evil: putting bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.
Isai. 5. 20.

Lord have mercy upon us.
The tenth, and last resemblance.
In the voracity and insatiability of it.

THe Sea swallows all the floods yet exceeds not her bounds nor is satisfied
with abundance of water: All the floods go into the Sea, yet the Sea is not
full: So the world entertaines, receives, and consumes all the good things of
the earth, yet never says, it is enough.

All that is in the World, is the lust of the flesh; the lust of the eye, or
the ^ride of Life. Joh. 2. 16. But the lust of the flesh is not satisfied with
delight: the lust of the eye with riches: nor the pride of life with honors.

Ergo mundus non satiatur.
The world is never satisfied.
The worldling never contented.
Whatsoever the worldling has, he has as if he had it not; still gaping,
still swallowing; still wishing, first desiring: He levels first at such a
thing, and obtaines it, at a thing beyond that at a thing beyond that, and
obtaines it: yet the possession of every new thing, that he wishes for, is but
the matter of another wish; building wish upon wish and degree upon degree, as
if to climb to the hight of his wish (which such a one never can reach to)
were to climb to heaven: but so to go upward, we may fear, is but so to go
downward.

Lord have mercy upon us.
The World, A Pesthouse.
AS you have looked upon the world compared to the sea, in these proper and apt
resemblances; and seen it full of trouble, vexation, and sinful ab^ses: I
would have you now look upon it as a Pesthouse, and in these fifteen Rooms
(into which we divide this Pest-ho^se) see every mis-deede a disease, and
every gross sin a sickness.





Another, the Devils Forge: in which the poor sinner made hot, is wrought to
what fashion the Forger of all mischief would have him.





of oppression: in which, the diseased laughs at the poor: to which, groans,
sighs, and laments are music; and the tears, nay the blood of the Widow, the
Orphan, and such other, as lie under the weighty pressure, a drink that
(spiced with the pro^^t, wrench'd, wrung, and extorted from them) goes down
with a great deal of pleasure.



Lord have mercy upon us.



O Dives haredibus, tibi vero pauper.
He is only rich to his heirs, to himself as poor as ^rus.
A Disease that makes him so silly, as to think he can serve two Masters: God
and Mammon: Though that God and Man, Christ jesus directly tells him, he cannot,
He in whom this disease is rooted, has the root of all manner of evil.



those fools, ^am. 4. 13, 14, 15. To day, or to morrow wet will go to such a
City, we will continue there a year: we will buy, and we will sell, and we
will gain: Here is nothing but we will, and we will; though no man to day can
tell, what shall be to morrow: for what is our life but a vapor?

Their Lesson, and ours is this: If the Lord will, we will, without which all
our will can be nothing.



Vade ad formicam, etc. Prove. 6. Go to the Ant says Solomon, consider her
ways, and weighing them, learn to be wise. She that has no guide, shall
guide thee; she that has no teacher, shall teach thee; she that has no
Lord, of a servant to this sin, (this drowsy, sluggish, slavish, and of all,
a disease the most despicable, shall make thee a Lord and Commander. She
prepares her meat in Summer, and gathers her food in Harvest. She labors,
and feeds, while the Grasshopper plays, and fasts. The slothful man sleeps,
and does nothing; or evil, which is worse than nothing: While his field and
his vineyard is covered with Thorns and Nettles: This is the field of the
fool, which Salomons wise man seeing, makes a stand, looks on it, considers,
and from it receives instruction. Prove. 24. 30, 31, 32.

Poverty comes upon the slothful man unawares, and Necessity, like an armed
man: for in this disease a man is thus dull, thus stupid. Before the enjoyment
of any thing sweet, we must sweat: for the gods sell all for Labor.

f^ll that we use to cast to a Dog which as soon as he has, he swallows,
and presently gapes for another. So this man: he gapes, swallows, and gapes.
This man, whose God is his Belly, whose Temple is his Ki^chin whose Altar is
his Table, whose Ministers are his Cooks whose Offering is a Banquet, and the
smoke of that Banquet his Incense.



A moderate Rain does good, makes the earth fair, fresh, and fruitful: but
immoderate shewers deprive her of all these blessings. And thus that earth,
Man, with moderate and immoderate drinking, fresh, fair, and fruitful: or
neither fresh, fair, nor fruitful in any of those things that become him.
Take heed, lest at any time your hearts be over-burthened with surfeiting and
drunkenness. Luke 21. 34.



The present fashion is, a Doublet two inches too short, and the Breech ten
inches too long, scarce half a leg to be seen: the wast so embraced with
points, and the knee with the young, or spawne, otherwise called sprigs, or
jinglers, that old Buckle and Thong, the Girdler, is a thing that is seldom
thought on and Timothy Tagge the principal man in the Parish. I could from the
Hat, with the band, as light as a Feather, observe to the sole of the shoe,
and in diverse places between them, show you other spots of the fashion, but so
I might stay too long, and the fashion go out before me: For as if every new
fashion made m^ Gallant a very new man, he must wear out ten fashions, before
he can wear out one suite; or he is not a man in fashion.

and embracing what this Mountebanke World shall prepare for us.

Lord have mercy upon us.

This infection, these Diseases, and a multitude hard to be thought on, are
still to be found in this Past house: St Bernard saying, Peccatum morbus est
anim^, Sin is a disease of the foul: And that the principal ca^se of all
the Diseases of the body, are those of the Soul, which is Sin, take these
holy places to witness.

1. By one man sin entered into the world, and Death by sin; and so Death went
over all men, forasmuch as all men have sinned. Romans 5. 12.

2. Behold all Souls are mine, both the soul of the father, and also the
soul of the son: The soul that sins, shall dye. Ezekiel. 18. 14.

3. Thy sorrow is incurable for the multitude of thine iniquities: because thy
sins were increased, I have done these things unto thee. Ierem 30. 15.

4. Si^ no more, le^t a worse thing happen unto thee. John 5. 14.

5. Thus says the Lord of Hasts: This City must be visited, O^pres^on is in
the midst of it: As the fountain caste^^ ^ut her water so she casts out her
malice: truelty and spoil is continually found within her. ^er. 6. 6, 7.

6. For sin has Fami^^ mea^erly stalked among us: Bia(...)s Mildews,
Catterp^^lers, and the greedily devouring Pe(...). 1 Kings 8. 37.

Lord have mercy upon us.

These and many other places do most perspicuously demo^strate unto us the
cause of these heavy Uisitations, Sin; the disease y^ Adam dyed of, and so
all the sons of Adam.

It cannot he time ill s^ent, here to make a stand, and a little to (...) ^^cke
to that heavy commination or threat(...) at this (...)re 5. And the better to
fix it upon our Hearts, to observe it in these four circumstances:

Who, how, what, and for what.

Who threatens? The Lord God of Hosts* How? As a man compelled, constrained,
and uecessitated by the multitude of Sins and Transgressions: intimated in
this word Must, This City must, What? Be punished, afflicted, For what? Sin:
Oppression is in the midst of it.

Oppression which was in the midst of that City, is in y^ midst of this, even
in the Center of it; and so in the Center of this Kingdom: diffusing,
shedding, and spreading it self into every part of her fair and large
circumference. As the Fountain casts out her water, so she casts out her
malice, etc.

Lord have mercy upon us.

For these, and their spotted companions, did the Pestilence, that Tyrant, in
the year of that never to be forgotten number, 1625. Arrest, and Imprison (in
that Goal in which they must rot that enter) so many, many thousands of
people: sparing neither the silver head of the old man, nor the golden hopes of
the young man; the strength of the Male, nor the beauty of the Female.

Lord have mercy upon us.

For these, did this Tyrant, that neither fears the rich, nor pitties the
poor, take the rich from his wealth, and the poor from his want, and make
them in the grave companions.

Lord have mercy upon us.

For these did this Tyrant snatch the wife from the husband, and the husband
from the wife: the parent from the child, and the child from the parent: the
first be wayling the loss of half themselves, and their beautiful
Olive-branches: and these branches (their children) the loss of that root,
from which they received their being.

Lord have mercy upon us.

For these, did this Tyrant make the Citizen fly the City to meet what he
fled in the merciless entertain of the Country, that undutifull handmaid;
that instead of taking to heart, the heart-sicke estate of her Lady, to the
numberless number of her tears, her groans, her sighs, and unutterable
measure of anguish, added the matter of them all in the hardness of her heart
to her miserable sons and daughters.

Lord have mercy upon us.

For thse, did that Tyrant cast so great an Eclipse over the glory of this
City, that nothing was seen but black; no more of her brightness, no more of
her splendour and beauty, than of the beauty of the heavens, when the dark robe
of night over-spreads it.

Lord have mercy upon us.

To particularize the calamities of that year were needelesse, so few years
have past since we felt it, that in husband, wife, child, parents, kinsman,
friend, trading, or in o^^e sad thing or another, many thousads yet living
feel it.

And to make us the more to feel it, God again has begun to strike us: But
like an ^noulgent father, he yet has bin pleased to strike us, telling his
strokes by leisure; and in that telling us, he had rather affright, than hurt
us. As I live (says the Lord) I desire not the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked may turn from his ways and live, Ezekiel 14. 11. For his way is the
way to death; but the way of the Lord to life, and both eternal.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Here God Almighty has struck one, there another; there another, and a great
way off, another: this week so many; another so many: one Bill rising, another
falling: the increase bidding fly from sin: the decrease not to fly from
the City: a command to depart, and asw^et invitation to tarry. Let every one
that calls on the name of Christ, depart from iniquity. 2. Tim. 2. 19.

Lord have mercy upon us.

The best flight we can make is to fly from that, as fast as we can, the
farther, the nearer to God. Every punishment is an Arrow from the qu^ver of God
Almighties anger: and those aimed only at sin; from which, if we carefully
fly, we remoove the mark, and with it evade the danger.

Lord have mercy upon us.

My wish to the flight of those that fly, is, that flying, they may thus fly:
and withal (Gods will ever placed in the fore front of all our wishes) that
they may not (as sometimes it happens at a shooting) intending to run from
the arrow they see not, run under it, and sink where they seek their
safety: Too many so have run: too many been so over-taken.

Let our prayers be one for another, that staying or flying, living, or dying,
we may all live and dye in the fear, love, and favor of Go^ our Almighty
Creator.

Lord have mercy upon us.

It is written of two of the Scholars of I socrates (Euphorus and Theopompus)
that for their difference in the swiftness, and slacknesse in Learning: The
one had need of a Bridle, the other need p^aspu^re.

But we had need of them both: every one both of Spur and Bridle: A Bridle
to ^ur^e us from running so fast in those courses for which God Almighty
pla^ues us: and a Sp^rre to prick us forward to those things that may m^ve him
to spare us.

Lord have mercy upon us,

And enlighten our understanding, make us see what we ought to see and know
what we ought to know: Which that we may assuredly do; teach us O Lord to
know thee; and to know, that to b^e able to speak (as it is said of Solomon)
from the Ce^er in Lebanon, to the Hysop that (...) ^o it of the Va(...) ^o know
all the Creatures, and not to know the^ their Creator, is, in knowing of all
things, to know noth^ng, and seeming so wise, to be foolish.

Lord have Mercy upon us.

St. Austen tells us: That he that knows thee, though these things he do not
know, is a happy and a blessed man: He that knows thee, and these for these,
is never a whit the more blessed: but he that knows thee, for thee; for thy
self the Fountain of all our happiness, is happy and blessed for ever.

Lord have mercy upon us.

Teach us O Lord to know thee; to know thee angry; and give us grace to
endeavor to please thee: Following the counsel of thy holy servant Ho^ea, in
turning to thee O Lord, that so having smitten us, thou may ^eale us; having
wounded us, thou may make us whole; and in thy good time, translate us from
this Sea full of storms and dangers: this Pesthouse full of Sores and
Diseases, to that Haven, and that Habitation, where there is no storm or
tempest, and where Death or Disease never entered.

Lord have mercy upon us.
FINIS.

