Two notable Sermons. Made by that worthy Martyr of Christ Master John
Bradford, the one of Repentance, and the other of the Lords supper never
before imprinted.

Perused and allowed according to the Queens Majesty's Iniunction.

1574

Imprinted at London by John Awdely, and John Wight,

TO THE CHRIstian Reader Tho. Sampson wishes the felicity of speedy and full
conversion to the Lord.
GOdly learned men do write and publish books to profit the age in which they
do live, and the posterity. This desire was in the Author of this treatise
Master John Bradford, who was the Preacher and publisher of this Sermon of
repentance. And now, to the end that we which do live in earth after him, and
are the posterity, may take as much or more profit by it then they did, to and
for whom in his life time he did both preach and publish it, the same his
labor is by new emprintyng published again. Nothing is added to toys Sermon,
or altered in it: only to the sermon of repentance before printed, is added
an other Sermon of the Lords supper, which he also made, and was never printed
before. And aptly shall thou see, good Reader, these two Sermons joined
together. For in diligent perusing of the last, thou shall see how necessarely
he draws the doctrine of repentance to them al, which do with due
preparation receive the holy Sacrament of Christ. I do not know which of the
Sermons I should most praise. I wish that by reading both, thou may make
thy great profit. In both these Sermons thou shall read Bradford preaching
repentance with his own pen.

They are counted the most profitable Teachers, which have themselves good
experiance by practice in themselves, of that which they do teach to others:
such as may safely say, Brethren be ye folowers of me, and look on them which
walk so ^il. 3. 17.
as ye have us for an example. And surely such a pattern was Master Bradford
in his life time, of this doctrine of repentance which in both these Sermons
he teaches, that I which did know him familiartye, must needs give to God
this praise for him, that among men I have scarcely known ^oue like unto him.
I did know when, and partlye how it pleased God by effectual calling to
turn his heart unto the true knowledge and obedience of the most holy Gospel
of Christ our Savior. Of which God did give him such an heavenly hold and
lively seeling, that as he did then know that many Luke. 7.
sins were forgeuen him: so surely he declared by deeds that he loved much.
For where he had both gifts and calling to have employed himself in civil
and wordly affairs profitably, such was his love of Christ, and zeal to the
promoting of his glorious Gospel, that he changed not only the course of his
former, life, as the woman did. Luke. 7. but even his former study, as Paul
did change his forprofession and study.

Touching the first, after that God touched his heart with that holy and
effectual calling, he sold his chains, rings, brooches, and iuels of gold
which before he used to wear, and did bestow the price of this his former
vanity in the necessary releife of Christ's poor members, which he could
hear of or find lying sick or pining in poverty. Touching the second, he so
declared his great zeal and love to promote the glory of the lord Jesus, whose
goodness and saving health he had tasted, that to do the same more pithely, he
changed his study, and being in the inner Temple in London at the study of
the common laws, he went to Cambridge to study Divinity, where he heard D.
Martin Bucer diligently, and was right familyar and dear unto him. In this
godly course he did by Gods blessyng so profit, that that blessed Martyr D.
Ridley then Bishop of London did as it were inuit him and his godly Companion
Master Thomas Horton to become fellows of Penbrake hall in Cambrydge: And
afterward the said D. Ridley called our Bradford to London, gave him a
Prebend in Paul's church, lodged him in his own house there, and set him on
work in preaching. And besides often preaching in London, and at Paul's
cross, and sundry places in the country, and speacially in Lankeshire, he
preached before King Edward the sixth, in the Lent the last year of his raygne,
upon the second Psalm, and there in one Sermon, showing the tokens of Gods
judgment at hand for the contempt of the Gospel, as that certain Gentlemen
upon the Sabbath day, going in a whirry to Paris garden to the Barebayting,
were drowned: and that a Dog was met at Ludg^te carping a piece of a dead
child in his mouth, he with a mighty and prophetical spirit: said: I summon
you all, even every mothers child of you, to the indegement of God, for it is
at hand as it followed shortly after in the death of King Edward. In which
state and labor of preaching he continued till the cruelty of the Papists ^ut
him of: so an thou may read in the historye of his life and death, compiled
by that faithful servant of the Lord Jesus M. John Fox.

In deed he had many pulbackes, but God still helped forward his chosen
servant in that trade of life to y^ which he had called him: in which he ran
forward so happily, that he did outrunne me and other his companions. For it
pleased God with great speed ^s make him ready and ripe to martyrdom: in
which through Christ he has now gained the crown of life. But in all stops
and stays he was much helped forward by a continual meditation, and practice
of repentance and ^ayth in Christ, in which he was kept by Gods grace,
notable exercised all the days of his life. Even in this mean time he heard a
Sermon which that noble Preather Master Latimer made before King Edward the
sixth, in which he did earnestly speak of restitution to be made of things
falsely gotten: which did so strike Bradford to the heart for one dash with a
pen which he had made without the knowledge of his Master (as full often I
have heard him confess with plenty of tears) being Clarke of the Treasurer
of the Kings camp beyond the teas, and was to the deceiving of the King, hat
he could never be quiet till by the advice of the same Master Latimer a
restitution was made. Which thing to bring to pass he did willingly forbear
and forgo all the private and certain patrimony which he had in earth. Let
all bribers and polyng offi^ers, which get to them selves great revenues in
earth by such slibbery shifts, follow this example, lest in taking a
contraryecourse, they take a contrary way, and never come where Bradford now
is.

But besides this, our Bradford had his daily exercises and practices of
repentance, His manner was to make to him self a Cataloge of all the grossest
and most enorme sins which in his life of ignorance he had committed, and to
lay the same before his eyes when hes went to private prayer, that by the sight
and remembrance of them, he might be stirred up to offer to God the sacrifice
of a contrite heart, seek assurance of salvation in Christ by faith, thank God
for his calling from the ways of wickedness, and pray for increase of grace to
be conducted in holy life acceptable and pleasing to God. Such a continual
exercise of conscience he had in private prayer, that he did not count himself
to have prayed to his contentacion, unless in it he had felt inwardly some
smyting of heart for sin, and some healing of that wound by faith, feeling y^
saving health of Christ, with some change of mind into the detestation of
sin and love of obeying the good will of God. Which things do require that
inward entering into the sacret parler of our hearts, of which Christ speaks,
and is that smiting of the breast which is noted in the Publicane Math. 7 and is
the same to the which the Psalm mist exhorts those men loose in sin. Psalm.
4. 5. Tremble ye and sin not: speak in your selves, that is, enter into an
account with your selves, when you are on your couches, that is, when ye are
solitary and alone, and be quiet or silent, that is, when ye have thus secretly
and deepelye considers of your case and dealing. ye shall cease to think,
speak, and do wickedly. Without such an inward excerise of prayer our
Bradford did not pray to his full contentacion, as appeared by this: He used in
the morning to go to the common prayer in the College where he was, and after
that he used to make some prayer with his Puplls in his chameer. But not
content with this, he then repaired to his own secretd prayer, and exercise in
prayer by himself, as one that had not yet prayed to his own mind. For he was
wont to say to his familiars: I have prayed with my Pupils, but I have not yet
prayed with myself. Let those secure men mark this well, which pray without
touch of breast, as the Pharisey did: and so that they have said an ordinary
prayer, or heard a common course of prayer, they think they have prayed well,
and as the term is, they have served God well, though they never feel styng
for sin, taste of groaning or broken heart, nor of the sweet saving health of
Christ, thereby to be moved to offer the sacrifice of thanks giving: nor
change or renewing of mind, but as they came secure in sin and senseles, so
they do depart without any change or affecting of the heart: Which is even the
cradle in which Satan rocketh the sins of this age a sleep, who think they
do serve God in these cursory prayers made only of custom, when their heart is
as far from God as was the heart of the Pharisey. Let us learn by Bradfordes
example to pray better, that is, with the heart, and not with ihe lyps aloue:
Quia Deus uon vocis sed cardis auditor est, as Cyprin says, that is, because
God is the hearer of the heart, and not of the voice, that is to say, not of the
voice alone without the heart, for that is but lyb labor. This conscience of
syn and exercise in prayer had Bradford, clean contrary to that cursed custom
of those graceles men, which do joy to make large and long accounts of their
lewdnes and glory therein, so feeling their delights with their lives passed,
as the Dog returns to smell to his cast gorge, and the horse to his dung:
such as the Prophet ^say 39. says: They declare their syns as Sodom, they
hide them not, woe be to their souls. It goes with them as in the days of
Jeremiah it went with those. Iere. 3. 3 Thou had a whores forehead: Thon
would not be ashamed. God give these men better grace, else let them be
assured they shall find woe woe to their very souls.

An other of his exercises was this: He used to make unto him self an
Ephemeris or a Iournal, in which he used to write all such notable things as
either he did see or hear each day that passed. But what so ever he did hear
or see, he did so pen it, that a man might see, in that book the signs of his
smitten heart. For if he did see or hear any good in any man, by that sight he
found and noted the want thereof in him self, and added a short prayer,
craving mercy and grace to amend. If he did heara or see any plague or
misery* he noted it as a thing procured by his own syns; and still added: Domine
miserere me^, Lord have mercy upon me. He used in the same book to note such
evil thoughts as did rise in him, as of envying the good of other men,
thoughts of unthankfulness, of not considering God in his works, of hardness
and vnsensiblenes of heart when he did see other moved and affected. And thus
he made to him self and of himself a book of daily practices of repentance.

Besides this, they which were familiar with him, might see how he being in
their company, used to fall often into a sudden and deep meditation, in which
he would sit with fixed countenance and spirit moved, yet speaking nothing a
good space. And some times in this silent sytting, plentye of tears should
trickle down his cheeks. Sometime he would sytinit, and come out of it with a
smyling countenance. Often times have I sytten at dinner and supper with him
in the house of that godly harbourer of many Preachers and Servants of the
Lord Jesus, I mean Master* Elsyng, when either by occasion of talk had, or
of some view of Gods benefits present, or some inward cogitation and thought
of his own, he has fallen into these deep cogitacions, and he would tell me
in the end such discourses of them, that I eyd perceive that sometimes his
tears trickled out of his eyes, as well for joy as for sorrow. Neither was he
only such a practiser of repentance in himself, but a continual prouoker of
others thereunto, not only in public preaching, but also in private
conference and company. For in all companies where he did come, he would freely
reprove any sin and mysbehauiour which appeared in any parson, especially
swearers, filthy talkers, and popish praters. Such never departed out of his
company unreproved. And this he did with such a divine grace and Christian
majesty, that ever he stopped the mouths of the gaynsayers: For he spoke with
power, and yet so sweetly, that they might see their evil to be evil and
hurtful unto them, and understand that it was good in deed to the which he
labored to draw them in God.

To be short, as his life was, such was his death. His life was a practice, and
example, a provocation to repentance. At his death, as the foresaid history
witnesses, when he was burned in Smitefield, and the flames of fire did slye
about his ^ares, his last speech publiklye noted and heard was this: Repent
England, Thus was our Bradford a Preacher and an example of that repentance
which he did preach. Jonas preached to Niniue repentance, and al Niniue, the
King, Princes, people, old and young repented, To England Bradford did peeache
and yet does preach repentance, and surely England has now much more cause to
repent then it had when Bradford lived and preached repentance. For all states
and sorts of parsons in England are now more corrupt shen they were then.

Let therefore now Bradfordes sermon, his life, his death move thee O England,
to repent al thy peril. I wish and warn, that as in Niniuie so in England, al
from the highest to the lowest do unfeignedly repent: They which are of the
Lourt, they which are of the Church, they whi^a are of the City, they which
are of the country, Princes, Prelates, and people: let all and every one repent
and depart from that evil which he has in hand, and turn wholly to the Lord.
And I do humbly beseech thy Majesty, oh glorious Lord Jesus, which did come
to bless Israel, turniug every one of them from their sins, to work now by
thy spirit in our hearts the same sound repentance which the holiness did
preach to men when thou saydest? Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand.
This work in us, O gracious God our Sauionr. Amen. And uow Reader I leave thee
to the reading and practicing of that repentance which Bradford hear teaches.

TO THE CHRIstian Reader John Bradforde wysheth the true knowlsdge and peace of
Jesus Christ, our alone and omni sufficient Savior.
GReat and heavy, is Gods anger against us, as the most grievous plague of the
death of our late King (a Prince of all that ever was sithe^ Christ's ascension
into heaven, in any Region peereles) now fallen upon us, does prognosticate For
when Gods judgment has begun with his Child this our dear dearlyng, let
other men think as they can, I surely cannot be persuaded otherwise, but that
a grievous and bitter cup of Gods vengeaneis ready to be poured out for ve
English men to drink of. The whelpe God has beaten to fray the bandeg.
Judgment is begun at Good house, In Gods mercy to himwardes he is taken away
that his eyes should not see the miseries which we shall feel. He was to good
to tarry with us so wicked, so froward, so Hebr. 11.
peruers, so obstinate, so malicious, so hipocriticall, fo covetous, unclean,
untrue, proud, and carnal a generation. I will not go about to paynt us out
in our colors. All the world which never saw England, by hearesay seeeth
England. God by his plagues and vengeance, I fear me, will paynt us out, and
point us out. We have so mocked with him and his Gospel, that we shall feel it
is no bourding with him.

Of long time we have covered our covetousness and carnalitie under the cloak of
his Gospel, so that all men shall see us to our shame when he shall take his
Gospel away and give it to a people y^ will bring forth y^ fruits of it: then
shall we appear as we be. To let his Gospel tarry with us, he cannot, for we
despise it, contemn it, are giu^ted with it. We disdain his Manna: it is but
a vile meat, think we. We would be again in Egypt, and s^t by the greasy
steshpots, to eute again our Garlike Onions, and Leekes. ^ithens Gods Gospel
came amongst us, we say now he had never plenty, therefore again let us go
and woyrship the Queen of heaven. Children begin to gather Iere. 44. Iere. 7.
sticks, the Fathers kindle the fire, and the women make the cakes to offer to
the Queen of heaven, and to provoke the Lord to anger. The earth cannot abide
now the words and Sermons of Anios: the cause of all rebelliou is Amos and his
Amos. 7.
preaching. It is Paul and his fellows that makes all out of order. Sumnia,
the Gospel is now (...) and Act. 17.
(...) the out cast and eursse of the Realm, and so are the Preachers:
therefore out of the doors with them. So that I say, God cannot let his
Gospel tarry with us, but must needs take it away to do us some pleasure
therein: for so shall we think for a time. as the Sodomitanes thought when Lot
departed from them: as the ol^ world thought Gene. 19. Gene. 6.
when Noe crept into his Arc: as the Ierosolomitanes thought when the Apostels
went thence to P^^tis. Then w^r they merry, then was at pastime. When Moises was
absent, then went they to eating and drinking, and rose again ^^ Exodus 2
play. Then was all peace, all was well, nothing amysse. But alas, sodainlye
came the flood and drowned them. Gods wrath wared hot against them. Then was
weal away, mourning and woe, then was crying out, wringing of hands, renting
of clothes, sobbing and fighyng for the miseries fallen, out of the which they
could not escape. But oh ye mourners and cryers out, ye renters of clothes, why
mourn ye? What is the cause of your misery? The Gospel is gone, Gods word is
little preached, you were not disquieted with it: Noe troubles you not, Lot is
departed, the Apostels are gone. What uow is the cause of these your miseries?
Will you at the length confess it is your syunes? Nay now it is to late, God
called upon you, and you would not hear him, therefore yell and cry out now,
for he will not hear you. You bowed your ears from hearing of Gods law,
therefore your prayer is execrable.

But to come again to us Englishmen, I fear me I say, for our vnthaukfulues
sake, for our impiety and wyeednes, as God has taken away our King, so will
he take away his Gospel: yea so we would have it, then should all be well,
think many. Well, if he take that away, for a time perchance we shall be
qutel, but at length we shall feel the want to our we, at length he will have
at us, as at Sodeme, at Jerusalem, and other places. And now he begins to
brue such a bruing, wherein one of us is like to destroy an other, and so make
an open gappe for foreign enemies to devour us, and destroy us. The father is
against the son, the brother against the brother, and Lord with what
conscience? Oh be thou merciful unto us, and in thine anger remember thy
mercy, suffer thy self to be entreated, be reconciled unto us, nay reconcile
us unto thee. Oh thou God of justice, judge justly, oh thou Son of God which
came to destroy the works of Satan, destroy his furours now smoking, and
almost set on fire in this Realm. We have syuned, we have sinned, and
therefore art thou angry, O be not angry for ever. Give us peace, peace peace
in the Lord: set us to w^^ against sin, against Satan, against our carnal
desires, and give us the victory this way. This victory we obtain by faith.
This faith is not without repentance, as her Gentlemau Ussher before her.
Before her, I say, in disceruing true faith from false faith, ^yp faith,
Englishmens faith: for else if springs out of true faith.

This Ussher then Repentance if we truly possessed, we should be certain of
true faith, and so assured of the victory our death, hell, and Satan. His
works then which he has styred up would quail, God would restore us politic
peace, right should be right and have right, Gods Gospel should tarry with us,
religion should be cherished, superstition suppressed, and so we yet something
happy, notwithstanding the great loss of our most gracious Liege sovereign
Lord. All these would come to pass you sae, if the Gentleman vssher I speak
of, I mean Repentance, were at Inn with us. As if he be absent, we may be
certain that Lady Faith is absent. Wherefore we cannot but be van quished of
the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and so will Satan's works prosper,
though not in althings to blear our eles, yet in that thing which he most of al
desires. Therefore to repentance for our selves privately, and for the Realm
and Church publicly, every one should labor to stir up both our selves and
others. This, to the end that for my part I might help, I have presently put
forth a sermon of Repentance, which has lien by me half a year at the least
for the most part of it. For the last summer as I was abroad preaching in the
country, my chance was to make a Sermon of repentance, the which was
earnestly of diverse desired of me, that I should give it them written, or else
put it forth in print. The which thing to grant, as I could not (for I had not
written it) so I told them that had so earnestly desired it. But when no nay
would serve, but I must promise them to write it as I could: I consented to
there request, that they should have it at my leisure. This leisure I prolonged
so long, that as (I ween) and offended them: so did I please my self, as one
more glad to read other men's wrytinges, then in such sort to publish mine own
for other men to read: not that I would others not to profyt by me, but that
I knowing how sclender my score is, would be loath for the enemies to have just
occasion of evil speaking and wresting that which simply is spoken. But when I
considered this present time, to occasion men now to look upon althinges in
such sort as might move them to godliness, rather then to any curious
questioning, I for the satisfying of my promise, and profyting of the simple
ignorant and rude, have now caused this Sermon to be printed: the which I
beseech God for his Christ's sake, to use as a mean whereby of his mercy it may
please him to work in me and many others true hartye repentance for our
sins, to the glory of his name.

Thus fare thou well in the Lord The.x^. of July 1553.
A fruitful Sermon of Repentance, made by the constant Martyr of Christ M.
John Bradford. 1553.
THe life we have at this present, is the gift of God, in whom we live, move
and are, and therefore he is called Iehoua. For the which life as we should be
thankful, so we may not in any wise use it after our own fantasy, but to the
end for the which it is given and lent us, that is, to the setting forth of
Gods praise and glory by repentance, conversion, and obedience to his good will
and holy laws whereunto his long suffering does (as it were) even draw us if
our hearts by impenitency were not hard even. And therefore our life in ye
scripture is called a walking, for that as the body daily drawech more and more
near his end, that is the earth: even so our soul draws daily more and
more near unto death, that is, salvation or damnation, heaven or hell.

Of which thing, in that we are most careless and very fools (for we alas, are
the same to day we were yesterday, and not better or nearer to God, hut rather
nearer to hell, Satan, and perdition, being covetous, idle, carnal, secure.
negligent, proud. etc.) I think my labor cannot be better bestowed, then
with the Baptist, Christ Jesus, and his Apostels, to harp on this string which
of all other is most necessary, and that in these days most specially. What
stryng is that, says one? Forsooth brother the string of Repentance, the which
Christ our Savior did use first in his ministry, and as his Minister at this
present I will use unto you al: Repent, for the kingdom Math. 4.
of heaven is at hand.

This sentence thus pronounced and preached by our Savior Jesus Christ, as it
does co^mau^d us to repent, so to the doing of the same it shows us a
sufficient cause to stir us up thereunto, namely for that the kingdom of
heaven (which is a kingdom of all joy, peace, riches, power, and pleasure) is
at hand, to all such as do so, that is, as do repent. So that the meaning
hereof is, as though our savior might thus speak presently: Syrs, for that I
see you all walking the wrong way, even to Satan and unto hell fire, by
following the kingdom of Satan which now is colored under the vain pleasures
of this life, and foolishnes of the flesh most subtelly, to your utter undoing
and destruction: behold ano^ ma^ke well what I say unto you The kingdom of
heaven, that is, an other manner of joy and felicity, honor and riches, power
and pleasure then you now perceive or enjoy, is even at hand, and at your
backs, as if you will turn again, that is, repent you, you shall most truly
and pleasauntly feel, see, and inherit. Turn again therefore I say, that is,
Repent, for this joy I speak of, eue^ the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Here we may note first the corruption of our nature in that to this
commandment, Repent you, he adds a cause, for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand, For by reason of the corruption and sturdines of our nature. God unto all
his commandments commonly eithrr adds some promise to provoke us to
obedience, or else some such sufficient cause as cannot but tickle us up to
hearty inbouryng for the doing of the same: as here to the commandment of
doing penance he adds this aetiologe or cause, saying: For the kingdom of
heanen is at hand.

Again, in that he joins to the commandment the cause, saying: For the
kingdom of heaven is at haud, we may learn that of the kiugdome of heaven,
none (to who^ the ministry. of preaching does appertain) can be partaker, but
such as repent and do penance. Therefore dearly beloved, if you regard the
kingdom of heaven, in that you cannot enter therein except you repent, I beseech
you all of every estate, as you would your own weal, to repent and do penance.
The which thing that ye may do, I will do my best now to help you by Gods
grace.

But first, because we cannot well tell what repentance is, through ignorance
and for lack of knowledge and false teaching: I will (to begin withal) show
you what repentance is. Repentance or penante is no English word, but we borow
it of the Latinistes, to whom penance is a forethinking in Englysh, in Greek a
being wise afterward, in Hebrew a conversion or turning, the which conversion
or turning, in that it cannot be true and hearty, unto God especially, without
some good hope or trust of pardon for that which is already done and past, I
may well in this sort define it namely, that penance is a sorowing or
forethinking of our sins past, an earnest purpose to amend, or turning to God
with a trust of pardon.

This definition may be divided into three parts: First a sorowing for our
syns: Secondly a trust of pardon, which otherwise may be called a persuasion of
Gods mercy by the merits of Christ for the forgeuenes of our syns: And
thirdly, a purpose to amend, or conversion to a new life The which third or
last part cannot be called properly a part, for it is but an effect of penance,
as toward the end ye shall see by Gods grace. But least such as seek for
occasion to speak evil, should have any occasion, though they tarry not out
the end of this Sermon: I therefore divide penance into the three foresaid
parts: of sorrowing for our syn of good hope or trust of pardon, and of a new
life. Thus you now see what penance is: a sorowing for syn, a purpose to amend,
with a good hope or trust of pardon.

This penance not only differs from that which men commonly have taken to be
penance, in saying and doing our enjoined Lady Psalters, seven Psalms,
fastings, pylgrimages, alms deeds, and such like things but also from that
which the more learned have declared to consist of three parts, namely
Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction.

Contrition they call a just and a full sorrow for their sin. For this word just
and full, in one of the differences between contritio^ and attrition.

Confession they call a numbering of al their sins in the ear of their ghostly
father; for as (say they) a Judge cannot absolve without knowledge of ye cause
or matter, so cannot the Priest or ghostly father absolve from other sins,
then those which he does hear.

Satisfaction they calamendes making unto God for their syns by their undue
works, opera indebita, works more then they need to do, as they term them.
This is their penance which they preach, write, and allow. But how true this
gear is, how it agreeeth with Gods word, how it is to be allowed, taught,
preached, and written, let us a little consider. If a man repent not until he
have a just and full sorrowing for his syns (dearly beloved) when shall he
repent? For in as much as hell fire, and the punishment of the Devils, is a just
punishment for syn: In as much as in all syn there is a contempt of God, which
is all goodness, and therefore there is acontempt deserte or all ylnes: alas who
can bear or feel this just sorrow, this full sorrow for our syns, this their
contricion, which they do so discern from their attrition? Shall not man by this
doctrine rather despair, then come by repentance? If a man repent not until he
have made confession of all his syns in the ear of his ghostly father: if a
man cannot have absolution of his syns until his sins be told by tale and
number in the Priests ear (in that, as David sa^^h non can understand, much
less. then utter all his syns, Delicta quis intelliget: who can understand his
sins in that David of him self complains else where, how that his syns are
ouerflowed his head, and as a heavy burden do oppress him, alas shall not a
man by this doctrine be utterly driven from repentance? Though they have gone
about something to make plaster for their sores, of confession or attrition to
aswage this gear, bidding a man to hope well of his co^trition, though it be
not so full as is required, and of his confession though he have not numbered
all his syns, if so be ye he do so much as in him lies: dearly beloved in
that there is none but y^ herein he is gilty (for who does as much as he may)
trow ye that this plaster is not like salt for sore eyes? Yes undoubtedly, when
they have done al they can for ye appeasing of consciences in these points,
this is the sum that we yet should hope well, but yet so hope, that we must
hand in a ma^mering and douting, whether our syns be forgeuen. For to believe
remissione^ pecca tornm, that is, to be certain of for geuenes of sins, as
our Creed teaches us, they count it a presumption. Oh abomination, and that
not only herein, but in all their penance as they paynt it.

As concerning Satisfaction by their opera indebita, vndne works that is, by
such works as they need not to do, but of their own voluntarines and
wylfulnes (wylfulnes in deed, who sees not monsterous abomination,
blasphemy, and even open fighting against God? For if satisfction ca^n be done
by man, then Christ died in vain for him that so satisfies, and so reigns
he in vain, so is he a Bishop and a Priest in vain. Gods law requires love to
God Deuteronomy 6. 2
with all our heart, soul, power, Math. 22, Mark. 20 L^ke. 10.
might, and strength, to that there is nothing can be done to ^^dward which is
not contained in this commandment: nothing can ve don over and above this.
Again, christ John. 3.
requires to manwarde, that we should love one another, as he loved us. And
trow we ye we can do any good thing to our neighborwar^ which is not herein
comprised?

Yea, let them tell me when they do any thing so in the love of god and their
neighbor, but that they had need to cry, Remitte nobis debita nostra: Forgive
us our syns. So Math. 6.
far are we of from satisfying. Does not Christ say: When you have L^ke. 17.
done althings that I have commanded you, say that you be but unprofitable
feruantes? Put nothing to my Aoc. 22. Deu. 4. 1.
word says God. Yes works of supererogation (yea superabomination) say they.
What soever things are true (says the Apostle saint Paul) whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, or if there be any praise, have you them in your mind, and do them,
and the God of peace shall be with you. I wene this well looked on, will pull us
from popish satisfactory works, which do deface Christ's treasures and
satisfaction.

In heaven and in earth was there none found that could satisfy Gods anger for
our sins, or get heaven for man, but only the son of God Jesus Christ, the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, who by his blood has wrought the work of
satisfaction, and alonely is worthy all honor, glory, and praise, for he has
opened the book with the seven seals.

Dearly beloved, therefore abhor this abomination, even to think that there
is any other satisfaction to Godward for sin, then Christ's blood only.
Blasphem it is, and that horrible, to think otherwise. The blood of Christ
purifieth (says saint John) from all sin, and therefore he is called the
Lamb slaiue from the beginning of the world, because there was never syn
forgeuen of God, nor shall be from the beginning unto the end of the world, but
only through Christ's death: prate the Pope and his prelates as please them, with
their pardous, Purgatory, Purgacious, Placeboes, Trentals, Dirigies, works
of supererogation, superabomination. etc.

I am he (says ye Lord) which puts away thine offenses, and that for Esaias.
45.
mine own sake, and will no more remember thine iniquities. Put me in
remembrance (for we will reason together) and tell me what thou have for thee,
to make the righteous. Thy first father offended sore. etc. And thus writes S.
John: If any man syn, we have an Advocate (says he with 1. John. 2.
the father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitation or
satisfaction for our syns. As in the. 4. chapter he says, that God has sent
his Son to be a propiciation or satisfaction for our syns, according to that
which Paul writes, where he calls Christ a mercyful and faithful Priest, to
purge the peoples syns: So that Hebr. 2.
blind bussards and peruers Papists they be which yet will prate our merits or
works to satisfy for our syns in part or in whole, before Baptism or after.
For to omit the testimonies I brought out of John and Paul, which the blind
cannot but se^: I pray you remember the text out of Esaias, which even now I
rehearsed, being spoken to such as were then y^ people of God and had been a
long time, but yet were fallen into grenous syns after their adoption into the
number of Gods children It is for mine own sake (says God) that I put away thy
syns. Where is your parting of the stake now? If it be for Gods own sake, if
Christ be the propiciation, then recant, except you will become Idolaters,
making your works God and Christ. Say as David teaches: Not to us Lord not to
us, but to ^hy name be the glory.

And it is to be noted, that God does cast in their teeth even the syn of their
first father, lest they should think that yet perchance, for the righteousness
and goodness of their good fathers, their syns might be the sooner pardoned, and
so God except their works.

If they had taken satisfaction for that which is done to ye Congregation
publicly by some notable punishment, as in the primative Church was used to
open offenders, sparkles whereof and some traces yet remain, when such as have
synued in adultery go about the church with a Taper in their shiertes: Or if
they had made satisfaction for restitution to manward of such goods as
wrongfully are gotten, the which true penance cannot be with out: Or if by
satisfaction they had meant a new life to make amends to the Congregation
thereby, as by their evil life they did offend the Congregation, in which
sense the Apostle seems to take that which he writes in. 2. Corin. 7. where
the old Interpretour calls Apologian, satisfaction, which rather signifies a
defense or answering again: If I say, they had taken satisfaction any of these
ways, then they had done well, so that the satisfaction to God had been left
al only to Christ.

Again, if they had made confession either for that which is to God
priuatelye, either for that which is to the Congregation publicly, either for
that which is a free consulation with some one learned in Gods book and
appointed thereunto, as first it was used and I wish were now used amongst us,
either for that which is a reconciliation of one to another, it had been
something: yea if they had made it for faith, because it is a true demonstration
of faith, as in Paul we may see, when he calls Christ the captain of our
confession, that is of one faith (and Romans 1.
so Confessors were called in the primative Church, such as manfully did
wttnes. their faith with the peril of their lives: if I say, they had taken it
thus, then had they done rightwell.

And so Coutrition, if they had left out their ^nblil dstinction between it and
attrition by this word just or full, making it a hearty sorrow for their sins,
then we would never have cried out against them therefore. For we say penance
has three parts, Contrition, if you understand it for a hearty sorowing for
syn, Confession, if you vuderstand it for faith of free pardon in Gods mercy by
Jesus Christ. and Satisfaction, if you understand it not to Godwardes) for that
only to Christ must be left alone) but to mauwarde in restitution of gods
wrongfully or fraudulently gotten, of name hindered by our slau^ders and in
newnes of life: although, as I said before, and anou will show more plainly by
gods grace that this last is no part of penance in deed, but a plain effect
or fruit of true penance.

I might here being in examples of their penance, how perilous it is to be
embraced: but let the example of their ground Sire Judas serve, in whom we see
all the parts of their penance, as they describe it, and yet no withstanding he
was damned. He was sorry enough as the effect showed: he had their contricion
fully, out of the which he confessed his fault saying: I have betrayed innocent
blood, and thereunto he made satisfaction, restoryng the money he had received.
But yet all was but lost, he hanged up himself, his bowels burst out, and he
remains a child of perdition for ever. I would wish that this example of
Judas in whom ye see the parts of their penance, contrition, confession, and
satisfaction, would move them to penance, and to describe it a little better,
making hope or trust of Gods free mercy a piece thereof, or else with Judas they
will mar all

Perchance these words, contrition, confession, and satisfaction were used as
I have expounded them at the first. But in that we see so much danger and hurt
by using them without expositions either let us join to them open expositions
always, or else let us not use them at all, but say as I write. that pena^nce
is a hearty sorrow for our syns a good hope on trust of pardon through Christ,
which is not without an earnest purpose to amend, or a new life. This penance
is the thing where to all ye scripture calls us. This penance do I now call you
al unto: this must be continually in us and not for a Lent season, as we have
thought: this must increase daily more and more in us: with out this we cannot
be saved.

Search therefore your hearts al, al swearers, blasphemers, hers, flatterers,
baudy or idle talkers, iesters, bribers, covetous, persons, droukards,
gluttons, who^ mongers, thieves, murderers, slaunderers, idle livers,
negligent in their vocation. etc. All such and all other as lament not their
syns, as hope not in Gods mercy for pardon, and purpose not heartily to amend,
to leave their swearing, dronkennes, whoredom, covetousness, idleness. etc. all
such, I say, shall not nor cannot enter into Gods kingdom, but hell fire is
prepared for them, weeping and gnashing of teeth, whereunto, alas, I fear me,
very many will needs go, in that very many will be as they have been, let us
even to the wearing of our tongue to the stumps, preach and pray never so much
to the contrary, and that even in the bowels of Jesus Christ, as now I beseech
you all, all, all, and every mothers child, to repent and lament your sin,
to trust in Gods mercy, and to amend your lives.

Now me thinks ye are somewhat astonished: whereby I gather that presently you
desire this repentance, that is, this sorrow, good hope, and newnes of life. The
which that you may the rather attain and get to your comforts as I have gone
about to be a mean to stir up in you (by Gods grace) this desire of
repentance, so through the same grace of God will I go about now to show you how
you may have your desire in this behalf.

And first concerning this part, namely sorrow for your syns, and hearty
lamenting of the same: For this if you desire the having of it you must beware
y^ you think not that of your selves or of your own freewyl, by any means you
can get it. You may easelye deceive your selves and mock your selves,
thincking more of your selves then is seemly. All good things, and not pieces
of good things, but al good things, says S. James, come from God the James. 1.
father of light. If therefore penance be good (as it is good) then the parts
of it be good. From God therefore do they come, and not of our free will. It is
the Lord that mortifieth, that brings down, 1. Reg. 2.
that humbles, says the scriptur in sundry places, After thou had
stricken my thigh (says Jeremy) I was ashamed. Lo he says, after Iere. 31.
thou had stricken me: and therefore prays he, even in the last words almost
he written: Turn us Lord and we shall be turned. The which thing David uses
very often. Lamen. 5
Wherefore first of al, if thou would have this part of penance, as for the
whole, because it is Gods gift, so for this part go thou unto Act. 11. 2. Tim.
2.
God, and make some little prayer, as thou can, unto his mercy for the same,
in this or like sort.

Merciful father of our Savior Jesus Christ, because I have sinned and done
wickedly, and through thy goodness have received a desire of repentance, whereto
this thy long sufferaunce does draw my hard heart. I beseech thee for thy
mercies sake in CHRIST, to work the same repentance in me and by thy spirit,
power, and grace so to humble, mortify, and tear my concsience for my syns to
salvation, that in thy good time thou may comfort and quicken me again
through Jesus Christ thy dearly beloved Son. Amen.

After this sort I say, or otherwise, as thou thinckest good, if thou will have
this first part contrition or sorrow for thy sins, do ye beg it of God through
Christ. And when thou have asked it, as I have labored to drive thee from
trusting in thy self, so now I go about to move thee from flattering of thy
self, from sluggishnes and negligence, to be diligent to use these means
following.

Unto prayer, which I would thou should first use as thou can, secondly
get thee Gods law as a glass to toote in, for in it and by it comes the true
knowledge of sin, without which knowledge there can be no sorrow. For how
can a man sorrow for his sins, which knows not his sins? As when a man is
sick, the first step to health, is to know his sycknes: even so to salvation,
the first step is to know thy damnation due for thy sins.

The law of God therefore must be gotten and well tooted in, that is, we must
look in it spiritually, and not corporally or carnally, as ye outward word or
letter does declare and utter: and so our Savior teaches us in Matthew,
expounding the sixth and seventh commau^dements, not only after the outward
deed, but also after the heart, making there the anger of the heart, a kind of
murder, lusting after an other man's wife, a kind of adultery,

And this is one of the differences between Gods law and ma^s law, that of
this (man's law I mean I am not contemnable, so long as I observe outwardli the
same. But gods law goes to the root and to the heart, condemning me for the
inward motion, allthough outwardlye I live most holyly. As for example: If I
kill no man, though in my heart I hate man's law condemns me not: but otherwise
does Gods law. And why? for it sees the fountain whence the evil does spring.
If hatred were taken out of the heart, then loftynes in looks, detraction in
tou^g, and murder by hand could never ensue. If lusting were out of the heart,
curiosity in countenance, wantonness in words, baudy boldness in body would not
appear,

In that therefore this outward evil springes out of the inward corruption:
seeing Gods law also is a law of liberty, as says saint Iame. 2.
James: and spiritual, as says s. Paul: perfectly and spiritually it Roma. 7.
is to be understand, if we will truly come to the knowledge of our syns. For
of this inward corruption, reason knows but little or nothing. I had not
known Romans 7.
(says Paul) that lusting (which to reason, and to them which are guided only
by reason, is thought but a triste) I had not known says he, this lusting to
have been syn, if the law had not said, Non concupisces, Thou shall not lust.

To the knowledge therefore of our syn (without which we cannot repent or be
sorry for our syn) let us secondly get us Gods law as a glass to toote in: and
that not only literally, outwardly, or partly, but also spiritually, inwardly,
and thoroughly. Let us consider the heart, and so shall we see the foul spots we
are stained withal, at lest inwardly, whereby we the rather may be moved to
hearty sorrow and sighing. For as s. Austen says, it is a glass which fears
no body: but even look what a one thou art, so it paynteth thee out.

In the law we see it is a foul spot, not to love the lord our God withal) all
I say) our heart, soul, power, might and strength and that continually.

In the law it is a foul spot, not only to make to our selves any graven
Image or similitude, to bow thereto. etc. but also not to frame our selves
wholly after the image whereto we are made, not to bow to it, to worship it.

In the law we see that it is a foul spot, not only to take Gods name in
vain, but also not earnestly, heartily, and even continually to call upon his
name only, to give thanks unto him, to believe, to publish, and live his holy
word.

In Gods law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
prophaner of the Saboth day, but also not to rest from our own words and
works, that the Lord might both speak and work in us and by us, not to hear
his holy word, not to communicate his Sacraments, not to give occasion to
others to holiness by our example in godly works and reverent esteming of the
ministry of his word.

In Gods law we see it a foul spot to our souls, not only to be an open
disobeyer of our Parents Magistrates, Masters, and such as be in any authority
over us, but also not to honor such even in our hearts, not to give thanks to
God for them, not to pray for the^ to aid, to help, or relieve the^, to hear
with their infirmities. etc. In Gods law we see it is a foul spot in our
souls, not only to be a manqueller in hatred, malice, proud lokes, brags,
backbiting, railing, or bodily slaughter: but also not to love our neighbors,
yea our ennemies, even in our hearts, and to declare the same in all our
^estures, words, and works.

In Gods law we see it a foul spot to our souls, not only to be a whore
monger in lusting in our hearts, in wanton looking, in unclean and wanton
talking, in actual doing unhonestly with our neighbors wife, daughter,
servant. etc. but also not to be chaste, sober, temperate in heart, looks,
tongue, apparel, deeds, and to help others thereunto accordyngly. etc.

In gods law we see it is a foul spot to our souls, not only in heart to
covet, in look or word to flatter, lie, color. etc. in deed to take away any
thing which pertayneth to another: but also in heart, countenance, word and
deed, not to keep, save, and defend that which pertayneth to thy neighbor,
as thou would thine own

In Gods law we may see it a foul spot, not only to lie or bear false wytnes
against any man, but also not to have as great care over thy neighbors name,
as over thine own.

Sin in Gods law it is we may see and a foul spot, not only to consent to
evil lust, or carnal desires, but even the very natural or carnal lusts and
desires themselves for so I may call the^, nature it self being now so
corrupted are sin, and self love, and many such like. By reason whereof I trow
there is none that tooteth well herein, but though he be blameles to the world,
and fair to the show, yet certainly inwardly his face is foul arrayed, and so
shameful, saucy, maungy, pocky and scabbed, that he cannot but be sorry at the
contemplation thereof, and that so much more, by how much he continues to look
in this glass accordingly.

And thus much concerning the second mean to the stirring up of sorrow for our
sin, that next unto prayer, we should toote in Gods law spiritually. The which
tooting if we use with prayer as I said let us not doubt but at the length Gods
spirit will work as now to such as believe, for to the unbelievers al is in
vain, there eyes are stark blind, they can see nothing) to such as believe (I
say) I trust something is done even al ready. But if neither by prayer nor by
tooting in Gods law spiritually, as yet thy hard unbelieving heart feels no
sorrow nor lamentyng for thy syn, thirdly, look upon the tag tied to Gods law:
for as to man's law there is a tag tied, that is a penalty, so is there to Gods
law a tag tied, that is a penalty, and that no small one, but such a great one
as cannot but make us to cast our currysh tails between our legs, if we
believe it, for all is in vain if we be faythles, not to believe before we feel.

This tag is Gods malediction or curse. Maledictus omnis (says it) qui non
permanet in omnibus quae scripta su^t in libro legis, vt faeiat ^am, ^oe,
accursed (says he is all, no exception, all, says God, which continues not
in all things (for he that is gilty of one, is gilty of the whole, says s.
James:) in all things therefore, (says the holy Ghost) which are written in
the book of the law to do them. He says not to hear them, to talk of them,
to dispute of them, but to do them.

Who is he now that does these? Rara auis, few such Birds, yea none at al.
For all are gone out of the way, though not outwardly by word or deed, yet
inwardly at the least by default and wanting of that which is required: so that
a child of one nights age is not pure, but (by reason of birth syn in danger
of Gods malediction: much more then we, which alas have droonken in iniquity
as it were water, as Job says, But Job. 15.
yet alas we quake not,

Tell me now, good brother, why dooyou so lightly consider Gods curse, that for
your sins past you are so careless as though you had made a covenant with
death and damnation, as the wicked did in Esayes time? What is Gods curse? At
the Popes curse with book, bell and candle, oh how trembled we, which heard it
but only though the same was not directed unto us, but unto others For this
Gods curse which is in comparable more sell and importable, and is directed to
us, yea hanging over us all by reason of our syns, alas, how careless are we? Oh
faithles hard hearts. Oh I^zab^ls gestes, rocked and laid a sleep in her bed.
Oh wicked Apo^. ^.
wretches, which being com into the depth of syn, do contemn the same. O
sorrowles sinners and shame les shrinking harlots.

Is not the anger of a King death? and is the anger of the King of all kings a
matter to be so lyghtely regarded as we do regard it, which for our sins are
so retchles, that we slug and sleep it out? As wax melts a way at the heat
of the fire (says David) so do the wicked perish at the face or countenance of
the Lord. If, dearly beloved, his face be so terrible and intolerable for
sinners and the wicked, what trow we his hand is? At the face or appearing of
Gods anger, the earth trembles: but we earth, earth, yea stones, iron,
flyntes, tremble nothing at all. If we will not tremble in hearing, woe unto us,
for then shall we be crashed in pieces in feeling, If a Lion rore the beasts
quake: but we are worse then beasts, which quake nothing at the roaring of the
Lio^ I mean the Lord of hosts. And why? because the curse of God, 2. Tim. 2.
hardness of heart is already fallen upon us, or else we could not but lament and
tremble for our syns. if not for the shame and foulnes thereof, yet at the
least, for the malediction and curse of God, which hangs over us for our
sins.

Lord be merciful unto us for thy Christ's sake and spare us, in thine anger
remember thy mercy toward us. Amen.

And thus much for the third thing, to the moving of us to sorrow for our syns,
that is, for the tag tied to Gods law. I meant for the malediction and curse of
God. But if our hearts be so hard that through these we yet feel not hearty sorrow
for our syns, let us fourthly set before us examples past and present, old and
new, that thereby the holy spirit may be effectual to work in his time this
work of sorowing for our syn.

Look upon Gods anger for syn in Adam and Eve, for eating a piece of an apple.
Were not they the dearest creatures of God, cast out of Paradise? Were not they
subject to mortalitye, trauail, labor. etc? Was not the earth accursed for
their syns? Do not we all, men in labor, women in traueling with child, and
all in death, mortality and miserye, even in this life feel the same? And was
God so angry for their syn, and he being the same God, will he say nothing to us
for ours (alas) much more horrible then the eating once of one piece of an
apple?

In the time of Noe and Lot Gene. 6. Genes. 19.
God destroyed the whole world with water, and the cities of So doma and
Gomorrha. Seboim and Adamah with ^ire and brimstone from heaven for their sins,
namely for their whooredomes, pride ydlenes, vnmercyfulnes to the poor,
tira^ny. etc. In which wrath of God even the very Babes, Birds, fowls,
fishes, heroes, trees, and gras perished: and think we that nothing will be
spoken to us, much worse and more abominable then they? For all men may see if
they will, that the whoredoms, pride, unmercifulness, tyranny. etc. of England,
far passes in this age, any age yt ever was before. Lots wife looking back,
Genes. 9
was turned into a salt stone: and will our looking back again, yea our running
back again to our wickedness do us no hurt, If we were not already more blnid
then beetels, we would blush. Pharae his heart was hardened so that no miracle
could convert him: if ours were any thing soft, we would begin to sob.

Of six hundred thousand men Joshua and Caleb.
alonely but twain entered into the land of promise, because they had ten times
sinned against the Lord, as he him self says: and Number. 14.
trow we that God will not swear in his wrath, that we shall never enter into
his rest, which have sinned so many ten times as we have toes and fingers, yea
hears of our heads and beardes (I fear me) and yet we pass not.

The man that swear, and he that Leuit. 24, Number. 15.
gathered styckes on the Saboth day, were stoned to death: but we think our
swearing is no syn, our bidding, rioting, yea whorehunting on the Saboth day
pleases god, or else we would something 1. Reg. 5.
amend our manners.

Helias negligence in correcting his sons, nypped his neck in two: but ours
which pamper up our children like puppets, will put us to no plounge. Helias
sons for disobeying their Fathers admonition, brought over them Gods
vengeance: and will our stubburnes do nothing.

Saules malice to David, Acabs 3. Regu. 21. 22.
displeasure against Naboth brought their blood to the ground for Dogs to eat,
yea their children were hanged up and slain 4. Reg. 21. 4. Reg. 10.
for this gear: but we continue in malice, envy and murder, as though we
were able to wage war with the Lord.

David's adultery with Bethsa be was visited on the child born, on David's
daughter defiled by her brother, and on his children one staying an other his
wives defiled by his own son, on him self driven out of his Realm in his
old age, and otherwise also, although he must heartily repented his sin: but
we are more dear unto God the^ David, which yet was a man after Gods own heart,
or else we could not but tr^^ble, and begin to repent.

The rich gluttons gay paunch fylling: what did it? It brought him to hell: and
have we a plackard that God will do nothing to us?

Achams subtyl theft provoked Gods anger aganist all Israel: and one
subtlety, yea open extortion is so fine and politic, that God cannot espy it.

Eiezi his covetousness, brought it not the leprosy upon him, and on all his
see^e? Judas also hanged himself But the covetousness of England is of an other
cloth and color. Well, if it were so the same Tailor will cut it accordingly.

Anania and Saphira by lying, linked to them sudden death: but ours now
prolongeth out life the longer, to last in eternal death.

The false witnesses of the two Judges against Susanna, lyghted on their own
pates, and so will ours do at length,

But what go I about to avouch ancient examples, where daily experience does
teach. The sweat the other year, the storms the winter following, will us to
way them in the same balances. The hanging and killing of men them selves,
which are (alas) to ryfe in all places, require us to register them in the same
roles. At the least in Children, Infantes, and such like, which yet cannot
utter syn by word or deed, we see Gods anger against sin in punishing them by
syckenes, death, my shape or otherwise, so plainly that we cannot but groan and
groont again, in that: we have ^ushed out this gear more abundantly in word
and deed.

And here with me a little look on Gods anger, yet so fresh, that we cannot but
smell it, although we stop our noses never so much I pray God we smell it not
more fresh hereafter, I mean it forsooth (for I know you look for it) in out
dear late soueraygne Lord the kings Majesty. You al know he was but a child in
years: defiled he was not with notorious offenses. Defiled quoth he? nay
rather adorned with so many goodly gifts and wonderful qualities, as never
Prince was from the beginning of the world, Should I speak of his wisdom,
of his ripenes in judgment, of his learning, of his godly zeal, heroycall
heart, fatherly care for his Commons, nurcely solicitude for religion? etc. Nay
so many things are to be spoken in commendation of Gods exceeding graces in
this child, that as Salust writes of Carthage, I had rather speak nothing,
then to little, in that to much is to little, this gift God gave unto us
English men before all nations under the sun, and that of his exceeding love
toward us. But alas and welaway: for our unthankfulness sake, for our sins
sake, for our carnality and profane living, Gods anger has touched not only
the body, but also the mind of our King by a long sycknes, and at length has
taken him away by death, death, cruel death, fearful death.

Oh, if Gods judgment be begun on him, which as he was the chefest, so I
think the holiest, and godlyeft in the Realm of England, (alas) what will it
be on us, whose syns are ouergrowen so our heads, that they are climed up into
heaven. I pray you my good brethren, know that Gods anger for our syn toward
us, cannot but be great, yea to fell, in that we see it was so great, that our
good King could not bear it What followed to Iewry after the death of Josias?
God save England, and give us repentances my heart will not suffer me to carry
longer herein. I trow this will thrust out some tears of repeutance.

If therefore to prayer for Gods fear, the tooting in Gods glass, and the tag
thereto will not burst open thy blockish heart, yet, I trow the tos^ing to and fro
of these examples, and specially of oue late King, and this troublesome time
will tumble some tears our of thine heart, if thou still pray for gods spirit
accordingly. For who art thou (think always with thy self) that God should
spare thee more then them whose examples you have heard? What friends have thou?
Were not of these Kings, Prophets, Apostels, learned, and come of holy stocks?
I deceive my self (think thou with thy self) if I believe that God being the
same God y^ he was, will spare me, whose wickedness is no sesse, but much more
then some of theirs. He hates sin now as much as ever he did. The longer he
spares, the greater vengeance ^il fall: the deper he draws his dow, the sorer
will ye shaft pearce.

But if yet thy heart be so hardened that all this gear will not move thee,
surely thou art in a very evil estate, and remedy now know I none. What said I
none know I none: Yes, there is one which is suresby, as they say, to serve, if
any thing will serve. You look to know what this is. Forsooth the passion and
death of Jesus Christ You know the cause why Christ became man and suffered as
he suffered, was the sins of his people, that he might save them from the same.
Consider the greatness of the sore, I mean syn by the greatness of the Surgion
and of the salve, Who was the Surgion: No Angel, no Saint, no Archangel, no
power, no creature in heaven nor in earth, but only he by whom althings were
made, all things are ruled also even Gods own dearling and only beloved
son, becoming man.

Oh what a great thing is this that could not be done by the Angels,
Archa^gels, Potestates, powers, or all the creatures of God, without his own
son, who yet must needs be thrust out of heaven, as a man would say, to take
our nature and become man: Here have ye the Surgion: great was the cure that
this mighty Lord took in hand.

Now, what was the salve. For soth dear gear, and of many compositions: I
cannot recite al, but rather must leave it to your hearty con^idetations. Three
and thirty years was he curyng our sore. He sought it earnestly by fasting,
watching, praying. etc. The same night that he was betrayed, I read how busy
he was about a plaster in the garden, when he liing s^at on the ground, praying
with tears, and that of blood not a few, but so many as did flow down on the
ground again, criing on this sort: Father? says he) if it be possible, let
this cup depart fr^ me, that is, if it be possible that else the syns of
mankind can be taken a way, grant that it may be so. Thou heardest Moises
criyng for the idolaters: Thou hear dest Lot for the Zoarites: Samuel. David,
and many other for the Israelites, and dear, father, I only am thine own
son, as thou have said, in whom thou art well pleased, wylt thou not hear
me? I have by the space of three and thirty years done always thy will: I have
so humbled my self that I would become an abject a mongest men to obey thee.
Therefore, dear father, if it be possible, grant my request, save mankind now
without any further labor salues, or plasters, But yet (says he) not as I
will, but as thou wylt.

But sir, what herd he? Though he swet blood and water in making his plaster
for our sore of syn, yet it framed not. Twyse he cried without comfort: yea
though to comfort him God sent an Angel, we yet know y^ this plaster was not
allowed for sufficient, until hereunto Christ Jesus was betrayed, forsaken of
all his Disciples, for worn of his dearly beloved bound like a thief, belyed
on, buffered, whipped, scourged, crowned with thorns, derided, crucified,
racked, nailed, hanged up between two thieves, cursed and rayled upon, mocked
in misery, and had given up the ghost: then bowed dowue the head of Christ,
that is, God the Father, which is the head of Christ, then allowed he the
plaster to be sufficient and good for the healing of our sore, which is syn.
Now would God abide our breath, because the stinck, that is, damuation or
giltynes was taken away by the sweet sauer of the breath of this Lam^e, thus
offered once for all.

So that here, dearly beloved we as in a glass may see, to the broosyng of
our blockyshe hard hearts, Gods great judgment and anger against sin. The
Lord of Lords, ye King of Kings Gene. 6. Genes. 19.
the brightness of Gods glory, the son of God, the dearling of his Father, in
whom he is well pleased, ha^geth between two thieves, crying for thee and me, and
for us al: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Oh hard hearts that we
have, which make tuts for syn. Look on this: toote in the very heart of Christ
p^arced with a spear; wherein thou may see and read Gods horrible anger
for sin. Woe to thy hard heart that pearred it.

And thus much for the first part of repentance, I mean for the means of
working contricion. First use prayer: then look on Gods law: thirdly, see his
curse: Genes. 19
fourthly set examples of his anger before thee: and last of all set before
thee the death of Christ. From this and prayer cease not, till thou fecle some
hearty sorrow for thy syn. The which when thou feel, then labor for the
other part, that is, faith on this sort.

As first in contrition I wylled she not to trust to thy free will for the
assayning of it, so do I Joshua and Caleb.
will thee in this. Faith is so far from the reach of man's free will, that to
reason it is plain foolishnes. Therefore thou must first go Number. 14.
to God, whose gift it is: thou must I say, get thee to the father of mercy
whose work it is, that as he has brought thee down by contrition and humbled
thee, so he would give thee faith, raise thee up, and exalt thee.

On this manner therefore, with Leuit. 24, Number. 15.
the Apostles and the poor man in the Gospel that cried: Lord increase our
faith: Lord help my unbelief, pray thou and say: O merciful God and dear
Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in whom as thou art well pleased,
so have thou commanded Tim. 2.
us to hear him, for as much as he often byddeth us to ask of thee, and
thereto promises that thou wylt hear us and grant us that which in his name
we shall ask of there: lo gracious Father, I am bold to beg of thy mercy
through thy son Jesus Christ, one sparckle of true faith and certain
persuasion of thy goodness and love toward me in Christ, wherethrough I being
assured of the pardon of al my syns, by the mercies of Christ, thy son, may
be thankful to thee, love thee and serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of my lyte.

On this sort I say, or otherwise as God shalmoue thee, pray thou first of all,
and look for thy request at Gods hand without any doubting, though forthwith
thou feel not ye same: for oftentimes we have things of God given us long
before we feel them as we would do. Now unto this prayer use thou these means
following.

After prayer for faith, which I would should be first: secondly, because the
same springs out of the hearing, not of Masses, Mattins, Cannons, Councels,
Docttors, Decrees, but out of the hearing of Gods word: get thee Gods word,
but not that part which serves spetially to contrition, that is the law: but
y^ other part, which serves specially to consolation and certain persuasion of
Gods love toward thee, that is, the Gospel or publication of Gods mercy in
Christ, I mean the free promises,

But here thou must know, that there is two kinds of promises: one, which are
property of the law, an other which are properly of ye Gospel. In the promises
of the law we may in deed behold Gods mercy, but so that it hangs upon the
condition rfour worthynes, as if thou love the Lord with all thy heart. etc.
thou shall find mercy. This kind of promises, though it declare unto us Gods
love, which promyseth where he needs not, yet unto him that feels not
christ, which is the end of the law, they are so far from comforting, that
utterly with the law they bring man to great despair: so greatly we are
corrupt, for none so loves God as he ought to do. From these therefore get
thee to the other promises of the Gospel, in which we may see such plenty and
frank lideralitie of Gods goodness, that we cannot but be much comforted,
though we have very deeply sinned.

For these promises of the Gospel do not hang on the condition of our
worthiness, as the promises of the law do: but they depend and hang on Gods
truth, that as God is true, so they cannot but be performed to all them which
lay hold on them by faith, I had almost said, which cast them not away by
unbelief:

Mark in them therefore two things, namely, that as well they are free promises
without any condition of our worthiness, as also that they are universal,
offered to all, al (I say) which are not so stubburne as to keep still their
hands whereby they should receive this alms in their bosoms 1. Reg. ^.
by unbelief. As concerning Infantes and children, you know I now speak not,
but concerning such as be of years of discretiou And now you look that I
should give you a fast of these promises which are both free and universal
excepting none but such as excepe themselves. Well, you shall have one or two
for a say.

In the third of John says our 3. Reg^. 21. 2^.
Savior: So God the Father loved the world, that he would give his dear lyng,
his own only son, that all that believe in him should not perish 4. Reg. ^^.
4. Reg. 10.
but have everlasting life. Lo sir, he says not that some might have life:
but all, says he. And what al: All that love him with all their hearts: all that
have lived a godly life Nay all that believe in him Although thou have lived a
most wicked and horrible life, if now thou believe in him, thou shall be saved.
Is not this sweet gear?

Again says Christ: Come unto me al ye that labor and are laden, and I will
refresh you, Let us a little look on this letter: Come un to me. Who should
come? Lords, Priests, Holy men, Moonkes, Friars? Yea Cobblers, Tinkers, whores,
thieves, murderers also, if they lament their sins. Come unto me (says he)
all ye that labor and are laden, that is, which are afraid of your sins, And
what wylt thou do Lord? And I will refresh you, says he.

Oh what a thing is this: And I will refresh you. Wot you who spoke this? He
that never told lie: He is the truth, there was never guile found in his
mouth: and now will he be untrue to thee good brother, which art sorry for thy
grievous syns: no forsooth Heaven and earth shall pass and perish, but his word
shall never fail

Saint Paul says? God would have all men saved, Lo, he excepteth none. And
to Titus: The grace of God brings salvation to all men. As from Adam all have
received sin to damnation: so by Christ all have grace offered to salvation,
if they reject not the same. I speak not now of infantes, I say: nor I need
not to enter into the matter of predes^inatio^. In preaching of repe^^auce, I
would gather where I could with Christ

As surely as I live (says God) I will not the death of a sinner. Are y^ a
sinner? Yea. Lo, God swears he will not thy death. How can thou now perish?
Consider with thy self what profit thou should have to believe this to be
true to others, if not to thy self also. Satan does so. Rather consider with
Peter, that the promise of salvation pertayneth not only to them which are
nigh, that is to such as are fallen a little: but also to all whom the Lord has
called, be they never so far of.

Lo, now by me the Lord calls thee thou man thou woman that art very far
of. The promise therefore pertains to thee: needs must thou be saved, except
thou with Satan say, God is false: and yet if thou do so, God is faith full,
and cannot deny him self: as thou shall feel by his plagues in hell, for so
dishonouring God, to think that he is not true. Will he be found false now? The
matter hangs not on thy worthynes, but it hangs on Gods truth. Clap hold on
it, and I warrant thee Christ is the propitiatio^ for our syns, yea, for the
syns of the whole world: believe this man, I know thou believed it: say therefore
in thy heart still, Domine adauge mihi side^: Lord increase my faith: Lord help
my unbelief. Blessed are they which see not (by reason) this gear, but yet
believe. Hope man, past all hope, as Abraham did.

And thus much for a taste of these promises, which are every where, not only
in the new testament, but also in the old. Read the last end of Leuiticus.
26. The Prophet Esaias. 30. where he says: God tarieth looking for thee to show
thee merry. Also the. 40. and so fourth to the. 60. Read also the 2. Regum,
24. Psalm, 33. Joel, 2. etc.

How be it, if this gear will not serve, if yet thou feel no faith, no
certain persuasion of Gods love: then unto prayer and diligent considering of
the free and universal promises of the Gospel thirdly set before thee those
benefits which God has ^ofore given thee, and presently gives thee Consider
how he has made thee a man or a woman, which might have made thee a Toade, a
Dog And why did he this? Uerely because he loved thee. And trowest thou, that
if he loved thee when thou wast not, to make thee such a one as he most
graciously has made thee: will he not now love thee being his handy work?
Does he hate any thing that he made? Is there unableness with him. Does he love
for a day, and so farewell: No forsooth, he loves to the end, his mercy endures
for ever. Say therefore with Job Operi manum tuarum, porrige dexteram, that is,
To the work of thy hands put thy helping hand.

Again, has he not made thee a Christian man or woman, where if he would, he
might have made thee a Turk or Payn^^? This thou know he did of love. And
do thou think his love is lessoned if thou lament thy sin? Is his hand
shortened for helping thee? Can a woman forget the child of her womb? and
though she should do it, yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord He has
given thee lyms, to see, hear, go etc He has given thee (...), r^ason,
discretion. etc. He has long spared thee and borne with thee when thou never
purposedst to repent, and now then repenting, will he not give thee mercy?
Wherefore does he give thee to live at this present to hear me to speak this,
and me to speak this, but of love to us all? Oh therefore let us pray him, that
he would add to this, that we might believe these love tokens that he loves
us, and in deed he will do it. Lord open our eyes, in thy gifts to see thy
gracious goodness, Amen.

But to carry in this I will not. Let every man consider Gods benefits past and
present, publyke and private, spiritual and corporal, to the confirming of his
faith concerning the promises of the Gospel for the pardon of his sins. I
will now go about to show you a fourth mean to confirm your faith in this
gear, even by examples. Of these there are in the scriptures very many, as also
daily experienc^ both diversely teach the same, if we were diligent to observe
things accordingly: wherefore I will be more brief herein, having respect to
time, which steals fast away.

Adam in Paradise transgressed grievously, as the painful punishment which we
al as yet do feel proves, if nothing else. Though by reason of his syn he
displeased God sore, and ran away from God, (for he would have hid him self,
yea he would have made God the caus^^ of his syn in that he gave him such a
^ate, ^o far was he from asking mercy) yet all ^hys notwithstanding, God
turned his f^ar^^ wrath neither upon him nor Eve, which also required not
mercy, but upon the the serpent Satan: promising unto them a seen Jesus
Christ by whom they at the length should ^e delivered. In token whereof, though
they were cast out of Paradise for their nurture, so serve in sorrow which would
not serve in joy; yet he made them apparel to cover their bodies, a visible
Sacrament and token of his invisible love and grace concerning their souls. If
God was so merciful to Adam which so fore brake his commandment, and rather
blamed God then asked mercy, trow est thou, oh man, that he will not be
merciful to thee, which blamest thy self, and desire pardon?

To Cain he offered mercy, if he would have asked it. What ha^t thou done,
says God? The voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me out of the earth. Oh
mercifu^ Lord (should Cain have said) I confess it* But alas, he did not so,
and therefore said God: Now, that is, in that thou desyrest not mercy, now, I
say, be thou accursed. etc. Loto the reprobate he offered mercy, and will he
deny it thee which art his child. Gene 9 Genes* ^9


Noah, did not he syn and was drunk? Good Lot also both in Sodom dissembled a
little with the Angels, prolonging the time, and out of Sodom he fell very
Genes. ^9
foul: as did Judas, and the Patriarchs against Joseph, but yet I ween they
found mercy. Moses, Myriam, Aaron, though they stumbled a little, yet received
they mercy: yea the people in the wyldernes often sinned and displeased God, so
that he was purposed to have destroyed them. Let me alone, says he to Moses,
that I may destroy them: but Moses did not let him alone, for he prayed still
for them, and therefore God spared them. If the people were spared through
Moses prayer, they not praying with him, but rather woorshipping their golden
calse, eating, drinking, and making ^olly good there, Joshua and Caleb.
why should thou doubt whether God will be merciful to thee? having, as in
deed thou have, one much better then Moses to pray Number. 14.
for thee and with thee, even Jesus Christ, who sytteth on the ^ight hand of
his father, and prays for us, being no less faithful in his fathers house
the Church then Moses was in the Synagoge. David y^ good King, had a foul
foil when he committed Leuit. 24, Number. 15.
whordome with his faithful servants wife Bethsabe: whereunto he added also a
mischeuous murder, causing her husband his most faithful soldiour Ury to be
slain, with an honest company o^ his most valiant men of war, and that with the
sweard of the v^circumcised. Tim. 2.


In this his syn, though a great while he lay a sleep (as many do now a
days, God give them good waking) thinking y^ by the sacrifices he offered all
was well, God was content: yea at length when the Prophet by aparable had opened
the poke, and brought him in remembrance of his own sin in such sort, that he
gave judgment against himself: then quaked he, his sacri^ices had no more
taken away his syns, then our sir John's ^rentals and wag ging of his fi^gers
over ye heads of such as lie asleep in their sins (out of the which when they
are awaked, they will well see that it is neither Mass nor Mattins^ bless^ng nor
crossyng will serve) ^^en I say, he cried out saying: Peccaui Domino, I have
sinned layth he against my Lord and good God which has don so much for me. I
caused in deed Ury to be killed. I have sinned, I have sinned. What shall I
do? I have sinned and am worthy of eternal damnation. But what says God by
his Prophet: Dominus (says he) transtulit peccatum tuu^, non morieris: The
Lord has taken away thy syns, thou shall not dye. Oh good God, he aid but
Peccaui, I have sinned out yet from his heart and not from the lyps only, as
Pharao and Saul did, and incontine^tly he he^reth: Thou shall not dye, the
Lord has taken away thy fyns, or rather has laid the^ upon an other, yea
translated the^ upon the back of his son Jesus Christ, who bare them, and not
only them, but thine and mine also, if that we will now cry but from our hearts,
Peccauimus, we have sinned good Lord, we have done wyckedly, enter not into
judgment with us, but be mercyful unto us after thy great mercy, and according
to the multitude of thy compassions do away our iniquities etc. ^or in deed
God is not the God of David only: Idem deus omnium, he is the God of all. So
that Quicuuque inuocauerit nomen domini, saluus erit: He or she whosoever they
be that call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. In confirmation whereof
this history is written, as are also the other which I have recited, and many
mo which I might recite: As of Manasses y^ wicked king; which slew Esaias ye
Prophet, and wrought very much wyckednes; yet the Lord showed mercy upon him
being in prison, as his prayer does teach us. Nabuchodonozer though for a time
he bare Gods anger, yet at the length he found mercy. The City of Niniue also
found favor with God, as did many other, which I will omyt for times sake, and
will bring forth one or two out of the new Testament, that we may see God to be
the same God in the new testament, that he was in the old.

I might tell you of many, if I should speak of the lunatike such as were
possessed with deuyls. lame, blind, dumme, deaf, lepers, etc. but time will
not suffice me: one or two therefore shall serve. Mary Magdalen had.vii.
devils, but yet they were cast out of her, and of al others she was the first
that Christ appeared unto after his resurre^^ton. Thomas 1. Reg. ^.
would not believe Christ's resurrection, though many told him which had seen
and felt him: by reason whero^ a man might have thought that his sins would
have cast him away. Except I should see and feel (says he) I will not believe.
Ah wylfull Thomas: I will not, says he. But Christ appeared unto him, and
would not leese him, as he will not do thee 3. Reg^, 21, 22.
good brother, if that with Thomas you wylt keep company with the Disciples as
Thomas did. Peter's fall was ougly, he accursed 4. Reg. 21* 4. R^g. ^^.
him self if ever he knew Christ and that for fear of a gyrle, and this not
once, but even three diverse times, and that in the hearing of Christ his
Master: but yet the third time Christ looked back, and cast on him his eye of
grace, so that he went out and wept vitterly: and after Christ's resurrection
not only did the Angels will the woman to tell Peter that Christ was risen, but
Christ himself appeared unto him severally: such a good Lord is he.

The thief hanging on ye cross said but this: Lord when thou co^mest into thy
kingdom remember me, and what answer had he? This day says Christ, shall thou
be with me in Paradise, What a comfort is this, in that he is now the same
Christ to thee and me and us all, if we will run unto him: for he is the same
Christ to day and to morrow until he come to judgment Then in deed he will be
inexorable: but now is he more ready to give then thou to ask. If thou cry, he
hears thee, yea before thou cry. Cry therefore, be bold man, he is not
parciall. Call, says he, and I will hear thee: Ask Esaias. 3^.
and thou shall have. Seek and Math. 7.
thou shall find, though not at the first, yet at the length. If he tarry a
white, it is but to try thee. Nam Hebr. 10.
veniens veniet, and non tardabit. He is coming and will not be long.

Thus have you four means which you must use to the attayning of faith or
certain persuasion of Gods mercy toward you, which is the secoud part of
penance, namely prayer, the free and universal promises of Gods grace the
recordation of the benefits of God past and present, the examples of Gods
mercy. Which although they might suffice, yet will I put one mo^ to them, which
alonely of it self is full sufficient, I mean the death of the son of God
Jesus Christ, which if thou set before the eyes of thy mind, it will confirm
thy plackard, for it is the great seal of England, as they say, yea of all the
world, for the coufirmation of al patents and perpetui^ies of the everlasting
life whereunto we are all called.

If I thought these which I have before recited, were not sufficient to
confirm your faith of Gods love toward such as do repent, I would tarry
longer here in. But because both I have been long, and also I trust you have
some exercise of conscience in this daily (or else you are to blame) I will but
touch and go. Consider with your selves what we are, mysers, wretches, and
enemies to God. Cousider what God is, even he which has all power, Majesty,
might, glory, riches. etc perfectly of himself and needs no thing, but has
althinges. Consider what Christ is: concerning his god head coequal with his
father, even he by whom althinges were made, are ruled and governed: concerning
his manhod the only dearlyng of his father, in who^ is all his joy. Now sir,
what a love is this that this God which needs nothing, would give wholly his
own self to thee his enemy, wreaking his wrath upon him self in this his
son, as a man may say, to spear thee, to save thee, to win thee, to buy
thee, to have thee, to enjoy thee for ever. Because thy sin had separated
the^ from him, to the end thou might come e^tsones into his company again,
and therein remain, he himself became, as a man would say, a sinner, or
rather syn it self, even a maledictio^ or curse: that we sinners, we accur^ed
by our syn, might by his oblation or offering for our syns, by his curse, be
delivered from sin and from malediction. For by syn he destroyed sin,
kylling death, Satan, and syn by rheir own weapons and that for thee and me
(man) it we cast it not away by unbelief. Oh wonderful love of God. Who ever
heard of such a love, the Father of heaven for us his ennemies to give his own
dear son Jesus Christ, and that not only to be our brother, to dwell among
us, but also to the death of the cross for us? Oh wonderful love of Christ to
us al, that was content and wylling to work this feate for us. Was there any
love like to this love?

God in deed has commended his charity and love to us herein, that when we
were very enemies unto him, he would give his own son for us. That we being men
might become, as you would say, Gods, God would become man That we being mortal
might be come immortal, y^ immortal God would become mortal man. That we
earthlye wretches might be Citizens of heaven, the Lord of heaven would become,
as a man would say, earthly, That we being accursed might be blessed God would
be accursed. That we by our father Adam being brought out of Paradise into
the puddle of all pain, might be redeemed and brought into Paradise ^gaine,
God would be our father, and an Adam thereunto. That we having nothing might
have all things, God having all things would have nothing. That we being
vassails and slaves to all, even to Satan the feend, might be Lords of all,
and of Satan, the Lord of all would become a vassal and a ^laue to us al, and
in danger of Satan. Oh love imcomprehensible. Who can otherwise think now,
but if the gracions good Lord disdayned not to give his own son, his own
hearts joy for us his very ennemies, before we thought to beg any such thing at
his hands, yea before we were: who I say, can think otherwise, but that with
him he will give us al good things? If when we hated him and ^led away from
him, he sent his son to seek us, who can think otherwise, then that now we
loving him, and lamenting because we love him no more, but that he will for ever
love us? He that gives the more to his enemies, will not he give the less trow
you to his friends? God has given his own son, then which thing nothing is
greater to us his enemies: and we now being become his friends, will he deny us
faith and pardon of our sins, which though they be great yet in comparison they
are nothing at al? Christ Jesus would give his own self for us, when we willed
it not, and will he now deny us faith if we will it? This will is his earnest,
that he has given us truly to look in deed for the thing wylled. And look
thou for it in deed, for as he has given thee to will, so will he give thee to
do.

Jesus Christ gave his life for our euyls, and by his death delivered us: Oh
then, in that he lives now and cannot dye, will he forsake us* His heart blood
was not to dear for us when we asked it not: what can then be now to dear
for us asking it? Is he a chaungeling? Is he inutable as man is? Can he repent
him of his gif^es? Did he not foresee our falls: Paid not he therefore the
price? Because he saw we should fall sore, therefore would he suffer sore. Yea
if his suffering had not been enough, he would yet once more come again. God
the father I am sure, if ye death of his son incarnate would not serve, would
himself and the holy ghost also become incarnate and dye for us. This death of
Christ therefore look on as the very pledge of Gods love toward thee,
whosoever thou art, how deep soever thou have sinned. See Gods hands are
nailed they cannot strike thee, his feet also he cannot run tro^ thee, his
arms are wide open to embrace thee, his head hangs down so kiss thee, his
very heart is open, so that therein see, to^te, look, spy Gene. 9 Genes. 19
pe^pe, and thou shall see nothing therein but love, love, love, love to thee:
hyde thee therefore, lay thy head there with the Evangelist.

This is the clyft of the rock Genes. 19
wherein Helias stood. This is the pillow of down for all akyng heads. Anoint
thy head with this oil: let this ointment enbaulme thy head, and wash thy face
Tarry thou here, and cock sure thou art, I warrant thee. Say with Paul: what can
separate me from the love of God? Can death, can poverty, sycknes, hunger, or
any misery persuade thee now, that God loves thee not? Nay, nothing can
separate thee from the love where with God has loved thee in Christ Jesus: whom
he ioueth, he loves to ye end. So that ^ow Leuit. 24,
where abundance of syn has ^en in thee, the more is the aboudance of grace.
But to what end* Forsooth that as syn has raigued to death, as the^ sees^, to
the kylling of Gods son, so now grace must reign to life, to the honoring
of Gods son, who is now a live, and cannot dye any more.

So that they which by ^ayth feel this, cannot any more dye to God, ^^t: o
syn, whereto they are dead and buried with Christ. As Christ therefore lives,
so do they and that to God, to righteous^^s and holiness. The life which they
live, is In fide filii bei, in the faith of the son of God, Whereby you see
that now I am slipped into that which I made the third part of penance, namely
newnes of life, which I could not so have done, if that it were a part of it
self in deed, as it is au effect or fruit of the second part, that is, of
faith T^^. ^.
or trust in Gods mercy. For he that believes, that is, is certainly persuaded
sin to be such a thing, that it is the cause of al misery, and of it selfso
greatly angereth God, that in heaven nor in earth nothing could appease his
wrath, save alonely the death and precious blood sheddyng of the son of God,
in whom is all the delight and pleasure of the father he I say, that is
persuaded thus of syn, the same cannot but in heart abhor and quake to do or
say, yea to think any thing willingly which Gods law teaches him to be syn.

Again, he that believes, that is, is certainly persuaded Gods love to be so
much to wards him, that where through syn he was lost and made a firebra^d of
hell, the eternal father of mercy, which is the omnisufficient God, and needs
nothing to us or of anithing that we can do to deliver us out of hell and to
bring us into heaven, did send even his own most dear son out of his
bosom, out of heaven into hell, as a man would say to bring us, as I said, from
thence into his own bosom and mercy, we being his very enemies: he, I say that
is thus persuaded of Gods love toward him, and of the price of his redemption,
by the dear blood of the Lamb imaculate Jesus Christ, the same man cannot but
love God again, and of love do that, and heartily desire to do better, the
which might please God. Trow you that such a one, knowing this gear by faith,
will willingly walter and wallow in his wilful lusts, pleasures and fa^tasies
Will such a one as knows by faith Christ Jesus i^ have given his blood to
wash him from his syns, play the Sow to walter in his puddle of filthy syn and
vice again? Nay rather then he will be defiled again^* by wilful synning he will
wash often the feet of his affections, watching over y^ vice still sticking in
him, which as a spring continuallye sends out poison enough to drown and
defile him, if the sweet water of Christ's passion in Gods sight did not wash
it, and his blood satisfy the rigor of Gods justice due for the same. This
blood of Christ shed for our sins, is so dear in ye sight of him that
believes, that he wy^l abhor in his heart to stamp it and tread it under his
feet. He knows now by his belief that it is to much that he thereto he has
set to little by it, and is ashamed thereof, Therefore for the residue of his
life he purposes to take better beede to himself then before he did. Because
he sees by his faith ye greuousnes of Gods anger, ye foulnes of syn, the
greatness of Gods mercy, and of Christ's love toward him, he will now be
heedye to pray to God to give him his grace accordingly, that as with his eyes,
tongue, hands feet. etc. he has displeased God, doing his own will: even so
now with the same eyes, tongue, ears hands, feet. etc. he may displease his
own self, and do Gods will. Willingly will he not do that which might renew
the death of the son of God He knows he has to much sin vnwyllingly in
him, so that thereto he will not add willing offenses.

This willing and witting offending and synning, whosoever does flatter him
self therein, does evidently demo^strate and show that he never yet in deed
tasted of Christ truly. He was never truly persuaded or beloved how soul a
thing sin is, how grievous a thing Gods anger is, how joyful and precious a
thing Gods mercy in Christ is, how exeeding broad, wide, hye and d^eepe
Christ's love is, Perchance he can write prate, talk and preach of this gear:
but yet he in part by faith never felt this gear. For if he did once feel
this gear in deed, then would he be so far from continuing in syn willingly
and wittingly, that wholly and heartily he would give over himself to that which
is contrary I mean to a new life, renewing Reg. ^
his youth even as the Egle does

For as we being in ye servitude of syn, demo^strate our service by giving over
our members to the obeying of syn from iniquity to iniquity: even so we being
made free from sin by faith in Jesus Christ, and endued with Gods spirit, a
spirit of liberty, must needs demonstrate this fredom and liberty by giving
over our members to the obedience of the spir it: by the which we are lead and
guided from virtue to virtue, and all kind of holiness. As the unbelievers
declare their unbelief by the working of the evil spirit in them out wardly
the fruits of y^, ^^esh: even so the beleuers declare their faith by the
working of Gods good spirit in them outwardly the fruits of the spirit. For as
the devil is not dead in those which are his but works still to their
damnation: so is not God dead in them which be his, but works still to their
salvation. The which working is not the cause of the one or the other being in
any, but only a demonstration, a sign, a fruit of the same: as the Apple is
not Esaias. 3u.
the cause of the Appletree, but a Math. 7.
fruit of it.

Thus then you see briefly that newnes of life is not in deed a Hebr. 10.
part of penance, but a fruit of it, a demonstration of the justifying faith, a
sign of Gods good spirit possessing the heart of the penitent: as the old life
is a fruit of impenitencie, a demonstration of a lip faith or unbelief, a
sign of Satan's spirit possessing the heart of the impenitent, which al those
be that be not penitent. For mean I know none. He that is not penitent, the
same is impenitent: he that is not governed by Gods spirit, the same is
governed by Satan's spirit. For all that the Christ's are governed with the
spirit of Christ, which spirit has his fruits. Al other y^ be not Christ's
are the devils. He that gathers Number* 14
not ^^ Christ, scatters abroad.

Therefore dearly beloved, I befech you to consider this grace, and deceive not
yourselues. If you be not Christ's, then pertain you to the devil, of which
thing ye fruits of the flesh does assure you, as whordom, adultecy,
uncleanness, wanto^nes, idolatry, witchcraft, envy strife, contention, wrath,
sedition, murder, dronke^nes, glut tony, blasphemy, slothfulnes, idleness,
baudy talking, sc^a^dering, etc If these apples grow out of the appletrees of
your haries, surely surely the deuel is at Inn with you, you are his birds:
whom when he has well fed, he will broth you and eat you, chaw you and champ
you world without end in eternal woe and mysery. But I am otherwise persuaded
of you al. I trust you be al Christ Jesus his people and children yea brethren
by faith.

As ye see your sins in Gods law and tremble, sigh, sorrow and sob for the same,
even so you see his great mercies in his Gospel and free promises, and
therefore ar glad, merry and joyful, for that you are accepted into Gods favor,
have your sins pardoned, and are endued with the good spirit of God, even the
seal and sign manuell of your election in Christ before the beginuing of the
world. The which spirit, for that he is the spirit of life given to you to
work in you, with you, and by you here in this life, sa^ctification and
holiness, where unto you are called that ye might be holy, even as your heavenly
father is holy: I beseech you all by admonition and warning of you that you
would styr up the gifts of God given to you generally and particularly, to ye
edifying of his Church: that is, I pray you that you would not molest the good
spirit of God by rebelling against it when it provoke and calls you to go
on forwards, that the which is holy, might yet be more holy, he which is
ryghteous, might be more righteous, as the evil spirit moves and stirs up
the filthye to be yet more filthy, ye covetous to be more couetons, the wicked
to be more wicked.

Decclare you now your repentance by works of repentance Bring fouth frutis,
and worthy fruits, Let your sorowing for your euyls demonstratine it self
departing from the euyls you have used, Let your certainty of pardon of your
syns through Christ and your ioyin him be demo^strated by pursuing of ye good
things which Gods word teaches you. You are now in Christ Jesus Gods
workmanship, to do good works which God has prepared for you to walk in. For
the grace of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared and
teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts and that we
should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the mighty God, and of our savior
Jesus Christ, which gave him self for us, to redeem us from all
unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculiar people unto himself, fervently given
unto good works. Again Titus. 3. for we our selves also were in times past
unwise, disobedient, deceived, serving iustes and diverse pleasures, living in
maliciousnes and envy, full of hate and hating one another. But after, that the
kindness and love of God our Savior to manward appeared, not by ye deeds of
righteousness which we wrought, but of his mercy he saved us by the fou^^aine of
the new birth, and with the renning of the holy Ghost, which he shed on us
abnudantly through Jesus Christ our Savior, that we once justified by his
grace, should be heirs of eternal life through hope. This is a true saying.
But I will make an end, for I am to tedious,

Dearly beloved, repent your syns, that is, be sorry for y^ which is past,
believe in Gods mercy for pardon, how deeply soever you have sinued, and both
purpuse and ear nestly pernse a new life, bringing forth worthy and true
fruits of repentance. As you have given over your members from syn so syn, to
serve the devil, your tounges to swear, to lie, to slaiter, to scold, to
jest, to scost, to baudy talk, to vain ianglyng, to boasting. etc. your hands
to picking, groping, ydlenes, fighting. etc your feet to skipping, going to
evil, to dau^sing. etc your ears to hear fables, lies, fanities and evil
things. etc: so now give over your members to godlynes, your tou^gs to speak,
your ears to hear, your eyes to see, your mouths to last your hands to
work, your feet to go about such thiuges as may make to gods glory, sobrie^y
of life, and love to your brethren, and that daily more and more diligently:
for in a stay to stand you cannot, either better or worse you are to day then
you were yesterday. But better I trust you be and will be, if you mark well my
theme, yt is, Repent you. The which thing that you would do, as before. I have
humbly besought yon: eue^ so now yet once more I do again beseech you, and that
for ye tender mercies of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, Repent you, repent you,
for the kingdom of heaven (yt is, a kingdom full o^al riches, pleasures, mirth,
beauty, swetenes, and eternal felicity) is at hand. The eye has not seen the
like, ye ear, has not heard ye like, ye heart of man cannot conceive the
treasures and pleasures of this kingdom, which now is at hand to such as
repent, that is, to such as are sorry for their sins, believe Gods mercy through
Christ, and earnestly purpose to lead a new life. The God of mercy through
Christ his son grant us his holy spirit, and work in our hearts this sorrow,
faith, and new life, which through his grace I have spoken of, both now and for
ever.

Amen.
An other Sermon made also by the said Master John Bradford, upon the Supper
of the Lord.
THere are two Sacraments Two Sacraments in christ's church.
in Christ's Church: the one of initiation, that is, wherewith we be enraled as
it were, in to the household and family of God, which Sacrament we call
Baptism: the other wherewith we be conserved, fed, kept and nourished, to
continue in the same Familye, which is called the Lords supper or the body and
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, broken for our syns, and shed for our
trausgressions.

Of the former Sacrament, that is, of Baptism, to speak now I am not
purposed, because occasion and time serve not so thereto. Of the second therefore
will I speak something by Gods grace, if that Baptism is in place of
circumcision,
first you remember this, that Baptism in Christ's Church now sithen Christ's
death, is come in place of Circumcision, which was in the same church before
Christ's coming. Whereby we may see Christian men's chudre^ ought to be baprised
that Christian Parents seem to be no loss bound to offer their Infants and
Sabes to be baptized, that they may be taken and accounted of us as members of
Christ's mistical body, whereunto they are received and sealed: then were the
Hebrews their children to be taken as pertaining to the coue naunt and league
with God wherein they were enroled, alonely the circumstance of the eight day,
not necessary to be observed being now abrogated.

But to come again, of the Galat, 4.
Lords Supper I am purposed presently to speak, through the help of God,
because we are assembled in Christ (I hope) to celebrate the same. Now that the
things which I shall speak may be better observed and carried away of you, I
will tell you how and in what sort I will speak of it. Three things would I
have marked, as the principals and scopes whereto I will refer al yt I shall at
this time speak thereof. They be these: Who, what, and wherefore. That is, (to
make it more plain) who did institute this thing which we are about to
celebrate, this is the first. The second is, what y^ thing is which is
instituted. And the last is, wherefore and to what end it was instituted:
whereby we shall be taught how to use it.

For the first, who did institute this Sacrament and Supper: who did institute
this Sacrament,
you all do know that things are more esteemed sometime for the dignity and
authority of the person: sometime for the wisdom of the person, sometime for
the power and magnificence of the persou, and sometime for the tender love and
kyndnes of the person. If need were I could by examples set forth every one of
these, but I hope it is not necessary. Now then, how can the thing which we be
about to celebrate, but be esteemed of every one highlye, in that the Auth or of
it does want no dignity, no authority, no wisdom, no power, no magnificence,
no holmes, no tender love and kindness, but has al dignity authority, wisdom,
power magnificence, holiness, tender lone, mercy, glory, and all that can be
wished absolutely? He is God eteruall, coequall, and substantial with the
Father and with the holy Ghost, the image of the substance of God, the wisdom
of the Father, the brightness of his glory, by whom all things were made, are
ruled and governed. He is the King of all Kings, and the Lord of all Lords, He
is the Messiah of the world, our most dear and loving brother, Savior,
Mediator, Advocate, Intercessor, Husbaud, Priest. So that the thing which
comes from him, cannot but be esteemed, loved, and embraced, if dignity,
authority, wisdom power, glory, goodness, and mercy like us. Yea, if auy thing
that can be wyshed like us, theu cannot this which our Lord did institute, but
like us, and that so much the more, by how much it is oue of the last things
which he did institute and command. God open our eyes to see these things
accordingly: so shall we come with more reverence to this Table of the Lord,
which thing he grant for his mercies sake, Amen. And thus much for the first,
who did institute this Sacrament.

Now to the second, what the 2 what the Sacrament is.
Sacrament is. If we shall ask our eyes, our nose, our mouth, our taste, our
hands, and the reason of man, they will all make a consonant answer, that it
is bread and wine. And verelye herein they speak the truth and lie not, as by
many things may be proved, although the Papists prate their pleasure to the
coutrary.

And here, my dearly beloved, I think I shall not be either tedious or
unprofitable unto you, if that I tarry a little in showing this verity, that the
substance of bread and wine remain in the Sacrament after the words of
consecration (as they call them) be spoken. Whereby we may learn how shameless
beasts they be, which Upon tra^substantiation all popery almost is builded.
would enforce men to believe tra^substa^tiation, which is an error whereupon in
a manner depends all popery. For it is the stay of their Priesthood, which is
neither after the order of Aaron, nor after the order of Melchisedech, but
after the order of Baal, which thing is somthyng seen by their number. For the
false prophets and Priests of Baal were always many more in number, when the
wicked were in authority, then the true Priests and Prophets of the Lord, as
the holy histories of the Bible do teach. Read the third of the Kings the. 18,
chap.

That in the supper of the Lord The Sacrament of the popysh Mass is not the
crament of christ's body.
or in the Sacrament of Christ's body (which the Papists call the sacrament of
the Altar, as though that were Christ's Sacrament, which thing they ca^ never
prove: For it being perverted and used to a contrary end, as of sacrifieyng
propitiatorily for the syns of the quick and of the dead, of idolatry by
adorning or worshipping it by godly honor. etc. is no more Christ's Sacrament,
but an horrible profanation of it, and therefore as Christ called Gods Temple,
which was, called au house of prayer, for the abusing and prophanyng of it by
the Priests, a den of the eues: so this which the Papists call the sacrament
of the Altar, full truly may we call au abominable Idol: And therefore I would
all men should know that the sacrament of the Altar as the Papists now do
abuse it, omittyng certain substantial points of the Lords iustitution and
putting in the steed thereof their own dregs and dreaues, is not the sacrament
of Christ's body, nor the Lords supper: whereof when we speak reverently as our
duty is, we would not that men should think we speak it of the popish Mass:
(that I say in the Supper of the Lord, or in the sacrament of Christ's body
there remains the substance of bread and wine, as our senses and reason to
teach, these many things also do teach the same.

First the holy Christ does plainly tell us, by calling it often bread The
first reason against tra^substantiation.
aftrr the words of consecration, as 1. Cornith. 10. Is not the bread which we
break a partakyng of the body of Christ, says Paul? Lo, plainly he says:
the bread which we break, not only calling it bread, but addyng thereto
breakyng, which cannot be attributed either to Christ's body, whereof no bone
was broken, either to any accident, but must needs be of a substance, which
substance if it be not Christ's body, cannot be but bread. As in the.xi.
chapter four times he plainly calls it: He that eats of this bread: He
that receives this bread. etc, And in the Acts of the Apostels we read, how
that (in speaking of the Communion) they met together to break bread. etc So
that it is plain that the substauce of bread and wine do remain in the
Supper after the words of consecration: as also may appear plainly by Christ's
own words, which calls that which he gave them in the Cup, wine or the fruit
of the vine, as both Matthew and Matke do write. Whereby we set that there is no
transubstantiation of the wine, and therefore may we also see, that there is no
transubstantiation of the bread.

As for the Panistes cauillyng, An answer to the Papists cavil for ye
foresaid reason. Math. 26 Exodus 7.
how that it has ye name of bread because it was bread, as Simon the leper was
called stylle prous, though he was healed: or as Moses rod, being turned into
a serpent, was called a Rod still, it proves nothing. For there was in the one
a plain sight, and the senses certified that Simo^ was no leper: and in the
other plain mention that the rod was turned into a Serpent. But concerning the
Sacrament, neither the senses see any other thiug the^ bread, neither is there
auy mention made of turning. And therefore their ^auill is plainlye seen to be
but a cauyll and of no force. But to come a gain to bring more reasons against
Transubstantiatie^:

Secondly, that the substance of The ^^co^d reason against tra^substan. Math.
19 Mark. 14 Luke. 22. 1. Cori. 11.
bread remains still, the very text does teach. For the Evangelists and the
Apostle Saint Paul do wytnes, that Christ gave that to his Disciples, and
called it his body which he took, on which he gave thanks, and which he
brake: but he took bread, gave thanks on bread, and broke bread Ergo he gane
bread, and called bred his body, as he called the cup the new testament. So
that it follows by this, that there is no transubstantiation. And this reason
I my self have promised in writing to prove by the authority of the Fathers,
namely Ireneus, Tertullian, Orgine, Ciprin, Epiphanius, Hierommus, Augustinus,
Theodorete, Cirill, Bid, it so be I may have the use of my books, The third
reason against tra^substantiacion.


Thirdly, that in the Sacrament there is no transub stantiation of the bread,
by this reason I do prove: Like as by our Savior Christ the spirit of truth
spoke of the bread, This is my body, so says the sa^ spirit of truth of the
same bread: That we many are one body 1. Cor. 10.
and one bread. etc. So that as it appears the Sacrament not to be the Church
by transubstantiation, even so is it not Christ's natural body by
trausubstanciation

Fourthly, I prove that there is The iiij. reason against tr^substantiation.
no transubstantiation by Luke and Paul's words spoken over the Cup. For no
Less are they effi^tuall to transubstantiate the cup, then their words spoken
of the bread are operatorius and mighty to transubsta^tiate the bread. For as
they say of the bread, This is my body, so say they of the Cup, This cup is the
new testament: which thing is absurd to be spoken or thought, either of the
cup or of the thing in the cup by transubstanti ation. Yea rather in saying
these words, This cup is the new Testament, we are taught by their coupling
this word Cup to the demonstratiue This, how we should in these words, This is
my body know that this word This does there demonstrate bread.

Fifthly, that the substance of bread remains in the Sacrament, The fyft
reason.
as ye reasons before brought forth do prove, so does the definition of a
Sacrament. For the Fathers do affirm it to consist of Ireneus Augustinus.
Chrysostomus.
an earthly thing and of an heavenly thing, of the word and of the element, of
sensible things and of things which be perceived by the mind. But
transubstantiation takes clean away the earthly thing, the element, the
sensible thing, and so makes it no Sacrament. And therefore the definition of a
Sacrame^tful well teaches, that bread which is the earthly thing, the sensible
thing, and the element, remains still, as Saint Augustine says: The word
comes to the Element, (he says not, takes away the Element,) and so it is
made a Sacrament. The syxt reason against tra^substantiation.


Sixthly, the nature, and propertion of a Sacrament teaches this also which I
have affirmed. For as Cipriane writes that Sacraments bear the names of the
^ipriax in Sermon de Chrysmat. Augustinus ad Bonifacium.
things which they signifye: so does saint Augustine teach that if Sacraments
have not some signification with the things wherofthey be Sacraments, then are
they no sacraments. Now, in the Lords supper this similitude is first in
nourishing, that as bread nourishes the body: so Christ's body broken feeds
ye soul. Secondly in bringing together many into our, that as in the sacrament
many graynes of corn are made on bread, many grapes ar made one liquour and
wine: so the multitude which worthelye receive the Sacrament, are made one body
with Christ and his Church. Last of all, in one vnlykelr lykelynes or
similitude: that as bread eaten turns into our nature: so we rightly eating
the sacrament by faith, turn into the nature of Christ. So that it is plain
to them that will see, that to take the substance of bread away, is clean
against the nature and property of a sacrament.

I will speak nothing how that this their doctrine of transubstatiation, beside
the manyfold absurdities it has in it (which to rehearse I omyt,) it utterly
overthrows the use of the Sacrament, and is clean contrary to the end
wherefore it was instituted, and so is no longer a scrament, but an Idol, and
is the cause of much Idolatry, converting the peoples hearts from an heavenly
conversation to an earthly, and turning the Communion into a private action,
and a matter of gasyng and piping of adoring and worshipping the work of men's
hands for the living God, which dwells not in* Temples made with men's
hands, much less lies he in pixes and chests, whose true worship is in
spirit and verity, which God grant us all to render unto him continually.
Amen. The, vij. (...)


The Sacrament of Baptism does also teach us, that as ye substance of the
water remains there: so in the Lords supper remains the substance of bread
after consecration. For as by Baptism we are engraffed into Christ so by the
Supper we are fed with Christ. These two sacraments the Apostle gladly coupleth
together. 1. Corinthians. 10. and. 1. Corint. 12. VVear baptsed into one body
(says he) and have drunk all of one spirit, meaning it by the Cup, as
Chrysostom and other great learned men do well interpret it. As therefore in
Baptism is given unto us the holy Ghost, and pardon of our syns, which yet ^ye
not lurking in the water: so in ye, Lords supper is given unto us the communion
of Christ's body and blood that is, grace, forgeuenes of syns innocence, life,
immortality, with out any transubstantiation or including of the same in the
bread. By Baptism the old man is put of, and the new man put on, yea Christ is
put on, but without tra^substantiating Calat, 3.
the water. And even so it is in the Lords supper. We up says spirituallye in
our souls do feed ou Christee body broken: do eat his flesh and drink his
blood: do dwell in him and he in us, but without trausubstantiation.

As for the tauill they make that An answer to the Papists cavil for y^
foresaid reason.
we are baptized into one ^ody, meaning thereby ye mystical body, and not the
natural body of Christ, whereby they would enforce that we are fed with the
natural body of Christ, but we are not ingraffed into it, but into the
mystical body, and so put away the reason aforesaid: as for this cavil, I
say, we may soon avoid it, if so he that we will consider how that Christ
which is the head of the mystical body, is not separate from the body, and
therefore to be engraffed to the mystical body, is to be engraffed into the
natural body of Christ, to be a member of his flesh, and bone of his bones as
Pope Leo full well does witness in saying, that Corpus regenerati fit caro
crucifixi: The body (says he) of the regenerate is made the flesh of Christ
crucified. And here to I could add some reasons for the excellency of
Baptism. I trow it be more to be begotten, then to be nourished. As for the
excellent miracle of the pa^efaction of the Trinifie, and the descendyng of the
holy Ghost in Baptism in a visible form, the like whereto was not seen in
the Lords supper, I will omyt to speak of further then that I would you should
know how it were no mastery to set forth the excellency of this sacrament, as
well as of the supper.

It is a plain sign of Antichrist, The.viij. reason.
to deny the substance of bread and wine to be in the Lords supper after
consecration. For in so doing and granting transubstantiation, the propertye
of the humane nature of Christ is denied. For it is not of the humane nature,
but of the divine nature to be in many places at once. As Didimus de spiritu
sa^cto does prove there by the divinity of the holy Ghost. Now grant
transubstantiation, and then Christ's natural body must needs be in many
places, which is nothing else but to confound the two natures in Christ, or to
deny Christ's humane nature, which is the selie same that saint John says, to
deny Christ to be come in the flesh And this who so does, by the testimony of
saint John in an Antichrist in his so doing, whatsoever otherwise he do prate.
Read saint Augustine in his Epistle to Dardanus, and his.l. and.xxx. treatise
upon S. John, and easily you shall see how that Christ's body must needs be in
one place. Oportet in vno loco esse: but his truth is in all places.

If there be no substance of bread The nidth reason.
in the Sacrament, but transubstantiation, then Christ's body is received of the
ungodly, and eaten with their teeth, which is not only against saint
Augustine, calling this speech, except you eat the flesh of the son of man
etc. a figurative spech: but also against the plain scriptures, which affirm
them to dwell in Christ and Christ in them, and they to have everlasting life
that eat him, which the wicked have not, although they eat the sacrament. He
that eats of this bread (says Christ (shall live for evermore. Therefore they
eat not Christ's body, but (as Paul says) they eat in judgment and
damnation, which I trow be an other manner of thing then Christ's body. And
this does saint Augustine affirm, saying: none do eat Christ's body which is
not in ye body of Christ, that is (as he expounds it) in whom Christ dwells
not, and he in Christ. Which thing the wicked do not, because they want faith
and the holy spirit, which be the means whereby Christ is received.

To the things which I have brought herefoorth to improve transubstantiation,
I could bring in the fathers to confyrme the same, which succeeded continuallye
many hundredth years after Christ. Also I could show that transubstantiation
is but a new doctrine, not established, before Satan (which was tied for a
thousand years) was letten lose. Also I could show that ever hitherto since it
was established, in all times it has been resisted and spoken against. Yea,
before this doctrine the church was nothing so endowed with goods, lands, and
possessions, as it has been since. It has brought no small gain, no small
honor, no small ease t the Clergy, and therefore no marvel though they strive
and fight for it. It is their Maozim, it is their Helena, God destroy it with
the breath of his mouth, as shortly he wylfor his names sake Amen.

If time would serve, I could and would here tell you of the absurdities which
come by this doctrine, but for times sake I must omyt it. Only for Gods sake
see this, that this their doctrine of transubstantiation is an untruth, already
I have proved, and forget not that it is ye whole stay of all Popery, and the
pillar of their Priesthood: whereby Christ's Priesthood, Sacrifice, Ministry
and truth is let, yea perverted and utterly ouerthrown, God our Father, in
the blood of his son Christ, open the eyes and minds of all our Magistrates,
and all other that bear the name of Christ, to see it in time, to Gods glory
and their own salvation. Amen.

Now to return to the second matter what the Sacrament is, you see that to the
senses and reason of man it is bread and wine. which is most true, as by the
scriptures and other wise I have allreadye proved, and therefore away with
transubstantiation,

But here lest we should make it no Sacrament, for a sacrament consists of
two things, and lest a man should by this gather; (...) we make it none other
thing (...) bare bread and a naked sign, and so rail at their pleasure on us,
saying: How can a man be giltre of the body and blood of Christ by unworthy
receiving of it, if it be but bare bread, and so forth? For this purpose I
will now speak a little more hereabout, by gods grace, to stop their mouths
and to styre up your good hearts more to the worthy estimation and perception of
this holy mysterye. When a loving friend gives to thee a thing, or sends to
thee a token (as for an example a napkyn, or such like) I think thou do not
as thou should do, if that with the thing thou considerest not the mind of
thy friend that sends or gives the thing, and according the runto, estemest
and receyuest it: And so of this bread think I, that if thou do not rather
consider the mind of thy lover Christ, then the thing which thou see: yea if
thou do not altogether consider Christ's mind, thon dealest unhonestly and
strumpetlike with him. For it is the propertye of strumpets to consider the
things given and sent them, rather then the love and mind of the geuer and
sender: whereas the true lovers do not consider in any point the things given
or sent, but the mind of the party. So we, if we be true lovers of Christ,
must not consider barely the outward thing which we see, and our senses
perceive, but rather altogether we must and should see and consider the mind
of Christ, and thereafter and according to it, to esteem the sacrament.

But how shall we know the mind of Christ? For sooth as a man's mind is best
known by his word: so by Christ's word shall we know his mind. How his
words be manifest and most plain: This (says he) is my dody: therefore
accordingly should we esteem, take, and receive it. If he had spoken nothing,
or if he had spoken doubtfully, then might we have been in some doubt. But in
that he speaks so plainly, saying, This is my body; who can, may, or dare
be so bold as to doubt of it? He is the truth and cannot lie, he is omnipotent
and can do all things: therefore it is his body. This I believe, this I
confess, and pray you all heartily to beware of these and such like words,
that it is but a sign or a figure of his body: Except you will discern betwixt
signs which fignify ouely, and signs which also do represent, confirm and
seal up (or as a man may say) give with their signification. As for an
example: An Iuye bush is a sign of wine to be sold: the buddyng of Aarous rod
did sygnifye Aarons Priesthood allowed of the Lord: the reservation of Moses rod
did signifye the rebellion of the children of Israel: the stones taken out of
Iordane, Gedeons fleese of wool. etc. such as these, be sign significatiue,
and show no gift, But in the other signs, which some call exhibitiue, is
there not only a signification of the thing but also a declaration of a gift,
yea in a certain manner a giving also. As Baptism signifies not only the
clensing of the conscience from syn by the merits of Christ's blood, but also
is a very clensyng from sin. And therefore it was said to Paul that he should
arise and wash away his syns, and not that he should arise and take only a
sign of washyng away his syns. In the Lords supper the bread is called a
partaking of the Lords body, and not only a bare sign of the Lords body.

This I speak not as though the elements of these sacraments were
trausubstantiate) which I have already impugned either as though Christ's body
were in the bread or wine, either were ^yed to the elements, otherwise then
sacramentally and spiritually, either that the bread and wine may not and must
not be called sacramental and external signs: but that they might be
discerned from significatiue and bare signs only, and be taken for signs
exhibitiue and representative.

By this means a Christian comcience will call and esteem the bread of the Lord
as the body of Christ. For it will never esteem the Sacraments of Christ after
their exterior appearance, but after the words of Christ. Whereof it comes
that the Fathers, as Chrysostom and others do speak with so full a mouth when
they speak of the Sacrament, for their respect was to Christ's words, If the
Schoolmen which followed them, had had the same spirit which they had, then
would they never have consented to transubstantiation. For with great
admiration some of the Fathers do say, that the bread is changed or turned
into the body of Christ and the wine into his blood: meaning it of amutation or
change not corporal, but spiritual, figurative, sacramental, or mystical.
For now it is no common bread nor common wine, being ordained to serve for the
foods of the soul. The scolemen have understood it as the Papists now preach
of a substautial chau^ging, as though it were no great miracle that common
bread should now be assumed into that dignity that it should be called
Christ's body, and serve for a celestial food and be made a Sacrament of his
body and blood.

As before therefore I have spoken, Christ's presence in the supper,
I would with that this Sacrament should be esteemed and called of us Christian
men, after Christ's words, namely Christ's body, and the wine Christ's blood,
rather then otherwy e. Not that I mean any other presence of Christ's body.
then a presence of grace, a presence to faith, a presence spiritually, and not
corporally, really, naturally, and carnally, as the Papists do mean. For in
such sort Christ's body is only in heaven on the right hand of God the father
almightye, whether our faith in the use of the Sacrament asceudeth and
receives whole Christ accordingly.

Yea, but one will say, that to call An objection,
the Sacrament on that sort, is to give an occasion of idolatry to the people,
which will take the Sacrament which they see, simply for Christ's body, as by
experience we are well taught, and therefore it were better to call it bread,
and so less harm should be, especially in this age.

In this objection I answer, that in deed great idolatry is committed ^n answer
to and about this Sacrament, and therefore men ought, as much as they can, to
avoid from occasioning or contirming it. But in as much as the holy Ghost is
wyser then man, and had foresight of the evils that might be, and yet
notwithstanding does call it Christ's body: I think we should do evil, if we
should take upon us to reform his speech. If Ministers did their duties in
Catechisyng and preaching, then doubtless to call the Sacrament Christ's body,
and to esteem it accordingly, cold not give occasion to idolatry, and co^tirme
it: Therefore woe unto them that preach not.

There be two euyls about the Sacraments, which to avoid the holy Ghost has
taught us. For lest we should with the Papists think Christ's body present in
or with the bread really, naturally, and corporally to be received with out
bodily mouth (where there is no other presence of Christ's body then
spiritual, and to the faith) in many places he keeps still the name of
bread, as in the epistle to the Corinthians the tenth and eleventh chapters.
And lest we should make to light of it, making it but a bare sign, and no
better then common bread, the holy Ghost calls it Christ's body whose speech
I wish we would follow, and that not only as well to avoid the evil which is now
a days most to be feared concerning the Sacrament, I mean of contemnyng it,
as also for that no faithful man comes to the Sacrament to receive bread
simply, but rather, yea altogether to communicate with Christ's body and blood.
For else to eat and drink (as Paul says) they have houses of their own. The
contempt of the Sacrament in the days of King Edward has caused these plagues
upon us presentlye, the Lord be mercyful unto us, Amen. And thus much for the
objection of easlyng the Sacrament by the name of Christ's body.

Why (says one) to call the Sacrament An other objection of Christ's presence
in the Sacrament.
Christ's body, and to make none other presence then by grace or spiritualy to
faith, which is of things hoped for, and of things which to the bodily senses
do not appear, is to make no presence at all, or to make him none otherwise
present, then he is in his word when it is preached, and therefore what need
we to receive the Sacrament, in as much as by this doctrine, a man may receive
him daily in the fi^^d as well and as much as in the church, in the celebration
and use of the Sacrament.

To this objection I first answer, that in deed neither the scripture nor
Christian faith will give us leave to make any carnal, real, natural,
corporal, or any such gross presence of Christ's natural body in the
Sacrament For it is in heaven, and the heavens must have it (as says Peter)
till Christ's coming to judgment, except we would deny the humanity of
Christ, and the veritye of man's nature in him. The presence therefore which we
believe and confess, is such a presence as reason knows not, and the world
cannot learn, nor any that looks in this matter with our eyes, or hears
with other ears, then wyththe ears and eyes of the spirit and of faith.
Which faith though it be of things hoped for, and so of things absent to the
corporal senses, yet this absence is not an absence in deed, but to reason
and the old man, the nature of faith being a possession of things hoped for.
Therefore to grant a presence to faith, is not to make no presence at all but
to such as know not faith. And this the Fathers taught, affirmyng Christ to
be present by grace, and therefore not only a signification, but also an
exhibition and geuyng of the grace of Christ's body, that is, of life and of
the seed of immortality, as Cypriane writes. We eat life and drink life
says S. Augustine. ^efecle a presence of ye Lord by grace or in grace says
Chrysostom. We receive the celestial food that comes from Athanasius.
above, says Athanasius. We receive the property of the natural conjunction
and knitting together says Hylerius. We perceive the Hylarius
nature of flesh, the blessyng that geuethlyfe in bread and wine, says
Cyrillus. And else where he Cyrillus.
says, that with the bread and wine we eat the virtue of Christ's proper
flesh, life, grace, and the property of the body of the only begotten Son of
God, which thing behimselfe expounds to be life. Basilius says, that we by
the Sacrament receive the Basilius.
mystical Aduent of Christ, grace; and the very virtue of his very nature.
Ambrose says, that we Ambrosius. Epiphanius. Hieronimus.
receive the Sacrament of ye true body. Epiphanius says, we receive the body
or grace. And Hierome says, that we receive spiritual flesh, which he
calls other flesh then that which was crucified. Chrysostom says, that we
receive in^uence of grace, and the Chrysostomus.
grace of the holy Ghost. Saint Augustine says, that we receive grare and
veritye, the innisible Augustinus.
grace and holiness of the members of Christ's body. All the which layings of
the Fathers do confirm this our faith and doctrine of the Sacrament, we
grau^ting in all things herein unto them, and they in like manner unto us. And
therefore the lying lyps which both be lie the Doctors as though they granted
a carnal and a re^^ presence of Christ's holy naturally and corporally after
the Papists declaration and meaning: and which belie us also, as though we
d^yed all presence of Christ, and so made it but a bare sign. These lying lips
the Lord will destroy if they repent not, and with us believe and teach the
truth, that the Sacrament is a food of the soul a matter of faith, and
therefore spiritually and by says to be talked of and vederstanded, which
faith they want, and therefore they err so grossly in that they would have
such a presence of Christ as is contrary to all the scriptures, and to our
Christian religion: whereby comes no such commodity to the receiver, as by
the spiritual presence which we teach, and according to Gods word do affirm.

For we teach these benefits to be had by the worthy receiving of this
Sacrament, namely that we abide in Christ and Christ in us. Again, that we
attain by it a celestial life, or a life with God: more over that by faith
and in spirit we receive not only Christ's body and vioud, but also whole
Christ God and man. Besides these we grant that by the worthy receiving of
this Sacrament, we receive remission of our syns, and confirmation of the new
Testament. Last of all by worthy receiving, we get an increase of incorporation
with Christ and amongst our selves which be his members: then which things
what more can be desired? Alas, that men consider nothing at all how that the
couplyng of Christ's body and blood to the Sacrament, is a spiritual thing,
and therefore there needs no such carnal presence as the Papists imagine. Who
will deuye a man's wife to be with her husband one body and flesh, although he
be at London, and she at York? But the Papists are carnal men, guided by
carnal reason only, or else would they know how that the holy Ghost because
of our infirmitye uses metaphorically the words of abiding, dwelling, eating
and drinking of Christ, that the unspeakable conjunction of Christ with us
might something be known. God open their eyes to see it. And thus much for this.

Now to that part of the objection which says, that we teach Christ to be
none otherwise present in the Sacrament then in his word, I would that the
obiectors would well consider what a presence of Christ is in his word. I
remember that sayut Augustine writes how that Christ's body is received
sometime visibly, and sometime inuisibly. The visible receypt he calls that
which is by the Sacrament: the invisible receypt he calls that which by the
exercise of our faith with ourselves we receive. And S. Hierom in the third
book upon Ecclesiastes, affirms that we are fed with the body of Christ, and
we drink his blood not only in mysterye, but also in knowledge of bolye
scripture. Wherein he plainly shows that the same meat is offered in the
words of the scriptures, which is offered in the sacrament, so that no less is
Christ's body and blood offered by the scriptures, then by the Sacraments.
Upon the 147. Psalm he writes also, that though these words, He that cares
my flesh, and drinks my blood, may be understand in mystery, yet he says it
is more true to take Christ's body and his blood for the word of the
scriptures, and the doctrine of God. Yea upon ye same Psalm he says plainly,
that Christ's flesh and blood is poured into our ears by hearing the word, and
therefore great is the peril if we yield to other cogitations whilst we hear
it. And therefore, I trow, S. Augustine says, that it is no les peril to hear
Gods word negligently, then so to use the sacrament. But hereof may no man
gather, that therefore it needs not to receive the Sacrament, or to affirm
that a man may as much by himself, mediating the word in the field, receive
Christ's body, as in the Church in ye right use of the Sacrament. For Christ
ordayneth nothing in vain or superfluously, he ordayneth nothing whereof we
have not need. Although his authority is such that without any questonyng his
ordinances are to be obeyed.

Again, though in the field a man may receive Christ's body by faith in the
meditation of the word, yet deny I that a man does ordinarely receive Christ's
body by ye only meditation of Christ's death, or hearing of his word, with so
much sight and by such sensible assurance) whereof God knows our infirmity
has no small need) as by the receipt of the sacrament, not that Christ is not
so much present in his word preached, as he is in or with his sacrament: but
because there are in the perception of the Sacrament more wyndowes open for
Christ to enter into us, then by his word preached or heard. For there, I
mean in the word, he har^ an entrance into out hearts but only by the ears,
through the voice and sound of the words: but here in the Sacrament he has an
entrance by all our senses, by our eyes, by our nose, by our taste, and by our
handling also. And therefore the Sacrament full well may be called, seeable,
sensible, tastable, and touchable words. As therefore when many windows be
opened in an house the more light may come in, then when there is but one
opened: even so by the perception of the Sacraments a chrystian ma^s conscience
has more help to receive Christ, then simply by the word preached, heard or
meditated. And therefore he thinks the Apostle full well calls the sacraments
obsignations or sealings of Gods promise. Read Roma. the. 4. of Circumcision.
And thus much for the answer to the obiectio^n aforesaid.

Now to return from whence we came, namely to the consideration of the second
thing what the Sacrament is: I have told you that it is not simply bread and
wine, but rather Christ's body, so called of Christ, and so to be called and
esteemed of us. But here let us mark what body and what blood Christ called it.
The Papists still babble. This is my Christ's presence in the supper,
body: This is my blood, but what body it is, what blood it is, they show not.
Look therefore my dearly beloved, on Christ's own words, and you shall see
that Christ calls it his body broken* and his blood shed. Mark, I say, that
Christ calls it his body which is broken, his blood which is shed presently,
and not which was broken or shall be broken, which was shed or shall be shed, as
the Greek textes do plainl^ show: thereby teaching us that as God would have
the Passover called, not which was the Passeourr, or which shall be the
Passover, but plainly the Passover, to the end that in the use of it, the
passing over of the striking Angel should be set before their eyes as present:
so in the celebration of the Lords supper the very Passion of Christ should
be as present, behold a with the eyes of faith. For which end Christ our
Savior did specially institute this Supper, saying: Do ye this in remembrance
of me, or as Paul says: Show you thr Lords death till he come.

The Supper of the Lord then is not simply Christ's body and blood, but
Christ's body broken and his blood shed. Wherefore broken? Wherefore shed?
Forseth that tencheth Christ himself saying: Broken for you, Shed for your
syns, and for the syns of many. Here now then we have occasion in the use of
the Sacrament to call to mind the greatness and greuousnes of syn, which could
not be taken away by any other means then by the sheding of the most precious
blood, and breaking of the most pure body of the only begotten Son of God
Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made, all things are ruled and governed.
etc. Who considering this gear shall not be touched to repent? Who in receipt
of this Sacrament, thinking that Christ says to him: Take, eat, this is my
body wyich is broken for thee: This is my blood which is shed for thy syns, can
but tremble at the greevousnes of his sins, for the which such a price was
paid? If there were no plague at al else to admonish man of syn, how grievous a
thing it is in Gods sight, surely that one were enough. But, alas, how are our
hearts bewitched through Satan's subtilties and the custom of syn, that we
make syn a thing of nothing. God open our eyes in time, and give us repentance,
which we see this Sacrament does, as it were, enforce us unto in the reverence
and true use of the same.

Again, in hearing that this which we take and eat is Christ's body broken
for our syns, and his blood shed for our iniquities, me are occasioned to call
to mind the infinite greatness of Gods mercy and truth, and of Christ's love
toward us. For what a mercy is this, that God would for man, being lost
through his wylfull sins, be content, yea desirous to give his own only
son, The image of his substance, the brightness of his glory, being in his
own bosom, to be made man for us, that we me^ by him might be, as it were,
made Gods? What a mercy is this, that God the Father should so tender us, that
he would make this his son, being coequal with him in divinity, a mortal
man for us, that we might be made immortal by him What a kindness is this, that
the almighty Lord should send to us his enemies, his dear darlyng to be made
poor, that we by him might be made rich? What bowels of compassion was this,
that the omnipotent Creator of heaven and earth would deliver his own only
beloved son for us creatures, to be not only flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bones, that we might by him through the holy Ghost be made one with him,
and so with the Father by communicatyng the merits of his flesh, that is
righteousness, holiness, innocence, and immortality: but also to be a stayne
sacrifice for our syns, to satisfy his justice, to convert or turue death in to
life, our syn into righteousness, hell into heaven, misery into felicitye for
us? What a mercy is this, that God will raise up this his son Christ, not
only to: justify and regenerate us, but also in his person to demo^strate unto
us our state which we shall have* for in his coming we shall be like unto him.
Oh wonderful mercy of God, which would assume this his Christ, even in humane
body into the heavens, to take and keep there possession for us, to lead our
captivity captive, to appear before him always praying for us, to make ye
throne of Justice a throne of mercy, the seat of glory a seat of grace, so
that with boldness we may come and appear before God to ask and find grace in
time convenient. Again, what a verity and constant truth in God is this, that
he would, according to his promise made first to Adam, and so to Abraham and
others in his time, accomplish it by sending his son so graciously? Who would
doubt hereafter of any thing that he has promised? And as for Christ's love,
oh whose heart can be able to think of it any thing as it deserves? He being
God would become man: he being rich would become poor: he being Lord of all
the world, became a servant to us all: he being immortal, would become
mortal, miserable, and fast of all Gods curses, yea even of hell it seife for
us. His blood was nothing to dear, his life he nothing considered to bring us
from death to life. But this his love needs more hearty waying, then many
words speaking, and therefore I omit and leave it to your considerations. So
that in the receiving of this supper, as I would you would tremble at Gods wrath
for syn, so would I have you to couple to that terror and fear, true faith,
by which ye might be assured lie persuaded of Gods mercy toward you, and
Christ's love, though al things else preached the contrary.

Do every of you surely think when you hear these words. Take, eat, this is
my body broken for your sins: Drink, this is my blood shed for your syns,
that God the eternal father embracing you, Christ calls and cleppeth you most
lovingly, making himself one with you, and you one with him, and one with
another amongst your selves: You ought no less to be certain now that God
loves you, pardons your syns, and that Christ is all yours, then if you did
hear an Angel out of heaven speaking so unto you. And therefore rejoice and
be glad, and make this Supper Eutharichiam, a thanks giving, as the Fathers
named it. Be no less certain that Christ and you now are all one, then you
are certain the bread and wine is one with your nature and substance, after
you have eaten and dronken it. Howbeit in this it differs, that you by faith
are, as it were, changed into Christ, and not Christ into you, as the bread
is: for by faith he dwells in us and we in him. God give us faith in the use
of this Sacrament to receive Christ, as he gives us hands to receive the
element, symbol, and visible Sacrament, God grant us not to prepare our teeth
and belly (as S, Augustine says) but rather of his mercy he prepare and give
us true and lively faith to use this and all other his ordinances to his glory
and our comfortes. He sweep the houses of our hearts, and make them clean,
that they may be a worthy harborough and lodging for the Lord. Amen.

Now let us come and look on wherefore the Sacrament was instituted.
the third and last thing, namely wherefore the Lord did institute this
Sacrament. Our nature is very obliuious of God and of all his benefits. And
again, it is very full of dubitation and doubting of Gods love and of his
kyndnes. Therefore to the end these two things might be something reformed and
helped in us, the Lord has institute this Sacrament: I mean that we might
have in memory the principal benefits of all benefits, that is, Christ's
death, and that we might be on all parts assured of communion with Christ, of
all kyndnes the greatest that ever God did give unto man. The former to be the
end wherefore Christ did institute this Sacrament, he him self does teach us,
saying: Do ye this in remembrance of me. The latter the Apostle does uo iesse
set forth in saying: The bread whih we brake, is it not the partaking or
communion of the body of Christ? Is not the cup of blessyng which we bless,
the partaking or communion of the blood of Christ? So that it appears the end
wherefore this Sacrament was instituted, was and is for the reformacion and
help of our oblivion of that which we should never forget, and of our
dubitation of that whereof we ought to be most certain.

Concerning the former, namely of the memory of Christ's dear what commodity
it brings with it, I will purposely for times sake omit. Only a lirle will I
speak of the commodities coming unto us by the partaking and communion we
have with Christ, First it teaches us that no man can communicate with Christ,
but the same must needs communicate with Gods grace and favor, where through
syns are forgeuen. There fore this co^moditye comes herethorow, namely that we
should ve certain of the remission and pardon of our sins. The which thing
we may also perceue by the cup, in that it is called the cup of the new
Testament: to which Testament is properly attributed on Gods behalf oblivion
or remission of our syns. First I say therefore the supper is instituted to
this end, that he which worthily receives, should be certain of the
remission and pardon of his syns and iniquities, how many and great soever they
be. Now great a benefit this is, only they know which have felt the burden of
syn, which of all heavy things is the most heavy. Again, no man can
communicate with Christ's body and blood, but the same must communicate with
his spirit for Christ's body is no dead carcass. Now he that co^municateth
with Christ's spirit, co^municateth as with holiness, righteousness, innocence,
and immortality, and with all the merits of Christ's body: so does he with
God and all his glory, and with the Church, and all the good that ever it or
any member of it had, has, or shall have: This is the communion of Sainctus
which we believe Note though I apply this thus: yet I would not yt any men
should think that co^munione^ sa^ctorum in the Creed is not set forth there
for the better explication of that which preceedeth it, namelye. what ye holy
catholic Church i^
in our Creed, which has waiting on it remission of sins, resurrection of
the flesh, and life enerlasting.

To the end that we should be most assured and certain of all these, Christ
our Savior did institute this his Supper, and therefore would have us to use
it. So that there is no man, I trow, which sees not great cause of giving
thanks to God for this holy Sacrament of the Lord, whereby if we worthily
receine it, we ought to be certain that all our syns what soever they be, are
pardoned clearly: that we are regenerate and borne again into a lively hope,
into an inheritance immortal, vnderiled, and which can never wither away:
that be are in the fellow ship of God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost: that we are Gods Tenples, at one with God, and God at one with us: that
we are members of Christ's Church and fellows with the Saints in all
felicity: that we are certain of immortality in soul and body, and so of
eternal life, then which thing what can be more demanded? Christ is ours, and
we are Christ's, he dwells in us, and we in him. Oh happy eyes that see these
things, and most happy hearts that feel them. My dear brethren, let us pray
unto ye Lord to open our eyes to see these wonderful things, to give us faith
to feel them. Surely we ought no less to be assured of them now in the
worthy receiuyng of this Sacrament, then we are assured of the exterior
symboles and Sacraments. If an Angel from heaven should come and tell you
these things, then would you rejoice and be glad: And my dear hearts in the
Lord, I even now, though most vnwyrthy, am sent of the Lord to tell you no
less, but that you worthily receiving this Sacrament, shall receive remission
of all your syns, or rather certainety that they are remitted, and that you are
even now Gods darlinges, Temples, and fellow inheritours of all the good that
ever he has, Wherefore see that you give thanks unto the Lord for this his
great goodness, and praise his name for ever.

Oh, says one, I cold be glad An objection of ^nworthy receiuyng.
in very deed, and give thanks from my very heart, if that I did worthily
receive this sacrament But (alas) I am a very grievous sinner, and I feel in my
self very little repentance and faith, and therefore I am a frayde that I am
unworthy.

To the answering of this objection The aunswar.
I think it necessary to speak something of the worthy receiving in this
Sacrament, in as great breuity and playnes as I can. The Apostle wylleth al men
to prove and examine themselves before they eat of the bread, and drink of
the cup: for they that eat and drink unworthily, eat and drink damnation.
Therefore this probacion and examination is necessary. If men will try their
gold and silver, whether they be coper or no, is it not more necessary^ that
men should try their consciences? Now how this should be, the Papists teach
amysse in sendyng us to their auriculer confession, which is impos sible. The
true probacion and trial of a Christian con^cience consists altogether in
faith and repentance. Faith has respect to the doctrine and articles of our
belief, repentance has respect to manners and conversation. Concerning the
former, I mean of faith, we may see the Apostle teaches us. 2. Corint 11.
Concerning the latter for our conversation, those syns which are called
commonly mortal or deadly are to be removed. These syns are discerned from
other syns by the Apostle, Romans 6. in saying: Let not syn raygne and bear
aswynge in your mortal bodies. For truly then we sin deadly, when we give
over to sin, and let it have the bridle at his liberty, when we strive not
agaynstie, but allow it and consent to it. How be it, if we strive against it,
if it displease us, then truly though sin be in us (for we ought to obey God
without all resistaunce or vnwillyngnes) yet our syns be not of those syns
which separate us from God, but for Christ's sake shall not be imputed unto us
believing.

Therefore my dearly beloved, if that your sins do now displease you, if you
purpose unfeignedly to be enemies to iyn in your selves and in others, as you
may, during your whole life, if you hope in Christ for pardon, if you believe
according to the holy scriptures and articles of the Christian faith set forth
in your Creed, if I say, you now trust in Gods mercy through Christ's
merits, if you repent, and earnestly purpose vefore God to amend your life,
and to give over yourselues to serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness all the days of your life, although before this present you have most grievously
sinned. I publish unto you that you are worthy gestes for this table, you shall
be welcome to Christ, your syns shall be pardoned, you shall be endned with his
spirit, and so with communion with him and the Father, and the whole Church of
God, Christ will dwell in you, and you shall dwell in him for evermore.
Wherefore behave your selves accordinglye with ioyfulnes and thanks giving. Do
you now appear before the Lord: make clean your houses, and open the doors
of your hearts by repentance and faith, that the Lord of hosts, the king of
glory may enter in: and for ever hereafter beware of all such things as might
displease the eyes of his Majesty. Fly from syn as from a Toade, come away
from popery and all Antichristian religion, be diligent in your vocations, be
diligent and earnest in prayer, harken to the voice of God in his word with
reverence, live worthys your profession. Let your light in your life so shine,
that men may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.
As you have been darkness, and followed the works of darkness, so now
henceforth be light in the Lord, and have society with the works of light. Now
has God renue^ his covenant with you, in Gods sight now are you as clean,
and healed from all your sores of sins. Go your ways, syn no more, lest a
worse thing happen unto you. See that your house being new swept, be furnished
with godliness and virtue, and beware of idleness, lest the devil come with seven
spirits worse then himself, and so take his lodging, and then your latter end
will be worse then the first.

God our Father, for the tender mercy and merits of his soune, be mercyful
unto us, forgive us al our syns, and give us his holy spirit, to purge,
cleanse, and sanetify us, that we may be holy in his sight through Christ,
and that we now may be made ready and worthy to receive this holy Sacrament,
with the fruits of the same to the full reioyning and strengthening of our
hearts in the Lord. To whom be all honor and glory, world without end.

Amen.
To God be all praise for ever.
Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, and John Wight. The.xxx. of September.
Anno Domini. 1574.


