A SATYR, Written to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, BY GEORGE WITHER, When
he was Prisoner in the Marshallsey, for his first BOOK.



LONDON: Printed by T.S. for John Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the
sign of the Green Dragon, 1622.

The Satyr to the mere Courtiers.
SIrs; I do know your minds; You look for fees,
For more respect then needs, for caps and knees.
But be content, I have not for you now;
Nor will I have at all to do with you.
For, though I seem oppressed, and you suppose
I must be feign to crouch to Virtues foes;
Yet know, your favors I do slight them more
In this distress, then ere I did before.
Here to my Liege a message I must tell;
If you will let me pass, you shall do well;
If you deny admittance, why then know,
I mean to have it where you will or no,
Your formal wisdom which has never been
In ought but in some fond invention seen,
And you that think men borne to no intent,
But to be trained in Apish complement;
Does now (perhaps) suppose me indiscreet,
And such unused messages unmeet.
But what of that? Shall I go suit my matter
Unto your wits, that have but wit to flatter?
Shall I, of your opinions so much prize
To lose my will that you may think me wise,
Who never yet to any liking had,
Unless he were a Knave, a Fool, or mad?
You Mushroms know, so much I weigh your powers,
I neither value you, nor what is yours.
Nay, though my crosses had me quite out-worne,
Spirit enough I Would find your spite to scorn:
Of which resolved, to further my adventure,
Unto my King, without your leaves I enter.
To the Honest Courtiers.
But You, whose only worth does color give.
To Them, that they do worthy seem to live,
Kind Gentlemen, your aid I crave, to bring
A Satyr to the presence of his King:
A show of rudeness does my forehead arm,
Yet you may trust him; he intends no harm.
He that has sent him, loyal is, and true,
And one, whose love (I know) is much to you:
But now, he lies bound to a narrow scope;
Almost beyond the Cape of all good Hope.
Long has he sought to free himself, but fails:
And therefore seeing nothing else preuailes,
Me, to acquaint his Sovereign, here he sends,
As one despairing of all other friends.
I do presume that you will favor show him,
Now that a Messenger from thence you know him.
For many thousands that his face never knew,
Blame his Accusers, and his Fortune rue:
And by the help which your good word may do,
He hopes for pity from his Sovereign to.
Then in his presence with your favors grace him,
And there is no Vice so great, shall dare outface him.
To the Kings most Excellent MAJESTY. A SATYR.
Quid tu, si pereo?
WHat once the Poet said, I may auow,
It Is a hard thing not to write Satyrs, now,
Since, what we speak (abuse raigns so in all)
Spite of our hearts, will be Satyricall.
Let it not therefore now be deemed strange,
My vnsmooth'd lines their rudeness do not change;
Nor be distastefull to my gracious King,
That in the Cage, my old harsh notes I sing:
And rudely, make a Satyr here unfold,
What others would in neater terms have told.
And why? my friends and means in Court are scant,
Knowledge of curious phrase, and form I want.
I cannot bear't to run my self in debt,
To hire the Groom, to bid the Page entreat,
Some favored Follower to vouchsafe his word
To get me a cold comfort from his Lord.
I cannot sooth, (though it my life might save,)
Each Favorite, nor crouch to every Knave.
I cannot brook delays as some men do,
With scoffs, and scorns, and take it in kindness to.
For ere I Would bind my self for some slight grace,
To one that has no more worth then his place.
Or, by a base mean free my self from trouble,
I rather would endure my penance double:
Cause to be forced to what my mind disdaines,
Is worse to me then tortures, rackes, and chains.
And therefore unto thee I only fly,
To whom there needs no mean but Honesty.
To thee, that love nor Parasite or Minion,
Should ere I speak possess thee with opinion.
To thee, that do what thou will undertake,
For love of Justice, not the persons sake.
To thee, that know how vain all fair shows be,
That flow not from the hearts sincerity;
And can, though shadowed in the simplest veil,
Discern both Love and Truth, and where they fail.
To thee do I appeal; in whom Heaven knows,
I next to God my confidence repose.
For, can it be thy Grace should ever shine,
And not enlighten such a Cause as mine?
Can my hopes (fixed in thee great King) be dead;
Or thou those Satyrs hate thy Forests bred?
Where shall my second hopes be founded then,
If ever I have heart to hope again?
Can I suppose a favor may be got
In any place, when thy Court yields it not?
Or that I may obtain it in the land,
When I shall be denied it at thy hand?
And if I might, could I delighted be,
To take it of others, when I mist of thee?
Or if I were, could I have comfort by it,
When I should think my Sovereign did deny it?
No; were I sure, I to thy hate were borne,
To seek for others favors, I would scorn.
For, if the beft-worth-loues I could not gain,
To labor for the rest I would disdain.
But why should I thy favor here distrust,
That have a cause so known, and known so just?
Which not alone my inward comfort doubles,
But all suppose me wronged that hear my troubles.
Nay, though my fault were Real, I believe
Thou art so Royal, that thou would forgive.
For, well I know, thy sacred Majesty
Has ever been admired for Clemency,
And at thy gentleness the world has wondered,
For making Sunshine, where thou might have thundered.
Yea, thou in mercy, life to them did give
That could not be content to see thee live.
And can I think that thou will make me, then,
The most unhappy of all other men?
Or let thy loyal Subject, against reason,
Be punished more for Love, then some for Treason?
No, thou did never yet thy glory stain
With an injustice to the meanest Swain.
It Is not thy will I Am wronged, nor do thou know,
If I have suffered injuries or no.
For if I have not heard falfe Rumors fly,
Thou Have grac'st me with the style of Honesty,
And if it were so (as some think it was)
I cannot see how it should come to pass
That thou, from whose free tongue proceeds naught
Which is not correspondent with thy thought.
Those thoughts to, being framed in Reasons mould,
Should speak that once, which should not ever hold.
But passing it as an uncertainty,
I humbly beggethee, by that Majesty,
Whose sacred Glory strikes a louing-feare
Into the hearts of all, to whom it is dear:
To deigne me so much favor, without merit,
As read this plaint of a distempered spirit:
And think, unless I saw some hideous storm,
Too great to be endured by such a worm,
I had not thus presumed unto a King,
With Aesops Fly, to seek an Eagles wing:
Know I am he, that entered once the list,
Against all the world to play the Satyrist:
T was I, that made my measures rough and rude,
Dance armed with whips amidst the multitude,
And unappalled with my charmed Scrowles,
Teased angry Monsters in their lurking holes.
I Have played with Waspes and Hornets without fears,
Till mad they grew, and swarmed about my ears.
I Have done it, and me thinks it is such brave sport,
I may be stung, but nere be sorry for it.
For, all my grief is, that I was so sparing,
And had no more in it, worth the name of daring.
He that will tax these times must be more bitter,
Tart lines of Vinegar and Gall are fitter.
My fingers and my spirits were benumbed,
My inck ran forth too smooth, it was two much gum'd;
I Would have my Pen so paint it, where it traces,
Each accent, should draw blood into their faces.
And make them, when their Villainies are blazed,
Shudder and startle, as men half amazed,
For fear my Verse should make so loud a din,
Heaven hearing might rain vengeance on their sin.
Oh now, for such a strain! would Art could teach it.
Though half my spirits I consumed to reach it.
I de learn my Muse so brave a course to fly,
Men should admire the power of Poosie.
And those that dared her greatness to resist,
Quake even at naming of a Satyrist.
But when his scourging numbers flowed with wonder,
Should cry, God bless us, as they did at thunder.
Alas! my lines came from me too-too dully,
They did not fill a Satyrs mouth up fully.
Hot blood, and youth, enraged with passions store,
Taught me to reach a strain nere touched before.
But it was coldly done, I thoroughly (...) not:
And somewhat there is yet to do, I did not.
More soundly could my scourge have yerked many,
Which I omitted not for fear of any.
For want of action, discontentments rage,
Base dis-respect of Virtue (in this age)
With other things which were to Goodness wrong,
Made me so fearelesse in my careless Song:
That, had not reason within compass won me,
I had told Truth enough to have undone me.
(Nay, have already, if that her Divine
And unseen power, can do no more then mine.)
For though foreseeing wariness was good,
I framed my style unto a milder mood;
And clogging her high-towring wings with mire,
Made her half earth, that was before all fire.
Though (as you saw) in a disguised show
I brought my Satyrs to the open view:
Hoping (their outsides, being mis-esteem'd)
They might have passed, but for what they seemed:
Yet some whose Comments iumpe not with my mind,
In that low phrase, a higher reach would find,
And out of their deep judgments seem to know,
What it is uncertain if I meant or no:
Aiming thereby, out of some private hate,
To work my shame, or ouer-throw my state.
For, amongst many wrongs my foe does do me,
And diverse imputations laid unto me,
(Deceived in his aim) he does mis-conster
That which I have enstil'd a Man-like Monster,
To mean some private person in the State,
Whose worth I sought to wrong out of my hate;
Vpbraiding me, I from my word do start,
Either for want of better Ground, or Heart.
Cause from his expectation I did vary
In the denying of his Commentary,
Whereas it is known I meant Abuse the while,
Not thinking any one could be so vile
To merit all those Epithites of shame,
How ever many do deserve much blame.
But say, (I grant) that I had an intent
To have it so (as he interprets) meant,
And let my gracious Liege suppose there were
One whom the State may have just cause to fear;
Or think there were a man (and great in Court)
That had more faults then I could well report;
Suppose I knew him, and had gone about
By some particular marks to paint him out,
That he best knowing his own faults, might see,
He was the Man I would should noted be:
Imagine now such doings in this Age,
And that this man so pointed at, should rage,
Call me in question, and by his much threatening,
By long imprisonment, and ill-intreating
Urge a Confession, were not a mad part
For me to tell him, what lay in my heart?
Do not I know a great man's Power and Might;
In spite of Innocence, can smother Right,
Color his Villainies, to get esteem,
And make the honest man the Villain seem?
And that the truth I told should in conclusion,
For want of Power and Friends be my confusion?
I know it, and the world does know it is true,
Yet, I protest, if such a man I knew,
That might my Country prejudice, or Thee,
Were he the greatest or the proudest He
That breathes this day: (if so it might be found,
That any good to either might redound.)
So far I Will be (though Fate against me run)
From starting off from that I have begun,
I vn-appalled dare in such a case
Rip up his foulest Crimes before his face,
Though for my labor I were sure to drop
Into the mouth of Ruin without hope.
But such strange farre-fetcht meanings they have sought,
As I was never privy to in thought;
And that unto particulars would tie
Which I intended universally.
Whereat some with displeasure ouer-gone,
(Those I scarce dreamed of, saw, or thought upon)
Maugre those caueats on my Satyrs brow,
Their honest and just passage disallow.
And on their heads so many censures rake,
That spite of me, themselves they will guilty make.
Nor is it enough, to swage their discontent,
To say I am (or to be) innocent.
For as, when once the Lion made decree,
No horned beast should nigh his presence be,
That, on whose forehead only did appear
A bunch of flesh, or but some tuft of hair,
Was even as far in danger as the rest,
If he but said, it was a horned beast:
So, there be now, who think in that their power
Is of much force, or greater far then our;
It is enough to prove a guilt in me,
Because (mistaking) they so think it to be.
Yet it is my comfort, they are not so high,
But they must stoop to Thee and Equity.
And this I know, though pricked; they storm again,
The world does deem them never the better men.
To stir in filth, makes not the stench the less,
Nor does Truth fear the frown of Mightiness.
Because those numbers she does daigne to grace,
Men may suppress a while, but never deface.
I wonder, and it is wondered at by many,
My harmless lines should breed distaste in any:
And so, that (whereas most good men approve
My labor to be worthy thanks, and love)
I as a Villain, and my Countries foe,
Should be imprisoned, and so strictly to,
That not alone my liberty is barred.
But the resort of friends (which is more hard.)
And whilst each wanton, or loose Rimers Pen,
With oily words, sleekes over the sins of men,
Vayling his wits to every Puppets beck,
Which ere I Will do, I Will joy to break my neck.
(I say) while such as they in every place
Can find protection, patronage and grace;
If any look on me, it is but a skaunce
Or if I get a favor, it is by chance.
I must protect my self: poor Truth and I
Can have scarce one speak for our honesty.
Then whereas they can gold and gifts attain,
Malicious Hate, and Envy is my gain,
And not alone have here my Freedom lost,
Whereby my best hope's likely to be crossed:
But have been put to more charge in one day.
Then all my Patrons bounties yet will pay.
What I have done, was not for thirst of gain,
Or out of hope preferments to attain.
Since to contemn them, would more profit me,
Then all the glories in the world that be:
Yet they are helps to Virtue, used aright,
And when they wanting be, she wants her might.
For Eagles minds never fit a Ravens feather,
To dare, and to be able, suit together.
But what is it I have done so worthy blame,
That some so eagerly pursue my fame?
Vouchsafe to view't with thine own eyes, and try
(Save want of Art) what fault thou can epsy.
I have not sought to scandalize the State,
Nor sown sedition, nor made public bate:
I have not aimed at any good man's fame,
Nor taxt (directly) any one by name.
I am not he that am grown discontent
With the Religion; or the Government.
I meant no Ceremonies to protect,
Nor do I favor any new-sprung Sect;
But to my Satyrs gave this only warrant,
To apprehend and punish Vice apparent.
Who aiming in particular at none,
In general vpbraided every one:
That each (vnshamed of himself) might view
That in himself, which no man dares to show.
And has this Age bred up neat Vice so tenderly,
She cannot brook it to be touched so slenderly?
Will she not bide my gentle Satyrs bites?
Harm take her then, what makes she in their sights?
If with impatience she my Whip-cord feel,
How had she raged at my lash of Steel?
But am I called in question for her cause?
Is It Vice that these afflictions on me draws?
And need I now thus to Apologize,
Only because I scourged Villainies?
Must I be feign to give a reason why,
And how I dare allow of Honesty?
Whilst that each fleering Parasite is bold
Thy Royal brow undaunted to hehold:
And every Temporizer strikes a string,
That Is Music for the hearing of a King?
Shall not he reach out to obtain as much,
Who dares more for thee then a hundred such?
Heaven grant her patience, my Muse takes't so badly,
I fear she will lose her wits, for she raues madly.
Yet let not my dread Sovereign too much blame her,
Whose awful presence, now has made her tamer.
For if there be no Fly but has her spleen,
Nor a poor Pismire, but will wreake her teene;
How shall I then, that have both spleen and gall,
Being unjustly dealt with, bear with all?
I yet with patience take what I have borne,
And all the worlds ensuing hate can scorn:
But 't were in me as much stupiditie,
Not to have feeling of an injury,
As it were weakness not to brook it well:
What others therefore think I cannot tell;
But he that is less then mad, is more then Man,
Who sees when he has done the best he can,
To keep within the bounds of Innocence:
Sought to discharge his due to God and Prince.
That he, whilst Villainies unreproved go,
Scoffing, to see him ouer-taken so,
Should have his good endeauours misconceiu'd,
Be of his dearest liberty bereaved;
And which is worse, without reason why,
Be frowned on by Authorities grim eye.
By that great Power my soul so much does fear,
She scorns the stearn'st frowns of a mortal Peer,
But that I Virtue love, for her own sake,
It were enough to make me undertake
To speak as much in praise of Vice again.
And practice some to plague these shames of men.
I mean those my Accusers, who mistaking
My aims, do frame conceits of their own making.
But if I list, I need not buy so dear
The just revenge might be inflicted here.
Now could I measures frame in this just fury,
Should sooner find some guilty then a Jury:
The words, like swords (tempered with Art) should pierce
And hang, and draw, and quarter them in verse.
Or I could rack them on the wings of Fame,
(And he is half hanged (they say) has an ill name)
Yea, l'de go near to make those guilty Elues,
Lycambes-like, be glad to hang themselves:
And though this Age will not abide to hear
The faults reprou'd, that Custom has made dear;
Yet, if I pleased, I could write their crimes,
And pile them up in walls for aftertimes:
For they will be glad (perhaps) that shall ensue,
To see some story of their Fathers true.
Or should I smothered be in darkness still,
I might not use the freedom of a quill:
'T would raise up brauer spirits then mine own,
To make my cause, and this their guilt more known.
Who by that subject should get Love and Fame,
Unto my foes disgrace, and endless shame:
Those I do mean, whose Comments have mis-us'd me:
And to those Peers I honor, have accused me:
Making against my Innocence their batteries,
And wronging them by their base flatteries:
But of revenge I am not yet so feign,
To put my self unto that needless pain:
Because I know a greater Power there is,
That notes smaller injuries then this;
And being still as just as it is strong,
Apportions due revenge for every wrong.
But why (some say) should his too fancy Rimes
Thus tax the wise and great ones of our times?
It suites not with his years to be so bold,
Nor fits it us by him to be controld.
I must confess ('it is very true indeed)
Such should not of my censure stand in need.
But blame me not, I saw good Virtue poor,
Desert, among the most, thrust out of door,
Honesty hated, Courtesy banished,
Rich men excessive, poor men famished:
Coldness in Zeal, in Laws partiality,
Friendship but Complement, and vain Formalitie,
Art I perceive contem'd, while most advance
(To offices of worth) Rich Ignorance:
And those that should our Lights and Teachers be
Live (if not worse) as wantonly as we.
Yea, I saw Nature from her course run back,
Disorders grow, Good Orders go to wrack.
So to increase what all the rest began,
I to this current of confusion ran.
And seeing Age, left off the place of guiding,
Thus played the fancy wagge, and fell to chiding.
Wherein, how ever some (perhaps) may deem,
I am not so much faulty as I seem:
For when the Elders wronged Susanna's honer,
And none withstood the Shame they laid upon her;
A Child rose up to stand in her defense,
And spite of wrong confirmed her Innocence:
To show, those must not, that good undertake,
Strain curt'sie, who shall do'^, for manners sake.
Nor do I know, whether to me God gave
A boldness more then many others have,
That I might show the world what shameful blot
Virtue by her lasciurous Elders got.
Nor is it a wonder, as some do suppose,
My Youth so much corruption can disclose;
Since every day the Sun does light mine eyes,
I am informed of new villainies:
But it is rather to be wondered how
I either can, or dare be honest now.
And though again there be some others rage
That I should dare (so much above mine age)
Thus censure each degree, both young and old,
I see not wherein I am ouer-bold.
For if I have been plain with Vice, I care not,
There Is naught that I know good, and can, and dare not.
Only this one thing does my mind deter,
Even a fear (through ignorance) to err.
But oh knew I, what thou would well approve,
Or might the small'st respect within thee move;
So in the sight of God it might be good,
And with the quiet of my conscience stood:
(As well I know thy true integrity
Would command nothing against Piety:)
There Is naught so dangerous, or full of fear,
That for my Sovereigns sake I would not dare.
Which good belief, would it did not possess thee;
Provided some just trial might reblesse me:
Yea, though a while I did endure the gall
Of thy displeasure in this loathsome thrall.
For notwithstanding in this place I lie
By the command of that Authority,
Of which I have so much respective care.
That in mine own (and just) defense I fear
To use the free speech that I do intend,
Lest Ignorance, or Rashness should offend.
Yet is my meaning and my thought as free
From wilful wronging of thy Laws or Thee,
As he ^o whom thy Place and Persons dearest,
Or to himself that finds his conscience cle aest.
If there be wrong, it is not my making it,
All the offense is some's mistaking it.
And is there any Justice borne of late,
Makes those faults mine, which others perpetrate?
What man could ever any Age yet find,
That spent his spirits in this thankelesse kind,
Showing his meaning, to such words could tie it,
That none could either wrong, or mis-apply it.
Nay, your own Laws, which (as you do intend)
In plain'st and most effectual words are penned,
Cannot be framed so well to your intent,
But some there be will err from what you meant.
And yet (alas) I must be ty'de unto
What never any man before could do?
Must all I speak, or write, so well be done
That none may pick more meanings thence then one?
Then all the world (I hope) will leave disunion,
And every man become of one opinion.
But since some may, what care soever we take,
Diverse constructions of our Writings make,
The honest Readers ever will conceive
The best intention's, and all others leave:
Chiefly in that, where I fore-hand protest
My meaning ever was the honestest,
And if I say so, what is he may know
So much as to affirm it was not so?
Sit other men so near my thoughts to show it,
Or is my heart so open that all know it?
Sure if it were, they would no such things see,
As those whereof some have accused me.
But I care less how it be understood,
Because the heavens know my intent was good.
And if it be so, that my too-free Rimes
Do much displease the world, and these bad times;
It Is not my fault, for had I been employed
In something else, all this had now been void.
Or if the world would but have granted me
Wealth, or Affairs, whereon to busy me,
I now unheard of, peradventure than,
Had been as mute as some rich Clergie-man.
But they are much deceived that think my mind
Will ere be still, while it can doing find;
Or that unto the world so much it leanes,
As to be curtold for default of means.
No, though most be, all Spirits are not earth,
Nor suting with the fortunes of their birth,
My body's subject unto many Powers:
But my soul's as free, as is the Emperors:
And though to curb her in, I often assay,
She Will break int' action spite of dirt and clay.
And is it not better then to take this course,
Then fall to study mischiefs and do worse?
I say she must have action, and she shall:
For if she will, how can I do withal?
And let those that o're-busie think me, know,
He made me, that knew, why he made me so.
And though there is some that say my thoughts do fly
A pitch beyond my states sufficiency;
My humble mind, I give my Savior thank
Aspires naught yet, above my fortunes rank.
But say it did, will it not befit a man
To raise his thoughts as near Heaven as he can?
Must the free spirit tied and curbed be
According to the bodies poverty?
Or can it ever be so subject to
Base Change, to rise, and fall, as fortunes do?
Men borne to noble means, and vulgar minds
Enjoy their wealth; and there is no Law that binds
Such to abate their substance, though their Pates
Want Brains, and they worth, to possess such states.
So God to some, does only great minds give,
And little other means, whereon to live.
What law or conscience then shall make them smother
Their Spirit, which is their life, more then other
To bate their substance? since if 'twere confessed,
That a brave mind could ever be suppressed,
Were It reason any should himself deprive
Of what the whole world has not power to give?
For wealth is common, and fools get it to,
When to give spirit's more then Kings can do.
I speak not this, because I think there be
More then the ordinarest gifts in me;
But against those, who think I do presume
On more then does befit me to assume:
Or would have all, whom Fortune bars from store,
Make themselves wretched, as she makes them poor.
And' cause in other things she is unkind,
Smother the matchless blessings of their mind:
Whereas (although her favors do forsake them)
Their minds are richer then the world can make them.
Why should a good attempt disgraced seem,
Because the person is of mean esteem?
Virtue's a chaste Queen, and yet does not scorn
To be embraced by him that is meanest borne,
She is the prop, that Majesty's support,
Yet one whom Slaves as well as Kings may court.
She loves all that bear affection to her,
And yields to any that has heart to woo her.
So Vice, how high so e're she be in place,
Is that which Grooms may spit at in disgrace:
She is a strumpet, and may be abhorred,
Yea, spurned at in the bosom of a Lord.
Yet had I spoke her fair, I had been free,
As many others of her Lovers be.
If her escapes I had not chanced to tell,
I might have been a villain, and done well:
Gotten some special favor, and not sat
As now I do, shut up within a grate.
Or if I could have hap't on some loose strain,
That might have pleased the wanton Readers vain:
Or but clawed Pride, I now had been vnblam'd,
(Or else at least there is some would not have shamed
To plead my cause:) but see my fatal curse,
Sure I was either mad, or somewhat worse:
For I saw Vices followers bravely kept,
In Silks they walked, on beds of Down they slept,
Richly they fed on dainties evermore,
They had their pleasure, they had all things store,
(Whilst Virtue begged) yea, favors had so many,
I knew they brook't not to be touched of any:
Yet could not I, like other men, be wise,
Nor learn (for all this) how to temporize;
But must (with too much honesty made blind)
Vpbraid this loved darling of mankind:
Whereas I might have better thriu'd by fayning:
Or if I could not choose, but be complaining,
More safe I might have railed on Virtue sure,
Because her lovers and her friends are fewer.
I might have brought some other things to pass,
Made Fiddlers Songs, or Ballads, like an Ass,
Or any thing almost indeed but this.
Yet since it is thus, l'me glad it is so amiss;
Because if I am guilty of a crime,
It Is that, wherein the best of every time,
Has been found faulty (if they faulty be)
That do reprove Abuse and villainy.
For what I Am taxt, I can examples show,
In such old Authors as this State allow:
And I would feign once learn a reason why
They can have kinder usage here then I?
I muse men do not now in question call
Seneca, Horace, Persius, Inuenall,
And such as they? Or why did not that Age
In which they lived, put them in a Cage?
If I should say, that men were iuster then,
I should near hand be made vnsay't again:
And therefore sure I think I were as good
Leave it to others to be understood.
Yet I as well may speak, as deem amiss,
For such this Ages curious cunning is,
I scarcely dare to let mine heart think ought,
For there be some will seem to know my thought,
Who may outface me that I think awry,
When there is no witness, but my Conscience by:
And then I likely am as ill to speed,
As if I spoke, or did amiss indeed.
Yet lest those who (perhaps) may malice this,
Interpret also these few lines amiss,
Let them that after thee, shall read or hear,
From a rash censure of my thoughts forbear.
Let them not mold the sense that this contains
According to the forming of their brains,
Or think I dare, or can, here tax those Peers,
Whose Worths, their Honors, to my soul endeares,
(Those by whose loued-fear'd Authority)
I am restrained of my liberty:
For lest there yet may be a man so ill,
To haunt my lines with his black Coment still,
(In hope my luck again may be so good,
To have my words once rightly understood)
This I protest, that I do not condemn
Ought as unjust, that has been done by them;
For though my honest heart not guilty be
Of the least thought, that may disparage me;
Yet when such men as I, shall have such foes,
Accuse me of such crimes, to such as those,
Till I had means my Innocence to show,
Their Justice could have done no less then so.
Nor have I such a proud conceited wit,
Or selfe-opinion of my knowledge yet,
To think it may not be that I have run
Upon some Errors in what I have done,
Worthy this punishment which I endure;
(I say I cannot so my self assure)
For it is no wonder if their Wisdoms can
Discover Imperfections in a man
So weak as I, (more then himself does see)
Since my sight dull with insufficiency,
In men more grave, and wiser far then I,
Innumerable Errors does espy,
Which they with all their knowledge I Will be bold,
Cannot (or will not) in themselves behold.
But ere I will my self accuse my Song,
Or keep a Tongue shall do my Heart that wrong,
To say I willingly in what I penned,
Did ought that might a Goodmans sight offend;
Or with my knowledge did insert one word,
That might disparage a true Honored Lord;
Let it be in my mouth a helpelesse sore,
And never speak to be believed more.
Yet man irresolute is, unconstant, weak,
And does his purpose often through frallty break,
Lest therefore I by force hereafter may
Be brought from this mind, and these words unsay,
Here to the World I do proclaim before,
If e're my resolution be so poor,
It Is not the Right, but Might that makes me do it;
Yea, naught but fearful baseuesse brings me to it;
Which if I still hate, as I now detest,
Never can come to harbor in my breast.
Thus my fault then (if they a fault imply)
Is not alone an ill unwillingly,
But also, might I know it, I entend,
Not only to acknowledge, but amend:
Hoping that thou will not be so severe,
To punish me above all other here.
But for m'intents sake, and my love to Truth,
Impute my Errors to the heat of Youth,
Or rather Ignorance; then to my Will,
Which sure I am was good, what e're be ill,
And like to him now, in whose place thou art,
What e're the residue be, accept the Heart.
But I grow tedious, and my love abusd,
Disturbs my thoughts, and makes my lines confused,
Yet pardon me, and daigne a gracious eye
On this my rude, vnfil'd Apology.
Let not the bluntness of my phrase offend,
Weight but the matter, and not how it is penned,
By these abrupt lines in my just defense,
Judge what I might say for my innocence.
And think, I more could speak, that here I spare,
Because my power suites not to what I dare.
My unaffected style retains (you see)
Her old Frize-Cloake of young Rusticitie:
If others will use neater terms, they may,
Ruder I am, yet love as well as they:
And (though if I would smooth't I cannot do it)
My humbel heart I bend beneath thy foot:
While here my Muse her discontent does sing
To thee her great Apollo, and my King:
Emploring thee by that high sacred Name,
By Justice, by those Powers that I could name:
By whatsoever may move, entreat I thee,
To be what thou art unto all, to me;
I fear it not, yet give me leave to pray,
I may have foes, whose power does bear such sway;
If they but say I Am guilty of offense,
'Twere vain for me to plead my innocence.
But as the Name of God thou bear, I trust
Thou imitat'st him to, in being just:
That when the right of Truth thou comm'st to scan,
Thou Wilt not respect the person of the man:
For if thou do, then is my hope undone;
The head-long-way to ruin I must run.
For whilst that they have all the helps which may
Procure their pleasure with my soon decay:
How is it like that I my peace can win me,
When all the aid I have, comes from within me?
Therefore (good King) that makst thy bounty shine
Sometime on those whose worths are small as mine;
Oh save me now from Enuies dangerous shelfe,
Or make me able, and I Will save my self.
Let not the want of that make me a scorn,
To which there are more Fools then Wisemen borne.
Let me not for my Meannesse be dispis'd,
Nor others greatness make their words more prized,
For whatsoever my outward Fate appears,
My Soul's as good, my Heart as great as theirs.
My love unto my Country and to thee,
As much as his that more would seem to be.
And would this Age allow but means to show it,
Those that misdoubt it, should ere long time know it.
Pity my youth then, and let me not lie
Wasting my time in fruitless misery.
Though I am mean, I may be borne unto
That service, which another cannot do.
In vain the little Mouse the Lion spared not,
She did him pleasure, when a greater dared not.
If ought that I have done, do thee displease,
Thy misconceiued wrath I will appease,
Or sacrifice my heart; but why should I
Suffer for God knows whom, I know not why?
If that my words through some mistake offends,
Let them conceive them right and make amends.
Or were I guilty of offense indeed,
One fault (they say) does but one pardon need:
Yet one I had, and now I want one more;
For once I stood accused for this before.
As I remember I so long agon,
Sung Them, and Rhynes Epithalamion:
When SHE that from thy Royal self deriues
Those gracious virtues that best Title gives:
She that makes Rhine proud of her excellence,
And me often mind her reverence;
Daign'd in her great goodnature to incline
Her gentle care to such a cause as mine;
And which is more, vouchsafed her word, to clear
Me from all dangers (if there any were,)
So that I do not now entreat, or sue
For any great boon, or request that is new:
But only this (though absent from the Land)
Her former favor still in force might stand:
And that her word (who present was so dear)
Might be as powerful, as when she was here.
Which if I find, and with thy favor may
Have leave to shake my loathed bands away,
(As I do hope I shall) and be set free
From all the troubles, this has brought on me,
Ple make her Name give life unto a Song,
Whose neuer-dying note shall last as long
As there is either River, Grove or Spring,
Or Down for Sheep, or Shepherds Lad to sing.
Yea, I will teach my Muse to touch a strain,
That was never reached to yet by any Swain.
For though that many deem my years unripe,
Yet I have learned to tune an Oaten Pipe,
Whereon I Will try what music I can make me,
(Until Bellona with her Trumpe awake me.)
And since the world will not have Vice thus shown,
By blazing Virtue I will make it known.
Then if the Court will not my lines approve
I Will go unto some Mountain, or thick Grove:
There to my fellow Shepherds will I sing,
Tuning my Reed unto some dancing Spring,
In such a note, that none should dare to trouble it,
Till the Hills answer, and the Woods redouble it.
And peradventure I may then go near
To speak of something thou wilt be pleased to hear:
And that which those who now my tunes abhor,
Shall read, and like, and daigne to love me for:
But the mean while, oh pass not this suite by,
Let thy free hand sign me my liberty:
And if my love may move thee more to do,
Good King consider this my trouble to.
Others have found thy favor in distress,
Whose love to thee and thine I think was less.
And I might fitter for thy service live
On what would not be much for thee to give.
And yet I ask it not for that I fear
The outward means of life should fail me here:
For though I want to compass those good ends
Iaime at for my Country and my Friends,
In this poor state I can as well content me,
As if that I had Wealth and Honors lent me,
Nor for my own sake do I seek to shun
This thraldom, wherein now I seem undone:
For though I prize my Freedom more then Gold,
And use the means to free my self from hold,
Yet with a mind (I hope) unchanged and free,
Here can I live, and play with misery:
Yea, in despite of want and slavery,
Laugh at the world in all her bravery.
Here have I learned to make my greatest Wrongs
Matter of Mirth, and subjects but for Songs:
Here can I smile to see my self neglected,
And how the mean man's suite is dis-respected;
Whilst those that are more rich, and better friended,
Can have twice greater faults thrice sooner ended.
All this, yea more, I see and suffer to,
Yet live content midst discontents I do.
Which whilst I can, it is all one to me,
Whether in Prison or abroad it be.
For should I still lie here distressed and poor,
It shall not make me breathe a sigh the more;
Since to my self it is indifferent,
Where the small remnant of my days be spent,
But for Thy sake, my Countries, and my Friends,
For whom, more then my self, God this life lends,
I would not, could I help it, be a scorn,
But (if I might) live free, as I was borne:
Or rather for my Mistress virtues sake,
Fair Virtue, of whom most account I make,
If I can choose, I will not be debased
In this last action, lest She be disgraced:
For 'twas the love of her that brought me to,
What Spleen nor Envy could not make me do.
And if her servants be no more regarded;
If enemies of Vice be thus rewarded,
And I should also Virtues wrongs conceal,
And if none lived to whom she dared appeal:
Will they that do not yet her worth approve,
Be ever drawn to entertain her love,
When they shall see him plagued as an Offender,
Who for the love he bears her, does commend her?
This may to others more offensive be,
Then prejudicial any way to me:
For who will his endeauours ever bend
To follow her, whom there is none will friend?
Some I do hope there be that nothing may
From love of Truth and Honesty dismay.
But who will (that shall see my evil Fortune)
The remedy of Times Abuse importune?
Who will again, when they have smothered me,
Dare to oppose the face of Villainy?
Whereas he must be feign to undertake
A Combat with a second Lernean Snake;
Whose euer-growing heads when as he crops,
Not only two springs, for each one he lops,
But also he shall see in midst of dangers,
Those he thought friends turn foes, at leastwise stranger:
More I could speak, but sure if this do fail me,
I never shall do ought that will avail me;
Nor care to speak again, unless it be
To him that knows how heart and tongue agree;
No, nor to live, when none dares undertake
To speak one word for honest Virtues sake.
But let his will be done, that best knows what
Will be my future good, and what will not.
Hap well or ill, my spotless meaning's fair,
And for thee, this shall ever be my prayer,
That thou may here enjoy a long-blest Reign,
And dying, be in Heaven re-crown'd again.
SO now, if thou have daign'd my Lines to hear,
There Is nothing can befall me that I fear:
For if thou have compassion on my trouble,
The Joy I shall receive will be made double;
And if I fall, it may some Glory be,
That none but JOVE himself did ruin me.
Your Majesty's most loyal Subject, and yet Prisoner in the Marshalsey, GEORGE
WITHER.

Epithalamia: OR NVPTIALL POEMS UPON THE MOST BLESSED AND HAPPY MARRIAGE
between the High and Mighty Prince Frederick the fifth, Count Palatine of the
Rhine, Duke of Bauier, etc. AND THE MOST VIRTUOUS, Gracious, and thrice
Excellent Princess, Elizabeth, Sole Daughter to our dread Sovereign, James,
by the grace of God King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the
Faith, etc. Celebrated at White Hall the fourteenth of February. 1612.

Written by George Wither.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for John Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the
sign of the Green Dragon, 1622.

TO THE ALL-VERTVOVS AND THRICE EXCELLENT PRINCESS Elizabeth, sole daughter to
our dread Sovereign, James by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France
and Ireland, etc. AND WIFE TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, FREDERICK the fifth,
Count Palatine of the Rheine, Duke of Bauier, etc. Elector, and Arch-s^w er to
the sacred Roman Empire, during the vacancy Vicar of the same, and Knight of
the most honorable Order of the Garter.

George Wither wishes all the Health; Joys, Honors, and Felicities of this
World, in this life, and the perfections of eternity in the World to come.

To the Christian Readers.
REaders; for that in my book of Satyricall Essays, I have been deemed over
Cynicall; to show, that I am not wholly inclined to that Vain: But indeed
especially, out of the love which in duty I owe to those incomparable Princes,
I have in honor of their Royal Solemnities, published these short
Epithalamiaes. By which you may perceive (how ever the world think of me) I am
not of such a Churlish Constitution, but I can afford Virtue her deserved
honor; and have as well an affable look to encourage Honesty; as a stern
frown to cast on Villainy: If the Times would suffer me, I could be as
pleasing as others; and perhaps ere long I will make you amends for my former
rigor; Mean while I commit this unto your censures; and bid you farewell.

G. W.

Epithalamion.
BRight Northern Star, and great Mineruaes peer,
Sweet Lady of this Day: Great Britains dear.
Lo thy poor Vassal, that was erst so rude,
With his most Rusticke Satyrs to intrude,
Once more like a poor Siluan now draws near;
And in thy sacred Presence dares appear.
Oh let not that sweet Bow thy Brow be bent,
To scarre him with a Shaft of discontent:
One look with Anger, nay thy gentlest Frown,
Is twice enough to cast a Greater down.
My Will is ever, never to offend,
These that are good; and what I here intend,
Your Worth compels me to. For lately grieved,
More then can be expressed, or well believed;
Minding for ever to abandon sport,
And live exilde from places of resort;
Careless of all, I yielding to security,
Thought to shut up my Muse in dark obscurity:
And in content, the better to repose,
A lonely Grove upon a Mountain chose.
East from Caer Winn, midway twixt Arle and Dis,
True Springs, where Britains true Arcadia is.
But ere I entered my intended course,
Great Aeolus began to offer force.
^ere re^ers and ^ibes the Winter, (...) was so ^ing (...)
The boisterous King was grown so mad with rage,
That all the Earth, was but his furies stage.
Fire, Air, Earth, Sea, were intermixed in one:
Yet Fire, through Water, Earth and Air shone.
The Sea, as if she meant to whelme them under,
Beat on the Cliffes, and raged more loud then thunder:
And whilst the vales she with salt waves did fill,
The Air showered floods, that drencht our highest hill;
And the proud trees, that would no duty know;
Lay ouer-turned, twenties in a Row.
Yea, every Man for fear, fell to Devotion;
Lest the whole I Will should have bin drencht in The Ocean.
Which I perceiving, coniur'd up my Muse,
The Spirit, whose good help I sometime use:
And though I meant to break her rest no more,
I was then feign her aid for to implore.
And by her help indeed, I came to know,
Why, both the Air and Seas were troubled so.
For having urged her, that she would unfold
What cause she knew: Thus much at last she told.
Of late (quoth she) there is by powers Divine;
A match concluded, twixt Great Them and Rhine.
Two famous Rivers, equal both to Nile:
The one, the pride of Europes greatest I Will.
The Other disdaining to be closely pent;
Washes a great part of the Continent.
Yet with abundance, does the Wants supply,
Of the still-thirsting Sea, that is never dry.
And now, these, being not alone endeared,
To mighty Neptune, and his watrie Heard:
But also to the great and dreadful Jove,
With all his sacred Companies above,
Both have assented by their Loves inuiting:
To grace (with their own presence) this Uniting.
Jove called a Summons to the Worlds great wonder,
'Twas that we heard of late, which we thought thunder. The reason of the (...)
Winter.

A thousand Legions he intends to send them,
Of Cherubins and Angels to attend them:
And those strong Winds, that did such blustering keep,
Were but the Tritons, sounding in the Deep;
To warn each River, petty Stream and Spring,
Their aid unto their Sovereign to bring.
The Floods and Showers that came so plenteous down,
And lay entrencht in every Field and Town,
Were but retainers to the Nobler sort,
That owe their Homage at the Watrie Court:
Or else the Streams not pleased with their own store,
To grace the Thames, their Mistress, borrowed more.
Exacting from their neighboring Dales and Hills,
But by consent all (naught against their wills.)
Yet now, since in this stir are brought to ground
Many fair buildings, many hundreds drowned,
And daily found of broken Ships great store,
That lie dismembered upon every shore:
With diverse other mischiefs known to all,
This is the cause that those great harms befall.
Whilst other, things in readiness, did make,
Hells hateful Hags from out their prisons brake: (...) cause of all (...)
dangers as (...) during (...) distempera^ of the air.

And spighting at this hopeful match, began
To wreake their wrath on Air, Earth, Sea, and Man.
Some having shapes of Romish shauelings got,
Spewed out their venom; and began to plot
Which way to thwart it: others made their way
With much diffraction thorough Land and Sea
Extremely raging. But Almighty Jove
Perceiues their Hate and Envy from above:
He Will check their fury, and in yrons chained,
Their liberty abused, shall be restrained:
He Will shut them up, from coming to molest
The Meriments of Hymen's holy feast.
Where shall be knit that sacred Gordian knot,
Which in no age to come shall be forgot.
Which Policy nor Force shall nere untie,
But must continue to eternity:
Which for the whole Worlds good was fore-decree'd,
With Hope expected long; now come indeed.
And of whose future glory, worth, and merit
Much I could speak with a prophetike spirit.
Thus by my Muses dear assistance, finding
The cause of this disturbance, with more minding
^y Countries welfare, then my own content, He notes the most (...)
alteration of (...) weather a (...) before these Nuptials.

and longing to behold this Tales event:
My lonely life I suddenly forsook,
and to the Court again my lourney took.
Meane-while I saw the furious Winds were laid;
The risings of the swelling Waters staid.
The Winter began to change in every thing.
And seemed to borrow mildness of the Spring.
The Violet and Primrose fresh did grow;
And as in April, trimmed both Cops and row.
The City, that I left in mourning clad,
^rouping, as if it would have still been sad.
^ found decked up in roabes so neat and trim,
^aire Iris would have looked but stale and dim
(...) her best colors, had she there appeared,
The Sorrows of the Court I found well cleared,
Their woeful habits quite cast off, and ty'rd
(...) such a glorious fashion: I admired. The (...) preparation (...) this
(...) the state wh^^ of ^is here ^^gorically (...)

All her chief Peers and choicest beauties to,
(...) greater pomp, then Mortals use to do,
Wait as attendants. Juno's come to see;
because she hears that this solemnity
^xceeds fair Hippodamia's (where the strife
Twixt her, Minerua, and lame Vulcans wife
^id first arise,) and with her leads along
(...) noble, stately, and a mighty throng.
Venus, (attended with her rarest features,
Sweet louely-smiling, and heart-mouing creatures,
The very fairest Jewels of her treasure,
Able to move the senceles stones to pleasure.)
Of all her sweetest Saints, has robbed their shrines;
And brings them for the Courtiers Valentines.
Nor does Dame Pallas, from these triumphs lurk;
Her noblest wits, she freely sets on work.
Of late she summond them unto this place,
To do your maskes and Revels better grace.
Here Meaning the (...), and (...) of (...) on (...) water, which (...) most
(...).
Mars himself to, clad in Armor bright,
Has shown his fury in a bloudlesse fight;
And both on land and water, sternely dressed,
Acted his bloody Stratagems in jest:
Which (to the people, frighted by their error,)
With seeming wounds and death did ad more terror,
Besides, to give the greater cause of wonder,
Jove did vouchsafe a rattling peale of thunder:
Comets and Meteors by the stars exhald. (...) works (...).

Were from the Middle-Region lately called;
And to a place appointed made repair,
To show their fiery Friscols in the air,
People innumerable do resort,
As if all Europe here would keep one Court:
Yea, Hymen in his Safferon-coloured weed,
To celebrate his rites is full agreed.
All this I see: which seeing, makes me borrow
Some of their mirth a while, and lay down sorrow.
And yet not this: but rather the delight
My heart does taken in the much hoped sight
Of these thy glories, long already due;
And this sweet comfort, that my eyes do view
Thy happy Bridegroom, Prince Count Palatine,
Now thy best friend and truest Valentine.
Upon whose brow, my mind does read the story
Of mighty fame, and a true future glory.
Me thinks I do foresee already, how
Princes and Monarchs at his stirrup how:
I see him shine in steel; the bloody fields
Already won, and how his proud foe yields.
God has ordaind him happiness great store:
And yet in nothing is he happy more,
Then in thy love (fair Princess:) For (unless Heaven, like to Man, be prone
to fickleness)
Thy Fortunes must be greater in effect,
Then time makes show of, or men can expect.
Yet, notwithstanding all those goods of fate,
Thy Mind shall ever be above thy state:
For over and beside thy proper merit,
Our last Eliza grants her Noble spirit
To be re-doubled on thee; and your names
Being both one, shall give you both one fames.
Oh blessed thou! and they to whom thou give
The leave for to be attendants where thou live:
And hapless we, that must of force let go,
The matchless treasure we esteem of so.
But yet we trust it is for our good and thine;
Or else thou should not change thy Them for Rhyne.
We hope that this will the uniting prove
Of Countries and of Nations by your love:
And that from out your blessed loins, shall come
Another terror to the Whore of Rome:
And such a stout Achilles, as shall make
Her tottering Walls and weak foundation shake:
For Thetis-like, thy fortunes do require,
Thy Issue should be greater then his fire.
But (Gracious Princess) now since thus it fares,
And God so well for you and us prepares:
Since he has daign'd such honors for to do you,
And shown himself so favorable to you:
Since he has changed your sorrows, and your sadness,
Into such great and unexpected gladness:
Oh now remember you to be at leisure,
Sometime to think on him amidst your pleasure:
Let not these glories of the world deceive you,
Nor her vain favors of yourselfe bereave you.
Consider yet for all this Iollitie,
You Are mortal, and must feel mortality:
And that God can in midst of all your Joys,
Quite dash this pomp, and fill you with annoyes.
Triumphs are fit for Princes; yet we find
They ought not wholly to take up the mind,
Nor yet to be let pass; as things in vain:
For out of all things, wit will knowledge gain.
Music may teach of difference in degree,
The best tuned Commonweals will framed be:
And that he moves, and lives with greatest grace,
That unto Time and Measure ties his pace.
Then let these things be He declares what vs^ is to be made of these shows
and triumphs, and wha^ meditations the mind may be occupied about, when (...)
behold them.
Emblemes, to present
Your mind with a more lasting true content.
When you behold the infinite resort,
The glory and the splendour of the Court;
What wondrous favors God does here bequeath you,
How many hundred thousands are beneath you;
And view with admiration your great bliss,
Then with your self you may imagine this.
It Is but a blast, or transitory shade,
Which in the turning of a hand may fade.
Honors, which you your self did never win,
And might (had God been pleased) another binne.
And think, if shadows have such majesty,
What are the glories of eternity;
Then by this image of a fight on Sea,
Wherein you heard the thundering Canons plea;
And saw flames breaking from their murdering throts,
Which in true skirmish, fling resistlesse shots;
Your wisdom may (and will no doubt) begin,
To cast what peril a poor Soldiers in:
You will conceive his miseries and cares,
How many dangers, deaths, and wounds he shares:
Then though the most passed over, and neglect them,
That Rethoricke will move you to respect them.
And if hereafter, you should hap to see
Such Mimick Apes (that Courts disgraces be:)
I mean such Chamber-combatants; who never
Wear other Helmet, then a Hat of Beuer:
Or nere board Pinnace but in silken sail;
And in the steed of boisterous shirts of maile,
Go armed in Cambrick: If that such a Kite
(I say) should scorn an Eagle in your sight;
Your wisdom judge (by this experience) can,
Which has most worth, Hermaphrodite, or Man.
The nights strange Fireworkes.
prospects, made to feed the eyes,
With Artfull fires, mounted in the skies:
Graced with horred claps of sulphury thunders;
May make you mind the Almighties greater wonders.
Nor is there any thing, but you may thence
Reap inward gain; as well as please the Sense.
But pardon me (oh fairest) that am bold,
My heart thus freely, plainly, to unfold.
What though I know, you knew all this before:
My love this shows, and that is something more.
Do not my honest service here disdain,
I am a faithful, though an humble Swain.
I Am none of those that have the means or place,
With shows of cost to do your Nuptials grace:
But only master of mine own desire,
Am hither come with others to admire.
I am not of those Heliconian wits;
Whose pleasing strains the Courts known humor fits.
But a poor rural Shepherd, that for need,
Can make sheep Music on an Oaten reed:
Yet for my love (I Will this be bold to boast)
It is as much to you, as his that is most.
Which, since I no way else can now explain,
If you will in midst of all these glories daigne,
To lend your ears unto my Muse so long,
She shall declare it in a Wedding song.
Epithalamion.
The Marriage being on S. Valentines day, the Author shows it by beginning
with the salutation of a supposed Valentine.
VAlentine, good morrow to thee,
Love and service both I owe thee:
And would wait upon thy pleasure;
But I cannot be at leisure:
For, I owe this day as debtor,
To (a thousand times) thy better.
Hymen now will have effected
What has been so long expected:
Them thy Mistress, now unwedded;
Soon, must with a Prince be bedded.
If thou wilt see her Virgin ever,
Come, and do it now, or never.
Where art thou, oh fair Aurora?
Call in Ver and Lady Flora:
And you daughters of the Morning,
In your near'st, and fear adorning:
Clear your foreheads, and be sprightfull,
That this day may seem delightful.
All you Nimphs that use the Mountains,
Or delight in groves and fountains;
Shepheardesses, you that dally,
Either upon Hill or Valley:
And you daughters of the Bower,
That acknowledge Vestaes power.
Oh you sleep too long; awake ye,
See how Time does overtake ye.
Hark, the Lark is up and sings,
And the house with echoes ringeth.
Precious hours, why neglect ye,
Whilst affairs thus expect ye?
Come away upon my blessing,
The Bride-chamber lies to dressing:
Strew the ways with leaves of Roses,
Some make garlands, some make poses:
It Is a favor, and't may joy you,
That your Mistress will employ you.
Where Is (...)
Sabrina, with her daughters,
That do sport about her waters:
Those that with their locks of Amber,
Haunt the fruitful hills of Wales,
Camber:
We must have to fill the number.
All the Nimphs of Trent and Humber.
Fie, your haste is scarce sufficing,
For the Bride's awake and rising.
Enter beauties, and attend her;
All your helps and service lend her:
With your quaintst and new'st devises,
Trim your Lady, fair Thamisis.
See; she is ready: with Joys greet her,
Lads, go bid the Bridegroom meet her:
But from rash approach advise him,
Lest a too much Joy surprise him,
None I ere knew yet, that dared,
View an Angel unprepared.
Now unto the Church she hies her;
Envy bursts, if she espies her:
In her gestures as she paces,
Are united all the Graces:
Which who sees and has his senses,
Loves in spite of all defenses.
O most true maiestick creature!
Nobles did you note her feature?
Felt you not an inward motion,
Tempting Love to yield devotion;
And as you were even desiring,
Something check you for aspiring?
That Is her Virtue which still tameth
Loose desires, and bad thoughts blames:
For whilst others were unruly,
She observed Diana truly:
And has by that means obtained
Gifts of her that none have gained.
Yon's the Bridegroom, do you not spy him?
See how all the Ladies eye him.
Venus his perfection finds,
And no more Adonis minds.
Much of him my heart diuineth:
On whose brow all Virtue shines.
Two such Creatures Nature would not
Let one place long keep: she should not:
One she will have (she cares not whether,)
But our Loves can spare her neither.
Therefore ere we will so be spighted,
They in one shall be united.
Natures self is well contented,
By that means to be prevented.
And behold they are retired,
So conioyn'd, as we desired:
Hand in hand, not only fixed,
But their hearts, are intermixed.
Happy they and we that see it,
For the good of Europe be it.
And hear Heaven my devotion,
Make this Rhyne and Them an Ocean:
That it may with might and wonder,
Whelme the pride of Tyber (...) the Ri^er which (...) Rome.
Tyber under.
Now yon White^all.
Hall their persons shroudeth,
Whither all this people croudeth:
There they feasted are with plenty,
Sweet Ambrosia is no deinty.
Grooms quaffe Nectar; for there is meeter,
Yea, more costly wines and sweeter.
Young men all, for joy go ring ye,
And your merriest Carols sing ye.
Here Is of Damzels many choices,
Let them tune their sweetest voices.
Fet the Muses to, to cheer them;
They can ravish all that hear them.
Ladies, it is their Highness pleasures,
To behold you foot the Measures:
Lovely gestures adds graces,
To your bright and Angel faces.
Give your active minds the bridle:
Nothing worse then to be idle.
Worthies, your affairs forbear ye,
For the State a while may spare ye:
Time was, that you loved sporting,
Have you quite forgot your Courting?
Joy the heart of Cares beguileth:
Once a year Apollo smileth. Semel in anno ridet Apol.

Follow Shepherds, how I pray you,
Can your flocks at this time stay you?
Let us also hie us thither,
Let Us lay all our wits together,
And some Pastoral invent them,
That may show the love we meant them.
I my self though meanest stated,
And in Court now almost hated,
Will knit up my Abuses stripped and whipped. He notes the mildness of the winter
which, excepting that the beginning was very windy, was as temperate as the
spring,
Scourge, and venture
In the midst of them to enter;
For I know, there is no disdaining,
Where I look for entertaining.
See, me thinks the very season,
As if capable of Reason,
Has lain by her native rigor,
The fair Sunbeams have more vigor.
They are Aeols most endeared:
For the Ayre's stilled and cleared.
Fawnes, and Lambs and Kidds do play,
In the honor of this day:
The shrill Blackbird, and the Thrush
Hops about in every bush:
And among the tender twigs,
Chaunt their sweet harmonious ijgs.
Moft men (...) of opinion, that this ^ay every ^ird does ^huse her ^ate for
(...) year.
Yea, and moved by this example,
They do make each Grove a temple:
Where their time the best way using,
They their Summer loves are choosing.
And unless some Churl do wrong them,
There Is not an od bird among them.
Yet I heard as I was walking,
Groves and hills by Echoes talking:
Reeds unto the small brooks whistling,
Whilst they danced with pretty rushling.
Then for us to sleep 'twere pity;
Since dumb creatures are so witty.
But oh Titan, thou do dally,
Hie thee to thy Western Valley:
Let this night one hour borrow:
She shall pay't again to morrow:
And if thou'st that favor do them,
Send thy sister Phabe to them.
But she is come her self unasked,
And brings By these he means the two Masks, one of them being presented by
the Lords, the other by the Gentry.
Gods and Heroes masked.
None yet saw, or heard in story,
Such immortal, mortal glory.
View not, without preparation;
Lest you faint in admiration.
Say my Lords, and speak truth barely,
Moved they not exceeding rarely?
Did they not such praises merit,
As if flesh had all been spirit?
True indeed, yet I must tell them,
There was One did far excel them.
But (alas) this is ill dealing,
Night unawares away is stealing:
Their delay the poor bed wrongeth,
That for Bride with Bridegroom longs:
And above all other places,
Must be blessed with their embraces.
Reuellers, then now forbear ye,
And unto your rests prepare ye:
Let Us a while your absence borrow,
Sleep to night, and dance to morrow.
We could well allow your Courting:
But 'twill hinder better sporting.
They are gone, and Night all lonely,
Leaves the Bride with Bridegroom only.
Muse now tell; (for thou have power
To fly thorough wall or tower:)
What contentments their hearts cheareth;
And how lovely she appears.
And yet do not; tell it no man,
Rare conceits may so grow common:
Do not to the Vulgar show them,
('It Is enough that thou do know them.)
Their ill hearts are but the Center,
Where all misconceiuings enter.
But thou Luna that do lightly,
Haunt our downs and forests nightly:
Thou that fauourst generation,
And art help to procreation:
See their issue thou so cherish,
I may live to see it flourish.
And you Planets, in whose power
Does consist these lives of our;
You that teach us Diuinations.
Help with all your Constellations,
How to frame in Her, a creature,
Blessed in Fortune, Wit, and Feature.
Lastly, oh you Angels ward them,
Set your sacred Spells to guard them;
Chase away such fears or terrors,
As not being, seem through errors:
Yea, let not a dreams molesting,
Make them start when they are resting.
But THOU chiefly, most adored,
That should only be implored:
Thou to whom my meaning tends,
Whether er'e in show it bends:
Let them rest to night from sorrow,
And awake with joy to morrow.
Oh, to my request be heedfull,
Grant them that, and all things needful.
Let not these my strains of Folly,
Make true prayer be unholy:
But if I have here offended:
Help, forgive, and Ice it mended.
Daigne me this. And if my Muses
Hasty issue; she peruses;
Make it unto her seem grateful,
Though to all the World else hateful.
But how er'e, yet Soul persevere
Thus to wish her good for ever.
THus ends the Day, together with my Song;
Oh may the Joys there of continue long!
Let Heavens just, all-seeing, sacred power,
Favor this happy marriage day of your;
And bless you in your chaste embraces so,
We Britains may behold before you go
The hopeful Issue we shall count so dear,
And whom (unborn) his foes already fear.
Yea, I desire, that all your sorrows may
Never be more, then they have been to day.
Which hoping; for acceptance now I sue,
And humbly bid your Grace and Court adue.
I saw the sight I came for; which I know
Was more then all, the world beside could show.
But if amongst Apolloes Lays, you can
Be pleased to lend a gentle ear to Pan;
Or think your Country Shepherd loves as dear,
As if he were a Courtier, or a Peer:
Then I, that else must to my Cell of pain,
Will joyful turn unto my flock again:
And there unto my fellow shepherds tell,
Why you are loved; wherein you do excel.
And when we drive our flocks a field to graze them,
So chaunt your praises, that it shall amaze them.
And think that Fate has new recald from death
Their still-lamented, sweet Elizabeth.
For though they see the Court but now and then,
They know desert as well as Greater men:
And honored Fame in them does live or die,
As well as in the mouth of Majesty.
But taking granted what I here entreat;
At heaven for you my devotions beat:
And though I fear, fate will not suffer me
To do you service, where your Fortunes be:
How ere my skill has yet despised seemed,
(And my vnripened wit been misesteem'd:)
When all this costly Show away shall flit,
And not one live that does remember it;
If Enuies trouble let not to persevere;
I Will find a means to make it known for ever.
CERTAIN EPIGRAMS CONCERNING MARRIAGE.
Epigram 1.
It Is said; in Marriage above all the rest
The children of a King find comforts least,
Because without respect of Love or Hate
They must, and often be, ruled by the State:
But if contented Love, Religions care,
Equality in State, and years declare
A happy Match (as I suppose no less)
Then rare and great's Elizaes Happiness.
Epigram. 2.
GOd was the first that Marriage did ordain,
By making One, Two; and Two, One again,
Epigram. 3.
Soldier; of thee I ask, for thou can best,
Having known sorrow, judge of Joy and Rest:
What greater bliss, then after all thy harms,
To have a wife that is fair, and lawful thine;
And lying imprisoned 'twixt her Iuory arms,
There tell what thou have escaped by powers divine?
How many round thee thou have murdered seen;
How often thy soul has been near hand expiring,
How many times thy flesh has wounded been:
Whilst she thy fortune, and thy worth admiring,
With joy of health, and pity of thy pain;
Does weep and kiss, and kiss and weep again.
Epigram. 4.
Fair Helen having stained her husbands bed,
And mortal hatred 'twixt two Kingdoms bred;
Had still remaining in her so much good,
That Heroes for her lost their dearest blood:
Then if with all that ill, such worth may last,
Oh what is she worth, that is as fair, and chaste!
Epigram. 5.
OLd Orpheus know a good wives worth so well,
That when his died, he followed her to hell,
And for her loss, at the Elizean Grove,
He did not only Ghosts to pity move,
But the sad Poet breathed his sighs so deep;
It Is said, the Devils could not choose but weep.
Epigram. 6.
LOng did I wonder, and I wonder much,
Romes Church should from her Clergy take that due:
Thought I, why should she that contentment grutch?
What, does she all with continence indue?
No: But why then are they debarred that state?
Is she become a foe unto her own?
Does she the members of her body hate?
Or is it for some other cause vnshowne?
Oh yes: they find a woman's lips so dainty:
They tie themselves from one, cause they will have twenty.
Epigram. 7.
Women, as some men say* unconstant be;
It Is like enough, and so no doubt are men:
Nay, if their scapes we could so plainly see,
I fear that scarce there will be one for ten.
Men have but their own lusts that tempt to ill:
Women have lusts, and men's allurements to:
Alas, if their strengths cannot curb their will;
What should poor women that are weaker do?
Oh they had need be chaste and look about them,
That strive against lust within, and knaves without them.
FINIS.
THE SHEPHERDS HVNTING: Being certain Eglogues written during the time of the
Authors Imprisonment in the Marshalsey.

By George Wither, Gentleman.



LONDON, Printed by T. S. for John Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the
sign of the Green Dragon, 1622.

To those Honored, Noble, and right Virtuous Friends, my Visitants in the
Marshalsey: And to all other my unknown Favorers, who either privately, or
publicly wished me well in my imprisonment.
NOble Friends; you whose virtues made me first in love with Virtue; and whose
worths made me be thought worthy of your loves: I have now at last (you see)
by Gods assistance, and your encouragement, run through the Purgatory of
imprisonment; and by the worthy favor of a just Prince, stand free again,
without the least touch of dejected baseness. Seeing therefore I was grown
beyond my Hope so fortunate (after acknowledgement of my Creators love,
together with the vnequall'd Clemency of so gracious a Sovereign) I was
troubled to think, by what means I might express my thankefulnes to so many
well-deseruing friends: No way I found to my desire, neither yet ability to
perform when I found it. But at length considering with my self what you were
(that is) such, who favor honesty for no second reason, but because you your
selves are good; and aim at no other reward, but the witness of a sound
conscience that you do well, I found, that thankfulness would prove the
acceptablest present to suit with your dispositions; and that I imagined could
be no way better expressed, then in manifesting your courtesies, and giving
consent to your reasonable demands. For the first, I confess (with thanks to
the disposer of all things, and a true grateful heart toward you) so many
were the unexpected Visitations, and unhoped kindnesses received, both from
some among you of my Acquaintance, and many other unknown Well-willers of my
Cause, that I was persuaded to entertain a much better conceit of the Times,
then I lately conceived, and assured my self, that Virtue had far more
followers then I supposed.

Somewhat it disturbed me to behold our ages Favorites, whilst they frowned on
my honest enterprises, to take unto their protections the egregiousts
fopperies: yet much more was my contentment, in that I was respected by so many
of You, amongst who^ there are some, who can and may as much dis-esteeme these,
as they neglect me: nor could I fear their Malice or Contempt, whilst I
enjoyed your favors, who (howsoever you are vnder-valued by Fools for a time)
shall leave unto your posterity so noble a memory, that your names shall be
reverenced by Kings, when many of these who now flourish with a show of usurped
Greatness, shall either wear out of being, or dispoyled of all their patched
reputation, grow contemptible in the eyes of their beloved Mistress the World.
Your Love it is that (enabling me with patience to endure what is already past)
has made me also careful better to prepare my self for all future
misaduentures, by bringing to my consideration, what the passion of my just
discontentments had almost quite banished from my remembrance.

Further, to declare my thankfulness, in making apparent my willing mind to
be commanded in any services of love, which you shall think fit (though I want
ability to perform great matters) yet I have according to some of your
requests, been contented to give way to the printing of these Eglogues; which
though it to many seem a slight matter, yet being well considered of, may
prove a strong argument of my readiness to give you content in a greater
matter: for they being (as you well know) begotten with little care, and
preserved with less respect, gave sufficient evidence, that I meant (rather
then any way to deceive your trust) to give the world occasion of calling my
discretion in question, as I now assure my self this will: and the sooner,
because such expectations (I perceive) there are (of I know not what
Inventions) as would have been frustrated, though I had employed the utmost and
very best of my endeauours.

Notwithstanding for your sakes, I have here adventured once again to make
trial of the Worlds censures: and what has received being from your Loves, I
here re-dedicated to your Worths, which if your noble dispositions will like
well of; or if you will but reasonably respect what your selves drew me unto,
I shall be nothing displeased at others cauils, but resting my self contented
with your good opinions, scorn all the rabble of uncharitable detractors: For
none, I know, will malign it, except those, who either particularly malice my
person, or profess themselves enemies to my former Books; who (saving those
that were incensed on others speeches) as diverse of you (according to your
protestations) have observed, are either open enemies of our Church; men
notoriously guilty of some particular Abuses therein taxt, such malicious
Critickes who have the repute of being judicious, by detracting from others; or
at best, such Guls, as never approve any thing good, or learned, but either
that which their shallow apprehensions can apply to the soothing of their own
opinions, or what (indeed rather) they understand not.

Trust me, how ill soever it has been rewarded, my love to my Country is
inuiolate: my thankfulness to you unfeigned, my endeavor to do every man
good; all my aim, content with honesty: and this my pains (if it may be so
termed) more to avoid idleness, then for affectation of praise: and if
notwithstanding all this, I must yet not only rest my self content that my
innocence has escaped with strict imprisonment (to the impayring of my state,
and hinderance of my fortunes) but also be constrained to see my guiltless
lines, suffer the despite of ill tongues: yet for my further encouragement,
let me entreat the continuance of your first respect, wherein I shall find
that comfort as will be sufficient to make me set light, and so much contemn
all the malice of my adversaries, that ready to burst with the venom of their
own hearts, they shall see

My Mind enamoured on fair Virtues light,
Transcends the limits of their bleared sight,
And placed above their Envy does contemn,
Nay, sit and laugh at, their disdain, and them.
But Noble Friends, I make question neither of yours, nor any honest man's
respect, and therefore will no further urge it, nor trouble your patience:
only this I Will say, that you may not think me too well conceited of my self;
though the Time were to blame, in ill requiting my honest endeauours, which in
the eyes of the World deserved better; yet some what I am assured there was in
me worthy that punishment, which when God shall give me grace to see and amend,
I doubt not but to find that regard as will be fitting for so much merit as my
endeavors may justly challenge. Mean while, the better to hold my self in
esteem with you, and amend the worlds opinion of Virtue, I will study to amend
my self, that I may be yet more worthy to be called

Your Friend, GEO: WITHER.

The Shepherds Hunting.
The first Eglogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Willy leaves his Flock a while,
To lament his Friends exile;
Where, though imprisoned, he does find,
He Is still free that is free in Mind:
And that there is no defense
Half so firm as Innocence.
PHILARETE. WILLIE. Philarete. WIlly, thou now full jolly tun'st thy Reeds,
Making the Nymphs enamored on thy strain,
And whilst thy harmles flock vnscarred feeds,
Have the contentment, of hills, groves, and plains:
Trust me, I joy thou and thy Muse so speedes
In such an Age, where so much mischief reigns:
And to my Care it some redress will be,
Fortune has so much grace to smile on thee.

Willy. To smile on me? I nere yet knew her smile,
Unless 'twere when she purposed to deceive me;
Many a Train, and many a painted Wile
She casts, in hope of Freedom to bereave me:
Yet now, because she sees I scorn her guile
To fawn on sooles, she for my Muse does leave me.
And here of late, her wonted Spite does tend,
To work me Care, by frowning on my friend.

Philarete. Why then I see her Copper-coyne's no starling,
'Twill not be current still, for all the guilding)
A Knave, or Fool, must ever be her Darling,
For they have minds to all occasions yielding:
If we get any thing by all our parling.
It seems an Apple, but it proves a Weilding:
But let that pass: sweet Shepherd tell me this,
For what beloved Friend thy sorrow is.

Willy. Art thou, Philarete, in durance here,
And do thou ask me for what Friend I grieve?
Can I suppose thy love to me is dear,
Or this thy joy for my content believe?
When thou think thy cares touch not me as near:
Or that I pin thy Sorrows at my sleeue?
I have in thee reposed so much trust,
I never thought, to find thee so unjust.

Philarete. WILL, why Willy? Prithee do not ask me why?
Does it diminish any of thy care,
That I in freedom maken melody;
And think I cannot as well somewhat spare
From my delight, to moan thy misery?
It Is time our Loves should these suspects forbear:
Thou art that friend, which thou unnamed shold'st know,
And not have drawn my love in question so.

Philarete. Forgive me, and I Will pardon thy mistake,
And so let this thy gentle-anger cease,
(I never of thy love will question make)
Whilst that the number of our days increase,
Yet to my self I much might seem to take,
And something near unto presumption prease:
To think me worthy love from such a spirit,
But that I know thy kindness past my merit.
Besides; me thought thou spak'st now of a friend,
That seemed more grievous discontents to bear,
Some things I find that do in show offend,
Which to my Patience little trouble are,
And they ere long I hope will have an end;
Or though they have not, much I do not care:
So this it was, made me that question move,
And not suspect of honest Willies love.

Willie. Alas, thou art exiled from thy Flock,
And quite beyond the Deserts here confined,
Have nothing to converse with but a Rock:
Or at least Out laws in their Caves half pined:
And do thou at thy own misfortune mock,
Making thy self to, to thy self unkind?
When heretofore we talked we did embrace:
But now I scarce can come to see thy face.

Philarete. Yet all that Willy, is not worth thy sorrow,
For I have Mirth here thou would not believe,
From deepest cares the highest joys I borrow.
If ought chance out this day, may make me grieve
I Will lcarne to mend, or scorn it by to morrow.
This barren place yields somewhat to relieve:
For, I have found sufficient to content me,
And more true bliss then ever freedom lent me.

Willie. Are Prisons then grown places of delight?

Philarete. It Is as the conscience of the Prisoner is,
Thevery Grates are able to affright
The guilty Man, that knows his deeds amiss;
All outward Pleasures are exiled quite,
And it is nothing (of it self) but this:
Abhorred loanenesse, darkness, sadness, pains,
Num'n-cold, sharpe-hunger, schorcning thirst and chains.

Willie. And these are nothing? --

Philarete. -- Nothing yet to me.
Only my friends restraint is all my pain.
And since I truly find my conscience free
From that my loanenesse to, I reap some gain.

Willie. But grant in this no coffeehouse be*
It does thy wished liberty restrain:
And to thy soul I think there is nothing nearer,
For I could never hear thee prize ought dearer.

Philarete. True, I did ever set it at a Rate
Too dear for any Mortals worth to buy,
It Is not our greatest Shepherds whole estate,
Shall purchase from me, my least liberty:
But I am subject to the powers of Fate,
And to obey them is no slavery:
They may do much, but when they have done all,
Only my body they may bring in thrall.
And it is not that (my Willy) it is my mind,
My mind's more precious, freedom I so weigh
A thousand ways they may my body bind,
In thousand thrals, but never my mind betray:
And thence it is that I contentment find,
And bear with Patience this my load away:
I Am still my self, and that I Would rather be,
Then to be Lord of all these Downs in fee.

Willie. Nobly resolved, and I do joy to hear't,
For it is the mind of Man indeed that is all.
There Is naught so hard but a brave heart will bear't,
The guiltless men count great afflictions small,
They Will look on Death and Torment, yet not fear't,
Because they know it is rising so to fall:
Tyrants may boast they to much power are borne,
Yet he has more that Tyranies can scorn.

Philarete. ^is right, but I no Tyranies endure,
^or have I suffered ought worth name of care

Willie. What e're thou wilt called, thou may, but I am sure,
Many more pine that much less pained are:
Thy look me thinks does say thy meaning's pure
And by this past I find what thou do dare:
But I could never yet the reason know,
Why thou art lodged in this house of woe.

Philarete. Nor I by Pan, nor never hope to do,
But thus it pleases some; and I do guess
Partly a cause that moves them thereunto,
Which neither will avail me to express,
Nor thee to hear, and therefore let it go,
We must not say, they do so that oppress:
Yet I shall never to sooth them or the times,
Iniure my self, by bearing others crimes.

Willie. Then now thou may speak freely, there is none hears,
But he, whom I do hope thou do not doubt.

Philarete. True: but if doors and walls have gotten ears,
And Closet-whisperings may be spread about:
Do not blame him that in such causes fears
What in his Passion he may blunder out:
In such a place, and such strict times as these,
Where what we speak is took as others please.
But yet to morrow, if thou come this way,
I Will tell thee all my story to the end,
It Is long, and now I fear thou can not stay,
Because thy Flock must watered be and pend,
And Night begins to muffle up the day,
Which to inform thee how alone I spend,
I Will only sing a sorry Prisoners Lay,
I framed this Morn, which though it suits no fields,
Is such as fits me, and sad Thraldom yields.

Willie. Well, I will set my Kit another string,
And play unto it whilst that thou do sing.

Sonnet.
Philarete. NOw that my body dead alive,
Bereaved of comfort, lies in thrall.
Do thou my soul begin to thrive,
And unto Honey, turn this Gall:
So shall we both through outward we,
The way to inward comfort know.
As to the Flesh we food do give;
To keep in us this Mortal breath:
So Seules on Meditations live,
And shun thereby immortal death:
Nor art thou ever nearer rest,
Then when thou find'st me most oppressed.
First think my Soul; If I have Foes
That take a pleasure in my care,
And to procure these outward woes,
Have thus entrapt me unaware:
Thou should by much more careful be,
Since greater foes lay wait for thee.
Then when Mewed up in grates of steel,
Minding those joys mine eyes do miss,
Thou find'st no torment thou do feel,
So grievous as Privation is:
Muse how the Damned in flames that glow,
Pine in the loss of bliss they know.
Thou see there is given so great might
To some that are but clay as I,
Their very anger can affright,
Which, if in any thou epsy.
Thus think; If Mortals frowns strike fear,
How dreadful will Gods wrath appear?
By my late hopes that now are crossed,
Consider those that firmer be:
And make the freedom I have lost,
A means that may remember thee:
Had Christ, not thy Redeemer bin,
What horrid thrall thou had been in.
These iron chains, these bolts of steel,
Which other poor offenders grind,
The wants and cares which they do feel,
May bring some greater thing to mind:
For by their grief thou shall do well,
To think upon the pains of Hell.
Or, when through me thou see a Man
Condemned unto a mortal death,
How sad he looks, how pale, how wan,
Drawing with fear his panting breath:
Think, if in that such grief thou see,
How sad will, Go ye cursed be.
Again, when he that feared to Dye
(Past hope) does see his Pardon brought,
Read but the joy that is in his eye,
And then convey it to thy thought:
There think, betwixt thy heart and thee,
How sweet will, Come ye blessed, be.
Thus if thou do, though closed here,
My bondage I shall deem the less,
I neither shall have cause to fear,
Nor yet bewail my sad distress:
For whether live, or pine, or dye,
We shall have bliss eternally.

Willy. Trust me I see the Cage does some Birds good,
And if they do not suffer too much wrong,
Will teach them sweeter descants then the wood:
Beleeue't, I like the subject of thy Song,
It shows thou art in no distempred mood:
But cause to hear the residue I long,
My Sheep to morrow I will nearer bring,
And spend the day to hear thee talk and sing.
Yet e're we part, Philarete, areed,
Of whom thou learnd'st to make such songs as these,
I never yet heard any Shepherds reed
Tune in mishap, a strain that more could please;
Surely, Thou do inuoke at this thy need
Some power, that we neglect in other lays:
For here is a Name, and words, that but few swains
Have mentioned at their meeting on the Plains.

Philarete. Indeed it is true; and they are sore to blame,
They do so much neglect it in their Songs,
For, thence proceeds such a worthy fame,
As is not subject unto Enuies wrongs:
That, is the most to be respected name
Of our true Pan, whose worth sits on all tongues:
And what the ancient Shepherds use to praise
In sacred Anthemes, upon Holy Days.
He that first taught his Music such a strain
Was that sweet Shepherd, who (until a King)
Kept Sheep upon the hony-milky Plain,
That is inrich't by Iordans watering;
He in his troubles eased the bodies pains,
By measures raised to the Souls rauishing:
And his sweet numbers only most divine,
Gave first the being to this Song of mine.

Willy. Let his good spirit ever with thee dwell,
That I might hear such Music every day.

Philarete. Thanks, Swain: but hark, thy Weather rings his Bell.
And Swains to fold, or homeward drive away.

Willy. And you goes Cuddy, therefore fare thou well:
I Will make his Sheep for me a little stay;
And, if thou think it fit, I Will bring him to,
Next morning hither. --

Philarete. -- Prithee, Willy, do.

FINIS.
The Shepherds Hunting.
The second Eglogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Cuddy here relates, how all
Pity Philarete's thrall.
Who requested, does relate
The true cause of his estate;
Which broke off, because 'twas long,
They begin, a three man Song.
WILLY. CVDDY. PHILARETE. Willy. LO, Philaret, thy old friend here, and I,
Are come to visit thee in these thy Bands,
Whilst both our Flocks in an Enclosure by,
Do pick the thin grass from the fallowed lands.
He tells me thy restraint of liberty,
Each one throughout the Country understands:
And there is not a gentle-natur'd Lad
On all these Downs, but for thy sake is sad.

Cuddy. Not thy acquaintance, and thy friends alone,
Pity thy close restraint, as friends should do:
But some that have but seen thee, for thee moan:
Yea, many that did never see thee to.
Some deem thee in a fault, and most in none;
So diverse ways do diverse Rumors go
And at all meetings where our Shepherds be,
Now the maine News that is extant, is of thee.

Philarete. Why, this is somewhat yet: had I but kept
Sheep on the Mountains, till the day of doom,
My name should in obscurity have slept
In Brakes, in Briars, shrubbed Furze and Broom.
Into the Worlds wide ear it had not crept,
Nor in so many men's thoughts found a room:
But what cause of my sufferings do they know?
Good Cuddy, tell me, how does rumor go?

Cuddy. Faith it is uncertain; some speak this, some that:
Some dare say naught, yet seem to think a cause,
And many a one prating he knows not what;
Comes out with Proverbs and old ancient sawes,
As if he thought thee guiltless, and yet not:
Then does he speak half Sentences, then pawse:
That what the most would say, we may suppose;
But, what to say, the Rumor is, none knows.

Philarete. Nor care I greatly; for, it skils not much,
What the unsteady common people deemes,
His Conscience does not always feel least touch,
That blameless in the sight of others seems:
My cause is honest, and because it is such,
I hold it so, and not for men's esteems:
If they speak justly well of me, I Am glad;
If falsely evil, it never makes me sad.

Willy. I like that mind: but, Shepherd, you are quite
Beside the matter that I long to hear:
Remember what you promised yester-night,
Youl'd put us off with other talk, I fear;
Thou know that honest Cuddies heart's upright;
And none but he, except my self, is near:
Come therefore, and betwixt us two relate,
The true occasion of thy present state.

Philarete. My Friends I will: You know I am a Swain,
The kept a poor Flock on a barren Plain:
Who though it seems, I could do nothing less,
Can make a Song, and woe a Shepherdess.
And not alone the fairest where I live,
Have heard me sing, and favors daign'd to give:
But, though I say it, the noblest Nymph of Them,
Has graced my Verse, unto my greater fame.
Yet, being young, and not much seeking praise,
I was not noted out for Shepherds lays:
Nor feeding Flocks, as, you know, others be:
For the delight that most possessed me
Was hunting Foxes, Wolves, and Beasts of Prey:
That spoil our Foulds, and bear our Lambs away.
For this, as also for the love I bear
Unto my Country, I laid by all care
Of gain, or of preferment, with desire
Only to keep that state I had entire.
And like a true grown Huntsman sought to speed
My self with Hounds of rare and choysest breed,
Whose Names and Natures ere I further go,
Because you are my friends I Will let you know.
My first esteemed Dog that I did find,
Was by descent of old Acteons kind;
A Brache, which if I do not aim amiss,
For all the world is just like one of his:
She Is named Love, and scarce yet knows her duty;
Her Damme's my Ladies pretty Beagle, Beauty.
I bred her up my self with wondrous charge,
Until she grew to be exceeding large,
And waxt so wanton, that I did abhor it,
And put her out amongst my neighbors for it.
The next is Lust, a Hound that is kept abroad
Among some of mine acquaintance, but a Toad
Is not more loathsome: it is a Curre will range
Extremely, and is ever full of mange:
And cause it is infectious, she is not wunt
To come among the rest, but when they hunt.
Hate is the third, a Hound both deep and long:
His Sire is True, or else supposed Wrong.
He Will have a snap at all that pass him by,
And yet pursues his game most eagerly.
With him goes Envy coupled, a lean Curre,
And yet she will hold out, hunt we never so far:
She pineth much, and feeds little to,
Yet stands and snarleth at the rest that do.
Then there is Revenge, a wondrous deep-mouthed dog,
So fleet, I Am feign to hunt him with a clog,
Yet many times he will much outstrip his bounds,
And hunts not closely with the other Hounds:
He Will venture on a Lion in his ire;
Cursed Choler was his Damme, and Wrong his Sire.
This Choler, is a Brache, that is very old,
And spends her mouth too-much to have it hold:
She Is very teasty; an unpleasing Curre.
That bites the very Stones, if they but stir:
Or when that ought but her displeasure moves,
She Will bite and snap at any one she loves.
But my quick scented'st Dog is Iaelousie,
The truest of this breede's in Italy.
The Damme of mine would hardly fill a Glove,
It was a Ladies little Dog, called Love:
The Sire a poor deformed Curre, named Fear;
As shagged and as rough as is a Bear:
And yet the Whelpe turned after neither kind,
For he is very large, and nere-hand blind,
Far off, he seems of a pretty culler,
But does not prove so, when you view him fuller.
A vile suspicious Beast; whose looks are bad,
And I do fear in time he will grow mad.
To him I couple Avarice, still poor;
Yet she deuoures as much as twenty more:
A thousand Horse she in her paunch can put,
Yet whine, as if she had an empty gut;
And having gorged what might a Land have found,
She Will catch for more, and, hide it in the ground.
Ambition is a Hound as greedy full;
But he for all the daintiest bits does cull:
He scorns to lick up Crumbs beneath the Table,
He Will fetched from boards and shelues, if he be able:
Nay, he can climb, if need be; and for that
With him I hunt the Martine, and the Cat:
And yet sometimes in mounting, he is so quick,
I see fetches falls, are like to break his neck.
Fear is wel-mouth'd, but subject to Distrust;
A Stranger cannot make him take a Crust:
A little thing will soon his courage quail,
And 'twixt his legs he ever claps his Tail.
With him, Despair, now, often coupled goes,
Which by his roaring mouth each hunts man knows.
None has a better mind unto the game;
But he gives off, and always seems lame.
My bloud-hound Cruelty, as swift as wind,
Hunts to the death, and never comes behind;
Who, but she is strapt, and musled to, withal,
Would eat her fellows and the prey and all.
And yet, she cares not much for any food;
Unless it be the purest harmless blood.
All these are kept abroad at charge of meny,
They do not cost me in a year a penny.
But there is two couple of a midling size,
That seldom pass the sight of my own eyes.
Hope, on whose head I Have laid my life to pawn;
Compassion, that on every one will fawn.
This would, when 'twas a whelpe, with Rabets play
Or Lambs, and let them go unhurt away:
Nay, now she is of growth, she will now and then
Catch you a Hare, and let her go again.
The two last, Joy, and Sorrow; make me wonder,
For they can never agree, nor bide asunder.
Ioy's ever wanton and no order knows,
She Will run at Larkes, or stand and bark at Crows.
Sorrow goes by her, and never moves his eye:
Yet both do serve to help make up the cry:
Then comes behind all these to bear the base,
Two couple more of a far larger Race,
Such wide-mouthed Trollops, that 'twould do you good,
To hear their loud-loud Echoes tear the Wood:
There Is Vanity, who by her gaudy Hide,
May far away from all the rest be spide,
Though huge, yet quick, for she is now here, now there;
Nay, look about you, and she is every where:
Yet ever with the rest, and still in chase,
Right so, Inconstancy fills every place;
And yet so strange a fickle natured Hound,
Look for her, and she is no where to be found.
Weakness is no fair Dog unto the eye,
And yet she has her proper quality.
But there is Presumption, when he heat has got,
He drownes the Thunder, and the Cannon-shot:
And when at Start, he his full roaring makes,
The Earth does tremble, and the Heaven shakes:
These were my Dogs, ten couple just in all,
Whom by the name of Satyrs I do call:
Mad Curs they be, and I can never come nigh them,
But I Am in danger to be bitten by them.
Much pains I took, and spent days not a few,
To make them keept together, and hunt true:
Which yet I do suppose had never bin,
But that I had a Scourge to keep them in.
Now when that I this Kennell first had got,
Out of mine own Demeanes I hunted not,
Save on these Downs, or among yonder Rocks,
After those beasts that spoiled our Parish Flocks:
Nor during that time, was I ever wont,
With all my Kennell in one day to hunt:
Nor had done yet, but that this other year,
Some Beasts of Prey that haunt the Deserts here,
Did not alone for many Nights together
Devour, sometime a Lamb, sometime a Weather:
And so disquiet many a poor man's Heard,
But thereof loosing all were much afeard.
Yea, I among the rest, did fare as bad,
Or rather worse; for the best Hopes.
Ewes I had,
(Whose breed should be my means of life and gain,
Were in one Evening by these Monsters slain:
Which mischief I resolved to repay,
Or else grow desperate and hunt all away.
For in a fury such as you shall see
Hunts-men, in missing of their sport will be)
I vowed a Monster should not lurk about
In all this Province, but I Would find him out.
And thereupon without respect or care,
How lame, how full, or how unfit they were,
In have vnkennell'd all my roaring crew,
Who were as mad, as if my mind they knew;
And e're they trail'd a flight-shot, the fierce Curres,
Had roused a Heart, and through Brakes, Briars, and Furs
Followed at gaze so close, that Love and Fear
Got in together, and had surely, there
Quite overthrown him, but that Hope thrust in
'Twixt both, and saved the pinching of his skin.
Whereby he escaped, till coursing ouerth wart,
Despair came in, and grip't him to the heart.
I hallowed in the resdue to the fall,
And for an entrance, there I flesh't them all:
Which having done, I dipped my staff in blood
And onward led my Thunder to the Wood;
Where what they did, I Will tell you out anon,
My keeper calls me, and I must be gone.
Go, if you please a while, attend your Flocks,
And when the Sun is over yonder Rocks,
Come to this Cave again, where I will be,
If that my Guardian, so much favor me.
Yet if you please, let us three sing a strain,
Before you turn your sheep into the Plain.

Willie. Iam content. --

Cuddy. -- As well content am I.

Philarete. Then Will begin, and we will the rest supply.

Song.
Willie. Shepherd, would these Gates were open,
Thou might take with us thy fortunes.

Philarete. No, I Will make this narrow scope,
(Since my Fate does so importune)
Means unto a wider Hope.

Cuddy. Would thy Shepherdess were here,
Who beloved, loves so dearly?

Philarete. Not for both your Flocks, Isweare,
And the gain they yield you yearly,
Would I so much wrong my Dear.
Yet, to me, nor to this Place,
Would she now be long a stranger:
She would hold it in disgrace,
(If she feared not more my danger)
Where I am to show her face.

Willie. Shepherd, we would wish no harms,
But something that might content thee.

Philarete. Wish me then within her arms;
And that wish will never repent me,
If your mishes might prove charms.

Willie. Be thy Prison her embrace,
Be thy air her sweetest breathing.

Cuddy. Be thy prospect her sweet Face,
For each look a kiss bequeathing,
And appoint thy self the place.

Philarete. Nay pray, hold there, for I should scantly then,
Come meet you here this afternoon again:
But fare you well since wishes have no power,
Let us depart and keep the pointed hour.

The Shepherds Hunting.
The third Eglogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Philarete with his three Friends,
Hear his hunting story ends.
Kind Alexis with much ruth,
Wailes the banished Shepherds youth:
But he slighteth Fortunes stings,
And in spite of Thraldom^ sings.
PHILARETE. CVDDY. ALEXIS. WILLY. Philarete. SO, now I see you are Shepherds of
your word,
Thus were you wont to promise, and to do.

Cuddy. More then our promise is, we can afford,
We come our selves, and bring another to:
Alexis, whom thou know well is no foe:
Who loves thee much: and I do know that he
Would feign a hearer of thy Hunting be.

Philarete. Alexis you are welcome, for you know
You cannot be but welcome where I am;
You ever were a friend of mine in show,
And I have found you are indeed the same:
Upon my first restraint you hither came,
And proffered me more tokens of your love,
Then it were fit my small deserts should prove.

Alexis. It Is still your use to vnderprise your merit;
Be not so coy to take my proffered love,
'Twill neither vnbeseeme your worth nor spirit.
To offer court'sie does thy friend behoue:
And which are so, this is a place to prove.
Then once again I say, if cause there be.
First makea trial, if thou please, of me.

Philarete. Thanks good Alexis; sit down by me here,
I have a task, these Shepherds know, to do;
A Tale already told this Morn well near,
With which I very feign would forward go,
And am as willing thou should hear it to:
But thou can never understand this last,
Till I have also told thee what is past.

Willy. It shall not need, for I so much presumed,
I on your mutual friendships, might be bold,
That I a freedom to my self assumed,
To make him know, what is already told.
If I have done amiss, then you may scold.
But in my telling I preuised this,
He knew not whose, nor to what end it is.

Philarete. Well, now he may, for here my Tale goes on:
My eager Dogs and I to Wood are gone.
Where, beating through the Conuerts, every Hound
A several Game had in a moment found:
I rated them, but they pursued their pray,
And as it fell (by hap) took all one way.
Then I began with quicker speed to follow,
And teased them on, with a more cheerful hallow:
That soon we passed many weary miles,
Tracing the subtle game through all their wiles.
These doubled, those re-doubled on the scent,
Still keeping in full chase where ere they went.
Up Hills, down Cliffes, through Bogs, and over Plains,
Stretching their Music to the highest strains.
That when some Thicket hid them from mine eye,
My ear was ravished with their melody.
Nor crossed we only Ditches, Hedges, Furrows,
But Hamlets, Tithings, Parishes, and Burrowes:
They followed where so eu'r the game did go,
Through Kitchen, Parlor, Hall, and Chamber to.
And, as they passed the City, and the Court,
My Prince looked out, and daign'd to view my sport.
Which then (although I suffer for it now)
(If some say true) he liking did allow;
And so much (had I had but wit to stay)
I might my self (perhaps) have heard him say.
But I, that time, as much as any daring,
More for my pleasure then my safety caring;
Seeing fresh game from every covert rise,
(Crossing by thousands still before their eyes)
Rushed in, and then following close my Hounds,
Some beasts I found lie dead, some full of wounds,
Among the willows, scarce with strength to move,
One I found here, another there, whom Love
Had gripped to death: and, in the selfsame state,
Lay one devoured by Envy, one by Hate;
Lust had bit some, but I soon past beside them,
Their festr'd wounds so stuncke, none could abide them.
Choler hurt diverse, but Revenge killed more:
Fear frighted all, behind him and before.
Despair drove on a huge and mighty heap,
Forcing some down from Rocks and Hills to leap:
Some into water, some into the fire,
So on themselves he made them wreake his ire.
But I remember, as I passed that way,
Where the great King and Prince of Shepherds lay,
About the walls were hid, some (once more known)
That my fell Curre Ambition had o'rethrowne:
Many I heard, pursued by Pity, cry;
And often I saw my Bloud-Hound, Cruelty,
Eating her passage even to the heart,
Whither once gotten, she is loath to part.
All pli'd it well, and made so loud a cry,
'Twas heard beyond the Shores of Britany.
Some rated them, some stormed, some liked the game,
Some thought me worthy praise, some worthy blame.
But I, not fearing the one, mis-steeming the other,
Both, in shrill hallowes and loud yernings smother.
Yea, the strong mettled, and my long-breathed crew,
Seeing the game increasing in their view,
Grew the more frolic, and the courses length
Gave better breath, and added to their strength.
Which Jove perceiving, for Jove heard their cries
Rumbling amongst the Spheres concauities:
He marked their course, and courages increase,
Saying, 'twere pity such a chase should cease.
And therewith swore their mouths should never wast,
But hunt as long's mortality did last.
Soon did they feel the power of his great gift,
And I began to find their pace more swift:
I followed, and I rated, but in vain
Strived to overtake, or take them up again.
They never stayed since, nor nights nor days,
But to and fro still run a thousand wayest
Yea, often to this place where now I lie,
They Will wheel about to cheer me with their cry;
And one day in good time will vengeance take
On some offenders, for their Masters sake:
For know, my Friends, my freedom in this sort
For them I lose, and making my self sport.

Willy. Why? was there any harm at all in this?

Philarete. No, Willy, and I hope yet none there is.

Willy. How comes it then? --

Philarete. -- Note, and I Will tell thee how?
Thou know that Truth and Innocence now,
If placed with meannesse, suffers more despite
Then Villainies, accompan'ed with might.
But thus it fell, while that my Hounds pursued
Their noisome prey, and every field lay strewn
With Monsters, hurt and slain; upon a beast,
More subtle, and more noisome then the rest,
My leane-flanckt Bitch, called Envy, hapt to light:
And, as her wont is, did so surely bite,
That, though she left behind small outward smart,
The wounds were deep, and rankled to the heart.
This, joining to some other, that of late,
Were very eagerly pursued by Hate,
(To fit their purpose having taken leisure)
Did thus conspire to work me a displeasure.
For imitation, farresurpassing Apes,
They laid aside their Fox and Woluish shapes,
And shrouded in the skins of harmless Sheep
Into by-ways, and open paths did creep;
Where, they (as hardly drawing breath) didly,
Showing their wounds to every passer by;
To make them think that they were sheep so foiled,
And by my Dogs, in their late hunting, spoiled.
Beside, some other that enuy'd my game,
And, for their pastime, kept such Monsters tame:
As, you do know, there is many for their pleasure
Keep Foxes, Bears, and Wolves, as some great treasure:
Yea, many get their living by them to,
And so did store of these, I speak of, do.
Who, seeing that my Kennell had affrighted,
Or hurt some Vermin wherein they delighted;
And finding their own power by much to weak,
Their Malice on my Innocence to wreake,
Swollen with the deepest rancour of despite,
Some of our greatest Shepherds Folds by night
They closely entered; and there having stained
Their hands in villainy, of me they plained,
Affirming, (without shame, or honesty,)
I, and my Dogs, had done it purposely.
Whereat they stormed, and called me to a trial,
Where Innocence preuailes not, nor denial:
But for that cause, here in this place I lie,
Where none so merry as my dogs, and I.

Cuddy. Believe it, here is a Tale will suten well,
For Shepherds in another Age to tell.

Willy. And thou shall be remembered with delight,
By this, hereafter, many a Winters night.
For, of this sport another Age will ring;
Yea, Nymphs that are unborn thereof shall sing,
And not a Beauty on our Greenes shall play,
That has not heard of this thy hunting day.

Philarete. It may be so, for if that gentle Swain,
Who wonnes by Tauy, on the Western plain,
Would make the Song, such life his Verse can give,
Then I do know my Name might ever live.

Alexis. But tell me; are our Plains and Nymphs forgot,
And can thou frolic in thy trouble be?

Philarete. Can I, Alexis, say thou? Can I not,
That am resolved to scorn more misery?

Alexis. Oh, but that youth's yet green, and young blood hot,
And liberty must needs be sweet to thee.
But, now most sweet whilst every bushy Vale,
And Grove, and Hill, rings of the Nightingale.
Me thinks, when thou remembrest those sweet lays
Which thou would lead thy Shepherdess to hear,
Each Evening tide among the Leauy sprayes,
The thought of that should make thy freedom dear:
For now, whilst every Nymph on Holy Days
Sports with some jolly Lad, and makes cheer,
Thine, sighs for thee, and mewed up from resort,
Will neither play her self, nor see their sport.
Those Shepherds that were many a Morning wont,
Unto their Boys to leave the tender Heard;
And bear thee company when thou did hunt;
Me thinks the sport thou have so gladly shared
Among those Swaynes should make thee think upon it,
For It seems all vain, now, that was once indear'd.
It cannot be: since I could make relation,
How for less cause thou have been deep in passion.

Philarete. It Is true: my tender heart was ever yet
Too capable of such conceits as these;
I never saw that Object, but from it,
The Passions of my Love I could increase.
Those things which move not other men a whit,
I can, and do make use of, if I please:
When I am sad, to sadness I apply,
Each Bird, and Tree, and Flower that I pass by.
So, when I will be merry, I as well
Something for mirth from every thing can draw,
From Misery, from Prisons, nay from Hell:
And as when to my mind, grief gives a flaw,
Best comforts do but make my woes more fell:
So when I Am bent to Mirth, from mischiefs paw.
(Though ceased upon me) I would something cull,
That spite of care, should make my joys more full.
I feel those wants, Alexis, thou do name,
Which spite of youths affections I sustain;
Or else, for what is it I have gotten Fame,
And am more known then many an elder Swain?
I^ such desires I had not learned to tame,
(Since many pipe much better on this Plain:)
But tune your Reeds, and I will in a Song,
Express my Care, and how I take this Wrong.
Sonnet.
I That ere'st-while the worlds sweet Air did draw,
(Graced by the fairest ever Mortal saw;)
Now closely pent, with walls of Ruth-lesse stone.
Consume my Days, and Nights and all alone.
When I was wont to sing of Shepherds loves,
My walks were Fields, and Downs, and Hills, and Groves:
But now (alas) so strict is my hard doom,
Fields, Downs, Hills, Groves, and all is but one pooreroome.
Each Morn, as soon as Daylight did appear,
With Natures Music Birds would charm mine ear:
Which now (instead) of their melodious strains,
Hear, rattling Shackles, Gyues, and Boults, and Chains.
But, though that all the world's delight forsake me,
I have a Muse, and she shall Music make me:
Whose ayrie Notes, in spite of closest cages,
Shall give content to me, and after ages.
Nor do I pass for all this outward ill.
My hearts the same, and undeiected still;
And which is more then some in freedom win,
I have truerest, and peace, and joy within.
And then my Mind, that spite of prison's free,
When ere she pleases any where can be;
She Is in an hour, in France, Rome, Turkey, Spain,
In Earth, in Hell, in Heaven, and here again.
Yet there is another comfort in my woe,
My cause is spread, and all the world may know,
My fault's no more, but speaking Truth, and Reason;
No Debt, nor Theft, nor Murder, Rape, or Treason.
Nor shall my foes with all their Might and Power,
Wipe out their shame, nor yet this fame of our:
Which when they find, they shall my fate envy,
Till they grow lean, and sick, and mad, and die.
Then though my Body here in Prison rot,
And my wronged Satyrs seem a while forgot:
Yet, when both Fame, and life has left those men,
My Verse and I Will revive, and live again.
So thus enclosed, I bear afflictions load,
But with more true content then some abroad;
For whilst their thoughts, do feel my Scourges sting,
In bands I Will leap, and dance, and laugh, and sing.

Alexis. Why now I see thou droup'st not with thy care,
Neither exclaim'st thou on thy hunting day;
But do with unchanged resolution bear,
The heavy burden of exile away.
All that did truly know thee, did conceive,
Thy actions with thy spirit still agreed;
Their good conceit thou do no whit bereave,
But show that thou art still thy self indeed.
If that thy mind to baseness now descends,
Thou Wilt iniure Virtue, and deceive thy friends.

Willie. Alexis, he will iniure Virtue much,
But more his friends, and most of all himself,
If on that common bar his mind but touch,
It wrackes his fame upon disgraces shelfe.
Whereas if thou steer on that happy course,
Which in thy just adventure is begun;
No thwarting Tide, nor adverse blast shall force
Thy Bark without the Channels bounds to run.
Thou art the same thou were, for ought I see,
When thou did freely on the Mountains hunt,
In nothing changed yet, unless it be
More merrily disposed then thou were wont.
Still keep thee thus, so other shall know,
Virtue can give content in midst of woe.
And she (though mightines with frowns does threat)
That, to be Innocent, is to be great.
Thrive and farewell. --

Alexis. -- In this thy trouble flourish.

Cuddy. While those that wish thee ill, fret, pine, and perish.

The Shepherds Hunting.
The fourth Eglogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Philaret on Willy calls,
To sing out his Pastorals:
Warrants Fame shall grace his Rimes,
Spite of Envy and the Times;
And shows how in care he uses,
To take comfort from his Muses.
PHILARETE. WILLIE. Philarete. Prithee, Willy tell me this,
What new accident there is,
That thou (once the blythest Lad)
Art become so wondrous sad?
And so careless of thy quill,
As if thou had lost thy skill?
Thou were wont to charm thy flocks,
And among the massy rocks
Have so cheered me with thy Song,
That I have forgot my wrong.
Something has thee surely crossed,
That thy old wont thou have lost.
Tell me: Have I ought mis-said
That has made thee ill-apaid?
Has some Churl done thee a spite?
Do thou miss a Lamb to night?
Frowns thy fairest Shepherds Less?
Or how comes this ill to pass?
Is there any discontent
Worse then this my banishment?

Willie. Why, does that so evil seem
That thou nothing worst do deem?
Shepherds, there full many be,
That will change Contents with thee.
Those that choose their Walks at will,
On the Valley or the Hill.
Or those pleasures boast of can,
Groves or Fields may yield to man:
Never come to know the rest,
Wherewithal thy mind is blessed.
Many a one that often resorts
To make up the troop at sports.
And in company some while,
Happens to strain forth a smile:
Feels more want, and outward smart,
And more inward grief of heart
Then this place can bring to thee,
While thy mind remains free.
Thou bewail'st my want of mirth,
But what find'st thou in this earth,
Wherein ought may be believed
Worth to make me Joyed; or grieved?
And yet feel I (naithelesse)
Part of both I must confess.
Sometime, I of mirth do borrow,
Otherwhile as much of sorrow;
But, my present state is such,
As, nor Joy, nor grieve I much.

Philarete. Why, has Willy then so long
Thus forborne his wonted Song?
Wherefore does he now let fall,
His well tuned Pastoral?
And my ears that music bar,
Which I more long after far,
Then the liberty I want.

Willy. That, were very much to grant,
But, does this hold always lad,
Those that sing not, must be sad?
Did thou ever that Bird hear
Sing well; that sings all the year?
Tom the Piper does not play
Till he wears his Pipe away:
There Is a time to slack the string,
And a time to leave to sing.

Philarete. Yea; but no man now is still,
That can sing, or tune a quill.
Now to chant it, were but reason;
Song and Music are in season.
Now in this sweet jolly tide,
Is the earth in all her pride:
The fair Lady of the May
Trimmed up in her best array;
Has invited all the Swains,
With the Lasses of the Plains,
To attend upon her sport
At the places of resort.
Coridon (with his bold Rout)
Has already been about
For the elder Shepherds dole,
And fetched in the Summer-Pole:
Whilst the rest have built a Bower,
To defend them from a shower;
Seil'd so close, with boughs all green,
Tytan cannot pry between.
Now the Dayrie-Wenches dream
Of their Strawberries and Cream:
And each does her self advance
To be taken in, to dance:
Every one that knows to sing,
Fits him for his Carrolling:
So do those that hope for meede,
Either by the Pipe or Reed:
And though I am kept away,
I do hear (this very day)
Many learned Grooms do wend,
For the Garlands to contend.
Which a Nymph that hight Desert,
(Long a stranger in this part)
With her own fair hand has wrought
A rare work (they say) past thought,
As appears by the name,
For she calls them Wreathes of Fame.
She has set in their due place
Every flower that may grace;
And among a thousand more,
(Whereof some but serve for show)
She has woue in Daphnes tree,
That they may not blasted be.
Which with Time she edged about,
Least the work should rauell out.
And that it might wither never,
I intermixed it with Liue-euer.
These are to be shared among,
Those that do excel for song:
Or their passions can rehearse
In the smooth'st and sweetest verse.
Then, for those among the rest,
That can play and pipe the best.
There Is a Kidling with the Damme,
A fat Weather, and a Lamb.
And for those that leapen far,
Wrestle, Run, and throw the Bar,
There Is appointed guerdons to.
He, that best, the first can do,
Shall, for his reward, be paid,
With a Sheep-hooke, fair in-laid
With fine Bone, of a strange Beast
That men bring out of the West.
For the next, a Scrip of red,
Tassel'd with fine colored Thread,
There Is prepared for their meed,
That in running make most speed,
(Or the cunning Measures foot)
Cups of turned Maple-roote:
Whereupon the skillful man
Has ingrau'd the Loves of Pan:
And the last has for his due,
A fine Napkin wrought with blew.
Then, my Willy, why art thou
Careless of thy merit now?
What do thou here, with a wight
That is shut up from delight,
In a solitary den,
As not fit to live with men?
Go, my Willy, get thee gone,
Leave me in exile alone.
Hye thee to that merry throng,
And amaze them with thy Song.
Thou art young, yet such a Lay
Never graced the month of May,
As (if they provoke thy skill)
Thou can fit unto thy Quill,
I with wonder heard thee sing,
At our last years Reuelling.
Then I with the rest was free,
When unknown I noted thee:
And perceived the ruder Swains,
Envy thy far sweeter strains.
Yea, I saw the Lasses cling
Round about thee in a Ring:
As if each one jealous were,
Any but her self should hear.
And I know they yet do long
For the res'due of thy song.
Have thee then to sing it forth;
Take the benefit of worth.
And Desert will sure bequeath
Fames fair Garland for thy wreath,
Hye thee, Willy, hye away.

Willy. Phila, rather let me stay,
And be desolate with thee,
Then at those their Revels be,
Naught such is my skill I wis,
As indeed thou deem'st it is.
But what ere it be, I must
Be content, and shall I trust.
For a Song I do not pass,
Mong'st my friends, but what (alas)
Should I have to do with them
That my Music do contemn?
Some there are, as well I wot,
That the same yet favor not:
Yet I cannot well auow,
They my Carrols disalow:
But such malice I have spid,
It Is as much as if they did.

Philarete. Willy, What may those men be,
Are so ill, to malice thee?

Willy. Some are worthy-well esteemed,
Some without worth are so deemed.
Others of so base a spirit,
They have nor esteem, nor merit.

Philarete. What Is the wrong? --

Willy. -- A slight offense,
Wherewithal I can dispense;
But hereafter for their sake.
To my self I Will music make.

Philarete. What, because some Clown offends,
Will thou punish all thy friends?

Willy. Do not, Phill, mis-vnderstand me,
Those that love me may command me,
But, thou know, I am but young,
And the Pastoral I sung,
Is by some supposed to be,
(By a strain) too high for me:
So they kindly let me gain,
Not my labor for my pain.
Trust me, I do wonder why
They should me my own deny.
Though I Am young, I scorn to flit
On the wings of borrowed wit.
I Will make my own feathers rear me,
Whither others cannot bear me.
Yet I Will keep my skill in store,
Till I Have seen some Winters more

Pillarete. But, in earnest, mean thou so?
Then thou art not wise, I trow:
Better shall advise thee Pan,
For thou do not rightly than:
That Is the ready way to blot
All the credit thou have got.
Rather in thy Ages prime,
Get another start of Time:
And make those that so fond be,
(Spite of their own dullness) see,
That the sacred Muses can
Make a child in years, a man.
It is known what thou can do,
For it is not long ago,
When that Cuddy, Thou, and I,
Each the others skill to try,
At Saint Dunstanes charmed well,
(As some present there can tell)
Sang upon a sudden Theme,
Sitting by the Crimson stream.
Where, if thou did well or no,
Yet remains the Song to show,
Much experience more I Have had,
Of thy skill (thou happy Lad)
And would make the world to know it;
But that time will further show it.
Envy makes their tongues now run
More then doubt of what is done.
For that needs must be thy own,
Or to be some others known:
But how then will it suit unto
What thou shall hereafter do?
Or I wonder where is he,
Would with that song part to thee.
Nay, were there so mad a Swain,
Could such glory sell for gain;
Phoebus would not have combined,
That gift with so base a mind.
Never did the Nine impart
The sweet secrets of their Art,
Unto any that did scorn,
We should see their favors worn.
Therefore unto those that say,
Where they pleased to sing a Lay.
They could do it, and will not tho;
This I speak, for this I know:
None ere drunk the Thespian spring,
And knew how, but he did sing.
For, that once infused in man.
Makes him shew't do what he can.
Nay, those that do only sip,
Or, but even their fingers dip
In that sacred Fount (poor Elues)
Of that brood will show themselves.
Yea, in hope to get them fame,
They will speak, though to their shame.
Let those then at thee repine,
That by their wits measure thine;
Needs those Songs must be thine own,
And that one day will be known.
That poor imputation to,
I my self do undergo:
But it will appear ere long,
That 'twas Envy sought our wrong.
Who at twice-ten have sung more,
Then some will do, at fourscore,
Cheer thee (honest Willy) then,
And begin thy Song again.

Willy. Feign I would, but I do fear
When again my Lines they hear,
If they yield they are my Rimes,
They will feign some other Crimes;
And it is no safe ventring-by
Where we see Detraction ly.
For do what I can, I doubt,
She will pick some quarrel out;
And I often have heard defended,
Little said, is soon amended.

Philarete. See thou not in clearest days,
Often thick fogs cloud Heavens rays.
And that vapors which do breath
From the earths gross womb beneath,
Seem not to us with black steames,
To pollute the Suns bright beams,
And yet vanish into air,
Leaving it (unblemished) fair?
So (my Willy) shall it be
With Detractions breath on thee.
It shall never rise so hie,
As to stain thy Poesy.
As that Sun does often exhale
Vapors from each rotten Vale;
Poesy so sometime draines,
Gross conceits from muddy brains;
Mists of Envy, fogs of spite,
Twixt men's judgments and her light:
But so much her power may do,
That she can dissolve them to.
If thy Verse do bravely tower,
As she makes wing, she gets power:
Yet the higher she does sore,
She Is affronted still the more:
Till she to the highest has past,
Then she rests with fame at last,
Let naught therefore, thee affright:
But make forward in thy flight:
For if I could match thy Rhyme,
To the very Stars I Would clime.
There begin again, and fly,
Till I reached Aeternity.
But (alas) my Muse is slow:
For thy place she flags too low:
Yea, the more's her hapless fate,
Her short wings were clipped of late.
And poor I, her fortune ruing,
Am my self put up a muing.
But if I my Cage can rid,
I Will fly where I never did.
And though for her sake I Am crossed,
Though my best hopes I have lost,
And knew she would make my trouble
Ten times more then ten times double:
I should love and keep her to,
Spite of all the world could do.
For though banished from my flocks,
And confined within these rocks,
Here I waste away the light,
And consume the sullen Night,
She does for my comfort stay,
And keeps many cares away.
Though I misle the flowery Fields,
With those sweets the Spring-tyde yields,
Though I may not see those Groves,
Where the Shepherds chant their Loves,
(And the Lasses more excel,
Then the sweet voyc'd Philomel)
Though of all those pleasures past,
Nothing now remains at last,
But Remembrance (poor relief)
That more makes, then mends my grief:
She Is my minds companion still,
Maugre Enuies evil will.
(Whence she should be driven to,
Were in mortals power to do.)
She does tell me where to borrow
Comfort in the midst of sorrow;
Makes the desolatest place
To her presence be a grace;
And the blackest discontents
To be pleasing ornaments.
In my former days of bliss,
Her divine skill taught me this,
That from every thing I saw,
I could some invention draw:
And raise pleasure to her height,
Through the meanest objects sight.
By the murmr of a spring,
Or the least boughs rusteling.
By a Dazie whose leaves spread,
Shut when Tytan goes to bed;
Or a shady bush or tree,
She could more infuse in me,
Then all Natures beauties can,
In some other wiser man.
By her help I also now,
Make this churlish place allow
Some things that may sweeten gladness,
In the very gall of sadness.
The dull loannesse, the black shade,
That these hanging vaults have made,
The strange Music of the waves,
Beating on these hollow Caves,
This black Den which Rocks embosse
Ouer-growne with eldest Moss.
The rude Portals that give light,
More to Terror then Delight.
This my Chamber of Neglect,
Walled about with Disrespect,
From all these and this dull air,
A fit object for Despair,
She has taught me by her might
To draw comfort and delight.
Therefore thou best earthly bliss,
I will cherish thee for this.
Poesy; thou sweetest content
That e're Heaven to mortals lent:
Though they as a trifle leave thee
Whose dull thoughts cannot conceive thee,
Though thou be to them a scorn,
That to naught but earth are borne:
Let my life no longer be
Then I am in love with thee.
Though our wise ones call thee madness
Let me never taste of gladness.
If I love not thy made fits,
More then all their greatest wits.
And though some too seeming holy,
Do account thy raptures folly:
Thou do teach me to contemn,
What make Knaves and Fools of them.
Oh high power! that often does carry
Men above --

Willie. -- Good Philarete tarry,
I do fear thou will be gone,
Quite above my reach anon.
The kind flames of Poesy
Have now borne thy thoughts so high,
That they up in Heaven be,
And have quite forgotten me.
Call thy self to mind again,
Are these Raptures for a Swain,
That attends on lowly Sheep,
And with simple Herds does keep?

Philarete. Thanks my Willie; I had run
Till that Time had lodged the Sun,
If thou had not made me stay;
But thy pardon here I pray.
Loved Apolo's sacred sire
Had raised up my spirits higher
Through the love of Poesy,
Then indeed they use to fly.
But as I said, I say still,
If that I had Willi's skill,
Envy nor Detractions tongue,
Should ere make me leave my song:
But I Would sing it every day
Till they pined themselves away.
Be thou then advised in this,
Which both just and sitting is:
Finish what thou have begun,
Or at least still forward run.
Hail and Thunder ill he 'l bear
That a blast of wind does fear:
And if words will thus afray thee,
Prithee how will deeds dismay thee?
Do not think so rathe a Song
Can pass through the vulgar throng,
And escape without a touch,
Or that they can hurt it much:
Frosts we see do nip that thing
Which is forward'st in the Spring:
Yet at last for all such lets
Somewhat of the rest it gets.
And l'me sure that so may thou,
Therefore my kind Willie now.
Since thy folding time draws on
And I see thou must be gone,
Thee I earnestly beseech
To remember this my speech
And some little counsel take,
For Philarete his sake:
And I more of this will say,
If thou come next Holy Day.

FINIS.
The Shepherds Hunting.
The fifth Eglogue.
THE ARGUMENT.
Philaret Alexis moves,
To embrace the Muses loves;
Bids him never careful seem,
Of another dis-esteeme:
Since to them it may suffice,
They themselves can justly prize.
PHILARETE. ALEXIS. Philarete. ALexis, if thy worth do not disdain
The humble friendship of a meaner Swain,
Or some more needful business of the day,
Urge thee to be too hasty on thy way;
Come (gentle Shepherd) rest thee here by me,
Beneath the shadow of this broad leau'd tree:
For though I seem a stranger, yet mine eye
Observes in thee the marks of courtesy:
And if my judgment err not, noted to,
More then in those that more would seem to do.
Such Virtues thy rare modesty does hide.
Which by their proper luster I espied;
And though long maskt in silence they have been,
I have a Wisdom through that silence seen,
Yea, I have learned knowledge from thy tongue,
And heard when thou have in concealment sung.
Which me the bolder and more willing made
Thus to inuit thee to this homely shade.
And though (it may be) thou could never spy,
Such worth in me, I might be known thereby:
In thee I do; for here my neighboring Sheep
Upon the border of these Downs I keep:
Where often thou at Pastorals and Plays,
Have graced our Wakes on Summer Holy Days:
And many a time with thee at this cold spring
Met I, to hear your learned shepherds sing,
Saw them disporting in the shady Groves,
And in chaste Sonnets woo their chaster Loves:
When I, endued with the meanest skill,
Among others have been urged to tune my quill.
But, (cause but little cunning I had got)
Perhaps thou saw me, though thou knew'st me not.

Alexis. Yes Philaret, I know thee, and thy name.
Nor is my knowledge grounded all on fame.
Art thou not he, that but this other year,
Seard'st all the Wolves and Foxes in the Sheere?
And in a match at Football lately tried
(Having scarce twenty Satyrs on thy side)
Held'st play: and though assailed kept'st thy stand
Against all the best-tride Ruffians in the Land?
Did thou not then in doleful Sonnets moan,
When the beloved of great Pan was gone?
And at the wedding of fair Them and Rhine,
Sing of their glories to thy Valentine?
I know it, and I must confess that long
In one thing I did do thy nature wrong:
For, till I marked the aim thy Satyrs had,
I thought them ouer-bold, and thee half mad.
But, since I did more nearly on thee look,
I soon perceived that I all had mistook;
I saw that of a Cynicke thou made show,
Where since, I find, that thou were nothing so;
And that of many thou much blame had got,
When as thy Innocence deserved it not.
But that too good opinion thou have seemed
To have of me (not so to be esteemed,)
Preuailes not ought to stay him who does fear,
He rather should reproves then praises hear.
It Is true, I found thee plain and honest to,
Which made me like, then love, as now I do;
And, Phila, though a stranger, this to the I Will say,
Where I do love, I am not coy to stay.

Philarete. Thanks, gentle Swain, that do so soon unfold
What I to thee as gladly would have told*
And thus thy wonted courtesy expressed
In kindly entertaining this request.
Sure, I should iniure much my own content,
Or wrong thy love to stand on complement:
Who have acquaintance in one word begun,
As well as I could in an age have done.
Or by an ouer-weaning slownesse mar
What thy more wisdom has brought on so far.
Then sit thou down, and I Will my mind declare,
As freely, as if we familiars were:
And if thou will but daigne to give me ear,
Something thou may for thy more profit hear.

Alexis. Philarete, I willingly obey.

Philarete. Then know, Alexis, from that very day,
When as I saw thee at thy Shepherds Coat,
Where each (I think) of other took first note;
I mean that Pastor who by Tauies springs,
Chaste Shepherds loves in sweetest numbers sings,
And with his Music (to his greater fame)
Has late made proud the fairest Nymphs of Them.
E'ne then (me thought) I did espy in thee
Some vnperceiu'd and hidden worth to be:
Which, in thy more apparent virtues, shined;
And, among many, I (in thought) deuin'd,
By something my conceit had understood,
That thou were marked one of the Muses brood,
That, made me love thee: and that Love I bear
Begat a Pity, and that Pity, Care:
Pity I had to see good parts concealed,
Care I had how to have that good revealed,
Since it is a fault admits no excuse,
To possess much, and yet put naught in use.
Hereon I vowed (if we two ever met)
The first request that I would strive to get,
Should be but this, that thou would show thy skill,
How thou could tune thy Verses to thy quill:
And teach thy Muse in some well-framed Song,
To show the Art thou have suppressed so long:
Which if my new-acquaintance may obtain,
I will for ever honor this days gain.

Alexis. Alas! my small experience scarce can tell,
So much as where those Nymphs, the Muses, dwell;
Nor (though my ^low conceit still travels on)
Shall I ere reach to drink of Hellicon.
Or, if I might so favored be to taste
What those sweet streams but ouer-flow in waste,
And touch Parnassus, where (...) ^ow'st does lie,
I fear my skill would hardly flag so hie.

Philarete. Despair not Man, the Gods have prized naught
So dear, that may not be with labor bought:
Nor need thy pain be great, since Fate and Heaven,
That (as a blessing) at thy birth have given.

Alexis. Why, say they had? --

Philarete. -- Then use their gifts thou must.
Or be ungrateful, and so be unjust:
For if it cannot truly be denied,
Ingratitude men's benefits do hide;
Then more ungrateful must he be by ods,
Who does conceal the bounty of the Gods.

Alexis. That Is true indeed, but Envy haunteth those
Who seeking Fame, their hidden skill disclose:
Where else they might (obscured) from her espying,
Escape the blasts and danger of envying:
Cryticks will censure our best strains of Wit,
And pur-blind Ignorance misconster it.
And which is bad, (yet worse then this does follow)
Most hate the Muses, and contemn Apollo.

Philarete. So let them: why should we their hate esteem?
Is It not enough we of our selves can deem?
It Is more to their disgrace that we scorn them,
Then unto us that they our Art contemn.
Can we have better pastime then to see
Their gross heads may so much deceived be,
As to allow those doings best, where wholly
We scoff them to their face, and flout their folly?
Or to behold black Envy in her prime,
^^e selfe-consum'd, whilst we vie lives with time:
And, in despite of her, more same attain,
Then all her malice can wipe out again?

Alexis. Yea, but if I applied me to those strains,
Who should drive forth my Flocks unto the plains,
Which, whilst the Muses rest, and leisure crave,
Must watering, folding, and attendance have?
For if I leave with wonted care to cherish
Those tender herds, both I and they should perish.

Philarete. Alexis, now I see thou do mistake,
There is no meaning thou thy Charge forsake;
Nor would I wish thee so thy self abuse,
As to neglect thy calling for thy Muse.
But, let these two, so each of other borrow,
That they may season mirth, and lessen sorrow.
Thy Flock will help thy charges to defray,
Thy Muse to pass the long and teadious day:
Or whilst thou tun'st sweet measures to thy Reed,
Thy Sheep, to listen, will more near thee feed;
The Wolves will shun them, birds above thee sing,
And Lamkins dance about thee in a Ring.
Nay, which is more; in this thy low estate,
Thou in contentment shall with Monarks mate:
For mighty Pan, and Ceres, to us grants,
Our Fields and Flocks shall help our outward wants:
The Muses teach us Songs to put off cares,
Graced with as rare and sweet conceits as theirs:
And we can think our Lasses on the Greenes
As fair, or fairer, then the fairest Queens:
Or, what is more then most of them shall do,
We Will make their iuster fames last longer to,
And have our Lines by greatest Princes graced
When both their name and memori's defaced.
Therefore, Alexis, though that some disdain
The heavenly Music of the Rural plain,
What is it to us, if they (o'reseene) contemn
The dainties which were nere ordained for them?
And though that there be other-some envy
The praises due to sacred Poesy,
Let them disdain, and fret till they are weary,
We in our selves have that shall make us merry:
Which, he that wants, and had the power to know it,
Would give his life that he might die a Poet.

Alexis: A brave persuasion. --

Philarete. -- Here thou see me pent
Within the jaws of strict imprisonment;
A fore-lorne Shepherd, void of all the means.
Whereon Man's common hope in danger leanes,
Weak in my self, exposed to the Hate
Of those whose Enuies are insatiate:
Shut from my friends, banished from all delights;
Nay worse, excluded from the sacred Rites.
Here I do live among out-lawes marked for death.
As one unfit to draw the common breath,
Where those who to be good did never know,
Are barred from the means should make them so*
I suffer, cause I wished my Country well,
And what I more must bear I cannot tell.
I Am sure they give my Body little scope,
And would allow my Mind as little Hope:
I waste my Means, which of it self is slender,
Consume my Time (perhaps my fortunes hinder)
And many Crosses have, which those that can
Conceive no wrong that hurts another man,
Will not take note of; though if half so much
Should light on them, or their own person touch,
Some that themselves (I fear) most worthy think,
With all their helps would into baseness shrink.
But, spite of Hate, and all that Spite can do,
I can be patient yet, and merry to.
That slender Muse of mine, by which my Name,
Though scarce deserved, has gained a little fame,
Has made me unto such a Fortune borne,
That all misfortunes I know how to scorn;
Yea, midst these bands can slight the Great'st that be,
As much as their disdain misteemes of me.
This Cave, whose very presence some affrights,
I have often made to Echo forth delights,
And hope to turn, if any Justice be,
Both shame and care on those that wished it me.
For while the World rank villainies affords,
I will not spare to paint them out in words;
Although I still should into troubles run,
I knew what man could act, ere I begun;
And I Will fulfill what my Muse draws me to,
Maugre all Iayles, and Purgatories to.
For whilst she sets me honest task's about,
Virtue, or she, (I know) will bear me out:
And if, by Fate, the abused power of some
Must, in the worlds-eye, leave me overcome,
They shall find one Fort yet. so fenced I trow,
It cannot fear a Mortals ouer-throw.
This Hope, and Trust, that great power did infuse,
That first inspired into my breast a Muse,
By whom I do, and ever will contemn
All those ill haps, my foes despite, and them.

Alexis. Thou Have so well (young Philaret) played thy part,
I am almost in love with that sweet Art:
And if some power will but inspire my song,
Alexis will not be obscured long.

Philarete. Enough kind Pastor: But oh! yonder see
Two honest Shepherds walking hither, be
Cuddy and Willy, that so dearly love,
Who are repairing unto yonder Grove:
Let Us follow them: for never brauer Swains
Made music to their flocks upon these Plains.
They are more worthy, and can better tell
What rare contents do with a Poet dwell.
Then whiles our sheep the short sweet grass do sheare
And till the long shade of the hills appear,
We Will hear them sing: for though the one be young,
Never was any that more sweetly sung.

A Postscript.
To the Reader.
IF you have read this, and received any content, I am glad, (though it be not
so much as I could wish you) if you think it idle, why then I see we are not
likely to fall out; for I am just of your minds; yet weigh it well before you
run too far in your censures, lest this prove less barren of Wit, then you
of courtesy. It is very true (I know not by what chance) that I have of late
been so highly beholding to Opinion, that I wonder how I crept so much into her
favor, and if I did think it worthy the fearing) I should be afraid that she
having so undeservedly befriended me beyond my Hope or expectation, will, upon
as little cause, ere long, again pick some quarrel against me; and it may
be, means to make use of this, which I know must needs come far short of
their expectation, who by their earnest desire of it, seemed to be fore-possest
with a far better conceit, then I can believe it proves worthy of. So much
at least I doubted, and therefore loath to deceive the world (though it often
beguile me) I kept it to my self, indeed, not dreaming ever to see it
published: But now, by the overmuch persuasion of some friends, I have been
constrained to expose it to the general view. Which seeing I have done,
somethings I desire thee to take notice of. First, that I am He, who to
pleasure my friend, have framed my self a content out of that which would
otherwise discontent me. Secondly, that I have coueted more to effect what I
think truly honest in it self, then by a seeming show of Art, to catch the
vain blastes of uncertain Opinion. This that I have here written, was no part
of my study, but only a recreation in imprisonment: and a trifle, neither in
my conceit fitting, nor by me intended to be made common; yet some, who it
should seem esteemed it worthy more respect then I did, took pains to copy
it out, unknown to me, and in my absence got it both Authorized and prepared
for the Press; so that if I had not hindered it, last Michaelmas-Tearme had
been troubled with it. I was much blamed by some Friends for withstanding it,
to whose request I should more easily have consented, but that I thought (as
indeed I yet do) I should thereby more disparage my self, then content them.
For I doubt J shall be supposed one of those, who out of their arrogant desire
of a little preposterous Fame, thrust into the world every unseasoned trifle
that drops out of their unsettled brains; whose baseness how much I hate,
those that know me can witness, for if I were so affected, I might perhaps
present the World with as many several Poems, as I have seen years; and
justly make my self appear to be the Author of some things that others have
shamefully usurped and made use of as their own. But I will be content other
men should own some of those Issues of the Brain, for J would be loath to
confess all that might in that kind call me Father. Neither shall any more of
them, by my consent, in have again trouble the world, unless I know which way
to benefit it with less prejudice to my own estate. And therefore if any of
those less serious Poems which are already dispersed into my friends hands,
come amongst you, let not their publication be imputed to me, nor their
lightness be any disparagement to what has been since more serious written,
seeing it is but such stuff as riper judgments have in their far elder
years been much more guilty of.

I know an indifferent Crittick may find many faults, as well in the
slightness of this present Subject, as in the erring from the true nature of
an Eglogue: moreover, it altogether concerns my self, which diverse may
dislike. But neither can be done on just cause: The first has bin answered
already: The last might consider that I was there where my own estate was
chiefly to be looked unto, and all the comfort I could minister unto my self,
little enough.

If any man deem it worthy his reading I shall be glad: if he think his
pains ill bestowed, let him blame himself for meddling with that concerned him
not: I neither commended it to him, neither cared whether he read it or no;
because I know those that were desirous of it, will esteem the same as much as
I expect they should.

But it is not unlikely, some will think I have in diverse places been more
wanton (as they take it) then befitting a Satirict; yet their severity I fear
not, because J am assured all that I ever yet did, was free from Obscaenity:
neither am I so Cynical, but that I think a modest expression of such amorous
conceits as suit with Reason, will yet very well become my years; in which not
to have feeling of the power of Love, were as great an argument of much
stupidity, as an ouersottish affection were of extreme folly. Lastly, if you
think it has not well answered the Title of the Shepherds Hunting, go
quarrel with the Stationer, who bid himself Godfather, and imposed the Name
according to his own liking; and if you, or he, find any faults, pray mend
them.

Valete.
FINIS.
FIDELIA: BY GEORGE WITHER. GENT:



LONDON, Printed by T. S. for John Budge, dwelling in Pauls-Church-yard, at the
sign of the Green Dragon, 1622.

An Elegiacall Epistle of Fidelia, to her unconstant Friend.
THE ARGUMENT.
This Elegiacall Epistle, being a fragment of some greater Poem, discouers the
modest affections of a discreet and constant Woman, shadowed under the name of
Fidelia; wherein you may perceive the height of their Passions, so far as
they seem to agree with reason, and keep within such decent bounds as
beseems their Sex, but further it meddles not. The occasion seems to proceed
from some mutability in her friend, whose objections she here presupposing,
confuteth, and in the person of him justly vpbraideth all that are subject to
the like change, or sicklenesse in mind. Among the rest, some more weighty
Arguments then are (perhaps) expected in such a subject, are briefly, and yet
somewhat seriously handled.

Often I have heard tell, and now for truth I find,
Once out of sight, and quickly out of mind.
And that it has been rightly said of old,
Love that is soon'st hot, is ever soonest cold.
Or else my tears at this time had not stained
The spotless paper, nor my lines complained.
I had not now, been forced to have sent
These lines for Nuncio's of my discontent;
Nor thus, exchanged, so unhappily,
My songs of Mirth, to write an Elegy.
But, now I must; and, since I must do so,
Let me but crave, thou will not flout my woe:
Nor entertain my sorrows with a scoff,
But, read (at least) before thou cast them off.
And, though thy heart's too hard to have compassion,
Oh blame not, if thou pity not my Passion,
For well thou know (alas, that er'e 'twas known)
There was a time (although that time be gone)
I, that for this, scarce dare a beggar be,
Presumed for more to have commanded thee.
Yea, the Day was, (but see how things may change)
When thou, and I, have not been half so strange;
But often embraced each other, gently greeting,
With such kind words, as Turtle, Dove, or Sweeting.
Yea, had thy meaning, and those vows of thine,
Proved but as faithful, and as true as mine,
It still had been so: for (I do not feign)
I should rejoice it might be so again.
But, since thy Love grows cold, and thou unkind,
Be not displeased I somewhat breath my mind;
I am in hope, my words may prove a mirror,
Whereon thou looking, may behold thine error.
And yet, the Heaven, and my sad heart does know,
How griu'd I am, and with what feeling woe
My mind is tortured, to think that I
Should be the brand of thy disloyalty:
Or, live to be the Author of a line
That shall be printed with a fault of thine;
(Since if that thou but slightly touched be,
Deep wounds of grief, and shame, it strikes in me:)
And yet I must; ill hap compels me to
What I nere thought to have had cause to do.
And therefore, seeing that some angry Fate
Imposes on me, what I so much hate:
Or, since it is so, that the Powers divine
Me (miserable) to such cares assign;
Oh that Loves patron, or some sacred Muse,
Amongst my Passions, would such Art infuse,
My well-fram'd words, and aerie sighs might prove
The happy blasts to re-inflame thy love.
Or, at least, touch thee with thy fault so near,
That thou might see thou wrong'st, who held thee dear:
Seeing, confess the same, and so abhor it,
Abhorring, pity, and repent thee for it.
But (Dear) I hope that I may call thee so,
(For thou art dear to me, although a foe)
Tell me, is it true, that I do hear of thee,
And, by thy absence, true appears to be?
Can such abuse be in the Court of Love,
False and inconstant now, thou He should prove?
He, that so woeful, and so pensive sat,
Vowing his service at my feet of late?
Art thou that quondam lover, whose sad eye
I seldom saw yet, in my presence dry?
And from whose gentle-seeming tongue I know
So many pitty-mouing words could flow?
Was It thou, so soughtst my love, so seeking that
As if it had been all thou had aimed at?
Making me think thy Passion without stain,
And gently quite thee with my love again?
With this persuasion I so fairly placed it,
Nor Time, nor Envy, should have ere defaced it?
Is It so? have I done thus much? and art thou
So ouer-cloyed with my favors now?
Art wearsed since with loving, and estranged
So far? Is thy affection so much changed,
That I of all my hopes must be deceived,
And all good thoughts of thee be quite bereaved?
Then true I find, which long before this day
I feared my self, and heard some wiser say;
That there is naught on earth so sweet, that can
Long relish with the curious taste of Man.
Happy was I; yea, well it was with me,
Before I came to be bewitched by thee.
I joyed the sweet'st content that ever Maid
Possessed yet; and truly well-a-paid,
Made to my self (alone) as pleasant mirth
As ever any Virgin did on earth.
The melody I used was free, and such
As that Bird makes, whom never hand did touch;
But, vn-allur'd, (with Fowlers whistling) flies
Above the reach of humane treacheries.
And (well I do remember) often then
Could I read over the policies of men;
Discover what uncertainties they were;
How they would sigh, look sad, protest, and swear;
Nay, faigne to die, when they did never prove
The slendrest touch of a right-worthy love:
But had chil'd hearts, whose dullness understood
No more of Passion, then they did of good.
All which I noted well, and in my mind
(A general humor amongst women-kinde)
This vow I made; (thinking to keep it than)
That never the fair tongue of any man,
Nor his complaint, though never so much grieved,
Should move my heart to liking whilst I lived.
But, who can say, what she shall live to do?
I have believed, and let in liking to,
And that so far, I cannot yet see how
I may so much as hope, to help it now;
Which makes me think, what e're we women say,
Another mind will come another day.
And that men may to things vnhop'd for clime,
Who watch but Opportunity and Time.
For it is well known, we were not made of clay,
Or such course, and ill-temper'd stuff as they.
For he that framed us of their flesh, did daigne
When 'twas at best, to new refine't again.
Which makes us ever since the kinder Creatures,
Of far more flexible, and yielding Natures.
And as we often excel in outward parts,
So we have nobler and more gentle hearts.
Which, you well knowing, daily do devise
How to imprint on them your Cruelties.
But do I sinde my cause thus bad indeed?
Or else on things imaginary feed?
Am I the less that late so truly jolly,
Made my self merry often, at others folly?
Am I the Nymph that Cupids fancies blamed,
That was so cold, so hard to be inflamed?
Am I my self? or is my self that She
Who from this Thraldom, or such falsehoods free,
Late owned mine own heart, and full merry then,
Did fore-warne others to beware of Men?
And could not, having taught them what to do,
Now learn my self, to take heed of you to?
Fool that I am, I fear my guerdon's just,
In that I knew this, and presumed to trust.
And yet (alas) for ought that I could tell,
One spark of goodness in the world might dwell:
And then, I thought, If such a thing might be,
Why might not that one spark remain in thee?
For thy fair outside, and thy fayrer tongue,
Did promise much, although thy years were young.
And Virtue (wheresoever she be now)
Seemed then, to sit enthroned upon thy brow.
Yea, sure it was: but, whether 'twere or no,
Certain I am, and was persuaded so.
Which made me loath to think, that words of fashion,
Could be so framed, so ouer-laid with Passion;
Or sighs so feeling, feigned from any breast.
Nay, say thou had been false in all the rest;
Yet from thy eye, my heart such notice took,
Me thought, guile could not feign so sad a look.
But now I Have tried, my bought experience knows,
They often are worst that make the fairest shows.
And howsoever men feign an outward grieuing,
It Is neither worth respecting, nor believing:
For, she that does one to her mercy take,
Warmes in her bosom but a frozen snake:
Which heated with her favors, gather sense,
And stings her to the heart in recompense.
But tell me why, and for what secret spite
You in poor women's miseries delight?
For so it seems; else why do you labor for
That, which when it is obtained, you abhor?
Or to what end do you endure such pain
To win our love, and cast it off again?
Oh that we either your hard hearts could borrow,
Or else your strengths, to help us bear our sorrow:
But we are cause of all this grief and shame,
And we have none but our own selves to blame:
For still we see your falsehood for our learning.
Yet never can have power to take it for warning;
But (as if borne to be deluded by you)
We know you trustlesse, and yet still we try you.
(Alas) what wrong was in my power to do thee?
Or what despite have I er'e done unto thee?
That thou should choose Me, above all the rest,
To bethy scorn, and thus be made a jest?
Must men's il natures such true villains prove them,
To make the^ wrong those most that most do love them;
Could thou find none in Country, Town or Court,
But only Me, to make thy Fool, thy sport?
Thou know I have no wanton courses run,
Nor seemed easy unto lewdness won.
And (though I cannot boast me of much wit,)
Thou saw no sign of fondness in me yet.
Nor did ill nature ever so ore-sway me,
To flout at any that did woe or pray me,
But grant I had been guilty of abusage,
Of thee I Am sure I never deserved such usage.
But thou were grieved to behold my smilings.
When I was free from love, and thy beguilings.
Or to what purpose else did thou bestow
Thy time, and study to delude me so?
Have thou good parts? and do thou bend them all
To bring those that never hated thee in thrall?
Prithee take heed, although thou yet inioy'st them
They Will be took from thee, if thou so imploy'st them.
For though I wish not the least harm to thee,
I fear, the just Heavens will revenged be.
Oh! what of Me by this time had become,
If my desires with thine had hapt to rome,
Or I, unwisely, had consented to
What (shameless) once thou did attempt to do?
I might have fallen, by those immodest tricks,
Had not some power been stronger then my Sex.
And if I should have so been drawn to folly,
I saw thee apt enough to be unholy.
Or if my weakness had been prone to sin,
I poorly by thy strength had succored bin.
You Men make us believe you do but try,
And that is your part, (you say) ours to deny.
Yet I much fear, if we through frailty stray,
There Is few of you within your bounds will stay;
But, maugre all your seeming Virtue, be
As ready to forget your selves, as we.
I might have feared thy part of love not strong,
When thou did offer me so base a wrong:
And that I after loathed thee not, did prove
In me some extraordinary Love.
For sure had any other but in thought,
Presumed unworthily what thou have sought,
Might it appear, I should do thus much for him,
With a scarce reconciled hate abhor him.
My young experience never yet did know
Whether desire might range so far, or no,
To make true Lovers carelessly request,
What rash enioyning makes them most unblessed,
Or blindly through frailty give consenting
To that, which done brings nothing but repenting.
But in my judgment it does rather prove
That they are fired with lust, then warmed with love.
And if it be for proof men so proceed,
It shows a doubt, else what do trials need?
And where is that man living ever knew
That false distrust, could be with love that is true?
Since the mere cause of that vnblam'd effect,
Such an opinion is, that hates suspect.
And yet, thee and thy love I will excuse,
If thou will neither me, nor mine abuse.
For, I Will suppose thy passion made thee proffer
That unto me, thou to none else would offer,
And so, think thou, if I have thee denied,
Whom I more loved then all men else beside;
What hope have they such favor to obtain,
That never half so much respect could gain?
Such was my love, that I did value thee
Above all things below eternity.
Nothing on Earth unto my heart was nearer
No Joy so prized, nor no Jewel dearer.
Nay: I do fear I did Idolatrize;
For which Heavens wrath inflicts these miseries,
And makes the things which were for blessings lent,
To be renewers of my discontent.
Where was there any of the Naiades,
The Dryad's, or the Hamadryades?
Which of the British shires can yield again,
A mistress of the Springs, or Wood, or Plain?
Whose eye enjoyed more sweet contents then mine,
Till I received my overthrow by thine?
Where Is she did more delight in Springs and Rils?
Where Is she that walked more Groves, or Downs, or Hills?
Or could by such fair artlesse prospect, more
Add by conceit, to her contentments store
Then I; whilst thou were true, and with thy Graces
Did give a pleasing presence to those places?
But now What is? What was has overthrown,
My Rose decked allies, now with Rue are strowne;
And from those flowers that honyed use to be,
I suck naught now but juice to poison me.
For even as she, whose gentle spirit can raise,
To apprehend Loves noble mysteries,
Spying a precious Jewel richly set,
Shine in some corner of her Cabenet,
Takes delight at first to gaze upon
The pretty luster of the sparkling stone,
(And pleased in mind, by that does seem to see
How virtue shines through base obscurity;)
But prying nearer, seeing it does prove
Some relic of her dear deceased Love,
Which to her sad remembrance does lay open,
What she most sought, and sees most far from hope:
Fainting almost beneath her Passions weight,
And quite forgetful of her first conceit:
Looking upon it again, from thence she borrowes
Sad melancholy thoughts to feed her sorrows.
So I beholding Natures curious bowers,
Seel'd, strow'd, and trimmed up with leaves, herbs, and flowers.
Walk pleased on a while, and do deuize,
How on each object I may moralize.
But er'e I pace on many steps, I see
There stands a Hawthorne that was trimmed by thee:
Here thou did once slip off the virgin sprayes,
To crown me with a wreath of living Bays.
On such a Bank I see how thou did lie,
When viewing of a shady Muthery,
The hard mishap thou did to me discuss
Of loving Thysbe, and young Piramus:
And oh (think I) how pleasing was it then,
Or would be yet, might he return again.
But if some neighboring Row do draw me to
Those Arbors, where the shadows seem to woo
The weary loue-sicke Passenger, to sit
And view the beauties Nature strowes on it;
How fair (think I) would this sweet place appear,
If he I love, were present with me here.
Nay, every several object that I see,
Does severally (me thinks) remember thee.
But the delight I used from thence to gather,
I now exchange for ears, and seek them rather.
But those whose dull and gross affections can
Extend but only to desire a Man,
Cannot the depth of these rare Passions know:
For their imaginations flagge too low.
And cause their base Conceits do apprehend
Nothing but that whereto the flesh does tend;
In Loves embraces they near reach unto
More of content than the brute Creatures do.
Neither can any judge of this, but such
Whose brauer minds for brauer thoughts do touch.
And having spirits of a nobler frame,
Feel the true heat of Loves unquenched flame.
They may conceive aright what smarting sting
To their Remembrances the place will bring,
Where they did once enjoy, and then do miss,
What to their souls most dear and precious is.
With me it is so; for those walks that once seemed
Pleasing, when I of thee was more esteemed,
To me appear most desolate and lonely,
And are the places now of torment only.
Where I the highest of contents did borrow,
There am I paid it home with deepest sorrow.
Unto one place, I do remember well,
We walked the eu'nings to hear Phylomel:
And that seems now to want the light it had,
The shadow of the Groue's more dull and sad,
As if it were a place but fit for Fowls,
That screech ill-lucke; as melancholy Owls,
Or fatal Ravens, that seld' boding good,
^^^ke their black Auguries from some dark wood.
Then if from thence I half despairing go,
Another place begins another woe:
For thus unto my thought it semes to say,
Hither thou saw him riding once that way:
Thither to meet him thou did nimbly have thee,
You he alighted, and even there embraced thee:
Which whilst I sighing wish to do again,
Another object brings another pain.
For passing by that Green, which (could it speak)
Would tell it saw us run at Barly-breake;
There I beheld, what on a thin rin'd tree
Thou had engraven for the love of me;
When we two, all one in heat of day,
With chaste embraces drove swift hours away.
Then I remember to (unto my smart)
How loath we were, when time compelled to part;
How cunningly thy Passions thou could feign,
In taking leave, and coming back again:
So often, until (as seeming to forget
We were departing) down again we set?
And freshly in that sweet discourse went on,
Which now I almost faint to think upon.
Viewing again those other walks and Groves
That have been witnesses of our chaste loves;
When I beheld those Trees whose tender skin
Has that cut out, which still cuts me within.
Or come, by chance, unto that pretty Rill
Where thou would fit, and teach the neighboring hill
To answer, in an Echo, unto those
Rare Problems which thou often did propose.
When I come there (think I) if these could take
That use of words and speech which we partake,
They might unfold a thousand pleasures then
Which I shall never live to taste again.
And thereupon, Remembrance does so rack
My thoughts, with representing what I lack,
That in my mind those Clerks do argue well,
Which hold Privation the great'st plague of hell.
For there is no torment gripes me half so bad,
As the Remembrance of those joys I had.
Oh have thou quite forgot, when sitting by
The banks of Them, beholding how the Fry
Played on the siluer-waues? There where I first
Granted to make my Fortune thus accursed;
There where thy too-too earnest suit compeld
My ouer-soone believing heart to yield
One favor first, which then another drew
To get another, till (alas) I rue
That day and hour, thinking I nere should need
(As now) to grieve for doing such a deed.
So freely I my courtesies bestowed,
That whose I was unwarily I showed:
And to my heart such passage made for thee,
Thou can not to this day removed be,
And what breast could resist it, having seen
How true thy love had in appearance been?
For (I shall never forget) when thou had there
Laid open every discontent and care,
Wherewith thou deeply seem'dst to me oppressed,
When thou (as much as any could protest)
Had vowed and sworn, and yet perceiu'dst no sign
Of pitty-mouing in this breast of mine:
Well Love (sald'st thou) since neither sigh nor vow,
Nor any service may avail me now:
Since neither the recital of my smart,
Nor those strong Passions that assail my heart;
Nor any thing may move thee to belief
Of these my sufferings, or to grant relief:
Since there is no comfort, nor desert, that may
Get me so much as Hope of what I pray;
Sweet Love farewell; farewell fair beauties light,
And every pleasing object of the sight:
My poor despayring heart here bids you,
And all Content, for evermore, adue.
Then even as thou seemd'st ready to depart;
Reaching that hand, which after gave my heart,
(And thinking this sad Farewell did proceed
From a sound breast, but truly moved indeed)
I stayed thy departing from me so,
Whilst I stood mute with sorrow, thou for show.
And the mean while as I beheld thy look,
My eye the impression of such Pity took,
That, with the strength of Passion overcome,
A deep-fetcht sigh my heart came breathing from:
Whereat thou (ever wisely using this
To take advantage when it offered is)
Renewd'st thy suit to me, who did afford
Consent, in silence first, and then in word.
So that for yielding thou may thank thy wit,
And yet when ever I remember it,
Trust me, I muse, and often (wondering) think,
Thorough what craney, or what secret chinke
That Love, unawares so like a slye close Else,
Did to my heart insinuate it self.
Gallants I had, before thou came to woo,
Could as much love, and as well court me to;
And, though they had not learned so the fashion,
Of acting such well counterfeited Passion;
In wit, and person, they did equal thee,
And worthier seemed, unless thou wilt faithful be.
Yet still unmoved, unconquered I remained:
No, not one thought of love was entertained:
Nor could they brag of the least favor to them,
Save what mere courtesy enioyn'd to do them.
Hard was my heart: But would't had harder bin,
And then, perhaps, I had not let thee in;
Thou, Tyrant, that art so imperious there,
And only take delight to Dominere.
But held I out such strong, such often assailing,
And ever kept the honor of prevailing?
Was this poor breast from loves allurings free,
Cruel to all, and gentle unto thee?
Did I unlock that strong affections door,
That never could be broken open before,
Only to thee? and, at thy intercession,
So freely give up all my hearts possession:
That to my self I left not one poor vein,
Nor power, nor will, to put thee from't again?
Did I do this, (and all on thy bare vow)
And will thou thus requite my kindness now?
Oh that thou either had not learned to feign,
Or I had power to cast thee off again!
How is it that thou art become so rude,
And ouer-blinded by Ingratitude?
Swar'st thou so deeply that thou would persevere.
That I might thus be cast away for ever?
Well, then 'as true, that Lovers periuries,
Among some men, are thought no injuries:
And that she only has least cause of grief,
Who of your words has smal'st, or no belief.
Had I the wooer bin, or fondly won,
This had bin more tho, then thou could have don;
But, neither being so, what Reason is
On thy side, that should make thee offer this?
I know, had I been false, or my faith failed,
Thou would at women's fickleness have railed;
And if in me it had an error bin,
In thee shall the same fault be thought no sin?
Rather I hold that which is bad in me,
Will be a greater blemish unto thee:
Because, by Nature, thou art made more strong,
And therefore abler to endure a wrong.
But it is our Fortune, you will have all the power,
Only the Care and Burden must be our.
Nor can you be content a wrong to do,
Unless you say the blame upon us to.
Oh that there were some gentle minded Poet
That knew my heart, as well as now I know it;
And would endeare me to his love so much,
To give the world (though but) a slender touch
Of that sad Passion which now clogs my heart,
And show my truth, and thee how false thou art:
That all might know, what is believed by no man,
There Is fickleness in men, and faith in woman.
Thou saw I first let Pity in, then liking,
And lastly, that which was thy only seeking:
And, when I might have scorned that love of thine,
(As now ungently thou despisest mine,)
Among the inmost Angles of my breast,
To lodge it by my heart I thought it best:
Which thou have stolen to, like a thankelesse Mate,
And left me nothing but a black self hate.
What can thou say for this, to stand contending?
What color have thou left for thy offending?
Thy wit, perhaps, can some excuse devise,
And feign a color for those injuries;
But well I know, if thou excuse this treason,
It must be by some greater thing then reason.
Are any of those virtues yet defaced,
On which thy first affection seemed placed?
Has any secret foe my true faith wronged,
To rob the bliss that to my heart belonged?
What then? shall I condemned be unheard,
Before thou know how I may be cleared?
Thou art acquainted with the times condition,
Know it is full of envy, and suspicion,
So that the war'est in thought, word, and action,
Shall often be injured, by foul-mouthed datraction:
And therefore thou (me-thinkes) should wisely pause
Before thou credit rumors without cause.
But I have gotten such a confidence
In thy opinion, of my innocence:
It is not that, I know, withholds thee now,
Sweet, tell me then; is it some sacred vow?
Have thou resolved, not to join thy hand
With any one in Hymen's holy band?
Thou should have done it then, when thou were free,
Before thou had bequeathed thy self to me.
What vow do deem more pleasing unto Heaven,
Then what is by unfeigned lovers given?
If any be, yet sure it frowneth at
Those that are made for contradicting that.
But, if thou would live chastely all thy life,
That thou may do, though we be man and wife:
Or, if thou long'st a Virgin-death to die,
Why (if it be thy pleasure) so do I.
Make me but thine, and I Will (contented) be
A Virgin still, yet live and lie with thee.
Then let not thy inuenting brain assay
To mock, and still delude me every way;
But call to mind, how thou have deeply sworn
Nor to neglect, nor leave me thus forlorn.
And if thou will not be to me as when
We first did love, do but come see me then.
Vouchsafe that I may sometime with thee walk,
Or sit and look on thee, or hear thee talk;
And I that most content once aimed at,
Will think there is a world of bliss in that.
Do thou suppose that my Desires denies
With thy affections well to sympathize?
Or such perverseness have thou found in me,
May make our Natures disagreeing be?
Thou know when thou did wake I could not sleep;
And if thou were but sad, that I should weep.
Yet (even when the tears my cheek did stain)
If thou did smile, why I could smile again:
I never did contrary thee in ought:
Nay, thou can tell, I often have spoke thy thought.
Waking; the selfsame course with thee I run,
And sleeping, oftentimes our dreams were one.
The Dyall-needle, though it sense does want,
Still bends to the beloved Adamant;
Lift the one up, the other upward tends;
If this fall down, that presently descends:
Turn but about the stone, the steel turns to;
Then straight returns, if so the other do;
And, if it stay, with trembling keeps one place,
As if it (panting) longed for an embrace.
So was it with me: for, if thou merry were,
That mirth of thine, moved joy within my heart:
I sighed to, when thou did sigh or frown:
When thou were sick, thou have perceived me swoone;
And being sad, have often, with forced delight,
Strived to give thee content beyond my might.
When thou would talk, then have I talked with thee,
And silent been, when thou would silent be.
If thou abroad did go, with joy I went;
If home thou lou'dst, at home was my content:
Yea, what did to my Nature disagree,
I could make pleasing, cause it pleased thee.
But, if it be either my weak Sex, or youth,
Makes thee misdoubt my vndistained truth,
Know this; as none (till that unhappy hour,
When I was first madethine,) had ever power
To move my heart, by vows, or tears expense;
No more (I swear) could any Creature since.
No looks but thine, though aimed with Passions Art,
Could pierce so deep to penetrate my heart.
No name but thine, was welcome to my care;
No word did I so soon, so gladly hear:
Nor ever could my eyes behold or see,
What I was since delighted in, but thee.
And sure thou would believe it to be so,
If I could tell, or words might make thee know,
How many a weary night my tumbled bed
Has known me sleepelesse: what salt-teares I Have shed;
What scalding-sighes, the marks of souls oppressed,
Have hourly breathed from my careful breast.
Nor would thou deem those waking sorrows (...)
If thou might see how sleeping I am paind.
For if sometimes I chance to take a slumber,
Unwelcome dreams my broken rest does cumber.
Which dreaming makes me start, starting with fears
Wakes; and so by waking I renew my cares:
Until my eyes ore-tir'd with watch and weeping,
Drowned in their own floods fall again to sleeping.
Oh! that thou could but think, when last we parted,
How much I, grieuing for thy absence, smarted:
My very soul fell sick, my heart to aching,
As if they had their last Farewels been taking;
Or feared by some secret Divination,
This thy revolt, and causeless alteration.
Did thou not feel how loath that hand of mine,
Was to let go the hold it had of thine?
And with what heavy, what unwilling look
I leave of thee, and then of comfort took?
I know thou did; and though now thus thou do,
I am deceived, but then it grieved thee to.
Then, if I so with Loves fell passion vexed
For thy departure only was perplexed,
When I had left to strengthen me some trust;
And hope, that thou would nere have proved unjust:
What was my torture then, and hard endurance,
When of thy falsehood I received assurance.
Alas, my Tongue, awhile, with grief was dumb,
And a cold shuddering did my joints benumme,
Amazement seized my thought, and so prevailed,
I found me ill, but knew not what I ailed.
Nor can I yet tell, since my suffering then
Was more then could be shown by Poets Pen;
Or well conceived by any other heart
Then that which in such care has borne a part.
Oh me; how loath was I to have believed
That to be true, for which so much I grieved?
How gladly would I have persuaded bin,
There had bin no such matter, no such sin.
I would have had my heart think that (I knew
To be the very truth) not to be true.
Why may not this, thought I, some vision be,
Some sleeping dream, or waking fantasy,
Begotten by my ouer-blinded folly,
Or else engendered through my Melancholy?
But finding it so real (thought I) then
Must I be cast from all my hopes again?
What are become of all those fading blisses,
Which late my hope had, and now so much misses?
Where is that future fickle happiness
Which I so long expected to possess?
And, thought I to; where are his dying Passions,
His honied words, his bitter lamentations?
To what end were his Sonnets, Epigrams,
His pretty Posies, witty Anagrams?
I could not think, all that might have been feigned,
Nor any faith, I thought so firm, bin stained.
Nay, I do sure and confidently know,
It is not possible it should be so:
If that rare Art and Passion was thine own,
Which in my presence thou have often shown.
But, since thy change, my much-presaging heart
Is half afraid, thou some impostor were:
Or that thou did but (Player-like addressed)
Act that which flowed from some more gentle breast.
Thy puffed invention, with worse matter swollen,
Those thy conceits from better wits has stolen:
Or else (I know) it could not be, that thou
Should be so ouer-cold as thou art now;
Since those, who have that, feelingly, their own,
Ever possess more worth concealed, then known.
And if Love ever any Mortals touch,
To make a brave impression, it is in such,
Who sworn loves Chaplains, will not violate
That, whereunto themselves they consecrate.
But oh you noble brood, on whom the World
The slighted burden of neglect has hurled,
(Because your thoughts for higher objects borne,
Their groueling humors and affection scorn)
You, whom the Gods, to hear your strains, will follow,
Whilst you do court the sisters of Apollo.
You, whom there is none that is worthy, can neglect,
Or any that unworthy is, affect.
Oh let not those that seek to do you shame,
Bewitch us with those songs they cannot frame:
The noblest of our Sex, and fairest to,
Do ever love and honor such as you.
Then wrong us not so much to give your Passion
To those that have it but in imitation:
And in their dull breasts never feel the power
Of such deep thoughts as sweetly move in your.
As well as you, they us thereby abuse,
For (many times) when we our Lovers choose,
Where we think Nature, that rich Jewel, sets
Which shines in you, we light on counterfets.
But see, see whither coffeehouse bears me,
And to what uncouth strains my Passion reares me:
Yet pardon me, I here, again repent,
If I have erred through that discontent.
Be what thou will, be counterfeit or right,
Be constant, serious, or be vain, or light,
My love remains inuiolate the same,
Thou can be nothing that can quench this flame,
But it will burn as long as thou have breath
To keep it kindled (if not after death)
Nere was there one more true, then I to thee,
And though my faith must now despised be,
Vnpriz'd, unvalued at the lowest rate,
Yet this I Will tell thee, it is not all thy state,
Nor all that better-seeming worth of thine,
Can buy thee such another Love as mine:
Liking it may, but oh there is as much odds,
Twixt love and that, as between men and Gods.
It is a purchase not procured with treasure,
As some fools think, nor to be gaind at pleasure:
For were it so, and any could assure it,
What would not some men part with, to procure it?
But though thou weigh't not, as thou ought to do,
Thou know I love; and once did love me to.
Then where is the cause of this dislike in thee?
Survey thy self, I hope there is none in me.
Yet look on her from whom thou art estranged?
See, is my person, or my beauty changed?
Once thou did praise it, prithee view't again,
And mark ift be not still the same it was then:
No false Vermilion-dye my cheek distaines,
It Is the poor blood dispersed through pores and veins,
Which thou have often seen through my forehead flushing,
To show no dawby-colour hid my blushing:
Nor never shall: Virtue, I hope, will save me,
Contented with that beauty Nature gave me.
Or, ift seem less, for that griefes-vaile had hid it,
Thou threwst it on me, 'twas not I that did it,
And can again restore, what may repair
All that is decayed, and make me far more fair.
Which if thou do, I Will be more wary than
To keep't for thee unblemished, what I can:
And cause at best 'twill want much of perfection,
The rest shall be supplied with true affection.
But I do fear, it is some others riches,
Whose more abundance that thy mind bewitches,
That baser object, that too general aim,
Makes thee my lesser Fortune to disclaim.
Fie, can thou so degenerate in spirit,
As to prefer the means before the merit?
(A though I cannot say it is in me)
Such worth sometimes with poverty may be
To equalize the match she takes upon her;
Tho the other vaunt of Birth, Wealth, Beauty, Honor:
And many a one that did for greatness wed,
Would gladly change it for a meaner bed.
Yet are my Fortunes known indifferent,
Not basely mean, but such as may content:
And though I yield the better to be thine,
I may be bold to say thus much, for mine;
That if thou could of them and me esteem,
Neither thy state, nor birth, would mis-beseeme:
Or if it did; how can I helped (alas)
Thou, not alone, before knew'st what it was.
But I (although not fearing so to speed)
Did also disinable't more than need,
And yet thou woo'dst, and wooing did persevere,
As if thou had intended Love for ever:
Yea, thy account of wealth thou made so small,
Thou had not any question often at all;
But hating much that peasant-like condition,
Did seem displeased I held it in suspicion.
Whereby I think, if nothing else do thwart us,
It cannot be the want of that will part us.
Yea, I do rather doubt indeed, that this
The needless fear of friends displeasure is.
Yes, that is the bar which stops out my delight,
And all my hope and joy confounds quite,
But bears there any in thy heart such sway
To shut me thence, and wipe thy love away?
Can there be any friend that has the power,
To disvnite hearts so conioyn'd as our?
E're I would have so done by thee; I Would rather
Have parted with one deerer then my father.
For though the will of our Creator binds
Each Child to learn and know his Parents minds;
Yet sure I am, so just a Deity,
Commands nothing against Piety.
Nor does that band of duty give them leave,
To violate their faith, or to deceive.
And though that Parents have authority,
To rule their children in minority:
Yet they are never granted such power on them,
That will allow to tyrannize upon them;
Or use them under their command so ill,
To force them, without reason, to their will.
For who has read in all the Sacred-writ,
Of any one compeld to marriage (yet?)
What father so unkind (thereto required)
Denide his Child the match that he desired,
So that he found the Laws did not forbid it?
I think those gentler ages no men did it.
In those days therefore for them to have bin
Contracted without license had been sin?
Since there was more good Nature among men,
And every one more truly loving then.
But now (although we stand obliged still
To labor for their liking, and good will)
There is no duty whereby they may tie us
From ought which without reason they deny us:
For I do think, it is not only meant,
Children should ask, but Parents should consent:
And that they err, their duty as much breaking,
For not consenting, as we not for speaking.
"It is no marvel many matches be
"Concluded now without their priuity;
"Since they, through greedy Avarice misled,
"Their interest in that have forfeited.
For, some respectlesse of all care, do marry
Hot youthful -May, to cold old -January.
Some, for a greedy end, do basely tie
The sweetest-faire, to soule-deformitie.
Forcing a love from where 'twas placed late,
To re-ingraffe it where it turns to hate.
It seems no cause of hindrance in their eyes,
Though manners nor affections sympathize.
And two Religions by their rules of state,
They may in one made body tolerate;
As if they did desire that double stem,
Should fruitful bear but Neuters like to them.
Alas, how many numbers of both kinds
By that have ever discontented minds:
And live (though seeming unto others well)
In the next torments unto those of hell?
How many, desprate grown by this their sin,
Have both undone themselves and all their kin?
Many a one, we see, it makes to fall
With the too-late repenting Prodigal.
Thousands (though else by nature gentler given,)
To act the horridst murders often are driven.
And (which is worse) there is many a careless else,
(Unless Heaven pity) kills and damnes his self.
Oh what hard heart, or what vnpittying eyes,
Could hold from tears to see those Tragedies,
Parents, by their neglect in this, have hurld
Upon the Stage of this respectlesse World?
It Is not one Man, one Family, one Kin,
No nor one Country that has ruined bin
By such their folly, which the cause has proved,
That foreign often, and civil wars were moved
By such beginnings many a City lies
Now in the dust, whose Turrets brau'd the skies:
And diverse Monarchs by such fortunes crossed,
Have seen their Kingdoms fired, and spoiled, and lost*
Yet all this while, thou see, I mention not,
The ruin, shame, and chastity has got;
For it is a task too infinite to tell
How many thousands that would have done well,
Do, by the means of this, suffer desires
To kindle in their hearts unlawful fires:
Nay some, in whose could breast nere flame had bin,
Have only for mere vengeance fallen to sin.
My self have seen, and my heart bled to see it,
A wit-lesse Clown enjoy a match unmeet.
She was a Less that had a look to move
The heart of cold Diogenes to love:
Her eye was such, whose every glance did know
To kindle flames upon the hills of Snow;
And by her powerful piercings could imprint,
Or sparkle fire into a heart of flint:
And yet (unless I much deceived be)
In very thought did hate immodestie.
And (had sh'enioyd the man she could have loved)
Might, to this day, have lived vn-reprou'd:
But, being forced, perforce, by seeming* friends,
With her consent, she her contentment ends.
In that, compelled, her-selfe to him she gave,
Whose Bed, she rather could have with her Grave;
And since, I hear, what I much fear is true,
That she has hidden shame and fame adue.
Such are the causes now that Parents quite
Are put beside much of their ancient right:
Their fear of this, makes children to withold
From giving them those dues which else they would:
And these thou see are the too-fruitfull ils,
Which daily spring from their unbridled wills.
Yet they, forsooth, will have it understood,
That all their study, is their childrens good.
A seeming -Love shall cover all they do:
When, if the matter were well looked into,
Their careful reach is chiefly to fulfill
Their own foul, greedy, and insatiate will:
Who, quite forgetting they were ever young,
Would have the Children dote, with them, on dung.
Grant, betwixt two, there be true love, content,
Birth not mis seeming, wealth sufficient,
Equality in years, an honest fame,
In euery-side the person without blame,
And they obedient too: What can you gather
Of Love, or of affection, in that father,
That but a little to augment his treasure,
(Perhaps, no more but only for his pleasure,)
Shall force his Child to one he does abhor,
From her he loves, and justly seeks for;
Compelling him (for such misfortune grieved)
To die with care, that might with joy have lived?
This you may say is Love, and swear as well,
There Is pains in Heaven, and delights in Hell:
Or, that the Devils fury and austerity
Proceeds out of his care of our posterity.
Would Parents (in this age) have us begin
To take by their eyes, our affections in?
Or do they think we bear them in our fist,
That we may still remove them as we list?
It is impossible it should be thus,
For we are ruled by Love, not Love by us:
And so our power so much never reached to,
To know where we shall love, until we do.
And when it comes, hide it awhile we may,
But it is not in our strengths to driu't away.
Either mine own eye should my chuser be,
Or I would never wear Hymen's Livery.
For who is he so near my heart does rest,
To know what it is, that mine approved best?
I have my self beheld those men, whose frame
And outward personages had naught of blame:
They had (what might their good proportion grace)
The much more moving part, a comely face,
With many of those complements, which we
In common men, of the best breeding see.
They had discourse, and wit enough to carry
Themselves in fashion, at an Ordinary;
Gallants they were, loved company and sport,
Wore favors, and had Mistresses in Court.
And every way were such as well might seem
Worthy of note, respect, and much esteem;
Yet has my eye more cause of liking seen,
Where naught perhaps by some has noted been:
And I have there found more content, by far,
Where some of those perfections wanting are;
Yea so much, that their beauties were a blot
To them (me thought) because he had them not.
There some peculiar thing innated,
That bears an uncontrolled sway in this;
And nothing but itself knows how to fit
The mind with that which best shall suit with it.
Then why should Parents thrust themselves into
What they want warrant for, and power to do?
How is it they are so forgetful grown,
Of those conditions, that were once their own?
Do they so dote amidst their wits perfection,
To think that age and youth has like affection?
(When they do see among those of equal years,
One hates what another most endeares.)
Or do they think their wisdoms can invent
A thing to give, that is greater than Content?
No, neither shall they wrap us in such blindness,
To make us think the spite they do, is kindness.
For as I would advise no child to stray
From the least duty that he ought to pay:
So would I also have him wisely know,
How much that duty is which he does owe:
That knowing what does unto both belong,
He may do them their right, himself no wrong.
For if my Parents him I loathe should choose,
It Is lawful, yea my duty to refuse:
Else, how shall I lead so upright a life,
As is enjoined to the Man and Wife?
Since that we see sometime there are repentings,
Even where there are the most, and best contentings.
What, though that by our Parents first we live?
Is not life misery enough to give;
Which at their births the children does undo,
Unless they add some other mischief to?
Cause they gave being to this flesh of our,
Must we be therefore slaves unto their power?
We nere desired it, for how could we tell,
Not being, but that not to be was well:
Nor know they whom they profit by it, seeing
Happy were some, if they had had no being.
Indeed, had they produced us without sin,
Had all our duty to have pleased them bin:
Of the next life, could they assure the state,
And both beget us and regenerate;
There were no reason then we should withstand
To undergo their tyrannou'st command:
In hope that either for our hard endurance,
We should, at last, have comfort in assurance:
Or, if in our endeauours we mis-sped,
At least feel nothing when we should be dead.
But what is the Reason for it that we shall be
Inthral'd so much unto Mortality?
Our souls on will of any Men to tie
Unto an everlasting misery.
So far, perhaps to, from the good of either,
We ruin them, our selves, and altogether.
Children owe much, I must confess it is true,
And a great debt is to the Parents due:
Yet if they have not so much power to crave
But in their own defense the lives they gave:
How much less then, should they become so cruel
As to take from them the high-prized Jewel
Of liberty in choice, whereon depends
The maine contentment that the heaven here lends?
Worth life, or wealth, nay far more worth then either
Or twenty thousand lives put all together.
Then howsoever some, seuerer bent,
May deem of my opinion, or intent,
With that which follows thus conclude I do:
(And I have Reason for it, and Conscience to)
No Parent may his Childs just suit deny
On his bare will, without a reason why:
Nor he so used, be disobedient thought,
If vnapprou'd, he take the match he sought.
So then if that thy faith vncrazed be,
Thy friends dislike shall be no stop to me:
For, if their will be not of force to do it,
They shall have no cause else to drive them to it.
What is it they against us can allege?
Both young we are, and of the fittest age,
If thou dissembledst not, both love; and both
To admit hinderance in our loves are loath.
It Is prejudicial unto none that lives;
And Gods, and humane Law our warrant gives.
Nor are we much unequal in degree,
Perhaps our Fortunes somewhat different be.
But say that little means, which is, were not,
The want of wealth may not dissolve this knot.
For though some such preposterous courses wend,
Prescribing to themselves no other end,
Marr'age was not ordained to enrich men by,
Unless it were in their posterity.
And he that does for other causes wed,
Nere knows the true sweetes of a marriage bed:
Nor shall he by my will, for it is unfit
He should have bliss that never aimed at it.
Though that bewitching gold the Rabble blindes,
And is the object of all Vulgar minds:
Yet those, me-thinkes, that graced seem to be,
With so much good as does appear in thee,
Should scorn their better-taught desires to tie
To that, which fools do get their honor by.
I can like of the wealth (I must confess)
Yet more I prize the man, though mony-lesse.
I am not of their humor yet, that can
For Title, or Estate, affect a Man;
Or of my self, one body, deigne to make
With him I loathe, for his possessions sake.
Nor wish I ever to have that mind bred
In me, that is in those; who, when they wed,
Think it enough, they do attain the grace
Of some new honor, to fare well, take place,
Wear costly clothes, in others sights agree,
Or happy in opinion seem to be.
I weigh not this: for were I sure before
Of Spencers wealth, or our rich Suttons store;
Had I therewith a man, whom Nature lent,
Person enough to give the eye content:
If I no outward due, nor right did want,
Which the best Husbands in appearance grant:
Nay, though alone we had no private iarres
But merry lived from all domesticke cares;
Unless I thought his Nature so incline,
That it might also sympathize with mine,
(And yield such correspondence with my mind^
Our souls might mutually contentment find,
By adding unto these which went before,
Some certain unexpressed pleasures more,
Such as exceed the straight and curbed dimensions
Of common minds, and vulgar apprehensions)
I would not care for such a match, but tarry
In this estate I am, and never marry.
Such were the sweets I hoped to have possessed,
When Fortune should with thee have made me bles^
My heart could hardly think of that content,
To apprehend it without rauishment.
Each word of thine (me-thought) was to my ears
More pleasing then that music, which the Spheres
(They say) do make the gods, when in their chime,
Their motions Diapason with the time,
In my conceit, the opening of thine eye.
Seemed to give light to every object by,
And shed a kind of life unto my show,
On every thing that was within it view.
More joy I Have felt to have thee but in place,
Then many do in the most close embrace
Of their beloued'st friend, which well does prove,
Not to thy body only tends my love:
But mounting a true height, grows so divine,
It makes my soul to fall in love with thine.
And sure now whatsoever thy body do,
Thy soul loves mine, and often they visit too.
For late I dreamed they went I know not whither,
Unless to Heaven, and there played together;
And to this day I nere could know or see,
'Twixt them or us the least Antipathy,
Then what should make thee keep thy person hence,
Or leave to love, or hold it in suspense?
If to offend thee I unawares was driven,
Is It such a fault as may not be forgiven?
Or if by frowns of Fate, I have been checked,
So that I seem not worth thy first respect,
Shall I be therefore blamed and vpbraided,
With what could not be helped, or avoided?
It Is not my fault: yet cause my Fortunes do,
Will thou be so unkind to wrong me too?
Not unto Thine, but thee I set my heart,
So naught can wipe my love out while thou art:
Though thou were poorer both of house and meat,
Then he that knows not where to sleep or eat:
Though thou were sunk into obscurity.
Become an abject in the worlds proud eye,
Though by perverseness of thy Fortune crossed,
Thou were deformed or some limb had lost,
That love which Admiration first begot,
Pity would strengthen, that it failed not:
Yea, I should love thee still, and without blame,
As long as thou could keep thy mind the same;
Which is of Virtues so compact (I take it)
No mortal change shall have the power to shake it.
This may, and will (I know) seem strange to those
That cannot the Abyss of love disclose,
Nor must they think, whom but the outside moves
Ever to apprehend such noble Loves;
Or more conjecture their unsounded measure,
Then can we mortals of immortal pleasure.
Then let not those dull vnconceiuing brains,
Who shall hereafter come to read these strains,
Suppose that no loves fire can be so great,
Because it gives not their cold Clime such heat;
Or think m'inuention could have reached here
Unto such thoughts, unless such love there were:
For then they shall but show their knowledge weak,
And iniure me, that feel of what I speak.
But now my lines grow tedious, like my wrong,
And as I thought that, thou think this too long.
Or some may deem, I thrust my self into
More then beseems modesty to do.
But of the difference I am not unwitting,
Betwixt a peevish coyness, and things fitting:
Nothing respect I, who pries ore my doing:
For here is no vain allurements, nor sond wooing,
To train some wanton stranger to my lure;
But with a thought that is honest, chaste, and pure,
I make my cause unto thy conscience known,
Suing for that which is by right my own.
In which complaint, if thou do hap to find
Any such word, as seems to be unkind:
Mistake me not, it but from Passion sprung,
And not from an intent to do thee wrong.
Or if among these doubts my sad thoughts breed,
Some (peradventure) may be more then need
They are to let thee know, might we dispute,
There Is no objections but I could refute;
And spite of Envy such defenses make,
Thou should embrace that love thou do forsake.
Then do not (oh forgetful man) now deem,
That it is ought less then I have made it seem.
Or that I am unto this Passion moved,
Because I cannot elsewhere be beloved:
Or that it is thy state, whose greatness known,
Makes me become a suter for my own:
Suppose not so; for know this day there be
Some that woo hard for what I offer thee:
And I have ever yet contented bin
With that estate I first was placed in.
Banish those thoughts, and turn thee to my heart;
Come once again, and be what once thou were.
Revive me by those wonted joys repairing,
That am nigh dead with sorrows and despairing:
So shall the memory of this annoy,
But add more sweetness to my future joy;
Yea, make me think thou meantst not to deny me,
But only were estranged thus, to try me.
And lastly, for that loves sake thou once bar'st me,
By that right hand thou gave, that oath thouswar'st me,
By all the Passions, and (if any be)
For her dear sake that makes thee iniure me;
I here conjure thee; no entreat and sue,
That if these lines do ouer-reach thy view,
Thou would afford me so much favor for them,
As to accept, or at least not abhor them.
So though thou wholly cloak not thy disdain,
I shall have somewhat the less cause to plain:
Or if thou needs must scoff at this, or me,
Do It by thy self, that none may witness be.
Not that I fear 'twill bring me any blame,
Only I am loath the world should know my shame.
For all that shall this plaint with reason view,
Will judge me faithful, and thee most untrue.
But if Oblivion, that thy love bereft,
Has not so much good nature in thee left,
But that thou must, as most of you men do,
When you have conquered, tyrannize it too:
Know this before, that it is praise to no man
To wrong so frail a Creature as a woman.
And to insult over one, so much made thine,
Will more be thy disparagement then mine.
But oh (I pray that it portend no harms)
A chearing heat my chilled senses warmes:
Just now I flashing feel into my breast,
A sudden comfort, not to be expressed;
Which to my thinking, does again begin
To warn my heart, to let some hope come in;
It tells me it is impossible that thou
Should live not to be mine, it whispers how
My former fears and doubts have, been in vain,
And that thou mean yet to return again.
It says thy absence from some cause did grow,
Which, or I should not, or I could not know.
It tells me now, that all those proofs, whereby
I seemed assured of thy disloyalty,
May be but treacherous plots of some base foes,
That in thy absence sought our overthrows.
Which if it prove; as yet me thinks it may,
Oh, what a burden shall I cast away?
What cares shall I say by? and to what height
Tower in my new ascension to delight?
Sure er'e the full of it I come to try,
I shall even surfeit in my joy and die.
But such a loss might well be called a thriuing
Since more is got by dying so, then living.
Come kill me then, my dear, if thou think fit,
With that which never killed woman yet:
Or write to me before, so shall thou give
Content more moderate that I may live:
And when I see my staff of trust unbroken,
I will vnspeake again what is mis-spoken.
What I have written in dispraise of Men,
I will recant, and praife as much again;
In recompense I Will add unto their Stories,
Encomiasticke lines to ymp their glories.
And for those wrongs my love to thee has done,
Both I and it unto thy Pity run:
In whom, if the least guilt thou find to be,
For ever let thine arms imprison me.
Mean while I Will try if misery will spare
Me so much respite, to take truce with care.
And patiently await the doubtful doom,
Which I expect from thee should shortly come
Much longing that I one way may be sped,
And not still linger 'twixt alive and dead.
For I can neither live yet as I should,
Because I least enjoy of that I would;
Nor quiet die, because (indeed) I first
Would see some better days, or know the worst.
Then hasten Dear, if to my end it be,
It shall be welcome, cause it comes from thee.
If to renew my Comfort ought be sent,
Let me not loose a minute of Content.
The precious Time is short, and will away,
Let us enjoy each other while we may.
Cares thrive, Age creeps on, Men are but shades,
Joys lessen, Youth decaies, and Beauty fades;
New turns come on, the old returns never,
If we let our go past, it is past for ever.
FINIS.
A Metricall Paraphrase upon the CREED.
SInce it befits, that I account should give
What way unto salvation I believe;
Of my profession here the sum I gather.
First, I confess a Faith in God the Father:
In God, who (without Helper or Pertaker)
Was of himself the Worlds Almighty Maker,
And first gave Time his being: who gave birth
To all the Creatures, both of Heaven and Earth.
Our everlasting welfare does consist
In his great mercies, and in Jesus Christ:
(The second person of that Three in one)
The Father's equal, and his only Son;
That euer-blessed, and incarnate Word,
Which our Redeemer is, our life, Our Lord.
For when by Satan's guile we were deceived,
Christ was that means of help, which was conceived;
Yea, (when we were in danger to be lost)
Conceived for Us, by the Holy Ghost.
And that we might not ever be for-lorne,
For our eternal safety he was Borne;
Borne as a Man (that Man might not miseary)
Even of the substance of the Virgin Mary,
And lo, a greater mercy, and a wonder;
He that can make All, suffer, suffered under
The Jewish spite (which all the world revile at)
And Romish tyrannies of Pontius Pilate.
In him do I believe, who was envied,
Who with extremest hate was Crucified:
Who being Life it self (to make assured
Our souls of safety) was both dead, and buried;
And that no servile fear in us might dwell,
To conquer, He descended into Hell:
Where no infernal Power had power to lay
Command upon him; but on the third day
The force of Death and Hell he did constrain,
And so in Triumph, He arose again.
Yea, the Almighty power advanced his head,
As Well above all things, as from the dead.
Then, that from thence gifts might to men be given,
With glory, He ascended into Heaven:
Where, that supreme and everlasting throne,
Which was prepared, he climbed; and sits on
That blessed seat, where he shall make abode
To plead for us, at the right hand of God.
And no where should he be enthroned rather,
Then there: for, he is God, as is the Father.
And therefore, with an equal love delight I
To praise and serve them both, as one Almighty:
^et in their office there is a difference.
And I believe, that Jesus Christ, from thence,
Shall in the great and universal doom,
Return; and that with Angels He shall come,
To question such as at his Empire grudge;
Even those who have presumed him to judge.
And that black day shall be so Catholic,
As I believe not only that the quick
To that assise shall all be summoned;
But, he will both adiudge them, and the dead.
Moreover, in the Godhead I conceive
Another Person, in whom I believe:
For all my hope of blessedness were lost,
If I believed not in the holy Ghost.
And though vain Schismatickes through pride and folly
Contemn her power, I do believe the holy
Chaste Spouse of Christ (for whom so many search
By marks uncertain) the true Cath'like Church.
I do believe (God keep us in this union,)
That there shall be for ever the Communion
Of Gods Elect: and that he still acquaints
His Children in the fellowship of Saints.
Though damned be Man's natural condition,
By grace in Christ I look for the remission
Of all my foul misdeeds; for, there begins
Deaths end, which is the punishment of sins.
Moreover, I the Sadduces infection
Abhor, and do believe the Resurrection:
Yea, though I turn to dust; yet through God, I
Expect a glorious rising of the body;
And that, exempted from the cares here rise,
I shall enjoy perfection and the life
That is not subject unto change or wasting;
But ever blessed, and for everlasting.
This is my Faith, which that it fail not when
It most should steed me, let God say, Amen.
A Metricall Paraphase upon the Lords Prayer
To whom, that he so much vouchsafe me may,
Thus as a member of his Church, I pray:
LOrd, at thy Mercy-seat, ourselves we gather,
To do our duties unto thee, Our Father.
To whom all praise, al honor, should be given:
For, thou art that great God which art in heaven.
Thou by thy wisdom rul'st the worlds whole frame,
For ever, therefore, Hallowed be thy Name.
Let never more delays divide us from
Thy glories view, but let Thy Kingdom come.
Let thy commands opposed be by none,
But thy good pleasure, and Thy will be done.
And let our promptness to obey, be even
The very same in earth, as it is in heaven.
Then, for our selves, O Lord, we also pray,
Thou would be pleased to Give us this day,
That food of life wherewith our souls are fed,
Contented raiment, and our daily bread.
With every needful thing do thou relieve us:
And, of thy mercy, pity And forgive us
All our misdeeds, in him whom thou did please,
To take in offering for our trespasses.
And for as much, O Lord, as we believe,
Thou so wilt pardon us, as we forgive;
Let that love teach us, wherewith thou acquaints us,
To pardon all them, that trespass against us.
And though sometime thou findst we have forgot
This Love, or thee; yet help, And lead us not
Through Soul or bodies want, to desperation
Nor let abundance drive, into temptation. See Pro. 30. 8. 9.

Let not the soul of any true Believer,
Fall in the time of trial: But deliver
Yea, save him from the malice of the Devil;
And both in life and death keep us from evil.
Thus pray we Lord: And but of thee, from whom
Can this be had? For thine is the Kingdom.
The world is of thy works the graven story,
To thee belongs the power, and the glory.
And this thy happiness has ending never:
But shall remain for ever, and for ever.
This we confess; and will confess again,
Till we shall say eternally, Amen.
Thou shall write them upon the posts of thy house, and upon thy Gates. Deuteronomy.
6. 9.
FINIS.

