The third and last part of the Secrets of the reverend Master Alexis of
Piemont, by him collected out of diverse excellent Authors, with a necessary
Table in the end, containing all the matters treated of in this present work.
Englished by Wyllyam Ward.

ARMIPOTENTI ANGLIAE



PRINTED AT LONDON by Roulande Hall, for Nycholas England. 1562.

Secrets and sovereign receptes well experimented and tried by diverse
Authors.
Against every grief or pain of the head, except the Pockes.
TAke red Roses, Camomill flowers, Melilot, Calamint, Sothernwood, of each two
handfulles, sees them in fourtye pound of water and good wine, until half be
consumed. And with this being hot let the Pacient wash his legs every
night and morning, from the knees downewarde, and his arms from the elbowe
downewarde. Also he must not have his stomach full.

A preseruatine against the falling syckennesse or epilepsia.
TAke the best castoreum, that you can find, and assa setida, of each half a
Dragme, roots of Piony well beaten into powder a dragme, aromaticum rosatum two
dragmes, of all these being well mixte and mingled together with Syrope of
Mynte, make seven Pills, to be taken twyse or thryse a week when you go to
bed. It has been often proved.

Against the falling syckennesse.
THe Pacient being tourmented with this disease it is good to make him smell
burnte Feathers, or old Shoes, for that reuiueth and makes them come to them
selves.

Another soueraygne remedy for the same.
TAke a hundred Swallows, an ounce of castoreum, as much Wine as shall suffice,
and of the best that can be found. Distill all together and give the Pacient
drink thereof three Dragmes fasting. This water is also very good for men that
be apoplectique if they be washed with it.

Against the Palsy.
TAke myrrh, mastir, of each two dragmes franken sense a dragme and alhalfe,
Cloves, Synamome, Nuttmegge, Lignum Aloes. Mace of each a dragme. Beat all
these into very fine powder. And the powder being sprinkled with aqua vite, and
dried again you must yet once sprinkle it again, and continuinge so
sprinkling and drieng it five times. Then beat it small again. And with this
powder parfume a fox skin laieng two dragmes thereof upon quick coals to the
intent that the parfume be received through out all the skin, and so laid
upon the member that is infected. Orels (which is better) let the skin
poudered with the said powder, be laid whote upon the paraliticke member and
so worn: And you shall so a merueylous effect.

Another way.
TAke a pound of Aqua vite, the roof of iua, the root of acorus, ye root of
Isope, of each two dragmes black Peper, Cloves, Nutmegge, of each a dragme,
Mace half a dragme: All this you must stamp well, and bind it in a fine
lynnen clothe and let it stiepe in Aqua vite three hole days, then drene out
the water, of this water take half an ounce: water of iua and of Endive of each
three dragmes: give it the Pacient to drink in the break of the day, and
let him not eat in sire hours after. The Pacient shall feel a greater effect
if the same day that he drinks the water, he also wash the sore member with
it.

Against the fransey.
THe body being purged, it is good to shave the head, and to lay upon the
seame of the crown of the head quick Pigeons (having first clefte them in the
back, and drawn out the entrayles) leauyngs them so upon his head until they
ware cold: or else little whelps of a month old their garbishe plucked out: or
if you will the lunges or lights of a sheep or wether hot. But because one
of the principal causes of the fransie is the tourment of watchinge, you must
labor to provoke sleep as much as you can, by remedies mete therefore: as with
washing his legs from the knees downewarde, and his arms from the elbowe
downewarde, with the decoction of violet flowers, of Nenuphar, of the ryne of
Mandragore roots, and annoyntynge his temples, the joints of the arm even to
the hand, and of the leg unto the foot with the oil of Nenuphar and poplar
mixed together.

A tried remedy against the great pain, ryngynge and defnesse of the ears.
TAke the oil of Castoreum two ounces, oil roset, and oil of better Almondes
of each an ounce, of Aqua vite two ounces, mingle al together and sees it until
the Aqua vite be consumed. Than every night at even when he goes into his
bed, drop four drops into his ears, and stop them with Cotton
sauourynge some what of Musk. It is a thing proved.

Another remedy well known and tried.
Sees in some pot a pound of Walnut oil, and when it smoketh, make the
smoke enter into the pacientes ears by a founell.

A remedy to stenche the bleedyng at the nose.
TAke the juice of Plantaine, Rose water, and the best Uinaigre you can, of
each four ounces: yelkes of Eggs well beaten two ounces: of acatia mixte with
the said things half an ounce: mingle al together, and annoynte your forehead
with it and your throat with some cloth.

Another for the same well proved, and of a merueylous strength.
THe Pacient shall take the water of panis porcinus as much as shall need, ye
which he shall take up at the nose, and incontinent he shall feel him self
helped.

Another soueraygne remedy.
TAke the blood of a man (that is to say that bledeth at the nose) an ounce or
two: and burn it upon some plate of iron, then make it into fine powder, and
blow it into his nostrelles, and he shall be well.

Another for the same.
TAke of the best Uinagre you can get, Plantayne water of each two pound, wete
certain lynnen cloutes in it, and lay them to the souls of his feet, and
palms of his hands, and against the liver, and the blood shall forth with
stent.

For the tooth ache, a remedy proved.
TAke half an ounce of Hierapicra: two Dragmes of Hiera Picra a medicine to
purge fleme and collor.
Mythridate, and half an ounce of Aqua vite, and with all these mingled
together, you shall often times a day annoynte the tooth that aketh and round
the gomme that he stands in: for this is singular if the ache comme of cold.

Anoher remedy whether the ache be by cold or heat.
TAke strong white Wine half an ounce, of the roots of Iusquiame in English
white Henbane, an ounce: Let all be well sodden together, until the third part
or half of the wine be consumed, we this hot wine wash all the gomme of that
tooth that aketh and keep it a good while in your mouth, on the side where the
tooth is.

Another for the same.
TAke Sage flowers, Rosemary, Betony, Sticados arabic, Marioram, of each a
handefull and a half: of Nigella or melanthium in English Geth, of perythrum
in English Pelytorye of each two Dragmes. Let all this be sodden together, in
a sufficient quantity of white wine until the half be consumed: then strain
it and stamp these herbs, and make thereof a plaster and lay it upon the
Jawe of the akynge tooth, and keep the wine that is strained out in your mouth
as whote as you may endure it.

Another remedy.
ALso, if the said tooth be hollow, mix half an ounce of Triacle together
with Negella and pyrethrum of each half an ounce, and a Dragme of Aqua vite.
And of this mixture fill up the hole of the tooth. But yet if all this (after
you have proved it) help you but a little or nothing, put to each of these
remedies two or three graynes of the juice of Poppye, called in Latin Opium,
and lay all as is said unto the grief that troubles you.

A remedy for the stynkynge of the mouth of nose.
TAke a pound and a half of Rose water, a pound of Uiolet water, half a
pound of Marioram water, beat into powder Nutmegges, Lignum aloes, Synamom,
Galingale, Zedoaria, of each two Dragmes, mix all with these waters, and still
it in a Limbecke. This done, parfume the water with eight graynes of fine
Musk. The head being purged with this water, that is to say, taking it up
every day at the nose into the head: but yet fasting, and the nose first well
purged, you shall see a merueylous effect.

Another for the same.
IT is a thing proved and tried, and very good to take fasting every day at
the beginning of dinner, or else from day to day an Alephangine pille.

A very good gargarisme or gargellynge of the throat against the Quinsey.
TAke two pound of Lycorous water, the juice of Plantaines, the suck of
Mulberies, the suck of Myrtelberries, of each two ounces: all this mixte
together, sees it well: than strain it and let it cool again, and than let
the Pacient gargle and wash his throat slightly withal.

For the same.
IT is a remedy proved and tried, to blow with a Reed in his throat fine
powder of Plantayne leaves dried.

Another for the same.
IT helps much also to annoint the soore with the oils of Camomille, of
Uioletts, of sweet Almonds, and of the grease of a Hen, as much of the one as
of the other, mixing it al together, and to annoint therewith the soore place,
with the application of new shorn or unwashed wulle.

An excellent plaster to soften or ripe an impostume in the throat.
TAke of Swallows nestes a pound, and make thereof a plaster with as much
Oil of sweet Almondes, and of Camomille as suffiseth to make it, and lay it
hot to the Pacientes throat.

Against spytrynge of blood coming of the Lunges or Lyghtes.
TAke the suck or juice of Purselane and Playntayne of each an ounce: beat
into powder a dragme of read Coral, and half a dragme of the stone Hematites
in English bloodstone: and all being mirte together give it to the Pacient at
all times when he spitteth blood.

For the same another remedy tried and proved.
MAke into very small powder gum Arabic, Tragacantha, Hearts horn burned, of
a bloodstone burned, and read Coral burned, of each half a Dragme, and of
Bole armenicke two scruples: mix all with the yelke of a raw Egg, and give
it the Pacient when he spitteth blood.

Another remedy found very syngular.
ROste well two Dragmes of Rubarbe, together with the seed of Purselane and
Coriander prepared, of each a Dragme, make all into very small powder, and
mingle a Dragme of this powder with as much juice of Purselane as shall
suffice, and give it to the Pacient when he spitteth blood.

Another remedy of merueylous great virtue.
TAke of the juice of Milfoyle two ounces, of a bloodestone burned, and well
beaten into powder two Dragmes, and give it to the pacient cold.

Another secret for the same, certain and experimented and good at all hours.
TAke the shelles of some raw Eggs, take away the little skin that is
within, and dry them so that they may be made into powder very fine. Than
mix two Dragmes of this powder with three ounces of Plantayne water, and give
the pacient of it ever when he voydeth blood, and you shall se that the Lunges
will be sound. But if you will that this medicine work with more speed, and
greater efficacy, mire it with two Dragmes of the said powder, with half an
ounce of syrop of dry Roses, half an ounce of Purselane, and as much of syrop
of Mirtell, which thing you shall give ye Pacient five days together. And this
thus taken he may be well assured that from thence forward the vain will never
break more.

For the same.
IT is a remedy most certain and proved as well to heal this sickennes
chanced to a man, as for to preserve one from it before it come, to eat
every morning fasting a scruple of Rubarbe roast.

Another for the same.
Every day at night when the Paciente would sleep, let him suppe a
sponefull of mundified Barley. For, at the last, the effect is very great, as
well to preserve him, as to heal him of it.

Against the vlceration of the Lunges or Lights, and spettell full of matter
and corruption.
TAke a pound of the tails of river Creuices, and four pound of Cow or
Ewes milk: and sees all together until half the milk be consumed. And than
stamp well the tails of the Creuices or Crabbes, and dissolve them in good
milk, putttynge to them half a handful of Barley flower, and as much of
amylum, of sweet Almonde milk four ounces, the yelke of a new laid egg,
and four ounces of Sugre very white: mengle all together, and s^t it on the
fire to sees, sturring it always softly, until it be well sodden. This done
let the sick man eat of this composition at morning and evening as much as
he shall think good: and he shall find him self very well.

Another for the same.
TAke vi. Dragmes of white Poppy sede, of Endive sede draagme and a half, with as
much Sorrel sede, kernels of Quinces made clean two Dragmes, the seeds of
Melons, Gourdes, Cytrons, Cowcumbers, of each an ounce and a half, of Gomme
Arabic, Tragacantha, of amylu^, of each a dragme, of ye suyce of L^^orous two
Dragme, of the Lunges of a Fore a Dragme and a half, Penides the waighte of
the whole, mix and burn al slightlye: Than make it into a fine powder, whereof
you shall take two Dragmes, mingling it with an ounce and a half of the syrop of
Juiuves, and three ounces of the water of Snayles distilled* ^^a^ give this
drink luke warm to the Pacient in the break of ^he day.

Another for the same.
MIngle half an ounce of very white Sugre with six ounces of the milk of an
Ass new mylked, and take a little of it at the break of the morning, s^epinge
a little upon it, and at night when you go to bed, continuynge so a month at
the spring, and twentye days together in Harvest.

A remedy for short wy^ded men.
TAke an ounce and a half of Licorous made clean, with as much Cetrac the
grains or corns being taken away, Juiubes, and Sebesten or Mixa of echetenne,
the root of Em^la campana. purified or made clean balfe an ounce, the root of
Fool foot or Horse hoof, called of the Apoticaries Vngula caballina, two
Dragmes let al sees in a sufficient quantity of water, until the half be
consumed, than strain it, and dissolve with that which is strayned three ounces
of the best Manna, or else an ounce and a half of the flowers of Acesis, and
give it to the Pacie^^ at the first time when the pain takes him, it is a
thing tried, so singular that it will heal the sick man, so that the
Physician shall be no more troubled with him.

A drink for the same disease, to be taken every day thryse.
Sees well and long two ounces of the Juice of Emula campana, with as much of
the Juice of Isope, and a pound of the water of Fool foot or Horse hoof:
and make thereof a syrope with as much Sugre as shall be necessary, of the
which the Pacient shall take in the morning two ounces without water, and as
much as at noone, and when he enters into his bed: and as long as the
paro^isme and fit of his pain, it is good to put among it four drops of
gomme Armeniack, with t^^ ounces of Oximel simple, and give the Oximel honny and
vinaigre sodden together.
Pacient drink of it.

Another tried secret good for poor folk.
Mix a pound of wild Mallowe or march Mallowe roots dried in the shadow,
with four pound of sodden honnye well scommed: stir it upon the fire until
it be like an Electuarye, whereof let the Pacient take often times, and he shall
find himself eased.

For the same, and good also for the poor sort.
TAke of clear condite water two pound, of Leeks chopped very small three
ounces, of fresh butter two ounces, of the best Sugre an ounce and a half, and
the yelke of an Egg. All this being very well beaten and styrred by the fire,
shall be given to the Pacient at dinner and supper.

A remedy against the pluresye.
IT is a thing well tried that at the first assault or coming of the pain of
the side, it is very good to be let blood in the vain called Basilica, of
the opposite arm: but if the blood be let out at the fourth access or
coming, or soon after, the Pluresie will by and by void away: not
withstanding you must never let the Pacient blood but his bellye must first
be purged and losed, either with taking some cassa at the mouth, or else with
some soft glister.

A decoction for the stomach, very good against the Pluresye.
BEing let blood, as it appertains, take the suck or juice of Isope,
capilorum Veneris, Figs, Dates, Sebesten, dried Reasynges, mundified Barley,
Licorous made cleane-of each half a handful: sees all in water as much as may
suffice, and put for to dissolve in it three ounces of grained Manna. But if the
Pacient be a poor man take an ounce and a half of Pulpa cassiae, which is the
inner part of it called also Medulla, instead of Manna, and give this drink.
xxiiii. hours after his letting blood, and very earlye in the morning, it is
a thing certain that in proving this the Pacient shall be healed, although he
were not let blood but a little before the fourth access, because the matters
and substance that nourished the disease in the larger condites are purged
away.

Another remedy most certain against all Pluresyes, as proved as divine, for
to preserve a man that he dye not of it.
MAke an ointment of two ounces of Dialth^a mirte with half an ounce of sweet
Almond eoyle, wherewith being hot annoint the sore side, casting upon it the
powder of half an ounce of Commin stamped very small and boulted. That done,
heat a Cabbedge leaf upon the hot coals, and spread with old Butter but
not salt, laying it hot upon the grief: the pain will cease merueylouslye,
and will resolve into matter of an impostume, so that at the last you shall
have the honor of it, and the Pacient health* Yet you must note that this
remedy must not be used but at the fourth access, or else after. This remedy
may also serve in every great grief disparsed through out all the body beneth
the head.

An ointment to rotte or ripe the pluresye.
TAke two ounces of Mucilage or Mucago of the sede of Cabedge, with as much
Mucago of the sede of March Mallows, Mucago of Figs an ounce, of Cow milk
three ounces, of fresh Butter two ounces, oil of sweet Almondes two ounces and a
half: mire all this together, sturryng it always upon a small fire and make
thereof a soft ointment with as much wax as shall need. This done, spread it
upon new shorn and unwashed Wulle, and lay it upon the grief, renewyng it
in four and twenty hours three or four times.

A plaster for the same.
Stamp well in a mortar four ounces of the roots of wild Mallows well
sodden, put to it an ounce of Butter, an ounce and a half of honny, of Pigeons
dunge two Dragmes: Mingle all together, and lay it hot right upon the pain,
and soon after the corruption will break.

For the same.
IT is a remedy well proved, although it be not much used, to give ye pacient
in. xxiiii. hours four times four ounces of the water Tartarum terrestre
hoate. For in so doing, the cure shall be so fair that you shall see the
impostume broken and purged from all corrupt and rotten blood. And more over
he shall be preserved from spitting blood, and from the consumption of the
Lunges.

Against the hot cogh, that is to say, when the pacient is so vexed with it,
that he can not well sleep.
TAke a dragme of the Pills of cynoglossa in English hounds tongue, with
syrope of Roses, and make thereof five Pylles, whereof the Pacient shall take
one every day at the entryng into his bed.

Against the same, if his voice be hoarse with it.
TAke Diacodion, and of the powder of Tragacante cold, Penides, of each. ii.
dragmes, Bole armenick a Dragme: Make all this into a very fine powder, and
with the syrop of Myrtle make Pills like Peason, of the which when the Pacient
goes to his bed he shall hold one upon his tongue, and he shall be well.

A tried electuary for the same.
TAke Diapenidion without species, Loch sani and experti, of each an ounce, of
Penides. ii. ounces, and we as much syrop of Isope, as shall suffice for to
incorporate all: make thereof an Electurye: whereof the sick man shall hold
some in his mouth lickynge it.

Again for the cogh.
TAke a pound of fresh butter without salt, three yelkes of new laid Eggs,
two ounces of the ^^owre of Amylum, and an ounce of Sugre melted in the water of
Uiolets: Mingled all together, and stir it always until it be well seasoned
and of a good taste. It is a good remedy which may serve you as well in stead
of meat, as of medicine.

Pylles for the cogh.
TAke two Dragmes of Agaricke prepared, and mix it with a Dragme and a half
of Frankenscence made into powder, and with the juice of Isope, so make thereof
ten Pills, of the which the Pacient shall take one every night when he goes to
bed. It is a remedy very good, as well for yonge-children, as for old
folk.

An ointment for the same.
TAke old Butter that is not Salt, the Oil of sweet Almondes, and of white
Lyllies of each an ounce, half an ounce of Mucelago of the seed of wild
Mallows, with as much of Mucilago of the seed of Mallows, and half a
scruple of Saffron: mix all together, and make thereof an ointment with a
little Ware: wherewith being hot, you shall annoint your breaste.

Against the tremblyng and payntyng of the heart. This is very good, but
especially for women, which are much subject thereunto.
TAke the Pills of dried Cytrons, Zedoariae, Doronici, calami aromatici, of
each a Dragme, of Grami Paradisi, half a Dragme, of the roots of Buglosse
dried two Dragmes, of fine Musk half a Scruple, Epithimi half a Dragme: Let
al be made into powder as well as is possible, and the powder after sifted:
whereof being mingled with the water of Turmentill, the Pacient shall take a
Dragme and a half, at the break of the day, and in the evening when he will
sleep a Dragme. And he shall see him self ryd and quit of his pain within
seven days.

A remedy against the same, and very good to restore the strength, being
weakened with to great heat of agues.
TAke two Dragmes of the best Synamom, half a Dragme of Mace, of Hyacinthes,
Smaragds of Rubies of each half a Dragme, of perced or vnperced pearls, of
each a Scruple, of Gold and Silver beaten into powder, of each a Dragme: Let
al together be made into a very fine powder, whereof styring it with Sugre
dissolved in Rose water, you shall make little Balls of two Dragmes a piece. I
have seen my self that many have been with this confection preserved from the
plague in a very dangerous time.

Another remedy, wherewith I have always found my self very well.
MAke a drink with two ounces of the suck of Buglosse purged on the fire, and
two Dragmes of very white sugre mixte together, and drink it luke warm every
night when you go to bed, and before ten days be past you shall be cured.

An Epitheme against the same pain.
TAKE Rose water, Borage water, the water of Epithema is a medicine laid to
the region of the heart or liver to cole it.
Melissophylum, in English Baulme, Sorrel water of each six ounces, of Sandall
white and read, and of the sede of red Roses, of each a Dragme and a half,
Lignum aloes, of the flesh of the heart of a Bucke, and of Hearts horn burned,
of each a Dragme, of red Coral, of Ben white and read, of each half a
Dragme, of the flowers of Buglosse, and of Borage, of each a handefull. Let
that be made into powder that can be, and let all sees together until the
third part of the water be consumed: Than put to it three ounces of the best
Malmesey, and two ounces of the best white Uineigre with a scruple of Saffron:
mingle all this together and lay it whote upon the sick man's heart, with a
linen clothe clean dyed in grain, early in the morning and at night before
supper. For admit that than he feel his grief or not: yet nevertheless this
is a thing experimented and very good.

An ointment very good for poor folk, that are not able to bye thefore said
medicine or nourishment.
TAke three ounces of yellowe Nenuphar, two Dragmes of the powder of the same
flowers of Nenuphar, of read Sandall, of read Coral, and of Sorrel seed, of
each a scruple, of Perles, of Lignum aloes of the flesh of the heart of a
Bucke, of each half a scruple, three grains of Camphyre, of white wax washed
in the water of Nenuphar, Cytryn or yellowe as much as shall need. That which
must be made in powder, being so made, make thereof a soft ointment, wherewith
you shall annoint the pacient morning and euenyng about the heart, before his
meals, and he shall be well.

Another composition very good in the time of a plague as well to preserve as
to heal.
TAke an ounce of the best Triacle, half ounce of the juice of Lemons, a scruple
of Saffron, of the two sorts of Pearls, of read Coral, and of Sorrel
seed, of each half a Dragme: two Graynes of Camphyre: mingle all together
very well with two or three drops of odoriferous white wine, and make thereof
an ointment: a certain quantity whereof you shall sprede upon a crymson silk
cloth, laying it hot upon the Pacientes heart, renewynge it morning and
evening.

Another ointment very good, and principally for children that are troubled
with worms.
TAke half an ounce of aloes epa^icum, a scruple of Saffron, two Dragmes of the
juice of Cytrons, a Dragme of pleasant white wine: mix all well together, and
spread it upon some linen clothe, and lay it upon his heart.

A remedy against the worms in young children.
TAke ye flower of bitter Lupines, aloes epaticu^ of each three Dragmes, of the
juice of worm wodde two Dragmes, all well mixed together, let it be spredde
upon some cloth or cloute, and lay it upon the chyldes Navel.

A remedy against the pain of the stomach.
TAke two ounces of the cromme of the bread of Bran sprinkle it with the wine of
Pomegranettes between sweet and sour, and plaintaine water of each four
ounces: press that hard, and give the wine tempered with the said water, unto
the Pacient: If the pain come of the continual and great burning of an ague,
take this drink an hour before it comme and you shall find it of a merueylous
virtue. But if y^ pain be exceeding, it shall be good to give unto the Pacient
this (...) following, at what hour so ever it be that the pain takes him.

Take three Dragmes of the Electuarie of Succo rosarum, two scruples of
Philonium romanum: Mire them and make thereof a Bolus, which shall greatly
profit him.

Another remedy for the same, when all other will not profit him.
TAke syrop of Roses, syrop of Wormewod of each an ounce and a half, a grain
of Opium, sees them slightlye one wawme, and stirrynge it together with three
ounces of the broth of a Hen, you shall give the Pacient drink.

A ^omentation or nouryshment very syngular for the same.
TAke red Roses, the flowers of Camomille, of Wormewod, of Mynte, of each a
handefull: heat the said herbs upon whote burning tyles sprinkled with white
wine, and lay them often times upon his stomach.

Another.
IT is a thing tried against the pain of the stomach so that it come not of
cold, and also to be preserved from the same, to take day by day before
meals, two scruples of Pills of washed Aloes.

Another against the same.
TAke half an ounce of washed Aloes, and three ounces of honnye Roset, sees
this in two pound of water, until there remain but half, than strain it
through a strainer, and give thereof unto y^ Pacient, every day early in the
morning two ounces: this will beale and cure his grief, or else will preserve him
from it if he be not already taken with it.

Another remedy.
IT is a thing well proved, that the sick man take earlye in the morninge a
Dragme and a half of the best Mythridate: and straight upon it drink a
draught of Malmesey, and by and by he shall be healed or eased.

Another very good.
TAke five ounces of Camomille water distilled, and of Nutmegges well beaten
into powder half an ounce, if you give it whote unto the Pacient, when the
pain has him, he shall be eased.

Another remedy proved.
TAke flowers of Camomille, Melilot, Mynt, Pulegruin, Calamy^t, Southernewodde,
Senegre^e, seed of Line, of each a handefull, red Roses, Sp^ea squinanti, of
each two Dragmes, Danci, carui, Any^e, Dill, Fenel, of each half a handeful,
Galingale, Zedoaria, of each two dragmes, Cloves, Nutmegges, Lignu^ aloes Ma^e,
read Coral, of each a Dragme: let all sceth in a sufficient quantity of
water and edoriferous white wine until the third part be consumed: than with
a sponge steeped in whote ^ycoure nourishe therewith his stomach morning and
euenyng before he eat, and this will bring his stomach in good state.

A nourishment very good against the same.
TAke a pound of oil of Spike made in Bal^^o marie, warm it luke warm, and
with new shorn and unwashed Wulle steeped in it, nourish therewith the
stomach, and at the last bind it upon it.

A little bag to carye about one against the same disease.
TAke wormewod, Mint, Pulegium* Calamint, of each half a handful, Nutmegge,
Cloves, Mace, Lignum aloes, of each adragme: make all into a fine powder, and
put it in a little bag, par^umyng it with odoriferous white wine, and than lay
it upon your stomach: if you continue to carry it about you, you shall feel your
self merueylous well.

A drink for the same.
I Have found my self always very well, as well for being preserved from this
pain of the stomach, as delivered of it, being troubled with it. To wit in
taking six ounces of honnye rosat strained, a Dragme and a half of Nutmegges,
and two ounces of the best water of a Uine, and sees them altogether until the
water of the Uine be consumed, and in taking fasting every morning three
sponnes full of that which is strayned.

Another remedy to lay to the stomach.
TAke Masticke, Cloves, Nutmegges, of each a dragme, half a Dragme of Mace,
and as much of Synamome: make hereof a very fine powder. Than tossed the upper
or neither crust of a lofe of Branne, and dippe it in whote Malmesey, strowing
upon it of y^ said powder, and so layinge it upon your stomach whote, the
pain will go away incontinent.

Another remedy well tried and proved, and good, chiefly for young children
vexed with the pain of the stomach: which is known, if they vomit or belche.
TAke the crommes of Branne bread four ounces, roast or tossed it, and beat it
small into powder, and after incorporate the powder with the juice of
wormewodde, and mynt of each as much as shall suffice and put to it more a
dragme of Nutmegges. Of all this being mixed together make an ointment, and
laying it upon your stomach, it will ease and cease the pain, the belching
and the vomiting.

A remedy against an apostume in the stomach.
IT is a thing well tried, that if the Pacient take every morning at the break
of the day, six ounces of Camomill water distilled, he shall be cured and healed
of the impostume already begone in him.

Against the same.
TAke four ounces of Emula purified, two ounces of wormewodde newlye extract and
make in form of Loch, with as much Sugre as shall need, and give it to the
Pacient morninge and evening before his meals.

A plaster for the same.
TAke two pound of white honny, half an ounce of green wormewodde, an ounce
and a half of the roots of march Mallows: sees al together until it be
very well sodden, put unto it some flower of Senegren, and of Lyneseede, of
each half a handefull. Than put to it some oil of wormewodde, as much as shall
serve to make a plaster, the which you shall lay upon your stomach,
renewynge it evening and morning.

A nourishment or keeping of the stomach in his natural heat by washyng or
bathyng it.
TAke two pound of Turpentyne, the suck or juice of wormewod, and of wild
Mallows of each four ounces, of fresh Butter an ounce, of Saffron a Dragme, of
oil of Wormewod two ounces: mix all, and sees it one wawme: and being whote
weate some linen cloth in it, and therewithal wash and bath your stomach
morning and evening. And you shall se that by and by the matter will dissolve.

A remedy against vomityng.
IF the vomityng come at a certain day or hour, it shall be good that the
Pacient, before or at the hour that he must vomit, do eat some morsel of
tosted bread, stieped in four ounces of the wine of sour Pomegranetts,
drinkyng also afterward the wine.

An ointment very good against choleric vomiting.
TAke oil of Quinces, oil of Roses, of each an ounce: half an ounce of
wormewod, of red Coral, and of red Roses of each half a Dragme, of Nutmegges a
Dragme: beat to powder that which may be beaten, and with a little wax make
thereof a soft ointment, and annoint the Pacients stomach with it morning and
euenyng before his meals.

Another remedy against phlegmatic vomitynge.
TAke the yelke of an Egg roasted, a scruple of frankensence, with as much
Masticke, make into powder that which may be made into powder, and put with the
egg. And the Pacient shalve well if he take of it every morning fasting.

A remedy against the Hycket oryexynge.
MYngle a pound of strong and odoriferous white wine, with a Dragme of
Galingale beaten into powder, and make thereof a drink, whereof the Pacient
shall take whote, eueninge and morning two ounces, two hours before his meals.

Another.
IT is a thing found very good, to give the Pacient every morning three hours
before he eat, a ra^ine of green Ginger, and by and by upon that let him
drink two draughtes of Malmesey: and he shall quickly be healed.

Remedies against the pain of the Liver, come through ventositie.
TAke the roots of Galingale, and Zedoaria, of each two Dragmes, a Dragme of
Spica, with as much Squinantum, Cloves, Nutmegges, of each half a Dragme: Let
al be made into a small powder: and make thereof an Electuary with scommed
Honny, as much as shall need: whereof you shall take some euenyng and morning
before you eat.

Another of a very great effect.
Mix together two ounces of Diarhodon abated, Trium sandolorum an ounce, of the
best Rubarbe made in fine powder a Dragme, and with syrope of Succorye, make an
Electuarye, whereof the Pacient shall take evening and morninge before al other
meat, the quantity of a Walnut.

A remedy found very good against the Liver that is appostumate or corrupted.
TAke four ounces of Diarhodon abated, of the best Rubarbe well made into fine
powder, mingle all with the syrop of Succorye and make thereof an Electuarie.
Let the thing that the Pacient shall take every morning two hours before his
meal, be of three dragmes.

For the same.
IT is a thing tried, that if you do put new shorn and unwashed Wulle to
steep in the oil of white Lilies, and the oil Nardus celcica, lay it right
where the pain is, and it shall keep that the liver corrupt not.

Remedies against the Dropsye.
TAke dry Wormewod, dry Agrimonye, dry Soldanella* of each two Dragmes, of
Spica two scruples: all this being made into a fine powder, lay to stepe in the
water of the roots of Eldern tree, as much as shall suffice, and give of it to
the Pacient, every morning at the break of the day two Dragmes.

Against the same.
TAke three ounces of the juice or suck of Iris, Galingale, Zedoaria* of each
two Dragmes, of Synomom, of Cloves, of each half a dragme of Soldanella, half
an ounce. All this being made into a very fine powder, make thereof an Electuarye
with as much scommed honny as shall suffice, of the which Electuary you shall
give half an ounce unto the Pacient every morning two hours before he eat.

A drink of great virtue and strength against the wyndye dropsye.
MYngle together two ounces of the water of the rotes of Walwort or Danewort,
with four ounces of the water of Elderne tree, and in drinkyng this early in the
morning thyrtye days together, you shall be very well.

Another remedy very good to take after a purgation.
TAke a pound of Goats dunge, with as much of Ox dunge, and dry it in an
oven, and so make it into a small powder, incorporatyng it with juice of
wormewod, and oil of Rue, as much as shall suffice as it were to make therewith
an ointment. And sprede some part of it upon a lynnen cloth, layinge it whote
upon the Pacientes belly when he goes to bed.

The next morninge folowinge, take four ounces of strong and odoriferous
wine, and sees it with a hand full of Sage, and as much Rosemary, until the
fourth part of the wine be consumed: with the which being hot, you shall
wash his bellye. All this done, take an ounce of Diagalanga, of Rosatum
aromaticum, ^riu^ sandalorum, Diarrhodon abated, of each half an ounce: mix
all together with Rosat honnye, and make thereof an Electuarye; and giving him
a mouthful of it incontinent after his bellye is washed.

Remedies against the Dropsy, called ascites. A drink very good to take once
a week.
TAke as much of the suck or juice of Iris or Gladiolus* as half an Egg
shell will hold, minglyng it together, with it four ounces of Melicrat, with
half a dragme of the best Rubarbe well beaten in powder. This drink being
given whote and early in the morninge unto the Pacient: it is a wonder to see
with what virtue and strength it works.

A synguler good Electuarye for the same, which ought to be declared or
disclosed but to your special friends.
TAke Agrimony, Cuscuta, dried Grapes, Licorous Mirabola^s, Cytrons of each
half an ounce, of the roots of Pa^s^ye, of Fenell, of Capers and Agaricke, of
each an ounce. All this gros^ye stamped must be sodden until the composition of
half the water, and strain it: and in strainyng it put to it half a pound
of Honnye, and four ounces of Sugre, and sees it again until it be as thick
as Honnye. This done, put to it half a Dragme of the best Rubarbe, two Dragmes
of gommie Turbith, a Dragme and a half of the leaves of Chameloe^, which has
leaves like to an Olive, tempered in Uinaigre, two Scruples of Diagridium
corrected, of Spica half a Dragme, with as much of Ginger: and make of all this an Electuarye, of the which you shall give the Pacient twyse a week. Note
yet that the greatest quantity may not be above half an ounce. And as for you
remember to give him rather less than more, or as much, having always
respect to the strength or weakness of the Pacient.

An ointment for the same.
MYxe an ounce of Vnguentum sa^da^ium, with half an ounce of y^ oil of Nardus
celtic^* and as much of the Oil of Camomille, wherewith forget not to
comfort every day his Liver morning and evening, by annoynting the place
right against it.

Another ointment very good.
TAke a pound of Turpentine, of Frankencense, Masticke, Myrhe, of each two
Dragnies, Nutmegges, Cloves, Galingale, Zedoaria, of each a Dragme and a half:
the juice of Walwort or Danewort, the juice of wild Cowcumbers of each an
ounce: and let that be made in powder that can be: and all put in a Limbecke,
let it distille for to have the oil of it, wherewith you shall annoynte all
his bellye. It is a special good remedy, not only to aswage the swelling of
the bellye in this sickness, ascites or dropsy: but also to take away al
waterye swellynge in what membre of the body so ever it be: yea it is good
also for the ache or pain of the joints, and of other parts come by cold.

A remedy against the yellowe Iaundise.
AP^rgation first taken, take two ounces of ground worms dried in the shadow,
and prepared in wine* of the best Rubarbe a Dragme, of Dogs dunge dried half
an ounce. Of all this together make a fine powder, and give unto the Pacient
every morning an ounce and a half fasting, and continuynge so fiftene days
he shall be well.

Remedies against the collicke.
TAke two ounces of strong white wine, of Nutmegges, and Cloves, of each half
a Dragme, of Galingale a Dragme, stamp these grosselye, and lay them one
night in the said wine, and in the morninge give it the Pacient to drink
with a little white Sugre. And let him continue thus drynkyng it twice a weke
fasting. It is a thing that I have tried to be very good to preserve a man
from the collicke.

A remedy never to have the collicke more.
TAke two pound of the ryne or pillinges of thick Rape roots, and four
pound of white Honnye, boil it together until the half be consumed.

Than mix with it some powder of Synomome, and Cloves, Nutmegge, Mace, black
Pepper, of each two Dragmes, and keep it in some vessel. Of the which rynes or
pillinges take every morning fasting half an ounce.

Another remedy to take in the pain and tourment of the collicke.
MYxe half an ounce of the Electuarye of Dates, with a Dragme and a half of
Philonij romani and make thereof little gobbets, the which you shall give to
the Pacient fasting, ever when the pain takes him. And you must note that in
case of necessity a man may give this medicine, yea before the disgestion of
the said diseases.

A very good powder that heals quickly the said sycknes.
MYxe a Dragme and a half of white Mulberrye leaves dried in the shadow, with
a Dragme of the ryne or pillinges of a Radishe root dried also in the shadow,
and a dragme and a half of the little karnelles or stones of meddlars. All
being made into powder, give unto the Pacient two dragmes in good and
odoriferous white wine.

A remedy which I have found to be very good for all grief or pain of the
guts or entrayles.
TAke Diagalinga, and Diabuglossa^um of each two dragmes Philouij romani four
scruples, mix al together, and make thereof little gobbets or lumpes: which you
shall give unto the Pacient at every time the pain tourmenteth him, and
specially when he is yet fasting.

A glyster wherewith I have cured many.
TAke thirtene ounces of strong white wine, four ounces of fresh butter, six
ounces of common oil, Annice, Dill, Fennel, wild Carwayes, called of the
Apoticaries carui agreste, Dauci, ameos, carthami, of each two dragmes: mix
them and sees them al until the half of the wine be consumed. Than strain it,
addinge to that which is strained two ounces of Honnye roset, an ounce and a
half of red Sugre, two dragmes of common salt, and the yelke of an Egg, mix
all this together and make thereof a glyster.

Another against the same.
Sees a pound and a half of strong white wine, with two ounces of hot
skaldynge water, until the said water be consumed, and make only a glister
of the luke warm wine: it is a thing tried that after the other glisters this
will help you much, if the ague be not with it.

Another for the same.
TAke eyghte ounces of the oil of Rue, three ounces of the oils of Castoreum, two
ounces of Philomium romanum. an ounce of Benedicta, of other things as before,
saving that you must put as little salt to it as is possible, to the end that
the virtue of the Philomium may remain in his. This glister is proved so good,
that where as all other will not help, it will deliver you; yea in a great
need or danger.

An ointment against the same.
TAke oil of Castoreum, oil of white Lilies, oil of Rue, oil of Cheiri, of
each three ounces: the juice of wild Mallows, the juice of artemisia, of each
four ounces, of skaldyng water six ounces, sees al together, until the water
be consumed: than put to it M^lanthinum, Mastick, Granum Paradisil Galingale,
of each a Dragme and a half: of Peper, Cloves, Nutmegge, Lignum aloes, of each
a Dragme. Make all this into a fine powder, and sees it again with a small
fire, and make thereof an ointment with a little wax, and so annoint the place
where the grief is, layinge upon it clean washed Wulle and warm. You shall
see a merueylous operation.

A very good receipt, which Pope clement the seventh took in his last
syckennes.
TAke Masticke, Frankensence of the male kind, Mace, of each half a pound,
Galingale, Zedoaria, of each four ounces, Cloves, Synamome, Xilobalsa^i,
carpobalsami, of each two ounces: of Ginger, Cardamony, long Pepper, black
Pepper, of each half an ounce Turbit, Agaricke, Rubarb^, of each two Dragmes:
the roots of Endive, roots of Buglosse, and Borage, of each two handefull:
Betonye, Rue, the flowers of Sticados, Arabicke, Marioram, Sage, Rosemarye, of
each half a handful: Let al be grossly stamped and beaten together, and put
into an hundred pound of strong white wine, and let it rest and remain there
three days together. And at the three days end press it hard, and strain
the wine out, and put it incontinent into a Limbecke, for to distill out of it
Aqua vite. This done put into the water of the first distillation a pound of
man's blood of the body of a very healthful and sleshie man, put it again
to distill. Do so in distillyng it always until nine times. That done take an
hundred leaves of Gold^foyle of the best and the fynest that can be had, fyftye
leaves of Siluerfoyle very fine, Jacynthes, Emeraudes, Rubies, Granades, of the
two sorts of Pearls, red Coral, red Roses, of each a Dragme and a half, of
very fine Musk, half a Dragme: Mingle all this together and make it all into
a powder, putting the said powder into the last water distilled, and let it
lie in it. xxiiii. hours. That done, put all again into the Limbecke and
distill it with a small fire: The which water being thus distilled the tenth
time, you must put into some thick violle and stop it well, or else all the
water would vanish away. It is merueylous good against al cold diseases,
either within or without the body, taking of it only a Dragme, or four
drops with a little white wine. But if the disease be hot without an ague,
as other some be by reason of some hot matter, give the Pacient of the said
water mixte with water of Endive, at every time the pain takes him.
Nevertheless if you will see with your eyes the merueylous Miracle that this
water does, give five or six ounces of it unto any syckman which has lost al
his strength and force with a little wine, suddenly you shall see al his strength
come again to him. Also assure your selves that there is no remedy more
sovereign against the plague, and so dayne death, than to drink of it every
morning before you go o^te of your house five or sire drops with strong
wine, or with the water of Endive: or else to wash your nostrels within and
without, with the rest of all your face with the same, or with a little wine
mixte with it, puttinge nothing else to it. I have found my self always
very well at all times of the plague by means of the same. Yea, namely it is
good also for those that have the disease called apoplexia or fallinge sickness,
if they wash their neck withal. This water is called Elisir vitae benedicti.

A remedy against the laxe or flyx^ come of choler.
TAke sire ounces of y^ suck or juice of Quinces: the juice of Endive, the
juice of Sorrel, of each three ounces, Sorell seed, Plaintaine seed, of each
two Dragmes: red Coral, red Rose seed, of each a Dragme Plaintaine water four
ounces: sees al together until ^he third part of the water and juice be
consumed. Than strain it pressing it hard, making thereof a syrop with as
much fine sugre as shall suffice, whereof the Pacient shall take two ounces
morning and evening two hours before he eat any thing. This drink is well
tried, and very good.

Annoyntment very good for the same.
TAke oil Roset made of Olyues not ripe, oil of Quinces, oil of Myrtel of
each an ounce, red Roses and read Coral of each a Dragme: Masticke* Nutmegge,
of each half a Dragme, make that into powder that may be made, making thereof
an ointment soft with a li^le wax, wherewith annoint your stomach and the
lower part of your belly.

Remedies against the laxe disenterycke.
TAke sire Dragmes of My^abolaus citrinis burned, Plantaine seed, Sorrel
seed, Endive seed, and all parched of each three Dragmes: of the ^ower
Cordial flowers, beside Uiolettes, of each a handefull: sees all in a
sufficient quantity of water, wherein first some steel must be quenched,
until the half be consumed: Than strain it, mixing with that which is
strained two Dragmes and a half of the best Rubarbe parched and of Pholonij
per^^ci four Scruples. This drink is found very good by experience.

Another drink very good.
TAke two Dragmes of Frankensence of the male kind with as much Masticke: a
Dragme of boale Armenick red Coral, Hearts horn burned, of each half a
Dragme: of the stone called the bloodstone burned two Scruples: Make al into a
fine powder and steep it in red wine y^ binds, and so give the sick man a
Dragme and a half of it when he goth to bed.

Another remedy.
TO eat in this bloodye flyre every morning fasting half a Dragme of
Rubarbe parched, is a thing well tried and very acceptable.

Another drink very good in cac^ the Pacient ^a^e therwyth any great
doloure in his bellye (as often times it happens) by reason of exulceration
and ^nawynge of the guts.
TAke three ounces either of Goats milk or shepes milk, wherein must first be
quenched some read hot steel, an vn^e and a half of the juice of Plantaine,
Aromaticum rosatum a Dragme, myngle al together, and make a drink for one
time. Whereof give the Pacient three days together: and the flyxe shall soon
after sease.

Another remedy when the pain is great.
TAke Myrtel berries. ii. dragmes, Sorrel sede, Plantain sede, of each, ii.
dragmes: of frankensence male three graynes, of new yellow wax two Dragmes: of
Synamome two Scruples: put all this into the bellye of a Turtle dove plucked,
sowyng her up again: than roste her with a little fire, and let the Pacient
eat of her three or five days together. Or if you will make a Coulys of her:
and it is certain that he shall be healed.

Suffumigations or smokynges for the same. The first.
Lay an ounce of Turpentyne upon a plate of iron made hot in the fire, and let
the Pacient receive morninge and evening the smoke at his foundement through a
close stool. And continuynge so three or four days, there is no doubt but he
shall be cured.

The second.
Stamp well two poonde of the dunge of a young ass, and dry it in an Oven,
and see y^ it burn not. This done, take a part of it and put it morninge and
evening upon hot coals under a close stole: to the end that the Pacient
syttyng upon it may have his foundement smoked therewith. It is a remedy of
great virtue against the bloodye flyre of young children, if first they be
purged with a little Rubarbe.

Another remedy for the same.
Sees a pound of apiastrum in English Baulme, together with a handefull of
Taxus barba^us in red wine and strong vineygre of each sufficiently, until
the third part be consumed. Than strain out the wine, and the vinaigre, and
byndng these herbs fast in a bag good and long, lay it hot euenyng and
morning upon his foundement. And continuyng so, you shall have a good end of
it.

An ointment very good for the bloody flyxe.
TAke Trochyskes or little balls of Carabe, little balls of Terra figillata, of
each three Dragmes, Galliae mus^at^, Galliae alefangine, of each a Dragme and a
half, red Coral, red Rose seeds, Masticke, Frankensence, of each a Dragme. Let
all this be made in powder, and put in very strong red Uinaigre* xxiiii.
hours together, and afterwade dry it by the fire or in the Sun. That done,
make it all again into powder, putting oil of Quinces, oil rosat raw, or
sharp, oil of Mastick of each two ounces, with as much white wax as shall
suffice. And with this annoint the Pacientes bellye.

Remedies against the swellyng and oppilation or stoppynge of the Spleen.
TAke two ounces and a half of the juice of wylde-Mallowes, or marshe Mallows
purified, two ounces of the juice of Calaminte, two Dragmes of Seen dried, and
make thereof an Electuarye, miringe all this with as much as shall suffice of
skommed Honnye, and give of* it unto the Pacient a sponnefull, three hours
before his meals. It is a remedy merueylous good.

A vomentation or nourishynge by washing for the same.
TAke of the roots of wild or marshe Mallows, and of Garden Mallows, of
each two ounces, Senegrene seed, Linescede, flowers of Camomil, Melilote, of
each a handefull: Calamint, Bauline, cuscuta, Pulegium, Anyce, carui, Fennel,
of each a handefull: sees all this in a sufficient quantity of strong white
Uinaigre, and wash the place right against the Spleen, every day bathing it,
and the Pacient shall be very well at his ease.

An ointment against the same.
TAke oil of Rue, oil of Capers* oil of Camomille, of each a pound: of the
strongest and best white wine you can get half a pound, roots of wild or
marshe Mallows, roots of other Mallows roots of Fern, of each half an
ounce: Braye well the roots, and sees them with all the rest, until there
remain no more wine: after that take it, and press out the Oil, puttinge it
to a pound of the best and strongest white Uinaigre with an ounce of panis
porcinus well stamped and purified, seething it well again, until the Uinaigre
be consumed, and than straining it again, press it barde that the oil may
come out.

Unto these oils thus strayned out, you must put oppoponacis, Bdellij,
Galbani, a^moniaci, of each two dragmes: dissolve thy gommes in strong
Uinaigre, miring them with the other things, and seethinge it slightlye once
again that the virtue of the gommes vanishe not away: make thereof a soft
ointment, with very good yellowe ware, wherewith annoynte the place right
against the Spleen every day morning and euenyng.

Another fomentation or bathing for the same.
IT is a thing experimented that if you wash or bath only the Spleen with
very strong Uinaigre wherein Pyrites, every stone of the which there may fire
be stricken.
there has been quenched the stone called Marchasita, which George Agricola
calls Pyrites, laying the clothe dipped in it, right upon the place of the
Spiens. Doing thus you shall not seek any other remedy, for this will abate
all the swellyng.

Remedies against the pain, swellyng and ventositie of the Matrice.
Sees together roots of matricaria an ounce, Dauci, half an ounce, white Honny
two ounces, skommyng well the Honny until it be thoroughly sodden: and straynyng
and pressing it hard, myngle this Honnye with two ounces of the broth that a
Hen has been sodden in, and three ounces of the decoction of anyce, and give
the woman drnike of it ten days together: she shall be healed. Wherefore keep
it well in mind.

Another tried of some women.
TAke a dragme of Nutmegges, a dragme and a half of y^ roots of Matricaria, a
scruple of Spica, sees all this in six ounces of good white wine, until the
third part be consumed. Than strain it out, putting into that which shall be
strayned two Dragmes of very white sugre, and so give of it unto the woman, at
the break of the day, and at all times when the pain shall take her.

Another remedy very good, and well known of women.
TAke a sweet apple, and make him hollow within, make a powder of Nutmegges,
Mace, Synamom, of each half a dragme, Cloves half a scruple* put all this
within the apple with a little Sugre, and roste it under hot ashes, and give of
it unto the woman ever when the pain comes unto her. But if the pain
increase so much that her life is in doubt, put to all this two grains of
opium, and sodaynely the pain will depart.

Another.
TAke Calamint, Matricaria, flowers of Cammomille, of Sage, of Rosemary, of
each a handefull: Sees all in lie, or ashye water of a sufficient quantity,
until the third part be consumed with the which water wash the legs of the
woman, from the knees to the feet.

A fomentation or nouryshyng.
TAke a handful of Artemisia, with as much of the flowers of Camomille, Mynte,
and Calamynte, make hot a tyle, and power some good and odoriferous wine upon
it, and after put also the herbs upon it for to lay them so hot upon the
Matrice, at every time that the pain comes. Nevertheless, take heed that
you wash or bath her not, because that all moisture is evil for her.

A very good ointment.
Mire a pound of the oil of Cheiri with four ounces of the oil of Sureau,
heat it and annoynte the upper part of the Matrice with it, dippinge some
lynnen cloth in the oil, and laying it hot upon the Matrice. This also laid
upon a woman's belly after this sort when she is in labor, will ease and
mitigate her pain.

A plaster or cere clothe to lay upon the Matrice if the grief be old or
inuerate.
TAke an ounce of dried Matricaria, with as much of the flowers of Cheiri,
dried: half an ounce of Gallia muscato. or else alefangine, if the woman be poor
of Galbanum, Bdellium* Serapini, of each two Dragmes: Olibani, Masticke, of
each a Dragme and a half: Dissolve these gommes in oil of Cheiri, making
into powder the rest that may be made: and make thereof a plaster with a
little pitche, wax and oil of Sefanni, spreadyng it upon some leather, and
layinge it upon the place of the Matrice, and renew it every eight days.

Remedies to make a woman's time to come that is let or hyndered by some cause.
TAke two ounces of the juice of Sauyne, and purify it, mixing with it two
dragmes of Synamome well made into powder: four graynes of Saffron, two ounces
of the water Radishe roots distilled with a little Sugre, for two times: this
provoke merueylously the flowers of a woman. Wherefore beware ye give it not
unto a woman great with child. For all that provoke her flowers, makes her
also to labor before her time.

Another remedy very good also to cause a woman to bring forth the child
before the time, if the woman be in danger of it.
Mire two graynes of Saffron, and two dragmes of Sugre in four ounces of
Pymperuell water, making thereof a drink, and give it to the woman at twyse,
at the break of the day, and when she goes to bed.

A washyng very good for the same.
TAke Calamint, Pulegium, Sage, artemisia, Rosemarie of each a handefull,
roots of Iris or Gladiolus, the roots of Walworte or Daneworte, roots of
Sureau, of each half a handful: sees all in good white wine enough, until three
parts be consumed. Wherewith wash the woman in the morning, and when she
goes to bed, from the haunches downward. Further more, the morning after she
is washed, you shall give her to drink a dragme of old Triacle, three graynes
of Saffron, and two ounces of the water of artemisia, mixte together. This is so
certain, that if she use it five times only she shall have her flowers.

Against to much abundaunce of flowers.
MAke a very fine powder of half an ounce of the inward skyn that covers
the kernels of wild Fylberdes, giving a dragme thereof unto the woman,
incontinent the to much coming shall cease.

An ointment against the same.
TAke the juice of Plantan, the juice of Solatrum, the juice of Rubarbe, of
each half an ounce, red Coral, Frankensence of the male kind, Mastick, of each
a dragme and a half: Coriander prepared, seeds of red Roses, of each two
Scruples, seeds of white Iusquiamum, the ryne of the roots of Mandragora, of
each half a dragme: strong red Uinaigre half an ounce, make in fine powder all
that may be made, and mingle al together, with the which being luke warm,
annoint the souls of the woman's feet every night when she goes to bed, and
you shall see a good and fortunat effect.

Against the prefocation or stranglyng of the matrice.
Sees in strong wine the roots of Gladiolus, the roots of Galamint, the
roots of C^clamen, in English rape Uiolet, of each a handeful, until half the
wine be consumed: than strain them, and with that which is constrained out
wash the woman's knees morninge and evening: for it is very good.

Against the same of what cause soever it come.
Mire a dragme of assa faetida, and half a Dragme of Daucus, with Honnye
roset, and make thereof five Pylles, and taking one of them every morning, they
are very good, as well to preserve a woman from it as to heal her of it.

Another against the same.
TAke two scruples of the best Agaricke, two Dragmes of Turpentine, seeds of
Daucus, and assa faetida, of each half a scruple, mingle them and make little
balls, of the which you shall give the woman every day. For it is a thing
very good to heal her, or else to keep her from it.

Against the same.
TAke water distiled of the roots of Daucus, of wild Poppye five ounces,
Honnye roset an ounce and a half: mix al together, and give the woman drink of
it. For whether the pain be already or is like to come, she shall be cured or
preserved from it.

Against the same.
TAke two dragmes of castoreum, a dragme of the same woman's hear, mixed with a
little Rosen of a Pyne tree, and make thereof great Pills as big as
Filberdes, with one of the which Pills perfume her nostrels, at the time of
the prefocation or stranglinge of the Matrice, and incontinent she shall be eased.

Remedies to be used when the Matrice comes out of her natural place, or
falls.
YOu shall mix oil of Masticke with oil of rosat, green or raw of each two
ounces, then cupularum glaudium, the flowers of wild Pomegranade tree, the ryne
of Pomegranades, Myrtelberries, of each a scruple, of Frankensence, mastick,
Acatia, Hypocistidos half a dragme: mi^e them and make thereof a very fine
powder. And then castyng it upon the neck of the Matrice and dippe your
fyngers in the oil, and so put the matrice upward with them.

A plaster very good.
TAke Sorrel seed, the seed of Plantaine, and of Coriander prepared, of each
two dragmes: read Coral, seeds of red Roses of each a dragme, Hypocistidos,
acacia, Frankensence of each a dragme and a half: Galls, the Pills of
Pomegranades, flowers of Pomegranads, of each. ii. dragmes: beat al into a
fine powder, gathering together the powder, with the oil of veriuyce rosat, and
making thereof a plaster with wax and pitche as much as shall suffice, and
spread it upon a piece of leather, a part of the which you shall lay upon
the woman's belly, right against the place of the matryce along unto both her
haunches. And this shall help her.

Remedies for the Matryce corrupted or apostumated. A plaster for to dissolve
it.
TAke the flowers of Camomille, melilot, Matricaria, the leaves of mallows,
the roots of Uiolettes, Branckvrsyue, of each a handefull: the roots of wild
or marshe mallows cut very small three ounces: sees it al in a sufficient
quantity of water until ye half be consumed: then put to it a bandful of
flower of Lineseede, with as much of flower of Synegrene, of Butter hens
grease, of each as much as will grease over the plaster, the which you shall
lay upon the appostumate or corrupt place. Notwithstanding remember that to
every grief of the Matrice (as we have our self well tried and proved) all
moist fomentation or bathyng is hurtful, and therefore beware in any ca^e you
do it not.

Another plaster for the same.
TAke the juice of green Camomil, and the juice Matricaria, of each two ounces:
mix them together with a pound of the plaster of Melilot, and lay it upon
the corrupt place: It is certain that doing so often times, it will wax ripe
and rotte.

A plaster.
TAke six ounces of Dyaquilon without Gomme: two dragmes of Saffron, an ounce
and a half of the juice of Matricaria: make thereof ceratum or plaster with
wax, and a little Rosen of a Pyne tree, and lay it upon the place of the
corruption: it is a singular thing.

Remedies against the ulcers or corrupt matter of the matrice.
TAke two ounces of the ointment of common Tutia, dissolve it well in eyghte
ounces of Ewes milk, and squirt it into the Matrice. This is very good.

A drink for the same.
TAke six ounces of new and fresh milk, myngle it with an ounce of Honny
roset, and give it to the woman ten days together, three hours before she
eat any thing. And this is also very good.

Remedies against the white flyxe of women.
TAke gomme Arabicke, Dragacante, Amylum of each two dragmes, of Masticke, a
dragme: make all into a fine powder, and with a little good Sugre dissolve it in
the juice of Quinces: Make thereof balls of two dragmes a piece: of the which
give one to the woman, every morning three hours before she break her fast,
whereupon incontinent let her drink a draught of red stipticke wine, doing
the the like at night before supper. And this shall help her so that in short
space she shall be healed.

Another against the same.
TAke the yelke of two eggs raw and new laid, Frankensence of the male
kind, boale Armenick Terra sigillata of each half a dragme, make into powder,
that which may be made, minglinge all together, and give to the sick woman: a
mouthfull of it every morninge, six hours at the least before she eat any
thing. This remedy is so excellent that I have cured many with it.

A drink.
TAke four ounces of red stiptick and byndyng wine wherein you must often times
quench first some hot Steel, gomme Arabic, Dragacante, of each half a
dragme, mingle it together and make a drink of it: Whereof you shall give the
woman fiftene days together earthly in the morning: and there is no doubt but
she shall be healed.

A powder against the same.
MYxe half an ounce of Date stones well beaten in to powder with a dragme of
Dragons blood in red wine, and give the woman one Dragme of it at the break
of the day, and another when she goth to bed, and she shall be healed.

Remedies against pyssyng hoar. A Syrop.
TAke Syrop of Uioletts, and of Nenuphar, of each an ounce, mingling with it
Plantaine water, Porcelaine, of common cold seeds, of each an ounce. This
Syrop digesteth the collericke matter, and takes away the bytyng humors that
cause the heat in pissynge.

A drink against the same, to take three hours before dynner and at noone.
Mix four ounces of the water of Mallows with two ounces of Syrop violet.
Drink this continually seven days: and at the eight day mix with it an ounce
of lenytife Diasebestes, with a dragme and a half of Diaprunis laratyue, and
make thereof a drink with the water of the decoction pectorall, the which you
shall give to the Pacient.

Against Gon^rhaea, which is when a man's scede goth from him vnwittynglye.
TAke four ounces of Ewes milk, and mixed it with. ii. dragmes of Hares hear
burned and well made into powder: give the Pacient drink of it twice a day
morning and evening two hours before he eat.

An ointment against the same.
TAke two ounces of Olibani, acacia, and Hypocistidos, of each two dragmes, of
Galls a dragme, Labdany, half a dragme: oil of Masticke, oil of Spike, oil
of Myrtle, of each half an ounce: Make that into a fine powder that can be made
powder, and make thereof a soft ointment with a sufficient quantitte of wax,
putting to it at the end half a scruple of Camphyre, with this ointment
annoint his raynes and the chine of the back, his flanks and the place about
the privy members, evening and morninge.

Another remedy merueylous good.
TAke half an ounce of Tutia, prepared, Sarcocolla, washed aloes hepaticum,
Sugre candie, of each three dragmes: mingle it and make it into a fine powder,
whereof dissolve one dragme in woman's milk, and therewith squirt the man's yard
a good way in, five or six times a day, and he shall incontinent be healed. But
if there be any vlceration he shall also soon be rid of it.

Remedies for them that piss blood.
TAke water of Plantain, of nightshade in Latin Solanum, Sorrel, Endive,
Wormewod, of each four ounces, white Sandall and red, Been white and red, of
red Roses, of each a dragme and a half, Spondium two dragmes, of Spica ten
grains: of the best Uinaigre three ounces: make that into fine powder which
may be made, and make thereof Epithema for the liver.

An ointment for the same.
TAke the juice of Plantain, of nightshade, of Sorrel, of each an ounce, oil
roset, oil of Myrtel, of each half an ounce, Hypocistidos, red Coral of each a
dragme: make that into powder that is to be made, and make of it an ointment
very soft with a little wax and annoyntinge the raines of the Pacient, from the
haunche unto the place about the privy members, and to the root of his yard.
And he shall be well eased.

A plaster for the same.
TAke Plantain seed, Sorrel seed, Purcelin seed, of each two dragmes, gomme
Arabicke, Dragacante, of each a dragme and a half, Hypocistidos, acacia, bole
Armenicke, sylke burned, of each a dragme, Terra sigillata. Hares hear burned
of each a dragme: make al together in a fine small powder, and make thereof a
plaster with oil rosat green or raw, wax and pitche, as much as shall
suffice: the which you shall lay upon the raynes of the Pacient. It is proved
and tried to be very good.

Remedies against the gravel.
IT is a thing certain, that if the Pacient swallowe down three dragmes of
new Cassa every day before dynner, he shall never have the gravel.

Another.
TAke the stone that is found in the heads of Crabs half an ounce: burn it, and
make it in powder very fine, mixing the powder with the water of Saxifrage, and
so give it to the Pacient.

Another remedy well tried, whereby I have often times found my self eased.
TAke oil of Scorpions made of oil of bitter Almondes, Turpentine, fresh
Butter of each half a pound, of Saffron a Scruple: beat all this in some
vessel on the fire, and with a linen cloth bathe and wash often times a day
from the heighte of the haunches, unto the root or beginning of the privy
members.

Against the same.
Dissolve three dragmes of he Goats blood prepared in sufficient quantity of
Broo^e flowers water distilled, and give it to the Pacient.

Another very good.
MIre an ounce of the juice of grene Lemmons with three ounces of Malmesey, and
gene it the Pacient to drink all at one time, when he ^eeleth his grief.

Receiptes to hasten the child birth, and to mitigate the pain of the
travail and labor.
TAke Genyper berries, and bay Berries of each seven: great Synamome half a
dragme, whole Synamom a dragme. Put al together in a turtle Doves belly that is
fat and ^^eshye, and put her on a Spyt and roste her, and baste her with Hens
grease, the which you shall give to the woman every day for her supper. It is
a thing as notable as any other can be. Yet in the mean time you must note,
that none of these receipts must be given to a woman great with child,
unless she have passed the moon of the nynth month that she was with child.

Another.
TAke fresh Butter washed in Uiolet water three ounces, mucilago of Cabbage two
ounces, mucilago of wild or march Mallows, mucilago of Figs of each halte
an ounce, and mix it together. And if the woman be nigh her time, let her put
every day into the entry of her Matrice, a cloute wete and dipped in this
lycour, and she shall bring forth her child without great travail and
difficulty.

Another.
TAke six pound of good white wine, Calamint, Sage, Rosemary, of each half a
ha^dful: sees al together until the fourth part of the wine be consumed: with
the which the woman drawing nigh to her time shall wash her legs, once a
day either morninge or evening.

Another.
TAke an ounce of the pilling of Radishe roots with as much Mercury, three
graynes of Saffron, a dragme of gross Synamome well beaten into powder, two
dragmes of the juice of Sauyne. Mingle and stamp well altogether, byndyng it in
some fine lynen cloth upon the neck of the Matrice. If the woman labor in
great danger, she shall suddenly be delivered.

Another remedy very good, but yet such one that may not be given but in
great necessity, or when the child is dead within her bellye.
Mix together two ounces of the juice of Sauyne, a dragme of Boras mynerall
well made in powder, and an ounce of odoriferous white wine, and give it the
woman to drink, and the effect will soon follow.

Remedies when a man pysseth against his will.
IT is a thing very good and tried, to give every morning to the Patient a
Cytryn myrab^lan well conserved.

Another for the same.
Take Plantaine water, ^^^^ water* Sorrel water, night shade water, of ^^^^
half a (...)wodde water four ounces, kinds o^ Cero^^^ia sandalia an ounce:
Spondij, two dragmes* red Coral, red Rose seeds, Plantain seeds, of each two
dragmes, of Spike ten grains, of very good Uinaigre three ounces: mire
altogether, and with a white linen cloth dipped therein and well cleansed,
wash and bathe the Liver with it and the raines of the back. That done, take
oil Roset, oil of Myrtel, oil of Quinces of each an ounce. Make into powder
that may be made, and make thereof an ointment very soft with a little wax,
annoyntynge incontinent the Pacients raynes of the back and his bellye.

Remedies against the stone in the bladder.
TAke Liton tripon, three dragmes, ten bitter Almondes with as much of y^ kernells
of Peches: braye all this well together, and make thereof little balls with
Sugre, the which you shall give to the Pacient every month ten days together,
at the break of the day, ^lepy^ge a little upon it, and you shall see a good
end and issue of it.

A remedy and preservative against the same.
TAke four ounces of Turpentine, and burn it upon some plate of Iron red
whote, until it may be made into powder: of the which powder, take two
dragmes, water of Sa^ifrage four ounces, mingling al together, make thereof a
drink, which you shall give the Pacient twice a weke, at the break of the day
continuyng so two months together. If he have not yet the stone, he shall
without doubt be preserved from it: but if he have it, he shall also be healed
of it.

Another for the same.
TAke si^re Dragmes of Turpentine ten times washed in water, and make thereof
little balls called Bol^, with the juice of Saxifrage, and a little Sugre, and
give it to the Pacient as is aforesaid.

Remedies for to heal the Emerhodes or Pyles. A very excellent ointment.
THe body being purged take oil Uiolet washed in water of Uioletts, and fresh
butter washed, of each an ounce: make there of a soft ointment with the yelke
of an Egg, half an ounce of oil of Lineseede, and as much wax as shall suffice:
anoint the Emorrhodes or Pyles with it twice or thryse a day There is no such
remedy as this is, when women lie in child bed because of the retention of
their flowers they are often times, yea almost daily molested with these
Emorrhodes or Pyles very soore.

A plaster against the same.
TAke of the cromme of bran bread a pound, of ewes milk, or cow milk, or
else goats milk, two pound: Sees all together until two or three parts be
consumed: than put to it two ounces of the grease taken of the chyne of a goat,
and an ounce of the powder of ground worms, mingling al together, and so lay
it whote upon his foundement.

An exce^lent and very good hot bath or baine for the same.
YOu shall take the leaves of Mallows roots and all the roots of wild or
marshe Mallows, of holy^ Hocke, Uiolets, Cabbage, the flowers of Taxus
barbatus, Camomille, Melilot, Syngrene, Lyneseede* of each a handeful and a
half: sees al in a sufficient quan titie of water of the river, or some other
fresh water, until half be consumed: than power it whote into some tubbe,
causing the Pacient to sit in it twyse a day, in the morning and at night, the
space of an hour.

Another remedy of very great virtue.
TAke. ii. ounces of the juice of leckes, an ounce of the juice of Persly, butter
made of cow milk, walnut oil* oil of y^ decoction of ca^aputia, of each an
ounce and a half, oil of Radishe roots an ounce, of the suet that is about the
kydneys of a Goat an ounce and a half: let all be well sturred and brayed in a
mortar. This being hot, if you lay it with fat well upon and about the
Emorhodes twyse a day, vsyng so thirty days long, I have proved the remedy
to be of great efficatie and virtue, that without doubt I dare assure the
Pacient of heath.

Remedies against the swellyng of the coddes.
TAke oil of white Lylyes, oil of Roses complete of each two ounces, of the
grease that is washed of from new shorn Wulle an ounce and a half, wete some
fattye Wulle in it, and lay it whote upon his Coddes: and then will the
swellyng go away with the pain.

Another against hard swellynge.
TAke Resyns dried and carnelles pluckte out three ounces, Barley flower two
ounces, as much of the flower of white Cyche peason, half an ounce of the flower
of Syngrene, as much of the flower of Lynesede, an ounce and a half of Honnye:
mingle all well together, stampynge it in a mortar, and lay it whote upon his
Coddes.

A good plaster for the same.
TAke gomme Arabicke, Dragacante, of each two dragmes, Galbanum, Armoniacke, of
each a dragme and a half, Bean flower and the flower of white Cyche peason,
of each an ounce: Dissolve the gommes in oil of sweet Almondes, and a little
Uinegre, then mire all well together, and make thereof a plaster with Pitche
and Wax, as much as shall suffice.

An ointment against the same.
TAke oil of white Lylyes, and oil of Camomille, of each an ounce, of Common
two dragmes, Labdany, Galbany, of each an ounce: Dissolve the Gommes in strong
Uinaigre, and make in powder that which is to be made: And make of this a soft
ointment, with a little Wax, wherein wete some new shorn and unwashed Wulle,
and lay it upon his Coddes.

A plaster.
Sees a pound of white Cyche peason in good white wine, until they be
thoroughly sodden: than stamp them well in a mortar, putting to them two ounces
of Camomille flower, a dragme of Saffron, two ounces of oil of white Lylyes:
mix al together, and lay it whote upon his Coddes, leaving the plaster upon
them night and day.

Remedies against the sciatica.
TAke the Blossoms or flowers of Camomille, Meliote, Syngreene, Dill,
Lyneseede, of each two handfulles: Wormewodde, Mynte, Pennyriall, Calamynt,
Southernewod, the flowers of Sticados arabic, Bytonye, Maioram, the herb
Paraly sis, Sage, Rosemarye, Germander, of each a handful and a half, sees
all this in two hundred pound of clear condyte water, until the third part
be consumed: than strain it, and sees it again well, putting to it half a
pound of quick Brimstone, four ounces of Saltpeter, prepared, and three ounces
of sait Gemma: sees them again and strain them: and than keep that which is
strayned for your use. The sick man shall every morning bathe him self the
space of eyghte days together, tarying in it an hour well covered, the head
only bare. The hour paste, coming out of the bathe, and al his body well dried
and wyped, let him go into his warm bed, and anon after let him take a dragme
of great Triacle, mixte with an ounce and a half of Sugre roset, and sleep
thereupon two hours, and in the mean time being well covered let him sweet,
and those that keep him, let them wy^e him and dry him well, and by and by
after they shall annoint the place where the pain holds him, that is, all the
leg from the haunch or huckle bone, with the ointment Marciaton vnguentum
agrippae, vnguentum of aragon, of each an ounce mixed together. Continuynge than
all in this order, and as I have said eight days, I dare assure ye pacient
health.

Remedies against inflammations of blood, which grows into an impostume in
some part of the body or members, called phelgmone. A plaster to ripe and
rotte the impostume.
TAke a pound of Cow milk that was never fleeted: a pound and a half of bread
well crommed small: three ounces of the juice of Cabbage, half a dragme of
Saffron, three ounces of the oil of white Lilies mix all together, and lay it
hot upon the sore place.

Another for the same.
TAke three ounces of Diaquilum without gommes, the juice of cabbage an ounce and
a half, of Saffron a dragme: make hereof a good and fat ointment and thick with
yellow wax as much as shall need: the which being spread upon leather, the
Pacient shall wear a day or two continually, and he shall find him self well.

Another to rotte or ripe incontinent.
CHawe well fasting half a pound of whete, and temper it well with a great
deal of spettell: take also two ounces of oil roset complete, and a dragme of
Saffron, mingling all together, and lay it upon the soore place, renuyng it
often times. The signs of the rypenes of it are these, when it is soft, moving
up and down like a wave of water, when it greueth the Pacient no more, when
the fever cease and continues no more. The impostume being thus brought to
a ripenes, prepare your self to lance or perce it. But if the Pacient be
afraid of y^ iron or fire, break it with this that follows: take two ounces
of Diaquilum simple, an ounce of leven, half an ounce of oil of sweet Almondes:
mix all, and spread it upon a piece of leather, or cloute, putting in the
mids of it a dragme of Pygeons donge made in powder, and so lay it upon the
place where the breaking of the soore shall be most commodious. You may also
take half an ounce of leven, a Dragme of common Salt, two Dragmes of the best
Uinaigre, four scruples of the powder of Cantarides, mix all together, and
bray it well in a mortar, until it be turned into a past or do we as it were: of
the which you shall put to it half a dragme, or according to the quantity of
the matter that must come out, covering that again with the Ceratum or
plaster before said.

The impostume being broken, and well made clean, if you fear that there will
come much blood again, take incontinent the yelkes of two Eggs, two Dragmes
of Salt, a dragme of bole Armenick, and steep or dippe certain pieces of towe
in it, and lay them upon the place where it is broken, and let them lie four
and twenty hours together.

Against a Ryngworme or Tetter, that runs all over a man's face, or against
the disease that is called Erysipilas or Lychen, of some Mentagra, the French
men call it feu volage, as it were a runnynge fire.
THE remedy is good to myngle at the beginning the juice of Plantaine,
Marygoldes, Solatrum, barba Iouis, in English Syngreene, of each six ounces,
with three ounces of Rose water, and wetynge certain cloutes in it, lay them
upon the soore or King worm. Yet you must take heed that ye take away the
cloutes, as soon as they begin to wax whote, to the end that the
heate*retournynge from the lynnen cloutes to the soore, do not increase the
pain, or else that the lynnen clothes being dried with the heat do not
cleave to the skin and pluck it with them.

For if it should be so, there would be danger in it because of the ulcers or
scabbes that would come of it.

Another remedy very good to heal the same, when it does but begin or
increase.
TAke Lytarge of Silver, si^e ounces, the juice of Plantaines three ounces, oil
roset two ounces, of the best Uinaigre an ounce, mix and braye all this well in a
mortar of Lead until it be like an ointment of the color of Lead, of the
which being spread upon some lynnen cloth you shall lay some upon the soore,
renuyng it evening and morning, and looking to it diligently until you be sure
of the state of it and of the increase. When it begins to declyne (which
thing you shall know because it will change from a white color unto a red)
take heed you lay no cold thing unto it: for it may be that you may make
some dead flesh red and dark come or grow in it, and so there should be
great danger, that by reason of the cold things the Kingworme or ^etter
should turn into an Hestiomem. But my counsel is to take the flowers of
Camomille, Melilot, Syngreene, of each a handful; and to sees the same in
sufficient water until there remain but the half. Than to strain it, and to
wash every day the place with a sponge wette in it: and afterward to wash it
with some-whote white wine. For that is it that keeps the member from
mortifying in such a disease. If the thing be grown to an ulcer, either by the
folly of the Physician, or else by the evil government of the Pacient, or by
the evil matter which could not be amended by medecines, take lytarge of
silver three ounces, the ointment of Populeon, Ceruse washed, Infrigidantis
Galeni; of each half an ounce, oil roset complet an ounce. Mix al together and
bray it well in a mortar, until it be as it were an ointment, which you shall
use until the disease be consolydate and sound.

Against ^^omatycke svvellynge.
IF this infirmity be in the leg, take twenty pound of water made with
Ashes, flowers of Camomille, roots of Walwort or Daneworte, of each a
handefull, common Salt half a pound, of the best white Uinaigre four ounces,
mix and sees all together until the half be consumed, than strain it, and
wash the leg with it.

Remedies for the scabbes* An ointment very good for to annoint young children
who because of their tenderness, can not endure a purgation.
TAke four ounces of oil roset, a dragme and a half of common Sa^t, an ounce
of fresh Butter washed and so bray and stir al well together, until it
become unto a soft ointment.

Another ointment very good for little children* and old folk, to use before
and after a purgation.
TAke Turpentine washed in Rose water four ounces, of y^ juice of Lemons an
ounce and a half, of fresh Butter an ounce, the yelke of one Egg, of common
salt two dragmes* of oil ro^et two ounces, myxe and stir together all a
great while in a mortar, until it become an ointment. With the which by a
fire when he goes to bed annoynte the scabbye part of the body, or else
all the body: but as thyn as may be.

Another remedy.
TAke the water of Lapatium ^^utum, distilled two pound the juice of Plantaine
four ounces, Rose water three ounces, the juice of Lemmons two ounces, Litarge
six ounces, Ceruse half an ounce, quick Brymstone three dragmes, make a very
small powder of that which may be made powder, and mingle it with the said
waters, letting all stand. xxiiii. hours long. That done, put all in a
Lymbeck, and distill it with a small fire. This water serves not only for to
heal the common scabbe: but also to make the crustes of old ulcers and scabbes
and of the pockes to fall of, and to take clean away the cicatrice or scabbe
thereof.

A bayne or bathe for the same.
TAke the leaves of Lapatium acutum, the leaves of ^umitorye, the leaves of
Mallows with the roots, leaves of Borage of each three handefull, of bran
bound in some cloth two handefull, of rye three handful: sees all this in
sufficient water until the third part be consumed, then strain all, and while
the Pacient is annoyntynge let him bath all his body in the same baine in the
break of the day, and without taryinge any long time, let him go into his
warm bed, and there let him sleep and sweat.

Against the scurfe or leprie, called in Latin psora.
AFter a purgation, I commend much the annoynting at night when he goes to
bed, all the parts of the body infected with this disease, with oil of Tartre
or of Lees of wine, and three ounces of very strong white wyn^.

A remedy against pu^^es, bladders, blysters, or wheles and against the small
pockes. An ointment.
TAke an ounce of Peche karnels burned and made into a powder, the juice of
Plantaine and of Syngreene, of each half an ounce, Ceruse or Lead washed a
dragme and a half: make of this a soft ointment as much as shall serve you.

Another remedy well tried.
TAke two dragmes of Camphyre, an ounce of Ceruse washed, half a pound of red
Ci^^es, a pound of the inner part of Melons without the pills, ten Swallows
eggs, two dragmes of Pearls, three dragmes of the seeds of Xilon or
Gp^sipium, the tree that bears Cotton, two dragmes of Salt four ounces of
the juice of Lemons, half an ounce of white wine lees: make that in powder that
ought to be, and put al together in ten pound of water of Lapatium acutum
distilled, leaving it so two days and two nights. This done, distillall
together in a Limbecke, with the which water so distilled, the Pacient shall
wash his face three or four times a day. It has been proved very good.

Against the strong cogh of young children.
Sees in wine some ^sope and some S^rpellum, or Sauorye, or else steep some
Jeniper berries in wine, and give the child to drink of which you will.

Against the stynkyng sweat.
TO those that so sweat, make a clothe steeped in wine wherein Myrtle leaves
or the herb it self, or else his fruit has been sodden.

Against the pain of the eyes.
TAke Mallows, Uiolets that grow in Lent, topp^ of black berry trees, dried
Roses, Ueruine, Willowe or Osier that grows on the ^illes, wash your eyes
with these at night, and make a plaster of the herbs with the yelke of an
Egg, and lay it upon your eyes.

For a white spotte in the eyes.
Burn cockle shells of the sea, and Olibanum, as much of the one as of the
other: make them into a powder with cuttle bones burned, and lay that upon your
eyes twyse or thrice a week.

Against the difficulty of bringing forth child, and the retention of the
skin that the child is wrapped in, called in Latin Secundina or Secundae.
TAke the roots of Parslye, and leaves of Leekes, wringe the juice out, and
mingle it with a little oil, and give it the woman to drink, putting a little
Uinegre into her Matrice, and she shall incontinently be delivered with gods
help.

A remedy when the foundement comes out.
FIrst wash or bathe very well the foundement (be it either of a man or of a
woman) with the decoction of wine and Worm wodde sodden together, and annoint
it round about with some restrayntiue ointment. After this straw upon it
Ashes made of Willowe and of his roots, and of the finne bones of some fyshe
salted, and put in the foundement again with some linen cloth: and doing thus
twice or thrice a day, he shall find him self very well.

Against the pain of the guts.
Sees in water some nightshade with ashes, and lay it upon the place where the
pain is. For this also is good raw Sisamum, sodden with his seeds, and laid
upon the painful place.

Against the difficulty in making water, saving for that which comes of
the stone. For Men.
Sees water Cresses, and make thereof Ca^aplasma a plaster, and lay it upon
the place about the privy members, causyng ye man to sit in the decoction of
it.

For Women.
MAke them an vndersmoking through a close stool with wild Minte, with Neppe
or Catte minte, and with Pulliole or Pulegium. We make sometime as well for the
man as for the woman, an estewe or baine wherein has been sodden some Jeniper,
Neppe Pulica^ia, in English flea worte, wild Mynte, Bay leaves, Pulegium,
Wormewod and Tansey, geuinge to Benedicta simplex, is an electuarie, very
medecinable for the gout.
the Pacient being in this bayne, Benedietam simplicem. But if the stone be the
cause, then sees in water Saxifrage with the roots of Sanguinaria, or
decoction until half of the water be consumed, the which give unto the
Pacient: but if he desire wine, give it him with some of this water in it,
continuynge so four or five days, and twyse or thryse a day. If he piss not
for all this, it is a sign that the stone is thorowlye grown and hardened.
But than if it stick in the bladder, take Mallows, Crista marina, in English
Sampere, little wild Cabbages, Saxifrage, Pellitorye of the wall, water
Cresses, Ameos, and the seeds of Nettels, sees all this in lycour, whereof
let the third part be wine, the other part oil and the fourth part salt
sea water, bathinge and washinge well with this decoction the parts about his
privy members, and laying upon them the herbs.

Against crabbelyce.
AGainst the Crabbelyce that breed about the privy members and under the
arm pyttes, annoint those places with ashes laid in oil: but against those
that stick in the eye brows, take an ounce of Aloes, Ceruse, Olibanum, of each
five ounces: make all into powder, and make of it an ointment with larde cut
small as much as shall suffice.

Against a Cankar.
NOte that the leaves of wild Juie sodden in wine, and laid to it are very
good for it.

Against the little worms and itching of the hands or body.
AGainst the itche and worms in what soever part of the body that it be, but
chieflye in the face and forehead, you must steep weate in wine with the
powder of olibanum, and lay it upon the place as it were a plaster.

Against the swelling of the coddes.
TAke Mallows, Wormwoode, Ueruene, bismalua or march Mallows, tansie, and two
cabbedges, sees all this in old strong wine, and bathing and washing them
twice or thrice a day. As for ye herbs, stamp them and sees them in Honnye,
laying them upon the coddes with wine.

For to make the worms come out of the hands and feet.
TAke a hot tyle, and some vessel full of water, then put some seeds of
Iusquiamum upon the red whote tyle, holding your hands or feet over the smoke
of it, you shall see the worms fall into the water like little hears. Another
way: Burn Ote straw into ashes, and put it into water as hot as you may
endure it, holding your bands and feet in it, and endurynge the heat until
it wax cold: than strain and press it so hard until there remain no moore
water, seperatyng it fair and softly. You shall find the worms as it were
little threades, which the smoke of the Jusquiam has drawn out. If the place
do itche, and is eaten with worms, burn straw into ashes, and toss it and
mingle it in water as bote as you can endure it: put in your hand or foot
that has the worms, and they will come out. Than afterward heal the
knawing as you do some other soore.

A remedy for the deafnes of the ears.
TAke the fat or grease of eeles new killed that swimmeth upon the decoction
of them, the juice of caprifolium, Barba Iouis* and a handful of Antes or
Pismers eggs, bray and strain all, mixing it and sething it with oil. The
decoction made, put to it some Uinaigre or wine sufficiently, that it may be
the more penitratiue and persing: this done, power some of it into the ear
that is not deffe, stopping the other that has the impediment, and lying upon
the good ear: and beware he go not the next day into the wind: but let him
keep his house, lying all the day long sometime on the good ear and sometime
on the ill.

A remedy against fistuleys.
TAke the leaves of red Cabbages, and their seeds, the roots of great r^bra
tinc^orum of each an equal quantity, braye all and sees it well until three
parts be consumed: than strain it, putting to it some honnye. And seethinge
it again until it be thick. Whereof you shall give the Pacient two spones
full, morninge and enenynge.

For the scabbes of the hands.
TAke Lapatium acutum, and fumitorie, making thereof as it were an ointment
with hogs or ^wines grease and May Butter, wherewith annoynte your hands.

A water of a great and marvelous effect, for to keep man's body e from many
infirmities and diseases.
TAke fonre pound of distilled Aqua vite, of very good wine, two pound of
salt burned, two pound of quenched Brimstone, four ounces of white Tartre,
four ounces of the wodde of a Filberd tree. iii. ounces of rock salt. Let all
this be brayed, syfted and mixed together, pouring upon the foresaid Aqua
v^te, and putting it in a Limbecke to distill.

What operations come of such distillations.
THe first distillation draws unto it the powers of all the spirits of man,
that no venimons best can approach or come nighe him: with it is kept flesh
and fish as with baulme, it heals and cleanses lentils and other spots of
the face: it drives away all manner of scabbes from the body, and cleanses
watrynge eyes.

The second drives away impostumes, and other superfluities of the body: it
pulls out and heals lose teeth, and puts, away all swellynge of the
Liver.

The third cleanses all spots and scurfe, it heals stinking of breathe,
and purges all phlegm of the stomach, as meat not disgested.

The fourth puts out of the body, all cold and congeled blood.

The fyfte delyuereth the body from the falling syckennesse.

The sixte dryueth away all languishe and infirmity come of the gout.

The seventh puts the gout from the feet.

The eight excels the Baulme, which* you should keep well.

The nynth, if you mix with it, and dissolve gold in it, is a preservative
for the liver.

The tenth, if you put a drop of it in any vessel of gold full of wine, a
frothe and skumme will swim upon the wine which is very gold in deed, so
that what so ever you touch with it shall be fair gold. Yet you must note
that after every distillation you must stamp and syfte the leese as at the
first time.

Another water or Balsamum almost for the same things.
TAKE a pound of Turpentine thrice distilled, a pound of Aloes thrice also
distilled, a pounder of Amber raw, Mascatum brayed upon a stone in manner of
some liquide ointment, putting to all this a little oil, and so incorporating
it and distilling it nine times. It is a Baulme that may well be kept, for it
is so parfite that it abides first all trial of fire and water.

Secondly, it will pearce through the hand.

Thirdlye, in annoyntinge your face it keeps your youthful color.

Fourthly, it fasteneth and consolidateth all incision or cuttinge.

Fifthly, it purges merueylously the eyes.

Sirtly, annoynting all the body with it, it is said that it shall never
rotte or corrupt, nor ever* breed worms. This has Hermes the Philosopher
written and confirm it as most true, for as much as I have proved and tried
it.

A powder very good to conserve the sight.
TAke Betony, Rue, Selandine, Saxifrage, Leuistici. Pulegium, Annice, Synamome
Euphrasia, in English eyebright, of each a handful, Grani Paradisi, Ginger,
fennel, persly, Isope, Organny, Osier of y^ mountains of each a dragme,
Galingale an ounce, of Sugre an ounce Make all this into powder, and eat of it
every day with your meat: for the sight is thereby preserved. And if your
sight be perished or half gone, it will heal it and recover it perfitly
again. This powder is found and thus ordained by master Gerarde, which tried
it upon him self: for he having used spectacles the space of twelve years
together, and yet scant could see with them, nor read the greatest letters
that were (so much was his sight perished) after he used this powder but a
whole Lent together, only in this sort as I have told you: he recovered so his
sight again, that all the rest of his life after, he conlde read the smallest
letter that was, very perfitly.

Against the pain of the flanks or the pluresye.
TAke a wild Bores tothe of the upper Jawe, and the greatest, and make thereof
a powder, whereof you shall give the Pacient to drink with a little broth, and
he shall be cured.

Against quartayne agues.
TAke the grease or fat that is under the manes of borses, and sees it in a
new earth pot: and when you feel the ague come, annoynte the chyne of your
back, and you shall be healed in three times so doing.

To heal old wounds and cankers of the legs.
TAke cuttyngs or shearings of shomakers leather, and sees them, and the
grease or fat that you shall get of them, set it by it self: than take of
the herb that grows at the foot or root of Willowes the finest that is,
and the moss that looks like Ueluet: dry it well and make it into a powder:
and lay of it upon the wound, and with the said grease anoint round about
the wound, and he shall shortly be whole.

Against the scurfe.
TAke Barrowes grease what quantity you will, and sees it with a glassefull
of wine, and half a pound of Bean flower in manner of an ointment: than take
vryne or piss, and heat it as whote as you can endure it, where with you
shall wash your head, and than annoint it with the said grease, and it shall
be whole within fiftene days.

Against ventositie, collicke, or pain of the matrice.
TAke a dragme of intrailes made in powder, a dragme of Stecas, give it the
pacient to drink in a new laid egg, and she shall be healed.

For the hardness or brawne of the feet.
Dip your feet in whote piss, and when the hardness or braune is molified,
take a launcet or ^yssours, and lance it round about: and than by and by put
some juice of Syngrene upon it, and the next morrow it will be well.

To make very perfect Vinaigre.
TAke the cromme of a whote lofe new drawn out of the Oven, a glass of
strong Uinaigre, wherein you shall put some Ginger, Pepper, Pyrethrum of Leuant,
Calamus aromaticus, the which things being brayed and stamped together, you
shall put into Uinaigre: Than take the cromme of a whote lofe, and put it so
that it may receive to it all the foresaid things. Than dry the said lofe
in an Oven, and make thereof a powder, and put the said powder in a Hoggeshead
of wine, and it will become very perfect Uinaigre.

Against the falling syckennes.
TAke the Matrice of a Sow, the which being made in powder you shall give to
eat or to drink unto the Pacient, and as soon as he has received it, the
sickennes will remove from the brain, and sprede into his fingers ends,
tormentinge him very soore: but whereas the said matter shall assemble and
^ome together, make a rupture: and the matter will* ^ome out as yellowe as
Saffron, and he shall be quicklye healed.

For children that be broke.
TAke white Paper, and chawe it well with your teeth, and make thereof a
plaster, as great as will cover all the broke, bind it in a swadle band with a
linen clothe: Than lay it to his coddes, and make fast the swathing band:
but you must renew every day the paper chawed, and he shall be whole.

Against the pain of the Spleen.
TAke of the longes or lights of a Fore made into powder, and use to give to
the Pacient to drink or to eat of in good white wine, and he shall be cured.

For to stenche blood.
TAke man's blood dried in the Sun, and make it into powder, and if it chance
that there be any vain broken or hurt, whereby there comes ^ut abundaunce
of blood, lay of the said powder upon it, and it shall be stenched.

For to heal in four days the scaldynge with water, or any other thing,
without ointments or Playsters. It has been tried and found true.
TAke an Onion and cut him ouerthwarte, and wringe out the juice upon the
scalded place, doing so every day twice and it will heal it.

For to stenche blood.
TAke a sour Orange, and make a hoole in y^ top where the flower grew,
keep that upper piece that you shall take of, that you may afterward close
up the hoole again: yet before you stop it up, you shall take the suet or
grease of a he Goat, the bigness of a Walnut, and put it into the hoole: than
set the Orange upon the coals or embers, that it may incorporate, and
dissolve: Than annoint along down your back bone, and overthwart the flanks
with the same lycoure, and it shall heal you within three or four times by the
grace of god.

Against the worms in little children.
TAke a lamp full of oil Olyue, and lay an iron in the fire, and when it is
red whote quench it in the said oil in the lamp: then annoint thereof the
nostrelles, the throat and the navel, and straight way you shall see a great
miracle.

To heal the Emorrhodes or Pyles.
TAke Dogs dung four ounces, half a pound of common oil, put them together
in a new earthen pot and sees them a little: then take out some of the dung,
and braye it upon a trenchour: then sees it again in the said oil, and put
to it three ounces of new wax, to the intent that all may come to incorporate
together: and before you annoint the Emorrhodes or Pills with the same
ointment, you shall wash them with white wine, and in four days he shall be
whole.

Against all kinds of pain and grief.
TAke a glasseful of the juice of Leucoron, which is our winter Gylofer, or
Uiolets fasting, and you shall see a merueylous effect.

Against styfnes or shrynkynge of synowes, called the crampe, or swelling,
coming of the wound taken of some venomous beast, in Latin Spasmus or
Spasma, or conu^lsio.
TAke Hogs dunge as much as you will, half a pound of oil roset: sees
all in a new yearthen pot, and lay it as whote as you can endure upon the
soore place, and it will heal it.

For them that can not pysse by reason of certain gravel, and viscositie or
carnosirie, which is abundance of flesh.
TAke the juice of Radishe roots, of little Leekes which are found under the
ground, and dry them, and make them into powder: put all together, and give
every morninge a certain quantity of it to the Pacient to drink, and he
shall be healed in short space.

Against deffenesse.
TAke a quick Eele, and put him on a spit alyne and roast him: take the grease
that comes out of him: Than take a Garlyke head roasted upon the coals
orcenders, and take one codde or husk of the same Garlyke at a time, and put
it into the said grease, and so put it whote into his ear, holdyng his ear
upward the space of one Credo, and you shall see the fylthie humor come out
of his ear, and he shall be healed.

Against opilation or stoppinge.
TAke wild or marshe Mallows, what quantity you will, and sees them in
runnynge water: than take of it about a glassefull whote with sugre Candye
morning and evening, and you shall be cured.

Against the gyddinesse of the sight.
Give every morninge unto a child to eat some sweet Fennel, and let the
same child lick the Pacientes eyes, and he shall be cured.

For them that can not broke their meat, b^t vomit it again.
TAke minte well stamped and the crommes of bread burned in the fire, and
vinaigre: and make thereof as it were a sauce, and sprede it upon some linen
clothe with the powder of Cloves: heat it upon a brick or tyle, and lay it
upon his stomach, and you shall see a goodly experience.

Against the head ache by to much drinking.
TAke Rue leaves, and braye them with Uinaigre, and put Roses to them and
bitter Almondes, and with this rub your head, and you shall be eased.

Against all the pain of the head.
TAke half a dragme of Bay berries, of Scammonia, and of Saffron a dragme,
braye all well together with Uinaigre and Roses. And when your head aketh,
annoint it where it greueth you with this ointment, and you shall se the virtue
to be merueylous great.

Against the pain of the head that continues always.
TAke leaves of black Juye, and braye them, and put them with Uinagre, oil
and wine, as much of one as of the other: sees this together, and annoint
your forehead and your temples, and it shall ease you very much by gods Good
grace.

Another way.
IF the pacient think that his hedde eleaueth in sonder by reason of the great
pain: take yuye, and make juice of it, the which you shall mingle with oil
roset: and with a linen cloute you shall annoynte fair and softly his
nostrels, his temples, and his forehead. And if the pain be vehement, lay some
of it upon the scull of his head.

Another way.
TAke the brain of a crow, and sees it and than eat it: for there is none
so great a pain of the head, or none so old but that it will heal it with a
singular virtue.

Against the Mygrame happening suddenly.
TAke Bengewine and braye it with Uina^gre, and annoint your forehead with it,
and your temples and it will mitigate the pain.

Against itchyng of the head.
TAke a sheep gall, and mix it with white chake and therewith rub your
head, and let it dry upon it, and it will heal you.

Against ulcers or scabbes of the head as well of men as of women.
TAke the gall of a Bull, and mingle it with Uinaigre, and having made it luke
warm, rub your head with it, and you shall find a merueilous remedy by the
grace of almighty God.

Against old and putrified wounds.
BRaye Celandine, and than mix it with old suet, and lay it so upon the
ulcers or scabbes, and you shall be healed incontinent God wyllyng.

For to keep that the flesh grow not to much in a wound.
TAke the lyghtes or lunges of a sheep whote, and lay it upon the wound, and
the flesh shall be equal with the skin.

To heal and take away the s^^^fe.
TAke a handful of Rue, and half an ounce of quick Brimstone, and sees it
with good old wine: and so wash your head with it: but yet your head must
first be washed with luke warm water, as men are wont to do most commonly, and
it shall be cured.

For to kill Lyce.
TAke the whaye that remains of cheesemaking, and put to it a little Uinaigre,
and drink of it certain days: and all the lyce will dye, and there will breed
no more about you.

Against the distillation of the brain, and heaviness of the head.
TAke Beete roots and braye them well, and than take the juice of them and
receive it up into your nostrels. And that will draw unto it all the humor of
the head, and cause it to come out.

Against murres or catarres that begin to grow.
YOu must abstain from supper, and from eating of any herbs, and from salt
and fat things. For the catarre comes of indisgestion of the meat, and by
the rawnes of the stomach. Therefore above al things you ought to astaine
from fat meats. And when you are amended, you may take your supper as before
your sickness you might have done.

For to restrain the murre or catarre.
TAke five parts of wine, and the sixte of honnye, mingle all together, and
let it cool, and make of it a gargarisme.

A remedy for that disease when the hear of the bearde or head falls of, of
it self.
First you must shave with a rasour the place, and than rub it well with an
onyon: that done, take barley parched and made into powder, and mix it with
Bear suet, and so lay it upon the place, and the hear will grow again.

To keep that the hears shall not fall of.
TAke the powder of Walnuttes, of heath Cypres burned, of the ashes of a Mule
or Mulets hoof burned, of the oil of Myrtell, the ashes of rats burned, and
their dung made in powder. Also the ashes or fresh dung of a Hedgehogge, and
some Sandaracha, in English yelowe* Oker: mix all the said things with
Uinaigre and soft Pitche, and lay it upon your head, and it will keep your
hear from falling of.

To make the hears of a man's beard or head to grow.
YE shall take y^ which grows sometime in y^ hoxe or pasterne of an Ass, which
is like unto little warts and burn them, and make powder of them, the which you
shall put in old oil, and than lay it upon the place. This thing has such
virtue that if a man annoynte or rub the jaws or chinne of a woman, she shall
have the hear grow upon the same place.

For to make hears grow.
YE shall take a Hedgehogge, and burn it al to coals, and put the powder or
ashes made fine and small, with Bears grease: and lay this ointment over all
the head of a balde man, and it will make his hear grow as fair as ever it
was.

For to curle hear a rare secret.
TAke the ashes of sheep horns burned, and mix it with oil, and rub your
head often times with it: but you must be first polde.

For to make hear black.
TAke Swallows dung, and put it in good Uinaigre in a Uiolle, or some
vernished earthen pot, than burye it in a dung hill, or in horse dung, and
leave it so. xxxv. days full. And than annoynte your head, being polde, with
this medecin in the shadow with a Painters pensille. But before you do thus,
you must annoint your face with dear suet, to the intent that none of the
color of the said ointment do spot or black your face. And while this color
and dying does dry, hold in your mouth some oil, to the end that your teeth
wax not black with it: and the fourth day that you have thus anointed your
head, you must wash it well, and all is done.

To keep that the hears wax not hoare or white.
MYxe the ashes of ground worms burned in oil and rub your Comb with it
when you kembe your head, and your hear shall never change color in your
old age. It is a secret that women commonly use.

For to make the hears black.
TAke Cypre leaves brayed, and mixte with Uinaigre: and annoynte your hear
with it, and that same will dye your white hears into black, and in their
place shall grow also black hears.

Against the pain in the eyes.
TAke raw cabbages, and braye them and steep in the said juice of them some
white bread, and annoint your forehead, and it will take away the pain of
your eyes.

Against the dymnesse or daselyng of the sight.
TAke salt Armoniack buried and well brayed: and mix it with the piss of a
young child, and therewith annoint often times your eyes, and lay of it upon
them, and it will take away the daselyng.

Another way.
TAke the juice of Fennel roots brayed, put to it as much good purified
honnye, and sees all with a small fire until it be as thick as honnye. Than
put that in a box of brass. And when you have need mix it with conserve
water or woman's milk: and certainly it will put*away the daselyng and dimnesse
of the sight incontinent, if you lay of it upon your eyes.

Against a web or spotte in the eye.
TAke the gall of a white Cock, and braye it with water, and lay it to your
eyes or put some in your eyes, and it will take away the web or spotte, and
will consume the drops of blood that are in the eyes, and strengthen the
sight.

For to take away the hurtful hears of the eye brovver.
YOu must pluck of the hears of the eyes diligently which hurt and hinder
the eyes: and than annoynte the place with he Goats blood hot, or Hares
blood, or else of the blood of a Batte or fl^nder mouse, or rub it with
the milk of a Bitche, or with a needle of copper, which being often heated and
quenched in vinaigre, with the which you shall touch the place, and the hears
will never grow again.

Against all pain of the ears.
YE shall take a seruple of the gall of a Goat, and as much honny, braye all
together, and heat it in a fire pan, putting it into his ear, and stop it
with Wulle, and it will he ale all the pain, yea though there were a canker in
it.

Against the pain of the ears and defnes, and for to purge the apostumes or
corruption of the ears.
MYxe Bengewine and new Goats milk together, and put among them some of an
Ox gall, and oil of Cedar, as much of the one as of the other. Put all this
luke warm into the Pacientes ears and it will wonderfully appease the pain of
them and comfort the weak hearing, and also the apostumes of the ears.

Against the pain of the ears.
Heat wild Bores pysse upon the fire, and put it into the Pacientes ear, for
it is a singular remedy. The said pysse may be kept in a violle of glass, or
better in the bladder it self of the Bore.

Against the noise or ryngyng of the ears.
MYxe together the grease of a Goose, with the juice of Saffron, and the juice
of Garlic, or Garlic brayed: Than power it into his ears, and certainly it
will heal him.

Against all infirmity of the ears.
YE shall take ground worms, and sees them with goose grease: and drop of
the same decoction into the pacients ears, and whatsoever pain it be it will
heal it.

Against defnes and hardenes of hearing.
TAke an Ox galle* and the pysse of a he Goat: Mix all together, and put of
it into the deffe ear and incontinent he shall be healed.

Against the pain of the ears, defnes, dirt, or fylthe, worms or water that
is in them.
TAke the juice of onyons, and mingle it with honnye, and than drop it into
the ears, and it will clear and heal them.

For to stenche bleedyng at the nose.
TAke very strong Uinaigre, and power of it into the ear of that side that
he bleedeth, and if he blede of both sides, put Uinaigre into both his ears,
and it shall stenche it.

To heal the syckennes called noli me tangere.
TAke the juice of the berbe called Dracunculus, or Ser pentine, and put of the
same juice into his nostrels, or dippe in a linen cloth, and lay upon the
soore and the next day take it away, for it will bring with it all the roots
of the soore.

Against stinkyng of the mouth.
TAke the root called acorios, or calamus aromaticus, and chawe of it fasting,
as it were Masticke, holding it a good space in your mouth, and it will make
you have a sweet breath and mouth.

Against the toth ache.
TAke the root of Jusquiam, and sees it in Uinaigre, and hold of the
decoction thereof in your mouth, and it shall heal you.

Another way.
TAke ground worms, and sees them in oil, and than bray them well, and put
of the decoction into the ear, on that side that the aching toothe is of, and
the pain will cease.

For to make teeth fall out.
TAke ground worms, and burn them upon a red whote tyle, and than take the
ashes of the said worms so burned, and put it into the hollow and akynge
teeth, and cover them with wax, and they will easily fall out without any pain
at all.

For to make teeth white that be black.
TAke white bread, and of a pommyse stone, as much of the one as of the other,
burn all together, and make thereof a powder, wherewith you shall rub your
teeth, and they will be very white.

For them that be hoarce.
YOu must swallowe down, three morninges together the yelke of a new lay
egg raw.

To heal the disease called the kings evil.
TAke Barley flower, liquide pitche, wax, and oil of equal quantity, mix
all together, and sees it well, and put into it a little piss of a young
^bilde, and sterring it well about, lay it upon the sore in manner and form of
a plaster, and it will heal it.

How to know the kings evil.
TAke a ground worm alive, and lay him upon the swellinge or sore, and cover
him with a leaf: if it be the kings evil, the worm will change and turn
into earth, if it be not, he will remain whole and found.

Against the cogh, and distillation of the breast, and lunges, and running of
the eyes, pain of the bladder, and when the pype of it is stopped, which
causes that a man can not pysse but with great difficulty. Also for those
that spyt blood at the mouth, or pysse blood: and for the flyxe, and
collicke, and pain or heauynes of the bellye and cholere: and also against a
vomitynge without an ague. Also against all pain of the body except of the
head: and especially against the vlceration of the lunges, if you give the
Pacient an electuarye or two of it.
TAke six dragmes of myrrh, five dragmes of frankensence, four dragmes of
the juice of poppy called opium, six dragmes of Saffron, four dragmes of the
seed of white Jusquiam called Henbane, and four dragmes of the pille or ryne
of the root of black Jusquiam: you shall beat into powder the said bark or
ryne by it self, and sift it fine and small through a sarce or syue, and than
grind the Saffron: and than the seed of the white Jusquiam or Henbane, and
than after the Myrrh and the Frankensence. With the which you shall mix the
Juice of the Poppye, having been laid before in water.

And this done, you shall put strayghte way to it a little water, to the intent
you may make thereof Trochiscos or little Balls or Tablettes, of the weyghte
of half a Dragme. You shall take of it at night with three mouthfuls of water.
This provoke steep, and asswageth all grief, as is aforesaid. If you will
you may make Pylles of it: for it is all one, as concerning the virtue of it.

Against all vehement coghes.
TAke the juice of Leekes brayed, and sees it with oil, and give it to the
Pacient to drink, and it shall profit him greatly.

Against the cogh be it never so great.
TAke Brimstone made in powder, as much as you can take up between your three
fingers: Give the same unto the Pacient with an Egg half roasted, before
breakefast, five days together, if it be a man, but if it be a child three
morninges. And there is no cogh so vehement, but it will heal it within the
said time God willing.

For one that has swallowed down a blood Sucker.
TAke Uinaigre wherein there has been first quenched some read hot iron: and
into the same put some butter, and heat it by little and little, and give it him
to drink, and it will make the blood Sucker come out. It has been proved.

Against an old and inueterate cogh.
TAke quick Brimstone, and beat it into powder, and wrap it in old Hogs or
Barrowes grease: And than the first day give three Pills thereof un to the
Pacient, the second day two, and the third day one. And the said Pills must
be made so that he may swallowe them down.

Against the bloody flyxe coming of the artere or synew of the lunges, or of
the liver.
TAke the root of Consyre called Marquerites, and wash it in cold water and
scrappe it with a knife of Juery or bone. Give unto the pacient to drink two
ounces or more of it, and as much as he can eat. But note that he must not
touch any Uinaigre that day, though it have great virtue to stay the
blood, for trewely it takes away the effect and virtue of this root, if
you give him any with it.

For to restrain a great and vehement vomitynge.
TAke a little quick Brimstone, and as much of the scraping of a Hearts horn:
all being brayed and made in powder, mingle and temper it in a soft Egg, and
drink it, and it will stop the vomiting.

For them that can not keep their meat in their stomach but vomit it up
again.
YE shall take a little aloes and give it them to drink with cold water, and it
will make them keep their meat in their stomach.

To quench and assuage thruste.
YE shall take water and oil mixed together, and heat it a little and drink,
and vomit it up again by and by. And if need be do so again, and it will
quench your vehement thruste.

Another way.
YE shall take the yelke of a Hen egg half roast and mixed with oil, and
swallowe it down, and it will take away your thruste.

Another.
YE shall take a stone in a Fountain, and lay it quickly upon your tongue,
and hold it so a while and it will quench your thruste.

To stop the hycket.
TAke a spone full of Uinaigre made of the Herb Scilla or Squilla, and drink
it, and by and by the hicket will cease, by the grace of almightye God.

For to stop the hycket that commer^ often.
TAke whote water, and put your hands into it, and hold them there a good
while, and the hicket will cease, it has been proved and found true.

A sovereign remedy for them that have wry necks by reason of shroken synowes:
also for them that have the gout.
TAke the stones of a Beuer, called Castoreum, white Pepper and Perseley of
each equal quantities: bray al together and sift them. This done, take a
sponefull of it, and put in so much honnye, and two mouth fulles of whote
water, and give it the Pacient to drink before breakefast, and he shall be
healed.

To take away the smellyng under the arm hooles.
TAke very old Bengewine, and make it into powder, and syfte it: and than
rub your arm hooles with it, and they shall smell well.

Against apostumes and swelling at the root of the nails.
TAke an akorne brayed with soap, and lay that upon it, and they shall be well.

To make a man's nails grow incontinent which be fallen of.
TAke the herb that is called Pentaphillon or Quinque^ follium, in English
Cinkfoyle, and braye it with any grease: and lay it upon the place and the
nail will come again incontinent.

Against the disease called Mentagra or Lichen, which is a foul breaking out
or coueryng all the face with a scabbe and begins at the chynge.
TAke the fresh branches of a fig tree, and sees them in Uinaigre, and
than bray them well, and with this annoint the soore, and undoubtedly he shall
be cured and healed immediatlye.

To take away the seabbe of a runnyng tetter, or ryngworme of the face.
TAke the roots of wild cowcumbers, and sees them unto the third part, then
braye them well and put to them some lytarge of Silver, and some Brimstone in
powder, as much of the one as of the other, and put to it also a little Wax:
and than rub and annoint the soore place with it, and it will heal it.

Against Burgeons and pushes in the face, as well by the heat of the Sun as
otherwise.
TAke the yelke of an Egg and braye it with honnye and Ceruse, and so annoint
your face with it, and it will cure them very well and perfitly.

Against all spots, pimples, pushes, or ulcers in the face.
TAke Masticke, and the herb called lappa mayor, in English clotte or great
burre, soap, wax, old oil, lytarge of Silver, as much of the one as of the
other: mingle al together, and sees it like an ointment, and annoint the place
with it, and it will heal it.

To take away the blackenes of the neck, and spots of the face.
TAke Bean flower and temper it with the Juice of the inner part of Pompons,
and make thereof eight Trochisci or little Balls, which you shall dry in the
shadow. And when you will go to your bayne or bathe, you shall take as much
as you shall think good of the said Balls, which you shall break and mix
with water, and annoint the blackenesse or spots with it before you enter into
your bath. And when you begin to sweat, then rub the places with it, and
wash them, and the spots will go out. It is proved and found true.

Against the brusyng of the face by a fall or slyppe.
TAke the rynde or bark of a Radishe root, and braye it well, and mix it
with Honnye, and annoint the place and it will heal you.

Another way very good.
YE shall take new soft cheese made of Goats milk braye it with honnye, and
lay it upon the place, and cover it with a clothe, and it will take away the
brusynge immediately by the help of God.

Against wartes and malanders.
YE shall take the herb called in Latin Scorpius, because it has seeds like
unto a Scorpions tail: braye it well, and put to it a grain of salt, and lay
it upon the wartes, and they will fall of.

Against swellynge of the stomach, pain of the raynes, gravel, fleame,
collicke, the emorrhodes or pyles: also to stay the flowers of a woman, and
for those that have an infected liver and spleen: also for those that coghe
ordinarily, and for them that have the falling syckennes.
TAke an ounce of the roof of Enula campana, three ounces of Fennel seed, two
ounces of black Pepper. Stamp each of these things by them self, and sifte
them very fine. Than put all into honny half sodden, and give the Pacient
of it the quantity of a hasell nutte with whote water. Some take it with
Oximel, other some with wine, and other take it alone in a spoone, to make them
piss the stone and gravel.

Against the pain of the Spleen.
TAke a dragme of the root of Enula campana, dried and made in powder, and
than sift it fine, and gene it the Pacient fasting with old wine, and this
will cure the Spiene.

Another.
TAke eueumis auquimis made in powder as much as you can take up with your
three fingers, and braye it with wine, and give it the Pacient to drink before
breakefast, and it will take away the pain.

For the pain of the loins or haunches.
TAke the root of Iris or gladiolus, and braye it with quick Brimstone and
Bears grease, and lay it upon your loins like a plaster, and you shall
find a sovereign remedy.

Against the swellyng or ulcers of the raynes of the back, and kydneyes.
TAke the leaves of dry Roses, the seeds of black Poppye, and the kernelles
or berries of Pyneaple, of equal quantity. Stamp each of these things by it
self, and mingle all together, and take of it the bigness of a walnut, and
put it in two mouth fulles of wine sodden, and three of water, and give it the
Pacient to drink, and it will heal him although he pissed blood.

Against the pain of the gravel, and for to make a man pysse.
YOu shall take a little amber stone, of the root of Cyperns, and of black
Pepper, stamp it, and than sees it, and give it to the pacient to drink a
spone full fasting, and it will make him pysse, and aswage the pain of the
gravel.

Against the pain of the raynes.
TAke a pound of wild or marshe Mallows, fresh sheep dunge, and the old
leaf of a hog, which is the fat that lies by the back, and the ribs,
which husbands use to roll up and keep to make saulues, of each two pound:
Stamp these things and mingle them together. That done, lay it upon Wulle
new shorn and un washed, and so lay it upon the raines of your back in manner
of a plaster, and it will shortly take away the pain.

Against the gravel.
TAke the roots of asparagus, in English Sperage, of Saxifrage, the root of
clotte or great Burres, the root of Smallage or Alexanders, the root of
Ebulus, in English Walwort or Danewort, three garlyke heads, the leaves of
Willowes, and a little persley. Stamp all these things and mingle them
together, and give the Pacient to drink of it three morninges with sodden wine,
or with some sweet wine, or wine made sweet with honnye, and it will make him
piss the gravel.

Against the pain of the bladder and gravel.
TAke the skin of a Have new ^leane, and put it hear and all in an earthen
pot, or lay it upon a clean tyle, and that done put it to the fire, so that
you may make a powder of the same skin, the which powder being sifted, you
shall keep in some clean vessel. And when you shall need it take thereof
three spone full in your drink: which thing soon appeaseth the grief of
the bladder, and the the gravel. Nevertheless the remedy would have greater
virtue, if you took the whole Hare alive, and put him in a new earthen pot,
and stop all the hooles with plaster or with claye, so that there come no
air out. Than if you put the said pot into an Oven, and let it burn
with a small fire, and when it is thoroughly burned, make it into a very fine
powder, and sift it fynely, and than use it for your purpose. This is very
good for them that have the gravel, and that piss blood, if it be taken with
a little wine.

Against the bloodye slyxe, or frettynge torment in the bellye.
TAke milk, and quench whote flynte stones in it, o^elles some whote iron,
and that done diverse times, give it to drink unto the Patient (prou^ded that
he have not the ague) and he shall be healed.

Against the straynynge, frettynge, and grypyoge of the bellye.
TAke seven or nine of the long and red berries of a wild rose tree, and let
them be type. Bray them well, and give to the Pacient with old wine, if he
have not the ague: but if he have the angue, give them him with water. And if
need be, you shall give them him so three days together, and he shall find it
a sovereign remedy.

For those that have frettyng and gryppyng in the belly, and the laxe.
TAKE the yelke of Eggs raw or ros^e, wild green Reasyns, Galls as much
of the one as of the other in weyghte: Mire all together in brayinge it, and
give it to the Pacient whote and he shall be cured by the grace of God.

Against the collicke.
TAke a Hen a live, and see that she eat not in two days: than kyl her, and
take the little skin that is in her breast, or throat bole, and dry it and
make it in powder, the which you shall give the Pacient, with some harshe or
gross wine somewhat sharp. And the Pacient must be fasting, and not having
supped the night before, but kept in a good diet.

Against the pain of the collicke coming suddenly.
TAke the heel of a Hare, and carye it about you, and the sudden collicke
shall never take you.

Again the pain of the guts or bowelles.
YOu shall take Baye leaves, and sees them in water, and give the Pacient
drink of this decoction and he shall be healed.

For to stop the laxe.
TAke the roots of Hearts horn next to the head, and make a fine powder of it
with a fyle: and of this powder give a dragme unto the Pacient with red wine
a gobblet full: and this will stop the laxe if he use it three morninges.

Against the frettyng of the bellye or laxe.
YOu shall take one Pomegranade or many, and put them in an earthen pot, the
which you shall stop well and lute about with Potters claye, to the end there
come no air out. This done, set it in an Oven to be burned: than the
Pomegranade being well made into powder, keep it. And when you have any
fretting or gripyng in your bellye, coming suddenly, drink a little of the same
powder with wine, and you shall be soon cured.

For to know a secret or hydden dyseaso of any man and to heal the same.
TAke a young whelpe that yet sucketh, and let him lie night and day with the
man the space of three days, during the which time the pacient shall take
milk in his mouth, and spite in to the whelps mouth. Than take the said
whelpe and cleave him in pieces, and you shall know the sick part of the man by
that of the dog, which you shall see either infected or whole and sound. For
certainlye the whelpe draws to him self the secret and hidden disease
whereof he dies, and the man shall be healed, and you may burye the dog.

For them that void blood at their fondement, and for those that have their
blood broken.
YOu shall take the young springes of nettels very tender, braye them well in
a mortar, and take the juice of them, and give it the Pacient to drink alone
in the morninge, or with some strong Uinaigre and cold water, three days
together, and there is none so corrupt blood but it will purify, nor no laxe
so great but it will stop it.

Against the worms that engender in men's bodies.
YOu shall take the galle of a Bulle, and dippe some Wulle in it, and lay it
upon the Navel, and it will make the worms come out of the body.

Against the gripyng of the bellye and desire to go to the stool and yet do
nothing.
TAke cow milk sodden, and give the Pacient often times drink of it and he
shall be whole.

Against the pain of the collicke.
TAke the little bird called in Latyne Vpupa in English a Lapwinge, and burn
her whole with her feathers, and take of the ashes, and give it the Pacient to
drink in wine.

Against the ulcers or fystules in the foundement of a man.
TAke Date stones and burn them and than make them into a fine powder, and
lay often times of the same upon the fistules or ulcers, or upon the hole of
the foundement, and he shall be whole.

For to heal the emorrodes, or those that lose their blood.
TAke Leekes and braye them well, and take the juice of them, the which you
shall give the Pacient to drink before breakefast, and the Emorrodes will soon
cease by the grace of God.

Against the ulcers of the foundement, and against the disease called commonly
saint Fiacres syckennes.
TAke the pysse or ryne of a Pomegranade, break it and sees it in good wine,
than bray it well, and lay it upon the soore place like a plaster, and it will
without fail heal the disease.

For to ripe or break an apostume or swellynge in the gryne.
TAke nas^urtium, and bray it with pitche, and lay it upon the swelling or
apostume, and he shall be whole.

Another.
TAke vnslekt lyme, two garlic heads, the yelkes of three eggs, mingle al
together, and lay it upon the sore place like a plaster: this will put away all
the pain and swellinge of the apostume.

Against hurt or flawing of the skyn by chasing and going either of the feet
or between the thighs.
TAke a mortar of lead, and a pestle of the same, and put in the said mortar
some oil roset, and the yelke of an egg: the which things you shall grind
until they become thick: and till some of the lead be mingled with the said
ointment. And when it is thick like a plaster, sprede it upon a fine and soft
linen cloth, and lay it upon the pain, and continue thus three days until
the pain be whole.

Against the swellyng and pain of the soles of the feet.
TAke the Moss that grows in the water, but let it be green, bray it well
with oil olyue, and lay it upon the place with a linen clothe, and it will
cease the pain, and take away the swellyng.

To make wartes fall of.
WHen you kill a Hog, let him that has the wartes receive the blood even
whote upon the place where the warts be, and as soon as it is dry let him wash
it of. And if it be a woman that has these wartes, she must take the blood
of a sow, and she shall be healed of them.

For to take away the felons and catts hears, which break out with wheales in
the fyngers, and also knoppes growyng in the feet.
TAke ground worms, stamp them and with a little oil lay them upon the
soores, and they will bring them away, and heal them.

For to assuage the pain of the gout quickly, and for all grief of the
feet.
YOu shall take ground Worms, and put them in Uinaigre, that they may purge
them selves of all the ordure and fylthe. The next morning wype them dry,
and put nine ounces of them in a pound of grease, brayinge them a good while,
to the intent you may incorporate them: and there with annoint your feet, and
the pain shall ease.

Another way.
TAke a Fore and sees him well, than strain the decoction of him through a
linen clothe, wherewith you shall bathe and wash often times your feet, and
it will take away the pain.

For to get out any thing that sticks in a man's body as thorns and such
other.
TAke a piece of a Sponge or Wulle dipped in piss and lay it upon the thing
that sticks in the flesh, and it will come out without pain. Or else take
some larde, and sees it in it own grease, and than lay it upon the soore
place and bind it, and it will draw out all thing that sticks in the flesh.

Here follows certain receiptes against the Plague.
A composition preservative against the pestilence, excellent as it were
Tryacle or Mythridatum.
TAKE Pympynell dried an ounce and a half, Sordij very, roots of Gentian,
Imperatoriae, Zeduariae, of each six dragmes, Calamint, apiastrum or
citraginis, enula campana roots, tormentillae, which is a kind of cinkfoyle,
Baye berries, the seed of card^^s benedictus, which is one of the kinds of
the herb called atractilis an Orange or Citron, oxalidis, which is a kind of
Sorrel, Bole armenicke prepared of each three dragmes, lykoryse scraped
Glyeanisi seminis, ye seeds of Scariol^ which is intibus satiua of the kinds
of Endive and Succorye, Cynamomi exquisiti, of each two dragmes, Gylloflowers,
red Roses, Coriander prepared, the seed of Basil, Corticis citrij sicci,
Santali lutei vel rubri, Agollochi, that is Xilaloe, vel ligni aloes, the
scraping of Juorie, red Coral, Pearls of each a dragme and a half: Saffron
two scruples. All these being beaten very small, mingle them with Sugre of
equal quantity, or else with Oxymelite or syrupo aceta^o or oxysacchara* or
rather the Syrope of Lymons: But unto weak stomachs contrary let it be made
like to a liquide con^ection, either opiatae vel massae, or else let there be an
electuarie per tabellas of a dragme weight, or four scruples, if you add unto
every ounce of Sugre a dragme of the said powder. You shall take of it two or
three hours before your meals. If it be powder, the quantity shall be a dragme
or half a dragme at the least, with some convenient lycour of those which are
now named: If it be opiatae, the quantity of a Chestnut or Walnutte. If it be
in form of a mass and thick you shall make two or three Pylles or mo very
soft for to take at one time, drinking after it some such lycour as I have
already spoken of. When it is in little tablettes, you may take one or two.

Another composition in powder on in another manner for the same.
TAke y^ roots of angelica, Gentian, Zedoaria, of y^ rotes of tormentilla, ye
seeds of oxalidis citrij mah; Synamome elect, which a kind of cassia, of
yellowe or red Sandale or Sandars, cardu^s benedictus, of each two dragmes the
pille of an Orange, a dragme and a half: the scraping of Juorie a dragme,
read Coral half a dragme, of the best Sugre like weight, put to all these
things as the powder shall seem pleasant and good. Or if you will seek
another way as is spoken of the first preservative. As concerning y^ quantity
of this co^pos^tio^ at every time, and the time of vsyng it, let it be as the
other before. But if you will have the^ both, let them not be of like sort, but
the one in powder or in tablettes, the other in opiate or mass with pills.

Common pylles very good for the same.
TAke aloes probatae and lotae two ounces, of Saffron an ounce, of good Myrrh as
much, or else Myrrh and ammoniacum dissolved in white wine, of each half an
ounce, mix them with honny rosef. And in winter you may put to it Zedoaria,
Agallochi or red Sanders of each a dragme. But in summer take away the Myrrh
and ammoniacum, and put to it bole armenicke prepared three dragmes, red Coral
half a dragme, Camphyre half a scruple. You shall commonly take a pille or
twain before your meals. Sometime you shall proceed unto a dragme after your
first sleep.

Antidotes or medecines preservatives and comfortable, of small cost, easy to
find and prepare for poor folk.
1. TAke Garlike, and drink a little wine after it: or a fig with a Walnut,
and Rue and a little

2. salt specially in winter.

3. Take twenty leaves of Rue with two Walnuts and as many figs, and a
grain of salt, al being mixed together receive it in the morning.

4. Take six leaves of Rue with Uinaigre.

5. Take the root of the herb called in Latin Imperatoria of some Laserpitium
gallicum in English Pelli^orie of Spain.

6. Take the root of angelica.

7. The root of Gentian.

8. The root of Zedoaria.

9. Of carduus benedictus.

10. Of carlina.

11. Take the herb called Scordium, of the one, of the two, or of ^o, in small
powder the quantity of a Dragme, either in a soft mass made with sodden
Honny and Uinaigre, or with some handsome Syrop, as of Lemons, or in opiate,
the bygnesse of a Chestenutte or of a Cyche pease with Wine in Winter, in
Summer with Rose water, or with the Juice of Sorrel.

12. Take Sorrel alone, or with Pimpernell tempered in Uinaigre, and drink of
it in the morning.

13. Or the Juice of them, where with you may make a tos^e in Summer.

14. Or Jenyper berries; green Pimpernell leaves, of Betonye, of Pule^ion, of
Sorrel as much of the one as of the other, brayed together, sodden with
sodden Honnye, and a little Uinaigre like a conserne.

Another medecin.
15. Take Jenyper berries, Bole armenicke of each two Dragmes, or of equal
weyghte. Being stamped let it be laid in sweet oil and Uinaigre, or in
Oximilite, in a mean form, either opiate or mass. If it be opiate, take as
much of it as a Chestnutte. If it be mass take one great pille and drink
after it a little Hydromel or Oxymel, or wine.

The things of favor or sweet smell, as powder, balls, waters, parfumes,
and first a powder for many purposes.
TAke Iris florentiana four ounces, of Maioram in Latyne samsuehum, red Roses, Cloves, of each an ounce, Melissophilli, Nucis odorate or muscate,
Zedoaria, Cynamome, Agallochi, yellowe Sanders, Masticke, Storax calamita,
Bengewine, of each half an ounce, calami odorati, spicae nardi radicis, of each
a Dragme: Juncus odoratus two scruples.

Make of these a powder to smell, to be beaten and broken in some piece of
sylke or fine linen clothe. Beat also these things grossly for to parfume
and to wash your head and beard: or else let them lie a certain time in white
wine and rose water, and afterward strain them. And keep that which shall be
strayned for to use when you will, or let them be stilled in some double
vessel, that there may be aqua aromatica. As I said it is for to parfume your
chamber morninge and evening, being laid upon coals, or this powder to give a
good odor keeping it about you or in some place between your garments and
linen, or to make a little bag of it, or to mix it with some lycour meet
for to wash your head and bearde, or otherwise to weate your handkercher in
it, or some piece of sponge to swell to or to make distilled water of it, for
to smell to.

A parfume.
TAke coals of Will was eyghte ounces, Ladani pu^i, two ounces, Frankensence of
the male kind of the wodde and berries of Juniper of each an ounce, Agallochi
or Xilaloes, Bengewine, Storar calamita, of each half an ounce, Nutmegges,
yellowe Sanders, of each three dragmes, Cloves, Storax liquida, of each two
dragmes, Zedoaria, calamus aromaticus, of each a Dragme, gomme tracaganthae,
dissolved in rose water sufficiently. And make little parfumes of what fashion
it pleases you.

A smelling balle.
TAke pure Labdanum, two ounces, Bengewine an ounce and an half, the coals of
Willowes an ounce Storax calamita sire dragmes: Iris florentiana, half an ounce,
Cloves three dragmes: Maioram, yellow or red sanders of each two dragmes: red roses calamus aromaticus of each two scruples, Leuige^tur. Than take the ^yl^
of sweet Almondes, Bengewine of each sire dragmes Storar calaminta half an
ounce. Let these things sees together with sire dragmes of Rose water.

Than strain it, and let that which is strayned be made soft with two ounces
of white Wax, and Storax liquida a dragme. Make it like a ce^eatum or plaster
with the which the other things must be stamped and incorporated with a whote
pestell. Put to it a dragme and a half of Musk, or else two scruples.

Another sweet balle meeter for the Summer.
TAke red roses and Uiolets, of each three ounces and a half, the berries and
leaves of Myrtle if you can get them, coals of Willowe, of each an ounce:
Jenyper berries, the Pills of Orenges, of each sire dragmes, yellowe or read
Sanders two dragmes: Bengewine a dragme, Camphyer two scruples. Make hereof a
powder. Than take oil of Roses an ounce and a half, Storax calamita, Bengewine
of each two dragmes: an ounce of rose water, or as much as shall suffice. Make
that soft that is strained with two ounces of white Wax. Make a ceratum, and
beat all the rest together with a whote Pestell. Put to it a little Musk five
or six grains.

Outward remedies to purge the air, the easyest, the presentest, and those
that are of the smallest price for men of small ability.
PArfume some Jenyper berries of the root cloven a sunder and dried, and of
the other drogges before mentioned for the first out ward remedy.

2. Uinaigre alone, or mixte with Rose water, for to sprinkle your chamber.

3. For to hold oftentimes in your mouth, and chaw, namelye when you go out and
keep company with men, there also the Pille and seed of a Citron, which
gives a good odor: Cinamome, Cloves, the roots of angelica or Zedoaria, and
such like, as are before mentioned.

4. For to smell with a Sponge, or with a Handkercher day and night, Malmsey,
or other strong wine and sweet, as Muscadell alone, or else with rose water,
wherein there has been tempered some aromaticall drogge already spoken of, as
Cloves or nutmegs.

5. Or good Uinaigre twyse as much as of cold water with a little Camphyre,
specially in Summer.

A powder against the worms.
TAke Coriander prepared five dragmes, Jenyper berries three Dragmes,
Sothernwodde, Hearts horn, corallinae, of each two dragmes: white Agaricke
new made in balls: Nutmegge, Cynamome elect, of each two scruples, make of
this a metely fine powder.

The whole sum of the regiment and gouernyng of a man's self.
1. IT is necessary that you be kept nete and clean, and all things in your
house, flyinge diligently and as much as you can all evil air.

2. Avoid al excess and superfluity, specially in drinking and eating, and
from women.

3. Also from travail, and from excess in sleeping and watchinge.

4. Beware of moist meats and corruptible, and of all things that is cause of
rawnes, and other evil humors.

5. Live soberly, drink and eat at ordinary hours, and in good order.

6. Take your rest, and use some neat and good exercise or occupation.

7. Maintain and keep your natural or accustomed voyding.

8. Be merye.

A sovereign powder against the venyme of the plague for rich men and for
princes.
TAke Saphyre, Hyacinthe, Smaragdus, of one of these, or two, or of all, one
Dragme: of Pearls, Bole armenicke of the best, the seeds of Oxalis, of each
two Dragmes: of the scraping of ^uorie two scruples, of Unicornes horn a
scruple, of the seeds of Ocimum half a scruple, yellowe or read sanders:
Agallochi or Xilaloes of the best. Doronici, Cynamom exquisite, saffron, of
each three graynes, Musk six grains. Make hereof a fine powder. You may
leave out the Musk for them that love it not.

The use of the said powder and for other that follow shall be declared
afterward.

A powder for poor folk, of no less efficacy and strength than the second.
TAke bole armenicke of the best two dragmes: the seed of Oxalis three
dragmes, aloes hepaticum lotum read Coral of each a Dragme, the powder of
Diamargariti frigidi two scruples: the powder of Diatrio santalon eight
scruples, the pylles of dry Orenges, Cloves, Cynamome, Saffron, of each five
Dragmes. Make thereof a fine Powder. You shall use the said Pouders with
Conserues, or without them, with Syroppes, distilled waters, or rather with
Juyces, and other such convenient lycours

A drink for poor folk, and in a places, where there is none or very little
Juice, either of Syrope, cytrons, Lemons or Pomegranades.
YOu shall take the powder prescribed for poor folk conditi rosati, or
conserve of Roses, conditi boraginis, or rather coraginis, of each a Dragme and
a half: of the suck of Oxalis two ounces Succi arantij. Succi coraginis
extract with Rose water: of good white Uinaigre of each an ounce, and make
thereof a drink.

A drink often times tried, profitable, and wholesome, the which as many men
say, was never found vain.
TAke powder of Motherworte, of the first, or of the second two dragmes: the
seeds of Sancti or of Orenges: of Myrrh, of each a dragme: the scrapinges of
Hearts horn a dragme, mix them together well beaten. You must drink this
with white Uinaigre before a fire: and as soon as there appears any
swellynge in the gryne or flank, or underneath the arm hooles, or any where
else, the remedy must be ready: for it provoke great sweat whereby the
venim or infection anoydeth in every part.

The Pacient thus sweatinge his infected sweat beside a fire, must be rubbed
and dried with whote linen clothes, which must be always changed, until the
savor of the sweat begone with rubbing.

Of the said pouders also a man may make conserues or opites after this manner
that follows.

Opiate.
TAke of the first or second powder, Orange pills conserved, of each an ounce
and a half. conditi rosati, that is to say, the conserve of Roses, the
conserve of Buglosse of each two ounces, of the syrope of the juice of Citrons
or Lemons or Orenges, or else of Oxalis or omphacini, as much as shall suffice.
Make thereof a liquide electuarie in form of an opiate. Whereof take an ounce or
more, and drink after it some of the foresaid lycours, and such as here
follow. It shall be well done, to mingle an ounce of Purcelane with the licours as
follows.

A drink meet after every taking of the said opiate, or to be mixte with the
takynges of the same opiate, for the strongest or meanest men, according to
the place and time.
TAke the Juice of Citrons or Lemons three ounces; of the wine of sour Orenges
of white Rose water, of each an ounce. And mix them together.

A drink for poor folk.
TAke the Juice of Sorrel very clear three ounces, of bitter or sour Orenges,
good white and clear Uinagre, rose water, of each an ounce. Make thereof a
drink, putting to it a little Sugre if you will.

A drink to cause one to sweat.
TAke good triacle or Mythridatum a dragme, bolearmenick of the best, or of the
powder of one of the herbs called cardiacae, before discribed half a dragme:
Scabiose water two ounces: water of Oxalis, Buglosse or Borage of each an ounce:
and make thereof a drink.

Another drink easy for poor folk.
TAke the decoction of Scabiose, and of the flowers of read Poppye a
glassefull with a little Sugre.

Or a Ptysane made with Barley and An^^e seed and the roots of Persley. Or of
the decoction of Cyche peason, the roots of Persley, the roots of Succorye:
the one or the other decoction with sharp Syrop two ounces, or with Sugre and a
little white Uinaigre.

These drinks must be taken whote, the Pacient being well covered in his
bed. The Triacle and Mythridate, although they be of great efficacy in this
behalf, yet they are not meet for women with child, nor for young children.
The use also of them ought not to be often, nor in great quantity, when the
fever is great. Some men's advise is to mingle the medecin for sweating with
some distilled water, or with the decoction of herbs, concerning the part to
the which the venomous matter has his course. Now if a man know that the
matter goes to the head, they will that the pacient take it for to sweat with
some distilled water, or with the decoction of Betony: but if it go to the
vital parts or to the breast and heart, with the water or decoction of Borage,
which is very Buglosse. If it go to the belly and bowels, with lycour of
Wormewodde. If to the liver, then with the decoction, or water of Agrimonie,
which is the true cupatorium.

An epitheme or medecin to lay the region of the heart to cool it.
TAke Rose water four ounces: water of Uiolettes and of Nempher of each three
ounces: water of Buglosse, of Oxalis, of wine of pomegranads of good Uinaigre,
of each two ounces: of Coriander prepared three dragmes, red Roses, flower of
Pearls of each a Dragme: of read Sanders half a dragme: of both Coralles,
of Camphyre, of each a scruple: Saffron half a scruple, myngle them together.
And make thereof an Epitheme.

An Epitheme for the Heart good for poor folks, which may also serve for
the Liver.
IT is made of twelve ounces or a pound of Rose water, of three ounces of good
white Uinaigre, putting to it in Summer white and read Sanders, of each a
dragme. If it be in Winter, instead of Sanders you shall put to it Cloves, the
flowers of Nardus celtica, or of Lauendar of each a dragme.

An Epitheme or medecin for the Liver.
TAke the water of Succorye in Latin ambubeia, Rose water, of Oxalis of each
four ounces: white Uinaigre: wine of Pomegranades of each two ounces: powder of
Diarhodon abbatis two dragmes: the powder Diamargariton frigidum, which is a
confection made with Pearls, one dragme: read Sanders half a dragme:
Camphier half a scruple. Make thereof an Epitheme.

Local medecines, and first a plaster or ointment, for to draw and dissolve.
TAKE the roots of Narcissus, or of Flowerdeluce with his oil, and braye it
with Honny. It is good for a delycate body, and eases all the pain.

Another easy drawyng medecin.
TAke Rue or Dogon brayed with Triacle, or Triacle alone, or of a Radishe root
cut into little round pieces, and lay on one after another, and change it
often times.

Another very good in manner of a plaster.
TAke Diachylum, two ounces, Ammoniacum, Galbanum, of each half an ounce and put
them together.

Medecines of the kinds that burn the skin or flesh called medicamenta
caustica, or vesicatoria, whereof the first is very strong.
APlaister of Cantarides, and of vnsleckt lyme mixed with oil of Walnuttes in
steed of a lancet, for to get out the swellynge.

Another plaster.
TAKE the roots of Narc isse or of Lilies sodden with ashes, of Pigeons dung
of each equal parts: of melligo anacardina called mel anacardinum as much as
shall suffice. And make thereof a plaster.

Another stronger.
TAke fermentum acris, sour Leven, Soap, Figs, old Walnuttes, of each half
an ounce, iris florentinae mustarde seed, vnsleckt lyme, Calcanthum, that is to
say romain Uitriol, beaten together of each two dragmes: as much Turpentine
as is needful. Make of it a plaster.

A medecin that cleanses and purifieth.
THe yelke of an Egg mixte with a little Barley flower or wheat flower,
putting to it honnye roset. It is very sweet and mete for a delycate body.

Another of the same very good.
TAke the Juice of Garlyke six ounces: the Juice of Wormewodde, good Honny of
each three ounces: Barley flower or Wheat flower, or flower Darnell or
Bearebarley two or three dragmes. Sees it until it be some what thick, and
make of it an ointment that mundifieth or purges the soore.

A plaster incarnatyfe.
TAke the leaves of Pimpernell, of Betaine, Ueruin, semperuiui tertij, commonly
called Vermicularis of the less Centorie, of each a handefull and a half:
sees it in white wine unto the half. And being strained put to it Rosen,
Wax, sheep suet, of each three ounces. Sees all together with a little woman's
milk put in it, until the Juyces be consumed. Than when you have taken it
from the fire, put to it when it begins to be cold, Rosen, Turpentine,
three ounces, clear Masticke and proved ten dragmes, aloes hepaticum two
dragmes: mingle them and stir them with a pors^cke, and make of it a plaster.

A repercussyfe and resolutyue oyntmente against the Canker.
TAke Lead burned and washed; Pompholix which the Apoticaries do call Nil,
Frankensence, of each two ounces, Wormewodde, of that which is called absinthium
ponticum half an ounce, oil of Roses three ounces, Wax six dragmes: the juice
of nightshade, as much as is sufficient for the thickenesse of the ointment.

A plaster dyapompholigos of Theodoricke, for to stop the gnawyng and eating
of the canker. It is repercusfiue, refrigeratiue and desiccatiue.
TAke good oil of Roses, white Wax, of each two ounces: the juice of the red
grains or berries of the herb called Solanum two ounces: read Lead washed an
ounce: Lead burned and washed, Pompho lygos commonly called Tutia, of each half
an ounce: frankensence of the male kind two dragmes. Make thereof a plaster.

An ointment very sweet for cankers that have corrupt matter in them, which
also alayeth the pain of those that have no corrupt matter in them.
TAke good Wax, Turpentine, Bulls suet, the new and fresh marow of a Dear
or Calfe, oleum rici ^ium, new and fresh Goose grease, Honny elect,
Frankensence, Diphrix, Pomphilix, of each equal porcions, and of oesipum thryse
as much, without y^ Frankensence the author thinks it will be sweeter, but
with it more resolutyue and will ripe it the sooner, and is better for Cankers
that have no corrupt matter in them.

An ointment of a merueylous virtue against the eating and running of the
canker, and to take away all the grief of the same.
TAke Kue or Sumach sextarios three. Pills of Cipres three ounces, Galls not
ripe, Cassia of each an ounce and a half: Vinu^ adrianum, that is to say: wine
that byndeth, and old wine of good odor five sextarios. All these things
being bruised together, lay them in wine three days, and then sees them three
or four wawmes styring it with a slyse of Cypres. Then having wrong all out
diligently, and cast away the thycke of it, the Juice will sees in the
thyckennesse of Honnye, for to be kept a^fterwarde in a vessel of Glass.

This ointment must be used alone without any mixture aganyst the said
disease, adding to it sometime a little wine. If the medecin be to thycke you
must make it liquide and soft, for the syckennesse which possesses the
priuye parts of a woman, that is to say, the neck of the Matrice. If you
dissolve it in the milk of an Ass, it mitigateth the pain, also is very
profitable for all other scorching of y^ skin that runs in length, and
extends more and more, and brings no inflammation. It is good for to dry up
the ears that have been of long time subject to a runnynge and putrified
matter of blood corrupted.

Also for the Gaumes that be infected and wythered, also against ulcers that
be hard to heal, and can not be cut, but with great pain, if it be
mingled moderately and reasonablye. But how is it that soft and gentle
remedies should resist such a disease, to the which the roughest and the
most wyldestgeue place. The said ointment is to be prepared as follows.

Take Sumach a pound: Pylies of Cipres three ounces: of unripe Galls, of
Cassia, of each an ounce. Vi^um adrianum, that is to say: Vinum astringens,
four pound.

A plaster mitigatiue, and very gentle for Cankers, specially of the breasts
or pappes.
TAke Saffron, Poppye, Frankensence of the male kind of each a dragme:
Lithargyri, Plumbi vsti loti two dragmes, Ceruse prepared and ounce and a half:
white Wax two ounces, Goose grease, new and fresh butter of each three ounces.
Rosacei boni four ounces. The powder being brayed with the Juice of Morella
must be mingled with the things molten.

FINIS.
Here after follow many goodly receyptes, touching the handelynge of diverse
metalles, all well tried and approved.
And first for to harden iron.
TAKE Ueruine, and bray it stalks and all, and keep the ^uyce of it in some
glass. Now when you will harden any iron, put to the same suyce as much of
piss, with the juice of a little worm called in Latyne Spondilis, in Dutche
Engherlincker. And let not your iron be to whote, but when you see that it is
indifferent whote, quench it in the said mixion, and let it cool of it self
until you see sytle spots upon it somewhat yellowe* and than put it to the
said water. If it wax very blewe, it is a sign that it is not hardened
enough.

For to harden knydes, and other such ^yke.
TAke the marowe of a Horse, wherein you shall cool your Iron.

For to harden a fyle or other instrument of iron.
TAke old shoes and burn them, and make them into a powder, and put to it as
much salt: cast this mixture upon and under the Fyles in a Cof^r or Chest of
iron covered with a cover of iron: and lay the powder so that it may be as
much above as under, the thickenes of a straw. Cover the said coser with his
cover, and put it into y^ fire until it be read whote: after this let it fall
into some cold water, and you shall have the Fyles good and very hard. You may
annoint them also with oil of Line or he Goats blood*

To harden any other substance material.
TAke the juice of Cynkefoyle, with the juice of Wormewodde, and put it in some
Glass, than take worms which you shall stamp, and strain through a linen
clothe, and rub the whote iron with all, and than quench it in the said
iuyces.

To make any instrument of steel hard and sharp.
TAKE the leaves and roots of Buglosse sodden in water, wherein you shall
quench your instrument of iron.

Another.
TAke Dragontion with his roots, and as much Ueruine: sees this in clear
water, and let it cool, and ware clear, and so annoynte your instrument
with it. Also take man's pysse mixte with clear water, made luke warm: in
this quench your instrument. Also you may harden it in good Mustarde made with
strong Uinaigre. Also when you will harden any thing you must see that it be
clean neat and pollished.

For to keep it from ^leanyng when it is a hardenyng.
TAke Tallo we and melte it, than power it in cold water until it wax thick
and swymme in the water the thickness of a fyngar. Than take your instrument
whote, and put it first through the Tallow and then into the water. Some quench
also shurtes of maile in the juice of Rape roots.

To make iron or steel soft.
IF you will make iron or steel as soft as copper, take vnsleckt lyme with as
much Alume, well stamped first in some mortar: mix well these two things
together, and lay them upon some lynnen clothe the thicknes of a finger or
half a finger, and wrappe your instrument that you will have made soft in it,
and lay it so in some small fire the space of an hour, until the fire go out,
and that your instrument be cold of it self, and than shall you find it as
soft as copper.

Another.
Lay your iron or Steel in a small fire, and when the fire is out, let your
iron cool of it self.

Another.
TAke the water of Radishe roots and quench your iron or steel in it. Also
you may take the ashes mixte with vnfleckte lyme, and make thereof lie, the
which you shall let run through the said substaunces: in this lie steep
your iron or steel the space of a night, and so shall you make it meet to
cut or engraue in. Afterward if you will harden it again you may quench it
in cold water.

Another.
TAke the yellowe flowers like to Marygoldes, the leaves be large and as broad
as the nail of a man's finger: take them stawkes and all, and stamp them, and
strain them through a linen clothe, and keep the juice in a pot. Than put
your iron or steel in the fire until it be read whote, and then quench it
in the said water, and it will be as soft as copper.

Another.
TAke some great snayles, and other great ground worms of equal portion, and
the third part salt. Than take an earthen pot, or some other platter of
earth full of holes, wherein you: shall powder or salt your snayles and worms,
and receive the salt which shall melt and drop from them into another pot
set underneath, and the thickest substance will remain in the vessel full of
holes, the which you may cast away. This done lay a stone upon the pot, and
sees it until it foam or froth no more: then take it from the fire, and let
it cool. In this water you may quench your iron or steel being read whote,
and by this means you shall make it as soft as copper, and for to harden it
again, you must make it read whote, and quench it in cold water.

Another.
TAke the herb called Fool foot, and distill it: then make your iron red
whote, and quench it in the same water. Also take snayles and stamp them with
good Uinaigre, wherein you may quench your iron or steel: Or quench iron in
the blood of an Eele, and it will be like wife soft.

Also take iron or steel, and wrappe it in Potters claye with a we ate linen
cloth, and lay it in the fire, and afterward let it cool of it self. Take
also the juice of Marubium, and the juice of Milfoyle, with the juice of
Radishe roots mixed with good wine, and quench your iron in the mixtion.

To make Crystal soft so that you may break it in pieces.
TAke burned lead and Crystal as much of the one as of the other, and break
it upon a stone, than put this mixture into a melting pot, and melt it, and so
shall you make it into what form or fashion you will. The same may you break
and bruise as you will.

Another.
TAke quick lyme and ashes of equal quantity, and lie with it, passinge and
strainyng it through the ashes and lyme nine or ten times. That done steep
your steel or Crystal in the same lie, the space of* xxiiii. hours, and you
shall find it soft.

For to soften iron.
TAke the water that is upon the blood of a man when he is let blood, which
you shall handsomely power from the blood. Than lay your iron in the fire until
it be whote, than with a little fether wet in the said water rub it so long with
it until the water vanishe away, and it will be soft.

Another.
TAke scommed honny, the new piss of a he goat, alome, borace, oil olive and
salt: mingle all well together, and quench your iron in the mixtion.

To soften a little that which is to hard.
THat which is to hard, keep it so long in the fire till it be very whote:
Than take Tallowe, with the which you shall rub your matter, and let it so
cool.

To mollify and soften iron or steel, in such sort that you may bow and wind
it which way you will.
TAke Camomille flowers with one part of herb Robert, and one part of
Ueruine: put all this in a pot with whote water, and so stop it that no
smoke may come out: than sees it, and quench your iron in it.

To soder all things, and first iron.
TAke an ounce of salt Armoniacke, an ounce of common salt, an ounce of Tartre
calcined, an ounce of belle metal, three ounces of Antimonium: stamp well all
together and sift or bolt it: this done put all in a linen cloth, and wrappe
it round about with potters claye well prepared the thickenesse of a finger
and let it ware very dry: than put it between two pot shardes upon a small
fire, and let it heat by little and little. Afterward make the fire greater,
until your whole mass become red and melt together: than let it so cool, and
after make it into a powder.

And when you will soder any thing, lay the two peeches that you will soder
upon a table, as nere the one to the other as you can, but you must lay some
paper under the pieces.

This done, cast of the said powder between the joints, and a little upon them:
than make some cruste of potters, but yet so that it be open above: after this
put some Borace in whote wine until it be al consumed, than with a little
feather rub the said powder, and incontinent it will begin to boil and
sees: and when you see it boil no more, it is a sign that the sodering and
consolidation is made. And if there be any excrescence or risyng up, you must
diminishe it by rubbinge it, for it will not be fyled.

To soder any whote thing.
TAke gomme water, chawke made in powder, and make thereof a dowe or paste,
wherewith you shall anoint the thing that is a sonder, laying it upon a table as
is before said: than take away the dowe or paste that is upon the ioyninge of
the two pieces, and leave it on both sides: than annoynte the joint with Soap,
and hold a whote cole over it, and by and by the said substance will melt.
After this take away the said dowe or past and it done.

To soder copper.
TAke balfe an ounce of copper, three quarters of an ounce of white Arsenick: melt
the copper, and divide your Arsenick in two parts, and cast one part into the
copper molten, mingle al together, than cast into it also the other part: and
than power it upon a stone, and beat it small.

To soder iron.
FYle well to purpose and proporcion the joints of the yrons, and than lay
them in the fire, as is before said, casting upon it some Uenise glass, and it
will be sodered.

A powder that will make all metal pliable and soft.
TAke a quarterne of Antimonium, axinigia vitri, and salt of equal quantity:
Make all together in a powder: than take of the same powder three parts, and
one part of the metal and melt it.

Another upon brass.
TAke salt stamped, Tartre, Saltpeter, axinigia vetri, ashes of Uines, or Lies
of wine, quick lyme: Make all this in powder, and lay it upon the place that
you will soder.

For to grave in iron or steel, kny^es and harness.
TAke one part of coals made of bir^he stamped, two pactes of Uitrsoll, with as
much salt armoniack: Than stamp all together with Uinaigre, until it be like
unto a soft dow or past. Now when you will grave in iron or other things, make
first the description or figures that you will grave, and that with Uermilion
mixed with oil of Line, and let it dried, and afterward cover it with the said
substance the thickenesse of a finger, the which the whoter it is laid upon
it, the sooner it will be done, but you must take heed you burn it not. And
when it is weldrie, take away the said powder, and wash well the grauing. Also
some take two parts of Spanishe green, or one part of common salt, and in
stamping it in some mortar, they put to it some strong Uinaigre, and than do
it as is aforesaid. Take also Uitrioll, Alom, Salt, Uinaigre, coals of
Birche, and do as before.

To grave with water.
TAke Spanishe green called Uerdet, quick Silver, Sublime, Uitrioll, and
Alome of each equally, stamp well all together, and put it in a glass, leaving
it so half a day, stirring it often times: Than make your description or
figures as you will, with Wax or artificial O^re and Oil of Line mixed
together, or Uermillion mixed with Oil of Line, than annoynte it with that
water, and let it alone so the space of a day: But if you will have your
description very deep graued, leave it so standing longer.

But if you will engraue writings or Images, you shall make a ground of Wa^e,
wherein you shall make your description with the poincte of a Bodken even to
the bottom: Than power the water upon it which water will engraue it. Or
else you may lay upon your description made as before is said, some
Marcurium sublimatum, and than cast some good Uinaigre upon it, and let it
alone so half an hour.

Another stronger and moore bytyng.
TAke a quarter of an ounce of Spanishe grieve, alumen plumae, salt Armoniacke,
Tartre, common Salt, of each a quarter of an ounce, all being well stamped and
mixte with strong Uinaigre, leave it so the space of an hour. And if you will
that your description be high or ra^sed up, write it with artificial O^re
and Oil of Line* brayed and mingled together: and let it ^r^e well: Than heat
the said water in a pan leaded within, letting it alone upon the fire. Than
take your steel and hold it over the said pan, upon the which you shall
power of the said water with a spone, and so the water will fall again into the
pan and there shall be nothing lost* Do thus the space of a quarter of an
hour, but let not the water be t^ whote, lest that the Oil which was mixed
with the Uernishe go not out.

This done, rub over the said substaunces with ashes or quick Lime, and
than shall you find that which before was anointed, whole and high, and the
other engraned.

To make a color of gold or siluet to lave upon metal* and to make also a
ground of gold or silver, upon iron* belles, or stones, which shall not go of
with water.
TAke one part of Ocre, the second part of minium, the fourth part of Bole
armenicke, and as much Aqua^ire, and bray well altogether with Oil of Line
^^ede* and put t^ it also the bigness of a little nut ^f (...) and* iii* or.
iiii* drops of Uernishe. If the color be to thick, ^nt a little more of the
said oil to it: Than strain it th^r^ we a fine linen clothe into some
clean bessel, and it will be as thick as honny and than rub what you will
with it, and let it dry, and than lay your gold or silver. upon it.

A color of gold to set upon brass or copper.
TAke a little pot well leaded, and put into it three ounces of oil of
lineseede, than take half an ounce of Masticke, and half an ounce of aloes
hepaticum ritrinum, and make it well into a powder, and put it into the said
oil, and cover it close with another pot wherein you shall make a little hole
above, that is to say in the bottom of the said pot that shall be uppermost.
Annoint the said pot well with potters earth and let them be so close one
upon another, that nothing may come out: than put in above a stick broad at
the end, with the which you may stir it: and let all sees as they do
Painters vernishe. This done polishe well that which you will gylt, and lay
the said color upon it, and dry it in the Sun, and if there be not enough,
put more on until it be well.

Another.
TAke dry Uernishe, Amber, Alome, of these two as much of the one as of the
other: than take Uernishe, and oil of lineseede: sees all together on a fire
of coals in a pot well leaded, that it may be well mirt together: then assaye
it upon a knife, and if it be to thick, put more oil to it: but if it be to
clear or to thin put more Alome to it.

Another.
TAke half an ounce of aloe hepaticum citrinum, half an ounce of Amber, these
two being made in powder set them on a moderate fire. in a pot well leaded,
but let it not be to whote at the first. And when all is molten, power some
boiling oil upon it, sturring and mixing it well together with alitle stick:
after this let it cool, and strain it through a linen cloth.

Another.
TAke half an ounce of bole Armenick, half an ounce of white gomme, and set it
upon a fire of coals, putting to it an ounce of oil of Line seed, and when
you may draw it in length like a threede, it is made.

A color of gold upon brass.
TAke oil of Line seed well clarified on the fire: than put to it Amber, and
aloe hepaticum citrinum, of each alyke, and being well stamped, mingle it so well
with the oil on the fire that it may be thycke, then take it from the fire,
and set it on the ground well covered the space of three days: And the brass
that you shall gilt, shall take the color of gold.

To make copper of a silver color.
TAke wine leese, alome and salt: bray well altogyther upon a stone: and put
unto it a leaf or two of silver, brayeng them also with the other foresaid
things. Put all in a pot well leaded, putting to it some water: then cast your
copper into it, and after rub it with a rubber: and so shall you see when it
is enough.

To gylte iron or steel.
TAke one part of wine seese, half as much of salt Armoniacke, and as much
spanishe grene, and a little salt: Sees all in white wine and anoint your iron
or steel, with it when you have well polished it: and so let it dry, and then
gilt it with gold ground.

To make a water for to gylt upon iron or steel.
TAke an ounce of the ashes of wine leese burned, an ounce of white wine, an ounce
of Alom, half an ounce of salt gemma, alumen plu^^^ the weight of two grotes,
Spanish green the weight of two grotes, Coperous y^ weight of a grote, baye
salt, a pint of ruening: sees this unto the half, and than put it in a new
pot* laying upon it. vii. or. viii. new paper leaves, and a tile over that, to
the end it may take no air.

To keep all manner of iron, or steel clean, and also all manner of
instruments of war.
TAke Lead fyled very small, and put it in a pot with oil Olyue, until it
cover it, leaving it so nine days together: Than anoint with the same oil,
harness, swords, iron or steel, and it shall never ruste. The grease of
neates feet sodden is also good for the same.

THE second Book containyng the manner how to take out quickly with water or
Lie, without hurtinge any thing, all manner of spots of garments of clothe,
velvet, silk, or other, whether they be spots of oil, grease, wine, or
what so ever they be.
To bring a cloth that was stained to his color again.
TAKE a pound of earthen pots bruised, and having powered upon it about four
pintes of water, let it rest a night. Than power out the Lie, and put into the
same two Ox galls, and a handful of dry birchen leaves, and let them sees
together half an hour long, or until the leaves go to the bottom. Than let
it cool, and such color as you will restore that was stained, take the
shearings or flocks of the clothe of the same color, and sees it again with
the said Lie, leauinge it so to rest the space of xiiii. days or more: for
the Lie will draw unto it self the color of the shearings or flocks. Than
power it out, and wash the clothe with it, and it shall receive his first
color again.

To take spots out of cloth.
TAke cold Lie made of the ashes of Beeche, and put to it a little wine Lies,
and of the old claye of some oven, put the clothe into it where the spot is,
for it will take all the spot out, than wash your cloth with clean water, and
dry it in the Sun. And if the spots be not well taken out do it again as
before.

Another way.
TAke six ounces of alumen fecis, four ounces of raw tartre, two ounces of
alome, half a dragme of camphyre, half a dragme of Dragons blood: stamp them
well, and mingle them well together. Than take six ounces of an Ox galle, three
pyntes of clear water, put all together in a kettle; and sees it until it be
diminished of the two third parts, than strain it through a linen clothe,
and though the galle nor the camphyre were not in it, yet the water would be
strong enough: when you will occupy it, bath the piece of new cloth in the
said water, and rub well the spot withal: and when the cloth is no more
weate with rubbing, weate it again, and rub the cloth with it until the spot
be out. This done, take whole water, and wash the place where the spot was:
but if the cloth be white take a little Soap with the same water, and distille
it, and occupy it as before.

Another way.
TAke six Ox galls, and twyse as much rain water, half a pound of Tartre,
an ounce of Alom, stamp them small, and take a glasseful of Uinaigre, into the
which you shall put six dragmes of Uitrioll well brayed, power al together, and
sees it until it be diminished of the two third parts, and than use it as is
before said.

A water to take spots out of white clothe.
TAke four ounces of alumen fecis, a pint of water, and sees them until they
be consumed to the. iiii. part. Than take white Soap and cut it small, an ounce
of Alome: put al into the water, and let it stand the space of two days, and
use it for your white cloth as before.

To take spots of grease or oil out of white cloth.
TAke whaye of wylke sodden with flower, steep your clothe in it so far as to
the spot, the space of a night: than wash it with fair river water, and hang
it in the most heat of the Sun: but if the cloth be of a noble color, you
may not let it be to whote lest the Sun hurt the color: for the heat of the
Sun soon hurts fair colors.

To take spots of grease and oil out of all sorts of cloth white or other.
TAke the water that pease has been sodden in, and steep your cloth where the
spot is in it, and than wash it with clean river water, and hang it in the
Sun.

Another.
TAke cold Lie, lies of white wine made a little whote, and mix them well
together. But you must take heed they be not to whote and wash your cloth as
before.

To take spots of wine out of all manner of cloth.
TAke Lie made we ashes of beech, white wine lees as much of the one as the
other, lay your cloth in it a night, and wash it afterward with cold water,
and dry it in the Sun.

To take all manner of spots out of sylke.
TAke the juice of great and round musherom^ of a sharp taste, weate the spots
in it the space of two hours, and than wash them with clear water, and let
them dry.

To take all spots out of crymsen Velvet.
TAke the ashes made of Uine twigges, and make therewith good Lie, whereof you
shall take but a pint, and put into it half an ounce of alumen fecis, and let
it stand a little while, and than strain it.

This done, take a dragme of Alome, half a dragme of Spanishe Soap, and half a
dragme of soft Soap a quarter of a bragme of common salt, and a quarter of salt
Armoniacke, half a quarter of the juice of Celandine, a quarter of the galle
of a Ealfe. Put al together and strain it through a linen clothe. And when you
will occupy of the said water, take flocks* or shearings of Scarlate, and a
little Brasyl small; sees all that a little in the said water, and than strained
^ through a linen cloth* and you shall have a fai^^ water* which will take the
spots out of any like crymsen color. And what color soever your clothe be
that has the spots, the same color flocks or shearinges must you take. Not
withstanding if it be not red, you must leave out your Brasyll.

A water to take al spots out of cloth of gold and velvet.
TAke raw read Arsnicke, martem crudum, as much of the one as of the other,
and when they be well brayed* power some fair water upon them, and putting
the herb Cinkfoyle to it, sees it unto half: and than let it cool, and set
it in the S^^^e two hours: than wash your clothe in it, and let it dry in
the Sune.

To make a soap that takes out all spots.
TAke a pound of roche Alome, beat it into powder: the roots of Iris of
Florence made in powder, half a pound of new laid eggs, two pound and a
half of Spanishe Soap, bray the said pouders with the Eggs and Soap, and make
thereof round bals. If one Egg be not enough, take as many as you shall think
good. And when you will take out any spot of grease, wash the place of the
spot on both sides of the cloth with fair water, than rub it with the said
balls and cloth upon cloth. This done, wash out the odure with clean water,
and wring the cloth to make the grease or filth come out the better. Than wash
it still with clean water, and it will be clean.

To take spots of black yncke or other things out of woollen or lynnen
cloth.
TAKE green Lemons or green Orenges with their pills, the which the Italians
call pomid, adam or which of the two you will: take but the liquide moisture
which you shall take out by pressing it, wherewith you shall rub well the spots,
and than let them dry. This done* take luke warm water, and wash the said
spots, and let them dry again. And if you see that at the first time the
spots be not well enough taken out, do it once again, and the cloth will
return to his color again.

To take spots out of Scarlate or Velvet of colors, without hurtyng any thing
at all the color.
TAke the juice of Saponaria, called of the Apoticaries condi si or ^auaria*
the which you shall lay upon y^ spot leaving it so an hour long, if it be in
Summer, and four hours if it be in (...)ter: Than take luke warm water and
wash the spot with it, and if it scour not clean, put more juice upon it, or
else of the said moisture of the orenges or Lemons: but if it be Scarlate not
died in grain, lay upon half Soap, and half juice: and than wash it with
whote water, and the spot will go out.

To take spots of oil of from parchement or white paper.
TAke sheep bones and burn them, and make them into powder: and rub the
spot on both sides with the same powder, and lay it so between two bourdes in
a press the space of a night and the spot shall away.

THE third Book, for to dye threede, yarne, or linen clothe, teaching how
to make the dying colors, and also to dye bones and horns, and to make them
soft, unto what form and fashion a man will.
To dye threede, yarne, or lynnen cloth into a sad brown.
TAKE a pound of bastard Saffron, the which you shall put into a little bag
and hang it in river water a day and a night. Than wash it so much, that it
give no more yellow color: this done, make a rank of Saffron in a pot not to
thick, than a rewe of Saffron, and a rewe of ashes, and cover it well, and let
it stand seven or eight hours: than take eight pottes of water, four pottes
of Uinaigre, and putting the Saffron with the ashes in a long bag and sharp
pointed at the end: strain xv. or. xvi. times the said water and Uinaigre
through it whote. And this is the last dying or color.

Than take again as much water and Uinaigre, and strain it through, and this
shall be the second dying. Do the like ye third time, and it shall be the third
dying. This color you shall heat, and lay your threede or linen clothe in
it the space of a night, than bang it up without wringing or rubbing it. Do in
like manner with the second color and with the third, but let it lie in it
that seven hours long.

To dye threde or linen clothe blewe.
TAke the berries of Ebulus, very ripe, and well dried in the Sun, lay them
in Uinaigre. xii. hours than rub them with your hand, and strain them
through a linen clothe, putting to them some Uerdet bruised and Alome alone. If
the blewe ve to clear put more Uerdet to it, and lay your threede or linen
clothe in it.

A blewe color to dye all things.
TAke an ounce of the beating of copper, a dragme of salt three spones full of
Uinaigre. Put all together in a laddel of copper: or some other strong vessel
of copper: and when you will dye, put the said matter into the whote decoction
of Brasyll, and die with it what you will.

Another way to dye blewe.
TAke three parts of ashes of lees burned, one part of vnsleket syine, and
make thereof lie, let it clarify and than strain it through a course linen
cloth take. (...). pots of the same water, and power it upon a pound of
Flaunders blew, such as is taken of the diers ^awdrons, mingle them well
together with a stick. Than set it on the fire until you can skante endure
your hand in it. But before you dye any thing, you must have your linen
cloth boiled in Alome and dried again, and plunged afterward in the whote Lie
twyse or thryse, according as you will have the color dark or clear. The
substance must be whote before you occupye it.

To dye read.
TAke half an ounce of Brasyll scraped, half an ounce of Uermillion well brayed.
Boil them together in rain water, and put into it the bigness of a nut of
Alome. Sees all unto the half, and dye with it. You may sees also the
Brasylle twyse or thrice putting to it at each time a little Uermillion. Also
you may make of it as many dyings and colors as you will.

Another way.
TAke vnsleckt lyme, and put a little water upon it, and let it stand a night,
and afterward strain the clearest through a linen cloth, and for every pint
of water put in half an ounce of scraped Brasyl. Let it sees unto the half,
and put to it half an ounce of Alome, set it upon wodde, and let it heat but
not sees. When you will, have that you will die ready prepared in such sort as
here follows. Take lees of red wine and put it in a bag* that all the wine
dreane out, and the lees wax dry. Make thereof balls as big as a hens
egg drying them in the Sun, and burning them after into ashes, and of this
ashes make a strong Lie, and make it very whote, and than weate in it the
thing that you will dye, drying it afterward, and than dye it with the
foresaid color.

To dye read.
TAKE for every pound of clothe a quarterne of Alome, and sees it, and put
the clothe in it two hours long. Than* take the roset of Brasyl with gomme
Arabicke, and let them sees a quarter of an hour. Than strain it, and put
into it your threede, clothe or any thing that you will.

To make fair roset.
TAke a pottle of water, an ounce of brasil: sees them unto the half, than
take them from the fire, and put as much grain to them as you shall think
good, and half a quarter of gomme. If you will have but a sleyght read, power
it into another pot, or put to it a quarterne of Alome in powder, and let it so
stand a night.

To dye wodde, bones, and horn, into green.
TAke two parts of Spanishe green, a third part of salt Armoniacke bray them
well together, and put them in Uinaigre. And put into it the thing that you
will die, coueryng it well, and so let it stand until it be green inoughe. But
before you die any thing, you must lay it half a day in Alome water, and than
dry it well again.

Another green.
PUt your horn, or wodde, or that you will die, in a vernished pot, and put to
it strong Uinaigre, mingling with if some Uerdegrease that is very thick and
not clear. Cover it well, and set it seven days together in a dunghill, and if
than it be not green enough, let it stand there longer. A man may do the
like with Spanishe green or Uerdet.

To die horn, bone, and wodde, into red.
TAke quick lyme, and cast some rain water upon it, and let so stand a
night: the next morning, strain the clearest through a lynnen clothe, putting
to it for every pot of water, half an ounce of the scrapinges of Brasil, and
^^^ them sees well in it: but yet they must be boiled in Alome first, as
before is said.

To die yellowe.
TAke the bark of an apple tree, not the outward hard and roughe bark, but
the inward, but it in small loppins, and power some water upon them, and than
put in your wodde, bone, or horn, to it with Alome. And let it sees well
together.

To dye black.
TAke Galls broken or bruised in pieces, and sees them in strong Uinaigre:
and put your wodde, bone, or horn in it. And let all sees well together. Take
them than out, and put them in whytes of Eggs, puttinge to it the juice of
walnuttes, and let them sees well together.

To make horn so^e.
TAke man's pysse, that has vene kept stopped, a month together, put into it a
pound of vnsleckt lyme, and half so much of ashes of burned wine Lees, four
ounces of Tartre, and as much salt. Mingle al well together, and let it sees
well, and than strain it twice or thrice through a clothe. This done, keep the
said Lie well covered: And when you will soften any borne, let it lie eyghte
days in it, and the horn will be soft that you may cut it, and dress it
after what sort you will.

Or else make a Lie of the ashes of the heads and stalks of Poppye, and in
the same Lie sees your horns and other things.

To mollifye or soften horn; so that you shall imprynte or make any fygures in
it.
TAKE a pound of the ashes wherewith Glasses be made, a pound of quick Lyme,
and a pot of water, let them sees so long until the two third parts be
consumed.

Than put a feather into it, and pluck it out again, and pille it between
your fingers: for if the feather do pille, it is a sign that it is sodden
enough. But if it pille not, let it sees moore: and when it is sodden enough
let it clarify, and power it out. Take than the fylinges of horn, lay them
therein two days together: Than annoint your hands with oil, and work the
horn well between your hands as it were dowe or paste; and than press him
into what form or fashion you will.

Another way.
TAke the juice of white Marrubium, and of Alexanders, and of Milfoyle, the
juice of Radishe roots, the juice of Celandine, and strong Uinaigre. Mire all
together, and put your horn into it well covered seven days together in a
donghyll. And than knede it and work it as you did before.

To cast horns in a molde like lead.
TAke ashes of wine lees burned, and vnsleckt lyme, and make thereof a strong
Lie, and put into it the fylinges or scrapings of horn, and let them sees well
together, and they will be as it were pappe, and put into it such color as
you will have it of, and than cast it into what moulde you will.

To make clear stones of Amber.
Sees Turpentine, in a pan leaded, with a little Cotto^, stirring it until it
be as thick as paste: and than power it into what you will, and set it in the
Sun eight days, and it will be clear and hard enough. You may make of this
little balls, ha^^es for knyues, and many other things.

Another.
TAke the yelkes of sixtene eggs, and beat them well with a spone: than take
two ounces of gomme Axabicke, an ounce of the gomme of Cherry trees: make those
gommes into powder, and mix them with the yelkes of the eggs, let the gommes
well melt, and power them into a pot well leaded. This done set them sire days
in the Sun, and they will become hard, and shine like glass, and when you
rub them, they will take up a straw unto them, as other Amber stones do.

To polishe and to a gloss or luster unto precious, stones.
TAke powder of Antimonium, and disparse it abroad upon a table of lead that is
very even and smothe. Polishe upon this table your stone, and it shall keep
and maintain him in his luster and gloss.

To make a stone that shall give give fire and burn of it self if you weate
it with your finger.
TAke the Lode stone that has virtue to draw iron to him on the one side, and
to put it away on the other side. Put it in a pot leaded, and put to it four
pound of Pitche, and a pound of Brimstone, lute and claye will your pot, and
set it in a Forneyse, giving it a small fire the space of a day and a night
augmenting the fire the second day and the third day more, until the stone
be on fire.

After you have made this stone on fire, and have in this manner burned it, as
is before said, you shall let it cool again, and your stone is prepared and
made to give fire when you will.

To mollify or soften crystal and precious stones so that you may cut them
like cheese, and that being put in a moulde they shall be hard again.
TAk^ in Auguste the blood of a Goose, and the blood of a he Goat, and let it
dry until it be very hard: And when you mollify and soften Christali or
precious stones, take of the said bloodes as much of the one as of the other,
and make it into powder: and than power some Lie made with the ashes of burned
Lies of Wine, and let them be intermingled together in a pot, putting to them a
dishe full of strong Uynaigre. And when you will soften your stone cast it in the
same, and heat it a little and the stone will be soft so that you may cut and
fashion of what sort you will: cast him afterward in cold water, and he will be
as hard with in an hour as ever he was: And than give him his gloss and
luster as before is said of the other.

To counterfey^e perles which shall be very fair* and as they were natural and
^rewe.
TAke in Summer the shelles of white Muskles, and scraye them clean with a
knyfe: take likewise one part of Snayle shelles, of the cleanest you can
find: and when you have washed them well, stamp them together in a mortar of
stone, as fine as you can, and wash them clean in the Sun upon a linen
cloth, and then put them into a new clean pot, the which ^ot you shall lute
and claye round about with ^utom sapientiae. And being dried in the Sun,
put it into a Forneyse, or Kille of Lyme, and let it burn there as long as
men are wont to let Lyme burn.

Than take it out, and you shall find it turned into powder as white as Snow.
This done, take the yelkes of Eggs made clean and broken a sunder with a
Spone: Myngle the powder with the yelke of the Eggs in some clean vessel:
Than wash your hands clean, and fashion your Pearls of what bigness you
will, persyng them with a Hogs brystell while they be whote. This done, set
them in some clean thing in the Sun, and the whoter the better: yet take
heed there come no rain to them: and than polyshe them in red Wine, and let
them dry again, and you shall have fair Pearls.

THE fourth Book* teaching diverse ways of giltyng, syluerynge, and diynge
Copper, Iron, and other Metalles: Likewise to form, melt, and to make certain
colors.
To prepare Mercury, and so to harden it that you may make it liquide, and
work it.
THE Emperor Frederick made many Images of this substance following, which
seemed to be of Silver, as at Uienna and Nieustadt in Austriche, and this
invention was found out by master William and master Martyne his
Alchemistes. To do this you must melt Saturn, that is to say, lead, and power
it in a round meltyng pot while it is whote. Press into it little round
stones, that you may haue^lytle round holes in it, upon the which holes you
shall lay a lynnen clothe, and power some Mercury upon it as much as you
will, setting it so in whote embers until the Mercury be hard.

And when it is hard enough, break it in little pieces, and cast them into
strong Uinaigre, and sees them in it a quarter of an hour. Or else take the
juice of the herb called Longdebeffe, with a little Uinaigre and oil, and
sees in it some pieces of your Mercury broken as before, and by this means it
shall be mortified very well, otherwise it would revive again. This done, take
two ounces of salt Armoniack, half a pot of Uinaigre, and power it with your
Mercury sodden in a pot leaded, and luting and stopping it very well, let it
stand. viii. or. x. days: for by this means the Uinaigre takes away all the
redness of the Mercury. This done, put your Mercury in a pot well luted and set
it in a Forneyse until it be well burned, augmenting by little and little the
fire, that it may keep the fire long in a like and temperate heat, until it
make certain choppes or cliftes, and than it is a sign that is enough. Than
put the Mercury in a pot, in the bottom whereof there must be some Brimstone:
stop well the pot, and set it in whote embers or ashes, or upon a fire of
coals, that it may heat by little and little, and that the Mercury may
receive the smoke of the Brimstone. Do so once a day. xxx. days together, and
than take out the Mercury, for it is hard enough to beat and cast. Take of
this Mercury five ounces, and ten ounces of Uenus, that is to say Copper, melte
them together, and it shall seem at all trialles, that it is true Silver.

A substance made of paper or other things, to express or set out any
manner of figure that you will, upon white iron. etc.
Lay your paper or parchement ouerthwarte the white iron, than weate it on the
out side, and let it dry again, than take it of, and you shall see the print
of it upon the white iron.

To gylte well.
Sees your Silver in Tartre, make it very clean rubbing it with brushes, and
put it into the Tartre again: than take two parts, one part of salt
Armoniacke, one part of Uerdet or Spanishe green, two parts of the beatyng of
Copper: stamp all this small and sifte it, and put it into the Tartre with the
Silver, it will get a red color, upon the which you shall gylte.

How to braye gold for to gylte with.
TAke a dragme of fine gold, beat it well, and put to it two dragmes of
Mercury mixed together: than set a melting pot on the fire, and when it is
glowing whote, put the gold with the silver into it, and when the Mercury
shall be in part vanished away in vapor, power it into a dishe, wherein there
is a little water, and wash it out, and it shall be ground and braied.

To gylt Copper.
MAke a bottom or ground of quicksiluer upon the copper, than give it one
gylde over with ground or brayed gold, than set it on the coals, and when it
smoketh take it away, and part or disparse it with the brushe of copper wire,
and than set it again on the fire until it be liquide and soft, or melte, or
dry, and when it has been so long upon the fire that it has gotten a red
color, take it of, and make it clean with your brushe of copper wire, and
than burnyshe it, and it is done.

To gylte iron.
YOu must boil your iron in Uinaigre, Salt, and Uitriol, and if the iron be
great, annoint the iron about with it, being whote, until it make it rise,
than lay on your grynded gold, as before.

To take of the gold from silver that i^ gylte, so that the silver shall
remain whole and sound.
PUt about your gilded silver some Brimstone, than take natural Mercury in a
Goldsmithes meltynge pot, or other vessel according as it ought to be, and
heat it, and put your gylt silver into it, the Mercury will draw the ground
unto him, than rub your silver with a brushe over the Mercurye wherein the
gold is, than heat your silver, and boil it again in the water of Tartre,
and it will be clean.

When you will take your Gold out of the Mercury, put it in a little bag of
leather, bindyng it and stopping it above, as men do Mercury, without over a
basyn, and that which remains in the leather, put it again in a meltynge
pot upon the fire, and let the Mercurye vanishe in a vapor, and go away in
the smoke. Than take that which remains, and power it in a meltyng pot, and
you shall find your gold.

To separate Silver from Copper, be it money or otherwise.
TAke half an ounce of Uerdet or Spanishe green, an ounce of white Uitrioll, as
much of Brimstone, half an ounce of Alome: sees al these things with a glass
full or as much as you will of strong Uinaigre; and put your silver into it.
Your silver will remain whole in the glass, wherein you sodde it, and the
Copper consumes in the moist humor.

A powder which being laid upon any thing syluered will take of the silver
from it.
TAKE a pound of ^yne lees, a pound of Arsnicke* a pound of common Salt, a
pound of quycke Lyme: ^ire these together, with the yelke* of Eggs, and put
them in a pot, which you shall set in a Forney se to sublyme, and when it
shall smoke some what yellowe it is enough.

To convert and turn copper into brass.
TAKE Copper what quantity you will, and the third part as much of Lapis
calaminaris, made in powder, and put them together in a meltyng pot, let them
melt together the space of an hour upon the fire, and then power them out.

To melte all metal perfytly.
WHEN the metal is molten: you shall put the fourth part of auxungia vitri
beside it, and it will melte perfitly.

For to give a color of Gold upon Copper.
TAKE half an vnee of Copper, a Dragme of Tutia alexandrina, two parts of
Dates, two parts of Figs, Grapes of a wild Uine black, of the bygnesse* of
three Hasell Nuttes, Musk the bygnesse of a Hasell Nut. Stamp all the said
things together, and make it like Paste, and beat your Copper very thin,
and than cut it in pieces.

This done, make one row of the said mixion, and a little Tutia upon it, and
than your Copper upon that, than some of the said mixtion, than again of
Tutia, and than of Copper, always bed upon bed: This done, lute or claye
up the Croset or meltynge pot that they are in, and set it on the fire,
lettynge all the said things melte, and than power them out, and it will be
like Gold.

Some take also Tartre, Bean flower, Tutia, as much of the one as of the
other, steep them well in Uinaigre, and than dry them, and lay them bed upon
bed, for every ounce of copper an ounce of the said powder, and it will take
color as is before said.

To make Verdet or Spanishe green.
TAke Brass or fyled Copper, sprinckle it with old piss and salt Armoniack:
lay the Copper upon a bourde in the Sun, and when it is dry, sprynkle it
again until it wax green. Thus is Uerdet made. Take Copper beaten like a
plate, make it clean, and braye some atramentum upon a stone with pysse, and
annoint the copper plate on every side, and let it dry in the Sun: than put
it in a pot leaded and set it on the coals, and let it heat the space of two
hours, and sometime open the pot above, and when you see black smoke come out
of it, take the pot from the fire, and let it cool, and open the pot for to
take out the copper plate, rubbing it into powder between your hands, and that
which will not yet turn to powder: do it again in all things as you did
before, until it may be made into powder: than wash it with whote water or
pysse in a basyn, and let it stand still, for the copper will go to the bottom,
and the atramentu^ will swim above: than power it out and dry the copper in
the Sun. This done, take of the said powder a pound, of Tartre calcined two
ounces, beat them together with childs piss, and let them dry. Than put them
in your pot, and burn them as before with a great fire until you see a
green smoke come out of it: and than let it cool again, and open your pot
and you shall find it fair and green.

To make a white color of lead.
TAke lead as much as you will, scrape it clean on both sides and cut it into
plates three finger broad, and a handful long or more, making a hole at the
end of each of them, hang them on a cord, and take a paile of oak or a pot of
three handfulls long that has a clean cover: Than hang your plates of lead
round about the pot within side, and power into it two pots of good Uinaigre,
and a hand full of salt, stirring them together vpo^the fire until they be
ready to sees, than cover the pot well that nothing breath out, and set it in
a warm place, leauinge it there. x. days together: than open it, and take out
the plates of lead, and you shall find at each side of the plates a white
color of a finger thick, take it of with a knife, and put it in a clean
glass. This done, hang your plates of lead again in the pot, as before,
covering them well as is said, and settinge it in a warm place, and at the.
x. day take of the white color with a knife as before, and hang them again
in the pot until you have gotten white color enough. Than braye all well
together in a mortar putting to it a little water the space of half an hour,
until it be thick like gruell. Than put the said powder in a pot or twain:
and set it in the Sun, and let it dry and harden, and than shall you have
your white color of lead. But you must note that you must always hang the
plates of lead in the pot again at every time as long as they will continue, and
if the Uinaigre diminishe, you must renew it again.

To make Lutum sapientiae.
LVtum sapientiae is a mortar or clay for to lute or plaster the Limbecks or
pots that are set on the fire, because they shall not break or cleave. To make
this Lutum sapientiae. Take the best Potters earth you can find, put in a
dishe or platter of earth, or in some other vessel, and power upon it Wine
mixte with horse dung, casting away the longest hears of the dung, mingle it
fyner all together until it be as thick as paste, wherewith you may paste
any thing: not withstanding put in it always good Salt for keeping it from
cleauynge.

To lute or dawbe pottes with a lynnen cloth that will not burn.
PUt your linen cloth in Salt water, and let it dry of it self, than weate
it in yelkes of Eggs well beaten, and when you will lute or plaster any pot
with it, give it one touch upon it very thin with the fore said Lutum
sapientiae.

For to soder glasses.
TAke minium, and half as much of quick Lyme, and the mele or flower that
hangs on the mill sides or walls, and the yelke of an Egg, in all this let
a linen cloth be weate and holden before the fire that it may be clammie
meet to cleave or stycks fast, and so lay it fair and softly upon the broken
place of the glass.

Another lutum sapientiae.
TAke Potters earth very clean two parts, horse dong one part, a little powder
of a Brick, and the fylyng of iron, and a plaster of quick lyme: and mingle
it with salt water, and the yelke of eggs: and make thereof a paste for to
lute or clay pots withal. Or else take dry earth, and stamp it small, and
sifte, it and cast upon it some wheat flower rank upon rank, and than the
yelkes of Eggs and Uinaigre, and mingle all together. Than plaster or lute
glasses pottes or limbeckes with it, and dry them in the shadow, and they will
never fail nor break in the fire. You may also mingle it with Ox blood instead of water, it is also good for that purpose.

THE fyfte Booke^ touching all separations of gold, of silver, of copper, and
other metalls, and how a man may try them and to use them profitably. Which is
a thing very gainefull for all goldsmithes, marchantes and ^^her that have need
of it.
To separate gold from silver.
Beat small the silver wherein you think there is any gold, then cut it in
small pieces: than you shall put aqua fortis, in a glass of separation upon a
little fire until it be hot, and cast up little bubbles like belles. Then power
the water out into a cup of copper and let it cool and by this means the
silver will stick about the cup, the which you must let dry in the cup:
and when you have powered the water out melt the silver in a hollow sharde, and
then take also the gold out of the glass of separation, and melte it in one.

Another way.
TAke silver that is gilte, ^ute it upon a pot shard or a tile with lead, then
turn it as thyn and as fine as you can upon some thing, then cut it in crooked
and wr^thed pieces, and put it into the glass of separation, power in upon it
aqua fortis a finger hight above it, stop the hole above that it breath not
out, then hold it upon a slow fire until the silver be dissolved in to the
water, the gold remains in the bottom which is black: then cast out this
water into a cup of copper as before, and power upon it some clean water, and
the silver will begin to gather into a curd and will go to the bottom.

Than power out the water again, and dry the Silver with a sudden heat.
This done, put it in a croset or earthen pot, and melt it, and being molten
power it out, and do the like with the gold, and when you put it into the
melting pot, put to it a little Borax.

Another way.
TAke antimonium, and put it in a melting pot that is with a sharp pointed
bottom, and melt it. Take also the Silver that the gold is in, and melt it and
power it into the antimonium, the gold will go to the bottom, and the silver
will tarry in the antimonium. Than take half an ounce of copper, and two ounces
of lead, and the antimonium, let them melte together, and power them into an
earthen pot, the antimonium will burn the Copper, and the Silver will abide
upon the pot.

For to separate Gold or Silver without fire or aqua fortis.
TAke two parts of salt Armoniack, and one part of Brimstone, beat them into
powder, than annoint your vessel, dishe, or any other thing yt is gylded,
first with oil olyue, and than disparse the said powder upon it, and when it
is so fast upon it, set it to the fire, and beat it over a vessel of water,
and the Gold will fall out of it.

To separate gold from Silver with a powder.
TAKE an. viii. part of Brymstone, a. xvi. part of salt. iii. ounces of salt
Armoniacke. ii. ounces of minium, and do as before is said.

To make gold softer.
TAke Mercury s^blimed, salt Armoniacke of each alyke, make them into a
powder, than put your gold into a melting pot, and when it is molten, put to
it a little of this powder and it will be soft.

Another way.
TAke half an ounce of Uitrioll, half an ounce of Uerdet, half an ounce of salt
Armoniacke, half an ounce of burned Brass: al being mingled with aqua fortis,
let it so repose in the heat two days, and than let it harden: do this three
times with aqua fortis, and let it dry: make it in powder, and put always
upon it half an ounce of gold, a dragme of powder, and power it three times into
it, and it will be softer.

To make gold and silver softer.
TAke Honny and Oil of each alyke, and quench your gold and silver, being
whote and glowing, three or four times in it, and it will be softer.

To soften all mettalles, and other things that are not soft, so that they
shall be soft and gentle to be wrought upon or forged.
TAke Masticke, Frankensence, Myrrh, Borax, Uernix, of each half an ounce,
make all into a powder together, and cast the bigness of two or three peasen
of it upon y^ hard things, and they will be soft and tender. Take what metal
you will, heat it upon coals, and quench it in the water of salt Armoniack
and it will be soft.

An oil that makes all metalles soft.
IF your silver be not soft, melt it, and power into it this oil that
follows. Take Saltpeter, Tartre, Salt, Uerdet, boil all together, until the
water be consumed, power upon it piss, and let it so consume, and you shall
have an oil of it, the which you shall put into your silver while it melts,
and you shall make it soft.

To separate gold from copper.
MAke a Forneyse with a hole, that you may put in a pegge or two, the which
you may take out when you will, and underneath in the bottom of the Forneyse
a gutter or hole, that the king which is the gold may remain in it. Take
twyse or as much Lead as Copper, and put it upon the hole or gutter of the
Forneyse, pouring it always until there be no more lead: Than take an y^on
mete for the purpose to take away the skin of it, that it may be clear and
neat, for than shall the copper be well prepared. This done, take a quarterne
of common salt, of brimstone a quarter, of saltpeter a quarter, of orpiment a
quarter: stamp these four well in a mortar, and power the said powder upon
the copper, when it begins to run and melte, the gold will go to the bottom,
pluck the pegge out, and the king will remain in the hole or gutter, take it
out afterward with Lead or Antimonium, and you shall find the Gold.

Another way.
TAke Antimonium, and melt it with your Copper and being molten you must skimme
it well, than power it into a dishe of stone, adding to it quickly as much
quick silver, cover it with another dishe, and shake it well together, the powder
draws the gold unto it and when it is cold again, open it, take the
Mercury out, and put it in another dishe, the which you shall set upon the
fire, that the Mercury may go away in a smoke, and you shall find your Gold
in the bottom.

A powder to separate gold.
TAke salt Armoniacke, Uerdet, of each one part, Saltpeter two parts,
Antimonium as much as all the r^st together, make them into powder, and do as
before, and the Gold will go from the Copper.

To wash Gold from Copper.
TAke the Copper that is gilt, and weate it in water, and than put it in the
fire, and let it be who^e and than quench it in cold water, and the gold will
come of: rub it of with a brushe of Copper wire, and it will go of.

To got together the gold out of the threedes of cloth of gold.
Burn the golden threedes into powder, and braye the said powder small upon
a Marble stone, and put it in a Basyn, than power upon this powder some water
of Tartre and quick silver, and do as before, and you shall have fine gold.

To gylde so that it shall not out with no water that is.
TAke two parts of Ocre, two parts of a Pommise stone burned until it be
white, Tartre the bigness of a good walnut, braye the said colors together
with oil of Lyneseede, and five drops of Uernix, strain them through a
linen cloth, and you shall have the substance to gylde withal.

To gather together into one the gold that is scraped of from letters and
Images.
TAke the scrapynges and put them in a glass full of water, until the chawlke
where upon the Gold was laid, be through soft, wash it afterward between
both your hands:

and separate the best you can the chalk from the gold: take the rest, and
grind it upon a grinding stone. This done, put it again into a glass: than
put some well brayed and small, in a cup of copper, and power the water upon
it: let it sees well: and than power the same water again into the glass
upon the substance scraped, puttinge into the water some quick silver, and
shaking it and mouinge it together a good space. The quick silver draws to
it self all the gold: than power out all the water, and put the quick silver in
a piece of wild Goats skin, the which you shall bynde-well above: than make
a hole with a needle, whereby you shall wrynge and make the quickesiluer to
come out, and that which shall remain with in, shall be fine gold: and if the
gold be not very fair, do unto it as unto the gold before.

To take gylte from a cup that is gylded within.
TAke Pyrethrum, and sees it in strong Uinaigre, so that there may come no
smoke nor breath out of it, than power into a cup gylte within, and the gold
will go of, and go to the bottom. For the prose thereof. Cast a silver ring
gylte into it, and you shall find the experience.

To make gold soft after the meltyng.
TAke as many wedges of gold, as you have molten, and put them one night into
a Forneyse of mortar in a pot: let them be through whote, but yet not so that
they melte, and they will be afterward very fair and soft.

For to give a color to the gold that it shall be soft.
TAke salt Armoniacke fired with quick Lyme, for it is very good, works
very handsomely and sinely: but it is better to take of Viride aeris, prepared
and than melt the gold, and so may you color your gold. The Viride aeris is
thus prepared: delay it in Uinaigre, and strain it through a felt, and let it
congele, and when it begins to wax thick, put to it some salt Armoniacke,
and let it harden a great while, or else power it upon a clean marble stone,
and than melt your gold with it, and keep it well: for it will serve you also
for other things.

To boil gold or silver to make it receive a fair color.
TAke Tartre well brayed, and put to it some well water or rain water, and
that which you shall boil in it shall be fair.

To give a color to gold.
TAke the bears of a man to y^ bigness of a finger, and lay them upon quick
coals, and hold your gold over them with a pair of tongues.

To give a weygh ^vnto gold.
TAke fair water, melte lead and put it into it diverse times, the oftener the
better, yea and it were twentye times. (...) which you would make heavy, and
heat it ten or twelve times, and quench it in the said water, and you shall
find it true.

For to make silver fine.
YOu shall put Silver into a pot of earth, and to every mark of Silver put
three ounces of Lead. Let it be molten together, until the flower of it ware
red. That done, put it in another earthen pot, putting to it for every mark
of silver sire ounces of Lead, and that power it, or strain it, and it will be
fine.

To make silver fair and white.
YOu shall put salt and Tatre made in powder, in a pan of Copper: put some rain
water to it, and let it sees well, for it will become white: but before you
sees them, you must heat or inflame them, and beware there come no iron into
the pan, for than the silver would become read.

To know if the silver have any gold (...) no.
DRaw a gross or great streeke with your silver up on the touch stone, than
take a dragme of Uerdet or Spanishe green well made into powder with salt
Armoniacke, mix them well with good Uinaigre, until they be all of one
color, weate the line or stryke made with your silver with it, and if the
silver have any gold in it, the line or streeke will remain a while fair, and
if there be none, the streeke will not remain fair, but will go out
incontinent. If you will have a better proof and more sure instead of Uinaigre
put aqua fortis: for that will incontinent ^ut out the live or streeke if there
be no gold in it.

To mortify or alay Mercury or quick silver.
PUt it in a morte ^of iron, and put to it some oil olyue or oil of bays;
this done, set it on a small fire, and let it sees therein, but take heed that
the smoke of it hurt thee not, for it is un wholesome, put often times some
oil into it, and also strong Uinaigre distilled that it may boil in it. And
by this means it will be mortified and killed. Than take it out, for it is
hard and will endure the hammer.

To gylte steel or iron.
TAke one part of Tartre, half as much of salt Armonicke, as much Uerdet, and
a little Salt: sees them in white wine, and vernishe with it a harness made
even, and let it dry. And than gylt it with gold brayed or ground as
Goldsmythes do.

To separat gold or silver from metal or iron.
PUt some Mercurye in a Goldsmithes melting pot, heating it upon the fire,
putting to it and mixing with it some Uenishe glass bruised small mixing al
together. Lay it upon the silver that is gylt, than lay it upon the coals
until it be whote, and rub it with a feather over some vessel: strain the
Mercurye or quick silver through a linen cloth, the which you shall afterward
bring again with Saltpeter.

Silver of Tyn, to make vessel or other things.
TAKE clear, fine, and bright Tyn, put it with true and natural Tyn in the
fire, that it may purge and be made clean from all duste, ashes, and fylthe:
and when it is clean inoughe and well skymmed, set it again on the fire. If
there be a mark of it, take half an ounce of Mercurye, or somewhat more: and
when it begins to rise in the first heat, take also the powder of
Cantarides, and cast it into it, and a flock of woman's hear that it may
burn in it. Having had fire enough, and all being melted together: power into
it the powder aforesaid, sprincklynge it first a little with water of
Artemisia, and than take it sodaynelye from the fire, and let it cool a great
while.

To white any vessel of copper within and without with silver color very
easily.
TAKE two parts of Mercurye, three parts of Tynne: Melte first the Tynne in
a meltynge pot, and than put the Mercurye to it. Stir it well together, and
than power it out, and let it cool, and stamp it well in a mortar until all
be brought into a powder.

Than take Alome and stamp it also in a mortar, and it will be like a white
powder, the which you shall lay upon a marble stone, garnished on the sides
with potters clay, in a moist cave or seller: setting under it a glass. The
Alome will turn into a water upon the stone, and will run into y^ glass.
And when you will silver your vessel of Copper, take the said water of Alom,
and annoynte your vessel with it, and let it dry.

Do thus three or four times, and leave it open that the bottom may be the
better. Than take the powder that you have made, and rub it upon it, and
your vessel will be white and seem as it were silver.

To make vessels of copper white like silver, both within and without.
TAke one part of Azure, two parts of Mercurye, three parts of white
Arsnicke, mix them together: than take grease and melte it in a pan, taking
the fylth from it, making it very clean. This done mix them together, and make
thereof as it were an ointment: annoint your vessel with it, within and
without very well: y^ done, put it in a new dishe of oak, or else in new and
fresh oken leaves, covering it well. Dig a hole and lay it in the earth,
in a place where the Sun shyneth most whotest, leaving it so the space of
three months, and than take it out, and make it clean with water and a
brushe, and you shall find your experience.

To make that tynne crack not.
TAke strong common salt, and honnye, as much of the one as of the other,
according to the quantity of your tyn, power your tyn. xii. times in it, than
strain out your tyn, for by this means it will purge and leave crackinge. Put
that in a pot, the which you shall claye or lute about very well, and set it
in a forneyse a day and a night, and you shall find as it were a lyme of
gold.

THE syxte Book* touching the making of certain oils and waters and other
substaunces which are of a merueylous virtue and operation.
To take Salamanders for to occupye or to serve a man's turn.
When you see the Salamanders lie and sleep in the Sun, put on a pa^er of
Gloves, and so go take them fair and softlye before they cast their Uenime
(which is yellowe) than put it in some vessel of glass wherein there is man's
blood. Than it will serve your turn very well.

To fine gold with Salamanders.
TAke two pound of fyled Brass or Copper, a pot Goats milk nine
Salamanders, put all this in a pot, wide and large beneth and narrow above,
cover it with his cover fast and closse, but let the cover have a bole in the
top: dig the said pot into the moist of the earth so deep that nothing
appear but only the cover where y^ hole is, so that the Salamanders may have
air and not die. Leave it so until the seventh day after noone. Than take
your pot out and you shall find that the Salamanders constrained by hunger
shall have eaten the Copper, and the great force of the poison causes the
Copper to turn into Gold. This done, make a bole as deep as two fyngers
into the which you shall put your pot with the Salamanders, than make about it
a fire of coals, which may bourne above and beneth, yet less bebeneth than
above: and the pot is set in the ground because the copper shall not melte.

And when you think that the Salamanders be burned to ashes, take the pot
from the fire, and let it cool well. This done, put the Copper and the powder
into some vessel to wash it, and power water upon it, making clean the
Copper with the said powder: than hang it in the smoke, and let it dry well,
and you shall have good gold, and you shall let a Goldsmith fine it, and make it
clean.

The mother of all waters for to make all metalle^ liquifiable.
TAke a pound of Sal nitrum, a pound of Uitrioll, stamp each of them by it
self, and than mingle them together in a mortar, distille the said water,
without addinge any other water to it: Take an ounce of the said water, an
ounce of wine not distilled, put them together in a glass, and they will bourne
o^ them selves so that you may light a candell at them: it is also the mother
of all colors.

Also take three ounces of the said water, three ounces of Mercury, the fourth
part of quick Brimstone, put them all together to dissolve in a glass. And
when they be dissolved, let the smoke come out, and you shall find the Mercury
fixed very read. And so may you fix all the Spiritus.

If you will make this water all together strong, add to the seven parts of
all these things aforesaid Uitrioll and Saltpeter, a pound of each, and
distill them, puttinge the water into a glass again, and it will be so
strong that it will break both iron and things made with forge.

To prepare common salt.
TAke white Salt, and power upon it some stale Pysse wherein has been (a
whole day) steeped some quick Lyme: mix them well together six times a
day, and let it repose the night, strain the piss through a felt, and put
all that is within into a pan leaded within, mingling it well together until
it become water. Than sees it upon coals until it be hard, and make it into
a powder, and put it in a Ox bladder bynding it well above, and than hang it
in a caudron full of whote water, leaving it there until the salt be turned
into water. Do this ten times, and at last time lot it burn so that it be a
fire and read, than let it cool, and thus is common salt prepared.

To prepare salt Armoniacke*
TAke ten pound of prepared salt, and power upon it some warm piss of a man
that is in health, and has not drunk but wine, and let the salt dissolve in
the said piss, and go to the bottom, than strain it through a felt into a
caudron, put to it some soute of a Bakers oven, boiling it together: When this
salt is dry: power upon it some man's piss, and do this so long until the
ten pots of urine be consumed in the ten pound of salt.

You must take heed, that the Caudron run not over, when the Uryne boyleth.
If peradventure it rise so that there is great danger of rynnyngs over: You
shall power some clear water upon it, and mix all together until all turn
into water, let it stand, and cast the clear out, and sees it so long
until it be dry, the which being dry, you shall take and put in a new
dyshe, and dry it in the Sun: And than sublyme it in this wise.

Take the said two pound, and two pound of fyled iron, and myngle them well
together, and put them into a vessel, that is called rotunda, lutynge it
well with lutum sapientiae: Than set it upon a Tryue^ in a Forneyse of
sublimation, making a good fire under it one day, during until the vessel
be through read whote underneath.

Then let it cool again in the night until the morning and then open it,
and you shall find upon the vessel white salt, the which you shall take
away, and putting to it as much common salt prepared, you shall bray them both
well together the space of half a long somer day, making a small and flow
fire under it, let it cool again, and bray it again, and sublime as before.
This do you three times, and then keep it for it is good.

To make sal alkali.
TAke the ashes of leese of wine burned, quick lime, of each equal quantity,
and put them into three stillitorie glasses one over another, to the intent
that that which falls from the one may distill into the other: then power the
water of the lower most into the uppermost, having a pot leaded underneath. Put
often times the same lie through it until the ashes be no more bitter. Let the
same lie stand a night, and sees it in the morning in a pot leaded until the
water consume away and become hard. Then let it cool, you shall find a
stone in it called Alkali, the which you shall beat in powder, and fill a new
pot with it half full, and cover it not, and put it in a forneise of
calcination, making at the first a little fire until it sees: then a great
fire until it begin to melt like lead, then power it quickly into another pot,
and let it cool, and it will be sal Alkali, which you must keep in a glass.

To make sal boras.
TAke tarter calcined in such sort as we will declare afterward, the same
being made in powder, put some hot water upon it until it dissolve, styryng
it well with a stick, then strain it through a lynen cloth, and do as before,
so long until the water be thick and troubled, then strain it through a
bag until it ware clear, and has taken the bytternes out of the leese or
tartre: which thing you shall know when the leese pricketh no more upon your
tongue. Then take sal commune praeparatum, and putting to it water of tartre,
power them together into a pan of iron or frying pan seething them until
they be thick, and then put them in a new pot until they be hard. You shall
turn often times the pot, and when the said pot would cleave or burn to let
it cool, and open it, and you shall have sal boras philosophorum, as good as
the true boras.

Water of Mercurye.
TAke a quartren of sublimed and fixed mercury and as much of the stone
galitsenstein: bray them together upon a marble stone: then having put them in
a line^ bag, make a hole in an horse donghill, put them in a glass into the
same hole not touching the sides of the hole in any wise, to the intent it fyle
or soil not, make two founells, and hang the bag with mercury and
galitsenstein over the glass covering it with a good strong linen cloth that
nothing fall into it: then lay donge enough upon it, and leave it so a
fortnight together until the mercury be stilled as water out of the bag. If
the water be not white enough, braye it again with the galitsenstein, and do
as before, continuing it until the water be good ad lunam faciendam.

Water of salt armoniack.
TAke salt armoniack as much as you will, as much of the yelkes of eggs, mix
them well together, putting to them a little vynegre, that it may drop or run
the better. Then hang it over a glass in a dongehill as before is said of
the water of mercurye, or else set it upon an even stone smooth and slypperye
in a moist cellar, layenge the stone a little at one side and setting a glass
underneath with a founell, and mortar at one side of the stone that it may not
run but into the fonnell. Then pass it through a feit, and keep it well. For
it will serve your turn very aptly.

A water called aqua lactis virginis.
TAke Litarge made in powder, and put it in a pan with good Uinaigre, sees it
with a little fire, and pass it through a white felt until it wax clear and
while it distilleth, put it ever in again until it be clear and white. Than
take axungia vitri, made in powder, and sifte it, and do with it, as with the
Lytarge, and there will come also water out of it: Mire these two waters
together, and they will be as white as milk, and it is called lac virginis.

Water of salt alkali.
TAke salt Alkali, and yelkes of Eggs, braye them with good Uinaigre, and do
as is before said, of the water of Mercurye.

A water called aqua croci Martis.
MAke of the green Galitsenstein stone into powder: and fill therewith a new
pot and steep it well. Burn it even in such sort as is, said before of the
Alome. When it is as red as Uermilion it is inoughe.

Than put some good Uinaigre into a Limbecke and distill it in a Forneyse with
a small fire. Do thus three times. Afterward put into it as much as into the red Galitsenstein stirringe them always together with an iron three days
long. Put them again into a Limbecke, and still them as before. If the water
be not read inoughe, put more of the said powder unto it, stirring it well
together, and distillynge it as before, it will be very good Crocus Martis to
make Gold.

To calcyne Tartre.
TAke Tartre of white wine, wash it with what^ water, and let it dry. Than
fill a pot of a quarte with the said Tartre, coueringe it well above, and set
it in a Forneyse of calcination, and let it burn until there come out no
manner of smoke. Than let it cool, and make it in powder, and put it into
another pot, luting it well with Lutum saplentiae, than leave it in a Forneyse
of Calcination, wherein there is a good fire, the space of three days or more,
until the Tartre be as white as Salt, the which you shall keep in some
warm place.

To calcine egg shelles.
Wash Egg shelles in lixiuio colatitio and let them dry: take away before
or after the little skin that is in them. Than put them in a great pot upon
the fire, and burn them to ashes stireinge them well. Than put them in a little
pot, and do as with the Tartre. When they be burned as white as chaulke, they
be calcined enough.

To calcine or burn Turia.
REd Tutia or yellowe is the best: put the same into a meltynge pot, and set it
upon the fire, and let it burn whote. Quench it then in good Uinaigre. Do so
nine times, and than braye it small like unto flower upon a stone and keep it.

A water called aqua lunaris.
TAke an hundred Hen eggs, take out the yelke and beat the white, put it
into a glass, and stope it well above, and set it in Horse dung. xiiii. days,
go to it every day, and take the dung from about it with a stick, leauinge
it so a good hour that it may have the air, than cover it again.

And when it has been there a long time, there will come out of it a water,
the which you shall power into another glass and let it cool, and that which
was congeled upon the water cast away, and put into it some lyme of eggs,
that the water may be above it four fingers broad: mingle them together, and
power them in again stoppynge it well, and set it again in the horse dung,
leauyng it so a long time as before, than take it out, and put it in a
meltynge pot, stirrynge it well, and set it upon a white felt, and by the
measure that it distilleth in, power it again upon it, continuyng so until
the water be clear, cast out the lees and the water is good ad Lunam or Solemn.

Aqua causata.
TAke two pound of the ashes of lees of wine burned, a pound of ashes of
Walnut shelles burned, two pound of the ashes of burned bean stalks; a
pound* of the ashes of the slippes or twigges of Uines: Mingle all these
together, and power water upon them, and add to it some quick Lyme, for each
pound of the said substance, you must have two pound of water, than let it
sees together one sething and let it stand and repose a day and a night,
stirring it sire times a day.

This done, power that which is clear into a caudron, and put to it an ounce
of Arsnicke, an ounce of Reagall, an ounce of calcined Tartre, and a quarterne of
Salt armoniacke, make all into powder, and put it into water, and let it sees
unto the half, let it cool again: and than put it in a Limbeck, and distill
it as is said. And when it will distill no more, let it cool, and open the
limbecke, and power it in again, and distill it thus five times, and keep the
water diffilled. Mercurye is hardened and fixed in the same water as we have
said in another place: keep also the lees, for it is good for to harden
Mercury as thus. Take Mercurye, put it in a meltyng pot, and heat it, power
the foresaid Lees into it, and mingle them together, and it will kill the
Mercury and make it hard and black, so that being cold again, it is as hard
as a stone, the which you may sublime.

A water callad aqua causcica.
TAke one part of sal Alkali, one part of common Alome, one part of alumen
plumae, one part of white Galitsenstein stone, one part of salt Armoniacke, two
parts of common salt prepared, braye all these very small and fine upon a
gryndstone, and weate them with Uinaigre, or very whote water, and put them in
a glass, the which you shall dig and set in a dunghill, leauinge it there
three weeks. All will be turned into water, put the same water into a melting
pot, and do as before you did with the felt, distilling it thoro we the felt
into another melting pot. Keep it to in a glass, for it is good to make
silver. The felt must be sharp at the neither end and broad above.

Aqua auri pigmenti.
TAke four pa^^es of orpiment, two parts of salt Armoniacke, one part of
calcined Egg shelles, and one part of common salt, braye these well upon a
marble stone, weate them with Uinaigre, and let them run of from the stone
into a glass in a seller or set them under a dunghyll, until they be turned
into water. Than distill it as you do aqua fortis. But in braying the orpiment,
you must stopppe your mouth and your nose, because of the smoke or fume of the
water, which is hurtful.

Water of common salt prepared.
TAke a pound of common salt, a quarterne of alome braye them upon a Marble
stone with Uinaigre, and let it run from the stone as before is said, and
distill it through a felt, and it is made.

Water of yelkes of Eggs.
TAke yelkes of Eggs sodden very hard, stamp them and put them in a
Limbecke, the first water which comes out is white, the other read and
thick: but when it is cold, it is thinner and liquide. All that you rub
with the same water, gets always a good color of gold.

Oil of Tartre.
TAke white Tartre calcined, braye it well upon a Marble stone, and let it
run into a glass, as is before said of the salt Armoniack, and of the
crocus martis. And when all is run into the glass, pass it through a felt
so often until it be clear. And keep it in a clean glass.

An oil called olcum Laterinum or Petroleum.
TAke a new tyle whereon there has been no manner of water, make it whote, and
lay it in oil of Walnuts, until it soke or drink no more: Than make it into
powder, and put it in a Limbecke and distill it. And when it will distill no
more, cast it out, and put in other, and do as before three times, and you
shall have your oil.

Oleum benedictum.
TAke oil Olyue in steed of oil of Walnuts, and do as before.

Oil of Brymstone.
TAke a pound of Brimstone well made in powder, a pound of oil of Lyneseede:
put them in a pot leaded, and boil them together until there rise a red
frothe or skymme upon them. Put Uinaigre into it, and the oil will begin to
rise up, and taking of the frothe or skimme, keep it, and keep the oil neat
and clean. Than wash pour Brymstone very clean, and power some oil of
Walnuts upon it, and let it sees as before, and when it wareth red as
before, power again some Uinaigre upon it, and skym of the oil, and keep it
with the first. Do this so long until the Brymstone smoke no more, wheather
it be set upon whate coals or upon a whole plate. Than wash it in whote
water, and let it dry. Than put it into a thick bag, and hynde it so that
the Brymstone may spread abroad in it. Put into a pot some quick lyme four
fingers thick, and lay the bag with the Brymstone abroad upon it: Than
power some good Uinaigre into it that it may be a handful high above the lyme,
and let it sees a whole day. Than take the Brymstone out of the bag, and
wash it well in whote water, power out the water and let it dry, and it will
be Sulphur purgatum and praeparatum.

A note.
TAKE that which before you have gathered together, and make a strong Lie of
it, with quycke Lyme and Ashes of wine Lees burned, take twyse as much of the
saw Lie, and sees them together until they be as it were Soap. Put the
skymme or frothe of the same into a glass, which you shall set in a dunghill
ten days. Than braye it, and put it in a Limbecke, and distill it as before is
said, and that which remains in the Limbecke is oleum fixum sulphuris, with
this oil you may fix all things.

To purge Brymstone.
TAke commom Brimstone, stamp it very small, and sift it: put it in a pot
leaded with three feet, and power into it some good Uinaigre, let it sees
slowly a day and a night, skymme it with a wodden spone full of little holes
like a skymmer. When the Uinaigre has thus boiled with it a day and a night,
put to it stale piss that is well sodden and well skymmed and passed through a
felt. Let it so sees with the piss two days and two nights, and skimme it
as before, and pass it so often through the felt until the water be clear.
Than let it dry in the Sun, and it is purged.

To sublyme Brymstone.
TAke purged Brimstone, as I have taught you before in the chapter of oil of
Brymstone, of* the which you will: Take thereof a pound of Brimstone calcined,
as is said in the chapter before, a pound of offall of iron, iron bruised small
a quartene, braye them well and sifte them, than put them into a Lymbecke,
which has a hole above, the which you shall stop with a piece of iron
plate, lute well with claye the sublimatorie that no breathe go out, and set
it in a Forneyse to sublime, making a little fire underneath it, look now and
than under the piece of iron plate: the which when it is no more moist, stop
the hole we lutum sapientiae, and make the fire a little greater, and leave it
so six hours. Than take it of, and that which sticks fast above upon i^,
rub it of with an Hares foot. Stir it again with the lees that remains
under, and set it in again and sublime it as before. Dee thus three times, and
always rub of that, which you find above upon it, and keep it, and braye
the lees by it self, and do as before, until they smoke no more upon the
fire: Than cast them out, and take one part of this sublimed Brymstone, two
parts of commom salt prepared, braye them well together, and sublime them as
before, laying first a plate upon the hole. Having done this five times, take
of the Brymstone before sublimed, and braye it with twyse as much common salt
prepared. And sublime it so often that the Brymstone be as white as Snow and
than there will be enough. Keep it.

Oil of Eggs.
TAke Egg shelles stamped, having the little skyn within taken away, keep
them. Than take the yelks of Eggs, and beat them well in a pot, and set a
glass of them under a dung hill of whote horsedung the space of eight days
together. Than take it out, and put the said Eggs into a Limbecke, and lute
it well, and distill them thus three times, and there will come Oleum ouorum.

Oleum auri pigmenti.
TAke auri pigmentum, and bruise it small, and sees it with oleum lunare in a
little pot leaded. And when it is half consumed, put it in a Limbecke and
distill it: Than take the Lees, and bray them upon a Marble stone, and put them
again into ye Limbeck, and power again upon it the same oil: do thus three
times and keep it, for it is good ad fixationem.

Oleum lunare.
TAKE as much of aqua lunaris described before, as you will, distill it in a
Limbecke until it wax dry, and you shall have your Oil, wherewith you may
fix all kinds, and harden also Mercury.

Oil of Brymstone.
BRay Brymstone with Tartre in manner of pappe, put it in a glass upon a fire
of quick coals. iii. dates than bray it again, and distill it in a Limbecke,
and that is called oleum sulphuris.

To sublyme Mercurye.
TAke a peunde of Mercury, a quarterne of salt armoniacke, power upon it good
vinaigre, that they may be liquide: mingle them together, and let them so
stand until the next morrow. Bray them well upon a Marble stone, for all must be
brought into powder before you put the vinaigre to them. When you have thus
braied them that the Mercury apeareth no more, let it dry, and braye it well
so dry without vinaigre, Than put it in a Limbeck, and sublime it in a
forneise of sublimation, as before is said of the y^ Brymstone: bind fast the
felt about the Limbecke that nothing breathe out. The first. ii. hours you
shall make a s^a^e fire under it, until the moisture come out above, which you
shall know by the vapor that is upon the piece of plate: than stop the hole,
and make a greater fire under it two hours long: than increase the fire four
hours long: than let it cool by little and little, and than open it and you
shall find the Mercury as white as a Lylly above, and that which sticks on
the side, and lies upon the lees, rub it of with a feather, and braye it
with the lees and strong vinaigre as before, let it dry and sublime it as
before. This do so long until the lees smoke no more upon the coals. Than
take the Mercury sublimed, and twyse as much common salt prepared, mingle them
together, and sublime them in a Limbecke as before. Do this three times.
Sublime the lees as is said until they smoke no more upon the coals, than
cast them away. And if the Mercury be not as white as Snow, take other commom
Salt prepared, and sublyme it again, until it be white inoughe.

FINIS.
A necessary Table conteynyng the summaries of all the receyptes, and
medicines, treated of in this present volume.
AGainst every grief or pain of the head, except the pockes. Fol. 1 A
preservative against the falling sickness or epilepsia. Idem Against the
falling sickness. idem Another sovereign remedy for the same. idem Against
the palsy. idem Another way. idem Against the Fransey. idem A tried remedy
against the great pain ringynge and defnesse of the ears. fol. 3 Another
remedy well known and tried. idem A remedy to stenche the bleeding at the
nose. idem Another for the same well proved and of a merueylous strength. idem
Another sovereign remedy. idem Another for the same. idem For the tooth ache
a remedy proved. idem Another remedy, wheather the ache be by cold or by
heat. idem Another for the same. idem Another remedy. idem A remedy for the
stinking of the mouth and nose. fol. 4 Another for the same. idem A very good
gargarisme or gargellinge for the throat against the Quinsey. idem For the
same. idem Another for the same. idem An excellent plaster to soften or ripe
an impostume in the throat. idem Against spitting of blood coming of the
Lunges or Lights. idem For the same another remedy tried and proved. idem
Another remedy found very singular. idem Another remedy of merueylous great
virtue. idem Another secret for the same, certain and experimented and good
at all hours. fol. 5 For the same. idem Another for the same. idem Against the
vlceration of the Lunges or Lights, and Spittell full of matter and
corruption. idem Another for the same. idem Another for the same. idem A
remedy for short winded men. idem A drink for the same disease, to be taken
every day thryse. fol. 6 Another tried secret good for poor folk. idem For
the same and good also for the poor sort. idem A remedy against the pluresie.
idem A decoction for the stomach, very good against the pluresie. idem
Another remedy most certain against all pluresies, as proved as divine, for to
preserve a man that he dye not of it. idem An ointment to rot or ripe the
plurcsie. fol. 7 A plaster for the same. idem For the same. idem Against the
whote cogh, that is to say, when the pacient is sovexed with it that he can not
well sleep. idem Against the same, if his voice be hoarse with it. idem A tried
electuary for the same. idem Again for the cogh. idem Pills for the cogh.
idem An ointment for the same. idem Against the tremblinge and pantinge of the
heart, this is very good, but especially for women, which are subject
thereunto. fol. 8 A remedy against the same, and very good to restore the
strength, being weakened with to great heat of agues. idem Another remedy
where with I have always found my self very well. idem An epitheme against
the same pain. idem An ointment very good for poor folk, that are not able
to bye y^ foresaid medicine or nourishment. ide^ Another compo^^tio^ very good
in the time of a plague as well to prese rue as to heal. fol. 9 Another oyntme
nt very good and principally for children that are troubled with worms. idem A
remedy against the worms in young children. idem A remedy against the pain of
the stomach. idem Another remedy for the same, when all other will not profit
him. idem A vomentation or nourishment very singular for the same. idem
Another against the same. idem Another remedy. idem Another very good. fol. 10
Another remedy proved. idem A nourishment very good against y^ same disease.
idem a little bag to carry about one against y^ same disease. ide^ A drink for
the same. idem Another remedy to lay to the stomach. idem Another remedy well
tried and proved, and good chiefly for young children, vexed with the pain of
the stomach, which is known if they vomit or belche. ide^ A remedy against an
impostume in the stomach. idem Against the same. fol. 11 A plaster for the
same. idem A nourishment or keeping of the stomach in his natural heat, by
washing or bathing it. idem A remedy against vomiting. idem An oyntme^t very
good against choleric vomitig. ide^ another remedy against flemetick vomiting.
idem A remedy against the hicket or yexing. idem Another. idem Remedies against
y^ pain of the Liver come through ventositie. idem Another of very good
effect. idem A remedy found very good against the Liver that is appostumate
or corrupted. fol. 12 For the same. idem Remedies against the dropsye. idem
Against the same. idem A drink of great virtue and strength and against the
windy dropsye. idem Another remedy very good to take after a purgation. idem
Remedies against the dropsye called ascites, a drink very good to take once a
week. idem A singular good electuary for the same, which ought to be
disclosed but to your special friends. fol. 13 An ointment for the same. idem
Another ointment very good. idem A remedy against the yellow ^aunders. idem
Remedies against the collicke. idem A remedy never to have the colic more.
idem Another remedy to take in the pain and tourment of the collicke. idem A
very good powder that heals quickelye the said sickennes. fol. 14 A remedy
which I have found to be very good for all griofe or pain of the guts or
entrails. idem A glyster wherewith I have cured many. idem Another against the
same. idem Another for the same. idem An ointment against the same. idem A
very good receipt which pope Element the seventh took in his last sickness.
idem A remedy against the late or ^i^e come of choler. fol. 15 An ointment very
good for the same. idem Remedies against the laxe disentericke. idem Another
drink very good. fol. 16 Another remedy. idem Another drink very good in
case the Pacient have therewith any great dolor in his belly (as often times
it happens) by reason of exulceration and knawing of the guts. idem Another
remedy when the pain is great. idem Suffamigations or smokings for the same.
idem The first. idem The second. idem Another remedy for the same. idem An
ointment very good for the bloody fi^e. idem Remedies against the swellyng and
oppilation or s^^pping of the spleen. fol. 17 A fomentatio^ or nourishing by
wash ^^^ for ye same ^^^ An ointment against the same. idem Another fomentation
or bathing for the same. idem Remedies against the pain; swelling, and
ventositie of the matrice. idem Another ^^^^d of some women. idem Another
remedy very good and web knows of women ^ 18 Another. idem A fomentat^on or
nouryshyng. idem A very good ointment. idem A plaster or clothe to lay upon
the matrice if grief de old or inueterate. idem Remedies to make a womans
time to come that is let or hyndered by some cause. idem Another remedy very
good also to cause a woman to bring forth the child before the time, if the
woman be in danger of it. idem A washing very good for the same. idem Against
to much abondaunce of flowers. idem An ointment against the same. idem Against
ye prefocatio^ or strangling of the matrice. ide^ Against the same of what
cause so ever it come. idem Another against the same. idem Against the same.
idem against the same. idem Remedies to be used when the Matrice comes out
of her natural place or falls. idem A plaster very good. idem Remedies for
the Matrice corrupted or apostumated, a plaster for to dissolve it. idem
Another plaster for the same. idem A plaster. idem Remedies against the
ulcers or corrupt matter of the Matrice. idem A drink for the same. idem
Remedies against the white f^ire of women. idem Another against the same. fol.
21 A drink. idem A powder against the same. idem Remedies against pissing
whote. idem A syrop. idem A drink against the same, to take three hours before
dinner and at noone. idem Against gonothea, which is when a man's seed goth
from him unwittingly. idem An ointment against the same. idem Another remedy
merueylous good. idem Remedies for them that piss blood. idem An ointment for
the same. fol. 22 A plaster for the same. idem Remedies against the grauel.
idem Another. idem Another remedy well tried where by I have often times found
my self eased. idem Against the same. idem Another very good. idem Reteyptes
to hasten the chyldbyrth, and to mitigate the pain of the travail and labor.
idem Another. idem Another. fol. 23 Another. idem Another remedy very good, but
yet such one that may not be given, but in great necessity, or when the child
is dead within her bellye. idem Remedies when a man pisseth against his will.
idem Another for the same. idem Remedies against the stone in the bladder. idem
A remedy and preservative against the same. idem Another for the same. idem
Remedies for to heal the Emerhodes or Pyles, a very excellent ointment. fol.
24. A plaster against the same. idem An excellent and very good hot bathe for
y^ same. idem Another remedy of very great virtue. idem Remedies against the
swellyng of the coddes. idem Another against hard swellyng. idem A good
plaster for the same. idem An ointment against the same. idem A plaster. fol.
25 Remedies against the sciatica. idem Remedies against inflammations of blood
which grows into an impostume in some part of the body or members, called
phelgmone. idem A plaster to ripe and to ret an impostume. idem Another for
the same. idem Another to rot or ripe incontinent. idem Against a ringworme or
tettre that runs all over a man's face, or against y^ disease that is called
Fry^^pilas or Lichen, of some Mentagra, the Frenchmen call it feu volage, as it
were a running fire. fol. 26 Another remedy very good to heal the same, when it
does but begin to increase. idem Against flematicke swellyng. fol. 27
Remedies for the scabbes. idem An ointment very good for to annoint young
children who because of their tenderness, can not endure a purgation. idem
Another ointment very good for little children and old folk to use before and
after a purgation. idem Another remedy. idem A baine or bathe for the same.
idem against the scurfe or leprie called in latin psora. idem A remedy against
puffes, bladders, blysters, or wheles, and against the small pockes. idem an
ointment. idem another remedy well tried. idem against the strong cogh of young
children. fol. 28 against the stinking sweat. idem against the pain of the
eyes. idem For a white spotte in the eyes. idem Against the difficulty of
bringing forth child, and the retention of the shinne that the child is
wrapped in, called in latin secundina or secundae. idem A remedy when the
foundement comes out. idem Against the pain of the guts. idem against the
difficulty in making water saving for that which comes of the stone. idem
For men. idem For women. idem Against Crabl^ce. fol. 29 Against a Canker. idem
Against the little worms and itching of the hand or body. idem Against the
swellyng of the coddes. idem To make the worms come out of ye hands or feet.
ide^ A remedy for defnes of the ears. idem A remedy against fistuleys. fol.
30 For the scabbes of the hands. idem A water of a great and merueylous effect
for to keep man's body from many infirmities and diseases. idem What operations
come of such distillations. idem Another water or Balsamum, almost for the
same things. idem A pounder very good to conserve the sight. fol. 31 Against
the pain of the flanks or the pluresye. idem Against quartaine agues. idem To
heal old wounds and cankers of the leg. idem against the scurfe. idem
Against al ventositie, colic or pain of ye matrice. ide^ For the hardness or
brawne of the feet. idem To make very perfect Uinaigre. idem Against the
falling syckennesse. fol. 32 For children that be broke. idem Against the pain
of the spleen. idem For to stench^ blood. idem For to heal in four days the
scaldyng with water, or any other thing, without ointments or plasters it has
bane tried and found true. idem For to stenche blood. idem Against the worms
in little children. idem To ^eale the Emerhodes or Pyles. idem Against all
kinds of pain and grief. idem Against styfnes or shrinkinge of synowes,
called the crampe or swellyng, coming of the wound taken of some venomous
beast in latin spasmus or co^uulsio. 33 For them that can not piss, by reason
of certain grauel and carnositie which is abundaunce of flesh. idem Against
defnes. idem Against opilation or stoppyng. idem Against the the gyddinesse of
the sight. idem For them yt can not broke their meat, but vomit it again.
idem Against the head ache by to much drinking. idem Against all the pain of
the head. idem Against the pain of the head yt continues always. ide^ Another
way. idem Another way. fol. 34 Against the megrame happening suddenly. idem
Against itching of the head. idem Against ulcers or scabbes of the head as well
of men as of women. idem Against old and putrified wounds. idem To keep yt
the flesh grow not to much in a wou^d. idem To heal and take away the scurfe.
idem For to kill Lyce. idem Against the distillation of the brain and heaviness
of the head. idem Against murs or catars that begin to grow. idem For to
refrain the murre or catarre. idem A remedy for the disease when the hear of
the bearde or head falls of, of it self. fol. 35 To keep that the hear
shall not fall of. idem To make ye bear of a ma^s head or ^eard to grow. idem
For to make hears grow. idem For to curle hear, a rare secret. idem For to
make hear black. idem To keep yt the hears wax not hoare or white. idem For
to make the hears black. idem Against the pain in the eyes. idem Against the
dimnesse or daselyng of the sight. fol. 36 Another way. idem Against a web
or spot in the eye. idem To take away y^ hurtful hears of the eye brows. ide^
Against all pain of the ears. idem Against the pain of the ears and defnes,
and for to purge the apostumes or corruption of the ears. idem Against the
pain of the ears. idem Against the noise or ringing of the ears. idem
Against all infirmity of the ears. idem Against defnes and hardness of
hearing. fol. 37 Against the pain of the ears, defnes, durte or fylthe,
worms or water that is in them. idem For to stenche bleeding at the nose. idem
To heal the sickness called noli me tangere. idem Against stynking of the
mouth. idem Against the tothe ache. idem Another way. idem For to make teeth
fall out. idem For to make teeth white that be black. idem For them that be
hoarce. idem To heal the disease called the kings evil. idem How to know
the kings evil. idem Against the cegh and distillation of the breast and
lunges, and running of the eyes, pain of the bladder, and when the pype of it
is stopped, which causes that a man can not piss, but with great
difficulty, also for those that spit blood at the mouth, or pysse blood, and
for the flire, and collicke pain, or beauynes of the bellye and choler, and
also against a vomiting without an ague, also against all pain of the body,
except of the head, and especially against the vlce^ation of the lunges, if
you give the pacient an electuary or two of it. fol. 38 Against all vehement
coghes. idem Against the cogh be it never so great. idem For one y^ has
swallowed down a blood sucker. idem Against an old and inueterate cogh. idem
Against the bloody flixe coming of the artere or synowe of the lunges or of
the liver. idem For to restrain a great and vehement vomiting. fol. 39 For them
that can not keep their meat in the stomach but vomit it up again. idem To
quench and assuage thruste. idem Another way. idem To stop the hicket. idem
For to stop the hicket that comes often. idem A souerain remedy for them y^
have wry necks, by reason of shroken sinowes: and for them y^ have y^ gout.
ide^ To take away swelling under the armeholes. idem Against apostumes and
swelling at ye rote of y^ nails. ide^ To make a ma^s nails grow which be
fallen of. idem Against the disease called lychen, which is a foul breaking
out of al ye face with a scab, beginni^g at y^ chin. ide^ To take away the scab
of a running ^ettre etc. fol. 40 Against burgeons and pushes in the face. etc.
idem Against all spots, pimples, pushes, or ulcers. etc. idem To take away the
blacknes of the neck. etc. idem Against the brusing of the face by a fall or
slip. idem Another very good. idem Against war^s and malanders. idem Against
swelling of the stomach, pain of the raines, grauel, fleame, collicke, the
emerbodes, or pyles, also to stay the flowers of a woman, and for those that
have an infected liver and spleen, also for those y^ cogh and for them that
have the falling sickness. idem Against the pain of the spleen. idem Another.
fol. 41 For the pain of the loins or haunches. idem Against swelling or
ulcers of the raines of the back. ide^ Against the pain of the gravel, and
for to. etc. idem Against the pain of the raines. idem Against the gravel.
idem Against the pain of the bladder and gravel. idem Against y^ blody flixe,
or fretting torment in. etc. fol. 42 Against the straining, fretting and
griping of. etc. idem For those that have fretting and gryping in the belly and
the laxe. idem Against the collicke. idem Against the pain of the colic
coming suddenly. idem Against the pain of the guts or bowels. idem For to
stop the laxe. idem Against the fretting of the belly or laxe. idem For to
know a secret or hidden disease of any man, and to heal the same. fol. 43 For
them that void blood at their foundement, and for those that have their blood
broken. idem Against the worms y^ engender in men's bodies. idem Against the
griping of the belly, and desire to go to stole, and yet do nothing. idem
Against the pain of the collicke. idem Against the ulcers and fistules in y^
foundement. etc. idem To heal y^ emerhodes or those ye lose their blood. idem
Against the ulcers of the foundement, and against the disease called commonly
S. Fiacres sickness. idem For to ripe or break an impostume or. etc. idem
Another. idem Against hurting or flawing of the skyn by cha^ing and going
either of the feet or between the thighs, id^ Against ye swellyng and pain
of the soles of the fete. 44 To make wartes fall of. idem For to take away y^
felons and cats hears which break out we wheles in the fingers, and also
knops. etc. idem For to assuage the pain of the gou^e. etc. idem Another way.
idem For to get out any thing y^ sticks in a man's. etc. idem Certain
receiptes against the plague. idem A compposition preservative against the
pestilence excellent as it were triacle or Mythridatum. fol. 45 Another
composition in powder, or in other. etc. idem Common pyles very good for the
same. idem Antidotes or medicines preservatives and comfortable of small cost
easy to find and prepare for poor folk. ide^ Another medecin. fol. 46
Things of favor or sweet smell, as powder, balls, waters, perfumes, and
first a powder for. etc. idem A parfume. idem A smellyng balle. idem Another
sweet balle meter for the summer. fol. 47 Outward remedies to purge the air,
the easyest, the presentest, and those that are of the smalest price for men of
small ability. idem A powder against the worms. idem The whole sum of the
regiment and gouernyng of a man's life. idem A sovereign remedy against the
venime of the plague for rich men and for princes. fol. 48 A powder for poor
folk of no less efficacy and strength then the second. idem A drink for
poor folk, and in a place where there is none or very little juice either of
syrope, cytrons, lemons, or pomegrades. idem A drink often times tried,
profitable and wholesome, yt which (as many men say) was never found vain. idem
Opiate. idem A drink mete after every taking of the said opiate, or to be mixed
we the takinges of the same opiate, for the strongest or meanest men,
according. etc. 49 A drink for poor folk. idem A drink to cause one to
sweat. idem Another drink for poor folk. idem An epitheme or medecin to
lay to the. etc. idem An epitheme for the heart good for poor folks which may
also serve for the liver. idem An epitheme or medecin for the liver. idem
Local medecines, and first a plaistor or. etc. fol. 50 Another easy drawing
medecin. idem Medecines of y^ kinds yt burn ye skyn or flesh. etc. ide^
Another plaster. idem Another stronger. idem A medecin that cleanses and
purifieth. idem Another very good. idem A plaster incarnatife. idem A
repercussife and resolutiue ointment against. etc. fol. 51. A plaster for to
stop the g^awinge or eating of the canker. idem An ointment very sweet for
cankers that have corrupt matter in them, which also alayeth the pain of those
that have no corrupt matter in them. idem An ointment of marvelous virtue
against the eating and running of the canker, and to take away all the grief
of the same. idem A plaster mitigatiue and very gentle for cankers, specially
of the breasts or pappes. fol. 52 First to harden iron. idem For to harden
knyues and other such like. idem For to harden a fyle or other instrument of
iron. idem To harden any other substance material. idem To make any
instrument of steel hard and sharp. idem Another. idem To keep it from
cleaving when it is a hardining. fol. 53 To make iron or steel soft. idem
Another. idem To soder all things and first iron. idem To soder any whote
thing. idem To soder Copper. fol. 55 To soder iron. idem A powder that will
make all metal pliable and soft. idem Another upon brass. idem To grave in
iron or stele, knives and harness. idem To grave with water. idem Another
stronger and more bytyng. fol. 56 To make a color of gold or silver to lay
upon metal, and to make also a ground of gold or silver, upon iron, bells,
stones, which shall not go of with water. ide^ A color of gold to set upon bras
or copper. idem A color of gold upon brass. fol. 57 To make Copper of a
silver color. idem To gylt iron or steel. idem To make a water for to gilt
upon iron or steel. idem To keep all ma^er of iron or steel, and also al
manner of instruments of war. idem To bring a cloth that was stained to his.
etc. idem To take spots out of cloth. fol. 58 Another way. idem A water to
take spots out of white clothe. idem To take spots of grease or oil out of
white cloth. ide^ To take spots of grease or oil out of all sorts of cloth or
other things. idem Another. idem To take spots of wine out of all manner of
cloth. idem To take all manner of spots out of silk. idem To take all spots out
of crymsen velvet. fol. 59 A water take all spots out of gold and velvet. idem
To make a Soap that takes out all spots. idem To take spots of black incke or
other things. etc. idem To take spots out of scarlet or velvet of colors with
out vurting any thing at all the color. idem To take spots of oil from
parchment or white paper. 60 To die threde, yarne or linen cloth into a. etc.
idem To die threde or linen cloth blew. idem A blewe color to dye all
things. idem Another way to dye blewe. idem To dye read. fol. 61 Another
way. idem To make fair roset. idem To die wodde, bones and horn into green.
idem Another green. idem To die, horn, bone, and wodde into redd^. idem To
dye yellowe. fol. 62 To die black. idem To make horn soft. idem To mollify
or soften horn so that you shall imprynte or make any figures in it. idem
Another way. idem To cast horns in a m^^d^ like lead. idem To make clear
stones of amber. idem Another fol. 63 To polish and to give a gloss unto
precious stones. idem To make a stone that shall give fire and burn of it self
if you weate it with your finger. idem To ^ollifie or soften Crystal and
precious stones ^o that you may cut them like these, and that being put in a
mould they shall be hard again. idem To counterfeyt pearls which shall be very
fair, and as they were natural and true. idem To prepare Mercury, and so to
harden it, that you may make it liquide and work it. fol. 64 A substance made
of paper or other things, to express or set out any manet of figure y^ you will
upon. etc* idem How to bray gold for to gilt with. fol. 65 To g^lt copper. idem
To gilt pro^. idem To take of the gold from silver that is gilt, so that the
silver shall remain whole and sound. idem To seperat ^iluer from copper, be it
money or etc. idem A^^^der which being la^^ng upon any thing siluered will take
of the silver from it. idem To convert and turn copper into brass. fol. 66 To
melt al metal perfit^^. idem For to give a color of gold upon copper. idem To
make verdet or spanishe green. idem To make a white color of lead. idem To
make Lutum sapientie. fol. 67 To l^te or dawde pottes with a linen cloth that
will not bur(...) idem To soder glasses. idem Another lutum sapientie. idem To
seperat gold from silver. fol. 68 Another way. idem To seperat gold or silver
without fire or aqua fortis. ide^ To seperat gold from silver with a powder. idem
To make gold softer. idem Another way. fol. 69 To make gold and silver (...)
idem To soften all metalls, and other things that are not soft so that they
shall be soft and gentle to be wroughts upon or forged. idem A^ ^yle that ^^aketh
all metalles soft. idem T^ seperat gold from copper. idem Another way. idem A
powder to seperat gold. idem To wash gold from copper. fol. 70 To get
together the gold out of thredes of. etc. idem To gilde so that it shall not out
with no water y^ is. idem To gather together into one, the gold that is scraped
of from letters and images. idem To take gilt from a cup that is gilded within.
idem To make gold soft after the melting. idem For to give a color to the gold
that it shall be soft. ide^ To boil gold or silver to make it receive a. etc.
fol. 71 To give a color to gold. idem To give (...) idem For to make (...)e.
idem To make silver fair and white. idem To know if ye silver have any gold in
it or no. idem To mortify and alay Mercury or quick silver. idem To gylt
steel or iron. idem To seperat gold or silver from metal or iron. fol. 72
Silver of tyn, to make vessel or other things. idem To white any vessel of
copper within and without with silver color very easily. idem To make vessel
of Copper white like Silver, both within and without. idem To make that tynne
crack not. idem To take Salamanders, for to occupye or to serve a man's turn.
fol. 73 To fine gold with Salamanders. idem The mother of all waters for to
make all metalles liquisyable. idem To prepare common salt. idem To prepare
salt Armoniacke. fol. 74 To make sal Alkali. idem To make sal Boras. idem
Water of Mercury. fol. 75 Water of salt Armoniacke. idem A water called aqua
lactis virginis. idem Water of salt Alkali. idem A water called aqua croci
martis. idem To calcine tartre. idem (...) egg shelles. fol. ^^ To ^^^csne or
^^rne tutia. idem A water called aqua lunaris. idem Aqua ^^^sata* idem A water
called aqua causc^c^^ fol. 77 Aqua auri pigmenti. idem Water of common salt
prepared. idem Water of yelkes of eggs. idem Oyl^ ^^ t^^^^e. idem An oil
called oleum la^e^^^^n^ or petroleum. idem Oleum benedictum. idem Oy^e of
Brymstone. idem A note* 78 To purge Brymstone. idem To sublime Brymstone* idem
Oil of Eggs. fol. 79 Oleum auri pigment^. idem Oleum lunare. idem Oil of
Brymstone. idem To sublime Mercury. idem
(...) of Secrete^ and sovereign ^e(...) good and approved Authors, (...) the
French tongue, and now latelye (...)gly she (to the profit of this (...)) by
W. Ward.
^ Prynted at London by Rouland Hall dwel^n^ ^^ (...), at the sign of the hale
Egle and the Keep.

1562.


