THE ACTIONS OF The Low Countries. WRITTEN By Sr. Roger Williams KNIGHT.

LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Matthew Lownes. 1618.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR Francis Bacon Knight, Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND.
Right Honorable:
THis part of History, having lain a long time by me, I have thought good to
publish to the world; and that especially for these reasons. First to incite
other men of Arms to imitate in like sort their great Master Julius Caesar,
who wrote exact Commentaries (adorned of late with observations of a worthy man
of our Nation) of such military actions as happened under his command.
Secondly, to prevent least such worthy pains should either perish, or
hereafter be set forth by others as their own: a thing too much practiced by
some, not of meanest note. Lastly, to make this a mean of drawing the residue
into light, which happily sleeps in the custody of some other man. This do
I presume to present to your Honor; as well in regard of the honorable
estimation which still remains of the Author, as for the worthiness which I
conceive to be in the Work. For all of us do well discern both the luster of
many excellent perfections in your own noble spirit, and how you favor men of
valor, learning, or honest endeavor: which virtues, as they have advanced you
to this height of honor, so will they make your memory eternally to flourish.

S. Stephens. 1 Ian: 1618. Your Honors in all service, PE: MANVVOODE.

To the Reader.
ALbeit in all Histories three things are especially required, Order, Poyse and
Truth: yet for diverse causes it happens that in many, one of these does fail.

For some have written of times so anciently past, that no means are extant,
either to direct or to correct them. Many of these living in Artlesse ages,
have stuffed their Stories with most senseless fictions; nothing better then
country women's tales. Of this sort was Hunibaldus, who fableth that the French
took their original from Francio a Trojan: and is followed in his sotteries
by Gregory of Tours, Rheginus, Sigebert, and diverse others of the same suite.
After this example Geoffry of Munmouth about 400 years since, did first (as
some affirm) draw the original of the Britans from Brutus the Trojan: forging
such races, names, reigns and passages of affairs, as may more easily be
convinced to be false, then supplied with any certain truth. Of the same
streine is Wittikind; who by his counterfeit Saxo, has drawn the Saxons and
first Inhabitants of Germany, from the old Macedonian Soldiers of Alexander
the great. So the Scots set up Scota daughter to Pharao King of Egypt, for
foundresse of their Nation. Likewise the Irish hatched their Hiberus, the Danes
their Danus, the Brabants their Brabo, the Goths their Gothus, as founders
both of their Nation and name: a subject wherein forgeries may range at large;
because the first times of Nations for the most part are, as very small, so
altogether obscure. Of this sort among the ancients were Herodotus, Diodorus
Siculus, and Theopompus: in whose Books Cicero says, many idle untruths are
found; even so far as the vain vein of the Graecians durst adventure to
aduowe for truths. In how many places (says Josephus) is Hellanicus charged
with falsities by Agesilaus, and by Ephorus? they by Timaeus? Timaeus by many
who followed? Herodotus by all?

Others have written of Countries far distant, either altogether unknown, or
by them never seen: who writing upon vulgar reports, things either imagined,
or erroneously observed, are easily entangled with untruths. Of this fault
Era^osthenes, Possidonius and Patrocles the Geographer are branded by Strabo.
Hence also did rise the fables of the Arimaspes, Gryphons, Troglodites,
Amazons, Satyrs, Pigmies, and of their cruel wars with Cranes: of Nations of
men with dogs heads, with horse feet, without heads, without mouths, with one
foot wherewith they cover themselves against Sun and rain, and of diverse
other monstrous kinds of men, beasts and fowls, which now are discovered for
vtopicall Aperies. With these may Stephanus and Arianus be joined; of whom the
one writes, that the French are a people of Italy; the other places the
Germans near to the Ionick sea. So Strabo choppeth, that the river Is^et or
Danowe, has his spring near to the Adriaticke sea: and that the rivers Lapus
and Vezer, discharge themselves into the river Enis; whereas the one runs
into the Rhine, the other into the Ocean. So are Tacitus, Marcellus, Orosius,
Blondus, in diverse places of Germany much mistaken. And so Sabellicus,
Volaterrane, and Conrade, do much confound the Alans and Almans; the
Hungarians and Hunnes; the Danes and the Dace; Austerane, and Austrich; placing
the mount Saint Ottoly in Bauaria, and the Riphaean mountains in Polonia, or
Muscouia.

Others have written of their own countries and times: but these again are of
diverse sorts. For some busy themselves much in those things which the popular
multitude do applaud: making wordie (I cannot say worthy) reports of Bear
baitings, lanching of ships, fleas, mice, owls, maskes, mayings, etc. And if
they speak of any public affairs, they discern nothing but the outside:
not unlike to beggars, who trauerse over many Countries, from door to door, and
touch as many fair buildings; but observe nothing either of the persons, or
furniture, or order within. Such Historians do daily and duly attend certain
Kings in India: And whatsoever they do, whether eat, drink, sleep, disport,
ease nature, retire to any woman; In a word, All, they barely wright down, and
nothing else.

Some others better furnished with judgment, do strongly biasse in their
affections: and that chiesty by two means, leuitie and partiality.

Of the first sort are they who affecting to write rather pleasingly then
truly, do enterlace many ieasts, conceits, tales, and other pleasing
passages; either omitting or defacing the solid truth. Of this fault
Trebellius is reproved by Laberian and Vopiscus, Tacitus by Tertullian and
Orosius, Orosius by Blondus. To these also we may adioyne Danudes,
Philostratus, Guidius, C^esias, Heca^aeus, and diverse others; who have
transformed the truth of many things into fabulous inventions of their own.

Of the second sort are they who upon hate, fear, or favor, either to some
persons, or to their native country, or to the religion which they profess,
or for some other partial respect, do write Panegyrickes or Inuectiues,
rather then Histories. So Salust writes, that the acts of the Graecians are
much admired: not because they exceed the Atchieuements of other men, but
because their writers having wit at will, did much enlarge them above the
truth. Of this fault Blondus and Sabellicus are noted in their Histories of
Venice: Paulus Aemilius and Gaguine in their Histories of France: and most
others in the Histories of their own Countries. Who extol, depresse, deprave
immoderately; making things seem not as they are, but as they would have them;
no otherwise almost then Comedies and Tragedies are fashioned by their Authors.

Amongst those few who have written with knowledge, judgment, and sincerity,
the Author of this History is worthy to be ranged: who doubtless was of
endless industry; always in action, either with his sword, or with his pen.
He was well known to be a man, who both knew and durst: his courage no less
free from indiscretion, then from fear. Yet has he wrote so modestly of
himself, that some may happily esteem him rather a looker on, then a medler,
in the hot medlies whereof he does write: but his attributing so little to
himself, will make others attribute the more unto him. In writing of others
he expresses a most generous disposition; neither forbearing the errors of
his friends, nor forgetting the vigilance and valor of his enemies; but
carrying himself with an even hand between them.

Touching the History it self, it is faithful and free; wherein are found
sieges, assaults, surprises, ambushes, skirmishes, battles, lively described.
Great variety both of persons and of actions; much mutability of fortune, many
changes in affairs. Admirable aduices, unexpected events, ponderous
judgments; a phraze in a Soldiers style, sinowie and sweet; full both of
perspicuitie and grace. In a word, I esteem it a complete History, if it
were complete. I mean, if it extended to all the actions wherein the Author
did serve. But whether the residue was never written, or whether it be
perished, or whether it rests in any other hand, I remain doubtful. This
piece being showed to me, by a person, of whose virtues I had rather speak
nothing, then not enough, I did much esteem; for that it comprizeth some
actions of the time wherein I have lived: Of which time I endeavor to leave a
large memorial to posterity. But coming to me in a ragged hand, much
maimed, both in sense, and in phrase: I have restored it so near as I could,
both to the style and meaning of the Author. This is all the pains that I
have taken. This is all the thanks which I do either challenge or deserve.

Io: HAYVVARDE.

THE OCCASIONS OF THE FIRST STIRS IN the Low Countries, the Duke D' Aluaes
first coming thither, and his surprising of the principal of the Nobility,
the Prince of Orange escapes into Germany, and Charles Mansfelt into France.
THe state of Spain, as I said in my discourse of their discipline, is
governed by two sorts of people; Captains and Clergy. The Captains animate
the King to wars, to maintain their wealth and greatness; so does the
Clergy to maintain their estate against them of the religion. The Spanish
counsel touching the Low Countries.
By these means, the ambition of the Duke D'Alua, of Cardinal Granuill, and
their seconds, persuaded the king to undertake to subdue the Netherlanders to
his pleasure; to lay upon them such gables, taxes, and all manner of tributes
as should please the King to demand. But this they could never effect without
making away their warlike and politic Nobility; namely, the Prince of Orange,
the Counts of Egmond, of Horn, of Battenburgh, the Lord of Brederode, the
Marquess of Bergues, with diverse others of good quality. Besides, they had a
great number of strong Towns, innumerable treasure and riches; the seat of
the most of their Provinces being marvelous strong by nature, by reason of
their great rivers and streights, furnished plentifully with Artillery,
munition, and other necessaries for wars. Also t^eir liberties were such,
that no stranger might govern either their Provinces, or any of their Towns.
And this grieved the Spanish not a little, that such base people as they
esteemed the Netherlanders to be, should possess peaceably such a brave and
rich Country, and their King carry no other title than Duke, Count, and Lord
over their seuenteen Provinces. Duke D' Aluaes commission.
Hereupon the king resolved to send his great Captain Duke D' Alua with a
mighty army, giving him commission to alter place and displace whom, and as
many as pleased him, as well in their provinces in general, as in any
particular Town. Also giving him authority to execute as many as pleased him,
without respect of persons. This being discovered unto the Prince of Orange,
The intelligence of the Prince of Orange.
from a Gentleman Burgundian of the Kings Chamber (who was greater with one of
the Kings Secretaries wives, than with her husband) by reason of the Spanish
long counsels in their resolutions, it came in good time to the Prince, long
before the Dukes troops marched from Spain into Italy. In the mean time the
Prince animated the people all he could against the Spanish, making diverse of
his assured friends acquainted with his intelligences; His policy,
but durst not trust Count Egmond, fearing his ambition and choler would mar
all. Notwithstanding considering his vogue and greatness with the men of
war, he durst attempt nothing without him. Wherefore politickely the Prince
fed both parties, assured the Gouernesse the Duchess of Parma, of his loyalty
toward the King and his religion: but in troth he was of the Protestant
religion, favoring them what he could under hand; so much, that he and his
instruments procured the people in great numbers to present supplications
openly to the Gouernesse, for the liberty of their consciences. Likewise
diverse Papists and Martinists presented her with supplications, to persuade the
king to stay his Duke D' Alua and his armies: showing her plainly that it was
against their liberty and customs, that strangers should govern them. In this
time the Prince and his instruments animated a quarrel betwixt Count Egmond,
and Card. Granuill; so as after a banquet at Brussels, upon a dispute with
multiplying of words, the Count took the Cardinal a box on the ear,
Cardinal Granuill takes a box upon the ear.
to the Prince and his parties great joy. This Count (as I said before) was so
ambitious, that he thought it his due to be chief over all warlike actions,
Count Egmonds nature.
which either King or his Country would undertake (I mean among the
Netherlanders) without comparison he deserved it. He was most valiant, most
liberal, and greatly fortunate in all his actions. Amongst the rest of his
actions, the chief praise of the battle of S Quintins, and of Grauelin
belonged to this Count. The Prince of Oranges favor, popular.
Notwithstanding the Prince of Orange carried all the vogue amongst the
popular, by his fine and politic government; and wanne a number of men of
quality with great courtesies and affable discourses: Insomuch that these two
Chiefes being joined, would have carried all the Country in general to have
done what they had listed. After this disgrace, the Cardinal very politickly
showed neither choler nor mind to revenge, but rather sought all means
underhand to stay the Count from proceeding further with the Prince; and both
he and the Gouernesse procured lotters from the King, with great speed to that
end. In which letters were contained, that nothing should be done in the
Netherlands, as well by Duke D' Alua, as by his base sister the Gouernesse, The
Kings letters.
without the Counts consent; and to repose all trust in the Count only for
martial affairs. The King wrote also unto the Count, assuring him, that
nothing should be too dear for him; and that his great service should not be
forgotten, but recompensed to the highest degree: Showing him, how all these
stirs proceeded from the Prince of Orange, and his instruments, to overthrow
religion, and to maintain his estate and greatness. Besides, they sent
counterfeit letters unto the Count, as though the Prince or his faction had
certified the King often aginst the Count to his disgrace. Before these posts
arrived, the Prince or his instruments had procured the Count, and all or most
of the Nobility with a great number of quality, to meet at Tilmount in Brabant:
where, after a great banquet, most of them signed a letter to the King, rather
to dye than to suffer the government to alter. This letter was written very
humbly to persuade his Majesty to stay his Duke D' Alua, assuring him to be
loyal in all points: desiring his Majesty to remember their liberties and
customs, which his Majesty was sworn to maintain in as ample manner as his
ancestors before. At this banquet all signed these letters, saving the Count
Peter Ernest of Maunsfelt, governor of Luxenburgh, and the Lord of Barlemount,
Peter Maunsfelt, and the Lord Barlemount will not sign.
who politickly promised to do the like the next morning: excusing themselves,
that at that instant the wine was their master. But at midnight they stole post
toward Luxenburgh, excusing themselves by letters unto the Prince of Orange,
that Count Egmond would be deboshed from them by the Spanish instruments; and
that they would not believe the contray, until they heard that his person and
men of war were in battle against the Spanish. It seems Peter Ernest was
willing to second them, for he left his son Count Charles as deep as the
best. They had reason to fear the Count, for the next day he began to repent
him of his bargain; Count Egmond repents.
taking occasions to murmr, and to stir factions against the Prince. But
the Prince politickly courtesied him with all favors, in such sort, Is
pacified.
that all fell in a banquet the next dinner; at which feast, according to their
custom, there was great carowsing: where the basest sort came in great
multitudes with glasses in their hands, crying to the Prince, Count, and
Nobility, Viue les gueses, viue les gueses, le diable emporte les espanioles:
Combination of the Nobility, with the Prince
God save the beggars, and the devil take the Spaniards. After ending the
banquet, the Prince procured many of the Nobility and of the best sort, to
promise to second him in the action he would undertake against the Spanish.
Egmond offended.
This being discovered unto Count Egmond, he commanded his horses and coaches
to be made ready; seeming to be much offended with the Prince of Orange and
his faction, and withal departed toward Louaine.

True it is, all murders are villainous; Charles Maunsfelts council concerning
Egmond.
but had the Prince credited Count Charles Mansfelt, Count Egmond had been
dead. I heard the Prince relate his counsel, which was; Let us kill Count
Egmond, then are we sure all the men of war will follow you and yours. Also
his countenance is such amongst them, as at his reconcilement unto the Spanish,
they will al follow him. But for fear of him my father and all the rest would
join with you. True it is, this young Gentleman was the wilfullest amongst
them, but spoke the grearest reason to maintain the Prince of Orange, as it
fell out afterward: for without doubt the reconcilement of Count Egmond, lost
himself and all his friends. Long afterward in France I heard Count Charles
speak this, and also how he would have wished the Prince afterward to have
marched with all his forces unto the edge of Louain, To take the streights
against Duke D' Alua.
there to have kept the streights betwixt Louain and Luxenburgh, where Duke D'
Alua must pass without all doubt. With the favor of God, had the Prince and
Count Egmond marched thither with their forces, by all reason they might have
fought with twice Duke D' Aluaes numbers. For there were four thousand brave
Lanciers and light horsemen under their charge, ready always entertained;
besides as many more who would have mounted themselves most willingly, The
forces of the Low Countries.
with at least twenty thousand footmen against the Spanish and the Prince, had
they made away the obstinate Count. Besides, the nature of the Neatherlanders
is to be very willing to second any novelties; much more against a people they
hated so much as the Spanish, whose forces and policies were unknown to them
at their beginning. Being as high as Lovaine, they had bin sure all the
Countries and Towns behind them, would have seconded them with all
necessaries. For the humor of the Nation is to be unreasonable proud with
the least victory, The disposition of the Neatherlanders.
or advancement with a reasonable army; and deadly fearful with the least
overthrow, or at the retreit of their men of war from their enemy. The posts
being arrived with the Gouernesse and Cardinal (who received express
commandment from the King to dissemble his disgrace with the Count, assuring
him Duke D' Alua should redress all) Count Egmond having received the Kings
letters, fell clean from the Prince unto the Gouernesse, and began to make
all the fair weather he could unto the Cardinal; Egmond draws all to the
Spaniard.
thinking himself sure. This poor Count persuaded all the rest to forsake
their Prince, assuring them that he would undertake to make all well again
with the King; in such sort, that most of the Nobility quited the Prince. The
Prince of Orange seeks conference with Egmond.
Who fearing that the variable popular would do the like, resolved to acquaint
Count Egmond what the King had passed against them in his Spanish council; and
opening his mind unto diverse of the best sort, the Prince procured Count
Egmond, with most of the rest to give him audience: whose words I heard the
Prince himself report, as follows.

Cousins and dear Countrymen, His advertisement.
it greiues me to see you so blinded with the Spanish dissimulation, which is
to no other end but to lull you asleep, until their tyrant D' Alua arriues
amongst us, who has so large a commission. And this he will not fail to
execute to the uttermost; which he can never do, and suffer us to live,
especially you Count Egmond. And resolve your self that they who send him with
such directions, know your courage to be too great to endure your Countrymen to
be made slaves, and to suffer him to wash his hands in your kinsmens blood.
Believe my words, it is true what I tell you; for there you see his hand, whom
diverse of you know to be in good credit with the King, especially with his
principal Secretary. And herewith he cast his letter with other testimonials
amongst them, telling the Count. Cousin resolve on it, if you take arms, I will
join with you; if not, I must leave you and quite the Country.

After pawsing a while, the Count answered. Cousin, I know the King has not
Spaniards enough to employ in all his Dominions: Egmonds answer.
wherefore you must think he must be served by others more then Spaniards. You
are deceived to judge the King a tyrant, without proof of cruelty; he cannot
be so ungrateful to recompense our services with such payments. Touching Duke
D' Alua, if it be the Kings pleasure to make him Governor of these Countries,
we must obey him as we did the Duke of Sauoy, and others. Touching our
government, resolve your self, he will not, neither shall alter it more than
the rest of his predecessors before him have done. For your self, if it please
you to stay, I dare adventure my credit to make all well with the King. And
assure you, does Duke D' Alua lay hands on you, I will not endure it. The Kings
dissembling letters.
Withal he hurled before the Prince and the rest the Kings letters; wherein
was no want of dissimulation, nor of promise of forgiveness, only to be
assured to bring them sound asleep, until Duke D' Alua should awake them.
Herewith the Count told the Prince resolutely, that he would not quite the
King. If he would not stay, it would grieve him to see his house overthrown.

The Prince answered. The Princes reply.
Cousin, I have been too long by his Fathers chamber, and do know the Kings
humors too well, and their Spanish government, to conceive that they will
pardon such persons as a number of us here be, after entering into such actions
as we have done against them. Good Cousin, do you forget how Duke D' Alua was
wont to say unto Charles the fifth: Hombres muertos no hazen guerra: Dead men
make no war. For these reasons, and diverse other, farewell: I will not stay
their justice, nor trust to their courtesies.For house it makes no matter; I
had rather be a Prince without houses, then a Count without a head.

The Protestants at Antwerpe.
During these treaties and delays, diverse brawles and bickerings fell out in
Antwerpe, betwixt them of the religion, the Martinists, and Papists. Twice or
thrice a week great numbers would be in arms, sometimes before the
Gouernesse Court, sometimes before the Prince of Oranges house, but often or
continually in places of greatest note. Although the Prince was most politic;
yet his courage was nothing co^parable to a number of others: if it had,
without doubt he might have hazarded to have surprised Antwerpe: Having done
it, he might have engaged the rest of the Country. For in Gant and in the great
Towns was faction for Religion, especially throughout the most of the Villages
and Countries, where was preaching and defacing of Images in many places;
Insomuch, that the Papists and Martinists drew them of the Religion out of
Antwerpe. Notwithstanding, they gathered together at a Village hard by
Antwerpe, Their overthrow at Osterwell.
called Osterwell; where they preached in great numbers: in such sort, that the
Gouernesse and all hers stood in doubt, whether it were best to hazard their
defeat there, or to stay for more forces. Being considered how they increased
daily, resolution was taken to charge them where they were; Intelligence being
brought them, that the Papists and Martinists, with a number of Soldiers did
salie to defeat them. Notwithstanding they were void of any men of conduct, or
soldiers gaged under ensigns, or Cornets; and all or the most Craftesmen,
Mechanics, or poor peasants; yet they resolved to fight, The Prince of Orange
his Oversight.
making head with good courage against their enemies. But for want of heads to
direct them, default of arms and munition, they were defeated in plain field.
Judge you what they would have done being in the Town of Antwerpe, having with
them a Prince of Orange, who had with him continually two or three hundred
Gentlemen, diverse of charge and conduct. Besides, he was Governor of the
Town, never without a good party, so as the Gouernesse and hers durst not lay
hands on him; although they knew him an enemy and a favorer of the Religion.
He openly takes part with the Papists.
To say truth, he cloaked it what he could; Insomuch, as all their parties
being often in arms in the great places, himself went to the strongest, which
were the Papists and Martinists: protesting to them to live and dye with the
Gouerness and religion. Without doubt his meaning was, touching the Gouernesse,
to be true to his Country, and to live and dye with the Religion. For amongst
them of the religion he had diverse instruments, some of his best Gentlemen and
Captains, who (God knows) at that time had but little skill in wars;
notwithstanding they were assured by them of his good will, in such sort that
they would have marched often against the others, Persuades the Protestants to
quietness.
but for the Princes persuasions to the contrary. Sometimes he would tell them
their enemies were more in number, and in charging them they should engage
their Town, wives, children, and goods: assuring them, if they would go
forward, the basest sort would ransacke their houses. Since I heard the Prince
say, that if he had known the wars then so well, as he did since, he would
have ranged on their sides: wishing then his valiant brother Count Lodowicke in
his place. Pity or fear overthrew the Prince often, as I will show hereafter.
Great warriers account the pitiful Captain a fool in wars, A pitiful
Captain.
and never cruel until he masters his enemy; then he must be bloody to
execute, if he cannot live in safety. This order continued until the news
came that Duke D' Alua was marching: Then it was high time for the Prince to
shift for himself. The Prince of Orange into Germany.
Before he arrived, the Prince was in Germany. After, moving the whole state
of the Empire, except the house of Austria, he found little comfort at their
hands; saving the Count Palatine of the Rheine, and his own house of Nassau.
Not without marvel; for those flegmatique people will second no body without
money before hand, and assurance to be paid monthly, especially being gaged to
serve the weakest party. When they come into the field, they will endure
neither hardness nor wants without their due guilt. When they have joined
battle, they have often cried guilt, hurled their weapons from them, and
suffered their enemies to cut them in pieces. I do persuade my self all
Potentates and estates hyre them, only fearing their enemies would have them.
Without doubt, if one side has them, and not the other, likely it is master of
the field; they come in such multitudes of Horsemen, as no Christian Nation
besides is able to furnish. Else persuade your self 500. hundred of either
English, Scottish, Burgundians, Wallones, French, Italians, Albaneses,
Hungarians, Poles, or Spanish, is worth 1500. Almaines.

Duke D' Alua being arrived in Loraine, Duke D' Alua arriueth in Loraine.
Count Peter Ernest Governor of Luxenburgh feared him; but like a wise
politic man, sent unto him to offer him all service. Count Maunsfelt upon his
guarde.
Notwithstanding he kept himself in his strong Towns of Luxenburgh, and
Tyonuill, having garrisons at his devotion: the Governors and Captains either
his kinsmen or assured friends. Neither would he suffer Duke D' Alua to enter
those Towns, or any other under his government of any strength; except only
his own person, Duke D' Alua courteth him.
with so many more as the Governors could dispose of at their pleasures. Duke
D' Alua knowing this man to be a very expert valiant Captain, would not offend
him, but rather pleased him all that he might. Insomuch as he procured diverse
favorable letters from the King, to encourage him of their good meaning
toward him; fearing otherwise that it lay in him to give the Duchy of
Luxenburgh to whom he listed: which might have been a good present to the
French King, being joined with Mets in Loreine. Duke D' alua remained quiet in
the Kings state at Brussels, with some tyrannous Spaniards about him, who from
the highest to the lowest gaped for the spoils and confusion of the poor
Netherlanders. These (God knows) at that instant were better fed then taught in
marshall discipline, (except a few of their Nobility and men of war, who were
all at the devotion of Duke d' Alua, by means of the ignorance and obstinacy of
Count Egmond, who was deceived and lulled asleep in his vain glory, by
certain treacherous, tyrannous and ungrateful Spaniards.) Insomuch as they
refused neither the tenth penny, Duke D' Alua surpriseth the chief of the
Nobility.
nor any other demands that pleased Duke d' Alua to charge upon them. Duke d'
Alua having intrapt the Counts of Egmond, and Horn, with diverse others of
great quality, sent for them to counsel. At their entry into a chamber
where he was, the great Provost arrested them of high treason, taking from them
their Rapiers and arms. You may easily judge their sentences, when they were
to be tried by the Cardinal Granuill and his friends. So for the box on the
care and other follies, Count Egmond lost his head, with diverse others, and
principally the men of best quality; whom they feared and mistrusted to have
any vogue with the popular, or means to annoy them either with forces or
Council. Count Charles Maunsfelt flies.
At this instant Count Charles Maunsfelt had with him a vigilant politic
companion, which his father (the old Fox) had foysted into the service of
Duke D' Alua, only to advertise him and his son of their proceedings. This
espy-all ran to Charles into a tennis-Court, and brought him presently into
his lodging, where they mounted themselves speedily to recover Luxenburgh:
which they did, Duke D' Alua pursues him.
although Duke D' Alua sent diverse others on the spur to bring them to him
dead or alive. These mist them narowly. For they had not passed the bridge of
Namurs, but the others were in the place within one hour. Duke D' Aluaes
treachery against Count Maunsfelt.
Returning to Duke d' Alua, he was in great choler for not intrapping Count
Charles, and not without reason. For having him, he might have held him
prisoner for the better assurance of his father. Duke d' Alua dispatched
present posts to the great Provost of Arden, who was altogether at his
devotion; The Provost of Arden the instrument.
by reason of a Pick betwixt Count Maunsfelt and him. By good espy-all Count
Maunsfelt was aduertized of their practice; which was, that the Provost should
use all diligence and means to intrappe the father or the son. If both, he
should do the King and him great service. Count Charles being aduertized of
the match, used all means possible to meet the Provost at equal hands. This
Count was rather desperate then valiant in all his quarrels; but politic and
full of wit in all his affairs. By good espy-alls he met this Provost, Charles
Maunsfelt meets the Provost.
having with him about twenty horsemen; all or the most his own servants. The
Count had about twelve, the most or all Captains and Soldiers. This encounter
(God knows) was far against the Prouosts will, considering the match. For most
men of judgment in those affairs value six chosen men well mounted, worth
twenty ramassets, as the brench term them. The Count (as of greatest courage)
began to speak as follows. Master Provost, I do understand Duke d' Alua
commands you to bring my father or my self unto him, and that you gave your
word you would do it. All honest men ought to maintain their words and
promises, especially great Officers of quality like your self. I must
confess you ought to obey the Kings Lieuetenant, but not to make promise of
more than you are able to perform. You know my father, my self, and you, are
neighbors children; and kinsmen a far of. Wherefore for all your small
pick, you might have used the Duke with less assurance. But to give him and
all his proud Spaniards to understand that a Netherlander carries as good
resolution as any Spaniard, and to terrify such base fellows as thou art from
the like attempt, Kills him.
there is for thee. And withal struck him with a pistol in his bosom, down
from his horse. Himself and his company mastering the rest, executed no more;
all yielding to his mercy. The Count told them, upon condition that some of you
will tell Duke d' Alua that I wished him here with his Provost, I give you all
your lives, and leave to go where you list. Tell him also I am gone to the
French King, and from him to the Turk, rather then to yield to his mercy. The
Count being in France, Goes into France.
was greatly favored and well used by the French King, and remained there
until Don John d' Austria came into the Low Countries, to be Governor and
Captain General. As I said before, Count Peter Ernest would never hazard
himself at the mercy of Duke d' Alua; notwithstanding there passed courteous
letters of dissimulation betwixt them. Duke d' Alua all this while played
gloria patri, as pleased him; thinking his work at an end in the Low
Countries; saving the finishing of two Citadels, the one at Antwerpe, and the
other at Flushing. In the mean time, he, the Cardinal, and others persuaded
the King all they might, to undertake the conquest of England: thinking thereby
to oppress religion in all other places. Being resolved both in Spain and
Flanders, he dispatched his great Captain and Marshall Chiapine Vitelly unto
her Majesty, with some fained message: but by all likelihood they had
intelligence of our discountents. For immediately after Vitellies retreit out
of England, the Earls of Northumberland, and Westmerland were in arms in the
North-countrie; And the Duke of Norfolk was charged as faulty presently after.
At which time Duke d' Alua had ready in Zeland some ten regiments to embarke
for England. But by Gods providence our stirs were quieted before they could
embarke. Also God blinded his affairs in such sort, that he undertook to
finish the Citadell of Antwerpe, before that of Flushing, to his undoing; as I
will show in this discourse.

Count Lodowicks entry into Frizeland, and the defeat of the Count of
Arenbergue.
I Can speak little touching the first iourny Count Lodowick made into
Frizeland; Count Lodowicke into Frizeland.
but I heard the Prince report, that Count Lodowick marched into Frizeland with
some two thousand and five hundred horsemen, and seven thousand footmen, all
Germans. And having intelligence with the Counts of Schowenburgh, and his
brother in law the Count Vanderbergue, he took the Castle of Wedle, with
diverse other places in Frizeland, having engaged Groining. Count Arenburge and
Count Meguen sent against him.
The Counts of Arenbergue and Meguen were dispatched from Duke d' Alua to stop
his courses, having with them the master of the Camp Don Gonsalvo de
Bracamount, with his Tertia of Sardinia, and some companies of Wallons,
Geldrois and Almans; Bracamount master of the Camp.
with the two bands of Ordinance of the Counts, and about five other Cornets,
Launciers, and Hergoletters, Albaneseis, and Wallons. Count Arenbergue carried
the Commission, and marched before with Bracamount and other bands of footmen;
giving charge to Count Meguen to follow him speedily with the rest. Count
Arenbergue being arrived within two leagues of Count Lodowick, The pride and
insolency of certain spaniards.
and understanding his forces, would have staid from Count Meguen; who would
have been with him that night. The pride of Bracamount and diverse of his
Spaniards was such, as valuing Lodowicke and his forces as nothing, they urged
Count Arenbergue with heinous words; Insomuch that a number of the basest sort
of the Spaniards began to call him cowardly traitor: although Count Arenbergue
was a valiant expert Captain, and only would have stayed for more forces. For
he knew, and all the world with him, that Lodowicke was a most valiant
obstinate executioner, Lodowicke a brave commander.
who always directed his troops to fight in good order; and so resolutely,
that at an encounter with the French, he and Count Maunsfelt made a discreet
valiant retreit. The Admiral and his Frenchmen being defeated, Bracamount and
his Spaniards urged the Count to approach Lodowicke, who was lodged in a
Village by Groaning, having on both sides broad high ways, both toward Groaning
and his enemies. At the end of the lane toward the enemy there was a great
heath, with three high ways entering unto it. True it is, Lodowickes companions
were Germans, but of the best sort; for five hundred of his horsemen were
Gentlemen that accompanied him and his brother Count Adolfe of Nassau, for good
will: Lodowicke^ forces.
All his rest were a thousand horsemen, which he led himself. Count Arenbergue
being approached Count Lodowickes quarters divided his horsemen on both sides
of his footmen, which marched in one squadron, conducted by Bracamount. The
order of the Spaniards.
He placed some five hundred shot before his squadron, the rest on both his
sides. Count Arembergue himself led the right wing of the horsemen, his
Lieutenant of Frizeland the left wing. He commanded the Herguleters to march
before the forlorn shot of his battle on foot, and with some fifty
Herguleters to keep as nigh Lodowickes quarters as they could, and to keep
centinell at the entry of the lane into the plain. Count Lodowicks Curriers
having discovered them at the Nuse, Lodowicke advanced out of the Village,
commanding two hundred reysters to displace Arenbergues Curriers, Lodowickes
order to train out the enemy.
and to stand in the mouth of the straight. Lodowick came with all his forces,
placed his Lieuetenant Henrick Vausican with a squadron of Pikes, some thirty
score in the plain, half of his shot on both sides of his squadron, advanced
the two hundred reysters thirty score before his battle, placed his brother
Count Adolfe with 600. Reysters on the right wing of his battle, and so many
more with one of his best Captains on the left wing; the rest he hid in two
squadrons in both the out-lanes, leaving in the middle lane a good squadron of
pikes, with some three hundred shot in the hedges on both sides. He gave charge
to the two hundred Reysters to skirmish with all courage; gave directions to
his brother to retire softly as the enemy approached, himself standing with
some seven hundred of the best horsemen, hidden in the right lane from the
enemy; and gave order to the other wing to run through the pikes which stood
in the middle mostlane, who had directio^s to shift themselves over the hedge
as though they were defeated. His directions were no sooner given, but
Arenbergues Curriers and his were together by the ears, and the Nassauians
forced to retire under their battles of pikes. Arenbergue advanced with all
speed both horse and foot. Being near Bracamount and his Spanish cried to
Count Arenbergue to charge: withal Arenbergue and his Lieuetenant charged at
once. According to direction Count Adolfe retired, bringing Count Arenbergue
(who had by far the greatest wing) on Count Lodowicke. So did the other bring
Arenbergues Lieuetenant through the lane where the pikes were. Lodowicke giving
sign to his Reysters in the third lane to charge, withal charge himself,
and found Count Arenbergue and his Lieutenant good cheap; by reason they were
out of order in running after Adolfes troops. His Lieuetenant Henrick
Vausichan was broken by the Spanish and Wallons: but at the sight of their
horsemen which were in route, their courage quailed; in such sort, that valiant
Lodowicke ran through them cheap. In this place the Count of Arenbergue was
slain, all or most of the Tertia de Sardinia slain or taken prisoners; with a
number of Wallons and Geldreis. Diverse Spanish Captains escaped by recovering
their horses, which were led not far from them. So did diverse Wallons, and
many of their horsemen, The Spanish discipline.
by reason Lodowicke executed the most of his fury on the Spanish footmen. At
the return of the Spanish Captains that escaped, Duke D' alua executed them,
as I showed in my discourse of their discipline, for urging their General to
their overthrow.

Count Lodowicke assayes Groaning, and the Duke D' Alua overthrows him at Dam
in Frizeland.
AFter this, Lodowicke besieges Groaning.
Count Lodowicke ransacked Frizeland at his pleasure, insomuch that he besieged
the fair and rich Town of Groaning. Duke D' Alua hearing this, dispatched his
Martial, otherwise called Master of the Camp, Vitelli in aid of Groaning.
general Chiapin Vitelli with sufficient troops of horsemen and footmen, being
joined with Count de Meguen, to stop Lodowickes course. Duke d' Alua used all
diligence to gather his whole forces; who marched with all speed after Vitelly.
Vitelly being arrived by Groaning, Lodowicke retired his siege into one quarter,
resolving to give Vitelly battle; to which end he sent his Trumpets to
Vitelly to dare him, Is dared to battle by Lodowicke.
a small river being betwixt both. Vitelly kept the passages, brake the
bridges, answered Count Lodowicke he had no order to give battle, but to
discharge the Town of Groaning; delaying the Count politickely, Refuses, and
yet gives hope thereof. D' Alua approaches.
and telling his messengers: I will send unto my General to obtain his good
will; your Master may be assured, having leave, a battle will be my first
business. Duke d' Alua being arrived with his fair army within a days
journey of Vitelli, Count Lodowicke retired into Iemming, a Village by
Nuse-heile toward Emden, Lodowicke retyreth.
breaking the bridges after him. At the end of the Village toward the enemy,
he left Henrick Vausichan his Lieuetenant, with all his infanterie, being some
eight thousand; which were increased by reason of his good success at the last
battle. This Iemming was a place environed with waters, saving two or three
large ways which came into it from Groaning. Fortifieth himself at Iemming.
On every way Count Lodowick made trenches, placed strong guards, ranged his
horsemen in four squadrons; making what means he could to fill ditches, to
enlarge grounds, to make ways for his horse to fight out of the high ways in
diverse of the meadows toward Nuse-heile. By reason of the streights, his
horsemen stood behind the footmen in the great ways. Henrick Vausichan having
entrenched himself reasonably strong, with five thousand men to defend the
place against the enemy; Seeks to stop the enemy.
planted diverse field pieces which flanked the quarter where the enemy must
attempt. Hearing Duke D' Aluaes Curriers advanced within the sight of the
Nassawians guardes, Lodowicke sent two hundred Reysters to re-encounter them,
giving them charge to stop their course what they could; to win time to
strengthen his trenches, with were in working with all his hands. Being
re-encountred, both these Curriers fell into a hot skirmish. Julian Romero
having the vantguarde with Robelos, seconded their Curriers with some four or
five hundred Horguleters, Relieueth his Curriers.
in such sort, that the Nassauians were forced to retire on the spur. At the
sight whereof Lodowicke passed some four hundred Reysters, commanded by a
valiant man, who charged the Spaniards into the squadrons which Julian and the
other led, being four regiments of Spaniards and Wallons. The grand Prior
Duke D' Aluaes son commanded the battle, having with him don John de
Mendosa, General of the horsemen with Vitelly. They passed with all speed
through the vaunt-guarde some seven hundred Lanciers, which chaced the
Nassawians into their infantrie. And withal Julian and Robelos advanced with
all speed: so did the grand prior with his battle; and Duke D' Alua with his
son Don Frederico accompained with diverse others of great quality, seconded
the battle in great march. Lodowicke giving courage to his infantry, the base
villains (as I showed you before) cried gilt, gilt, according to their simple
and old base customs. Julian and Robelos being Pell mell with them, His
Germans cried for guilt, and are paid by the Spaniards.
they hurled down their weapons, crying, Live Spaniard, bone Papists moy.
Notwithstanding Lodowicke recovered his horsemen, who began also to shake and
to cry for money. True it is, at the first approach of Duke D' Alua in
Frizeland, four days before the horsemen began to murmr, and to counsel
Lodowicke to return to Emden. His brave resolution in greatest distress.
Lodowicke seeing this disaster, pulled off his caske, desiring his horsemen to
follow him, or to stand to bear witness how honestly his brother stood with
some five hundred horsemen; desiring him to charge those Lances which advanced
hard before them. The valor of Count Adolfe.
Count Adolfe did it with great courage, although half his squadron quitted
him. At which instant Lodowicke cried to his horsemen, All you that have a
humor to live follow me. Withal he gave the spurs. Some three hundred
horsemen followed him, the rest ran away. Notithstanding, his brother and
himself with less then six hundred Reysters drove above eight hundred
Launciers besides Herguleters into their vanguarde of foot. Count Lodowicke
defeated.
By that time the Spanish General of horsemen was arrived with great troops,
which soon mastered the Nassawians; in which place Lodowicke was hurt very
sore in two or three places, and his horse also. Notwithstanding he escaped
with wonderful hazard by swimming a river, Adolfe slain.
and recovered Emden. His brother Count Adolfe with the most or all the
Gentlemen that followed him were slain, or taken; so that scarce forty
escaped of both their troops. All or the most of his infantrie were taken and
slain, saving a troop which made a composition, being strongly entrenched
with Henrick Vausichan. Notwithstanding the Spanish used them cruelly,
according to their cowardly deserts; putting all or the most to the sword, and
winning all their artillery munition and baggage. This overthrow reco^penced
double Lodowicks victory: But without doubt had the base people fought and
followed Lodowickes directio^s, the loss had bin the Spaniards, the seat of
the Nassauians was such. Besides, I forget to speak of a ditch which Lodowicke
commanded to be cut, in such sort, that the water could have assured their
quarter within less then ten hours. The cause of Lodowickes dating Vitells.
This valiant Count had reason to draw Vitelli to battle; knowing, in
retyring before greater forces, the courage of his base soldiers would quail.
But having intelligence of Duke D' Aluaes approach, and finding the minds of
his men failing, he had greater reason either to retire without engaging a
fight, or to have fortified a strong passage where he might have made head
safely, until the Prince his brother would have succored him with more
supplies. This he might have done, considering the time and warning he had
since the arrival of Vitelli, until the coming of Duke D' Alua; principally
since the overthrow of Arenbergue; finding Groaning not to be taken, and seeing
forces increasing daily against him. But give him his worthy right, to correct
his deeds I may be compared unto a counterfeit Alexander on a Stage, better
then to the valiant and discreet Count.

The Prince of Oranges first journey into Brabant.
TOuching the Prince of Oranges journey into Brabant, The Prince of Orange
toward Brabant.
I can speak no more than this. By the aid of the Count Palatine of the
Rhyne, and his own house of Nassau, which engaging the greatest part of his
own Country of Nassau, he leauied some ten thousand Reisters, and twelve
thousand Launce-Knights. With those, and some two thousand Ramassees, of
Watlons, French, and Flemmings, fugitives; but a number of them brave Gentlemen
of good quality, especially the Count of Holdestocke, being entered Cleueland,
the Prince bent his course toward the river of Mase: resolving to pass the
said river by the great and rich Town of Liege, making account to find some
good party in that Town. Besides, diverse of the other Towns of Brabant,
Flaunders, and other Provinces promised him assistance, in case he would
encounter D. D' Alua in the field. Comes to Liege.
Having passed the Mase, and being encamped by Liege, D. d' Alua understanding
his meaning by good espy-alls before his arrival, sent some Captains of
quality who were expert in those affairs, both to the Bishops and to the
Clergy; to advertise and direct them to defend themselves; D' Alua sends to
Liege.
assuring them (if need required) he would hazard battle for them. This
Town being Neuter, and of the Empire, only governed by Priests and such men,
with the assistance and counsel of Duke D' Aluaes instruments, began to
show themselves rather enemies then well-willers unto the Prince; Liege enemy
to the Prince.
Insomuch that diverse sacked and spoiled some baggage and victuals loosely
guarded, which passed under their favors. The poor Prince seeing himself so
used by the Liegrois, was uncertain what to imagine, fearing the rest of the
Towns would do the like; having but small store of munition of his own, and
little hope to procure from others. Also Duke d' Alua fronted him with a fair
army, but not comparable to his, especially in horsemen: for the Prince had
more then double his numbers. Notwithstanding, Duke d' Alua was on the surest
hand, by reason all the Towns and passages were at his devotion. Diverse
skirmishes passed betwixt both parties; but the Prince could never engage Duke
d' Alua to battle, by reason he would be sure to be strongly entrenched
(especially being in the field) and lodged often under the favor of his
Towns. Having intelligence that the Prince meant to enter Louaine, Sends
forces to affront the Prince.
to front him in his passage; he sent his great Captain Robelos and Mondragon,
with some twenty ensigns of footmen Spanish and Wallons, and five Cornets of
horsemen into Tylmount. This Tylmount is within three leagues of Louaine; a
place of no strength, but sufficient to withstand the Princes forces, having an
army hard by to countenance them. For D. d' Alua was encamped within three
leagues. The garrison there annoyeth the Prince.
In the Princes march the garrison of Tylmount annoyed him greatly: so that all
his forces were constrained to stand in battle before Tylmount, until his
reregard and baggage were past. Louaine refuses a Spanish garrison.
Insomuch that Duke d' Alua had the better means to look to Louaine: but
offering them garrison, they refused it; assuring him they would be loyal unto
the King, and him. Duke d' Alua politickely contented himself, fearing by
despair to enforce them to revolt to the Prince. Notwithstanding, he used them
with threatenings, that he would look unto to their doings; assuring them that
he would account them rebels, if they would assist the Prince with any
necessaries. But he doubted not their loyalties in defending the Town.

To be the better assured, he sent diverse of good judgment to assist and
counsel them, as he did to Liege. Himself retired with his army near unto
Brussels; to assure both Brussels and Monts in Henault. The Prince being
encamped under Louaine, found not them so angry as the Priests of Liege. For
Louaine was an University governed by good natured people, and a number of
Nobility (as strangers term all Gentlemen) were allied to the Prince, or to
diverse of his followers. Besides, at that time the people in general hated the
Spanish deadly; in such sort, that for all Duke d' Aluaes instruments (but for
their buttered hearts and flegmatique livers) they would have opened their
gates. The Prince perceiving their peevishness, seeing his Orators could not
prevail to make him enter, he burnt their barriers, and terrified them in such
sort, But yet yield him money and victuals.
that either fear or love made them to give a great piece of money, with much
victuals. Perceiving his fortune that no place would accept him, and that Duke
d' Alua would adventure no battle; The Prince retyreth.
he thought it his best to retire. But politickly he and his instruments
persuaded their army, that the Admiral Chastilion was arrived in the
frontiers of Artois with a mighty army of Frenchmen; His policy to keep his
army from mutiny.
and that they would join with them. They gave out also, that the Queen of
England had sent a great treasure unto the Admiral to pay both their forces.
Hereby they encouraged the Mechanic mercenary Reysters to march; Having
intelligence at Valentia a Town in Henault, near unto the frontiers. He
comes to Valentia.
Being arrived there, the Prince and his army began to take courage, partly
because they knew Duke d' Alua would follow them no further, but chiefly
because they might be presently in France. Auoydeth the danger of his mutinous
soldiers.
And although the army should mutiny, according to their custom, as I said
before, the Prince and his commanders might easily escape and shift for
themselves; who otherwise should be in great danger. For being engaged amongst
their enemies, they might have been delivered by their own soldiers to Duke
d' Alua, either for passage or for money. In this place the Prince finding his
rutters alert, (as the Italians say) with advise of his valiant brother,
Bids d' Alua battle.
he sent his Trumpets to D. d' Alua to tell him: that he would be the next
day four leagues toward him, with fewer in number then himself did lead,
where he would stay his answer and dare him battle. The Duke lay entrenched
within six leagues of the Prince, having with him some twenty thousand. True it
is, his horsemen did not amount to four thousand. But they were Italians,
Wallons, and Albaneses, who in troth were to be valued with thrice as many
Reisters: yea, in my judgment with six times so many, being not accompanied
with such Chiefs as Count Lodowicke. The trumpets being arrived, He hanged one
of the Trumpetters.
D. d' Alua hanged one, and answered the other: Well, Refuses to fight.
tell thy Master, my Master will maintain his army continually; and thy
Master (I am assured) will break his within few days upon wants. Therefore I
have no reason to fight, were I sure to win the battle. And although I know
the valor of my men far surmounting his, yet notwithstanding no battle can
be fought without some losses on both sides. For these causes I will not fight.
Vitelly persuaded him all he could to accept the offer, Vitelly persuadeth to
fight.
and to fight: alleging the danger not to be great, considering the difference
betwixt the men. Alleging also that in defeating the Prince, and leaving his
person dead in the field, their wars would be ended by all reason. For my
part I am of Vitellyes mind; but the wisest and of best judgment will be of
Duke d' Aluaes. For all battles end as pleases the great God. The danger of
the loss of the battle to the Spaniards.
Had Duke d' Alua been defeated, he had not only lost his forces, but all his
Masters countries. The next day the Prince rose from Valentia according to
promise, The Prince marches to the place assigned.
leaving all his baggage and worst disposed soldiers in safety by Valentia.
He marched with all or the most of his horsemen and footmen triumphing with
drums and trumpets toward Duke d' Alua, to the place his trumpets did assign.
Duke d' Alua was also in order of battle, but kept all his footmen in
trenches with his horsemen; saving the guards which were beaten in by the
valiant Count Lodowicke, Count Lodowicke has the vantgard and beats in the
Dukes guards.
who led the vant-guarde with three thousand of the best sort of Reisters. But
the Prince and Manderslo his Marshall, with diverse others, would not march so
fast as Lodowicke, with the battle and rereguard. Wherefore Lodowicke was
forced to retire, being within sight of Duke d' Aluaes trenches; Counsels to
force his tents.
raging with the Prince and the rest, for not marching to force the trenches.
Alleging unto the^, as it was very true, it were better to be defeated in
fighting, then for wants; as they were sure in a short time to be. Being
retired, they resolved to follow their first determination, the sooner the
better; seeing Valentia would do nothing for them. D' Alua follows.
Duke d' Alua having news of their retreit and resolution, rose also, following
them a far off like a fox; in such sort that he would be surely lodged, and
march safely from hazarding battle, by Peronne on the French frontiers.
Vitelly cutteth off straglers.
Vitelly ouertooke diverse baggages and straglers, in such sort, that he put a
number of them to the sword: who were not guarded by reason of their own
negligence, in straggling behind and aside the rereguarde, Is forced to run, by
Lodowicke.
unknown to Count Lodowicke who made the retreit. But so soon as Lodowicke
had knowledge hereof, he returned in such sort, that Vitelly and his
vant-guarde of horsemen were forced to run till he met Duke d' Alua, to his
disgrace; considering his speeches four days before. D' Alua retyreth.
After this the Duke pursued no further, and the Prince and his army entered
France, having no means to content his army but with spoils of the French:
The Prince in France.
which they did not spare (as the Provinces of Champaine and Picardy can
witness) in their retreit to Germany.

THis was the fortune of the poor Prince, for want of means to nourish his
men of war: and will be of all others, The causes of the Princes bad
success.
unless their Chiefes provide in time either money or spoils. To say troth,
the Princes fortune might easily have been judged when he feared to enter
Liege. For all voluntary arms, I mean that are not paid, are gone and
defeated in short time; in case they miss rich spoils at their first entry
into the enemies Countries. In my time I remember four came to ruin with
those fortunes. Besides this, they did some other matters about Zutphen,
Ruremond, and those parts, by means of the Princes brother in law the Count of
Bergues: But it proved to small effect. For always the Masters of the field
command all weak places in a short time. Wherefore (as I said before) a
voluntary army must either be enriched presently with spoils, or else assured
by strong seats. But let the seat be never so strong, the master of the field
will command it in time, unless it be some strong port like Flushing, What
towns are defensible.
Rochell, Callice, Marsillis, Brouage, Graueling: or at the least some frontier
strong place, that a State or Potentate dares not assiege, having no hope to
despair the Governor to deliver it into their enemies hands. For example,
Goorden of Callice being wooed and desired by his Master the French King, to
deliver Callice unto his favorite Espernon; for all his fair words and large
offers he would be Governor still. So likewise S. Luke held Brouage; also
Lamote kept Graueling; making his peace as pleased him with the Spanish King,
and after offending to the highest degree. Wherefore in a troubled estate,
there can be no surety comparable to a strong government.

Duke D'Alua abuses his masters service in not finishing the Cittadle of
Flushing before that of Antwerpe, and in neglecting to place sure garrisons in
the sea ports.
AFter this, the poor Prince remained in Germany (God knows) almost
despairing to do any more good against the Spanish; but that the Almighty
stirred new instruments to maintain his cause, and blinded the Spanish in
their affairs. As I said before, they left the Cittadle of Flushing, being the
only port and key of the Neatherlands unfinished, and ended that of Antwerpe:
All men of war of any judgment may easily conceive, The Duke D'Aluaes error
in not building and fortifying the the Cittadle of Flushing.
had they finished first the Cittadle of Flushing, Zealand had never revolted.
Yea, had they placed some 2000. soldiers in garrison in their ports of Brill,
Medenblike, and Harlem; with some five hundred in the Cittadle of Flushing;
Holland and Frizeland, with the rest of the Province had been sure. For the
Spanish with their infinite Indian treasure, beside the rich Netherlands and
other places, were sure to be master of the field; having none to fear or to
annoy them, but England, Scotland, Germany, and France. England.
Touching England, we had neither reason nor surety to have meddled with their
actions; without being assured of some of their best ports; the mutability of
the people is such. Scotland.
Touching Scotland, I persuade my self they would not have meddled with the^,
in case they had not bin joined with England. France.
Touching France, you saw the Spaniards means so great in those parts, that
his faction was to be compared to the Kings, or any other; and would have been
far greater if the Guyse had lived. Touching Germany, Germany.
their house of Austria compassed the contrary of the best sort in those parts.
Mercenaries.
As for Mercenaries, we know it by good experience, commonly they follow the
best purse; and by that reason the multitude of that Nation and Swizers had
been theirs. Italy.
Touching the state of Italy, either it is his, or dare not offend him. For the
Venecians are no body without Mercenaries; Venice.
The Geneuois are all or the most part at his devotion: Genua.
the great houses of Mantua, The great houses.
Ferrara, Parma, Vrbin, Graftino, with all the rest of any quality of those
stirring spirits, are either his servants or Pensioners. Clergy.
Touching the Clergy, either his love or fear makes Popes and Cardinals as
pleases him. Portugal Portugal.
is his. Touching Denmark, Denmark.
Sweden, Sweden.
The Hauns The Hauns towns.
towns. Poland. Poland.
and such like; they are either mercenaries too far off to annoy them, or the
most of them Mechanics, without Chiefes of any conduct. Being assured (as they
thought) of the Neatherlanders affairs, D'Aluaes pride.
Duke d'Alua made his statue in brass, placed it in the midst of the Castle
of Antwerpe, treading on the Counts of Egmond and Horn; with the Prince of
Orange looking under him for ways to escape. He made also pieces of Arras,
wherein were represented his sieges, battles, and actions of arms in one
piece: his own portraiture standing like the picture of the Sun, with all
the ensigns and Cornets which ever he wanne, placed round about him.

Count Lodowicke surprizeth Mounts in Henault, which is besieged and taken by
Duke d'Alua.
AT this time the French King and they of the religion were at peace, so that
the Admiral Chastilion thought himself assured of the King: but poor Lord,
himself and many others were treacherously handled, as the massacre of Paris
can witness. The massacre of Paris.
At this time Count Lodowicke was in Paris: and finding access to the King by
the Admirals means, Lodowicke craves aid in France.
procured diverse principals of the religion to promise, to succor the Prince
his brother, and him against the Spanish. To whose demands the King agreed
most willingly, by his Machiauell mothers counsel; Obtayneth the Kings
consent.
who never cared what became of any estate or world to come, so she might
serve the present purpose, and maintain her own greatness. Considering her
Machiauell humors, she was much too blame in this; The French humors.
knowing the French disposition, rather then to live long in peace, to fall
into fight one with another. In going with Count Lodowicke she was assured,
that most or all which would go with him, would be of the religion: If they
prospered, Lodowicke promised some frontier towns to the French for the Kings
use; if not, they might be glad to lose so many enemies. By reason of the Kings
and his mothers distembling leave, and master Secretary Walsinghams true and
honest meaning to the cause in general, M Secretary Walsingham.
and to Count Lodowicke in particular, the Count esteemed his affairs in good
estate. Master Secretary then being Ambassador for the Queens Majesty in
Paris, furnished the Count all he could with countenance and crowns; in such
sort, that the Count resolved to depart into the Low Countries: having the
Admirals assurance to second him, if his iourny prospered. But presently there
went with him Mounsieur De la Noue, Mounsieur de Poiet, Mounsieur de Roueres,
Sir William Morgan, Mounsieur Ianlis, Mounsieur de Mouie, with diverse other
French Gentlemen of quality. Lodowicke dispatcheth his instruments to Mounts.
These by the Admirals means were to second him presently with six thousand
footmen, and some four hundred horse, all Frenchmen. Count Lodowicke sent
sundry Gentlemen Netherlanders, some known in Mounts in Henault, some strangers
unknown, appareled like Merchants. Who with their practice and means used the
matter well with diverse of the Religion, which were well known unto them:
Besides a number of Papists honest patriots, who loved the Prince of Orange,
principally because they knew that he and his hated the Spaniards. And although
the Prince were of the religion, his promise was to grant liberty of conscience
being victorious: for which cause he carried many thousand hearts more then he
should have done otherwise. In those days few of the popular were of the
religion, but all in general hated the Spanish deadly. Count Lodowickes
instruments behaved themselves so well, that promise was made unto them; when
they would devise any means, they should be seconded to do the Prince
service, or any of his. This message being declared to the Prince, he returned
the one party presently to their fellows, whom they had left behind them in
the town; giving them charge in the break of morning the third day, to use
the matter so, that the porter should let them out at the Ports of Hauery. That
being out, The stratagem for gaining the town.
they should give the watch some bribe, and shoot off a Piece; appoynting that
he would be in person hard by ready to enter. According to promise, the
parties executed his commandment: acquainting therewith an honest Inne-keeper
of the religion. The Count giving order unto some seven hundred footmen to
march with all speed possible toward Mounts, The surprising of Mounts.
departed with the chiefs named before, accompanied with some four hundred
brave horsemen; all or the most Gentlemen and officers who had commanded
before. The worst of these three, either la Noue, Poiet, or Roueres deserved to
command twenty thousand men. The worthy Count having made a great Caualcadoe
(as they term it) from his last lodging, arrived three hours before day at
the place appointed: After, leaving Mesieurs de Poiet, and Roueres in ambush
within four hundred pases of the port, himself, Mounsieur de la Noue, Sir
William Morgan, and some fifty horsemen approached as near unto the port as
they could be covert. According unto promise the Merchants were let out, and
withal a Piece went off; at which noise the Count and his troop rushed in,
Lodowicke enters the town.
diverse pieces and pettronels going off. The watchmen ran away at the noise,
Mesieurs de Poiet, and Roweres dislodged on the spur, Assembleth the
Magistrates.
and entered also. The Count entering the Marketplace, and there setting his men
in order, caused all the Magistrates to be assembled. Being together he used
these speeches.

Dear Countrymen, my coming is not against you, He speaks to them.
but against the tyrannous Spaniards; who have undone the Prince my brother,
and all his house, and will make you slaves if you do not resolve to prevent
them; which you may if it please you. Join with me, and I assure you, I come
not hither of my self, but am promised by the French King, and other
Potentates to be seconded presently. In the mean time you shall see Lodowicke
and his troops sufficient to answer the fury of Duke d'Alua. Assure your
selves without the aid of mighty strangers, and assurance that my brother the
Prince will march with all speed to our succors with a puissant army, and
these Gentlemen had never engaged our selves upon any land town as this is.
Although we need not to fear, knowing the strength of the place to be
sufficient to withstand any forces that shall present themselves before it,
being manned with a reasonable troop; much more having so many Chiefes as you
see here; naming unto him the great Captains that accompanied him, whose names
were well known unto most of the Burgesses.

His speeches gave great courage unto the Burgesses, who were soon persuaded
to depart peaceably to their houses, and to deliver the keys of their gates to
the Count. Although the people hated the Spanish deadly, they knew not what to
make of this surprise; whereat great murmuring was in corners. The Papists
perplexed.
Some feared Lodowick would alter their mass, which they most esteemed (for
all or the most part were Roman Catholics) others feared Duke d'Aluaes
fury, in such sort, that many presented supplications to the Count, that he
would permit them to depart the town, with their wealth and baggage. Some had
leave; especially such as were known to be obstinately spaniolized; The
spaniolized Mount^is depart with good leau^.
who eased the rest greatly that stayed. For in their houses the Count lodged
diverse of his troops, and were for the most part the wealthiest of the town.
Duke d'Alua bearing this, The King of France his advertisement to Duke D'Alua.
was greatly amazed; although the French King advertised him how all promises
passed in France; and that he had made a draught for his master and himself,
to be quit of a great number of enemies; thinking indeed that Lodowicke and all
his followers should fall into his hands. But the Count himself and his
vigilant followers deceived both King and Duke: who (as you heard) surprised
Mounts suddenly and unlooked for at both their hands. D'Alua distrusteth the
French.
This made Duke d'Alua amazed, thinking the French King doubled with him and
his Master; as King Henry and his Constable Mountmorency did for Mets in
Loraine, with Charles the fifth. Count Lodowickes footmen (named before) being
arrived, and the Count perceiving the murmr of the greatest part of the
townsmen, who were very well armed, strong, and in good order (in such sort
that Duke d'Alua using before all the policy he could, never could place
garrison in this town, by reason of their strong seat well fortified, and
above three thousand men bearing arms; besides as many or more able to carry
arms; all obstinate, mutinous Wallons, wanting neither victuals, artillery,
nor munition) he sought to make his party and himself as strong as he could.
And hearing how Duke d'Alua gathered all the forces he could, with great speed
and preparations to besiege him presently; he acquainted therewith them of the
religion, and such burgesses as he thought assured unto him. After placing his
men in order in the marketplace, Lodo wicke disarmeth such as he distrusted.
and seizing on the best in Mounts, he made proclamation upon pain of death,
that all townsmen should bring their arms into the Towne-house within six
hours, which was obayed with all possible speed. This done, he gave arms unto
some five hundred of the religion, and assured unto him; the rest he fed with
fair words; assuring them on his honor, that neither himself nor any of his
companies should abuse them. But what he did was for the surety of himself
and his company; assuring them, if the siege presented not, to deliver them
their arms again: If it presented, and it pleased the Almighty to favor him,
at the enemies retreit he would leave them as he found them; Conditionally, to
accept a small garrison during the Spanish government. He gives the^ leave
to depart.
As for such (said he) as will not endure my government and orders, let them
come unto me, they shall have free leave to depart with all their goods:
leaving behind them victuals and such necessaries as may pleasure their
besieged friends. They choose to stay, and for what causes.
They seeing their fellows houses who departed before used with havoc, which
happened (as they thought) for want of masters to keep them, and to complain
of their guests abuses: seeing also they could not carry away the one quarter
of their goods; the most part resolved to stay. Desiring the Counts leave to
signify unto their friends in Antwerpe and Brussels, how they were constrained
to stay perforce in the town; meaning by that means to excuse themselves unto
Duke d'Alua, whom they feared above all the world. Every day some of Lodowickes
horsemen ran unto the ports of Brussels, Lodowicks horsemen spoil the Country.
and up and down the Countries as pleased them; spoiling and wasting what they
listed. Often they had great skirmishes, but always they defeated their
enemies with half their numbers, in such sort that d'Aluaes Captains made
ambushes for them, five hundred at a time, and the others would pass through
them being scarce half their numbers. This continued some time: but d'Alua
having gathered his forces, Chiapine Vitelly encloseth Mounts.
dispatched Chiapin Vitelly with the most of his Caualrie, and certain
regiments of footmen; giving him charge to enclose the town in such sort, as
the garrison could not sally forth. Being approached Mounts, Lodowicke sallied,
Lodowicke sallieth, and in what order.
accompanied with the Lord of la Noue, and Poyet, Sir William Morgan, and
diverse other adventurers of good quality, with all his horsemen, and half his
footmen; leaving Mounsieur de Roueres in the town, well accompanied with the
rest. Being past his Counter scarf, he left Mounsieur de la Noue, who gave
order unto five hundred Harquebusiers to hide themselves close in the high
ways, some hundred score from the gates; Poyet and la Noue in ambush.
Poyet and la Noue stood with two squadrons of horses a little before them,
either squadron being of an hundred and fifty; the rest the Count commanded to
go to engage the enemy to skirmish. Mounsieur de Roueres Roueres left in the
town.
caused diverse pieces of artillery to be transported from other Mounts, unto
the Mounts that commanded the field toward the enemy. The enemy advanced
bravely both horse and foot; at which sight Lodowickes Curriers encountered
theirs with sundry Cornets. The first medley.
But they forced the Nassawians to retire, and double their pases toward la
Noue and Poyet. At this sight la Noue advanced, desiring the Count to give
order to Poiet to stand, and the Harquebusiers to keep close, La Noue charge.
telling him; I know the enemy will repulse me, notwithstanding I will charge
with your leave; in my retreit, let the ambush of shot discharge their voles;
then Poyet may charge the better cheap. The Curriers being hard at hand, la
Noue adua^ced, crying to his company, Courage, turn bridle. And withal
charging some 400. Launciers, and Herguleters, gave the^ the retreit into our
squadrons, Retyreth to draw the enemy to the ambush.
which advanced to re-encounter la Noue. At whose sight la None retired,
bringing the enemies full upon the ambush of shot: which gave them such a salve
of Harquebushes, The ambush shows it self. Poiet charge.
that happy was he that retired first. Withal Poyet charged very
courageously, in such sort, that the enemies doubled their pases toward their
battle. Lodowicke retyreth his footmen into the Town.
At whose retreite, the Count wisely retired his footmen into the town, with
his horsemen in good order. In the mean time Mounsieur de Roueres forgot not
to plague them with his artillery. The General of the horsemen and Vitelly
advanced, their battle remained half of horse and foot in arms, until
their quarters were entrenched; The enemies order for entrenchments.
which they did in a short time: For they were furnished with a great number of
pioners, and all necessaries, in such sort, that in less then forty hours
they assured the one half of the town from salying forth. Notwithstanding,
the ports toward Valentia and Hauery were clear. The holding of an Abbey
without the town.
There stood an Abbey or Cloister some half an English mile from the town, on
a little river which ran from the town to the Cloister. The place was not
strong, nor able to abide the Cannon. Nevertheless, it was necessary to be
kept; For what cause.
for betwixt it and the Town there was good store of grass and corn, with
other necessaries to feed horses and cattle: Besides, they were assured the
enemy would attempt this place first. Therefore to win time, it was most
necessary to be kept. Into this Cloister Mounsieur de Poyet desired to go
with some eight hundred Harquebusiers: Although the Count and the rest were
loath to hazard his person. Notwithstanding the other alleging himself to be
but the third person in the town, desired and persuaded them, that half their
footmen should not go to keep any place, without the company of a principal
Chief. To fulfill his desire it was granted him, referring all unto himself:
being entreated not to engage himself further then he might well retire; and
assured that Lodowick and the rest would quite the town and all to follow him,
although they were sure to perish. Mounsieur de Poyet having possessed the place,
Fortifieth the place.
and furnished with about ten days victuals, used all means to strengthen
himself. By this time Vitelly had made the quarters toward Brussels very
strong; Vitelly finisheth his work begun.
in such sort, that two thousand were sufficient to guarde it against ten
thousand. For he made there good forts about a quarter of a league one from
another, with strong trenches that ran from fort to fort, that no horsemen
could sally over them; And their footmen durst not pass those guardes, for
fear of the Counts horsemen. Vitelly dislodged with all his horse and foot,
saving the guards which he left in his forts; and remained in battle betwixt
the ports of Valentia and Hauery, Makes a new fort.
until he erected a large fort like unto the others. Having left two regiments
of footmen in it, he retired with his Caualrie and the rest of his footmen
unto the next Village, some half a league off, leaving near half his troops
in guard, that they might be sure until the arrival of Duke d'Alua: D'Alua
sets forth.
Who began to set out from Brussels with the rest of his army, artillery,
munition and baggage that night, about two hours before day. The town and
cloister having intelligence, sallied out from both quarters some eight hundred
footmen, with all their horsemen; to give a camisado under the conduct of
Mounsieur de Roueres. Being met in one place, Roueres salyeth upon Vitellyes
quarter.
they gave furiously into Vitellies quarter, and forced his guardes into their
place of arms. Mendoza succoureth the quarter.
Mendoza being lodged apart with most of the Caualrie, gathered presently his
horsemen in order, and gave resolutely into Vitellies quarter: which was in
danger to be run through with this Camizado. Roueres order for retreit.
Mounsieur Roueres like a discreet soldier had left one of his best Captains
short of the enemies quarter, with some three hundred of his best shot, and a
hundred and fifty horsemen for his retreit; which saved him and the most of
his troops. Mendoza charged Roueres in such sort, that happy was he who could
return first. Coming unto his ambush, they peppered Mendoza and his horsemen
with a salve of Harquebushes, that turned them back upon the other: At which
instant the hundred and fifty horsemen charged them on their backs. By that
time, Vitelly and the most of his troops were in order; advancing with all
speed toward Roueres. Roueres retyreth.
Notwithstanding Roueres and his brave Captains (especially his Caualerie)
retired with small loss into the Cloister, where Poyet was ready to receive
them in order without; in such sort, that Vitelly pursued no further. At this
Camisado the enemy lost six for one of the Nassawians; by reason Roueres had
forced their guardes before the rest were in arms. The next day toward night
Duke d'Aluaes vantguard was in sight of the Town; but before his rereguard
came to their quarter it was nine of the clock the next morning, by reason
they marched very slowly: and not without reason. For they haled with them two
and twenty pieces of battery, besides some other field pieces, with all the
munition belonging unto them. Duke d'Alua being arrived, Duke D'Alua arriueth.
encamped on the river side betwixt the meadows and the hills, from the ways
toward Valentia down to the Cloister. Along this river he made strong
trenches, Entrencheth himself.
which assured his army toward the fields; toward the town he made large
deep trenches, impossible to be entered. This man would commonly assure
himself with trenches, although the enemies were lodged three days journey
from him. Now before Mounts he entrenched all his quarters, as though he
meant to be besieged; and not without reason, having intelligence how
Mounsieur Ianlis marched for their succors with seven thousand Frenchmen, and
the Prince of Orange making ready a mighty army in Germany. After his
arrival, Battereth the Cloister.
the next day he prepared to beat the Cloister; unto which place he brought
six pieces of Cannon. Mounsieur de Poiet resolved before not to keep the
place, but to win time in forcing them to place the Cannon. This Cloister was
so near the town, that none could encampe betwixt it and the town, by reason
of the towns artillery, and of wet meadow grounds which could not be
entrenched. Payet abides one days battery, and retyreth by night.
Wherefore Mounsieur de Poyet did most bravely abide this whole days battery,
and in the night set the Cloister on fire with a train: and so retired
himself and his troops safely into the town, leaving nothing behind. Within
few days Duke d'Alua began to make his approaches, in such sort that he
assured the town from sallying (saving their secret sallies through the
rampire and bul-workes) before he mounted his pieces to beat the forts and
defenses. The town plagued him greatly with their counter-battery: and besides
they often sallyed, and annoyed them with sundry attempts on their artillery
and trenches. With much ado, after receiving great losses, he made three
platformes. The midst did batter the port of Hauery; Battereth the town.
the two others the flanks and parts of the Curtains on both sides. On these
three platformes he placed two and twenty Cannons, with which, and with his
Culuerins that did beat the defenses, he discharged during his siege above
24000. shot. The fury of the battery.
The fury of all batteries are past at the first, I mean within two days:
yea, commonly in one. For the defendants knowing the place, and the success of
the fury, will re-enforce their breaches and re-entrench themselves in such
sort, that the assailants can do small hurt with their approaches. A breach
made.
The second day they battered: and having made their breach reasonable (as they
thought) they prepared to the assault. Preparation to the assault.
The point fell by lot to the Tertia of Lumbardy, led by the valiant Mounsieur
of the Camp Julian Romero: Julian Romero has the point.
who was seconded by the master of the Camp Don Francisco de Baldesso and his
Tertia de la Ligue; after him the regiments of Wallons, of the Marquess of
Hauery, Count Barlemount, Messieurs de Ligues, and of Capers. So were all the
rest of the army in battle ready to second one another, according to their
direction; with their whole Caualery in order of battle, some quarter of a
league from their trenches. Diverse had leave to dismount themselves, who
accompanied Julian at the point. Preparation of the defendants.
The Count re-entrenched himself overthwart the breach with a half moon.
Himself and some two hundred horsemen stood at the mouth of the great lane
toward the breach; the rest of his horsemen were in three troops, making
Patroiles (rounds we call it) from place to place round about the town. As one
troop came unto him, he sent another out. Mounsieur de la Noue stood with the
armed men in the midst of the half moon. Mounsieur de Poyet stood on the one
quarter of the moon, with half the shot. Mounsieur de Roueres on the other
with the rest. At every corner of the moon they placed diverse pieces of
Ordinance, laden with nails, small bullets, and stones; which flanked the
mouth of tbe breach. Iulians Captains would not give place one to another,
more then the Collonells, but by lot. After knowing who should lead, The
assault.
and the breach discovered saultable, Julian commanded the point to the
assault: which were suffered to enter. But being in the midst of the moon,
they were murdered like dogs; in such sort, that happy was he that could
retire first. Notwithstanding Julian advanced with all courage with his
seconds: but being on the breach, and having discovered their trenches and
works within, The retreit.
he caused his troops to retire, not without loss. For all their small shot
played incessantly upon his troops. At this assault the Spaniards courge was
quailed from assaulting any more. Julian escaped with great danger, Julian
Romerees danger and loss.
having sundry Harquebushes on his arms. His Lieutenant Collonell was slain,
with five of his principal Captains, and the brauest part of his soldiers;
besides many adventurers as well horsemen as footmen, The Counts loss.
which were not of his regiment. The Count escaped not freely, for diverse of
his best men were slain; especially Mounsieur de Roueres shot in the head with
a musket. Roueres slain.
Duke d'Alua perceiving the valor and conduct of Lodowicke and his men,
resolved not to force his breach, D'Alua will no more assault.
but cunningly attempted them often with alarmes and counterfeit assaults; in
such sort that he spoiled many of the defendants with his artillery, in
presenting themselves on the breach.

At this instant Mounsieur Ianlis was marching with The overthrow of Ianlis.
his succors, in number (as I said before) seven thousand French, all
footmen; saving some four hundred horsemen. Being arrived hard by Valentia,
Duke D'Aluaes forces.
Duke d'Alua sent don Frederico with his Martial Chiapine Vitelly, accompanied
with one thousand five hundred horsemen, and four thousand footmen; himself
remained in strong trenches with all the rest in arms, who being all together
were about one and twenty thousand footmen, and three thousand horsemen.
Mounsieur Ianlis, although he was a most gallant soldier, at this re-encounter
showed small discipline: Vitelly having intelligence of his march and order.

Don Frederico being arrived at Saint Gellane, Chiapine Vitellies ambush to
entrap Ianlis.
some two leagues from Mounts, hearing Ianlis was in march, and that he meant
to pass that way within ten hours; Vitelly desired him to leave all his men
in ambush in that place in troops, on both sides of the high ways. Having
finished his orders, His order to train him to it.
he commanded his nephew John Battisto del Mount, Lieutenant general of the
horsemen, to march with five hundred horsemen half Launciers, the rest
Herguleters, giving him in charge to march in three troops softly, until his
Curriers should meet his enemies: then to return one troop after another
without engaging himself to fight, unless the enemy would enforce him; but
to use all means to bring them engaged unto the ambush; then to run with his
troops as though he were afraid, The order put in execution.
aside of the ambush. He was not two leagues from Vitelly, but his Curriers
met the French: who according to their accustomed fury charged the Spanish
Curriers, and they according to their direction retired before them; so did
their second, and Battisto himself with the third; bringing them in his tail
unto the place directed. By this time all or the most of the French horsemen
were arrived, charging Battisto his troops who could first; persuading
themselves all to be theirs. The French fall into the ambush.
Vitelly like a discreet Captain, desired don Frederico to suffer them to
run until they were entered into the ambush of five hundred musketeers, which
stood under a hedge where they must pass; and being entered, to charge them
with half the horsemen, which stood equally divided on both sides of the way.
By that time the French were entered the ambush of Musketeers; and perceiving
the squadrons of Launciers advancing toward them, they began to retire and
to double their pases back; but withal don Frederico charged. John Battisto
being on the other side turned also; so did Vitelly second with the rest; in
such sort, that presently their few horsemen were forced to run through their
own footmen, The disorder of the French march.
which brake in a short time; for they marched far a sunder (as they said)
two leagues from their first troops unto their last Besides, they had no
companies of pikes to make any stand; especially their horsemen being broken.
Mouy escapes.
Mounsieur de Mouie escaped into Mounts by reason of the woodland Countries.
Few returned into France, because the Peasants murdered them in cold blood.
After the overthrow, the greatest part of them were executed. M. Ianlis with
diverse Gentlemen resisted valiantly: but at the last he was mastered, I anlis
prisoner.
and carried prisoner into the Castle of Antwerpe. Executed at Antwerpe.
Where himself and an English Gentleman taken with him, named master John
Winkfield were executed long afterward. Duke d'Alua hearing that the Prince of
Orange was ready to march with ten thousand Reysters, and twelve thousand
Launce-Knights, besides diverse fugitive Netherlanders, commanded his Officers
to strengthen his trenches with all speed, D'Aluaes order against his arrival.
as well toward to town as the field: giving order that all the munition and
victuals that might be gotten should be brought into his Camp, and that his
horsemen should bring in all the forage they could, and spoil the rest. For he
resolved to stay in the field, and at least to amish either the Prince or the
Town; giving charge unto all men not to engage any skirmish or fight, but to
make the town from sallying forth. The Prince arrived with his army mentioned
before, without any let to speak of, until he encamped on the top of the hills
toward Valentia, within half a league of Duke d'Aluaes trenches. At whose
sight the Duke gave straight charge, that none should sally out of his
trenches; giving the Prince leave to encampe quietly without skirmishing. That
night the Prince sent often diverse troops unto the Dukes trenches, thinking to
keep his army in arms; but none seemed to stir, or to take an alarm. The
next morning the Prince sent great troops of horse and foot to procure the
enemy to sally; standing himself with the rest in order of battle in sight
of the town and of Duke d'Alua; Attempt to Duke d'Aluaes trenches.
but none would sally out of the trenches: In such sort, that the Prince
dislodged with his whole forces, resolving to force their trenches, or to lose
not a few of his best men. Being in order of battle near unto Duke d'Alua,
he sent his Martial Manderslo with three thousand Launce-Knights, and three
thousand Reysters; giving them order to charge the trenches with all
resolution. Being approached within musket shot of the Spanish and Wallons, The
Almans forced to retire.
the poor Almans courage began to quail, not without reason; finding better
shot then themselves within the trenches, and their horsemen not serviceable,
upon whom all their glory did rest. Notwithstanding that Manderslo and his
troops began to retire, A second attempt with great loss.
the Lord of Drume the Princes Lieutenant, and Count Holhocke, with diverse
others of quality, accompanied with many troops of horse and foot, marched
resolutely and attempted the trenches against reason. For receiving hot salues
of musketadoes, they were forced to retire. At which attempt the Lord of Drume
was slain, with diverse others of quality, and a great number of their
soldiers both horse and foot.

THe Prince being retired into his Camp, A Camisado on the Princes army by
Julian Romero.
Julian Romero with earnest persuasions procured license of Duke d'Alua, to
hazard a Camisado that night upon the Prince. At midnight Julian sallyed out of
the trenches with a thousand musketeers, and two thousand armed men, most
pikes; all the rest stood in arms in the trenches, their horsemen ready
without the trenches to second Julian, Julian Romeroes order for the Camisado.
principally for his retreite if need were. Julian divided his forces into
three troops. The first two hundred old shot, which could keep their matches
close, led by a desperate Captain named Munchecho. The second one thousand
armed men and shot, led by Julian himself. The third led by his Lieutenant
Collonell and Sergeant Mayor; whom he commanded to stand fast in the midst of
their way betwixt the two Camps for his retreite, and not to stir unless some
of credit came from him to command the contrary. Presently after his
directions, he commanded Muncheco to charge; He charge.
who resolutely forced two guards, being at the least a regiment of Almaines.
Julian seconded with all resolution, in such sort, that he forced all the
guards that he found in his way into the place of arms before the Princes
tent. Here he entered diverse tents; amongst the rest his men killed two of the
Princes secretaries hard by the Princes tent, Only not seizes upon the princes
person.
and the Prince himself escaped very narrowly.

FOr I heard the Prince say often, that as he thought, A dog saves the Prince.
but for a dog he had been taken. The Camisado was given with such resolution,
that the place of arms took no alarm, until their fellows were running in
with the enemies in their tails. Whereupon this dog hearing a great noise,
fell to scratching and crying, and withal leapt on the Princes face, awaking
him being asleep, before any of his men. The princes care of himself.
And albeit the Prince lay in his arms, with a lackey always holding one of
his horse ready bridled; yet at the going out of his tent, with much ado he
recovered his horse before the enemy arrived. He recouereth his bo^se hardly.
Nevertheless one of his Quiries was slain taking horse presently after him;
and diverse of his servants were forced to escape amongst the guards of foot,
which could not recover their horses. For troth, ever since, until the Princes
dying day, he kept one of that dogs race; so did many of his friends and
followers. The most or all of these dogs were white little hounds, with crooked
noses, called Camuses. The Camp being in arms and in some order, made head
toward Julian in such sort, that he commanded the retreit, Julian retireth.
Before he could recover his stand with his Lieutenant, the army began to
charge him in great troops; in such sort, that with much ado he could arrive
with his troops; As hardly bestead.
and for all his good order, he lost many of his men, as well taken as slain.
Having recovered his stand, Yet he saved himself and his roupes.
with the presence of the two thousand horsemen, which came for his retreit,
the Nassawians followed no further.

Without doubt had Duke d' Alua followed Iulians council, Iulians council to
defeat the Princes army.
the Prince had been defeated in that place. Julian advised that all their
horsemen and half their footmen should have been in a stand, where he left
his Lieutenant, and himself with his three thousand to enter the Princes
Camp: that having good success, the stand should have entered also. For my
part I am of Iulians mind; but the wisest sort are of Duke d'Aluaes. Although
Iulians courage assured him victory, The danger of following it.
Duke d' Alua had reason not to hazard his forces in battle; being assured
the Prince would be forced to retire with wants. For if the Prince and his
army had been in arms and in order, it must have sorted to a battle, having
made half his army to run: and perhaps by that means the Prince might have
succored the Town. For without doubt let two armies incampe one hard by
another, the first that discountenanceth his fellow, is in great hope of
victory; The retreite of the Prince of Orange, and his fine stratageme and
speeches to escape from his mutinous army.
or at least by all reasons to make his adversary to retire. This Camisado
quailed the poor Almaines in such sort, that the Prince was glad to use all
the policy he could to retire; thinking the sooner the better, for fear least
his Reisters would grow to their old custom, to cry for gilt, which he had
not. To preuentall mutinies, he caused his officers and many of his best
instruments to give forth, that his brother Count John was arrived with five
hundred Reisters by Ruremount; and with great treasure (sufficient to pay all
his forces for three months) from the Queens Majesty, the King of Denmark,
and the Germane Princes of the religion. His retreit.
His Camp being thoroughly furnished with these speeches, he dislodged the next
day; making all the haste he could to recover the Mase. Withal he aduertized
his brother of his fortune, desiring him to make the best shift for himself
that he could.

The Prince being arrived by Ruremount, having intelligence with diverse towns
in Holland, fed his army with good speeches: assuring them that his brother
Count John was at Serenbarke, with his brother in law the Count of Bergue; and
that he would send for them to make his passage over the Mase, where his
brother Count Lodowick would arrive; whom he looked for daily to come from
Mounts.

After the Princes retreit, Count Lodowickes composition for Mounts.
Count Lodowicke finding no remedy, began to parle; but stood on most
honorable terms. Duke d' alua knowing him to be a most honorable resolute
man, and the town not to be taken by fury, fearing delays would grow to
disadvantage, accepted his parle, agreeng to such conditions as pleased the
Count: In such sort, that Lodowicke and his garrison was to pass over the
river of Mase, He comes to his brother the Prince.
where his brother the Prince was staying for him. Being met, resolution was
taken that Lodowicke should pass into Germany, and the Prince into Holland.
The Prince departs from his army by night.
The Prince fearing the worst, passed the river by night, with a few Gentlemen:
Amongst others Sir William Morgan was one. The Princes sudden departure gave a
great murmuring amongst the Reisters. Notwithstanding, he wrote a letter to his
brother, to assure him that he would content them with all speed possible, and
that his going into Holland was principally to seek means to pay them; giving
to his brother leave and authority to sell all that he had in Germany, rather
then he should be disgraced with false promises. This letter being read
openly gave some contentment unto the army; but principally the person of
Count Lodowick stayed them, whom they much honored and respected, knowing no
fault to be in him.

I forgot to write how Malins accepted a garrison of the Prince, Malins
receives the Princes garrison.
as some of his forces passed by it in going to Mounts; which after wards
retired with the Prince. Duke d'Alua for their reward after the taking of
Mounts, sent his master of the Camp Julian Romero, with his Tertia of Lumbardy
and others, Is sacked by the Duke d' Aluaes appointment.
who entered the town, and sacked it to the uttermost.

THe beginning and ending of this siege was most honorable, although
unfortunate. Sometimes great Captains wrong themselves. Had the Count left
either Mounsieur de la Noue, Lodowickes error.
or Mounsieur de Roueres, or Mounsieur de Poyet governor in Mounts. and
retired himself with the other to prepare their succors, by all reason it had
been far beter. For the least of the three had been sufficient to command
the town, and the two others would have stood the succors in good stead: I
mean the Prince and Mounsieur Ianlis. The only way for the Prince had been to
have encamped before Brussels, The Princes error.
which was a weak rich town, unfortified; where he must have forced Duke
d'Alua either to leave his siege to fight with him, or else to lose the town:
and not to attempt treanches which wanted no defense that could be desired.
Touching Mounsieur Ianlis, the world may judge there might have been better
order at his defeat.

The revolt of Flushing, the brave resolution of Vorst the Seaman; and of the
Baily, Mounsieur de Barland, in seizing on the Town, and in executing Signiour
Pacheco.
DVring the siege of Mounts, one Seigniour Pacheco came from Duke d'Alua,
Pacheco appointed Governor of Flushing.
with a Commission to be Governor of Flushing and of the Ramkins. Pacheco had
also authority to execute diverse of the Inhabitants in Flushing, principally
the Baily Mounsieur de Berland, and Vorst the famous Seaman. At this instant
they began the Cittadle of Flushing. The Cittadle begun.
Pacheco being let in with some of his fellows, and the restat the gates;
having intelligence with Mounsieur de Beauoir Governor of Middleburgh, thought
within three days to have placed a garrison of Spaniards and Wallons in
Flushing, A garrison to be brought in.
and then to have finished the rest of his purposes at pleasure. Vorst began
to mistrust the matter: Whereupon he went to Mounsieur de Berland, telling him
resolutely that he would not stand to the Spanish government, nor trust to
their courtesies. Mounsieur de Berland began to lean to his opinion and to
apprehend some fear; because he had received diverse letters from his friends
in Brabant, that Pacheco would come to be governor of Flushing, and that Duke
d'Alua was informed of some matters against Barland, Barland.
and the said Vorst, with diverse others. Hereupon Mounsieur de Barland and
Vorst resolved to lay hands on Pacheco, Conspire against the Spaniards.
and to seize upon the town. Being respected, and greatly beloved of the
popular, they made diverse acquainted with Duke d' Aluaes practices; and how
Pacheco was the man that should execute his determination. Presently they gave
order to make good watch at the water-port, to prevent the entry of the
Spaniards; who were hard by it with their arms in their hands, ready to enter.
Withal they assembled all the Magistrates and Burgesses into their
Towne-house: whether they sent for Pacheco, making him believe they would obey
all his directions, conditionally that he would show them his authority.
Pacheco being arrived amongst them, Mounsieur de Barland asked him for his
Commission. Pacheco showed it. Withal Vorst laid hands on him, Seize upon him.
saying, Shellum Spaniard, thou have more directions then these. Pacheco
striving with Vorst, Vorst and his companions threw him down, giving him and
his followers store of good blows. Rifling Pacheco, they found about him all
his directions; whereby diverse of them were to be executed. Presently they
carried Seignior Pacheco to the gallows; Hang him with Duke D' Aluaes
Commssion about his neck.
where they hung Duke d' Aluaes Scutchion, at which they hanged Pacheco, with
his Commission about his neck; although Pacheco offered them assurance of
ten thousand Ducats to have his head struck off. And 25. of his followers.
They hanged also some five and twenty of his followers; beating them with
stones and cudgels all the way as they passed to the gallows. Mounsieur de
Beauoir arrived at the gates toward Middleburgh with some four hundred
Wallons, within two hours after the executing of Pacheco. The Flushingers
resolved to resist his entry. Beauoir retired to Middleburgh
Beauoir being a white-liuered soldier retired into Middleburgh.

Without doubt had he showed any valor, Beauoir want of resolution. Flushing
unfortified.
he might have entered. For at that instant Flushing was nothing fortified to
speak of, saving toward the water; The rest was a low green rampire,
without Flanks, Parepet, or Ditch (but such as men of any resolution might
have entered) or any pieces mounted toward the land; unless it were some
paultry rusty old Clinkes, which a man would as readily choose in a manner to
stand before, as behind, at their going off. Presently the Flushingers fell to
working night and day on their rampire; The Burgesses fortify.
and drew diverse pieces of Ordinance out of their ships, and mounted them
thereon. They dispatched also letters into England and France for succors, with
a few crowns. Flushing was in those days (God knows) a poor beggarly Town
of Fishing, in respect of that it is now: without Town, fort, fortress, or
Village to friend in all that Country.

As God would, there were diverse followers of the Prince of Orange, Succors
into Flushing.
and of his brother Count Lodowicke. Some were Seamen, named by the enemies
Freebotters; but some of them were resolute gallant Gentlemen: namely Mounsieur
de Lambres, de Skonuall, Batelentia Ruchable, etc. These were Sea-Captaines,
rouing out of their Countries where fortune served them best, in the Prince of
Oranges name. There were also diverse Wallons and Flemmings which kept the
woods of Flaunders, not knowing how to escape; namely the Captains Barnard,
Ely, Ambrose Duke, and others. Hearing of the revolt of Flushing, they marched
directly thither; and at a place named Meerchauen they made a strong trench: In
which place they remained not three days hut the Flushingers sent their boats
to fetch them. The Captains Barnard, Ely, and Ambrose Duke being entered
Flushing, Wallons and Flemmings 400.
with some four hundred Wallons and Flemmings well armed, did something assure
the town. Some of these had good understanding in the wars: principally in
fortificatio^, they did help the townsmen greatly; in such sort that they
mounted their pieces in good order, and mended their fortifications.

Captain Thomas Morgan comes to Flushing, which was the first English band
that served the Neatherders against the Spanish King.
AT this time there was a fair muster of Londoners before the Queens Majesty
at Greenewich. A muster before the Queen at Greenewich.
Amongst the Londoners were diverse Captains and soldiers, who had served some
in Scotland, some in Ireland, others in France. And having nothing to do, with
the countenance of some great men who favored the cause, and the small helps
of the deputies of Flushing, Captain Thomas Morgan levied a fair company of
three hundred strong; amongst whom were diverse Officers which had commanded
before, with many Gentlemen, at the least above one hundred, amongst which my
self was one. This band was the first that served the Neatherlanders; I mean
since Duke d'Alua came to be Governor and Captain general of the
Neatherlands. Duke d'Alua sends forces against Flushing.
Captain Morgan and his Company arrived in good time: For at his arrival
Flushing was in distress. For Duke d'Alua had sent forces of Wallones and
Spaniards under the conduct of Don Ruffello, to second Mounsieur de Beauoir;
who had command to entrench themselves on the Dike toward the Rampkins. Had
they done it, the town could not have cut the ditch, as they did afterward;
and Duke d'Alua was to second them with all his whole forces. He pauseth upon
the arrival of the English.
But hearing how the English were arrived in greater numbers then we were
indeed, Duke d'Alua staid, to march in good order, and with great means: For
he wanted a number of sea provisions. Also Beauoir and Ruffello hearing of our
arrival, made no haste to march. In the mean time there arrived from Rochell
three fair Companies, led by the Captains Henry, Tristan and Vtiran: of
which one was levied for Mounsieur de Saras, who was appointed Governor of
Flushing by letters from the Prince of Orange. These troops being arrived,
we thought our selves assured in the town. Beauoirs and Ruffelloes faintnes.
Belike Duke d' Alua was offended with Beauoir and Ruffello, not without
reason; For no two Captains could do their General worle service then they
did. For without doubt they might have lodged on the ditch before the arrival
of Captain Morgan; besides the cowardliness of Beauoir, for not forcing the
town when Pacheco arrived. They endeavor to amend their faults.
Perceiving Duke d' Alua to be in choler, they (to repair their fault)
resolved to attempt the ditch. And to do it the better, they thought good to
mount certain Culuerings on a forced hill (I mean made with men's hands) which
stood By attempting the dike.
some half a mile from the town, betwixt the way of Middleburgh and the dike;
I mean the fourth dike from Flushing to Middleburgh. Beauoir kept some 200
Wallones in a strong house, half way betwixt Middleburgh and Flushing. This
place was guardable without battery. Into this place Beauoir and Ruffello
brought their forces, which might be some 2500 Spaniards and Wallones. They lay
in ambush.
Out of that place they advanced at midnight; leaving their great troop hidden
out of the highway, within a quarter of a mile of the said hill. At the break
of day, they sent some 100 shot toward the hill. The garrison perceiving their
meaning, sailed with about 700. English French and Wallones; who were desired
and commanded by Saras to dig down the hill. The garrison fallieth.
According to direction the garrison advanced; and being approached, the enemy
retired. Our men being at work, the enemy advanced some 400 shot, which
entered into hot skirmish. Ours followed them so fast, that their ambush was
feign to discover themselves for their safeguard; Beats back the shot of the
Spaniards.
at whose sight ours retired in good order, by reason half our men made a
stand, for the retreit of those which charged. After this skirmish, Saras
discovering the number of enemies, retired the garrison into the town; not
without reason. For he thought he marched to besiege us; and knew no other,
but that the most of their army might be at Middleburgh or there abouts. Our
men so behaved themselves at this skirmish, that the enemy lost three for one;
The loss of the Spaniard.
notwithstanding the enemy tarried in the place, and after dinner made as
though they would take the hill. The morning skirmish liked our Captains so
well, Another sally to dislodge the enemy.
as they desired the Governors leave to sally. Which earnest request was
granted, upon condition, not to engage themselves too far. Whereupon the
Governor and the Captains mounted on the Rampire, to direct their fight.
Having resolved, Captain Morgan and our Englishmen had the vantguard. The
English have the vantguard.
To make the skirmish the more honorable, we sallied with our Ensigns; the
Frenchmen were to second us; the Wallones and Flemmings last; The whole were
in number some 800. Captain Morgan being arrived within a great musket shot
from the enemy, Captain Morgans order for the skirmish.
made a stand, and advanced his shot forwards: giving them commandment to
stand also, until he commanded them, or the enemy forced them. He placed his
armed men on both sides of the bridge, leaving a ditch betwixt them and the
enemy: and stood himself with a troop of gentlemen on the Causway before the
bridge. The two troops of Frenchmen and Wallons placed themselves in
meadows, on both sides of the causeway; leaving their few armed men right
against Captain Morgan. They placed their shot in ditches, a little before
their armed men; saving some 100. whom they directed to enter into skirmish
when the English began. Our order was scarce directed, but the enemy charged
our men very hotly; The enemy charge the English very hotly.
in such sort, that all or the most part of both parties shot were by the
ears. Who acquit themselves valiantly. The retire.
Notwithstanding that theirs were twice so many, ours quit themselves very
valiantly; until a great squadron of their armed men advanced, which forced
our English shot to retire: by reason that most of the English shot skirmished
on the causeway, and hard by it on both sides, where the enemies could join
with them. Captain Morgan at the push of the pike.
At this sight Captain Morgan and his armed men advanced resolutely to the
push of the pike: and so did the French and Wallones shot flank amongst them
their vollies, The enemy retireth.
that they plagued them greatly; in such sort that the enemy advanced no
further. To say t^oth, they could not join with ours, by reason ours kept the
ditches and bridge. Perceiving they could not force our quarter, the enemy
retired; but stood fast, within a great musket shot of the place. Saras
perceiving the enemies mind, thinking they would charge again, and fearing
we had lost more then we did, sent unto ours to retire; which they did with
good order into the town, with small loss in respect of the skirmish; which
endured very hot and almost the space of two hours; In which time our men came
twice to the push of the pike. Once the enemy had hold on Captain Morgans
Ancient; Captain Morgans ensign rescued.
which was rescued bravely by George Brown and diverse other young gentlemen.
Master Mackwilliams, Bostock, The loss of the garrison.
with other gentlemen were slain, with some fifty English soldiers: and as
many or more hurt of the French and Wallones. So they killed and hurt some 100.
of which were many gentlemen and officers. Some prisoners were taken on both
sides. By the enemies own confession they had slain and hurt above 400. The
enemies loss.
whereof some were of good account.

The surprise of the Brill in Holland, by Mounsieur de Lumay Count de la Mark.
AT this instant Mounsieur de Lumay otherwise called the Count De la Mark,
being on the coast of England with the Prince of Oranges directions, finding
the Seamen named before; I mean Lambert, Batelentia, Rouchable, and Skonall;
they made a party betwixt them to take the Brill in Holland. Count Dela Mark
attempteth the Brill.
True it is, the Prince of Orange had intelligence with most towns in Holland;
but not with the Brill, that ever I could learn. At this time there were but
few Spaniards in Holland; in the Brill some hundred; in diverse other places so
many or fewer. Hereupon this Count de la Mark and these Captains gathered
into some eight sails (the most Fly-boats) seven hundred Wallons, Dutch, some
English and Scots; all Mariners. Landeth his men.
Arriving at the Brill, they landed; having Drums, Trumpets, and Ensigns
with them, sufficient to have furnished thrice their numbers. At their sight,
the simple Spanish Governor thought himself betrayed; judging that these
troops would never have come thither without intelligence with the townsmen.
The Spanish countenance,
The rest of the Spanish made proud faces, as though they meant to abide their
fury and siege: Notwithstanding, they signified a fear unto the Burgesses, in
sending their baggage and women toward Roterdam. The Count and his Captains
approached with courage; and withal landed three Pieces out of their ships,
with straw, pitch, and wood. He approached the gate, The Count fiercth the gate.
and put the same soon on fire. In the mean time the Spaniards escaped
toward Reterdam. Thus was the Brill won without blows; The town entered.
in such sort, that all Holland revolted, saving Amsterdam: but diverse towns
would accept no garrison. The Princes courtesy to the Hollanders.
Notwithstanding, the Prince politickely wrote unto the Count, to use them
withal courtesy agreeing with their humors; suffering them to do what they
listed, as well for religion as for government; whereby he gained all their
hearts. For at that instant the most of the popular were Papists. The Counts
disorder.
The Count De la Mark had almost marred all with his government. For albeit
he was valiant and liberal, yet was he lascivious, wilful and obstinate; in
such sort, that he would enjoy and wench or woman that pleased him. Toward
women.
Also he called an Abbot and his Friars into a Chamber, Toward the Papists.
where he forced them to deny their Mass and to preach against it, in case
they would not be hanged. Besides these, he committed many other disorders: So
as his insolency had almost thrust the Prince and his faction out of Holland.

The Flushingers grow in jealousy against Saras their Governor, offering his
place unto Captain Morgan; who refused it for love he bare unto Saras:
otherwise he had small reason in doing it.
THe French, Wallons and Dutch which were in Flushing, had been for the most
part in the wars before: and diverse of the basest sort would take any thing
they could carry away, and lived at far greater charges to the Burgesses then
the English did. For indeed the English at that time were raw, The civil
behavior of the English.
and looked for no more then bare victuals, lodging, and promise of pay.
Hereupon the Burgesses grew in great liking with our Nation: Insomuch that for
a small suspect, they would have made Capt. The Flushingers affection toward
them.
Morgan their Governor, and have cashered Saras; having no occasion, but that
he had a brother that dwelt amongst the enemies, whom the enemies forced to
write unto the Governor, to persuade him, They suspect Saras, and would make
Captain Morgan Governor.
to run a course on their sides. Without doubt, Saras was honest unto the
cause: For his brothers message and letters came no sooner unto him, but he
showed them unto his Captains and the principal Burgesses. Also this was he
that commanded afterward chiefly in Harlem. Captain Morgan, finding this man
honest unto him, friended him also unto the popular; refused their offer, and
maintained Saras what he could in his place. Who maintains Saras.
Notwithstanding, few men of war would have done it, unless a man had been
greatly beholding unto him; I mean far more then he was to Saras;
considering what a rich strong government Flushing was. To say troth, Is not
ambitious.
this Captain had never any great ambition in him; although fortune presented
fair unto him often, beside this time. Also immediately he wrote letters into
England, which showed the strength and goodness of the place. Sir Humphrey
Gilbert the first English Colonel in the Low Countries.
Withal he procured Sir Humphrey Gilbert to come over, to be Colonel over
the English soldiers: which he might have easily obtained himself. Hereupon
Sir Humphrey contracted with the Flushingers, to come unto them with one
thousand five hundred English; besides those who were with them before. In the
mean time, the Count De la Mark assured the most part of Holland.

Roterdam surprised by the Count of Bossue, by the mere simplicity of the
Burgesses; where the Count shows great cruelty upon the poor people: which
was the occasion that all or the most of the Towns in Holand received either
Garrisons or Governors; principally Dort, which was resolved before to the
contrary. But after this cruelty, they suffered themselves easily to be
surprised by the Count De la Mark.
ROterdam being without garrison, the Count Bossue Count Bossue toward
Roterdam.
approached it with some troops of Spaniards and Wallons from Vtricke. Being
arrived within a quarter of a league, he placed his troops in ambush, Lies in
ambush.
at a little Castle in a small wood on the river side toward Dordrecht;
leaving with them his Lieutenant governor, and giving him charge at the
shooting of Pieces to dislodge with all speed toward the town. The Count
being Governor of Holland and off Vtricke came to the gates, Comes to the
gates.
with some two hundred Wallons and Flemmings; and leaving them within ten
score of the port, went himself unto the port with some ten or twelve
Gentlemen, offering to enter. They shut the wicket against them. Is refused.
He showed them, bow he was their Governor and Countryman; advised them not
to deal so, and to look unto themselves; else he would make them know him:
Desiteth to speak^ with the Burgomasters.
Withal he desired some of the Burgesses to go fetch the Burgomasters unto
the port, that he might speak with them. In this T^^^e there was no garrison,
but Burgesses; poor men of war, as you may judge by their government. The
Burgomasters being arrived, the Count used fine speeches to persuade them to
let him enter with those men, to save them from the Heretics, as he termed
the Prince of Oranges faction. (...) answer.
They answered, that they durst do nothing without the consent of their
Burgesses in general; and that they would assemble themselves presently in
their Towne-house, and use their best means to persuade them to follow his
directions; promising to return presently unto him. Being departed, this
Count, who was a good soldier and of good understanding, knew the multitude
would cry against the Spanish: wherefore he thought the sooner he began his
play, the better. And first he did deliver some pieces of gould unto the
Guarde; The Count shareth the Guarde with wine.
desiring them to fetch him good store of Wine and Beer: the which was
brought, presently. He and his company began to carowse one with another,
and with the Guarde; in such sort that they opened the little Wicket to speak
with the Count. They open the wicket.
Being armed under his Coat, and valiant, he gave signal unto his troops,
He rusheth in.
and therewith rushed in with some five or six Gentlemen, giving blows of
Pistols and Swords on the poor Guarde; In such sort, that his two hundred
entered, Seizes the port.
and kept the port until the ambush named before entered. Takes the
Marketplace.
Then he marched unto the Marketplace, executing all he could find in his
way; thence through the town as pleased him: where he slew a great number,
Sacketh the Town.
and sacked what he listed. In this sort (God knows) he soon mastered the
town. The Prince of Orange hearing this, The Prince persuades other towns to
garrisons.
acquainted many of his friends with this action of Count Bossue; showing, that
he knew he would do the like in other places, unless good guardes were kept;
which could never be without some garrison, or at the least Governors that
understood the wars. In those days the names of Soldiers were odious unto
them. Notwithstanding, they feared the Spaniards so much, that rather then to
accompany with them, they would accept Devils. Whereupon diverse agreed to
accept garrisons: and the most of all to receive Governors, They accept them.
except Dort. But finally the Prince so used the matter with them, that all
were content that Dort should be surprised; but not with murder and sack, as
the Spanish did at Roterdam. After this resolution, the Prince wrote unto the
Count of Mark, and his Captains, to do the best they could to surprise Dort.
The Prince promises reformation of Count De la Mark.
Withal he wrote unto him, both to desire and to command him, to use the
Burgesses with all courtesy; assuring them of Holland, to redress all the
Counts abuses at their next meeting, which should be before long; sending them
the Copy of his letters to the Count. In the mean time he undertook the
Count should leave his insolency, and be guided by the Princes directions. The
Count made ready a great number of skutes, having placed some thousand
Soldiers among them, with a great number of Trumpets and Ensigns; leaving the
Brill notwithstanding in good order of defense: for his victory increased his
forces. The Count takes Strinland.
He took Strineland, right against Dort. The next morning before day he
landed his men at the head, before the fair, strong and rich Town of Dort,
Enters Dort.
invincible without famine or treason; having in it a garrison and munition,
with a good Governor. This fortunate wilful Count with his shows and looks
entered the town without blows. By this time the Counts deputies had sent him
three English companies, Three more English companies.
under the conduct of the Captains Moris, Drise, and Read.

The arrival of Sir Humfrey Gilbert: which was the first Regiment of
Englishmen that served the Neatherlanders against the Spanish King; with our
follies before Bruges and Sluice.
ALSO Collonell Gilbert arrived at Flushing with ten English bands: Collonell
Gilbert at Flushing.
at whose arrival Flushing was most assured. Hearing that the town of Mounts
was in great distress, and of the Prince of Oranges retreit, with his
success; Saras and Collonell Gilbert devised their best means to relieve
Count Lodowicke; Having a little intelligence with some Burgesses of Bruges.
Saras Saras and he entered Flanders.
and Sir Humfrey resolved to enter Flanders: And so leaving a good garrison in
Flushing, they landed at New-hauen, right against Flushing, some 1400
Englishmen, 400 Wallones and Flemmings, with some 600 brave Frenchmen, newly
arrived from Rochell under the conduct of the Captains, With 2400 men.
Lariuere, Gentane and others. Presently we took our march toward Sluice: and
being arrived at a village called Ardenburgh, we resolved there to stay; both
to prove if we could do any good on Sluice, and to have further intelligence
from Bruges. This place was a league from Sluice, and three leagues from Bruges.
They attempt Sluice with ambush.
The next night Saras and Sir Humfrey sent some eight hundred English, French
and Wallones; giving them charge to keep themselves close as near Sluice as
they could, until they heard further from them. Before day we placed our
ambush near the ports, in such sort, that at the opening of the gates (had our
men known the wars then as diverse of them did since) we might have easily
entered the town. Knew not how to take the advantage.
To say troth, those that sent us were as ignorant as our selves: In such sort,
that we did no more than we were commanded, which was to ly close.
Notwithstanding diverse people came amongst us; some we took, and some we
suffered to go back again. The enemy having discovered our numbers and
lodging, The garrison sallieth.
sallied some 200 shot, where we fell to hot skirmish. But all we were lodged
in three places, not able to succor one another suddenly. Nevertheless, half
our troops charging them resolutely, Is beaten into the town.
forced them to run one after another into the ports. At this alarm, Saras and
Sir Humfrey hearing the artillery going off, marched with the rest. Being
arrived, the Governor like an old soldier, politickly to win time to
advertise Duke d' Alua, held Sir Humfrey and Saras in a parley: The Governor
ouerreacheth the chiefs of the Flushingers.
as though he meant to deliver both town and castle unto them. Withal he
requested them to retire unto their lodgings, where they were before; or else
to lodge nearer where pleased them. Hereupon they retired to Ardenburgh,
Dallieth with them.
leaving their first troops in a village hard by the town. The next day our
Governors were desirous to have the Captain of Sluice his resolution; Who
seeing he could not defer them longer, requested them to take patience that
day, and the next morning he would keep promise with them. The next morning,
They approach the town.
ours marched with great glory to receive the town, as we thought. Being
hard by the port, He plagueth them with his ordinance.
the Governor welcomed us with a good volley of shot; making us to retire
faster than we came; by discharging their artillery against us. Having
received some loss, Saras and Sir Humphrey retired into Ardenburgh,
Aduertiseth Duke d' Alua with his purpose.
to their grief. With this stratageme the Governor of Sluice wan four days;
in which time he advertised his General of our meaning: who sent the Count of
Reux with certain horsemen into Bruges, He strengthens Bruges.
and a good troop of footmen marching after him. Notwithstanding, Saras and
Sir Humfrey dislodged with our forces, and marched unto Bruges. At the break
of day, They summon Bruges.
Sir Humfrey sent his trumpet to summon the town. The trumpeters horse was
killed with a shot from the Rampire: and they made answer vtto diverse gentlemen,
who were approached near the walls, that the Count de Reux desired all our
troops to stay where we were; assuring us, either within four and twenty
hours the Count would deliver us the town, Count de Reux answer.
or find means to hang us all, at the least our confederates in the town.
Sir Humfrey in a chafe.
Sir Humfrey was in great choler; swearing diverse oaths, that he would put
all to the sword, unless they would yield. After staying some six or eight
hours, Saras understanding the wars better then Sir Humfrey, The Flushingers
retire.
persuaded him to retire: withal assuring him, unless he would do it
quickly and in good order, he and his troops would repent it. For the
peasants advertised him, there were diverse troops of horsemen entered the
town, and a great number of footmen marched toward it, which would arrive
within four hours. Being in a march, we doubled our pases in such sort,
that we recovered Ardenburgh that night. Come to Ardenburgh.
To say troth, the Count Reux was either a white liuered soldier, or an
ignorant Captain; else he and his horsemen might have slain a great number
of our men; our march was so disorderly. Insomuch, as had the Count been a
brave Captain, with three hundred horsemen he might have defeated our
troops. After our retreit, the Count executed many Burgesses, who had
intelligence with us. He executes the Burgesses. The Flushingers stand at
Ardenburgh.
Saras being arrived at Ardenburgh, we resolved to remain there certain
days. This place was such, that it might have been kept against double our
numbers. Besides, betwixt us and Flushing we had meadows and wood-land
countries: In such wise, that horsemen could not hurt us marching in any good
order. Hear of a conuoy.
Resting in Ardenburgh two days, we had intelligence that there was marching
from Gaunt to Bruges sixteen pieces of artillery, with some munition, conducted
with one of the Counts Captains like himself. Send to surprise it a certain
number of soldiers.
Whereupon Saras and Sir Humfrey sent 300 English, French and Wallones, of the
best sort; giving the charge unto Rowland York, Lieutenant to Captain Morgan,
and unto Tristan, and Ambrose Duke, over the French and Wallones. Having
received direction, we marched four leagues off; Who laid an ambush.
and placed our ambush by the break of day, in the high way, where the conuoy
was to pass. We had not stayed eight hours, but we might discover the
conuoy, which marched as follows. The order of conuoy.
Before, they had some fifty horsemen; behind, as many, with a good band of
footmen, Wallones; the artillery and munition in the midst. At their sight
commandment was given unto us, to lie very close, until they were entered our
ambush; which was on both sides of a great way, that passed through a small
grove of wood. We had gotten some twenty or thirty iades or mares, which we
trimmed up with old saddles, cushings and halters, that we got in Boores
houses as we passed. Those we placed behind the ambush; who had commandment
to lie close, until the ambush discharged their volley: then to charge with
all resolution. These iades were in the charge of Ambrose Duke the Wallone, an
expert soldier; who had seen service on horseback often before. It enters
the ambush.
The conuoy being entered the ambush, our volley went off in good order; Which
breaks upon it.
in such sort that their first fifty horsemen ran on their foootmen Withal,
Ambrose Duke charged with the mares and iades: So did our footmen enter the
highways against theirs; And defeateth the Spaniards.
in such sort, that their horsemen ran away, leaving their footmen and conuoy
to be executed by us: which were for the most part, with small loss, or none
at all to our selves. Out of this place we arrived at Ardenburgh the next day,
Conueying away the munition.
with all the artillery and munition, in like order as we found them. By a
bridge we staid, and took a great number of boats laden with wolsackes and
merchandise, which we returned all into our quarter. To say troth, these three
leaders named before, were the minions at all attempts of our troops in those
days. The Flushingers retire to Flushing.
The next day after our arrival at Ardenburgh, intelligence was brought, that
Mounts was delivered, and Mallins taken and sacked; and that Julian Romero was
marching into Flanders to as sist the Count of Reux, with 20 ensigns of
footmen and some cornets of horsemen. This news made us not to take counsel
twice for our retrait. Whereupon we marched with all speed toward Flushing.

Our first offer to assiege Tergoose, with our sudden retr^it.
BEing arrived right against Flushing at Newhauen, we made stand; They resolve
to assiege Tergoose.
where Saras and Sir Humfrey took resolution to assiege Tergoose; which stands
in an Island of Leland, bordering on Brabant, and Flanders. Our shipping being
arrived from Flushing, we embarked and arrived the next day at night, by
Beereland, a village of the said Island. After, anchoring and giving directions,
Rowland York, Vtran, Land their men
and Ambrose Duke, landed with their accustomed troops or more; albeit diverse
were slain at the exploit of Sluice and the conuoy. The brauest youths desired
to go always with the first; in such sort, that these were always well
accompanied. Being landed upon the ditch which inuirons the Island, the enemy
perceiving (as it is like) our navy long before we anchored, sallied the most
of the soldiers out of the town; The Tergoosians in ambush.
and placed themselves in ambush, in a village hard by the place we landed at,
through which we must pass to go to the town. After Saras and Sir Humfrey
were landed, the vantguard was given to Captain Morgan: and commandment to
York, Vtran, and Ambrose Duke, to enter the village. The enemies having with
them their Governor, a brave Captain, Pacheco Governor of Tergoose. The
ambush breaks upon the English.
named Pedro Pacheco, kept themselves close in the village, until York and we
entered the ambush. Then they delivered a hot volley of shot upon us, and
withal charged with some 100 pikes; in such sort, that with much ado the one
half of our troops could recover the place where Captain Morgan stood with
our seconds. True it is, the enemy stood in the village round about the way
where we marched, and received us at the entry of some 100 of ours into the
village, out of the narrow way where we passed, Forced to retire.
and could not march about five in a rank; wherefore they found us good cheap.
Our retrait was so fast, that the enemy followed us upon the heels, into the
troops which Captain Morgan led: who charged them resolutely with his armed
men, in such sort, Captain Morgan charge them.
that the enemies ran back. But wisely he had placed half his men in the
village, for his retreit; who delivered their volley on Captain Morgan; They
retire.
In such sort, that he stayed for Saras and Sir Humfrey, who were not within a
mile, by reason they stood at the first alarm, and not without marvel: For I
persuade my self, the most of them were afraid. I am to blame to judge their
minds; but let me speak troth. I do assure you, it was not without reason;
The loss of the English.
for the most of us who entered with York were slain: such as escaped, swam,
and struggled thorough muddy ditches. Amongst other gentlemen, Edward Argoll
was slain by Sir Humfrey his standard. The enemy recovered their town; and all
our troops entered Barland, some two hours after their retreit. The
Flushingers enter Barland.
The next morning we dislodged toward Tergoose. Before Tergoose
Our vantguard being arrived within half a mile of the town, we made a
stand, until the rest arrived. In the mean time, The enemy sallieth.
the enemies sallied, and gave suriously into our guards; forced our first
guards to run amongst our battles of pikes: which stood in a large place, by
the house of the Count Egmond, having a a bridge betwixt them and the enemy.
Notwithstanding, Captain Morgan with his brave shot entered an orchard, and
flanked the enemy which stood on the high ditch, beating on our pikes with
volleyes of shot. Withal, Sir Humfrey and his armed men passed the bridge, and
charged the enemy with great resolution; In such sort, Is repulsed.
that the enemy fell to running. Notwithstanding, our men executed a great
number; and amongst others, three Spanish Captains, with diverse other
officers. We lost also diverse of our men. You must think that in those days
few of us, or of the enemy, knew the wars so well as since. The order of
Pacheco.
For this Pacheco and his men quited Ziricksea, some seven days before; as a
place not guardable. Also being Governor of a town, he was to blame to sally
with his garrison so far as Barland, especially himself: for without doubt,
had Saras and Sir Humfrey known of his being there with most of his troops,
and therewith given a right direction, it had cost him his town, besides his
defeat. Sir Humfrey should have directed at least half his troops, Sir
Humfrey Gilberts order.
to cut betwixt them and the town, at the first allarum. Some may say
perhaps, there were no ways, or he knew of none. There were other ways,
although not so near. Besides, a Co^mander that enters the enemies countries,
ought to know the places that he does attempt: If not, he ought to be furnished
with guides; especially in coming to besiege a town. But we were so ignorant,
that we knew not our own estate; much less the enemies. For the next day
after our arrival and skirmish, we marched to imbarke our troops; The
Flushingers retire to their ships.
alleging we wanted artillery and munition, with all other necessaries that
belonged to a siege. Before our imbarking, the old soldiers Captain Gentoine
and Henry the Frenchman used a fine stratageme. They requested Saras and Sir
Humphrey to cause all their ensigns to imbarke, The ambush by the French
Captains.
with the baggage, and a good number of soldiers; and to leave in a Church,
and in a Churchyard, and in a great Close adjoining, the most of their ablest
men: and they to keep close that day, to see if the enemy would sally, to cut
off their rere-guard and straglers. As they directed, Saras and Sir Humphrey
placed one thousand two hundred of their best men in that place; which was
half ways betwixt our quarter and the imbarking place, about a great league
from the town. Our ensigns were not all aboard, but Pacheco salied with the
most of his garrison; which might be some four hundred. Disappoynted by a
foolish Officer.
Being approached our first ambush, who were Wallons; a foolish Officer
contrary to direction discharged a volley of shot on the enemies, who were some
quarter of a mile before their troops, whereby all was marred. Belike our
armed men gave them such sound blows in the last re-encounter, that they
desired no more. So upon this volley the enemy retired into their town: and
we embarked presently, not unwilling for any thing I could perceive. The
Flushingers embarke.
To say troth, our losses might be in a manner compared equal, from our
landing to our embarking. Let me not wrong our Governors too much. They said
they were aduertized that Tergoose was void of garrison, saving some hundred:
and that they knew nothing of Pachecoes arrival. Land under their town.
Being embarked, we arrived at our town of Flushing, where we landed under our
town, March to Southland.
and marched to a Village named Southland; three leagues from Flushing, in the
same Island. Before this time, Camfier reuolt^th.
Camfier revolted also unto the Prince of Orange, by reason of their Governor
Mounsieur de Rouse.

The Camisado given, our troops being lodged in Southland, by Mounsieur de
Beauoir and Don Rufello: where our men defended themselves and overthrew the
enemy most valiantly: with our second siege of Tergoose, where we were
defeated shamefully by the negligence and ignorance of our Governor.
MOunsieur de Beauoir Governor of Middleburgh, and don Rufello hearing of our
arrival in Southland, (belike Pacheco aduertized them that we had received
greater loss then we did before Tergoose) thinking our courage qualified,
prepared all their forces to defeat us with a Camisado. To do it the more
terribly, they prepared a great number of haulters; giving them to their
soldiers with a commandment, to hang all the prisoners they should take. The
old saying is true, It is no surety to reckon without an host. Being ready,
after directions given, they salied out of Middleburgh, some two thousand
Spaniards and Wallons, at the shutting of their gates; and took the next way
toward the sandy hills, betwixt Flushing and Southland. As God would, The
Victualers give advertisement.
certain of the victualers discovering their march, cut their Mares out of
their Wagons, by which means they recovered Southland an hour before the
enemy arrived; which, next unto the Almighties will, saved all our troops.
Having the alarm, the enemies vanguarde was in sight; which presently charge
our guards, Beauoir charge the guards
making them to run into the Camp, and to quite the sandy hills. All their
forces seconded with all speed very resolutely; forcing our first and second
troops to run into our place of arms, Forces them to run.
which was near unto the other side of the town in a churchyard, and a large
street before it; Wins the Artillery.
so as they wanne our artillery, turning the same toward us. But resolutely
our Officers gathered a sufficient number of armed men into the Marketplace:
who being led valiantly with brave Captains, Is beaten back
charged the enemy, giving them a retreit and defeat beyond our fieldpieces.
Rechargeth.
Here they came again with a fresh charge; but our armed men re-encountred
them at the push of Pike most valiantly; in such sort that the Ensigne-bearers
Philip Watkins, Thomas Louet, John Hamon, with diverse others, brake their
Ensigne-staues at the push of Pike: So our men gave the enemy a full
overthrow, driving them clean out of the Camp, Is overthrown
and following them in defeat half way to Middleburgh. After, our men hung a
number of them with their own haulters. This piece of service was one of the
best and worthiest encounters that our men had from that time to this hour, in
all their wars of the Low Countries. The loss of the enemy.
The enemies were all overthrown: notwithstanding many escaped, by reason of
the ditches and narrow ways; especially the most of their Officers and
leaders, by reason of their horses and Tades. And of the Flushingers.
Ours escaped not scot-free: for we had slain and hurt about two hundred and
fifty; many of them Officers, and amongst others the Captains Bouser, Bedes,
and Bostocke English; besides Wallons and French which served most valiantly.
The English commended for their service
But the chief praise next unto God, ought to be given to the English
Ensigns and armed men. Captain Walter Morgan served very well; who was
overthrown with a Musket shot in the head of the armed men. All the rest did
most valiantly. Some will blame me for the naming of our own losses: but it is
a shame for a soldier to write less then truth. There can be no brave
encounter without men slain on both sides. True it is, the fewer the better
conduct; but the more dies, the more honor to the fight. This encounter so
encouraged our men, The second attempt of Tergeose.
that Saras and Sir Humphrey resolved to return to Tergoose. After finishing
their preparations and orders, we landed at the same Village we did before: in
number above three thousand English, French and Wallons: for our troops were
increased with Rowley and his garrison of Camfier. Their landing
Our second landing was in better order then the first, by reason our ships
attempted the Island in two places; In two places.
but all or the most part that carried soldiers, were at the landing place.
The other being so many vessels in number, approached the shore; in such sort
that the enemy durst not separate their forces to attempt both: fearing that
the other would cut betwixt them and the town. Being all on the shore, we
marched unto a fair Village named Bifling, Come to Bifling.
some league from Tergoose; where we lodged that night and the next day. The
second night at midnight we marched toward Tergoose; before six of the clock
in the morning we were all within an English mile of the town. Finding the
inconvenience of our last skirmish in the one place, order was given to the
companies of the Captains, Direction to take the fort.
Morgan, Henry Barnard and Vtran, to march with all speed to attempt the fort
which stood on the head of the Haven which entered into Tergoose. And if the
enemy would not quite their fort, then to lodge on the one ditch betwixt them
and the Town; where they stood in battle on the other ditch, to see the
effect of our attempting the fort. Being hot in skirmish with the fort, The
fort assaulted.
according to our direction; a company of our men began to seek means to pass
over the ditches, to cut betwixt the fort and the town. There was also a way
that passed through the medows, from the ditch where our battle stood; whither
Sir Humfrey and Saras sent many to second us. The enemy perceiving our
resolution to lodge betwixt the fort and the town, Quitted by the enemy.
quitted the fort. Notwithstanding York, with most of C. Morgans company,
re-encountred the^ on the ditch; in such sort, that half of those who were in
the fort were cut off, before they could recover the town. True it is, the
enemy had reason to quit the fort, by reason they were not victualed but from
hand to mouth; neither was it worthy of any great munition, because it could
not endure any battery. Being entered the suburbs, The Flushingers enter the
Suburbs.
Pacheco salied with great courage, and skirmished in such sort, that our first
troops were forced to stand for their fellows; Pacheco salieth.
at which instant the enemy fired all or the most of the Salt-houses. Fired the
salt-houses.
Our men being arrived close together, we charged Pacheco, Is forced to retire.
forced their troops to double their pases into their gates; and withal
lodged and placed our first guardes at a Chapel within eight score of the
town: where we stayed and made good, until all our troops were lodged. By
reason of our small army, we could not assure the one half of the town: for
the garrison were eight hundred strong, The number of the garrison.
all natural Spaniards, commanded by more expert leaders then our selves. Yet
having made our trenches and approaches, we landed six Pieces of battery
within six score of the walls; Ordinance planted.
which did beat on the port toward the haven. Perceiving those Pieces could
not make any breach to content our Governors, we dislodged them, to beat on
the bulwarks which flanked that curtain. Having battered this parapat, A
breach made.
and made it fit as we thought, to be attempted with a small scalado;
resolution was taken to assault it the next night. In the mean time so great a
pick and jealousy grew betwixt Sir Humfrey and Saras, The Pieke between the
thief of the Flushingers.
that each would feign disgrace his fellow. Notwithstanding both agreed to
attempt the scalado. After midnight, we dislodged from our quarter some two
thousand of our best men, all in Camisadoes with scaling ladders, God knows
like ignorant soldiers: else we would never have attempted a scalado on such a
troop. For lightly a scalado never takes place, unless it be on a simple
troop, or a negligent guarde, having a rampire or fort to defend.
Notwithstanding ambition and courage so pushed us on, The scalado given.
that Sir Humfrey and Saras being approached, advanced up their ladders: so did
a great number of Gentlemen and soldiers on sundry ladders. The enemy
politickely kept close until many were ready to enter. Then they discharged a
voley of shot full in our faces, killing many. And withal, their armed men
advanced to the push of the Pike; In such sort, that they dismounted the most
without ladders. The Flushingers repulsed.
At which terror we retired without commandment, until we came under the
dike where the enemies shot could not hurt us. And not without reason. For
being on the bulwark, it was flanked from the curtain in such sort, that none
could abide it. Neither could we join with the enemy, unless he listed; by
reason of a dike betwixt both, one which they had a drawbridge at their
commandment. At this scalado Sir Humfrey and Saras served very valiantly: he
that escaped best of both, had sundry Hagabushadoes on their armours and
Camisadoes. I mean their shirts that covered their armours. Many young
Gentlemen and Officers performed also courageous service. Diverse were slain
and hurt: among others one Bourege was taken by the enemy, whom they commended
greatly for his valor: but he dyed afterward of his hurts in their hands.
This attempt so quailed our courage, that we despaired of the town:
Notwithstanding resolution was taken to continue the siege, The Prince
aduertized of all.
until the Prince of Orange were aduertized how the world went. Hereupon
Saras, Sir Humfrey and Rowland dispatched posts to the Prince; both to
aduertize him, and to procure more means. The Prince understanding our case,
Writes for succors.
dispatched letters to the towns of Holland, and to the Count De la Mark, to
desire them to do their best endeavor to assist us before Tergoose. The Count
sent his Lieutenant Bartelencie with some 2000 Neatherlanders and Almaines.
Being joined with us, they gave some courage at the first; but when their
discipline and valor was tried, Their ignorance in service.
we found them simpler men then our selves: yea, so raw, that they brought us
every day into more disorders. Nevertheless, the sight of our numbers caused
us to besiege the town round about. The Tergoosians iu want.
Belike the enemy feared us, or wanted some necessaries. And finding means to
acquaint D. d' Alua with their wants; Certifieth D. d' Alua. Who sends them
Mondragon with 3000. strong.
he sent with all speed his Colonel Mondragon with his regiment of Wallons, and
about seven companies more of Wallons and Spaniards: who might be in all some
3000 strong. This Colonel was expert, valiant and vigilant. Being arrived at
Bergham up Zoone, and finding our forces masters of the seas, and making good
guarde round about the Island where we were; he was in great pain, and knew
not how to pass the water. He enters the Island at a low water.
By good espy-alls and guides, he found the Island easy to be entered at a low
water, from the bank of Brabant; where the passage in the deepest place was
not above four foot, and for more then half the way dry lands; But at
quarter flood all was covered with seas; at the least six English miles. So as
his troops must recover the dike of the Island from the place where they
entered, The hazard of his entrance.
in less then three hours; or else be ouerflown with the sea. Also being
ready to enter on our dike, had our governor kept good guards with any valor,
his troops must needs have bin defeated. Also he could not bring many hands to
fight in order; the narrownes of the place where he marched was such. But this
Collonell remembering the straight commandment of his General, fearing the
town to be in greater wants, then indeed it was; resolved to pass, and landed
without resistance. Notwithstanding, he lost in his passage near two hundred.
Besides, he and his troops were so wet and weary, that they remained all that
night in the place where they landed: which was about two great leagues from
our Camp. The error of the chiefes of the Flushingers.
Then judge you what would have become of his troops, had we been commanded by
expert Governors, and charged them at their landing with half our numbers. In
reason we had defeated them. The next morning Mondragon took his march toward
Tergoose, Mondragon in sight of the town.
having intelligence with the town: Who sallieth.
And being in sight, the town sallied and entered into hot skirmish with our
guardes, on the side from their succors: In such sort, that the most of our
Camp made head toward them. While we were in hot skirmish with the garrison,
Mondragon passed his men through the town pel mel with ours: Mondragon comes
upon the Flushingers.
In such sort, that they forced our guardes to run, and quite all our
trenches, even to the fort, at the head of the water toward the sea. Forces
them to the fort.
This fort was so little, that it could not hold 300 of our men. Wherefore our
disorder was great, in seeking means to escape into our navy; Thence to their
ships.
which anchored within a harquebush shot of the fort. A great number were
drowned, besides those that were slain; and some yielded unto the enemy:
especially those who were in the fort. Diverse officers were carried prisoners
into the castle of Antwerp: and amongst others Cap. Tristan, and Vtran. Thus
ended our ignorant poor siege. And but for the skuts and small boats which
came hard by the shore to receive us in, Sir Humfrey Gilberts discouragement
and desire to return into England.
all had been lost. Our blow was so great, that Sir Humfrey and the most of
our men not being acquainted with such disasters, sought all means to return
into England. Notwithstanding, before we embarked, Sir William Morgan arrived
from the Prince, with authority from the Prince and the States in Holland, to
make large offers to stay Sir Humfrey and his regiment for their service. But
all would not serve to stay either Sir Humfrey, Ziricksee taken by Vorst.
or any of his troops. Whilst our siege of Tergoose endured, Vorst the
Admiral and his seamen wan Ziricksee without blows. By that you may perceive,
that Pacheco and his were not exceeding expert, in quiting such a place in such
manner as they did.

I Did hear also, Sir William Pelham vieweth Flushing.
that Sir William Pelham was sent from England, to view the seat of Flushing.
Being returned, they said his report was, His judgment
that it was a place not worthy to be kept; meaning not sufficient to withstand
so great an enemy any long time. If that be true, we were not very great
Captains at that time; for then without fellow, he was accounted our chiefest
soldier. By this time the Prince had gotten a sure footing in Holland, The
Prince Lord of all Holland.
so as all places of any importance were his.

Duke d' Alua assieges Harlem; where many disasters fell on both sides: which
siege may be called the tediousest, dearest, and painfullest of any in those
days.
DVke d' Alua seeing the people generally ready to revolt, with the lest show
the Prince could make; resolved to gather his forces, and to charge the
Hollanders with all fury: Dnke d' Alua against Holland
swearing to his Captains and soldiers, that the spoil of Holland should be
theirs, upon condition they would execute all they found. Having prepared a
mighty army with all necessaries, he dislodged out of Brussels toward
Holland. Being arrived at Newmegen, he passed the rivers of Wale and Rhyne in
the dead of winter; In winter.
and against all reason marched from Arnam toward Vtrick. His high Marshall or
Master of his Camp general was Chiapine Vitelly; His Chieftains.
Don John de Mandosa was General of his horsemen; his General of the
artillery, Mounsieur d' Cressoneir; his masters del Camp were Baptista de
Mount, Dorkus Julian, Romero, John Francisco d' Baldeso, Lanchio, Auila and
Mondragon. There were with him also many other of Nobility and Gentlemen of
quality; as well Italians, Almaines, Burgonians, and Netherlanders, as also of
Spanish. Being arrived at Amsterdam, he commanded his son Don Frederick,
Chiapine Vitelly, and Mandosa, to march with the vanguard, and to engage the
town of Harlem; In such sort, that nothing could pass from it to Leyden, or
to any other place by land. Having placed four regiments of Almaines and
Wallons, well entrenched in the wood hard by the town, and in the ways
toward Leiden; Don Fredrick placed himself with a Spanish Tertio or Regiment
well entrenched, Don Fredricks quarter.
in a village and a strong house between the town and the sea; and so lodged
the rest of his companies, that the town sallies were cut off; saving on the
one quarter, which was meadows and marish toward the Mere. The forces of the
town.
In the town were the most of the Princes best Captains; namely, Mounsieur d'
Saras, Steven, Butch, Balford, Smith, with diverse others of the Scots, French,
Almaines and Wallons. Amongst whom were some 200 English, in sundry Companies;
without any Ensign of their own. The garrison in the whole might be some
three thousand soldiers. The order of the siege.
They caused also about six hundred Burgesses to carry arms; besides two
thousand and more of all sorts of people, sufficient to supply the place of
pioners: of which were some three hundred women, all under one Ensign. The
women's Captain was a most stout dame, named Captain Margaret Kenalt. Having
divided the town into quarters, and giving charge of every quarter unto a
principal chief, they fell to working in great numbers on the weakest parts
of the City, and mended continually some part of the fortifications; In such
sort that within one month their town was three times stronger, then the first
hour the enemy encamped before it. Two skonces at the mouth of the water.
They kept also two small sconces on the mouth of the water that ran from the
town into the mere, which assured the passage that ways; by which means
they received daily all manner of commodities, that pleased the Prince and the
States of Holland to send them. The Prince kept at Delfe in Holland. He chose
for his Lieutenant of the wars the Baron of Battenburgh; The Princes care of
the town.
for General of his horsemen and Marshall, Mounsieur de Carlon; for Admiral
of the Mere for that service, one Noris Brand. By reason of the Spanish long
delays in their resolutions about their martial affairs, He dispatcheth an
army to the Cage.
the Prince dispatched away his chiefes with some five thousand soldiers, and
about sixty boys and cromsters; of which, six were galliots and friggats.
This army arrived at the Cage within three leagues of Harlem, a place environed
with waters; where because the Spanish could not attempt, by reason the Prince
was master upon the waters, the Baron Battenburgh furnished Harlem at his
pleasure with all necessaries. There stood in the main right against it on the
Mere side, a village named the Sase; Which landeth at, and entrencheth the
Sase.
where he landed and entrenched very strongly. In that place he encamped with
some six hundred horsemen, and the most of his foote-men. At the Cage there was
no danger, wherefore he anchored his shipping hard by the shore; leaving for
their guard six hundred soldiers, with the Admiral and one Ashilers. By this
time Duke d' Alua arrived before the town with his whole forces, Duke d' Alua
before Harlem with 30000.
artillery and munition; amounting in the whole near to thirty thousand; of
which might be some thousand and five hundred horsemen. He needed no great
cauallery, by reason he was assured there would be but few against him. Also
those grounds did not serve for great troops of horsemen to fight in. After
viewing the strong seat of the Baron of Battenburgh, Vieweth the seat of
Battenb.
and perceiving no good could be done upon his troops; to affront him,
Affronteth him with forces.
he advanced John Battisto del Mount with five Cornets Italians; who
entrenched strongly with sixteen Companies of footmen in a village called
Hellingham, half the way betwixt both our companies. Afterward, Makes his
approaches.
he began to make his approaches carefully; sparing neither pioners nor cost,
to spare his soldiers. The town sallieth with good success.
Before he planted his battry, the town made many brave sallies, killed a
great number with small loss to themselves. Once they carried diverse Ensigns
out of their enemies trenches, and nailed sundry pieces of battery. The battry.
After, placing his battry and playing furiously, he gave two sharp assaults:
which were defended worthily by the besieged, to the enemies great loss; of
whom a great number of quality were slain and hurt; and amongst others, the
brave master of the Camp Julian Romero lost his eye with a hargabushado. The
enemy often possessed the breach: but being entered their half moon, I mean
the trench which the defendants made overthwart the breach within, The town
received the assa^ants.
they were murdered like dogs. The defendants had diverse fowlers and other
pieces laden with nails and small shot, which they placed on the corners of
their half moon. Those were discharged full against the enemies, being entered
upon the breach. Also they had placed a great number of small shot in houses
both high and low, full of Cannoners who flanked the half moon; and besides,
the half moon was double manned with Musketeers and Calliuers. Duke d' Alua
his losses were so great, To their loss
that perceiving the brave resolution of the defendants, Who retire.
he gave over his assaults, and began to mine and to approach carefully with
sape and other stratagems. D' Aluaes stratagems.
Sometimes he would mount Cages on masts, Cages erected.
made with plankes and such devices, of musket proof. In those he would place
diverse musketeers, who by reason of their height did beat into the trenches of
the half moon. The defendants good Cannoniers plagued those Cages in Which
are beaten down.
such sort, that often the Cages, birds and all fell down and brake their
necks in their own trenches. So, at last no birds could be found to sing in
Cages, where fire-worke and Cannon-shot could annoy them. His mines took
little effect. Some the defendants found with counter-myne. Mines.
One mine being passed under a bulwark before it was found, and then
discovered, the defendants made such trenches round about it, that the mine
being fired, and the enemies entered, the trench plagued them like the half
moon; so as they were driven to quitte their mine, as before they had done
their breach. Another time they battered a new bulwark: and the defendants
perceiving they would lodge in it, left rampiring against their battery, and
fell to myning their own bulwark. After, making many trenches round about it,
and placing diverse barrells of powder in their mine, the enemies offered to
enter. The defendants quitted the bulwark, sufferd the enemies to enter in
great numbers; and being at the push of pike at a barrier of their trench,
they fired the mine, Blow it up and sally upon the enemy.
blew, slew, and took at least 1600: and withal sallied into their trenches,
and recovered their own ground where their bulwark stood, And recover their
ground.
which they entrenched and kept. Duke d' Alua his losses were so great, that
albeit his choler increased, yet the courage of his soldiers much quailed; so
that the wisest sort requested him to save his men from such furious terrors,
and rather to spend a long time either to famish the town, or to procure the
Princes forces to fight; which he could not do without means to fight by
water. Being in Amsterdam, with the resolution of his Admiral Count Bossue,
Duke d' Alua gives order to force the town.
and good intelligence with the principal Burgesses of the said town, he
resolved to cut a passage from the Southern sea into Harlem Mere; He makes a
cut in Harlem Mere. Passes 45 ships into it.
which they did, and passed some forty five sails, whereof most were greater
then those of the Princes. These they armed and double manned, with the best
sort of soldiers out of their Camp, besides their mariners. Anchoring close
under a fort of theirs, not far from ours, they resolved to besiege the two
forts at the mouth of the water, Besieges the two forts.
that came from the town to the Mere. Having those, they were sure to stop
that passage, and to famish the town without giving battle. In short time they
made a platform to beat th^se forts, which would hold good if their shipping
could stay where they were. The Prince hearing their intent, commanded the
Baron of Battenburgh to prepare all his Navy to attempt the Spanish fleet.
Preparation for a sea fight. Collonell Morgan ariueth out of England.
By this time Colonel Morgan was arrived with ten English companies: who, by
reason he was but newly landed, stood on some points of contract with the
Prince. But the service required haste; and the Prince commanded the Baron of
Battenburgh to advance his Navy with all speed, and to use all diligence to
succor the distressed skonces. And albeit the English regiment stood on
terms, Colonel Morgan (his own band commanded by Rowland York, being
arrived some month before their fellows) offered himself, and so did his
Lieutenant Captain Bingham, with diverse others, The English refuse to march
without money
to serve where the Prince would command them. But their regiment refused to
march without money. To say troth, they were promised to be mustered and paid
at their landing. Battenburgh wants men to man his Navy.
The Baron of Battenburgh wanting soldiers to man both his Navy and his
trenches at the Sase, was forced to depart with the Navy before toward
Harlem; God knows, nothing well manned, in respect of the Spanish. The
Spanish Admiral having intelligence, was ready with his Navy double manned,
wanting no necessaries: For the fair and rich town of Amsterdam had furnished
them with all wants, especially with store of Mariners. The Nauies approached
each other.
Being approached within sight one of another, we found the Spanish in good
order of battle, keeping close together. They advanced toward us triumphing
with Drums, The bravery of the Spaniards.
Trumpets and glistering armours, with great courage; so as the sight quailed
the courage of our white-liuered General and cowardly Admiral. In such sort,
that being approached near ready to board each other, The Princes General and
Admiral fly.
our General and our Admiral shranke out of our first rank backewards; and
advancing their fellows forwards, both themselves and diverse others of our
best vessels made all the sails they could to fly; leaving their poor
companies engaged to the mercy of their enemies, by whom (God knows) they
were soon discountenanced. The rest disco^sited.
Our Admiral and General with our best ^a^les escaped to the Cage, as I said
before; a place of ours, where we kept garrison: the rest of our Navy made to
the contrary shore from Harlem. Diverse escaped by reason they drew far
lesser water then the Spanish; diverse were boarded and burned; among others two
Hoyes, where York and Captain Morgans company was. Notwithstanding, half
our men escaped with leaping into the water, and recovered the shore. Thus
lost we our Sea-battaile; principally for want of soldiers to man thoroughly
our ships; but partly with ill directions and cowardly executions of the Baron
of Battenburgh, and Admiral Norris Brand. For no General or Chief can excuse
himself escaping out of an overthrow, without staying with the last troops
that fight. The two skonces lost.
After this our two skonces were lost, and Harlem engaged to be lost without
succors by land; which could not be without battle. Shortly after, the town
began to fall to distresses; having in it at the least one thousand six
hundred mouths, The town seeks to pass away their unprofitable people.
with no means to be rid of any of them, but through the enemies Camp: which
they offered to pass often, but always they were returned into the town, or
massacred in the Camp. The Prince attempteth to relieve the town by land.
The poor Prince perceiving the distress of the town, sought all means to
relieve it. Having no other means, he went to Cublick Banquets; where he
encouraged the Hollanders to take arms, and adventure themselves with his men
of war, rather then suffer their distressed Countrymen to perish. These poor
Hollanders having engaged themselves with promise, resolved to meet on a day
in the Camp of Sase. Being arrived, the Baron of Battenburgh and Mounsieur de
Carlo General of his horsemen, took resolution to try the fortune of wars
with the enemy, rather then to suffer the world to cry out, that the town was
lost without blows on their sides: and thinking his name to be infamous (as
indeed it was) for the Sea Fight, he thought it better to be buried dead then
alive. Battenburgh leads toward Harlem.
Hereupon he dislodged from his trenches of Sase, accompanied with some six
thousand footmen and six hundred horsemen; and having with him some thousand
Mares. Upon most of the which he placed two shot a piece: the rest were led
with Boures laden with powder and other necessaries, which the town wanted
greatly. Resolving to put those necessaries into the town, he advanced his
forces. Being arrived hard by Hellingham, Comes to Hellingham.
a place (as I said before) which the enemy kept; at the break of day, the
enemy taking the alarm, the Baron made a stand. After, conferring with his
Captains, he took resolution to defer their dessigne, Retyreth.
and returned with our Camp to Sase. The besieged being in great distress for
victuals, especially for munition, and finding the ill conduct of our General
and Chiefes; Saras sent to the Princes Camp.
dispatched out of town their Captain Mounsieur de Saras, and Hauton his
Lieutenant; who passed with great danger, and were forced to swim many
ditches, hard by the enemies guardes. Being arrived at the Sase, bearing with
them the towns resolution; which was, at the first sight of our Camp to
sallie on the enemies trenches; and so either to receive their wants into the
town, or to escape how they could. Saras having conferred with the Prince and
Baron at Leyden, returned to the Sase; where they took a full resolution
either to dye, or succor the town. Hereupon they dislodged from the Sase, The
Princes power toward Har^em.
with our army named before, having with them some six hundred wagons laden
with victuals and munition; with skonces made of boards of the proof of
Muskets which ran on wheels, (...) moveable skonces.
having in them places to play with sundry fieldpieces; which skonces were to
join and to open as pleased our Enginer, every five and ten pases. Being all
joined together, I mean in one, it might cover at the least three hundred men.
This skonce was to be drawn with horses on both sides, and in the midst,
until we were engaged with the enemies small shot; then to be pushed with
poales by the force of men. Being parted with all necessaries, and arrived
betwixt their Camp at Hellingham and the sea, the enemies took the alarm in
all their quarters. Arriving within sight of their Camp, The Spaniards keep
close.
they kept their men very close, within their trenches, and on the side of the
vvood; so that we could not see them. Our men within the town had made a
great salie through the Curtain; The townsmen make a sallie.
in such sort, that they might issue out, where there was neither guard nor
trench of the enemy. But a traitor leaping over the walls in the night
discovered all their intent. Are hindered by wet straw fired.
Whereupon the enemy prepared great quantity of straw, which being made wet,
they set on fire in sundry places, at such time as their Curriers gave the
alarm of the approach of our army, when the townsemen were ready to sally out;
by which means the townsmen could neither see the approaching of our army,
nor knew what time they ought to sally. D^ d' Aluaes order against the Town.
So the enemy directed five thousand of his best footmen, and three hundred
horsemen to charge the townsmen if they sallied, and the rest to charge our
Camp, if it were possible unknown to the townsmen; And so they did, by their
government and fine stratagem. For at the sight of our army (being within two
Musket Shot of their trenches) Duke d' Alua caused the 5000 footmen, Sends
forces of the retreit of the Princes power.
and 3 hundred horsemen, to discover themselves before the breach which our men
had made in the curtain: withal he commanded the brave Baron Chiffero, and
John Battisto del Mounto, (who had quited Hellingham with all his horsemen, and
was newly arrived in their Camp) with others, to march on the sea-sands,
until his artillery went off in vollies; then to cut into the high ways,
betwixt Harlem and our Camp at Sase; Appoints foots to charge them.
having with them some five hundred horsemen, and about five thousand footmen.
Also he commanded his master of the Camp Julian Romero, Del Mount, Donkus, the
Barons of Likes, of Capers, of Frunsberke, and Poule Viler to leap over the
trenches with their regiments, and charge our army at the discharging of his
artillery. And horse against their horse.
Also Don John de Mendosa general of his horsemen, who was hidden, as I said
before, was commanded to charge our horsemen at the going off of the artillery.
The Duke with the rest of his army stood in battle within the trenches. Our
General and Chiefes placed our Wagons to frontier The order of the Princes
army.
the fairest places where their horsemen could charge us: our Wallons, Dutch
and Flemmish, stood within the Wagons in good order of battle, all in one
squadron, with our horsemen on both the sides toward the enemies, our English,
French, and Scots stood, some twenty score before the front of our battle.
The battle.
As we were basie in placing our engines, I mean our skonces and wagons,
their artillery went off; and withal the enemies presented in all quarters, as
they were directed. At this sight (God knows) our courage much abated.
Notwithstanding, The horsemen charge.
the Baron of Battenburgh and Mounsieur de Carlo charged Mendosa, he having
better then eight hundred horsemen, and ours not six hundred: At which charge
Mounsieur de Carlo general of our horsemen was slain, Carlo slain.
with many others of our best men. At that instant the Baron Chiffero, and John
Battisto came on the spur toward the Baron of Battenburgh, leaving their
footmen marching with all speed on the side of ours. Upon their approach, the
Baron and our horsemen ran into our Wagons, with all the enemies horsemen in
their tails. The footmen defeated.
Then Julian and the rest named before, drove in the English and French shot,
winning our skonces and Wagons; and our battle brake and ran toward the
Mere. By reason of meadows and ditches diverse escaped into our Navy, which
anchored not far off, under a strong skonce; whose boats rowing from our
ships saved many. But the Baron our General was slain after he had recovered
our battle, with the most part of our men. All or the most part of our
Cornets, ensigns, artillery, munition, wagons, engines and baggage were lost.
Thus were we overthrown with ill directions and ignorant government. The
error of the Prince.
What Prince or estate would direct their men of war, especially being more
then half their own Countrymen, to attempt above 26000 good soldiers well
entrenched, governed with great Captains; not being in the whole 6500
footmen, and of those half poor spirited Burgesses? Or what General or
Captain would undertake it, unless he were ignorant and without judgment in
martial affairs? Some will say, had our friends perished in the town without
blows, it had been our shame. I do confess it, having any reason to fight.
But being sure to perish both, it was our greatest shame to attempt it. If we
had kept our selves vndefeated, and given order to the town to have compounded
with the enemy, their composition had been the better. But being defeated,
the townsmen were feign to yield to the mercy of Duke d' Alua. The Town
yields.
For the sight of our Ensigns and Cornets so quailed their courage, that
having no other remedy, they yielded to his mercy within four days after our
overthrow. But he executed the most part of them most cruelly, The cruelty of
Duke d' Alua.
saving the Almaines of Stinbaghs regiment (who compounded for the most part to
serve the King) and Balfort with a few Scottish men; Balford.
who to escape Duke d' Aluaes cruelty, promised to kill the Prince of Orange:
but being arrived with the Prince, he confessed his promise, and served him
faithfully long after.

The Spanish mutinies, Mounsieur de Herges repulseth them at their scalado on
Vtricke, Duke d' Alua assiegeth Alkmer, where he receives the greatest
disgrace that ever he did since he carried arms.
DVke d' Alua having won Harlem, and as he thought broken the courage of the
Hollanders; thinking the Prince of Orange and them not able to furnish any
place like unto Harlem, and that his cruelty on that Town would terrify any
garrison from hazarding themselves to be besieged: he resolved with his
counsel of war to attempt one of the other strongest towns, as Alkmer or
Leyden; which being won, the rest or most of the others would yield. Duke d'
Alua against Alkmer.
To that end he dispatched his Son Don Frederick, accompanied with the
master of his Camp general Chiapine Vitelly, giving them half his army, and
charge with all diligence to enclose the strong town of Alkmer, situated in
North-Holland himself with the rest of his army, officers, Nobility,
artillery, munition, with all other necessaries, was to second them with all
speed. His orders being set down, and his army dislodged, having passed
their fort of Sparendam, A mutienie amongst the spaniards.
the Spanish Tertias began to mutiny; partly discontented for want of pay, but
chiefly fearing to be troubled with a more miserable lodging then they had
before Harlem. This proceeded chiefly from a few of the Neatherlanders which
served amongst their bands, and knew the seat of Alkmer to be an ill favored
ma^sh, far more unwholesome then Harlem; and knew it also to be a seat thrice
stronger then Harlem. To say troth (if it were lawful for men of war to
find fault with any enterprise that their General undertakes) they had reason
to fear Alkmer, considering how their misery endured before Harlem above ten
months: in the which time they lost above twenty thousand lives, the most with
sickness and misery. Whereupon being past the fort of Sparendam, and lodged
on the firm land, having neither river nor marsh betwixt them and the fair
town of Vtrick; the Spanish Tertias chose and forced one to be their chief,
named in their language an Electo, They choose an Electo.
who is lightly one of the finest stirring spirits amongst them, His quality
and government.
well known to be stout and valiant. Sometimes they forced a person to be
their Electo against his will; But whether he be willing or not, they will be
sure to give him a strong guard of the chiefest mutiners; with such articles as
if they find him faulty in the least point, they will murder him, had he a
hundred lives. Especially he must neither sign nor write any thing, but in
public places before them all. Likewise, he must neither receive writings nor
speeches but in open audience; nor do any thing without their general
consent. Observing their articles and orders, the multitude will respect and
obey him during his government; His authority.
in as ample sort as the Kings Lieutenant; and all are sworn not to do any
thing without his consent. And with their General and officers they promise to
free him from all matters that can be laid unto his charge; which they have
observed firmly at sundry times, as I will show hereafter. And to say troth,
if there can be any good orders in mutinies, the Spanish do theirs in good
order; and keep as good and as straight discipline during the time of their
Electo, as when their officers are amongst them. As I said in my little
discourse of the Spanish discipline, there can be no dangerous mutiny without
a Chief; Chiefes appointed by States.
which must be authorized by a Prince, or Estate. If any of them mutineth,
there must be present means to cut them off, as Alexander did his Parmenio,
or some other means to be assured of their persons; else ambitious Chiefes
will often employ armies against their own States and Masters, and will not
fail to use their means and credits to deceive the multitude, to serve their
own turns. Being stirred in arms, by all reason they are irreconciliable to
their Princes or Estates; the multitude and followers may be pardoned and
forgiven, but in no reason their principal instruments can look for any sure
reconcilement. A Chief appointed by the mutiners.
But a popular multitude either in arms, or otherwise mutined, may be
appeased and reconciled easily in respect of the others, having no other
instruments then were made by themselves; especially forced Electoes like unto
the Spanish. The Spanish mutiny against Vtricke.
As I said before, the Spanish Tertias and some six regiments of Wallons
resolved to enter the City of Vtrick, and to sack it rather then to miss their
due pay. Whereupon they marched with all speed toward Vtrick; and in their
way they carried with them all the ladders they could find in villages and
Churches, which they thought would serve their turns. Being approached hard
by the town, they found the walls well manned and in good order; The town
defended by Mounsieur de Hierges.
by reason Mounsieur de Hierges Governor of Gelderland and of Vtrick, was
arrived there upon intelligence of their determinations; who commanded the
Captain of the Castle upon his allegiance to the King, to use all endeauours
for the defense of the town. The Castillian assured him of his loyalty, to the
uttermost of his power.

To be the better assured of his Spanish garrison, Mounsieur de Hierges caused
half the garrison of the Castle to sally; and to manne the Curtain, where the
mutiners attempted. Before they offered any attempt, Hierges sent a Spanish
drum unto them; assuring them, rather then they should enter the town, He and
as many as loved the Kings service would die in the place. Notwithstanding, the
mutiners resolved, and advanced the scale; giving their fury on the Curtain
next unto the Citadell; thinking belike, that their fellows within would not
be cruel against them. But being in the ditch, and having placed their ladders
to the Rampire, both Hierges and the Captain of the Castle and all the rest,
plagued them with volleyes of shot both great and small; The mutiners retire.
In such sort, that happy was he that could return first, leaving behind them
all or the most part of their ladders, with many of their men slain or hurt.
Afterward the mutiners returned into the country, so greatly discontented, as
they did not only rail on Mounsieur de Hierges, Rail on their King.
the Captain, and garrison, but on their King, General, and Officers: In such
sort, that most of them swear they would be paid, and better used, or else
they would serve the enemy against their King. Are pacified by D' Alua.
Duke d' Alua hearing their resolutions, dispatched Commissioners to appease
them: and in the end was forced to content them, both with five months pay,
and assurance to be forgiven. Having pacified them and reconciled all, they
accepted their Officers, and agreed to march whither they should be led. Send
away their Electo.
But first, according to their custom, every man gave a crown unto the
Electo, who was to depart with all speed out of the Kings dominions; but with
good assurance and pasport not to be molested. This mutiny hindered Duke d'
Aluaes intent some month. Notwithstanding, according to his first resolution,
Don Fredricke.
Don Fredrick and Vitelly marched with all speed to enclose Alkmer. D' Alua
follows.
So did the Duke follow with the rest in all speed. In the mean time, the
Prince and States of Holland had sent into the town, five or six expert
Captains; Alkmer strengthened by the Prince.
especially the Scottish men Smith and Cornelleys, who entered the town with
some four hundred soldiers. The most of these Captains had been in Harlem,
and saved the town for a long time, next unto the Almighties will. The
vanguard being arrived, The town engaged.
they soon engaged the town; so as none could either sally or enter. Duke d'
Alua being arrived with the rest, Pontones for the ordinance.
prepared great pontons or bridges, with other necessaries to plant his battry:
which he could hardly do, by reason of the marish and wet rotten grounds,
whereon the town stood. Notwithstanding, with his expert Captains and cunning
Enginers he mounted eighteen pieces of Cannon, The Cannon planted.
with some six Culuerings in a marshie ground against reason; impossible to be
done, as the defendants thought. These pieces did bea^e cross, on two
platformes, The battry.
a weak bulwark, and a Curtain, some eight score off. Having no other flank,
by reason the ground served not, they could not bring the battry within less
then eight score: The distance of the battry.
wherefore their fury was the less. To say troth, all batteries ought to be
placed within less then eight score; if it be full seven score, it is very
far to do any great hurt: In case the defendants be in any great numbers
within, having store of earth to rampire and entrench themselves.
Notwithstanding, I heard some of the best defendants in that town say, The
fear of the town.
in their judgments, the fear of the people and of most of the soldiers
within was such; that had not the enemies environed the town round about as
they did, but left any place void, the best of the defendants would have
quitted the place, and shifted for themselves. No way to flee.
But being straightly environed and no ways to escape, remembering their
cruelty at Harlem, they resolved to fight; by reason the soldiers which had
been in Harlem, did importune the rest; especially the Captains, who were
assured to perish coming into their enemies hands. After some 7000 shot, The
breach.
the breach was reasonable, as the assailants thought. But in troth it was not;
Not assaultable
for above four foot of the ground of the rampire was nothing battered, but
falsely covered with the ruin of the parapet and the earth that fell from the
highest parts of the breach. Also they were feign to give their assaults on
Pontons and such Engines; Pontons for assaults.
which they had made against reason, to adventure men against a place defended
with any valor. For a breach (be it made never so assaultable) having many
hands to defend it with any valor, lightly is never entered; In case they
within be of any judgment, as I said before, and having earth to entrench
themselves. But the fury of Duke d' Alua and his Commanders was such, The
assault.
that they advanced to the assault, and attempted it with great courage. Being
twice repulsed, notwithstanding they advanced the third time, to their folly
and dear costs. For at those assaults they lost diverse of their best
Captains, The Spaniards repulsed.
and at the least 1600 of their brauest soldiers.

The next day the rain fell in great abundance, The siege leauied.
in such sort, that they raised their siege in few days; and lost diverse
pieces of battry which they could not hale out of the marish. At this town did
the famous Duke d' Alua lose the greatest credit, D' Aluaes disgrace.
that he did in any place since he carried arms; which he had done sixty
years. His experience for war.
For fifty years, the least commandment he had, was General of the horsemen:
which place he had in Germany, when Charles the fifth overcame Duke John
Frederick of Saxony and his confederates. But had the Duke marched straight to
Delfs haven and taken it, His error.
and Mayston-sluce, when he marched to Alkmer (which places were unfortified to
any purpose) by all reason he had carried all Holland in a short time. I am
sure, the most men of war who know the seat of the Country, will confess
no less then my self.

Mounsieur de Poyet surpriseth Gertrudenberg.
Whilst Duke d' Alua was busy about his enterprise of Alkmer, Mounsieur de
Poyet, who had bin with Count Lodowick in Mounts, being newly arrived out of
France, was chosen Lieutenant of the war to the Prince of Orange. Having
conferrred with the Prince, they gathered certain Companies of English,
Scottish, French and Flemings, at Dort in Holland: which they embarked with
petardes, Mounsieur de Poyet landeth his troops in the night.
ladders, and such Engines of war. Mounsieur de Poyet using great diligence,
landed his troops in the night, on the dike toward Seauenbrooke; some half a
league from the strong town of Gertrudenberg in Brabant, situated on the water
side next unto Dort. After, placing his troops in order, he sent before him a
valiant French Captain, named Malion, His order for the surprise.
accompanied with a dozen resolute soldiers; amongst whom were two or three of
the country soldiers, who had been often in the town, and knew all the
rampires as well as the inhabitants themselves. Whilst Malion spent some howr
in discovering the place they meant to scale, Mounsieur de Poyet advanced his
troops toward the town. Being within a quarter of a league of the town,
he stayed until about an hour before day. Having conferred with Malion, he
delivered unto him some two hundred of his best soldiers, giving him charge to
scale with all courage; assuring him to second him with the rest. Malion and
his troops entered the ditch of a small raueling, joining unto the rampire,
where he placed his ladders. After the passing of the round (notwithstanding
that the sentinels gave the allarum) Malion and his troops recovered both
raueling and rampire, Malion e^treth
before any great troop came to encounter him. The garrison being gathered
together in reasonable numbers, charged Malion resolutely at the push of the
pike; Poyet secondeth him.
but being seconded by Mounsieur de Poyet and his troops, they were quickly
content to quitte the fury, and also forced to run into the market place,
whither the assailants followed them in the tail. Notwithstanding, being
entered the market place, Resistance in the market place.
the Governor with his fresh troops turned upon us, and gave a hot charge at
the push of the pike; but our many hands soon overcame them, giving them the
retreit in rout. The garrison defeated.
Some took themselves into the towne-house, which they kept a little while, and
then yielded to have their lives saved. Diverse ran over the rampire toward
Breda; More then half were slain. The Governor with a few recovered his
house, The Governor escapes.
which stood on the rampire; out of which he escaped over the wall unto Breda;
leaving behind him all that he had, saving what he carried upon him. Thus
was the strong town of Gertrudenberg surprised, with less then 1200 men;
having in it at the least 600 soldiers, besides Burgesses, with the loss of
four and fifty persons of our side; to the great grief of Duke d' Alua, not
without reason. For considering his loss and disgrace at Alkmer, it did equal
at the least his victory at Harlem.

Baldeso, sent by Duke d' Alua into Holland, enters the Hague, attempteth
Delfe, and other places without success.
WHen Duke d' Alua advanced to besiege Alkmer, he sent the Master of his Camp
Don Francisco de Baldeso, Baldeso sent into Holland.
with his Tertia De la Ligue, with five Corners of horsemen, and some twelve
companies of Wallons out of sundry regiments; commanding him to advance into
the bowels of Holland, to relieve his troops in the rich Villages (where he
thought best) betwixt Leyden, Delfe, and the Sea-co^st, as far as the river
of Mase, and the town of Brill: Charging him to attempt nothing without his
advice and consent; unless it were with sure intelligence with some of the
towns. Baldeso being entered the fair and rich Village of Hague, Enters the
Hague.
without any resistance, found it a place sufficient to lodge double his
troops; all in covert, The seat thereof.
and most in beds. This Hague is counted the fairest Village in Europe, and the
place of the general assembly of all the Neatherlands, next unto Brussels (I
mean the seauenteene Provinces since they were united under the house of
Burgundy) where the King has a fair Palace, and diverse of the Nobility
houses, with a great multitude of Lawyers. This Hague is such a Village, that
Charles the fifth being requested to fortify it, answered; he had rather it
should remain the fairest Village, then a reasonable fair town.

But I persuade my self, both he and the Country would have fortified it,
but that it stands more then half on sandy grounds: which can never be
made strong by the earth it self, by reason of the looseness of the sand. The
Prince of Orange tried to do it, but could not to any purpose; so as it might
be kept with any garrison against an army, without a reasonable army to defend
it. Baldeso after lodging a few days in the Hague, caused all the Villages to
bring him such necessaries as pleased him. Then he advanced certain of his
companies to a Village called Riswike, Baldeso fortifieth Riswicke.
in the way toward Leyden from Delfe; which he entrenched and baricaded.
Placed his first guardes at the bridge toward Delfe.
Likewise he entrenched his first guardes at the bridge, half the way betwixt
Delfe and the Hague; where often our troops and theirs had many a hot
skirmish, both near unto the guardes, and sometimes hard by the ports of
Delfe. The States garrisons.
Colonel Morgans regiment and diverse companies of French men were lodged in
the Villages, betwixt Delfe and Roterdam, safely from the enemy; by reason
both the towns covered them behind and before with great ditches on both
sides, not to be passed with troops, having any guards to defend them. These
troops served always ready to thrust into Delfe, Roterdam, Delfe- haven, or
Mayston sluice; where the enemy would have attempted first. In Leyden.
In Leyden was Mounsieur de Lorges, son to that brave Count of Mongomery,
with a fair French regiment; and other companies of Scots, and of the
Countrymen and Burgesses well armed. Captain Chester in Delfe.
In Delfe was Captain Chester with two hundred Englishmen; whom afterward
the Prince advanced to be Colonel of those troops, by reason of some sting
against Colonel Morgan. There were in it also three fair companies of
Frenchmen, besides the Burgesses well armed. In Roterdam.
In Roterdam were some bands of Scots, and of the Countrymen, besides the
Burgesses. In Delfs haven.
At Delfs-hauen was Mounsieur de Maysonflure, with sundry bands of French,
Scots, and of the Country. In Mayston-sluce.
In Mayston-sluce was Mounsieur de Saint Alagondy, and Terlon, with some 1200,
most of them Countrymen; a great number of Peasants and Burgesses. Besides, the
garrisons wrought continually to fortify both Delfs-hauen and Mayston-sluce;
in such sort that both the places were strong and guardeable, with reasonable
defenses. Delfs-hauen fortfied.
Especially Delfs-hauen was very strong; not to be won easily, having
necessaries that belong to a fortress. The garrison of Delfs-hauen had
fortified the Village of Ouerskie, half the way betwixt Delfe and Roterdam;
where they kept a strong guarde. Mounsieur de Poyet, for the better assurance
of Leyden, Mounsieur de Poyet in Leyden
being the nearest place engaged and environed with enemies, thrust himself
into it. Baldeso practiced all he could with Leyden and Delfe; once by
treachery of some, who kept the towne-port toward Vtricke. Baldesoes attempts
upon Delfe.
Baldeso prepared sundry Turfe-boates, in which he lodged good troops of
soldiers. Once being entered the ports, with the resolution of the garrison,
and the good conduct of Poyet, they were repulsed; where Baldeso lost many of
his men. Another time he had intelligence with some in Delfe: but being
discovered to the Townsmen and garrison, diverse of our bands which lodged hard
by entered in the night; but either some of the Townsmen or Baldesoes guardes
discovered our arming: so as he gave over his enterprise, when he was ready to
attempt, in the like order as he did at Leyden. But had he come, we were ready
at the least 1000 soldiers, besides the Burgesses, at the water-port where he
should have entered; and ^ad bent sundry pieces of artillery, laden with
nails, haile-shot, and such devices. Had he presented himself, his troops
could not escape without great murder among them, with no danger to our
selves. Aduertiseme^ts to d'Alua.
After these attempts, Baldeso aduertized Duke d'Alua of his affairs; showing
him that no good could be done, without an army and the fury of artillery.
To that end he requested more troops or means, or leave to retire himself
with those troops he had.

Duke d'Alua retyreth out of Holland, sends Julian Romero, Mounsieur de
Capers and Fronsperge to assist Baldeso, Verdugo Governor of Harlem.
THe Duke remembering his disgrace at Alkmer, D'Alua retyreth to Brussels.
fearing his army would mutine if he would ouercharge them with pains and
travel, having no treasure to content them; resolved to retire to Brussels. But
before he departed, he sent the master of his Camp Julian Romero to his army,
Sends Julian Romero to assist Baldeso.
which was lodged in the Country by Vtricke and Amsterdam; giving him charge,
if he could, to procure his Tertia of Lumbardy (of which Julian was Colonel)
to march into Holland, With Mounsieur de Capers.
to join with Baldeso. He sent also Mounsieur de Capers; commanding him to
procure his regiments of Wallons to do the like. Fronsberke.
Also the regiment of Fronsberke the Almaine. These Colonels were directed to
the Camp, to procure their regiments to march willingly, and not perforce. He
commanded Mendoza general of his horsemen to send with them six of the best
Cornets. Six Cornets of horse.
After that these Regiments and Cauallery were contented to enter Holland, and
had sworn to obey their Colonells in all manner of service; Julian General.
Duke d' Alua gave the chief charge unto Julian, and the next unto him was
Baldeso. He placed Colonel Verdugo Governor in Harlem; Verdugo.
with his regiment of Wallons, and one Cornet of horsemen, with three ensigns
of Almaines out of Frunsbergs regiment. Himself departed out of Amsterdam,
D'Aluaes retire, and to what end.
with his son Don Frederick, Chiapin Vitelly, Mendosa and all the rest of
his army toward Brabant; resolving not to attempt any great siege or service,
before he had acquainted the King how the world went. To that end being
arrived at Brussels, he dispatched two of quality unto the King; either to
send him treasure and means more plentifully, and in better order; or to give
him leave to retire himself, and to send another Governor.

Julian Romero wins Mayston-sluce, but dares not attempt Delfes-hauen.
IVlian and his succors being arrived, Julian Romero attempteth Mayston sluice.
and having conferred with Baldeso, resolved to attempt Mayston-sluce; and
dislodged from the Hague with their forces named before, haling with them six
pieces of battery. Being arrived at the great Village called Florden, within a
small league of Mayston-sluce, they quartred their horsemen, with a regiment
of footmen for their guardes; His order.
and departed with the rest to approach the Sluice. They carried with the^ all
the skutes and boats that might be found, in Wagons; with plankes, ladders,
and all other necessaries that they thought fit, to scale and to make bridges
over the dikes. Being before the Sluice, with their bridges and means they had
made to pass the ditches, they took the great ditch on both sides of the
Sluice; Takes the dyke the Sluice stands upon, dismounteth the artillery of the
forte.
I mean the dyke the Sluice stands upon, and which keeps the sea from drowning
the land. Having mounted their artillery on both sides of the dyke, they
dismounted ours within, which did beat on the dyke. After, turning their
artillery toward the seas, I mean the river of Mase, which is above a league
broad in that place, they beat away such vessels as the defendants had
anchoring before their fort. Mounsieur de Terlon departs.
Mounsieur de Terlon being Admiral and Governor of Brill, perceiving their
success, departed out of the fort in a skute, with great hazard, to recover
the Brill; presently the enemies passed their boats over the dyke into the
Mase. Being passed, Iulians boats in the Mase.
it much abated the courage of S. Aldegoundy and his garrison, not without
reason. The w^aknesse of the fort toward the water
For betwixt the fort and the water their Rampire was worth nothing; so as at a
high water it covered the dyke of the fort, as high as the parapet. The enemy
perceiving their success, Julian placed his artillery upon a Ponton.
prepared a Ponton: which they builded artificially upon their boats, and
placed on it three of their pieces. The garrison perceiving their stratageme,
having no means to avoid it, nor hope of succors; compounded for their fort,
The forte yields.
delivering the enemies their chief prisoners with their ensigns and arms.
Thus was the fort of Mayston-sluce lost, partly by reason our ships of war
durst not hazard to dismount the enemies artillery (which they might have done,
showing their accustomed valor, as they did since and before in diverse places)
but chiefly by reason our men did not cut the dyke on both sides of the fort,
to have drowned the Country; having done that, the enemy would never have
attempted the place. By reason of the strength of Delfes-hauen, the enemy
refused to attempt it. Delfes-hauen unattempted.
To say troth, they had no reason to do it; having no means to approach but
on such a dyke; and the enemy being so well fortified and manned, as their
approaches had been vain.

The King of Spain calls home the Duke d'Alua, and in his room establishes
Don Lewis de Requesence Governor of the Low Countries.
IN this time order came from the King, to retire Duke d'Alua into Spain, and
to resign his place unto Don Lewis de Requesence, Commendador Mayor de
Castillia; a soldier of great reputation for counsel, but no body for
execution; as the battle of Lapanta could witness. For this Commendador
being chief Counceller to Don John de Austria, did what he could to procure
the Christian army, not to hazard battle with the Turks. Also being in the
fight, he advanced so slowly with a rereguarde of Galleys, that he nor his came
to any blows; so as both there and in other places, always the Commendador
was reputed a coward. But belike in respect of his wit and mildness, the King
sent him into the Low Countries; perhaps persuaded, that a mild Captain
would win the hearts of the people, far better with fair means, then Duke
d'Alua with his cruelty. But in troth, both King and Council deceived
themselves; in calling away Duke d'Alua, and in making choice of such a
General as the Commendador Mayor. For by all reason, if the Duke had been
royally maintained as he ought; he had made his master absolute King over all
the seauenteene Provinces. To say troth, fury and resolution well used or
executed, had been the only ways to supprsse that nation; the Spanish being
resolved to subdue them, as they were. For all other since, the witty politic
Neatherlanders did always ouer-reach the Spanish; especially having such a
head to direct them as the Prince of Orange, and being so strongly situated;
wanting no means to maintain wars, and resolved to withstand the Spanish to
the uttermost, rather then to yield to any composition. For whether the people
be strongly situated or not; wealthy or poor; few, or great in multitudes;
being resolved to be mutinous and discontented, The error of the Spaniard in
remoouing D'Alua.
and not willing (as I said before) to be brought unto any composition, but
such as pleases themselves: God help that Prince or State, that must be
forced to compound with such a a people, by any means but by the sword; which
had been far more easy in the hands of Duke d'Alua, then of the poor
Commendador. But the emulation amongst Councellers for greatness overthrew
that service, with many others; as I will show hereafter. The Spanish Priests,
namely Cardinal Granuill, the Bishop of Toledo, with the aid of Rigomus did
persuade the King, that Duke d'Alua was too great a subject. By such means
rather then any other, Duke d'Alua was called home, and questioned for many
disorders; committed as well in other places, as in the Low Countries.

Walkheren besieged with the Princes shipping, Middleburgh relieved by the
Spaniards, diverse skirmishes betwixt the forces of either side; Mondragon
enters Middleburgh, the Spanish Navy at their return toward Antwerpe
defeated.
Whilst Julian was busy in Holland, Walkheren besieged with ships by the
States.
Mounsieur de Poyet, and Boiset Governor of Walkheren, with his brother, the
Admiral of Zeland, had besieged the Island, with a great number of ships of
war; In such sort, that nothing could enter into Middleburgh, Armue, and
Ramkins, which the enemies held. Messieurs de Beuoir, and Don Ruffello being
distressed for want of victuals in the said places, found means to acquaint
the Commendador with their estate. Julian Romero out of Holland.
Whereupon the Commendador sent for Julian to come with most of his forces, and
to leave Baldeso with the rest in Holland. Having prepared a Navy of some
hundred sail of ships, The Co^mendador sends a Navy toward Walkheren.
hoyes, and crumsters, giving them in charge unto the Masters of the Camp,
Sanio, d'Auila, Castillan of Antwerpe, and Mondragon: After, furnishing them
with all necessaries, both double manned with soldiers, and appointed with
great store of victuals, as well to relieve the distressed places, as the army
abroad; he commanded them to use all diligence, first to enter Middleburgh, and
to relieve Mondragon Governor of the Island (with his regiment of Wallons, and
some sour Companies of Spaniards) both with victuals and munition; then, to
return with the Navy for Antwerpe, and to carry with them Mounsieur de Beauoir
with his troops. Before this Navy passed Lillo, The Ramkins attempted by the
States. From the ships.
Messieurs de Poyet and Boiset had attempted the Ramkins, and anchored with
ships under the fort, which did dismount diverse pieces within; having their
tops of Musket proof, out of which our Musketeers did command the parapet next
unto them. By the mine.
Also a mine was made in the dike toward Middleburgh; which being fired,
rased a corner of the fort to little purpose; but that there was but a few
soldiers within, not half to man the walls, with a cowardly Ensign bearer
which commanded. By these means the Ramkins was delivered to Mounsieur de
Poyet some four days before the succors arrived. Yielded up.
Also there arrived from Holland, Colonel Morgan arriueth.
Collonell Morgan and his Regiment, with other Companies of Wallons and
Flemings. The Spanish succors being in-sight, The Spanish in sight.
our men planted the Spanish Ensigns on the Ramkins, and discharged a volley
of artillery as if it were for joy; only to bring their Navy to anchor under
the commandment of our artillery. Trained into danger of the shot.
Being approached and anchored, they soon perceived what friends did welcome
them: In steed of safe anchoring, they were feign to dislodge under the muck of
the dike a league off, Retire into safety. Defended by the Cannon from land.
to be safe from our artillery. Being anchored, Beauoir and Ruffello marched
with the most of their men of war to that place, haled with them four pieces
of battry, which stood their Navy in great steed; for they commanded all the
road where the Navy lay; In such sort, that albeit our Navy anchored within
half a league of theirs, betwixt them and Flushing, we durst not attempt them
in that road, by reason of their artillery mounted on the shore. Perceiving no
hope to succor their distressed places by water, they took resolution to
sail about the Island, and to land their men at a place named the Hague, Sail
toward Hague.
which stands on the neck of the Island, to the Eastward from Camfier; a league
from the said town, and some league and a half from Middleburgh. Whilst
their Navy was doubling about the Island, Are affronted by land from Flushing.
our men of war marched right against them always, not knowing their intent,
nor where they meant to land; but had they known our directions, they might
have easily entered and seized on the town of Flushing, The danger of Flushing.
in sailing by it. Of two thousand soldiers which we had in the Island, we had
not in the town two hundred. In passing by Flushing, had their Navy bent their
course into the haven, there was nothing to defend them, but a paultery bome;
which God knows, could never have endured one push of the smallest vessel.
For the town artillery, it vexed them only in sailing by it. Being entered the
haven, the soldiers had nothing to do, but to have leaped out of their ships
to shore on both sides of the haven: which might have been done easily; having
nothing to let them but the men of war, which were at their passing by a
great league off. For then (God knows) the Burgesses were nothing trained
either with arms, or any policy of defense. Also at this instant the bulwark
that flanked the haven was nothing furnished to any purpose. Therefore often
true intelligence is the best part of an enterprise, and worth always half an
army. The Spaniards land at the Hague.
Being anchored at the Hague named before, they landed their men and placed on
that dike certain pieces of artillery; in like sort as they did at their last
anchoring, for defense of the Navy. Having landed their victuals, and such
necessaries as they had to furnish their distressed places; they sent to
Beauoir and Ruffello, to send them all the means they could to transport their
necessaries. Being arrived, Relieve Middleburgh.
Mondragons men with victuals and munition departed toward Middleburgh: where
bebeing arrived, Mounsieur de Beauoir and Don Ruffello returned with the old
garrison to the Hague. In this time all our men of war were arrived at
Camfier, the next place to front them; Are affronted by the Princes soldiers.
so was our Navy anchored within half a league of theirs, half the way
betwixt the Hague and Camfier. Mounsieur de Roll Governor of the said town,
having set good order in his town, Mounsieur de Boiset Governor of the whole
Island and Roll, sallied with the rest, to front the enemies at the Hague.
Being arrived right against our Navy, we being in number two thousand English,
Scots, French, Wallons, Who entrench themseues.
and Flemings, entrenched our main in that place; then we advanced some three
hundred, twelve score further, and entrenched there two hundred; and advanced
six score further, one hundred. Our guard was narrow, by reason we were
entrenched on a dike of sixteen pases broad, the seas on the one side, on the
other side meadows environed with ditches, not passable with armed men,
without means to make bridges. The enemies perceiving our lodgings, belike
thought it was to cut off their passage betwixt the Hague and Middleburgh.
Whereupon not having passed half their necessaries, presently to intercept us,
Are charged by the Spaniards.
they marched full against us upon the dike: a thousand or more advanced into
the meadows right against us; some five hundred on our side toward
Middleburgh, followed with all their troops. Those on the dike forced our
first troop to run, following them in rout unto our second. Being on the
trench of our two hundred, Who are forced to retire.
we plagued them with a volley of shot, so as they were driven to retire above
twelve score; where they stood until their shot in the meadows approached
near unto us. Collonell Morgan perceiving the heat of their skirmish, The
English advance.
advanced his Lieutenant Collonell, Captain Bingham, with two hundred shot and
armed men: So did Boiset and Roll advance with them, and many of the other
nations. Withal, the enemies advanced with great resolution upon the dike: The
Spaniards second charge
so did the others in the meadows pass over the ditches with planks and
hurdles; In such manner that those troops annoyed us greatly. For they flanked
us with volleyes on our sides so cruelly, that being at the push of the pike
with the troops on the dike, The Princes soldiers flee. The Spaniards enter
the trench
our men behind made away. The enemies perceiving their retreit, passed over
the trench, where they executed and hurt many: by reason we fought and knew
not of our fellows retreit, until our backs were toward the enemies. Who
followed us so close and with such fury, Gives chase to the Princes soldiers.
that our great stand ran above half a league; until we came to a strong
trench at a winde-mill, where we kept a good guard, which was commanded by the
town artillery. Retireth.
The enemy perceiving the place too hot to attempt; and not guardeable being
possessed, by reason of the town arttillery, retired. We perceiving their
retreit, began to take such courage that we resolved to charge them; Is pursued
advancing with a cry and fresh resolution; charging their rereguard, their
vanguard doubled their pases. Perceiving their countenances, it gave further
courage; whereupon our charge began to be resolute and furious: Put to flight
and executed.
so as all their troops ran; where we executed of them a far greater
number, then they did of ours in our first retreit. We followed them through
their lost trenches, close to their trench and village of Hague. By reason of
the nights approach we quitted our skirmish, and kept guard at our trenches:
which we mended all the night, keeping good guard and far better order then
we did before. All the night both town and succors transported their
necessaries into the town; so that by their great number of skutes and
wagons, all their victuals and necessaries were entered the town before two of
the clock the next day in the afternoon; And as I said before, Mondragon with
his, Mondragon in Middleburgh.
entered Middleburgh; and Beauoir with Don Ruffello and their followers arrived
at the Hague. By reason of our equal losses and weariness, neither of both
parties were eager to procure any skirmish: The Spaniards return to Antwerp.
So that according to the Commendadors directions, their troops embarked. Our
fleet perceiving their meaning to sail for Antwerpe, belike to discharge an
honest report to the world; our Chiefes resolved to fight with them by sea.
Are charged by the Prince his fleet.
Having taken resolution and embarked the most of our soldiers, we made
toward them with good courage, Capt. York.
as they sailed by Camfier; Captain York being aboard the Vice Admiral of
Flushing, with a great number of young English gentlemen and soldiers, the
most of Collonell Morgans Company, procured our Vice Admiral to board their
Vice Admiral: which he easily yielded unto, for the man was valiant and eager
of himself to charge. So was valiant Mounsieur de Boiset our Admiral, Boiset.
with the most or all his Navy very eager to charge their fleet; being well
manned with good store of gallant soldiers, of the nations of English, Scots,
and French. Being close together, with great courage ours cried Amain.
According to direction, The Spanish borded.
our Vice Admiral boarded theirs: So did valiant Robinson a Scottish Captain,
being in one of the best Flushioners, board their rere Admiral. Mounsieur
Boiset charged their Admiral through their Navy, who escaped with good
sailing. Captain Harry and Ambrose Duke, the valiant Frenchmen and Wallons,
being aboard of some of our best sails, boarded also two of their best sorts
of vessels. The enemy perceiving our resolution, Flee.
fell in rout before the wind, with all the sails they could make, to recover
the river of Antwerpe. Notwithstanding, we took, burnt, and forced to run
on the sands, above two and thirty sails; 32 sails of theirs taken
and returned victorious, with their Vice Admiral, rere-Admirall, and diverse
others into our town of Camfier: where we filled our prisons with Spaniards,
Wallons, and great numbers of their mariners. This victory recompensed in
honor double theirs; although not so profitable as their victualling of
Midbleburgh and Armu; which by that means held out many a month the longer,
and would have done still, but for the defeat of Rumers wall. Notwithstanding
that Middleburgh was victualled and far better manned, principally by the
person of brave Colonel Mondragon; the Prince gave not over his determined
purpose, but charged both the Besoits, The Prince again besieges the Island.
I mean the Governor and his brother the Admiral, to use all diligence to
make sure guarde round about the Island with their ships, as they did before;
and to cut off all succors from entering any more. His preparation
To that end they prepared a far greater number both of ships and soldiers;
on which enterprise the Prince did set his rest, with good reason. For he was
assured to win the Island in time, being master on the Seas. Mondragon^
distress.
Within few months, Mondragon and his began to fall into distress, for want
of victuals. Mounsieur de Poyet sent into Walkheren.
To terrify them the more, the Prince sent his Lieutenant General Mounsieur
de Poyet into Walkheren, with the most of his men of war, saving Colonel
Morgans regiment; which remained in Strinland, standing on terms for pay, and
leave to return for England, The English malecontent.
by reason of some discourtesies that fell out betwixt the Prince and the
Officers of the said regiment. Notwithstanding diverse Gentlemen of that
regiment accompanied Mounsieur de Poyet; amongst others Captain Walter Morgan,
Master Christopher Carlell, and Master Anthony Fant. Mondragon fearing Poyet
would attempt Armu, sent his Lieutenant Colonel into the said town with a
strong guarde; by reason the place was but newly fortified, but very strong,
without many hands to defend it. Also he kept a strong guarde at the head of
Middleburgh, a mile out of the town, to defend the haven. Poyet advanced his
forces on the Ramkins dyke, toward Middleburgh. Being arrived right against
the enemies guards at the head, ours entrenched themselves in that place;
lodging our forces on the dyke, from the Ramkins to the said first guarde:
having betwixt us and the enemy the haven, which might be some threescore
broad; where we had diverse good skirmishes, as well by those that sallied from
Middleburgh, as by them that lodged at the head.

The occasion of Sir Roger Williams serving the Spaniard.
Colonel Morgan being arrived in England, with his regiment in good order, to
the number of seven hundred, who being mustered before her Majesty near to
S. James, the Colonel and some four hundred of his best men were sent into
Ireland; which in truth were the first perfect Harguebushiers that were of our
Nation, and the first troops that taught our Nation to like the Musket, as I
said in my little discourse of the Spanish discipline: There also I touch how
Philip de Commines speaks much of Lewis the eleventh, but nothing how he
quitted his Duke of Burgundy. Most true it is, at Colonel Morgans going into
Ireland, hearing how the young Prince of Condy was newly escaped from France
into Germany, meaning (as it was told me) to leauie an army, and to march with
all speed into France: this bruit, and my greedy desires to travail to see
strange wars, made me to quite the voyage into Ireland, and to go with all
speed toward the said Prince. Being arrived in Germany, I found the Prince
nothing ready to march, nor any speech of his sudden leauie. Having spent
there all the time I could, want of crowns forced me to return for England.
Passing from Colen toward Antwerpe, and entering Lire in Brabant, I was brought
before the Master of the Camp Julian Romero; who amongst many questions
enquired of me, what Noblemen in England I knew best. I answered, the Earl of
Pembroke; whom I served a Page. He replied, what? he that was General of the
English before S. Quintin? I never honored any man more: and withal requested
me earnestly to try his courtesy in the Spanish army; assuring me to depart
when pleased me. Having spent all my crowns, and being loath to return into
England without seeing something; I promised to stay. Also in those days there
was no dispute betwixt her Majesty and the Spanish King, to my knowledge. This
was the manner, and the first hour that I entered into the Spanish service.

Middleburgh in distress, the Spanish prepare a Navy to relieve it, which is
beaten and overthrown by the Nassawians in a furious conflict.
MOndragon feeling his wants, aduertized the Commendador; who perceiving no
means to succor him, but by sea, which could not be without forcing the
Princes ships, prepared all the sails and means he could. In time he made
ready some 120 sail: The Spanish preparation to relieve Middleburgh.
of which were foure-score of war, as well ships as Crumsters and Hoyes, the
rest victuallers, laden with all necessaries to furnish the distressed places.
Being in readiness, some at Antwerpe, some at Bargen up Some, the rest at
Tergoose, he gave them in charge to his masters of Camp, Julian Romero and
Santio d'Auila Generals.
Julian Romero and Santio d'Auila, desiring them for fashion sake to accept
Mounsieur de Beuoyr for Admiral, and to give him some grace, in respect of his
disabling for the commandment of Zealand. This he did only to flatter the
Wallons: by reason Mounsieur de Beuoyr was descended from one of their
principal houses. The Princes Navy.
The Prince hearing their intent, prepared for his Navy all or the most of the
ships of war, that Holland and Zeland could make at that time, to the number
of some two hundred: a few ships, the rest Crumsters and Hoyes. These are the
best ships to fight in those waters, by reason the most of them draw but little
water, and carry for the most part principal good artillery; some demi Cannons,
and many whole Culuerings. For those waters are full of sands and many dangers,
The nature of the sea.
although it be broad in some places ten of our miles, all covered with seas;
notwithstanding not nauigable in the most places, but in narrow streams:
Insomuch as in many places you may discover steeples and banks, which in time
past were Islands like unto the rest. For this cause I suppose those Countries
do carry the name of Sealand. The best ships for that sea.
Also those small sails turn far shorter and readier, then other ships in
those narrow passages; and keep far better by a wind. Having this Navy in
a readiness well manned, especially with great store of good Mariners,
besides a good number of soldiers of Scots, French, and Neatherlanders; he
commanded his Admiral Mounsieur de Boiset, to advance with his Navy betwixt
Siricksey and Tergoose, The Princes Navy at Siricksey.
where the enemies must pass; there to try the fortune of war, rather then
they should succor Mondragon. After finishing all preparations, the
Commendador divided his Navy named before into three squadrons. 3 Squadrons of
Spaniards.
The greatest vessels and the far more in number, Santio d'Auila at Tergoose.
he commanded Santio d'Auila to advance under the Island of Tergoose; there to
anchor under the favor of some artillery mounted on the shore, and to stay in
readiness until he received further direction. Himself with the rest of his
Council and army marched to Bargen-vp-some; where he found Julian Romero and
his Admiral Beuoyr, ready to set out with the rest of his Navy, staying but
for his directions. He divided their vessels into two squadrons; giving them
equally to the Admiral and Julian. Julian Romero and Boiset.
All his Navy being furnished to the uttermost he could, Want of Mariners
among the Spaniards.
they wanted Mariners, especially of the same Countrymen, that were well
acquainted with those sands and shallow waters; but they were very well manned
with brave land soldiers: But not of soldiers.
for they had in them some 90. ensigns of soldiers, Spanish, Burgundians and
Wallons. The Commendador, after placing himself with his Nobility and a great
troop of men of war on the high bank of Brabant, within half a league of
Bergen, where he might see very easily the place where the battle was
fought: having given a signal to Santio d'Auila from a hill on Brabant side,
The Commendador gives a Signal. Santio de Auila aduanceth.
which he might easily perceive; Santio de Auila advanced his squadron with all
the sails he could toward Romers wall, where the Nassawians lay in good
order of battle, having divided their battle into four squadrons. The order
of the Nassawians.
Mounsieur de Boiset the Admiral of Zealand, commanded the greatest; the
Admiral of Holland, the second, which was his right wing; the Admiral of
Sirickesey the third, which was the left wing; Boisets Vice Admiral Boenire
commanded the fourth; whom Boyset commanded to make all the sails he could
toward Santio d'Auila. Being arrived within culuering shot, he commanded
Boenire to lead Santio d'Auila over the shallow waters, if he would follow him;
if not, to keep in the wind as near unto him as he could; without fighting,
unless the enemy would force him, until Boyset began. Julian and Beuoyr
having not two leagues to sail unto the Nassawians, who were ready under the
head of Bergen in good order; and perceiving that Santio d'Auila could not
sail unto them, by reason that most of his vessels drew too deep water, and
that his smallest vessels were in fight with Boenire: they advanced with great
courage in good order, Julian and Beuoir advance.
thinking to have sailed betwixt the Nassawians and Brabant side, and to have
joined with Santio d'Auila. By this time Santio d'Auilaes smallest vessels were
in hot skirmish with Boisets Vice Admiral; but many of his greatest vessels
were run on ground, with very ambition to come to fight before their
fellows; Julian and Beuoyr being right against the Nassawians. The joining of
the fight.
Boiset having the wind, made with all resolution toward the enemy; so did
they abide them with no less courage: In such sort, that the valiant Admiral
Mounsieur de Boiset, Boiset and Julian boardeth each other.
and the resolute brave Master of the Camp Julian Romero, boarded each other:
so did the Admiral of Sirickesey, So Beuoyr and the Admiral of Sirickesey.
and the Admiral Beuoyr board each other, with no less courage; so did
Boenire, Boisets Vice Admiral, board the Vice Admiral of Santio d' Auila.
Being in wonderful hot fight a long time, the most part of the vessels,
especially the squadrons of Julian and Boiset, had bin on aboard each other
near two hours; The length of the fight.
the most part of which time they were at the push of the pike, and blows of
swords. Boiset and his fellows were more expert seamen then the Spanish
Commanders, The Nassawians better seamen then the Spaniards.
and far better furnished with all manner of provisions that belong to a
sea fight; especially fireworkes: which they employed to the Spaniards great
loss. So that Iulians Alfere being aboard of Boiset, was blown up with
powder; and with him threescore at the least of his brauest soldiers. And had
they not done it at that instant, Julian himself had been gone; for he was
entering with the rest. The Spaniards were cruelly plagued in all quarters,
especially by reason Santio d'Auilaes great vessels could not come to succor
their fellows, among which he was in person; being a most valiant man,
accompanied with a great number of their best soldiers. Julian flies.
Julian perceiving his fellows distressed without remedy, and himself most
of all; with wonderful hazard, he and diverse of his Gentlemen and soldiers
did leap into their skuts, which carried them to the shore where the
Commendador stood; so did many others escape by the like means. Likewise
diverse of their smallest vessels ran themselves on the shore where the
Commendador stood; many were fast on the sands; diverse were burnt; the rest
made all the sails they could to recover the river of Antwerpe. And Santio
d'Auila.
Amongst these was Santio d'Auila; notwithstanding he had grounded his own
vessel, in seeking to come to fight. The Nassawians followed them into the
river of Antwerpe, defeating and taking many as they ran away. The Spanish
loss.
By the Spaniards own reports, they lost in this battle above threescore
sail of all sorts; forty seven ensigns; above six hundred brass pieces, of
which above 200. were taken out of the Cittadle of Antwerpe; slain and taken
above six thousand soldiers and mariners. Few were saved that came to their
hands, but all or the most that were taken were slain or drowned. Amongst many
of their Commanders and men of good account, their Admiral Beauoir was slain
valiantly, at the push of pike: The Nassawians loss.
So was Santio Dauilaes vice Admiral. The victorious escaped not scotfree. For
their Admiral Boiset lost his right eye with the blow of a pike, the Admiral
of Holland sore hurt with a shot in the thigh; Boenyre, Boisets vice Admiral
was slain, with many other of good mark, besides at the least sixteen
hundred soldiers and mariners. Thus was tke battle of Romers-wall begun and
ended. Perhaps some will say, because there was no greater slaughter and
confusion, it may not be termed worthy and comparable unto diverse others. But
in troth I heard diverse report, besides the Commendador, who had been at
Lapanta and here; that the fury there was nothing comparable unto this; The
fury of the fight.
number to number. For my part, I never saw any thing so furious. I may well
speak it, for there are some of good quality yet alive, can testify the same.
But for Julian Romero himself, I had bin blown up with his Alfere; yet I
escaped with as great hazard as any other of his followers. But I will dispute
against any soldier, that no fight has been comparable unto it by sea, these
five hundred years; saving that before Sluice, fought by our famous King Edward
the third, against the French King and the Earl of Flanders, and that of
Lapanta.

FINIS.

