THE TRAGEDY OF ALCESTE and ELIZA.

As it is found in Italian, in La Croce racquistata.

Collected, and translated into English, in the same verse, and number, By Fr.
Br. Gent.

At the request of the right virtuous Lady the Lady ANNE WINGFIELD Wife unto
that noble Knight, Sir Anthony Wingfield Baronet his Majesty's High Shiriffe
for the County of Suffolk.

LONDON, Printed by Th. Harper for John Waterson, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crown 1638.

My Book.
Think thou to escape, when no book scapes, that passes
The Press, but it is pressed to under-go
The censure, both of wisemen and of asses,
That can, and cannot judge of what we do?
No, look not for it: an Eagles eye will spy
Spots in the Sun, no other bird can see;
And yet the Owl that has the weakest eye
Will see by owle-light, twice as much as she.
Why then prevent them both, and first confess
Thy fault, and mine that sent thee to the Press.
Reader.
IF I were by thee when thou read'st my Book,
I should observe thy courtesy and skill.
And happily conjecture by thy look
How I might mend some faults that escaped my quill:
For I must tell thee, I was never yet
Ashamed to borrow of a better wit.
But if I should perceive thee wink or scowle
At any trifle, with thy pur-blind eyes,
I should account thee but an idle Owl,
That (so unlike an Eagle) catchest flies.
For though my stock of wit be nere so little,
I scorn to have it said, I rob the Spittle.
For the better understanding of this History, you may observe, That
COsdras (or as some call him Cosroes) King of Persia, at such time as he took
Jerusalem from the Christians, amongst other spoils carried away the remainder
of the Cross which Constantine had left. And it was fourteen years before
the Emperor Heraclius could recover it out of the Pagans hands.

The occasion, progress, and issue of this war, is the Argument of this
Book, entitled La Croceracquistata: out which this tale is taken. Wherein the
Author had a large field: for all the great Princes and Captains of the world
were in these two Armies.

Alceste and Eliza were two of them, which were in the Christian army. Whose
story on^y I have picked out, as I find it in several places of ^he Italian
Book.

Every abruption in my Author is observed with a digression of mine own,
whereby you are directed to the very leaf and line. That they that list to
compare the translation with the original may see, that I have observed not
only the sense, but the length and number of his staves.

Prince Theodor (who begins this Narration) was the Emperor Heraclius Nephew,
and appointed by him to entertain the Popes Nuncio, Artemio, being sent unto
the army from his Holiness, to appease certain differences happened amongst
the Princes there.

The rest is easy to be understood.

Wherein if there be more Poetical liberty then the precise rule of truth
will warrant; or less regard to avoid superstition then there ought to be
amongst us; let the fault be his, that I have too precisely followed.

The Tragedy of Alceste and Eliza.
When Theodor had made a short relation
To Artemio of the present jarre,
And named each Knight, their nature and their nation
That served Heraclio in that holy war,
Against the Persian King, and come thus far,
He paused a while; and then began again:
As you may see, if you will but take the pain.
LIB. 3. Page 49. 28.
BEhold (quoth he) that hindmost couple there,
Whose colors and devise are white and red;
A pair for gentleness without compare,
Whom love has linked in a lawful bed.
Alceste and Eliza those two are
With hearts conjoined, and souls unsevered.
She (thanks to Love) for him's grown bold in war.
And he in peace makes amorous war with her.
29.
Wounded with grief and love, the maid was brought
Well near the period of her loathed life:
Though now for patience and affection thought,
The only pattern of a constant wife.
Her Lovers absence, such despair had wrought,
That full four years together, in that strife,
She kept the woods, and hard adventures sought:
Her love unknown, her clothing rude and naught.
30.
She is the only Woman in the Camp,
And her The Emperor suffers though a Woman:
But such her virtues are that they instamp
Her valor equal to the manliest Man.
Her arrows fly as if with Jove's bright lamp
They were directed to the mark: she can
With shaftes from out her golden quiver there
Kill beasts that run, and fowls that fly in the air.
31.
Her Bow does promise, we the promise take,
Of greater matters, from her femall hand,
And I the sad and true report could make
Of all her griefs, and let you understand
How she became an Archer, for whose sake;
But that I fear your patience to offend.
And here he paused; as if he stood in doubt
He should but trouble him, to tell it out.
32.
The Ambassador, perceiving what desire,
Prince Theodoro had to tell his tale
Of those two Lovers, that in endless fire
Of grief and Love were sacrificed for all,
Turning about to hear a case so dire,
(Though accidents of Love be full of gaul)
Commands himself (as courtesy does still
In such light things) to please an others will.
33.
And answered thus, I shall be glad to hear,
Since happily you are not loath to tell,
The sharp events of honest Lovers, where
In length of time, they end their troubles well.
This said, he held his peace. When Theodor,
With voice distinct and clear, of what befell
(Untold before) a fresh report did make,
And turning to the Nuncio thus he spoke.
34.
In the Laconic sea Citera lies,
As fair an Island as the Sun can see
In this our Horizon, and one likewise
Surrounded with the sea as pleasantly;
There were these Lovers borne, and that implies
Their tender age was spent as merrily,
In laughning, sporting, playing still together,
When neither place nor age denide it either.
35.
There did a Love that knew not what Love was
Knit on their hearts a knot they never knew;
They Would sigh sometimes, but when they sighed, alas
They understood not whence that sighing grew:
For as for fear or hope, no cause there was;
(Though hope and fear increast their love, it is true)
Thus, silly things, some space before they know
What it is to Love, do perfect Lovers grow.
36.
Their age increased, and their desires as fast,
Which afterward they often quench and light
With, marriage bed; till envious Fortune cast
To spoil their pleasures, and to part them quite.
Cosdra girt Carthagen about the waste,
And we were summoned to defend our right.
The Army marches, then to sea it hailes,
And covers all the Ocean with their sails.
37.
Thus hard necessity (which choice denies)
Compelled the Knight to leave his dearest wife;
His leave he took with water in his eyes
And looked as pale as if he left his life.
At last they part, and he the sail unties,
Which Boreas sighs and his do drive astrife.
Away he goes, but goes without a heart,
For fair Eliza will not let that part.
38.
His eyes full-fraught with tears, his breast with woes,
This poor distressed husband onward drives,
And sadly through the watery Forest rows,
To succor Carthage, or to spend their lives.
But it was too late, the town was lost, and those
Which took it gone, before his fleet arrives.
He staid awhile to put his ships in frame
And then returned the fleet from whence it came.
39.
Now in this interim there was a Knight,
Newly arrived on the Affric side,
To lend poor Carthage (as he thought he might)
Some little help in this their greatest need:
Who after supper (when men's hearts are light,
And take least heed of what they say) espide
The enamoured Alcest, stand with down-cast eyes,
Observed him sad, and does the cause surmise.
40.
Fie Sir (quoth he) banish this melancholy,
Which clouds your brow, and corasives your heart:
Thought (you do know) is but a wise-mans folly,
And does naught else but duplifie our smart.
If it be Love possesses you so wholly,
(As many youths it does that lack the art)
Why pluck it up betimes; there is no such ill,
As to be subject to a woman's will.
41.
Nor can there be a woman that is not base,
That wretched sex, has neither love nor faith,
It is not valor, wit, or comely grace,
But gold, it is only gold their fancy fwa'ith.
IN have tried a thousand, yet not one whose case
Diffreth in this: I loathe them all he says.
And reckons up a number so embraced
By him for money; and describes the last.
42.
Upon Citera shore that does behold
Asopoes back, a stately house is set
Built partly on a rock, as if it would
Behold it self in the sea that closes it.
There had I one, (but as the rest for gold)
Eliza called, a rare and dainety bit
And if ones looks could have persuaded me
That any had been honest, t'had been she.
43.
Some what retired, and in black garments clad,
A nigard of her hair, and modest look
Demure in gate, and rather slow then sad,
Reserv'dly wise in all she undertook,
A down-cast eye, from whence her beauties had
Fixed at her foot the rays they from it took,
Seemed thus to say. I look not, view not me,
For I regard no others misery.
44.
But as loves wealth the more it is concealed
Appears the more, and moves the more desire,
And love burns hottest till it be revealed,
(Denial serving but to blow the fire)
So I Eliza much the fairer held,
In those mean clothes, and longed the more to try her:
But so her Nurse to ease my love had wrought
That to conclusion now the match was brought.
45.
This woman lean with age, and meager grown,
Faines religion, counterfeits devotion,
Goes muttering on her beads in such a tone,
As you would think her matines never done:
You often see her kiss the holy ground,
And knock her hollow breast until it sound,
She Is mistress of deceit, and with her art
Can turn the key of every others heart.
46.
This aged Beldame silently by night,
Convei'd me to the place mine Idol lay:
An unfrequented passage out of sight,
She privately had opened toward the sea.
Her chamber and her bed this wandering Knight
Described at full, and all he could bewray;
Lavish of speech at such a lavish table,
Where wine of Creet had made his tongue more able.
47.
Whereby the husband being made too sure
Of that afront which he had done him, cried,
How dare thou (villain) think thy self secure
Whilst thus thou gloriest in so foul a deed?
Shall I my wives shame and mine own endure?
Heaven sent thee hither to receive thy meede:
At my hand take it; when drawing out his sword,
He furiously assailed him at the board.
48.
The Adulterer confounded and surprised,
Had scarce his drunken hand upon his sword,
When ill defended, as he was advised,
He wounded fell, to die the earth in blood.
His fortune with his folly had devised,
To end his supper at a sadder board.
Amongst the pots and platters on the ground
His carcass lay: his soul in wine was drowned.
49.
Alceste lingers not, but hastes to sea
With one small Pinnace, leaving all the rest;
The South Wind swelled his sails, and he made way
Through deepest waves, with deeper thoughts oppressed.
A deadly palenesse on his face there lay,
A sadness worse then death possessed his breast,
He found no rest or place, sometimes he brake
Out into sighs, but nere a word he spoke.
50.
The fourth day that this desperate lover quit
The Afric shore, he might discern in sight,
(The flatnesse of the sea permitting it)
Fair Citerea's Isle, though nothing nigh it:
He altered then his course, at last he litt
Upon the coast of Mallea, when 'twas night.
From thence a servant to his wife he sent,
With this commission, and to this intent.
51.
Go thou (quoth he) and get my wife aboard,
And when thou have her far enough from shore,
That no man can perceive, or hear a word,
Then murder her: I need not tell thee more,
Which if thy sword refuse, why let thy sword
Be spared from blood, so thou will cast her over.
Be sure to make her sure, and lend no ear
To any scuce she makes, or any prayer.
52.
Away he goes, resolved to do the deed;
Comes to Citera, in Alcestes name
Salutes Eliza, who was soon agreed
To meet her husband, since he wild the same.
And (lest his tale might some suspicion breed)
He told her where he left him, whence he came;
And that he should be forced to stay a while
Before he could return into the Isle.
53.
The loving wife that knew the messenger
Easly believed the message which he brought.
And joyful of the news, suspects no danger
But sets her heedlesse feet into his boat.
The Rascal leaves the shore, and in his anger,
When time and place was fitting (as he thought)
More raging then the sea whereon he went,
Flies on the Woman, gives his fury vent.
54.
And on her gentle face (that might appease
The Lions fury, and the Adders sting,
And was of force to mollify with ease
The hardest Oaks that in the deserts spring)
When he had fixed his stern and staring eyes,
In act as desperate as spite could bring,
He wrapped his left hand in her tender hair,
And with his right he did his sword up-reare.
55.
And with abusive speech (disjoyntly placed
With horror of the fact) dispatch says he,
Eliza thou must die, this is thy last,
Thy time is come, thou mai'st no longer be:
Will thou have sword or sea? she wretch in have
(Put to so hard a choice as here you see)
With lips as pale as earth, and trembling breath,
Required at least the reason of her death.
56.
The reason is (quoth he) to tell thee plain
Thy husbands will, for he commands it so;
This said, he tug'd her by the hair again
And moved his sword to give the fatal blow.
At that, (like Phoebus in a shower of rain)
Her beauties thorough her watery glasses show
Come on (quoth she) obey my Lord, and thine,
If such his pleasure be, even such is mine.
57.
For him, not for my self, my life was sweet,
For him I loath it that does it despise,
Love made it his at first, and his t's yet,
On him it rests, for him it lives and dies.
And though my death with some displeasure meet,
Because it parts me from the thing I prize,
Yet his contentmet is so dear to me,
It Will sweeten every torment thou shall see.
58.
But, one thing rests, which I must entreat,
As the last service thou can do for me,
That when thou see my Lord, thou will repeat
These words, which dying hardly uttered be,
Thy late Eliz whose faithful love as yet Has never wronged thee, dies as
true to thee.
And here she turned to God; then did expose
Her fair breast, naked to his cruel blows.
59.
But he that was before so armed with rage,
That neither tears nor prayers had prevailed,
The greatness of ones heart, ones constant carriage
Prisoner and bound (who would believe it) quail'd,
His sword was up to lop her tender age,
Put pity had so charmed him, that it failed,
Unable now to strike or fetch a blow,
His arm grew weak, his hand his sword let go.
60.
Which made him leave the work, and turning to her
More mildly then before, these words he spoke.
I would thy death were not within my power,
Or that I could remit it for thy sake;
But thou art wife unto that Lord of our,
I but his servant that this undertake:
Yet if thou will accept of what I Will give,
Instead of death, thou shall in exile live.
61.
If thou will promise on thy faith before,
To get thee gone, and never return again,
I Will set thee yonder on that rusticke shore,
And say I drowned thee in the Ocean:
From whence thou mai'st by travel more and more
Absent thy self, and these our coasts refrain.
But swear thou will not stay in any place,
Where news may come of his Eliza's case.
62.
She answered, Friend dispatch, strike through this breast*
Why would thou have me live, since I forgo
That cruel one? who (such) yet I protest
Is my Lives Life. Let fall that deadly blow,
Let fall that hand, that hand to death addressed,
Let me not live against his will to go:
For such a life would be a death to me,
And any death for him will pleasing be.
63.
Thus she entreats for that life parting blow,
To show the duty of a loving wife.
But now he will not consent it should be so
That heretofore would have denied her life.
A strange dissension here is seen to grow,
Betwixt these parties, and a noble strife,
An innocent young Woman begs to die,
Which he that was to kill her, does deny.
64.
But after that Eliza had somewhile
Begged death, of that her murderer in vain,
And by entreating in an unuis'd style,
Had showed a noble courage to remain,
(In hope her innocence to reconcile,
At better leisure, if she were not slain)
Commands her self at last to be content,
And to a loathed life does give consent.
56.
And both her cheeks bedewed with her tears,
(Like untouched Roses in a mornings frost)
To lead her bani'sht feet to him she swears
Amongst strange people, in a foraine cost.
Her veil she leaves, and cuts her golden hairs,
And all that may disguise her beauties most.
She sadly throws her purple robe aside,
And in a servile habit does abide.
66.
He lends it her: and on a desert place
He leaves her weeping; steals himself from thence.
She over the mountains all-alone does trace,
Tastes little food but what her sorrow vents.
Studies to seem uncivile rude and base,
As if she had been bred to give offense,
Like those rude people that she met with ever;
Yet does her study and her art deceive her.
67.
In vain she strives to hide the gentle air
Of her aspect, her fashion, or her gate;
Her courtlike carriage will not rude appear,
Nor yet her eyes their lovelines abate.
Her fair hands show too white, her skin too fair
In all she does they mark too great a state.
As when a cloud does overspread the sun,
With her black curtains, yet the dai's not done.
68.
Now when sh'had wandered up and down 10. moons,
A forlorn stranger, in an unknown land:
And with her scalding sights, and inward groans
Had made the woods resound that were at-hand;
A courteous Shepherd that had heard her mones
Received her home into his household band:
Where (taken for a Boy) she is set to keep
Sometimes great cattle, sometimes flocks of sheep.
69.
And with a sheephooke, and a Shepherds accents,
(Accents too sweet for such a mean profession)
She drives her flocks unto the hills ascents,
To feed or fold them, as she sees dicretion.
The woods attentive to her sad laments,
She makes compassionate, beyond expression.
The rivers and the groves by turns condole
The lamentations of her vexed soul.
70.
Where standing sadly (on a time) she spied
A mountaine-goat, come, running toward the wood
She kept her close, and striking at his side
The steel devoured his life, and sucked his blood.
His one horn to the other then she tide,
And made thereof a Bow both strong and good.
Wherewith she quickly such an Archer grew,
As Parthia or Persia never knew.
71.
With this she scoured the woods, and when it was night
Came richly laden home wards with her pray,
And where the thickest trees most hindered light,
There all alone she spent the weary day,
Breathing those passions out, which still invite
The usual tribute, which her eyes did pay.
And after all her weeping, all her pain,
The air in sighs, the grass in tears remain.
72.
Long she continued in this bitter plight,
Which had the blossom of her beauty blasted;
Her glad sad April would afford no light,
For in obscurity it ever lasted.
Until by chance, a certain ventrous Knight
Most deadly wounded, toward this Cottage hasted,
Where shortly after he his life forsook,
Whose horse and armor this Virago took.
73.
With these she meant, and presently assai'd
To prove her self a Knight amongst the best.
She thought her death was long-enogh delai'd,
Or that her sorrow lived too long (at least)
And though the hard, and sturdy armor laid
Too sore a burden, on her tender breast,
Yet still she bore it: and I know not whether
The steel grew softer, or her body harder.
74.
Mean while, the servant (unto whose great care
Her death was left) returned unto his Lord,
And told him, how he dragged her by the hair,
And having killed her, cast her overbord.
Well, then (quoth he) take thou that money there,
But get thee gone; he now so much abhord
The act, and feared the name of homicide,
He could no more the actors sight abide.
75.
Away he goes. But now more doubts then one
The credulous husband hammers in his heart.
He doubts the occasion may be small or none;
And now repents him of so rash a part.
Comes to Citera, takes the Nurse alone,
(He fiercely looks, she as she would depart)
At last he questions her (too late grown wise)
With sword in hand, and fire in both his eyes.
76.
Come-on thou Queen (quoth he) For I will know
The truth of all, who was it that thou brought
To wrong my wife and me? dispatch and show
(For thou art she that my dishonor wrought'st)
The aged devil at such a fearful blow
Fell trembling down, her heart was wholly lost.
And craving pardon, told in what degree
Her self was guilty, but Eliza free.
77.
Overcome my Lord with gold, I must confess
I heark'ned to a loving fools desire,
Who came well stored with lust, with wit the less,
To crave my help, his heart was so on fire
But I that knew it was time but lost to press
Your chaste Eliza, never once would try her.
My wits I tried, and by another moine
Contented him with fraud, my self with coin.
78.
Terea I persuaded to receive
The foolish Lover in Eliza's room:
For Terea's age and stature would deceive
(They are so like your wives) a wiser groom.
The ass or'e-joy'd with what he did conceive
I brought unto your very marriage room.
For I had made your ignorant wife, by art,
Remove that night into an other part.
79.
I left the gallant there awhile; who stayed
Full of desire, expecting my return:
At last I came, and brought with me the maid,
Wrapped in my Mistress gown, to fit his turn.
A light (scarce giving light in that dark shade)
I suddenly put-out, it should not burn:
And in your chamber, and your very bed
They took their pleasures, and their pleasures fed.
80.
And I, before the light from-out the east
Should show it self, or what he might would hide,
Importuned him to leave his restless rest,
And steal away before he were discride.
And he whose hot desire (as then he gest
Was satisfied at full) went out unspide.
And here the Beldam staid. Alceste stood
Vnmov'd at first: then rage enflamed his blood.
81.
Thou damned wretch (quoth he) through thee have I
Then slain my loving, chaste, and loyal wife,
(Or rather life) and that too wrongfully.
Thy fault shall never pass without thy life.
He was about to strike, when suddenly
The baseness of the object stayed his knife.
He runs from her to Terea to know
Whether the queen had told him true or no.
82.
He finds it so: and it was no easy wound
That arrow made, for through his heart it wrought.
An extreme sorrow had his wits so drowned
That to revenge it on himself he thought;
And sure his soul had quickly been unbound
To follow hers, (a naked ghost now brought)
But that his Friends the resolution spy,
And teach him soon a better way to die.
83.
Persuaded by them not to make his death
The dire occasion of his endless woe,
He Is come to Asia, where he undergoeth
The greatest dangers that a man can know:
But howsoever he seeks to spend his breath,
Ventring a thousand ways to end it so,
His fate reserves him for a better story,
And where he seeks his death, he finds his glory.
84.
When this distressed Knight had full four years
Continued constant in this mournful plight,
(Acknowledging his error with his tears,
And never finding comfort or delight.)
A wandering Knight before the trench appears,
And calls Alceste to a single fight.
His name unknown, he still maintained the place,
And kept his bever down to hide his head.
85.
The strange defiance which this stranger made,
Came quickly to Alcestes ears by many;
He armed with speed, and on his Courser staid
The opening of the gate, then took the valley.
His visage and his carriage well bewraid
He was of courage to have answered any.
He takes his Lance, and fits himself to run,
But first unto the Knight he thus begun.
86.
I am the same Alceste, you have sought
To fight withal, yet give no reason why;
Thought that be reasonlesse, me thinks you might
Reveal your name, before we battle try.
Thou see I am a Knight, if that be ought,
Take that (quoth he) and make no more reply.
I bear thee no ill will, yet am this day
The greatest foe thou have, it is all I le say.
87.
And here their horses spurred, together went,
The stranger stoop't his lance, as well 'twas seen
He did it warily: Alceste lent
A blow upon his shield, it split again:
And yet it fell far better than he meant,
For now his Lance (more kind than he had been)
Flying in pieces, made no other wound,
But left the adverse party on the ground.
88.
Alceste lites, and runs unto his foe,
To seize his arms, when taking off his crest,
Afrighted starts, to see Eliza so:
The face was hers he knew, that he loved best,
His gentle wife he thought dead long ago,
Only maintained alive within his breast.
He stands amazed, and unremov'd, like one
Deprived of life, sense, speech, and motion.
89.
And there had di'ed (his wandering soul forsook
And fled for sudden joy so from his heart)
But that it was deprest, with grief he took
For his past error, in his nobler part.
From whence in floods of death, his life and look
Now went, now came; yet life would not depart.
Sorrow or joy might each have wrought their will,
But both conjoined, could not Alceste kill.
90.
His living wife looked on him steadfastly,
And seeing him forbear to use his brand,
She sent a silent speech from out her eye,
Which he that loves, or none, can understand.
Cruel (quoth she) thine anger satisfy;
Who rescues me? who saves me from thy hand?
Eliza's come into thy hands, that she
Obeying them, may only die by thee.
91.
I know too well Alceste, it is thy will
(Not to offend thee with the name of husband)
I should not be thy wife, or living still:
Eliza will not live, lest she offend,
I mean to die; but o do thou distill
The blood out of these veins, and there is an end.
Why staist' thou? do it: glut thy sefe at last;
Only believe, I never was unchaste.
92.
If through thy servants pity unto me,
Some four years since, I was not slaughtered,
Repent it not: for though I living be,
The shady woods have held me buried.
Now to be killed again I come to thee,
That so our wills may not be severed:
For I by thee a double death shall die,
And thou by that a double pleasure try.
93.
Alceste at these speeches fell a shaking,
Like to a reed that on the sea-banke grows
A flood of tears his sorrows overtaking
Shows his repentance, and from whence it flows.
Or'ecome with kindness, and his foul mistaking
He Is often dumb, and by his silence shows
All that his tongue locks up, and more reveals
One look of his, then want of speech conceales.
94.
But after he his fault had fully shown,
And seasoned his requests with bitter moan,
Bitter to him, but his repentance known,
More sweet to her then Hybla's nectar grown,
The loving Spouse (forgetting faults fore-gone)
Beheld him with a calmer look, like one
That sent a faithful message from her heart
Which promised pardon, profer'd peace in part.
Here ends the relation which Prince Theodore made to the Popes Nuntio the
rest of the story follows, as I find it reported by the Author, in other
places.

2 Digression.
And here my Author leaves this loving pare,
To tell what other accidents befell
In both the Armies which I must forbear,
As not b^longing to the tale I tell.
Yet lest the Reader stray too far about,
I Will lend him this short thread to help him out.
HEraclio was besieged by Cosdras host,
Within his trenches, which the Emperor
Defended bravely to the P^gans cost,
Till one Gersan (a cunning Engener)
Devised a concav'd glass, convect, imbost,
And in the f^shion of an hemisphere,
Which taking the sun beams within it is center,
Returned in fire, what but in light did enter.
This in a chariot closely he convei'd,
As near the Christians camp as well he might.
The Pagans (armed for all advantage) staid
To see what strange effect this Engine wrought.
It was no sooner to the Sun displayed,
But death and terror to the camp it brought,
And had consumed them all, but for these twain,
As you may read in this ensuing Scene.
I find in the Imperial history, that this glass was devised before the
wars betwixt Cosdras and Heraclius, to set certain ships on fire in a haven;
the truth I aver not, my Author I follow. This tale is discontinued from the 3.
to the 23. book, as appears.

Lib. 23. p. 407. 1
BOth camps had line encampt on several hills,
The one against the other diverse days,
And neither of them both had any wills
To leave the mountains for the plainer ways.
Until old Gersan (sire of arts and skils)
Though broken now with years, yet other ways
Of sounder judgment, and profounder skill,
Offered himself to be at Cosdra's will.
2.
This man was noted from his very cradle,
To be of high conceit, and deep foresight;
That could out-watch the Moon, and was as able
To make it break of day before 'twas light,
Hang stones in the air, as if the air were stable,
Turn rivers backwards to their fountains right,
Count the Suns st^ps, and measure heaven in parts,
For sense and study help him in his arts.
3.
When Gersan was conducted to the King,
He found him musing in no little fret:
He meant to give the assault; but then the thing
Which stayed him, was, the Emp'ror hindered it.
If you my Lord (says he) forbear to bring
Your standard forward, never conquered yet,
Because you see Heraclio guards the place,
Or that you think it in too strong a case.
4.
I Will promise you, by noon to burn as far
Within your enemies trenches, as a bow
Will shoot a shaft, or engine used in war
Can cast a stone, I speak but what I know.
Courage, an easy passage needs no spur;
A for unarmed will never hurt his foe,
And I with fire from heaven will make you see
The place you think too strong, too weak for me.
5.
Thus far he went: and Cosdra lending ear,
Made little doubt of what he heard him speak.
The camp arose before the day was clear,
And marched away as soon as 'twas day-breake,
Descending down the hill a full carriere,
Approch't the Roman Camp, which was not weak,
The Pagan King had then so huge an host,
It filled the plains, and covered all the coast.
6.
The Sun was risen, and from both the camps
The shadows through his golden rays showed bright.
The armours, kindled by celestial lamps,
Were reinflamed by a greater light.
The mooving steel seemed fields of corn, whose clamps
A southern wind had breathed upon in spite.
Helmets, targets, curaces, and the rest
Were but as straw, or ears of corn, at best.
7.
The vangard fierce Rubeno managed,
The rereward Cosdra; and the maine was led
By stern Armallo, on a Thracian steed,
Pide white and black, and richly furnished,
Moving undauntedly his lofty head
Above each squadron; for it might be said
There was no meaner man that with his crest
Could reach his shoulder, or above his breast.
8.
This Leader marched in haste, and with him led
The ample Army which he did command,
As whole, as Ganges when she leaves her bed,
And fills the Ocean with her Asian sand.
Or that proud River which does overspread
The sunburned Afric, when it flows the land,
And heavens defect with her full veins supplies,
And makes the sea with her seven horns to rise.
9.
The watchful Sentinels mean while descri'd
The Persian Army which approacht them nigh,
And first the dust and then the men they spide,
That in the clowd came marching silently,
With this important news they run and ride.
Heraclio slept not when he heard the cry.
The allarum given, the warlike trumpets sound,
And through the entrails of the camp resound,
10.
The Emperor all armed save his head,
D^^posed quickly of his men at arms;
Causing ^^oops of them to be assembled
Within the trench, to answer all alarms.
The right wing by himself was governed,
The ^eft he left to Theodors commands.
(...) with signs, and there with voice did show
What might be helpful, what might hurtful grow.
11.
The Cavalrie upon the rampire stood
So fitly placed, that with signs they might
Make show to them without, their hearts were good,
And courage served them to a present fight:
What vantage death, what damage lies in blood,
What glory arms, what honor wounds requite.
They shake their shields, and flourish with their swords,
To show the field is not a stage for words.
12.
But now behold (consuming all the plain)
The assailant Army makes a close approach,
And they that on the fenced sconce remain,
Discern the Ensigns that so near incroch:
From hence the Pagan, thence the Roman train
With fierce aspects, and visage of reproach,
Before their swords or darts can come to light,
Do shoot at one another scorn and spite.
13.
Mean while Rubeno brought his men by art
Up to the Romans trench, without prevention;
And Gersan carried on a four-wheel'd Cart
Amongst the soldiers, this his new invention,
So bound about, and covered every part,
That humane light was blind to his intention.
Four gentle horses black as pitch of hue
This fiery chariot (soft and easily) drue.
14.
But when that engine was convei'd so ny't,
That now the Roman camp in danger lay,
Gersan stayed his horses, to unty it:
The native light out-shin'd the lightsome day;
H^ turned it then against the Sun, to try it,
When in that light a fire was seen to play,
So kindled by the suns united beams,
As one great river made of many streams.
15.
The work is made of one great hollow glass,
Well leaded over on the outer side,
Into whose concave when the Sun does pass,
His beams are fixed, and in one point abide,
Where all reflections meet from every place,
And back again reflect, with greater pride.
The r^yes it gathers out again it flings;
Like one maine River from a thousand springs.
16.
This deadly glass, the Suns united rays
Sends back again, with such an ardent ire,
That it inflames the air, dryes up the ways,
Consumes the woods, and sets the fields on fire.
Now what can soldiers do in such a case?
O^ who can free them when they help require?
Weapons cannot, defense serves not the turn,
The fire flies always out, and all does burn.
17.
The lightnings which the cruel glass sends out,
Strikes on the Romans as they lie in hold:
And where it strikes, no Grecian is so stout,
Or yet Italian, but his heart grows cold:
The flames spare no man, so disperc't about;
The trenches are grown empty to behold;
The valley is so wasted with the stroke,
That part in flames, and part remains in smoke.
18.
Caesar his tired soldiers does persuade
To stop the current of that raging fire:
Which quenched in one place, does the rest invade,
As Gersan turns the glass, or his desire;
Sometimes the men themselves his mark are made,
Sometimes the hand which brings the water nyer,
The very vessels (as each other thing)
Return with fire, though they the water bring.
19.
The Emperor like a Mariner of skill,
That guides a naked and distressed ship
Through stormy seas, and winds that whistle shrill,
With broken ribs, and in a dropsy fit,
Yet stands it out, against winds and billows still,
And in a case of death shrinks not a whit,
Or howsoever with waves and crosse-winds tossed,
Will never yield till life and all be lost.
20.
So he to animate his weary men
Boldly through the thickest flames does wade,
And makes the several breaches up again,
Which in the rampires side, the fire had made.
His soldiers (through suspicion) look as when
A man is desperate or clean dismayed.
Both hope and fear have given their hearts one blow,
But this they cannot, that they will not know.
21.
Eliza sees the flames, and looking pale,
Creeps silently to her dear husbands side:
As in a sudden shower of rain or hail,
The loving Turtle uses to abide.
She clings to him, that death it self might fail
To part her life from his, or them divide.
The fire grows near her, and from her fair breast
She sends a sigh, and calls up on Alcest.
22.
My dear, the fatal hour is come (says she)
Of our lives date: it troubles me the less
Since heaven is pleased I should dye with thee,
Or rather in thy bosom, as I guess;
I know our souls can never severed be,
And though our bodies suffer this distress,
I hope that heat which kept them living, will
Preserve them after death united still.
23.
And reason it is (since heaven has preordain'd
That we should meet in this extremity)
That they whose lives Loves-fire has still maintained,
Should dye by fire conjoined as lovingly.
And happy we if this for us remained
When we are dead. I hope it verily,
That some sweet air will on our ashes blow,
And mingling them in one, unite them so.
24.
The loving husband feign would have replied,
But sorrow stopped his breath, he could not speak:
He forced himself, but inward grief denied
All but a sigh, the rest was all too weak.
At last his face grew clear, his tongue unti'd,
(As lightning on a clowd is seen to break)
And turning to his fair and lovely Bride,
He kindly looked, and thus to her replide.
25.
Lend me thy bow, for I will thither go,
Whence that old Sire consumes and burns so fast;
And taking equal distance for my blow,
Will with an arrow break that fatal glass,
I hope I shall return as quickly too;
But say I dye, whose life can better pass?
Who more contented? who with greater gain?
When I may save thy life, by being slain?
26.
The Dam'sell answered him without delays,
In gesture loving, mixed with some disdain.
When was my life so dear to me? she says,
What sign thereof has hitherto been taken?
That thou should thus desire to change thy days,
For mine so vile, and so unworthy gain.
Eliza is not, no, her heart can tell
Like other women, if thou mark'st her well.
27.
I speak it not to brag, but if it be true
That I have felt a thousand deaths for thee,
In four years space, when (far without thy view)
In desert woods I sought my misery:
How can I now endure thou should pursue
An action of such danger, without me?
And shall not I, that (loathed) have challenged thee,
(Spurred on by Love) now bear thee company?
28.
Is this thy mind? and cannot all the proves
Given heretofore, when lest I could affuie,
Persuade thee that Eliza's one that loves,
But she must stay, and thou must go and dye?
Alceste, this my only glory proves,
That in the chains which our affections tie
The link wherein I am, is not so weak,
But first the knot of this my life will break.
29.
But why delay we time? my bow and I
Will go with thee: this expert hand does know
A nearer way to 'th mark, then thine can spy,
Strikes farther of, and gives a greater blow.
And well thou know, if Love have made me die
The field in blood, if warlike yea or no;
To show how much she dares, how little fears
That in her bosom amorous fire bears.
30.
This said, she stayed, and when Alceste had
In vain persuaded her to change her mind,
They both agreed: and (soon in armor clad)
The knight related what they had designed.
The Emperor to hear it was right glad,
His royal arms about their necks he twined,
And said; Go then, and let your fortunes be
Such as your virtues are, well known to me.
31.
And if reward may any vantage bring
To that desire which virtue does incense,
(Virtue which seems to ask no other thing,
But takes it self alone for recompense)
Leave this enclosed ground, not tarrying
To hinder that, which gives us such offense:
For I will not be wanting unto you,
Either in honor or reward, I vow.
32.
They undertake the charge, and take their leaves,
With constant minds, and well-assured faces:
Whereat the Emperor good hope conceives,
And comforts them with Fatherly embraces.
Their wide attempt a narrow passage craves,
(Delays be dangerous in desprat cases.)
But now these venurous wights their horses take,
And (mounted) straight the burning Sconce forsake.
33.
Upon two coursers never liter were
Bred of the rases in Arabia;
That fire within them, snow without them bear,
Wings at their heels whereon the wind does play,
They issue forth; and short thin garments wear,
To shun the fury of that glasses ray.
Praised and lamented of a thousand Knights,
Depart this generous pair of loving wights.
34.
Cleantus stays to guard a secret way,
Whereby they may find safe retreat at need,
If adverse Fortune do not say them nay,
Or that their bold attempt should well succeed.
Their horses run as in a cloudy day,
A flash of lightning flies, such is their speed;
Anon so ny the cruel glass they grow,
Eliza tries to draw her horned bow.
35.
The string let-go resounds, and soundly sent
The winged shaft flies through the open air,
The arrow singing all the way it went,
The cord still trembling, as it were for fear.
When lo, right as the skillful Archerment
The arrow lights, and breaks the glassie spear:
And as a torch that is in water drencht
The light extinguished, and the fire was quenched.
36.
The glass thus broken, all the pieces fly
About the field, and strew the dusty plain.
Whereby the flames that did so damnifie
Became but idle practices and vain.
This when the Christian soldiers saw that lie
Intrench't within the circle of the flame,
Their hopes revive, and they new courage take,
Defend themselves, and brave resistance make.
37.
The Pagan-hoast (enraged with this disgrace)
Flies to revenge, and sets upon these twain;
But fair Eliza quickly turns her face,
To find her dear Alceste out again.
Together toward their Camp they spur apase;
And happily they had not run in vain,
But that Eliza's horse amidst his race,
Stumbled and fell, through roughness of the place.
38.
With that she crid, O stay not, husband fly,
O stay not, fly; what meanst thou thus to stay;
If thou escap'st, the death is sweet I die:
I am but lost, what good does this delay?
What folly is this? will thou thy valor try
Against a hundred troops? art mad I say?
O fly: there is no more to think upon;
Let one suffice for both: O fly, be gone.
39.
But he (not used to yield to such invites)
Makes haste to get betwixt them and his wife.
His horse he gallops, and his sword he gripes,
Resolved to die except he saved her life.
He thought himself against a thousand Knights
Of force sufficient, in so just a strife.
Thus armed and charmed with love, he scorned to fly
From her he loved, and leave her there to die.
40.
So he with-stood a Camp, opposed them all,
(By desperation over hardy made)
But over-laid at last was driven to fall:
Three mortal wounds he in his breast received.
But first his sword had made Armene spraule,
And Altomar upon the ground had laid,
Wounded Tarpantes arm, Anfrisos breast,
And broke Falsirons helmet ore his Crest.
41.
Meane-while Elizas horse gat up again,
And she to find her husband sought about,
At last she spied him, wounded, wan, and feign,
Bleeding amongst a thousand spears a foot,
She thither flings, with frenzy in her brain.
And he that saw her up, did what he might
To repossesse his horse, and rise again,
Now weak with loss of blood, and full of pain.
42.
The loving wife forbeares not to expose
Her naked breast, against the piercing steel,
She thwarts the troops and weapons of her foes,
And makes the^ know her strength, by what they feel.
But woman's breast against such cruel blows
Is found too slender and too weak a shield
She held it out, till one cross blow by chance
Lit on her side, which opened to the Lance.
43.
The inamored Eliza falls not yet,
But keeps her stirrops firm whereon she stood,
Her new device with gold and jewels set
Was now enameled with a stream of blood.
Her presence in Alceste did beget
Strength to remount, and make his passage good.
They now together better hopes conceive
To escape by flight, then e^st they thought to have.
44.
But from the left hand wing to stop the way,
Which toward the bridge they took with all their might,
Artasso brought his troops in good array,
And gat betwixt their Rampire and their flight.
The wretched Lovers durst no longer stay,
But made away, with all the speed they might:
In flying yet there was some hope, though small,
In staying there was less, or none at all.
45.
From plain to hill, from hill to dale again,
This loving couple up and down do fling
Staining the ground with blood where're they strain,
And still pursued at heels by 'th Pagan King:
At last a hard and crooked path they gain,
That leads unto a wood, or desert spring,
So thick with trees, and bushes overgrowne,
That there they lost them, how was never known.
He comes to this tale again in the next book, as you may see by turning over
this leaf.

3 Digression.
My Author, like a Keeper, walks his round,
And has the world (as he his park) at will,
Viewes every nooke and corner of his ground,
Sees which are rascal, which are fit to kill:
And I, that serve but as his dry-foot Hownd,
Must not exceed my leame, but draw on still,
To find a brace of Deere-ones broken out,
That Death the blood-hownd hurries all about.
THe Persian King beheld the glass put-out,
Which had anoy'd the Christian Camp so sore,
And saw the Christians (thereupon grown stout)
Defend themselves more bravely then before,
With all his Host enclosing them about
(Rage and revenge could not have acted more)
Makes-fierce Armallo first assault their Wall,
An unexpected sally frustrates all.
Lib. 24. page 485. 1.
Meane-while Eliza and her dear Alcest
Gallop their horses up and down the woods,
Exceeding weak, and faint for lack of rest,
Bedewing all their passage with their bloods,
And with their wounds still more and more oppressed,
(Although Elizas were the lesser floods)
Oppressed in-deed for now the weary Knight
Began to languish, and to die outright.
2.
And spent and weak, his face like frozen snow,
With trembling voice, and sounding somewhat low
He reigns his horse, to make him go more slow,
And cries, stay wife, I can no farther go,
My pain to such extremity does grow,
I feel my self consume with bleeding so;
Thus languishing and tired at length he tri'de
To light, and rest his ill affected side.
3.
And underneath a shrub he sits him down,
And leanes his armed head upon a stone,
His shield (an idle burden) from him thrown,
His arm too weak to bear it now is grown;
The woman that had slackt her pase, eftsoone,
(Struck to the heart to hear his dying tone)
Leapes from her horse, and runs to him ama^ne,
More senseless of her own, then of his pain.
4.
The wound she had upon her tender side,
Which troubled her till then, she feels no more
Such strange effects in love are osten tried,
As fire within and marble frozen over.
It Was not her own (for that she qualified)
They were her husbands wounds she felt so sore
Rather for him she felt the greater anguish,
That he in body, she in soul did languish.
5.
The afflicted came whereas her dear Lord lay,
And when she law him dying, and his eyes
Already veiled, his spirits all decay
And nothing left him but a case of Ice,
She knew not what to do, or what to say:
She invocates the earth, to heaven she cries,
She neither hides her grief, nor it bewraies,
She weeps, forbeares, curses, complains, and prays.
6.
She runs to call some help, she knows not whom,
Heards-man or Shepherd, but she knows not where,
Returns the way she went, and all-alone
(Like one distract) she wanders here and there.
The woods alone, that hear her make her moan
Can lend no comfort, though they lend an ear:
Their boughs are silent, silent are their leaves,
The air no answer to her sorrow gives.
7.
At last she back returns, and does unclasp
The sturdy Helmet from his frozen head,
And lays it gently in her hollow lap,
Upon a pillow of her garments spread:
Then stoop't to kiss it, when it was her hap
To kiss those lips that were already dead;
And now she is feign to take a kiss by stealth,
Which he was wont to give her of himself.
8.
With that her cheeks beperled with her tears,
(Like damask Roses with a mornings Ice)
She leaves him lying, to disgorge her cares
(Fixing meanwhile her fair eyes on the skies)
Alas, (quoth she) and were not all their spears
Able to pierce this breast that naked lies?
Can nothing kill me, that unarmed go?
And must Alceste die, that is armed so?
9.
Base steel, it was thy treason lost Alcest,
What strokes are those that use to harden thee,
If (when with blows thy temper should prove best)
Thou changest nature, and becomest free?
Alas, this single garment saved my breast,
That sturdy armor would not safeguard thee:
For thee I shall account all steel as glass,
And he that trusts in armor, but an ass.
10.
Betrayed by it, from me thou do depart,
And where alas, where (cruel leave thou me?)
Distressed, alone, in such an uncouth part,
As naught but trees, and stones there are to see.
Or what availes that freed from fire thou were,
Since to thy death thou ran'st as speedily?
And carrying death along with thee for hire,
Mett'st with the sword, where thou escap'st the fire.
11.
Ay-mee, thou dyest; has then Elizas fate
Kept her alive to see this misery?
Why was her life preserved at sea alate;
Was that too fair a death for her to die?
And must her husband in this doleful state,
First die within her arms, sans remedy?
And she that neither fire nor sword can kill,
Must she live griefs mortal monster still?
12.
It shall not be. And in that desperate plight
Unto her dear Alcestes sword she flies,
She sets the point against her left side right,
Where to the heart the readiest passage lies.
But now it chanced, the pale discoulered Knight
(Before his wife fell on his sword) revives:
He strives to speak, at last brings out her name,
And prays her (dying) to forbear the same.
13.
Whether it were, that as a candle shows
A little blase, before it go quite out,
His light now ready to extinguish rose
To some more show, then formerly it might;
Or that of wonders, this is one of those
That Love alone (as sovereign) brings about,
And he that can do all, and none does more,
Thus made his last words heard, not heard before.
14.
Eliza live, and love me still (quoth he)
In thy fair besome now our loves must dwell;
Remember thou have often said to me
Thy heart was mine; for my sake use it well.
And I (if heaven permit it so to be)
And that those powers do not my suite repel
Do promise (for thy comfort) to love thee,
As much as (after death) thou can do me.
15.
But first I look, that thou should living show
The like to me, that so I may depart
The more content. And here (as wind does blow
A candle out) a chillness seized each part:
His hand and arm (lift up) so feeble grow
They fall like lead, upon his fainting heart.
Eliza sees it: and with drowned eyes
In floods of tears, to him she thus replies.
16.
Thou bidst me live. I must not disobey,
(If he forbid it not that is of power)
I then of Fortune and of Love will stay
To be the fatal mark, now grief no more.
And whilst she weeping stood, and thus did say,
He looked more cheerful, then he did before.
But heaving up his heavy eyes toward heaven,
His soul forsook him, and the stroke was given.
17.
Now when she saw him perfect earth appear
(Because on earth she never should see him more)
She rent her face, and tore her golden hair,
Her guiltless eyes the badge of fury bore.
And so excessive was her grief and fear,
Her heart could not contain it as before;
Her soul burst out, and left her so awhile,
To show how death can any pain beguile.
18.
The Sun meanwhile into the sea was got,
And silent night had darkened all the cost,
Yet still her swouning held, and left her not,
Thus had Eliza all her senses lost.
When lo, an ugly, old, ill-favored Trot,
With ghastly looks, and locks about her tossed,
Came flying thither on a winged Goat:
The air (divided) gave a fearful noat.
19.
This Beldame chief at every wanton match,
Gads Moon by moon, at dreadful time of night,
And is preferred at each lascivious watch,
For doing that wherein the worst delight.
And when fate shall the loathsome life dispatch
Of that proud tyrant, prone to all despite,
She hopes, with thousand other witches fell,
To make her self (one day) the Queen of hell.
20.
Altea she is called, who with foul jaws,
Comes from Avernus to disturb our rest.
Each minister of hels infernal laws
Not only answers, but obeys her hest.
This woman bore Armene, on the waves
Of Thessalie, and nursed him at her breast,
He whom Alceste killed, as he did pass
In so much haste, to break the fatal glass.
21.
In which respect, inflamed with deep disdain,
The angry mother nightly runs about
To be revenged on him that had him slain,
And gall and woormwood from her eyes does shoot:
And now she comes to seek him, but in vain,
She finds him dead before her spite breaks out.
And like a Kite that thinks he spies his prey,
Returns unfed, and cries, such is her stay.
22.
And thus unto her self. Though death forbid
That I should wreck me where I most desire,
It shall not hinder me, that in his stead
This woman feel the rigor of mine ire:
And my designs shall so far forth proceed,
To interrupt his peace in heavens high quire,
Whilst from above, with anguish he shall see
Her that he loves so dearly, plagued by me.
23.
This said, Altea with disheveled hair
In hideous manner scattered to the wind,
First shakes her rod, wherewith she keeps in fear,
The furies that have heads with Adders twind,
Then strikes the ground, and by their names does rear
The Infernal spirits up, to harm inclined.
When lo, at iteration of her divellish charm,
The unclean squadron quickly thither swarm.
24.
The implacable Megera hasts to tell
What she would have them do at her request:
Nay, she commands the damned crew of hell
To take possession of Eliza's breast:
And as within their own Tartarian cell,
This wicked rabble there take up their nest.
Committing (like unhospitable guess)
On her fair body, outrage and excess.
25.
This done, the inhabitants of dark Avern
Cry out, exclaim, and threaten all at once.
She with her cudgel conjured up the stern
And lasie hell hounds from their restless rest,
Till all the kennell were driven out, and yern
To dominere within her tender breast.
And then she mounted on her Goat again,
Swifter then any of the winged train.
26.
When she departed thence, the night did mourn
In blackest hours, farthest from the day,
Equally distant to the lights return,
As to the time wherein it went away.
And now the Damsel underneath the thorn
(That in a swoune by her lost-lover lay)
Revives; but not as erst, for now she bid
More pain and woe, then ever woman did.
27.
She feels a silent horror overflow
Her breast, yet knows not what the cause should be.
She little thinks her alterations grow
From devils, which torter her so cruelly;
Mean while those spirits all their poison blow
Into her organs: and they make her see
(Or rather think she sees, such are her fears)
Both Lions, Panthers, Tigers, Woolfes, and Bears.
28.
'Twas midnight then, and heaven as dark as pitch,
No Moon appeared, nor could one see or hear
Ought in that desert place to stir or quitch,
So mute the world was, and so dark the sphere:
And yet the power was such of that damned Witch,
(What with transparent poison and such gear)
That this poor damsel did both hear and see,
And when 'twas midnight, thought it noon to be.
29.
She turned about, and saw a sudden fire
Rise in a meadow out of broken stones:
And by that kindling, (which was soon grown higher)
A wind to rise from out their flinty bones:
It blew amain, and that breath did inspire
A flame, which up to heaven did clime at once;
And in that flame deceased mortals cast,
By those infernal ghosts, we spoke of last.
30.
And when those devils had gathered up as fast
The ashes of their burned flesh again,
They sprinkled them with tears, and made a paste,
Wherewith they shaped anew the bodies slain;
Which reincarnate and patch't up in haste,
Consume afresh in never dying pain.
The flames do bellow, and the horrid sound
Of Ghosts tormented endlesly resound.
31.
Now whilst Eliza this strange torment eyed,
A cold ran to her heart through every vein,
A crew of hell hounds ready there she spied,
To drag her husband to that scorching flame;
The wretched knight exclaimed, complained and cried
Upon Eliza, and her Love did blame,
But she that saw him thus, (in spite of hell)
Would not abandon him she loved so well.
32.
Till fear at last so much possessed her brain,
That (cold and trembling like a leaf in the wind)
She was no longer able to refrain
Her fearful foot, but more afrighted mind.
She runs away, and hears Alceste plain,
Speaking, and groaning, at her back behind.
He calls upon her, and entreats her back,
And makes her challenge that she loves him not.
33.
And thereupon she stays, afrighted sore,
And feels her heart still stricken with the sound,
She hardly breathes; yet running more and more,
Flies from that sad report, which now she found
More feared in death, then deer in life before:
The noise afflicts her still with fierce resound,
And still she runs to find a safer place,
Through thickest woods, that rend her hair and face.
34.
Over highest mountains, and the broken horns
Of steepest rocks, and craggy cliffes she strayes,
And where it is overgrown with bush and thorns,
There finds she out impenitrable ways:
And yet the fearful noise where ere she turns,
Pursues her still at heels, and never stays.
She looks with eyes distorted, ghastly fierce,
Neither in color nor in shape as erst.
35.
She speaks in diverse tongues, and does at full
Pronounce each Countries accents though remote,
Neighs like a Horse, and bellows like a Bull,
Bleats like a Sheep, and stammers like a Goat,
Of many sounds makes one confused and dull,
The Adders hissing, and the Panthers note,
The woolfs hoarse howling, and the whistling sound
Of hollow vaults and crannies underground.
36.
The poor soul flies, and strikes her weary breast,
Her ivory palms she beats and wrings for woe,
She tears her hair; and gives her cheeks no rest,
That to a palenesse turn their untoucht snow,
A thick deep panting shakes her sides, oppressed
With violence of her heart, that strikes them so.
Now whilst this torment lasts, the liquid night
Gives way unto the days succeeding light.
37.
And she her sad lights turning toward the East,
And viewing there the new approaching Sun,
Supposed a fire to rise from out the dust,
Which burning every mortal thing did run:
With that she ran more eagerly then erst,
And called with her each thing, the fire to shun.
Away ye groves (she cries) ye fields away,
The fire will catch you if you longer stay.
38.
And at an instant with her tender hands
(O wondrous force of power demoniack!)
She plucked up ancient trees, like little wands,
Stripped off their boughs, and made their bodies crack,
The wood gives way on heaps, and quaking stands,
Where that infernal fury drives it back.
An angry eastern wind did never blow
To waste a Forest, or consume it so.
39.
But when those loathsome fiends themselves withdrew,
And gave a little respit to her flight;
And that her eyes had lost their bloody hue,
Her hair grown smooth that stood before upright,
She rightly found from whence her error grew,
She sees but Firres and Mirtels in her sight;
There Is no Alceste now; she hears no cries;
The fire is quenched; and Phoebus mounts the skies.
40.
Whereby (poor thing) she well perceived at last
That she with unclean spirits was possessed.
And that their fury carried her so fast
O re hills and dales, without one minutes rest.
Frozen and dumb, amazed, and aghast,
She mused a while; and then with grief oppressed,
Fixing on heaven her sad and watery eyes,
She calls on God in this most humble wise.
41.
O God! if for her sins Eliza still
Must be tormented with such cruelty,
That neither wounds nor grief will serve to kill,
(Because no death should end her misery)
Defend her yet, (if it be thy blessed will)
That she may show therein her constancy*
And that no power infernal may prevail,
To tyrannize her soul, though weak and frail.
13.
It Is true my soul has erred; for so great love
Should not be placed in sensuality.
And so it erred, tht foolishly it strove
To leave its native seat, as desperately.
But who can moderate, much less remove
The fire that in a Lovers heart does lie?
O let thy mercies, and my slender faith
Purchase forgiveness at thy hands, she says.
43.
And then proceeds, tears running down her face.
O what a mischief am I brought unto
By cruel fate? that (though it be my case
By death and love to be afflicted so)
When Land and Sea lacks torment and disgrace,
Sorrow and loss, for me to undergo,
(The world being weary of tormenting me)
Hell should rise up to work my misery.
44.
With saying this, her one and other star
Declining toward the ground, and weeping too,
Are now made fairer by her sorrows far,
And sorrow lovely by her weeping so.
And I would say heavens rebels ceast their war
For this short time, more then they use to do,
In pity of those tears: but that I know
Hell has no mercy, devils no pity show.
45.
But those fell spirits and unjust, mean while
Deny the comfort of their short delay,
And now return to give her new turmoyle,
Leaving her rest but little time of stay:
Her voice is changed, her color does recoyle;
She howles and bawles, like any dog at bay;
And here and there she runs, with fury pressed;
Cries madly out; and strikes her guiltless breast.
46.
It Is strange I tell you: sometimes she will rise
Above the earth; and as some fowls are found
Of swifter wing then others, so she flies,
And to the tops of highest trees does bound;
And sometimes like a wrigling snake she lies
Trailing her breast along the mossie ground,
This way and that way, up and down she straies,
And comes and goes the very selfsame ways.
47.
At length returned from wandering to and fro,
Where late before she left Alceste dead,
It seems to her (the infernal furies so
Abuse her senses, and her sight mislead)
A monstrous Boar, with bristles fierce in show,
Too nearly lodged, she thought too deerly fed.
And she that never laid her bow aside,
Now thought it long, until her skill were tried.
48.
And all her arrows she had quickly sent
To wait upon her metamorphos'd Lord:
Which (as before his death, her aim was bent
Still at his heart) flew thither from the cord.
Happy Alceste that he did prevent
This sight, by dying on another sword:
At least to see that he had escaped the hell,
To have her murder him, he loved so well.
49.
Now whilst this folly rambled in her brains,
Certain old Shepherds chanced to come that way,
(Driving their flocks to pasture on the plains)
Who spide her madness, where her husband lay,
And (with their horns assembling other Swains)
Sought all they could her frantic course to stay:
They held her fast, and then with tender twigs
First bound her hands, and after that her legs.
50.
And causing her together with her knight
To be conveid for burial to their cote,
Performing every part of humane right,
And not omitting any thing of note.
They laid his body under marble white,
Though not so rich and smooth, yet cleanly wrought:
And over his tomb a noble trophy dight,
Of Arms hanged up unto that warlike wight.
He comes to this tale again in the 28 book as you may see in the following
leaf.

4 Digression.
And here again my Author breaks his thread,
To weave some other stuff upon his loome.
To say the truth, it is time, when one is dead,
The other buried in a living tomb,
To leave them to their rest: but I am led
By stricter task, to show what is become
Of poor Eliza, whom at last I find
(As you may read) distracted still in mind.
Lib. 28. p. 567. 1
THe honest shepherds that in marble pure
Had caused Alceste to be buried,
Now taking care of fair Eliza's cure,
(Still with foul spirits vexed and wearied)
That her disease (which was not very sure
By mortal hand) might be recovered:
Unto the Isle of Saro brought her bound,
Where they the holy man Niceto found.
2.
The mournful widow being thither led,
Full of intestine smart, and hellish rage,
Pale, afflicted, and all over spread,
With stains and badges of hels vassalage,
Whilst Satan seemed a little quieted,
And spared a while her body to outrage,
Her bitter sorrow drew from her fair eyes
Streams of complaint, and thus to him she cries.
3.
Behold here poor Eliza at thy feet,
Who had the title both of faith and love,
And durst in combat with her husband meet
That so her death might her affection prove,
Behold in what a miserable plite
She Is now brought to thee, let her sight thee move;
Behold her made (by this impetuous storm)
Of love and fortune now the very scorn.
4.
To thee I come, beseeching thee (if ever
Mortals sorrow moved thee to compassion)
To cure my soul of this intestine fever
Of extreme torment, and infernal passion.
Or show at least how I by death may sever
My life and grief, in any honest fashion:
For better 'twere, at once, to feel deaths power,
Then thus to dye a thousand times an hour.
5.
And here the fair and comfortless lets fall
Her tears in greater plenty from her eyes;
Which seem as fountains overflowing all,
So fast they gush, so full their streams arise.
Her extreme weeping does Niceto call
To take compassion of her miseries.
He comforts her: and (to prepare her faith
For heavenly graces) thus unto her says.
6.
Superfluous love (my daughter) is a fault,
And dotage our Creator much offends,
Because the creature enters by default
On that which is his due, and it mispends.
No mervaile then if (in this lower vault)
We feel his hand, when his just wrath descends,
Whilst we in earth, love any mortal thing,
With that high love, belongs to heavens high King.
7.
And thou that had the bloody mind to kill
Thy self with thine own hands, so desperately,
(Because thy husband died against thy will,
And that thou lov'dst him so immoderately)
Deserve no favor, but that all this ill
For penance of thy fault, should light on thee.
The knife and fire (thou know) must then be used,
When juice of herbs and liquors are refused.
8.
The guilty widow heard (with humble show)
All that he said, and list'ned unto it,
And falling down before the Hermit low
Confessed, and sorrow'd for her love-sicke fit.
Renounced the pleasures that bewitched her so,
And cursed the fancies that bereft her wit.
Each error she so sorrow'd, and lamented,
As never any sorrow'd or repented.
9.
Niceto lifting up his sacred hands,
Untyde her soul, and that (unbound) adrest
(More lovely fair then ever 'twas in bands)
To God, that he would grant her sad request.
But now again began those hellish brands
To move afresh, and muster in her breast.
She changes gesture, color, shape, and speech,
Distorts her eyes, and gnasheth with her teeth.
10.
Whereat Gods servant (after he had sent
His winged prayers to the King of heaven)
His pity on the woman wholly bent,
That hell to such extremity had driven.
And calling on the name omnipotent,
Which makes each Ghost to tremble in Avern,
He breathes clear light, and utters purest fire,
In thundering notes his conjuring words aspire.
11.
By that great God that governs heaven, and raigns;
By that great love that nailed him to the Cross;
By that great pain wherewith he healed the pains
Of those lost sheep, that else had suffered loss;
By that great power which measures and restraines
Each living thing to the Tartarian Fosse;
By that great Lord, whose all-supernall might
Lays chains on hell, and governs heaven aright.
12.
By him I charge you, unclean spirits hear,
Hear wicked angels what I say to you,
Depart I say from out those members fair,
And get you to your loathsome vaulted stow.
Come out you unclean beasts, that place forbear,
Come out (I say) you harmfull monsters now.
Jesus, sweet Jesus, Jesus rich in power,
Command this cursed legion out this hour.
13.
These heavenly words no sooner passage found,
But fair Eliza fell, as falls a Corse
That livelesse strikes upon the senseless ground,
Her fall revived our hopes, awak't remorse:
Her heart left beating, all her veins were drowned,
A violent oppilation stopped their sourse,
Whereby her life now out now in did enter
And made the circle move from out it is center.
14.
And at that fall, (as boystrous winds still do
When from their empty and resounding iayle,
The high-Commander, lets his bridle go,
Which stays the fury of their blustering gale,
Rush headlong out, and whistle where they blow,
The East, the West, the North, and South, none fail,
And in a fierce and fearful skirmish make
The earth to totter, and the heaven to shake)
15.
Even so those spirits (made perforce to pack)
Left poor Eliza in a deadly slumber:
The Island trembled, and the air grew black,
The clouds were broken with unholsome thunder;
They light upon an old obdurat oak,
And at an instant tear it all asunder:
The boughs and branches in such shivers fly,
They strew the ground, and darken all the sky.
16.
At last the earthquake ends; and round about
The clouds disperse; and with them all our care;
The sky grows clear; and all that beastly rout
Are loose and gone; no longer groans the air;
And now the poor young Woman looking out
Recovers life, she breathes and sighs for fear.
Her soul returns unto it is wonted cure,
It gathers strength, but yet is scarce secure.
He comes to this again, in the 583. page of the same book, as you may see
hear following.

5 Digression.
Here where my Author does but change his pen,
I in a fury cast mine quite away:
Because I cannot sing of Arms and Men,
Or make a verse of all I mean to say.
And yet I Will take it ap again, to tell
How fair Eliza beautifies her Cell.
Lib. 28. p. 583. 66.
When good Niceto had Eliza blessed,
And given due thanks for that exceeding grace,
He left the Isle. But first he thought it best
To settell her in some convenient place,
Where she might live hereafter more at rest,
And sing his praises that had heard her case:
At whose great name, she saw good reason now,
That every knee in Heaven and Earth should bow.
67.
He might have studi'd long, and traveled far,
To find her out a fitter place of rest.
The aptness of the Isle wherein they were
Made him believe that place to be best;
It was not troubled with the noise of war,
Nor yet with any powerful hand oppressed:
The quietness and safety of this Isle,
Made him resolve, to leave her there awhile.
68.
Not far from thence a Monastery stood,
Built on the rising of a little hill,
Which overlook't a stream, whose Crystal flood
Ran ever from it, yet was with it still,
The building not so curious, as good,
Rich in the Meddowes, and the land not ill.
A neat-built Chapel, and a spacious Hall,
Were all the rooms of note, the rest were small.
69.
A more retired place for contemplation,
Plenty, or ease, was no where to be found.
Yet wanted it no honest recreation,
As Orchards set with trees, and allied round,
A Garden, both for use, and delectation,
More like an Eden, then a common ground.
A Dormitory, placed so well by art,
That every Sister had her Cell apart.
70.
Thither the man-of-God convei'd his guest,
Who of a Soldier now a Nun would prove,
(Craving the sacred veil amongst the rest)
By vow a Recluse never to remove.
Where long time after, she her self expressed
Handmaid to God, as she had been to Love.
Till of her mortal veil by death bereavn
She re-enjoy'd her faithful Love in Heaven.
FINIS.
By this time, I suppose the Reader's glad
As well as I, this Tale is at an end:
A Tragedy well told will make one sad;
Then, how much more when it is so poorly penned?
The lines be true, although the rimes be bad,
Let that suffice thee, as thou art my Friend.
It Is one thing to go bound, another free;
Try it thy self, and thou will bear with me.


LAconia. Peloponnesi Regio: nunc Morea. Cythera. Insula contra Cretam, nunc
Candiam. 5. millibus a Maleae prom: distans, veneris numini Dedicata. Cosdras
vel Cosraes, Persarum Rex: Anno salutis 534. Hic Tyrannus nonaginta millia
Christianorum interfecit; ac partem crucis dominicae secum asportauit. Pius 2.
Pontif. Heraclius. Romanorum Imperator: qui contra Cosroem bell^m per quatuor
decim annos continue gerebat. Carthago. vrbs Aphicae totius celeberima,
Romaniquae Imperii aliquando aemula a Didone condita. Asopis. Regiuncula
Peloponnensi, in tractu Acaiae ab Asopo fluvio cui iac et. Asopus. Fluvius
Poloponnensi, in Chronio monte nascens in sinum Corinthiacum influens. Malea.
Promontorium Liconiae. a Maleo Argivorum Rege dicta; qui in ea Templum
construxit, quod Maleaticum appellavit. Partha. Asiae regio: huius incolae
Parthi dicuntur. hi arcu plurimum valuerunt, quo vel fugentes hosti detrimentum
afferebant. Persia. Regio orientalis in Asia: cuius Imperium uti olim celebr.
sic etiam hodie maxim clarum est: amplissimasque regiones Comprehendit; a
Sophis Persiae Regibus possidetur. Arabia. Regio Asiae majoris inter Indaeam
and Aegyptum. Thessalia. Regio Greciae: ad mare inter Peneum amnem and montem
Thermopylas extensa. Tartara. Locus profundissimus inferorum, in quo sontes
plectuntur. Avernus. Lacus Campaniae, prope Baias, quem Plutoni dicatum and
inferorum limen esserudis vetustas credidit. Capitur plerunque pro ipso
inferorum loco, vel propter faetorem vel propter necromanciam quae ibi
exercebatur. Asia, una ex quatuor partibus orbis terrarum. Divisa hodie in
quinque parts, secundum ejus Imperia. Aphrica vel Africa. Tertia pars orbis
quae freto Herculeo a Nilo caeterisque orbis partibus deducitur. ab Aphro
dicta, uno ex posteris Abrahae. Libya and Hesperia a Graecis dicta. Thracia.
Latissima Europae Regio, Macedoniae ad occasum proxima. ita dicta a Thrace,
Martis filio; aut a Regionis asperitate. Ganges. Indicae fluvius maximus, qui
universam secat Iudiam, secum aureas arenas trahens. a Gange Aethiopun^ Rege
dictus. Eden. Orientalis regio. Isa. 37. 4 Reg. 19. Lat. voluptas, sive
deliciae.
FINIS.
Imprimatur.

SA. BAKER.
Feb. 18. 1638.

