THE DEVILS LEGEND. OR: A Learned Cachephochysme containing the Confession of
the Leaguers Faith: Wherein Doctor Pantaloun, and Zanie his Pupil, do teach
that all hope ought to be grounded on the Puissant King Phillip of Spain, and
upon all the happy Apostles of the holy League, and that they ought not to do
as the Brytans, Englishmen, and Protestants do; which believe in God only,
harkening rather to the voice of Jesus Christ, than unto their holy Father the
Pope.

Composed in Rome by the reverend Father Iuuenall Borget, and sent unto the
Gentlemen of England by Charles Cyprian.

Translated according to the French Coppie.



Printed at London for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop by London
Bridge gate. 1595.

The Devils Legend. Or A learned Cakephochysme, containing the confession of
the Leaguers faith: handled betvveene Docter Pantaloun, and Zanie his pupell.
Pantaloun. ZAny finding in my self an immoderate care of thy poor soul,
which like a foolish bird couets to fly into Hell ere her pinnions have
strength to bear her from her necks breaking, and seeing thou desistest from
blessing thy forehead with thy right hands crossing, as if the sign of the
Crucifix were a bug-beare to scarre away thy blessings, and that thou abiurest
the touch of holy water, forgetst thy prayers, and have lost the memorable use
of thy Beads, which like the check of a clock kept time to thy tongues babble: I
would feign know since all the memorable: service of thy ancient divinity is
forgotten, in what new devil now of late thou reposest thy new beleeuings.


Zanie. My good Master, my Tutor, or the fountain from whence I have begotten
mine instruction, be not ignorant, that early in the morning after I have
religiously called upon the great Creator of good cheer, and with infinite Aues
saluted the crimson virgin of the dark celler, and with the help of their two
dieties, filled the emptiness of my seldom satisfied belly: I then repose all
my faith, build the groundworke of my hope, and plant the mighty mountain of
my charity in the holy (O lie) league, conjoined with her happy Apostle,
scorning to imitate the king-counterfaiting Hugonites, which believe only in
God and none other.


Pantaloun. I pray thee my good disciple, tell me what beast is that which thou
call the holy league, and what creatures are those which thou baptisest her
Apostels?


Zanie. What beast in the Devils name? of my honesty Tutor I smile at the
simpleness of thy question: why it is the beast of all beasts: that which
makes the best the most beastliest, and the most beastliest best in a beastly
censure; it is the desire of lust, idleness invention, and the best bloome in
ambitious spring: to wit, she is a fair whore violated by adulterous princes,
confessed and absolved by false Priests, and vncontionably bribde by ignorant
people; as for her Apostles, they are as Pope Sextus a better spaniard than a
Gospeller, truer to the one, than religious to the other, though honest to
neither: the father and the Son, without the Holy ghost, (for he like the
vocative case, is wanting in all their substantives) which is to be understood
the father of Spain, the son of Sauoy, and instead of the Holy Ghost, the
grand devil of Loraine.


Pantaloun. Recite to me then my good scholar, all the articles of thy Creed,
grounded and made by those Apostles, to the end that we may not only heleeue,
but the world may be wise in assured knowledge, that thou art become a great
Doctor in the Spanish Macharon, or the devils golden Legend.


Zanie. Tutor I will: First I believe in the most great, mighty, and saint
murdering king of Spain: the creator of the new land, as much of the arche
dominator or superintendant of the poor Hugonites, as much of the Turks great
master of France: as much as of England, Emperor or monarche: not fully so
much of the world, as of the filthe and uncleanness in the world: I believe in
his son and in his daughter, his children and their children: I believe in
that great, fair, well cut, and better combed beard the Duke of Tienops and of
Sauoy, who by his rare and unsearchable virtue, is ascended up into the sign
Gemini, together with the infant, passing many times by the wanton horned sign
Capricornus: I believe in the great Messiah or Saluator the Duke of Parma, that
he is dead, buried, and descended into hell: I believe in the great, gross,
gray, and goodly head of the Duke De Mains which stands in more need of
philosophy, than beggars of alms: and to be brief, for tediousness is
laborsome, I believe in the holy church of Lorraine, as much Apostolic as
Christian, and to neither of both any thing at all allied.


Pantaloun. Into how many articles is this Creed or symbol divided, and which
be they.


Zanie. Into twelve, and these they are: Ambition, Envy. Hypocrisy, Tyranny,
Slander, Flattery, Treason, Sedition, Ignorance, Malice, Rashness, and
Rebellion, and these my dear master are the degrees or ladders steps, whereby
all true catholics must be received into the church of the league or Spanish
Synagogue.


Pantaloun. But what is the intentive meaning of these holy happy Apostles of
the league, and what is the end of their so much admired excellencies.


Zanie. The intention is most good, because in the seeming procreation of their
acts they immitate God himself, foreuen as he created all things for his own
glory, so bring they forth all their factions, for their own triumphs, only
this difference, his is admired and reverenced of all souls, theirs wondered
at and hated of all what ever has feeling of christianity.


Pantaloun. But how gallop they or post they forward in this so meritorious or
blessed work, or how sweat they in the ferueneie of this holy action.


Zanie. Even so and in such manner as the three Sages which Pilgrim-like
trauaild from the Orient, faining to worship Christ, and plant him in too long
forsaken France, bringing with them three presents, War, Pestilence, and
Famine, whilst the Loade-starre to their travail, is hypocrisy and
presumption.


Pantaloun. But what fruit or profit shall redownd to this endless web of
their continual working?


Zanie. If they sow Iuorie, they shall reap thorns, if they beget a monster,
they shall bring forth a Chymera, if by their factious troubles they confound
sweetness in the beginning, by the residence of their evil, they shall find
bitterness in the ending.


Pantaloun. How shall then my gallant pupil this thy holy league find an end
from the eternity of her labor?


Zanie. O my good master, she must first charitablie visit her dear holy
father Lucifer, and her mother Proserpina, and all her worm eaten progenitors
of Lorraine, for sooner shall she purchase a fee simple in any of their
regions, than have an estate for term of life in the consines of unhappy
France.


FINIS.
Composed by Charles Cyprian.
A new pleasant and delightful Astrology, invented by reverend Master
Harlequin the royal Astrologer, calculated for the Leaguers Merydian.
The first error is in the twelve signs.
THE Leaguers have brought into France so many ravenous Woolues, that the
poor sign of Mutton is for ever banished their Zodiac, they have instald so
many Cod-peeces in their Cathedrals, that the pure sign of the Virgin is as
rare to be seen, as thunder in winter, or a million of black Swans in a
fishpond, and they have made such a tole-free open passage, unto whole armies
of disordered persons that are boundless in their villainy, that the sign of
Lybra, or the equal poysing balance is cassierd as unprofitable amongst them,
but it is most true, and too true, that they have elevated in their Horrizon,
and instald in triumphant credit, the great Taurus or bulbegger of Lorraine,
with a multitude of Caprycornians and Sagitarians, which bend all their horns
and hooues against Burbon, but I may prophecy unto them that they have not
found Saint Sebastian which patiently endured the Darts which were shot into
him.

The second error is in the Planets.
Again, these Leagwers show themselves more Dogs than Doctors, that in stead
of following the other Planets which acknowledge the Sun as their common
Prince, or principal substance of their borrowed splendour, yet will they that
Mercury of Britain, and Venus his wife, and all such wandering stars like
themselves, shall bend their borrowed bonfiers against the true son of
France, which notwithstanding of his own benevolence* has given them the
little glimmering brightness which they have, and which is worse than the
worste of all, after that they having lost the true natural heat of that
glorious sun, they search the coldenesse of the Satournian Spaniard, both
frostie in goodness, dried by with covetousness, and as melanchollyas
ambition can make him.

The third error is in the Climates.
NOw these Rabins or seemeing (though altogether unsound) Doctors, pretending
deep insight into Millstone Astrology, seeking to set fire upon the house of
Burbon, and stuff her walls with strange vermin or monstrous creatures, have
whispered in the Spaniards ears like the downe-falling of a water to a
thundering Myll, and with that secret prattle have made him believe that France
is colder than Spain, and more temperate for the devils dwelling: in such sort
that the Spanish Marrans covetous of the purest air, bring their intemperance
into our clymate, but they are mightily deceived in the foolishness of their
opinions, for that often times and most commonly, those which soiourne and
dwell in their country of Spain, notwithstanding it is much whotter, yet do
they live longer than they which come into France, Flaunders, or England.

The fourth error is in the distinction of times.
THese monstrous liars, the Serpents Scholars, make also the poor deceived
people of the League believe, that the times or seasons are much differing one
from the other, and that in some they must use purgations, in others costicke
medicines, and in some neither of both; as in the canicular, or dog days:
but if you will believe me (gentle readers) the fools of Parris stand in no
need of purgations, neither yet of the new diet, either by emptiness to ease
their bellyes, or by sparenesse of repast, to keep their sheets cleanly: the
Spaniards also for the most part, and principally those which come into
France, fear hell ten times more than the Dog days. When they say that
such a season shall be windy, such a time rain, and such a day fair pleasant
weather, all that serves to nothing, or to no purpose, for the fool antidated
before in mine Astrology, which behoulding the conversion, fear neither
wind, rain, nor fair weather, (God be thanked) for if they chance to be
dabled a little with walking up and down the town, the day shall come I hope,
when they shall be duckt ouerhead and ears, or else utterly drowned.

The fifth error is in the Ecclypses.
THese logger-head learned Leaguers, make certain distinctions of the Moon
ecclipsed and not ecclipsed; but I that am not ignorant but know very well,
that the Moon has no power to gaze upon the Suns forehead, nor to give aim
to his brightness, hold this for a certain actiome, that she shall always
be ecclypsed, and that every one of them cannot be but ecclipsed in true duties
or endeavors, and walk in the dark like boys at hood-man blind; which is
the cause that diverse of them do fall, and if they escape breaking their necks,
yet they loose themselves, altogether hopeless for ever recovering one minute
of day light, or any iotte of succor at their great Messiah the Duke of Parma.

The sixth error, is in the marks, or notes.
THey propose and carry before them the golden number, but yet in despite of
all the promises of the huge King of Castile, I am assured that in the end the
poor Parysyans will find it, but a beggars reckoning; it is very true, that
the women shall have two dominicall letters, so much the greater, by how much
the greater they are inamoured with the greatest Alphabet, to wit, great O. and
great Q. And when you would know the year of the holy Barracados of Parris, or
rather if you will the day when the Guysards fights only with their balafte,
you shall need but to make your honest repair to me your assured friend
Harlequin who knows not only the moving of the elements, but the secret
working of every star in the heavens.

The seventh error is in the disposition and course of the year.
THese Leaguers make the years to be twelve months, but the Parrysyans which
have watched so many nights, and stood so many hours Sentinels on the walks,
shall not be paid for six months; they make six days in the week, always
banishing Sunday as an idle note in the Callender: but for Friday and Saturday,
they are always more villanouslie sharpeset, and know far worsse tyrants in
the Spanish army than in the Kings regiment; they make the day four and
twenty hours in length, but the poor hungry Parrisians that have neither
dinde, supt nor can get a breakefast, swear the clockes lie, for it cannot be
less then eight and forty.

The eighth error, is in the prediction of all that shall happen unto the
Leaguers from their conception, until their descending into Hell.
THe godly and blessed Merdologians, or rather Fortune Tellers, make the Ass
head abused Leaguers believe, that they are borne under the sign of the Lion,
and so consequently through that influence, they shall all prove renowned
warriors; but I descent from their judgments, for I believe that they shall
all rather be borne under the Crabbe, or demi Creuisse; learning to go more
backwarde than ever they went forward, and for their education, they shall
undoubtedly be brought up under the sign of Aquarius, because at their
birthes Wine was banished for inflaming the liver: and I hold it certain in
rules of their Nativity, that there shall be many Gramarians and Musicians
amongst them, who shall decline so much, and diminish so mightily, that
beggerie and scorn shall be all their companions, and in the end they shall
dye under the Spanish Scorpion, if suddenly before their times they be not
anointed with the juice of Hempseede, to mend their falling evils.

The ninth error, is in the humor that shall rule amongst them.
NOw to give them audatious boldness, and to encourage them in their foolish
and damned rash adventures, these Astrologians do promise them, that the humor
of Jupiter shall have influence and rule in their natiuities, but I, even I
noble Harlequin, by the aforesaid predictions, speculations and conjectures, do
conclude, that the melancholy humor shall be predominant and master over
them, which shall make them so fantastical and mad in their brains
drunkenness, that diverse of them shall dream in the night, that they are
already mounted upon the devils wings, into the third heaven, and when they
awake, they shall find themselves accompanied with shame and discredit, the
very monsters of the world, having no sore but the earths barrenness: others
shall dream of certain prises of Come and Wine, and forfeit the dear prises
of their soul, selling their bodies to hell and eternal damnation* others,
(and of them shall be an infinite number) shall dream that they are Kings, and
princely Governors of Realms and Principallities, but when they awake, they
shall find themselves the thridbare governors, fathers, and nourishers of
fleas, Lice, and all manner of fleshly persecuters.

The tenth error is in the length of the Leaguers world.
Division is the mother of destruction: and union the first bringer forth of
conservation or prosperity: whence it springs that the Astrologians belonging
to the League, conclude in their union a perpetuity, but I arguing both in
form and figure, prove the flat contrary, for say I, they shall be so united
in will, that look what the one would have, the other would be glad to cut his
throat so he might attain it: and during the time of their disputation, who
shall first sit down and take the chief place at the table: I noble Harlequin
a passing good Burbonian, will like an University lurcher, lick all the fat
from their trenchers.

FINIS.
Believe as ye list.
LONDON, Printed for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop by London
bridge gate. 1595.


