A SVMMARIE AND TRVE DISCOVRSE OF SIR FRANCES DRAKES West Indian Voyage.

Wherein were taken, the Towns of Saint Iago, Sancto Domingo, Cartagena and
Saint Augustine.

With Geographicall Mappes exactly describing each of the towns with their
scituations, and the manner of the Armies approaching to the winning of them.



Imprinted at London by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blacke-Friars by
Ludgate. 1589.

The Reader must understand, that this Discourse was dedicated, and intended to
have been imprinted somewhat before the coming of the Spanish Fleet upon our
coast of England: but by casualtie the same was forgotten and slacked for a
time of some better leisure.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT DEVREVX, EARL OF ESSEX AND EWE, VISCOUNT of
Hereford and Bourchier, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Louaine,
Master of the Queens Majesty's horse, and knight of the most honorable order
of the Garter, T. C. wishes increase of all honor and happiness.
RIght Honorable, having by chance recovered of late into my hands (after I
had once lost the same) a copy of the Discourse of our late West Indian
voyage, which was begun by Captain Bigges, who ended his life in the said
voyage after our departure from Cartagena, the same being afterward finished
(as I think) by his Lieutenant Master Croftes, or some other, I know not
well who. Now finding therein a most true report of the services and other
matters which happened in the said voyage, the sight whereof is wonderfully
desired by many honest and well disposed persons. I have presumed to
recommend the publishing thereof, unto your Lordships protection and favor,
for these two causes. The one, for that your Lordships Honorable disposition
is in the knowledge of all men that know your self most thirstingly affected
to embrace in your own person, the brauest enterprises, if the time would
once afford any such fit occasion, as might be agreeable to her Majesty's
resolution: who vvisely (and long may she do it) governs all things to the
greatest advantage of her self and people. The other, because my self having
been a member in the said actions, and was Lieutenant of Master Carleils
own company, whereby I can well assure the truth of this report: I thought
it my bounden duty, having professed my service to your Lordship before all
men, to dedicate the same rather unto your Lordship then to any other. And
although it be now a year and a half sithence the voyage ended, whereby
some man will say, that it is now no nevve matter: yet the present time
considered, how doubtful some of our meaner sort of people are of the Spanish
preparations, I think this Discourse a very fit thing to be published, that
they may see what great victories a fevve English men have made upon great
numbers of the Spaniardes, even at home in their own countries. The
beholding whereof will much encourage those, who by fame and bare words
are made to doubt much more then there is cause why they should. Upon which
point, as there may be much said: so my self being no Discourser, do desire to
be held excused therein: and therefore do only commend the truth of this
report unto your Lordship: which will be also auovved by diverse Captains
that were in the said voyage. And so in all humbleness do take my leave,
ready to do your Lordship all faithful service.

Your Lordships soldier and humble servant. THOMAS CATES.

A SVMMARIE AND TRVE DISCOVRSE OF SIR FRAVNCES DRAKES WEST INDIAN VOYAGE,
wherein were taken the towns of Saint Iago, Sancto Domingo, Cartagena and
Saint Augustine.
THIS worthy knight for the service of his Prince and country, having
prepared his whole fleet, and gotten them down to Plymouth in Devonshire, to
the number of five and twenty sail of ships and pinnaces, and having assembled
of soldiers and mariners to the number of two thousand and three hundred in
the whole, embarked them and him self at Plymouth aforesaid the twelfth day
of September 1585. being accompanied with these men of name and charge, which
hereafter follow.

Master Christopher Carleill Lieutenant General, a man of long experience in
the war as well by sea as land, and had formerly carried high offices in both
kinds in many fights, which he discharged always very happily, and with
great good reputation.

Anthony Powell Sergeant Mayor. Captain Matthew Morgan, and Captain John
Sampson Corporals of the field.
These principal officers had commandment over the rest of the land
Captains, whose names hereafter follow.

Captain Anthony Plat. Captain John Merchant. Captain Edward VVinter.
Captain John Goring. Captain Robert Pew. Captain George Barton. Captain
William Cecill. Captain Walter Bigs. Captain John Hannam. Captain Richard
Stanton. Captain Martine Frobusher Vizeadmirall, a man of great experience in
sea faring action, and had carried chief charge of many ships himself, in
sundry voyages before, being now shipped in the Primerose. Captain Francis
Knolles, Rieradmirall in the Gallion Leicester. Master Thomas Venner Captain
in the Elizabeth Bonaduenture under the General. Master Edward VVinter
Captain in the Aid. Master Christopher Carleill the Lieutenant general,
Captain in the Tigar. Henry White Captain of the sea Dragon. Thomas Drake
Captain of the Thomas. Thomas Seely Captain of the Minion. Bailie Captain
of the Bark Talbot. Robert Cross Captain of the Bark Bond. George
Fortescute Captain of the Bark Bonner. Edward Careless Captain of the Hope.
James Erizo Captain of the white Lion. Thomas Moon Captain of the Francis.
John Rivers Captain of the Vantage. John Vaughan Captain of the Drake. John
Varney Captain of the George. John Martin Captain of the Benjamin. Edward
Gilman Captain of the Skout. Richard Hawkins Captain of the Galliot called
the Ducke. Bitfield Captain of the Swallow.
After our going hence, which was the fourteenth of September, in the year of
our Lord, one thousand five hundred eighty and five: and taking our course
toward Spai^e, we had the wind for a few days somewhat skant, and sometimes
calm. And being arrived near that part of the coast of Spain, which is called
the Mores, we happened to epsy diverse sails, which kept their course close
by the shore, the weather being fair and calm. The General caused the
Vizeadmirall to go with the Pinnaces well manned to see what they were, who
upon sight of the said pinnaces approaching nere unto them, abandonned for the
most part all their ships (being Frenchmen) laden all with salt, and bound
homewardes into France, amongst which ships (being all but of small burden)
there was one so well liked, which also had no man in her, as being brought
unto the General, he thought good to make stay of her for the service, meaning
to pay for her, as was accordingly performed at our return, which bark was
called the Drake. The rest of these ships being eight or nine, were dismissed
without any thing at all taken from them. We being afterward put somewhat
further off from the shore, by the contrariety of wind, we happened to meet
with some other French ships, full laden with Newland fish, being upon their
return homeward from the said New found land: whom the General after some
speech had with them, and seeing plainly that they were Frenchmen, dismissed
without once suffering any man to go aboard of them.

The day following standing in with the shore again, we discried an other tall
ship of twelve score tons or thereabouts, upon whom Master Carleill the
Lieutenant general being in the Tiger, undertook the chase, whom also anon
after the Admiral followed, and the Tiger having caused the said strange ship
to strike her sails, kept her there without suffering any body to go aboard
until the Admiral was come up: who forthwith sending for the Master, and
diverse others of their principal men, and causing them to be severally
examined, found the ship and goods to be belonging to the inhabitants of S.
SEBASTIAN in Spain, but the mariners to be for the most part belonging to S.
John de LVCE and the passage. In this ship was great store of dry Newland
fish, commonly called with us Poor John, whereof afterward being thus found a
lawful prize, there was distribution made into all the ships of the Fleet,
the same being so new and good, as it did very greatly bestead us in the whole
course of our voyage. A day or two after the taking of this ship, we put in
with the Isles of BAYON, for lack of favorable wind, where we had no sooner
anckered some part of the Fleet, but the General commanded all the Pinnaces
with the ship boats to be manned, and every man to be furnished with such
arms as was needful for that present service, which being done, the General
put him self into his Galley, which was also well furnished, and rowing
toward the City of BAYON, with intent, and the favor of the Almighty to
surprise it. Before we had advanced one half league of our way, there came a
messenger being an English Merchant from the Governor, to see what strange
Fleet we were, who came to our General, and conferred a while with him, and
after a small time spent, our General called for Captain Sampson, and willed
him to go to the Governor of the City, to resolve him of two points. The
first, to know if there were any wars between Spain and England. The
second why our Merchants with their goods were imbarred or arrested. Thus
departed Captain Sampson with the said messenger to the city, where he found
the Governor and people much amazed of such a sudden accident.

The General with the advice and counsel of Master Carleill his Lieutenant
general, who was in the galley with him, thought not good to make any stand,
till such time as they were within shot of the City, where they might be
ready upon the return of Captain Sampson, to make a sudden attempt if cause
did require before it was dark.

Captain Sampson returned with his message in this sort. First, touching peace
or wars, the Governor said he knew of no wars, and that it lay not in him
to make any, he being so mean a subject as he was. And as for the stay of the
Merchants with their goods, it was the kings pleasure, but not with intent to
endommage any man. And that the kings conter commandment was (which had been
received in that place some seauennight before) that English Merchants with
their goods should be discharged: for the more verifying whereof, he sent such
Merchants as were in the town of our Nation, who traffiqued those parts: which
being at large declared to our General by them, counsel was taken what might
best be done. And for that the night approached, it was thought needful to
land our force, which was done in the shutting up of the day, and having
quartered our selves to our most advantage, with sufficient guard upon every
straight, we thought to rest our selves for that night there. The Governor
sent us some refreshing, as bread, wine, oil, apples, grapes, marmalad and
such like. About midnight the weather begins to ouercast, insomuch that it
was thought meeter to repair aboard, then to make any longer abode on land,
and before we could recover the Fleet, a great tempest arose, which caused
many of our ships to drive from their ancker hold, and some were forced to sea
in great peril, as the bark Talbot, the bark Hawkins and the Speedewell,
which Speedewell only was driven into England, the others recovered us again,
the extremity of the storm lasted three days, which no sooner began to
assuage, but Master Carleill our Lieutenant general, was sent with his own
ship and three others: as also with the galley and with diverse Pinnaces, to see
what he might do above VIGO, where he took many boats and some Caruels,
diversely laden with things of small value, but chiefly with household stuff,
running into the high country, and amongst the rest, he found one boat laden
with the principal Church stuff of the high Church of VIGO, where also was
their great Cross of silver, of very fair embossed work, and double gilt all
over, having cost them a great mass of money. They complained to have lost in
all kind of goods above thirty thousand Ducats in this place.

The next day the General with his whole Fleet went up from the Isles of BAYON,
to a very good harbor above VIGO, where Master Carleill stayed his coming,
as well for the more quiet riding of his ships, as also for the good commodity
of fresh watering, which the place there did afoord full well. In the mean
time the Governor of GALLISIA had reared such forces as he might, his numbers
by estimate were some two thousand foot, and three hundred horse, and marched
from BAYON to this part of the country, which lay in sight of our Fleet,
where making stand, he sent to parle with our General, which was granted by
our General, so it might be in boats upon the water: and for safety of their
persons, there were pledges delivered on both sides, which done, the Governor
of GALLISIA put him self with two others into our Vize-Admirals Skiffe, the
same having been sent to the shore for him: And in like sort our General in his
own Skiffe, where by them it was agreed, we should furnish our selves with
fresh water, to be taken by our own people quietly on the land, and have all
other such necessaries, paying for the same, as the place would affoorde.

When all our business was ended, we departed, and took our way by the
Islands of CANARIA, which are esteemed some three hundred leagues from this
part of Spain, and falling purposely with PALMA, with intention to have taken
our pleasure of that place, for the full digesting of many things into order,
and the better furnishing our store with such several good things as that
affoordeth very abundantly, we were forced by the vile sea gate, which at that
present fell out, and by the naughtiness of the landing place, being but one,
and that under the favor of many Platformes, well furnished with great
ordinance, to depart with the receipt of many their Canon shot, some into our
ships, and some besides, some of them being in very deed full Canon high. But
the only or chief mischief, was the dangerous sea surge, which at shore all
alongest, plainly threatened the overthrow of as many Pinnaces and boats, as
for that time should have attempted any landing at all.

Now seeing the expectation of this attempt frustrated by the causes aforesaid,
we thought it meeter to fall with the Isle FERRO, to see if we could find any
better fortune, and coming to the Island, we landed a thousand men in a valley
under a high mountain, where we stayed some two or three hours, in which time
the inhabitants, accompanied with a young fellow borne in England, who dwelt
there with them, came unto us, showing their state to be so poor, that they
were all ready to starve, which was not untrue: and therefore without any
thing gotten, we were all commanded presently to imbarke, so as that night we
put off to sea South Southeast along toward the coast of Barbary.

Upon Saturday in the morning, being the thirteenth of November, we fell with
Cape Blancke, which is a low land and shallow water, where we catched store of
fish, and doubling the Cape, we put into the Bay, where we found certain French
ships of war, whom we entertained with great courtesy, and there left them. The
after noone the whole Fleet assembled, which was a little scattered about their
fishing, and put from thence to the Isles of Cape Verde, sailing till the
sixteenth of the same month in the morning, on which day we descried the
Island of S. IAGO, and in the evening we anckered the Fleet between the town
called the PLAY or PRAY and S. IAGO, where we put on shore a thousand men or
more, under the leading of Master Christopher Carleill Lieutenant General,
who directed the service most like a wise commander. The place where we had
first to march did afford no good order, for the ground was mountains and
full of dales, being a marvelous stony and troublesome passage, but such was
his industrious disposition, as he would never leave, until we had gotten up to
a fair plain, where we made stand for the assembling of the Army. And when we
were all gathered together upon the plain, some two little miles from the
town, the Lieutenant general thought good not to make attempt till day light:
because there was not one that could serve for guide or giving knowledge at all
of the place. And therefore after having well rested, even half an hour
before day, he commanded the Army to be divided into three special parts,
such as he appointed, whereas before we had marched by several companies,
being thereunto forced by the naughtiness of the way as is aforesaid.

Now by the time we were thus raunged into a very brave order day^light began
to appear, and being advanced hard to the wall, we saw no enemy to resist,
whereupon the Leiutenant general appointed Captain Sampson with thirty shot,
and Captain Barton with other thirty, to go down into the town which stood
in the valey under us, and might very plainly be veiwed all over from that
place where the whole Army was now arrived and presently after these Captains
was sent the great Ensign, which had nothing in it but the plain English
Cross, to be placed toward the sea, that our fleet might see Saint Georges
Cross flourish in the enemies fortress. Order was given that all the ordinance
througout the town and upon all the platformes, which was above fifty pieces
all ready charged, should be shot of in honor of the Queens Majesty's
coronation day, being the seuententh of November, after the yearly custom of
England, which was so answered again by the ordinance out of all the ships in
the fleet which now was come near, as it was strange to hear such a
thondering noise last so long to gether. In this mean while the Leiutenaunt
general held still the most part of his force on the hill top, till such time
as the town was quartered out for the lodging of the whole army, which being
done every Captain took his own Saint Iago.
A The place where the whole Fleet first ankered. B The place where the
Pinnaces and Shipboates did set the soldiers on shore, which might be some
five miles from the town of S. Iago. C The way which the army did pass over
the mountains. D A l^rge plain and place where the army was martialled in
order of battel^, and so marched toward the town. E A troop of shot sent
before the vantgard to discover. F A troop of shot belonging to the vantgard,
and was lead a little before the squadron of pikes of the said vantgard. G The
squadron of pikes which had the vantgard, which squadron with the troops of
shot belonging unto it consisted of three companies. H Two troops of shot
which marched as the right wing or flank of the vantgard. I Two troops of
shot marching on the left wing or flancke of the vantgard. K A troop of shot
being also of the vantgard and followed the pikes. L The first troop of shot
belonging to the battle, and is the lesser of the twain that march before,
appointed expressly to discover and to take knowledge of any thing before. M The
second troop of shot being the greater belonging to the maine battle, and
marched next before the same. N Troops of shot belonging to the maine battle.
O The great squadron of pikes which carried the place of maine battle, which
with the troops of shot belonging unto it, consisted of four companies of one
hundred and fifty men to each ensign. P The squadron of pikes which made the
riergard, which with the troops of shot thereunto belonging, consisted of
th^ee enseignes or companies. Q Troops of shot belonging to the riergard. R A
place fortified without the town of Saint Iago, by the which we entered the
same being upon a high hill or mountain, and easily ouerlooking all the town,
unto the which town^ from thence there lies a way by that sloping part of the
hill which (...) toward the sea, but the rest of the said town lies in a
low bottom^ a valley between two hills and the hills being cliffed on both
sides of ^^e said valley which valley continues a great way up into the
country^ in the which valley does grow many pleasant fruits, which are
wa^red at pleasure by means of a small fine brook of running water issu^^g
out of the mountains of the Island country. S The valley aforesaid wherein do
grow ^^th many excellent herbs and sundry most delicate fruits, as Dates
Cochus nuttes, Planten^, Orenges, Lemon^, Sugercanes and diverse o^ers. T The
market place. V The Church. X The middle platform, standing to the s^warde
furnished with very good artillery. Y The platform on the west part of the
town furnished in like sor^ Z The platform on the East part well planted with
great ordinance as the rest. AA A place upon the height of the mountain
standing on the west side of the valley, and was fortified as the other over
against it by the which we entered. BB A little Chapel that stood on the
point of land on the West side of Saint Iago. CC The town people being
Portingals and flying from thence. DD The way which we marched into the country
toward the village called Saint Domingo, where it was said the Bishop and
governors were fled, but upon our approach thitherwardes, they also fled from
thence before us. EE The village of Saint Domingo being twelve English miles,
that is, six leagues of France distant from Saint Iago into the heart of the
Island country. FF The town of Prayo standing by the sea side, which upon our
going away was burned with fire as the town of Saint Iago was. GG The
purtraicture of a flying fish, drawn very like to the living fish, whereof we
saw great store, and had many by falling into the ships, for they fly not above
ten or twelve score pases and so fall into the sea again, out of the which
they rise and take their flight commonly in flocks together when they be hardly
chased, and even ready to be devoured of the Dolphin and a fish called Bonito.
This picture of the flying fish is well nigh as big as the living fish, of
which kind there has not been seen any in my knowledge to carry above double
the lengh of this pictured fish.

quarter, and in the evening was placed such sufficient guard upon every part
of the town that we had no cause to fear any present enemy.

Thus we continued in the city the space of fourteen days, taking such
spoils as the place yielded, which were for the most part, wine, oil, meal,
and some other such like things for victual, as vinegar, olives and some other
trash, as merchandise for their Indian trades. But there was not found any
treasure at all, or any thing else of worth besides.

The situation of Saint IAGO is somewhat strange in form like to a triangle,
having on the East and West sides two mountains of Rock and cliffie, as it
were hanging over it, upon the top of which two mountains was builded certain
fortifications to preserve the town from any harm that might be offered. From
thence on the South side of the town is the maine sea, and on the North side,
the valley lying between the foresaid mountains, wherein the town stands:
the said valley and town both do grow very narrow, insomuch that the space
between the two cliffes of this end of the town is estimated not to be above
ten or twelve score over.

In the midst of the valley comes down a riueret, rill, or brook of fresh
water, which hard by the sea side makes a pond or poole, whereout our ships
were watered with very great ease and pleasure. Somewhat above the town on the
North side between the two mountains, the valley wageth somewhat larger then
at the towns end, which valley is wholly converted into gardens and orchards
well replenished with diverse sorts of fruicts, herbs and trees, as lymmons,
orenges, sugar canes, cochars or cochos nuts, plantens, potato roots,
cocombers, small and round onions, garlic, and some other things not now
remembered, amongst which the cochos nuts and plantens are very pleasant
fruicts, the said cochos having a hard shell and a green husk over it, as
has our walnut, but it far exceeds in greatness, for this cochos in this
green husk is bigger then any man's two fistes, of the hard shell many
drinking cups are made here in England, and set in silver as I have often seen.

Next within this hard shell is a white rine resembling in show very much even
as any thing may do, to the white of an egg when it is hard boiled. And within
this white of the nut lies a water, which is whitish and very clear, to the
quantity of half a pint or thereabouts, which water and white rine before
spoken of, are both of a very cool fresh taste, and as pleasing as anything
may be. I have heard some hold opinion, that it is very restoratiue.

The Planten grows in cods, somewhat like to beans, but is bigger and
longer, and much more thick together on the stalk, and when it waxes ripe,
the meat which fills the rine of the cod becomes yellow, and is exceeding
sweet and pleasant.

In this time of our being there, happened to come a Portingall to the
VVestermost fort, with a flag of truce, to whom Captain Sampson was sent with
Captain Goring, who coming to the said Messenger, he first asked them what
nation they were, they answered Englishmen, he then required to know if wars
were between England and Spain, to which they answered that they knew not,
but if he would go to their General he could best resolve him of such
particulars, and for his assurance of passage and repassage, these Captains
made offer to engage their credits, which he refused for that he was not sent
from his Governor. Then they told him, if his Governor did desire to take a
course for the common benefit of the people and contrie, his best way were to
come and present himself unto our Noble and merciful Governor Sir Frances
Drake: whereby he might be assured to find favor, both for him self and the
inhabitants. Otherwise within three days we should march over the land, and
consume with fire all inhabited places, and put to the sword all such living
souls as we should chance upon: so thus much he took for the conclusion of
his answer, and departing, he promised to return the next day, but we never
heard more of him.

Upon the four and twentieth of November, the General accompanied with the
Lieutenant general and six hundred men, marched forth to a village twelve
miles within the land, called S. DOMINGO, where the Governor and the Bishop
with all the better sort were lodged, and by eight of the clock we came to it,
finding the place abandoned, and the people fled into the mountains: so we
made stand a while to ease our selves, and partly to see if any would come to
speak to us. After we had well rested our selves, the General commanded the
troops to march away homewardes, in which retreat the enemy showed them
selves, both horse and foot, though not such force as durst encounter us: and
so in passing some time at the gase with them, it waxed late and toward night,
before we could recover home to S. IAGO.

On Monday the six and twentieth of November, the General commanded all the
Pinnaces with the boats, to use all diligence to imbarke the Army into such
ships as every man belonged. The Lieutenant general in like sort commanded
Captain Goring and Lieutenant Tucker, with one hundred shot to make a stand in
the market place, until our forces were wholly embarked, the Vizeadmirall
making stay with his Pinnace and certain boats in the harbor, to bring the
said last company aboard the ships. Also the General willed forthwith the
Gallie with two Pinnaces to take into the^ the company of Captain Barton, and
the company of Captain Bigs, under the leading of Captain Sampson, to seek
out such munition as was hidden in the ground, at the town of PRAY or PLAY,
having been promised to be showed it by a prisoner, which was taken the day
before. The Captains aforesaid coming to the PLAY, landed their men, and
having placed the troop in their best strength, Captain Sampson took the
prisoner, and willed him to show that he had promised, ^he which he could not,
or at least would not: but they searching all suspected places, found two
pieces of ordinance one of iron, an other of brass. In the afternoon the
General anckered the rest of the Fleet before the PLAY, coming him self a
shore, willing us to burn the town and make all haste a boorde, the which was
done by six of the clock the same day, and our selves embarked again the
same night, and so we put off to sea Southwest.

But before our departure from the town of S. IAGO, we established orders for
the better government of the army, every man mustered to his Captain, and
oaths ministered to acknowledge her Majesty supreme Governor, as also every
man to do his uttermost endeavor to advance the service of the action, and to
yield due obedience unto the directions of the General and his officers. By
this provident counsel, and laying down this good foundation before hand, all
things went forward in a due course, to the atchiuing of our happy enterprise.

In all the time of our being here, neither the Governor for the king of
Spain, which is a Portingall, neither the Bishop, whose authority is great,
neither any of the inhabitants of the town or Island ever came at us (which we
expectected they should have done) to entreat us to leave them some part of
their needful provisions, or at the least, to spare the ruining of their
town at the going away. The cause of this their unreasonable distrust (as I do
take it) was the fresh remembrance of the great wrongs they had done to old
Master William Hawkins of Plymouth, in the voyage he made four or five
years before, when as they did both break their promise, and murdered many of
his men, whereof I judge you have understood, and therefore needelesse to be
here repeated. But since they came not at us, we left written in sundry places,
as also in the Spitle house (which building was only appointed to be spared)
the great coffeehouse and scorn we took at this their refraining to come
unto us, as also at the rude manner of killing, and savage kind of handling the
dead boy of one of our boys, found by them straggling all alone, from whom they
had taken his head and his heart, and had stragled the other bowels about the
place, in a most brutish and most beastly manner.

In revenge whereof at our departing we con^umed with fire all the houses,
as well in the country which we saw, as in the town of S. IAGO.

From hence putting over to the West Indies, we were not many days at sea,
but there began amongst our people such mortality, as in few days there
were dead above two or three hundred men. And until some seven or eight days
after our coming from S. IAGO, there had not died any one man of sickness
in all the Fleet: the sickness showed not his infection wherewith so many
were stricken, until we were departed thence, and then seized our people with
extreme hot burning and continual ague, whereof some very fevve escaped
with life, and yet those for the most part not without great alteration and
decay of their vvittes and strength for a long time after. In some that dyed
were plainly shevved the small spots, which are often found upon those
that be infected with the plague, we were not above eighteen days in passage
between the sight of Saint IAGO aforesaid, and the Island of DOMINICA, being
the first Island of the West Indies that we fell wi^ha^l, the same being
inhabited with savage people, which go all naked, their skin colored with
some painting of a reddish tawney, very personable and handsome strong men,
who do admit little conversation with the Spaniards: for as some of our people
might understand them, they had a Spaniard or twain prisoners with them,
neither do I think that there is any safety for any of our nation, or any
other to be within the limits of their commandment, albeit they used us very
kindly for those few hours of time which we spent with them, helping our
folks to fill and carry on their bare shoulders fresh water from the river to
our ships boats, and fetching from their houses, great store of Tobacco, as
also a kind of bread, which they fed on, called Cassado, very white and
sauerie, made of the roots of Cassania. In recompense whereof, we bestowed
liberal rewards of glass, colored beads and other things, which we had
found at Saint IAGO, wherewith (as it seemed) they rested very greatly
satisfied, and showing some sorrowful countenance when they perceived that we
would depart.

From hence we went to another Island VVestward of it, called Saint
CHRISTOPHERS Island, wherein we spent some days of Christmas, to refresh our
sick people, and to cleanse and air our ships. In which Island were not any
people at all that we could hear of.

In which time by the General it was advised and resolved, with the consent of
the Lieutenant general, the Vizeadmirall, and all the rest of the Captains to
proceed to the great Island of HISPANIOLA, as well for that we knew our
selves then to be in our best strength, as also the rather allured thereunto,
by the glorious fame of the City of S. DOMINGO, being the auncientest and
chief inhabited place in all that tract of country there abouts. And so
proceeding in this determination, by the way we met with a small Frigot, bound
for the same place, the which the Vizeadmirall took, and having duly examined
the men that were in her, there was one found by whom we were advertised, the
haven to be a barred haven, and the shore or land thereof to be well
fortified, having a Castle thereupon furnished with great store of artillery,
without the danger whereof, was no convenient landing place with ten English
miles of the City, to which the said Pilote took on him to conduct us.

All things being thus considered on, the whole forces were commanded in the
evening to imbarke them selves into Pinnaces, boats, and other small barks
appointed for this service. Our soldiers being thus embarked, the General put
him self into the bark Fraunces as Admiral, and all this night we lay on the
sea, bearing small sail until our arrival to the landing place, which was
about the breaking of the day, and so we landed, being New years day, nine or
ten miles to the VVestwardes of that brave City of S. DOMINGO: for at that
time nor yet is known to us, any landing place, where the sea surge does not
threaten to ouerset a Pinnace or boat. Our General having seen us all landed
in safety, returned to his Fleet, bequeathing us to God, and the good conduct
of Master Carleill our Lieutenant general, at which time, being about eight
of the clock, we began to march, and about noone time, or toward one of the
clock we approached the town, where the Gentlemen and those of the better
sort, being some hundred and fifty brave horses or rather more, began to
present them selves, but our small shot played upon them, which were so
sustained with good proportion of pikes in all parts, as they finding no part
of our troop unprepared to receive them (for you must understand they viewed
all around about) they were thus driven to give us leave to proceed toward
the two gates of the town, which were the Saint Domingo.
A Fires made by the Spaniardes dwelling in the Co^ntry upon sight of our
ships, to give notice unto those of the Town. B The place where our Pinnaces
and Shipboates landed our soldiers, which might be some ten miles from the
city of Saint Domingo. C A woody way which our Army marched along the
country, to the city of Saint Domingo the same being a beaten broad high way.
D A large pl^^^ and place where the Army was martialled into order of b^ttel^,
and so marched toward the city. E A tro^pe of shot sent before the vantgard
to disco^er. F A troop of shot belonging to the vantgard, and was lead a
little before the squadron of pikes of the said vantgard. G The squadron of
pikes which had the vantgard, which squadron with the troops of shot belonging
unto it^ consi^^ed of three companies. H Two troops of shot which marched as
the right wing or flancke of the vantgard. I Two troops of shot marching as
the le^t wing or f^anke of the vantgard. K A Troop of shot being also o^ the
v^tgard, and followed the pikes. L The first troop of shot belonging to the
battle, and is the lesser of the twain that march before^ appointed expressly
to discoue^ and to take knowledge of any thing before. M The so^^nd troop of
shot being the greater belonging to the maine battle and marched next before
the same. N Troops of shot belonging to the maine battle. O The great
squadron of pikes which carried the place of maine battle, which with the
troops of shot belonging unto it consisted of four Companies o^ 150. men to
each company or there about. P The squadron of pikes which made the riergard,
which with the troops of shot thereunto belonging, consisted of three
enseignes or companies. Q Troops of shot belonging to the riergard. R The gate
where M. Car^eill the Lieutenant General entered with his companies, where was
placed and discharged against us three pieces of ordinance. S The gate where
Captain Powell entered with the vantgard. T A great drove of kine and oxen of
a huge bigness, which the enemy had driven upon us to p^t us out of order,
that then their horsemen might the better assail us. V Two troops of horsemen
of the enemy, which sometime charged our vantgard, but were quickly made to
retire. X Two troops of Spaniards which sometime we saw in sight. Y A troop
of shot of the enemy which lay in ambush, and discharged their voley of shot
upon us hard by the gate where the Lieutenaunt General with his troops entered
the city pel^ mell with them. Z The place where the whole Fl^ete anckered. AA
The market place of the city. BB The great church being very finely built and
sumtuously furnished. CC The castle wherein they had planted some 50. pieces of
ordinance which commanded all the harbor, as well to seaward as also to the
inward part thereof, being walled about with freestone, and was kept by the
Spaniards after the town was lo^t the space of twelve hours, until they saw
us ready to enter it by force, and they fled over the river by little boats.
DD Ships which they purposely drowned in the mouth of the harbor, because our
Fleet should not enter into the said harbor. EE A goodly great Gallie which
the Spaniards had in their harbor which at our departure from the city we
burned. FF Ships of the Spaniard^ in the inner harbor, which upon our
departure we consumed with fire. GG Gardens which were very pleasant being very
full of many excellent sorts of fruits, which belonged to the indwellers of
the city. HH A Frierie on the top of a hill called Saint Barbara. II The way
which a messenger went from the General up into the country to the Lord
President of Saint Domingo, being some 12. miles distant from the city. KK A
place called the white Tower. LL A strange beas^ drawn after the life, and is
called by our English mariners Aliga^ta, by the Spaniards Ca^man, which lives
both at sea and land, he watches the To^toise when she lays eggs, and when
the Tortoise is gone from them he will hunt them out, and devour them all that
he finds. He has been seen by the Spaniards to take hold of an ox or cow
by the tail and so to draw them forcibly into the sea, and there devour them:
and so likewise a man whom he has surprised a sleep or othe^wise at unawares:
for it he be in time espied a man may well escape by flight, for he runs not
so fast as a man, but with pieces and pikes we killed many in desolate Islands
and eat them, whose flesh is most like to veale in sight, but the old are
somewhat rammish in taste: the young of half growth are very special good
meat, his back is well armed with a strong scale, but his belly soft, and
between the forlegge and the body is the best place to strike him with a pike,
they are of eight or nine foot long and some less, his back of a darkish
gray color, his belly whitish yeallow. MM A Tortoise is a fi^h that lives in
the sea, but comes to the land to lay his eggs in breeding time, and going
upon her sins which are strong and tough, comes to the sand some 40. or 50.
pases from the sea, there with her sore sins scrapeth a hole in the sand, and
so turning her hinder part in the said hole lays her eggs, which at one
time are about on^ hundred, and so s^raping the sand over the eggs again to
hide them goes her way to the sea and never comes again, the eggs by the
heat of the sun are in a due time hatched, and the young go presently to the
sea one following of an other, with whom i^ the A^^garta do meet, he deuoureth
the^ one after an other as they come. This Torto^ses flesh is good meat, and
is like unto beef both in taste and show, the eggs are also very good, saving
that they have a little rammish taste (as to me seems) but many others liked
them well, the scale of the back which is but one shell is about three foot
long, and two foot and a half broad, whereof many are used for targets
against arrows, or any other edged weapon. In the Islands of Ca^nanes we
killed a hundred in two nights, where we killed also many Aligartas aforsaid,
and therewith refreshed our people greatly. The Torto^se in the night coming up
to lay eggs as is aforesaid, is watched by us, who purposely walking along by
the sea side, as soon as we can epsy them on land either going up or coming
down, we run to take hold of them, who runs but slowly, and so ouerturne
them by the side of the back shell, and lay them o^ their backs, and so
leaving them go on to seek more until the morning, and then gather them all
together, for they can not possibly turn themselves on their belly again, the
back is blackish, the belly has also a scale, but it is softer then the
b^cke, and yallow of coullour, and between the two shelles they will draw in
their head and feet as it were between t^o boordes, when they be afraid of
any thing.

next to the seaward. They had manned them both, and planted their ordinance
for that present and sudden alarm without the gates, and also some troops of
small shot in Ambuscado upon the high way side. We divided our whole force,
being some thousand or twelve hundred men into two parts, to enterprise both
the gates at one instant, the Lieutenant general having openly vowed to
Captain Powell (who led the troop that entered by the other gate) that with
Gods good favor he would not rest until our meeting in the market place.

Their ordinance had no sooner discharged upon our near approach, and made
some execution amongst us, though not much, but the Leiutenant general
began forthwith to advance both his voice of encoragment and pase of
marching, the first man that was slain with the ordinance being very near
unto him self, and thereupon hasted all that he might to keep them from the
reaching of the ordinance. And notwithstanding their Ambuscadoes, we marched
or rather ran so roundly into them, as pell mell we entered the gates with
them, and gave them more care every man to save himself by flight, then
reason to stand any longer to their broken fight, we forthwith repaired to the
market place, but to be more truly understood a place of very fair spacious
square ground before the great Church, whither also came as had been agreed,
Captain Powell with the other troop, which place with some part next unto it
we strengthened with Barricados, and there as the most convenient place assured
our selves, the City being far too spacious for so small and weary a troop
to undertake to guard. Somewhat after midnight they who had the guard of the
Castle, hearing us busy about the gates of the said Castle, abandoned the
same, some being taken prisoners, and some flying away by the help of boats,
to the other side of the haven, and so into the country.

The next day we quartered a little more at large, but not in the half part of
the town, and so making substantial trenches, and planting all the
ordinance, that each part was correspondent to other, we held this town the
space of one month.

In the which time happened some accidents more then are well remembered for the
present, but amongst other things it chanced that the General sent on his
message to the Spaniardes a negro boy with a flagge of white, signifying truce
as is the Spaniards ordinary manner to do there, when they approach to speak
with us, which boy unhappily was first met withal, by some of those who had
been belonging as officers for the king in the Spanish galley, which with the
town was lately fallen into our hands, who without all order or reason, and
contrary to that good usage wherewith we had entertained their messengers,
furiously stroke the poor boy through the body with one of their horsemens
staves, with which wound the boy returned to the General, and after he had
declared the manner of this wrongful cruelty, died forthwith in his presence,
wherewith the General being greatly passioned, commanded the Provost martial,
to cause a couple of Friars, then prisoners, to be carried to the same place
where the boy was stricken, accompanied with sufficient guard of our soldiers,
and ther^ presently to be hanged, dispatching at the same instant another poor
prisoner, with this reason wherefore this execution was done, and with this
message further, that until the party who had thus murdered the Generals
messenger, were delivered into our hands, to receive condign punishment, there
should no day pass, wherein there should not two prisoners be hanged, until
they were all consumed which were in our hands.

VVhereupon the day following, he that had been Captain of the kings galley,
brought ^he offender to the towns end, offering to deliver him into our hands,
but it was thought a more honorable revenge, to make them there in our sight,
to perform the execution them selves, which was done accordingly.

During our being in this town, as formerly also ^t S. IAGO there had passed
justice upon the life of one of our own company for an odious matter: so here
likewise was there an Irish man hanged, for the murdering of his Corporal.

In this time also passed many treaties between their commissioners and us,
for ransom of their City, but upon disagreements, we still spent the early
mornings in firing the outmost houses: but they being built very magnificently
of stone, with high loftes, gave us no small travel to ruin them. And albeit
for diverse days together, we ordained each morning by day break, until the
heat began at nine of the clock, that two hundred mariners did naught else
but labor to fire and burn the said houses without our trenches, whilst the
soldiers in a like proportion stood forth for their guard: yet did we not or
could not in this time consume so much as one third part of the town. And so
in the end, what wearied with firing, and what hastened by some other respects,
we were content to accept of five and twenty thousand Ducats, of five
shillings six pence the piece, for the ransom of the rest of the town.
Amongst other things which happened and were found at S. DOMINGO, I may not
omit to let the world know one very notable mark and token, of the insatiable
ambition of the Spanish King and his nation, which was found in the kings
house, wherein the chief Governor of that City and country is appointed
always to lodge, which was this. In the coming to the hall or other rooms of
this house, you must first ascend up by a fair large pair of stairs, at the
head of which stairs is a handsome spacious place to walk in, somewhat like
unto a gallerie, wherein upon one of the walls, right over against you as you
enter the said place, so as your eye ca^ not escape the sight of it, there is
described and painted in a very large Scutchion, the arms of the king of
Spain, and in the lower part of the said Scutchion, there is likewise
described a globe, containing in it the whole circuit of the sea and the
earth, whereupon is a horse standing on his hinder part within the globe, and
the other fore part without the globe, lifted up as it were to leap, with a
scroll painted in his mouth, wherein was written these words in Latin NON
SVFFICIT ORBIS: which is as much to say, as the world suffiseth not, whereof
the meaning was required to be known of some of those of the better sort, that
came in commission to treat upon the ransom of the town, who would shake
their heads, and turn aside their countenance in some smiling sort, without
aunswering any thing, as greatly ashamed thereof. For by some of our company
it was told them, that if the Queen of England would resolutely prosecute the
wars against the king of Spain, he should be forced to lay aside that proud
and unreasonable reaching vain of his, for he should find more then enough to
do, to keep that which he had already, as by the present example of their
lost town they might for a beginning perceive well enough.

Now to the satisfying of some men, who marvel greatly that such a famous and
goodly builded City so well inhabited of gallant people, very bravely
apparelled (whereof our soldiers found good store for their relief) should
afoord no greater riches then was found there, wherein it is to be understood
that the Indian people, which were the naturals of this whole Island of
HISPANIOLA (the same being near hand as great as England) were many years
^ince clean consumed by the tyranny of the Spaniards, which was cause, that
for lack of people to work in the Mines, the gold and silver Mines of this
Island are wholly given over, and thereby they are feign in this Island to use
copper money, whereof was found very great quantity. The chief trade of this
place consists of sugar and ginger, which grows in the Island, and of hides
of oxen and kine, which in this wast country of the Island are bred in
infinite numbers, the soil being very fertile: and the said beasts are fed up
to a very large growth, and so killed for nothing so much, as for their hides
aforesaid. We found here great store of strong wine, sweet oil, vinegar,
olives and other such like provisions, as excellent wheat meal packed up in
wine pipes and other caske, and other commodities likewise, as woollen and
linen cloth, and some silks, all which provisions are brought out of Spain
and served us for great relief. There was but little plate or vessel of
silver, in comparison of the great pride in other things of this town, because
in these hot countries they use much of these earthen dishes finely painted
or varnished, which they call Parsellina, and is had out of the East India, and
for their drinking, they use glasses altogether, whereof they make excellent
good and fair in the same place. But yet some plate we found, and many other
good things, as their household garniture very gallant and rich, which had cost
them dear, although unto us they were of small importance.

From S. DOMINGO we put over to the maine or firm land, and going all alongest
the coast, we came at the last in sight of CARTAGENA, standing upon the sea
side, so near as some of our barks in passing alongest, approached within the
reach of their Culuerin shot, which they had planted upon certain platformes.
The harbor mouth lay some five miles to the VVestward of the town, wherinto
we entered about three or four of the clock in the after noone without any
resistance, or ordinance or other impeachment planted upon the same. In the
evening we put our selves on land toward the harbor mouth, (...) the leading
of Master Carleill our Lieutenant general, who after he had digested us to
march forward about the midnight, as easily as foot might fall, expressly
commanding to keep close by the sea wash of the shore for our best and surest
way, whereby we were like to go through, and not to miss any more of the way,
which once we had lost within an hour after our first beginning to march,
through the slender knowledge of him that took upon him to be our guide, whereby
the night spent on, which otherwise must have been done by resting. But as we
came within two miles of the town, their horsemen which were some hundred, met
us, and taking the Alarm, retired to their towneward again upon the first
volley of our shot that was given them: for the place where we encountered being
woodie and bushie even to the water side, was unmeet for their service.

At this instant we might hear some pieces of artillery discharged, with
diverse small shot toward the harbor, which gave us to understand, according
Cartagena.
A The place where the whole Fleet first anckered. B The place where the
Pinnaces and Shipboats did set the soldiers on shore^ which might be some
four or five miles distant from the to^ne of Cartagena. C The way which our
Army marched along the sea side toward the town^. D Small sticks in great
numbers of half a yard long being sharp pointed at both ends, the one end
being thrust into the ground in the common high way as we should have marched,
and the other ends sticking upwards, and as it were been against us, and were
all dressed with a most villainous and mortal poison: so as it did but break
the skin of any part of a man either in the leg or otherwise, there was no
remedy to be had to preserve his life. But the direction which was given us by
Master C^rleill Lieutenant general to march close by the sea side, was cause
that very few of our men were touched with them. E The troop of pikes as (...)
which had the vantgard of our Arm^. F A Fortific^tion ^uilt of stone work
clean over the n^cke of the land, very orderly done each part aunswearing
and flancking the other, having a ditch or trench without it, and within were
five pieces of great ordinance, sakers and demiculuerins, which did beat
right in front upon our approach, and within the said wall for the guard thereof
were also three hundred men, pikes and shot, the said neck of land being but
fifty pases over from one sea water to the other. G Two great Galleys which
were within the haven, were placed as you see without the stone wall aforsaid,
of purpose to beat cross the straight of land: and so to flancke us in our
approach, in which Galleys were planted eleven pieces of ordinance and 400.
soldiers, which of ordinary did belong unto them and were all small shot,
which ordinance and final shot as well on land as in the Galleys, was
wonderfully employed that it was strange to hear the same. But God who has
appointed the means, preserved our troops above all expectation: for by the
direction which was given by Master Carleill the Leiutenaunt General to march
close by the sea side, which was also lower then all the rest of the ground and
by the advantage of the darkness, the day light being not as yet broken forth,
we escap^d the most danger of all their thundering, and made our approach with
v^ry s^all loss to speak of. And so finding at one end of this
Fortifica^tion a little place for their horses to salley, which was also made
up with a good Barikado of wine pipes filled with earth, we attempted the same,
and finding our pikes longer then theirs, our bodies better armed, and our
minds more resolutely prepared, we plucked the same do^ne with our hands to
the ground, and will they nill, we entered perforce, in which fight the
Captain of the place being a very gallant personage, was first hurt and then
taken prisoner, and almost all his off^^ers slain, with diverse others of his
company. H A great Gall^^sse well furnished with ordinance, which she implo^ed
as well as she might, but not to any purpose because she could not come so
near the shore, which was not deep enough of water for her. I The Spaniards
flying away after our entry into the Fortification aforsaid, and having
quickly afterward lost their town also, they passed through the some, and
by the bridge on the other side do take their ^light into the country. K
Certain Pinnaces of ours which entertained a little skirmish with the forte of
the haven, but returned to the Fleet without being able to do any matter of
importance. L The Forte which kept the inner haven, which was built of fair
free stone, and had in it both good store of ordinance and men to defend it,
but it was abandoned the day after we had won the town, upon intelligence
they had gotten of an attempt which was intended against it the same night
following. M The place where the two Galleys were burned. N The place where our
Fleet anckered the second time, which was after the town was won. O Ships
of theirs which we burned. P The market place of the town. Q The Church which
was newly builded of very fair stone work which by us was much reined again,
by a chance in shooting a piece of ordinance at the setting of the watch, the
bullet whereof being a great culuerin or rather a demicannon, happening to take
the top of a maine pillar, made one part after an other to fall down. R A
bridge by the which the Spaniards took their flight into the country after
they had lost their town. S The place where our ships ancke^ed the third time
being upon our departure. T An Island wherein is planted as is in an orchard a
great number of delicate fruits, more then can be well remembered, as Orenges,
Lemons, Plantens, Mamey, Apples, Sugercanes. etc. In the said Island is also a
very great well of fresh water, where we furnished the whole Feet of fresh
water. V A beast called a Guana bearing this shape and fashion as is here
truly purtraicted, it lives on the land in the woods and desert places, and
is caught by the savage or Indian people who sell them to the Spaniards, they
are of a sad green color, and their body of the bigness of a connie, they are
eaten by the Indians and Spaniardes^ and so likewise by us for a very dilica^e
meat, in the breeding t^me the femall is full of eggs in great number, and
they of all the rest are esteemed the most delicate. X Two lakes of standing
water being brackish.

to the order set down in the evening before by our General, that the
Vizeadmir^^l accompanied with Captain Venner, Captain White, and Captain
Cross, with other sea Captains, and with diverse Pinnaces and boats should
give some attempt unto the little fort standing on the entry of the inner
haven, near adjoining to the town, though to small purpose, for that the
place was strong, and the entry very narrow was chained over: so as there
could be nothing gotten by that attempt, more then the giving them an Alarm on
that other side of the haven, being a mile or two from the place where we now
were. In which attempt the Vizeadmirall had the rudder of his Skiffe stricken
through with a Saker shot, and little or no harm received elsewhere.

The troops being now in their march half a mile behither the town or
less, the ground we were on grew to be straight, and not above fifty pases
over, having the maine sea on the one side of it, and the harbor water or
inner sea (as you may term it) on the other side. This straight was fortified
clean over with a stone wall and a ditch without it, the said wall being as
orderly built with flanking in every part, as can be set down. There was only
so much of this straight unwalled, as might serve for the issuing of the
horsemen, or the passing of carriage in time of need: but this unwalled part
was not w^^^out a very good Barricado of wine buts or pipes, filled with earth,
full and thick as they might stand on end one by other, some part of them
standing even within the maine sea.

This place of strength was furnished of six great pieces, demi-Culuerins and
Sakers, which shot directly in front upon us as we approached. Now without
this wall upon the inner side of the straight, they had brought likewise two
great galleys with their prowess to the shore, having planted in them eleven
pieces of ordinance which did beat all cross the straight, and flanked our
coming on. In these two galleyes wered planted three or four hundred small
shot, and on the land in the guard only of this place three hundred shot and
pikes.

They in this their full readiness to receive us, spared not their shot both
great and small. But our Lieutenant general, taking the advantage of the dark
(the day light as yet not broken out) approached by the lowest ground, according
to the express direction which him self had formerly given, the same being
the sea wash shore, where the water was somewhat fallen, so as most of all
their shot was in vain. Our Lieutenant general commanded our shot to
forbear shooting until we were come to the wall side, and so with pikes
roundly together we approached the place, where we soon found out the
Barricadoes of pipes or buts, to be the meetest place for our assault, which
notwithstanding it was well furnished with pikes and shot, was without staying
attempted by us: down went the buts of earth, and pell mell came our swords
and pikes together, after our shot had first given their volley, even at the
enemies nose. Our pikes were somewhat longer then theirs, and our bodies better
armed, for very few of them were armed, with which advantage our swords and
pikes grew to hard for them, and they driven to give place. In this furious
entry, the Lieutenant general slew with his own hands, the chief ensign
bearer of the Spaniards, who fought very manfully to his lives end.

We followed into the town with them, and giving them no leisure to breath,
we wanne the market place, albeit they made head, and fought a while before we
got it, and so we being once seized and assured of that, they were content to
suffer us to lodge within their town, and them selves to go to their wives,
whom they had carried into other places of the country before our coming
thither.

At every streets end they had raised very fine Barricadoes of earth works,
with trenches without them, as well made as ever we saw any work done: at the
entering whereof was some little resistance, but soon overcome, it was with few
slain or hurt. They had joined with them many Indians, whom they had placed in
corners of advantage, all bow men, with their arrows most villanously
empoisoned, so as if they did but break the skin, the party so touched died
without great marvel: some they slew of our people with their arrows, some
they likewise mischieued to death with certain pricks or small sticks
sharply pointed, of a foot and a half long, the one end put into the ground,
the other empoisoned, sticking fast up, right against our coming in the way,
as we should approach from our landing toward the town, whereof they had
planted a wonderful number in the ordinary way, but our keeping the sea wash
shore, missed the greatest part of them very happily.

To ouerpasse many particular matters, as the hurting of Captain Sampson at
sword blows in the first entering, unto whom was committed the charge of the
pikes of the Vantgard by his lot and turn, as also of the taking of Alonso
Brauo the chief commander of that place by Captain Goring, after the said
Captain had first hurt him with his sword, unto which Captain was committed
the charge of the shot of the said Vantgard.

Captain VVinter was likewise by his turn of the Vantgard in this attempt,
where also the Lieutenant general marched him self, the said Captain VVinter
through a great desire to serve by land, having now exchaunged his charge by
sea with Captain Cecill for his band of footmen.

Captain Powell the Sergeant mayor had by his turn, the charge of the four
companies which made the battle.

Captain Morgan, who at S. DOMINGO was of the Vantgard, had now by turn his
charge upon the companies of the Riergard.

Every man as well of one part as of another, came so willingly on to ^he
service, as the enemy was not able to endure the fury of such hot assault.
We stayed here six weeks, and the sickness with mortality before spoken
of, still continuing among us, though not with the same fury as at the first,
and such as were touched with the said sickness, escaping death, very few or
none almost could recover again their strength, yea many of them were much
decayed in their memor^e, insomuch that it was grown an ordinary judgment,
when one was heard to speak fooli^hly, to say he had been sick of the
Calentour, which is the Spanish name of their burning ague: for as I told you
before, it is a very burning and pestilent ague. The original cause thereof,
is imputed to the evening or first night air which they term La serona,
wherein they say and hold very firm opinion, that who so is then abroad in
the open air, shall certainly be infected to the death, not being of the
Indian or natural race of those country people: our people by holding their
watch, were thus subjected to the infectious air, which at S. IAGO was most
dangerous and deadly of all other places.

With this inconvenience of continual mortality, we were forced to give over
our intended enterprise, to go with NOMBRE DE DIOS, and so ouerland to
PANNANIA, where we should have stricken the stroke for the treasure, and full
recompense of our tediouse travails. And thus at CARTAGENA we took our first
resolution to return homewards.

But while we were yet there, it happened one day, that our watch called the
Sentinel, upon the Church steeple, had discovered in the sea a couple of small
barks or boats, making in with the harbor of CARTAGENA, wherepo^ Captain
Moon and Captain Varney, with John Grant the Master of the Tiger, and some
other seamen, embarked them selves in a couple of small Pinnaces, to take them
before they should come near the shore, at the mouth of the harbor, lest by
some straggling Spaniards from the land, they might be warned by signs from
coming in, which fell out accordingly, notwithstanding all the diligence that
our men could use: for the Spanish boats, upon the sight of our Pinnaces
coming toward them, ran them selves a shore, and so their men presently hid
them selves in the bushes hard by the sea side, amongst some others that had
called them by signs thither. Our men presently without any due regard had to
the quality of the place, and seeing no man of the Spaniards to show them
selves, aboorded the Spanish barks or boats, and so standing all open in
them, were suddenly shot at by a troop of Spaniards out of the bushes, by
which volley of shot there were slain Captain Varney, who died presently, and
Captain Moon, who died some few days after, besides some four or five
others that were hurt: and so our folks returned without their purpose, not
having any sufficient number of soldiers, with them to fight on shore. For
those men they carried were all mariners to row, few of them armed, because
they made account with their ordinance to have taken the barks well enough at
sea, which they might full easily have done, without any loss at all, if they
had come in time to the harbor mouth, before the Spaniards boats had gotten
so near the shore.

During our abode in this place, as also a S. DOMINGO, there passed diverse
courtesies between us and the Spaniards, as feasting, and using them with all
kindness and favor: so as amongst others there came to see the General, the
Governor of CARTAGENA, with the Bishop of the same, and diverse other
Gentlemen of the better sort.

This town of CARTAGENA we touched in the out parts, and consumed much with
fire, as we had done S. DOMINGO upon discontentments, and for want of agreeing
with us in their first treaties touching their ransom, which at the last was
concluded between us, should be a hundred and ten thousand Ducats for that
which was yet standing, the Ducket valued at five shillings six pence
sterlinge.

This town (though not half so big as S. DOMINGO) gives as you see, a far
greater ransom, being in very deed of far more importance, by reason of the
excellency of the harbor, and the fit situation thereof, to serve the trade
of NOMBRE DE DIOS and other places, and is inhabited with far more rich
merchants. The other is chiefly inhabited with Lawyers and brave Gentlemen,
being the chief or highest appeal of their suits in law of all the Islands
about it, and of the maine land coast next unto it. And it is of no such
account as CARTAGENA, for these and some other like reasons, which I could give
you, over long to be now written.

The warning which this town received of our coming toward them, from S.
DOMINGO, by the space of twenty days before our ariuall hither, was cause
that they had both fortifi^d and every way prepared for their best defense. As
also that they had carried and conveyed away all their treasure and principal
substance.

The ransom of an hundred and ten thousand Ducats thus concluded on, as is
aforesaid, the same being written, and expressing for nothing more then the
town of CARTAGENA, upon the payment of the said ransom, we left the said
town, and drew some part of our soldiers into the Priorie or Abbey, standing
a quarter of an English mile below the town upon the harbor water side, the
same being walled with a wall of stone, which we told the Spaniards was yet
ours, and not redeemed by their composition: whereupon they finding the defect
of their contract, were content to enter into onother ransom for all places,
but specially for the said house, as also the block house or Castle, which is
upon the mouth of the inner harbor. And when we asked as much for the one as
for the other, they yielded to give a thousand crowns for the Abbey, leaving
us to take our pleasure upon the block house, which they said they were not
able to ransom, having stretched them selves to the uttermost of their
powers: and therefore the said block house was by us undermined, and so with
gun powder blown up in pieces.

While this latter contract was in making, our whole Fleet of ships fell
down toward the harbor mouth, where they ankered the third time, and
employed their men in fetching of fresh water aboard the ships for our voyage
homewardes, which water was had in a great well, that is in the Island by the
harbor mouth, which Island is a very pleasant place as has been seen,
having in it many sorts of goodly and very pleasant fruits, as the orange
trees and others, being set orderly in walks of great length together.
Insomuch as the whole Island being some two or three miles about, is cast into
grounds of gardening and orchards.

After six weeks abode in this place, we put to sea the last of March, where
after two or three days a great ship which we had taken at S. DOMINGO, and
thereupon was called the New years gift, fell into a great leake, being laden
with ordinance, hides, and other spoils, and in the night she lost the
company of our Fleet, which being missed the next morning by the General, he
cast about with the whole Fleet, fearing some great mischaunce to be happened
unto her, as in very deed it so fell out, for her leake was so great, and her
men were all tired with pomping. But at the last having found her and the Bark
Talbot in her company, which staying by great hap with her, was ready to take
their men out of her, for the saving of them. And so the General being fully
advertised of their great extremity, made sail directly back again to
CARTAGENA with the whole Fleet, where having stayed eight or ten days more,
about the vnlading of this ship, and the bestowing thereof and her men, into
other ships, we departed once again to sea, directing our course toward the
Cape S. ANTHONY, being the Eastermost part of CVBA, whither we arrived the
seven and twentieth of April. But because fresh water could not presently be
found, we weyed anchor and departed, thinking in few days to recover the
MATTANCES, a place to the Eastward of HAVANA.

After we had sailed some fourtee^ ^^yes, we were brought to Cape S. ANTONI^
again, thorough lack of favorable wind: but the^ our scarsitie was grown
such, as need made us look a little better for water, which we found in
sufficient quantity, being in deed, as I judge, none other th^n rain water
newly fallen, and gathered up by making pittes in a plot of marrish ground,
some three hundred pases from the sea side.

I do wrong if I should forget the good example of the General at this place,
who to encourage others, and to hasten the getting of fresh water aboard the
ships, took no less pain him self then the meanest, as also at S. DOMINGO,
CARTAGENA and all other place, having always so vigilant a care and foresight
in the good ordering of his fleet, accompanying them, as it is said, with such
wonderful travel of body, as doubtless had he been the meanest person, as
he was the chiefest, he had yet deserved the first place of honor: and no
less happy do we account him, for being associated with Master Carleill his
Lieutenant general, by whose experience, prudent counsel, and gallant
performance, he atchiued so many and happy enterprises of the war, by whom
also he was very greatly assisted, in setting down the needful orders,
laws, and course of justice, and for the due administration of the same upon
all occasions.

After three days spent in watering our ships, we departed now the second time
from this Cape of S. ANTHONY the thirteenth of May, and proceeding about the
Cape of FLORIDA, we never touch^^ any where, but coasting along FLORIDA, and
keeping the shore still in sight, the eight and twentieth of May early in the
morning, we descried on the shore a place built like a Beacon, which was in
deed a scaffold upon four long mastes, raised on end for men to dicouer to
the seaward, being in the latitude of thirty degrees, or very near
thereunto. Our Pinnaces manned, and coming to the shore, we marched up along
the river side, to see what place the enemy held there: for none amongst us had
any knowledge thereof at all.

Here the General took occasion to march with the companies him self in
person, the Lieutenant general having the Vantgard, and going a mile up or
somewhat more by the river side, we might discern on the other side of the
river over against us, a fort, which newly had been built by the Spaniards, and
some mile or three about above the fort, was a little town or village without
walls, built of wooden houses: we forthwith prepared to have ordinance for
the battery, and one piece was a little before the evening planted, and the
first shot being made by the Lieutenant general him self at their Ensign,
struck through the Ensign, as we afterward understood by a French man, which
came unto us from them. One shot more was then made, which struck the foot of
the fort wall, which was all massiue timber of great trees like mastes. The
Lieutenant general was determined to pass the river this night with four
companies, and there to lodge him self entrenched as near the fort, as that
he might play with his muskets and smallest shot upon any that should appear:
and so afterward to bring and plant the battery with him, but the help of
mariners for that sudden to make trenches could not be had, which was the
cause that this determination was remitted until the next night.

In the night the Lieutenant general took a little rowing Skiffe, and half a
dosen well armed, as Captain Morgan, and Captain Sampson, with some others
besides the rowers, and went to view what guard the enemy kept, as also to
take knowledge of the ground. And albeit he went as covertly as might be, yet
the enemy taking the Alarm, grew fearful that the whole Force was approaching
to the assault, and therefore with all speed abandoned the place after the
shooting of some of their pieces. They thus gone, and he being returned unto us
again, but nothing knowing of their flight from their fort, forthwith came a
French man being a Phipher (who had been prisoner with them) in a little boat,
playing on his phiph the tune of the Prince of Orange his song, and being
called unto by the guard, he told them before he put foot out of the boat,
what he was him self, and how the Spaniards were gone from the fort, offering
either to remain in hands there, or else to return to the place with them
that would go.

Upon this intelligence the General, the Lieutenant general, with some of the
Captains in one Skiffe, and the Vizeadmirall with some others in his Skiffe,
and two or three Pinnaces furnished of soldiers with them, put presently over
toward the fort, giving order for the rest of the Pinnaces to follow. And in
our approach, some of the enemy bolder then the rest, having stayed behind
their company, shot off two pieces of ordinance at us: but on shore we went,
and entered the place without finding any man there.

When the day appeared, we found it built all of timber, the walls being none
other then whole masts or bodies of trees set upright and close together in
manner of a pale, without any ditch as yet made, but who intended with some
more time, for they had not as yet finished all their work, having begun the
same some three or four months before: so as to say the truth, they had no
reason to keep it, being subject both to fire and easy assault.

The platform whereon the ordinance lay, was whole bodies of long pine trees,
whereof there is great plenty, laid a cross one on another, and some little
earth amongst. There was in it thirteen or fourreene great pieces of brass
ordinance, and a chest unbroken up, having in it the value of some two thousand
pounds sterling, by estimation of the Kings treasure, to pay the soldiers of
that place, who were a hundred and fifty men.

The fort thus won, which they called S. John's fort, and the day opened, we
assayed to go to the town, but could not by reason of some rivers and broken
ground which was between the two places: and therefore enforced to imbarke
again into our Pinnaces, we went thither upon the great maine river, which is
called as also the town by the name of S. AUGUSTINE.

At our approaching to land, there was some that began to show them selves, and
to bestow some few shot upon us, but presently withdrewe them selves. And in
their running thus away, the Sergeant mayor finding one of their horses ready
sadled and bridled, took the same to follow the chase, and so ouergoing all
his company, was (by one laid behind a bush) shot through the head, and
falling down therewith, was by the same and two or three more, stabbed in
three or four places of his body with swords and daggers, before any could
come near to his reskue. His death was much lamented, being in very deed an
honest wise Gentleman, and a soldier of good experience, and of as great
courage as any man might be.

In this place called S. AUGUSTINE, we understood the King did keep as is
before said, one hundred and fifty soldiers, and at an other place some dozen
leagues beyond to the Northwardes, called Saint Augustine.
A The place where the whole Fleet came to ancker. B The place where the
Pinnace^ and Shipboats did set us on shore. C A Beacon or high scaffolde
standing on the sand hills, wherein the Spaniard^ did use to discover ships at
sea. D The way which our army marched along the sand by the sea side toward
their fort. E The place where our Pinnaces put our ordinance on land. F A love
plain or meadow ground through the which our troops pass^^, to go toward the
woods right over against the Spaniards so^^e. G A wood growing hard by the
river side, having between it and the river side a high bancke of sand, in
which wood our men encamped themselves, and in the said great b^ncke of sand,
being fitted for the purpose was placed also two pieces of ordinance to beat
the Spanish sort, which was done with such expedition as they were planted and
dischardged twice or thrice the same day we landed, meaning the next day to
have had more ordinance brought, and to have it planted on the same side of
the river wherein the sort is, whither Master Carleill our Lieutenant general
was minded the same night to transp^^t himself and some part of the army, to
long himself in some trenches close by the fort, but the Spaniards perceiving
the approach abandoned the place before the day. H A Pinnace which the Spaniards
had lying hard by their ^orte in the little river. I The fort which the
Spaniardes had made of the bodies of Cedar trees, they placed therein some
fourteen great and long pieces artillery, which at our ariuall there to the
s^nd bancke played upon us, the forte was called Saint John de Pinos which
afterward we burned. K On Pinnaces as they rowed up the river being all full of
men, who because the way was not passable were feign to embarke them selves to
take the town of Saint Augustine, which being won was at our departure
burned to the ground. L The town of Saint Augustine were dwelled a hundred and
^fty Spanist soldiers. M The town house. N A ^igh scaffold for a watchman. O
The Church. P The lively pu^traicture of a fish called the Dolphin, which is of
three several coullours the top of his back and all his fins be blue, all his
sides are of light green, the belly white, his head almost all blue, the tail
one part blue, and the lower part green, he is very pleasant to behold in
the sea by day light, and in the night he seems to be of the coullour of
gold, he takes pleasure as other fishes do by swimming by the ship, he is
excellent sweet to be eaten, this fish lives most by chasing of the flying
fish and other small fishes, they are caught most commonly by our mariners with
harping iron^ or fisgigs.

S. HELENA, he did there likewise keep an hundred and fifty more, serving
there for no other purpose, then to keep all other nations from inhabiting any
part of all that coast, the government whereof was committed to one Pedro
Melendez Marquess, nephew to that Melendez the Admiral, who had ouerthrown
Master John Hawkins in the Bay of MEXICO some fifteen or sixteen years
ago. This Governor had charge of both the places, but was at this time in
this place, and one of the first that left the same.

Here it was resolved in full assembly of Captains, to undertake the
enterprise of S. HELENA, and from thence to seek out the inhabitation of our
English country men in VIRGINIA, distant from thence some six degrees
Northward.

When we came thwart of S. HELENA, the shols appearing dangerous, and we
having no Pilot to undertake the entry, it was thought meetest to go hence
along. For the Admiral had been the same night in four fadome and half
three leagues from the shore: and yet we vnder^tood, that by the help of a
known Pilot, there may and does go in ships of greater burden and draught
then any we had in our Fleet.

We passed thus alongest the coast hard abord the shore, which is shallow for
a league or two from the shore, and the same is low and broken land for the
most part.

The ninth of June upon sight of one special great fire (which are very
ordinary all along this coast, even from the Cape FLORIDA hither) the
General sent his Skiffe to the shore, where they found some of our English
country men (that had been sent thither the year before by Sir Walter
Raleigh) and brought one aboard, by whose direction we proceeded along to the
place, which they make their Port. But some of our ships being of great draught
unable to enter, we ankered all without the harbor in a wild road at sea,
about two miles from shore.

From whence the General wrote letters to Master Rafe Lane, being Governor of
those English in VIRGINIA, and then at his fort about six leagues from the rode
in an Island, which they call ROANOAC, wherein specially he showed how ready
he was to supply his necessities and wants, which he understood of, by those he
had first talked withal.

The morrow after Master Lane him self and some of his company coming unto
him, with the consent of his Captains, he gave them the choice of two offers,
that is to say: Either he would leave a ship, a Pinnace, and certain boats
with sufficient Masters and mariners, together furnished with a months
victual to stay and make farther discovery of the country and coasts, and so
much victual likewise that might be sufficient for the bringing of them all
(being an hundred and three persons) into England if they thought good after
such time, with any other thing they would desire, and that he might be able
to spare.

Or else if they thought they had made sufficient discovery already, and did
desire to return into England, he would give them passage. But they as it
seemed, being desirous to stay, accepted very thankefully, and with great
gladness that which was offered first. Whereupon the ship being appointed and
received into charge, by some of their own company sent into her by Master
Lane, before they had received from the rest of the Fleet, the provision
appointed the^, there arose a great storm (which they said was extraordinary
and very strange) that lasted three days together, and put all our Fleet in
great danger, to be driven from their ankering upon the coast. For we brake
many Cables, and lost many ankers. And some of our Fleet which had lost all
(of which number was the ship appointed for Master Lane and his company) were
driven to put to sea in great danger, in avoiding the coast, and could never
see us again until we met in England. Many also of our small Pinnaces and
boats were lost in this storm.

Notwithstanding after all this, the General offered them (with consent of his
Captains) another ship with some provision, although not such a one for their
turns, as might have been spared them before, this being unable to be brought
into their harbor. Or else if they would, to give them passage into England,
although he knew he should perform it with greater difficulty then he might
have done before.

But Master Lane with those of the chiefest of his company he had then with
him, considering what should be best for them to do, made request unto the
General under their hands, that they might have passage for England: the
which being granted, and the rest sent for out of the country and shipped, we
departed from that coast the eighteenth of June.

And so God be thanked, both they and we in good safety arrived at Portesmouth
the eight and twentieth of July 1586. to the great glory of God, and to no
small honor to our Prince, our country and our selves.

The total value of that which was gotten in this voyage, is estimated at
three score thousand pou^ds, whereof the companies which have traveled in the
voyage were to have twenty thousand pounds, the adventurers the other forty.
Of which twenty thousand pounds (as I can judge) will redound some six pounds
to the single share.

We lost some seven hundred and fifty men in the voyage. The men of name that
died and were slain in this voyage, as I can presently call to my remembrance,
are these.

Captain Powell. Captain Varney. Captain Moon. Captain Fortescute.
Captains Bigges. Captain Cecill. Captain Hannam. Captain Greenefield.
Thomas Tucker a Lieutenaunt. Alexander Starkey a Lieutenaunt. Master Escot a
Lieutenaunt. Master VVaterhouse a Lieutenaunt. Master Nicholas VVinter.
Master Alexander Carleill. Master Robert Alexander. Master Scroope. Master
James Dier. Master Peter Duke.
With some other, who for have I can not so suddenly think on.

The ordinance gotten of all sorts brass and iron were about two hundred and
forty, whereof the two hundred and some more were brass, and were thus found
and gotten.

In S. IAGO some two or three and fifty pieces.

In S. DOMINGO about four score, whereof was very much great ordinance, as
whole Cannon, Dimi-Cannon^ Culuerins and such like.

In CARTAGENA some sixty and three pieces, and good store likewise of the
greater sort.

In the fort of S. AUGUSTINE were fourteen pieces.

The rest was Iron ordinance, of which the most part was gotten at S. DOMINGO,
the rest at CARTAGENA.

Page 21. lin. 24. within. 23.20. recharging. 30.4. of ordinance. 36.11.
Pannama.


