THE PRODIGALS TEARS. WITH A HEAVENLY New years Gift sent to the Soul;
Containing many most zealous and comfortable Prayers, with devout Meditations:
Both worthy the acceptance of all Christians, and their expense of time to
peruse.

By H. G. Preacher of the most sacred Word of God.

Psalm. 118. We wish you good luck, ye that be of the House of the Lord.

Ovid. Flectitur iratus voce rogante Deus.
August. Oration Coelum penetrat, nubes transit, Dei aures attingit.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for John Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in
Little Britain near Duck Lane end: or else at Bernard Alsop his House, at S.
Annes Church, near Aldersgate. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir William Cokayne, Knight, Lord Mayor of the
Honorable City of London, the Right Worshipful the Aldermen his Brethren,
and Sherifes of the same; Together with those two splendent Ornaments therein,
M. Robert Heath, Esquire, Recorder, and M. Thomas Jones, Esquire, Common
Serieant: The God of their Fathers guide, prosper, and defend them in this
life, and indue them with that inexpressible Blessedness of the life of Glory
hereafter.
RIght Honorable, and right Worshipful; Theology, Nature, Morality, and
Heathen Philosophers, do all condemn and brand ( Ingratitude) and disciplines
Man (grateful Retribution) Whence ( Benefits) received and conferred in the
seventeenth Chapter of S. Luke, verse 18. ten Lepers were by Jesus Christ
cleansed, and but One returned for to give God praise: the Nine are recorded
for their Ingratitude, and that One stranger, for his thankfulness, commended
by Christ for the same, and in holy Scriptures recorded, of all good Christians
to be imitated. In the seventh Chapter of S. Luke, verse 37. is likewise
publicly noted, with the brand of Ecce, that all might observe and take
notice, what strange news should ensue, Behold a Woman in the City, which was
a sinner. As her sin did defame her; likewise her tears and penitent
behavior did wash away and blot out her crime and infamy: for Christ Jesus,
her most merciful Savior, to whom she sued, and wholly applied, pitied her
unfeigned Tears, cleansed and remitted her Soul of all her Sins, commended
her Faith, and recorded her Zeal and Charity: That wheresoever that Gospel
should be read, or preached; that which was done by her unto him, should
likewise be spoken of, and be remembered. Nature instructs; and thankful
David blusheth at Man in the 49. Psalm, verse 10. Man being in honor, has no
understanding, but is compared to the Beasts that perish. How far the Beasts,
in whom there is but instinct of Nature, excells many men in gratefulness to
their Benefactors; the first Chapter of Isaiah, verse 3. expresses: The Ox
knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribbe; but Israel has not known,
my people has not understood. The Horse neigheth, when his Owner comes to
Prouender him; the Ox, and Cow, loweth, when their Owner foddereth them: the
Sheep know the Voice and Whistle of their Shepherd; for at the Echo thereof,
they look up, and flock together, and then bleat, as an acknowledgement of
him. Aesope in his Fables makes mention of a Lion, out of whose Paw a
Shepherd took a Thorn; and gratefully the Lion requited the Shepherd for
such his former kindness: for when the Shepherd, for a notorious Crime, was
adjudged to be put among Lions, of them to be devoured; it happened this Lion
was one of them, and knew the Shepherd, and came and fawned on him, and saved
him from the others: and so his life was thus strangely preserved. Aesope in
his 22. Fable thereupon insculped this Motto, Accepti memores nos decet esse
boni; It behooves us to be thankful, and always mindful of them, that do
good unto us.

Morality justly exacteth, where kindness and courtesies have been performed,
Men to be Reciprocal, in some measure, and not to bury them in oblivion; no
sooner done, but forgotten, and written in the Dust: These kind of People are
Sordidum genus hommum, the basest and respectlesse Generation, not worthy to
be accounted as a People; Heathens, not Christians, for they scorn it: and I
would that Christians did not too much affect, and disgrace Religion by it.
Bias says, That two Heads in one Body, is a monstrous sight; but one
unthankful Heart, in one Bosom, is more odious to behold. Nay, Cui beneficia
excidunt, haerent iniuriae? Some are such Pagans, and Iudas-like to their
friends, that they who have fed them at their Table, clothed their Nakedness,
harbored them in their Houses, succored them at all times in all their
Distresses, and supplied their Wants, and Necessities: these, with Judas, for
base Gold and Silver, will sell and betray an invaluable trusty and loving
friend. The Heathen Philosopher Simonides being demanded, What would quickly
grow out of date, or be soon forgotten, and wax old? thus answered,
Beneficium, a good Turn, or Benefit. Seneca says, Memoria Beneficiorum
labilis, iniuriarum vero tenax; Good Turns done, are soon forgotten, and
slide suddenly out of Men's minds; but revenge for Injuries done unto them, they
will hold that in memory, and for a thousand good Turns that you have done to
them, requite and repay you with mischief, for a small injury or trespass,
unwillingly or not wittingly, committed by you against them. Diogenes says the
same. Plato says, All humane things grow old, and come to the end of their
time, except Ingratitude; for the greater the increase of mortal man is, the
more does Ingratitude augment. That Heavenly Propheticke David would not be
guilty of this monstrous sin; but in his 116. Psalm, verse 11. inquireth,
Quid retribuam Domino? What shall I render unto the Lord, for all the benefits
that he has done unto me? And so proceeds in others of his Psalms;
zealously stirring up his Soul to a recapitulation and remembrance of Gods
great Goodness toward her: Praise the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not all
his Benefits. Lucian compares an unthankful Man to a Vessel bored full of
holes, which is neither apt to contain nor receive any thing. Aurelius says,
It behooves a Man, in receiving of Benefits, to be thankful, though he want
power to requite them. And Seneca 38. Epist. Beneficia been soluere, interdum
solutio est ipsa confessio; To repay, and well requite, whence a Benefit was
bestowed; sometimes, the acknowledgement, and confession thereof, is an
accepted Solution, and an acknowledged Satisfaction: Which willingly and humbly
I pay at this present to your Honor and Worships, and come with the poor
Cottager and Tenant at Will, to present, with him, as this Time it is usual, a
few Lemons, Oranges, or Dish of Pippins; showing with him therein my Love, and
the meandness of my Estate, who am not able to present Gifts of better value:
but therein expressing my duty, and a poor Beads-mans hearty praising, and
praying to God for your Honor and Worships health, and prosperity: by whose
kind permission, and mutual general consents, in the Maioraltie of the late
deceased grave Senator, Sir John Swinnerton, which is seven years and a half
since; I was admitted Preacher to the Jail of Ludgate, and by your Honor and
Worships Predecessors, hitherto successively therein have bin continued: And
most willingly, long since, your Honor and Worships, in Court, did generally
condescend, the Stipend thereunto belonging, to augment. In acknowledgement,
hearty thankfulness, and in some lieu thereof, vouchsafe to receive the
first Fruits of my poor Harvest, a Bunch of Grapes, of my first Vintage, a
Flower from a Slip of the first growth. I do unfeignedly acknowledge, I owe my
self, and mine, by your Hon. and Worcester. all to be commanded, who have been so
good and beneuolent lately to me and mine. Continue favorable still, in
receiving of this my small grown Wheat, and leave the Chafe; my Wine, leave
the Dregs; my sweet Flower, leave the unpleasant sented Earth: nay, I hope,
a little Treasure, though in a base Earthen Vessel presented to your view. I
am the miserable Son of Man, that is subject unto Mutabilitie; but poor and
mean, and therefore the more respectlesse, and least regarded, in these days,
wherein Money is so loved, and Mammonists adored, respected, and of all, capped
and crouched unto with low-bended knee. I am a Vine, whose Branch is weak,
young, and tender, and stands in need of supporting: Will your Honor and
Worships vouchsafe, with your powerful hands, to support me? I am a new
gathered fresh flourishing Flower, which soon fades. I am in the Bud, and
Bloome, soon blasted: Vouchsafe your careful Ouersights, and Protections,
that the Critikes of this our Age, wherein we live, may not break into your
Fields, Orchards, or Gardens, which like a wild Boar will extirpate me wholly:
and I will, by Gods grace, as by duty bound, for ever heartily and daily pray
and supplicate unto the Almighty, for continuance of his great goodness, and
mercy, toward your Honor and Worships. Now the Lord Almighty, who of his
infinite goodness feeds you all with the finest Wheat, and cloatheth you with
the purest Wool, continue Peace, Plenty, Prosperity, Safety, and Health
within the walls of that most famous and Honorable City, whereunto God has
elected and made you the prime Governor, and eminent Magistrate, next under our
most gracious Soueraign, and dread Lord, the K. Majesty; a place conspicuous
to the whole World, and admired at the state and civil government thereof. May
it still so flourish, in Plenty, Honor, and with discreet understanding
Magistrates. The Lord God grant, that all your successors may be such vigilant
Watchmen, for the preservation and maintenance thereof, as now it is; may that
good care be continued still, from generation to generation, from predecessors
unto all successors; and from this your Lo. time, wherein all things quietly
are governed, and safely rest. And when ye shall surcease to live among men,
your names may live for ever, and be remembered for the good you have done; that
as now men do rejoice to hear of your names, whilst you are living; they may
lament for the loss of you, when you are gone. May this be an Inheritance
bestowed by the Almighty, to continue unto all your Ho. and Worcester. successors, to
the Worlds end. Amen. Now that Blessedness, the Lord vouchsafe your Ho. and
Worcester. which is mentioned in Psalm. 128. To fear him, and walk in his ways, and
quietly to eat the fruit of your endeavors, the fatted Ox in your Stalls, the
Sheep of your Fould, and the Dove that flies about the Courts of your own
Houses. The Lord make your Wives like David's Vine, fruitful; make your
Children like Olive Branches, decking and standing round about your Tables; and
may they drop sweetness and goodness to the Church, and Commonwealth, wherein
they are borne, bred, and brought up. O Lord let them vestigiate the steps of
their Fathers, to be an honor unto their Posterity and Lineage, a godly
President unto successiue Posterities, and Generations; that many hundred
years hereafter it may be spoken both of you and your Children: Lo these are
the Men that feared the Lord; and therefore God did so bless them, that they
did see their Childrens children, unto the third and fourth generation, to
flourish, prosper, graciously and virtuously to live; and in Magistracy, and
doing good, their Parents to succeed. Furthermore, the Lord Jesus give unto
your Honor and Worships, from the first day of this New year, at the
expiration of your days, the New Heavens, and the New Man, Christ Jesus, in
the immortality of your Souls; and of his infinite mercy grant, that as
here on Earth ye feast like Princes, ye may be partakers of that most Royal
Feast and Banquet of Jesus Christ, the Prince of Glory, and Light of the whole
World, who came a Light at this time into the World, to light all thither. And
this blessedness, I will daily and heartily pray unto Almighty God, to bestow
on you all, at the end of this your mortal lives. The Lord Jesus, with that
blessed Life of Glory, indow you and all your Posterities for evermore. Amen.

Your Honor and Worships much bounden, and in the service of my Lord and Master
Jesus Christ, at all times to be commanded. Henry Goodcole.

TO ALL GODLY, zealous, religious, sanctified, and Christian-minded People, who
expect and unfeignedly desire the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, fruition
thereof, to the everlasting joy of their Souls.
PEruse me, Will you please?
Then find help for each Disease:
Soul and Body I apply,
And cure both their Malady.
Such good means not disdain,
When to thee so friendly sent;
Lest in sickness thou remain,
And thy folly do repent.
Had I wist, breeds much woe,
Gentle Patient be no foe
To the health and happy states
Of such peerless loving Mates.
Farewell, good Soul, till we meet
In Heavens Bliss, each to greet:
Expect we do, and daily pray;
Lord grant to us that happy day.
CHristian and conscionable Reader, thou may now justly, with Apelles,
reprove and deride me, who thus have presumed to diuulge and diue into the
height of all Learning, Arts, Sciences, Knowledge, Wit and Skill, whose
unskillfulness in all of them recommands me to the lowest degree that may be to
be abased. I know it is but lost labor to cast water into the Ocean; an
unthankful respectlesse Gift, to cast a Sheaue of Wheat into a rich man's
Garner, or to put a small Bunch of Grapes into a vaste Winepresse, small
increase thereof can issue. Yet seeing I am called and sent into my Heavenly
Lord and Masters Harvest, hired and sent to his Vineyard, in both to work, and
not to loyter; That I have in both endeavored, I present thee good Christian
friends, this little of my hard labor, and gleaned Corn, obtained by
following others of my fellow Laborers: Though theirs was pure, yet mine not
without Chafe: receive my Grapes, though not without some sour and sharp
distaste, altogether disliking your Pallat, and disappointing your expectation.
The Lord of the Vineyard has sent by me some Bread and Wine, to strengthen and
comfort you withal: eat a morsel thereof, and draw out your Wine, for his
sake that sent it, and do not refuse or dislike both, for the meandness of
the Messenger, that brings and now presents his Lords affected love expressed
to you therein. If you accept thereof thankefully and gladly, I shall return
my Master intelligence, and think my pains well bestowed, rest well
satisfied, and account my self most bountifully by you to be rewarded, if my
suit be granted; namely, your kind acceptance thereof from my unworthy hands.

Thine at all times, to bring thee to my Lord and Master Jesus Christ his
Courts. H. G.

THE PRODIGALS Tears.
The Prodigals testimony of his conversion, manifested in the detestation of
his former follies.
Hear, O hear, you that walk after the lusts of your hearts: you that spend
your time in vanity, deferring the time of Repentance; from Infancy to youth,
and from youth to Age; not caring to turn from you the evil day, which
draws near, nor applying your hearts to wisdom, but how to satisfy the
inordinate lusts and affections of the flesh you draw on sin after sin,
multiplying tra^sgressions: you are become a stiff-necked people, hardening your
hearts against the sweet and comfortable motions of Gods Spirit, ready to
awake you from this sleep of sin, and to renew in you that image which was
well-neere defaced in you, by means of your transgressions. Hear the tears
and attend the complaint of a converted pervert: one that has wandered too
login the field of vanity. And now after the taste of those bitter husks of
penury, returns home with blubbered face, contrite heart, and humbled spirit,
crying Peccaui, I have sinned, I have sinned; walking in the foolishnes of mine
own heart, and like the wild Ass, shifting the wind, so have I shut mine
ears to the words of discipline and correction. And what did the Prodigal in
the Gospel, which I did not? He received his portion, and consumed it; and
have not I received the portion of Gods love in as ample manner as any, even
the portion of my heavenly Father, which he no sooner bestowed on me, then I
in the height of my heart wasted? Nor did the prodigal go further from his
Father, then I from the Instructions of my heavenly Father. Departing from
Bethel the house of God, to Bethauen the house of iniquity.

Oh miserable Exile! From the mansions of peace, concord, and tranquillity, to
the receptacles of sin, horror, and impiety. From the smooth running
streams of Syloe, to the waters of bitterness, from the tower of my strength,
to the vale of desolation. Unhappy exchange, to deprive my self of so
glorious inheritance, so exquisite blessings, so incomparable bounties, for the
vain flourish of a little worldly delight, which in the end converted to
bitterness: for a momentanie pleasure (to forfeite an eternal Treasure) not
subject to the change or mutability of Time, nor exposed to the violence of any
perturbations, nor engaged to popular respect: but in it self, and of it self
perfectly refined; deriuing her best luster from none other subject, then the
original of all Beauties: the Idaea of all perfections, the mirror of all
lustres, God himself. And this to loose for any Earthly respect: how much were
the eyes of my understanding eclipsed? to conceive no better of an infinite
goodness, then of a floting pleasure, producing none other Fruit then
bitterness, anguish, and sorrow. And what remedy? Esau could not regaine his
Byrth-right, with many tears. And can my unfeigned repentance (though I should
blind mine Eyes with weeping, and groan in the heaviness of my heart)
repossesse me of all that I have lost? Can the sighs of a troubled spirit and
the extreme heaviness which I sustain, by reason of the burden of my sins
prevail with the Lord, who poyseth the sins of men, and has sworn in his
wrath to be euenged of the wicked? Yes Lord, yes: as I have found grace and
favor in thy sight, suffer me to speak a word unto thee, be not displeased
with me.

The Prodigals comfortable and undoubted assurance, that God will accept his
tears and contrition, relying and trusting in the mercies and promises of God.
REmember not my sins passed, let thy mercies prevent them: I am weakened and
clean out-worne, and go mourning every day. I shall remember all my years
unto thee with bitterness of heart. I know Lord, that Peter wept, and was
pardoned, and shall I that knock at the gate of thy mercy be excluded?

Marie Magdalene had in her many legions of Devils, yet with tears of
unfeigned repentance, she was assoyled, and made a Temple of the Holie-Ghost:
Behold Lord my tears are unfeigned, my anguish of heart abundant, and my
griefs be not hid from thee. Thou have promised to look to him that is
poor, that is broken in spirit, and that trembles at thy words. Behold Oh
Lord, I am Esaias 66.
poor, deprived of thy favor, broken in spirit to have offended so benign a
Savior, and I tremble at thy words, as at judgments of terror, worthily
deserving to be eternally thrust from thy presence, and to have my being with
the reprobate: Yet Lord will thou be good unto Israel: thou will wash me from
my filthynes, and cure my infirmities: thou will bind up my wounds with that
good Samaritane, pouring the oil of thy Divine comforts into them: For this
(Lord) will I thank thee and for this badge of thy love will I sing praise
unto thee. I will make melody Ephesians. 5. 19
in my heart to the Lord: For it is a good thing to be thankful; These
tears which I shed shall witness my contrition, the praises which I sing to
thee: shall express my affection: and the speedy renewing of my ways, shall
show my conversion.

The prodigals confession of the manner of his vanities, with a feeling of Gods
great goodness.
FAther, I have fed too long upon the husks of Vanity, I have strayed too
far from thy Temple, and walked in unknown ways, where I was famished for
want of Spiritual food: all athirst for want of Spiritual drink: For the
well was deep, and I had not wherwithall to draw: but John 4.
now, since my return I am replenished with all things, thou have put on me a
new Garment, so as I have laid away all my old affections, and betaken me to
a new spiritual School: Thou have put upon my finger a Ring, to intimate that
I am married and affianced to thee; thou have feasted me with thy choicest
dainties, expressing the joy thou conceyuest at my conversion: I will stay
therefore Luke 10.
no longer in the Tents of Kedar, nor with the inhabitants of M^loch. I am now
for my Fathers household: for my Father has many servants, and in my Fathers
house there be many mansions. I have fed too long with the Hog, eating
Akornes under the Tree, but never looking up, from whence they came.

When thy greatest benefits, O Lord, were multiplied upon me, and thy
Fatherly kindness was shown in abundance I was as one that had not received,
or as one that had not tasted them. For why, the vanities of the world had
bewitched me, and the deluding Objects of seeming happiness had captiuated me:
But now Lord, I am escaped the snare of the Fowler, the Net is broken, and my
soul is delivered: or as a brand from the fire: so have I bin prevented by thy
mercies.

The Prodigals bequest to God.
ANd what shall I give Ps. 116. 12.
unto the Lord, for all that he has given unto me? Sacrifices and
burnt-offerings thou will not have, but a contrite and broken heart (O Lord)
thou will not despise:

My heart is prepared, my Psalm. 47. 47.
heart is prepared: I will give thee what thou have so long time asked. And if
thou say as thou sayedst unto David, Give me thy Pro. 23. 26.
heart: I will answer with David, I will give thee my heart: It is thine, O
Lord, it is thine: for thou sufferedst thine own heart to be pierced for it:
and should I then detain it from thee, that have so dearly purchased it? I
will reserve it only for thee: thou shall make it thine own Temple; for the
heart is the Temple of God. To whom fitter 1. Cor. 4. 16
may I bequeath my heart, then to thee, who have given thy self for a ransom,
thy Spirit for a pledge, thy word for a guide, the world for a walk, and
reserues a kingdom for my inheritance? To whom fitter then to thee that
createdst me after thine own form, renewed it when I had defaced that form,
illuminated me with thy Spirit, invested me with thy grace, and ministers
whatsoever thou know to be necessary for the conservation of Nature? Who
fitter then thou, whose mercy preuenteth me falling, whose grace conducteth me
walking, and whose comforts raise me drowping? I will therefore with unfeigned
repentannce return to thee; for I shall find favor in thy fight. My heart
will I sacrifice unto thee, for more acceptable it is unto thee then many burnt
offerings: I will not suffer it to stray from thee (O Lord:) for I fear as
Dina was defloured when she strained from home; so my heart by gadding from
thee, her best home and surest Sanctuary, may chance to be corrupted with the
filthiness of this world. She has many suitors, and all hope to have her.
Give her me says the Tempter; give her me says riches; give her me says
pleasure; but none of these shall have her: for what is riches that I should
set my mind upon them? or pleasure, that I should give my self over unto her?
Have I not tasted the vanity of the one, and the peril of the other: For
wherein can the Epicure glory, or the sensual man please himself? he has
tasted of pleasures in abundance, and slaued his best affections to
unworthiest objects. He has drunk deep of the Babylonian Cup, exposed
himself to the places of public shame, and made himself heir of beggary.
What delights were upon Earth, which this licentious man embraced not? what
consorts he embraced not? what means of spending hours, and that without
tediousnes he used not? And is there any thing so vain? Behold, his time is
expired, the period and date of his days extended, and all his former delights
like a vapor vanished. And great is his Matthew. 25.
account: when it shall be demanded of him, Where is thy talent? What
advantage have thou made of it? O quam amar a est ea voluptas, etc. says a
blessed father, which ruins thy soul, depriues thee of an inheritance,
drives thee from heaven, presses thee to hell, and makes thee eternally
wretched: what fruits then of so many idle hours? What comfort in the veil of
bitterness, or by the river wherein repent thou would, but no time is
admitted; weep thou would, but tears are fruitles: suffer thou would,
but sufferings are Luke 16.
effectlesse: There is no joy left which may any way solace thy poor forlorn
spirit. Being placed there, where neither the Anselm in Med de amiss. Virg.
Saints can come unto thee, or thou to the Saints. O misery above miseries! to
loose, and to loose that irrecouerably, which should have been kept eternally:
instead of felicity to gain misery, instead of comfort and spiritual
consolation, death, ruin, and perdition. Shall then pleasures have my heart,
that produce no better fruits then bitter repentance? No, no: leave me all
delights, and all outwardly-seeming comforts, go far from me: You cannot
content me; for I am of a more incircumscribed nature. Once I confess were you
too much possessed of my heart: for my affections were devoted, my
understanding darkened, and all my intellectual powers and faculties so
exposed to your service, as I walked in darkness; Caecus eram, and caecitatem
meam nesciebam; nudus and non cognoscebam. August.
and yet which was more miserable, imagined that I was in light: I was blind,
and knew it not: in darkness, and perceived it no: naked, and felt it not. But
the Lord has given me sight, that I may see his glory: light, that I may walk
in his light; and apparrelled me with the best ornaments of his divine Spirit,
a defense against the inclemency of all seasons, taking upon me the whole
spiritual armor of a Christian to discomfit Satan, subdue the flesh, renew
the spirit, and confirm in me the power of the Almighty.

The Prodigal describes, how the things in this present world, do hinder man
in his best devotions and service unto God, and his forsaking of them*
YEt honor, with her ambitious and elated titles challenges a part in me: it
is a fine thing to have store of attendance, to be great in the eye of the
world, to have the chief place in Feasts, to be admired etc. once it is
mortally dangerous, and as the world goes, of a thousand least meritorious:
Ever to be gaping with the fish, and with a greediness to apprehend every
occasion, lest while the water is in troubling, the means of Vt semper pendeat
hamus.
obtaining be cut off. Deserts in precedencies of this kind least observed:
where all Arts be ofttimes exiled, learning discountenanced, and ignorance for
a purple Magistrate honored -- vt Iuuenal
pueri Iunonis auem: alas poor honor! when merit seldom possesses thee:
The Laconians would not have honor hereditarie, from the father to the son,
without the demerits of the son. Alas then how Truncoque simill^nus: Heroes:
ibid.
many of Iuuenalls Blocks should we see represented upon the Theater of
Honor? Brave descents basely disparaged, and prodigality without one
prodigalls tear in greatest families. Farewell then Honor, thy name is only
worthy, because only men of name possess thee: thou art not a fit harbor for
the poor Prodigal to lodge his heart in.

Yet riches be fair inducements, and worthy a heart of gold. True, they are
so, but many Mammons have them: They build on a weak foundation: they know how
to enlarge their Barnes, but not to communicate to the necessity of the Saints.
They can sing a Luke 12.
Requiem to their souls, Luke 12.
with, Now soul take thy ease; but they remember not what the Prophet says:
There is no rest to the ungodly. Then must Esaias 48. 22.
my heart plant my pauillion elsewhere: for she would gladly have a resting
place, that when the deluge of sin is past, she may bring one Olive branch
unto the Arc of her Soul, to express her peace is made.

The Prodigal expresses, that nothing can content the Soul, or has any
right in the Soul, but God, only and alone.
Give unto God that Genes. 8. 2*
which is Gods. It is Mat. 22. 21.
he that deserves thee, O my heart! and there is none fit to possess thee,
but he. He it is that can only satisfy thee, he it is that can only suffice
thee; thou requirest peace, he will give it thee, as he gave it unto such as
followed August.
him. He is the God of peace, who then can establish my heart in peace, but he
that is the God of peace. Teneat te cor meum quia perfodisti Luke 24. John 20.
eor tuum vt saluares meum: It is not pleasure shall transport me, nor riches
ensnare me, or honor inflame me, I am wholly pressed for my Savior: I will take
up his Cross willingly, with Simon of Cyrene, and on my shoulders bear it:
where, though I faint under my burden; yet will he support me with his
mercies: for his love is more strong then wine. What afflictions can separate
me from the love of my God? No Lord, I have sinned, I have sinned, and in the
abundance of my sorrows do I fly unto thee for refuge; neither hunger nor
nakedness shall take me from thee, I have tasted thy exceeding mercies toward
me, and thy compassions have been from generation to generation. For who Mark
10. Luke 13. Mark 7. 9 Matthew. 9. Luke 7. and infra.
ever came unto thee for sight, and went away blind? for hearing, and went away
deaf? for speech, and went away dumb? for health, and went away sick? for
comfort, and went away sorrowful? for the forgiveness of sins, and went
away a sinner? O inexplicable mercy! O inscrutable piety! O ineffable
clemency! I that have ever offended, and never till now repented: I that have
multiplied trangression upon transgression, making league with my sins: I
that have been a rebellious child, and have turned my ear from thy
discipline and instruction. I that never felt remorce of conscience, never made
recourse to thy Temple, never brake the bread of comfort to the hungerstarued
soul. To be short, I that gloried in my sins, and made light of my
offenses, deferring repentance from day to day; am now heard in thy mercy,
comforted in my misery, and promised an inheritance of glory.

Cyrus, that renowned Qu. Curt. and Just. 1. l.
Prince of Persia, promised such as aided him against his grandsire Ast yages,
that if they were footmen, he would make them horsemen, if horsemen, they
should ride in their Charriots. But the King of Hosts that rides in the
clouds, for things temporal, things eternal, for things of no value, bounties
of incomparable esteem. No, he Adiuuat languentes, hortatur pulsantes coronat
vincentes, ibid.
will do more, even whilst we soiourne here in this tabernacle of clay; for
he will help us fainting, exhort and excite us fighting, and crown us
vanquishing. Hence it is (poor Prodigal) that I reap comfort: seeing his
mercy upon all flesh, readier to save then to kill, willinger to hear then we
to ask, and as forward to crown as we to fight.

The prodigals earnest desire.
THough Father, I have ever retired my self, in the heat of the day, and have
not labored in thy Vineyard; yet coming in the evening of my days, the
Sunneset of my life, it is thy fatherly will, that I shall have my penny.
Suffer me, at least (Father) to Matthew. 15. Luke 15.
feed upon the crummes under thy Table: or as the Prodigal son, let me be
one of my fathers meiny. I desire no great place in thy house, for I am
unworthy of thy acceptance: yet Father, speak but comfortably to thy Servant,
and my soul will be glad.

Thou have promised, that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his
sins, thou will put all his offenses out of thy remembrancr. Behold Lord, I
present my self unto thee prostrate upon the ground, desiring remission and
pardon of all my sins; nor be these tears I shed dissembling, for thou
know the secrets of al hearts, and examinest the reins: and I know thou have
denounced a double woe, upon the Hypocrite and Pharisee. It is not my prayer,
but my hearty prayer, not my tears, but my hearty tears, not my conversion, but
my hearty conversion which pleases thee. For the Pharisees prayer, the harlots
vow, the traitors kiss, the sacrifice of Caine, the fast of Iezabel, the
oblation of Ananias, theteares of Esau are nothing; they are not accepted,
because not heartily offered; but this sacrifice which I offer proceeds from my
heart, otherwise (Father) had I not given it thee. For I know thou art just and
righteous, and considerest all the ways of man, whether they be straight or
crooked. How long Lord, how long, ere thy fury will be appeased? that my ways
may be directed to thee, my hope erected by thee, and my confidence planted in
thee; so may the tempests rage, but not dismay me, the floods rise, but not
come near me, the winds blow, but not remove me: for my foundation is built
on a rock, a rock impregnable, a mount in accessible, a fort irremoueable:
Blessed Vide Aug. in Medit.
fort where the Saints be enthroned, glorious mount with Gods presence
beautified, and puissant rock, which against the gates of hell has prevailed.
O that I might be but a doorekeeper in the house of the Lord, singing Songs of
mirth and spiritual melody, to inhabit there all the days of my life. Happy
Citizens which be enfranchised there joyful Quiristers that may sing there,
and victorious soldiers, that for the Church millitant, are transplanted to a
Church Triumphant: Here they begin to fight, there to reign: Here they
were in Tents of Clay, now in Camps of Immortality. Now in heaven, here on
earth: In heaven to receive their reward, in earth to sustain all Afflictions.
For whosoever will partake of consolations, must likewise have his share of
tribulations: And that which the Poet says is true.

Pati noncesset,
Qui regnare cupit;
Fit it is (dear Father) that thy Children suffer here, to reign els-where:
that no punishment, how intolerable soever, may seem worthy of the infinite
love which is borne unto us in CHRIST our Lord. For is the master inferior to
the Servant? Thy Son (blessed Father) whose foot steps we ought to follow, was
whipped that we might be exempted: scourged, that we might be spared: Crowned
with Thorns, that we might be crowned with a Crown of pure gold: Crucified,
that we might be glorified.

Far be it from me to refuse thy Cross, which bore that Cross, that I
should have borne so willingly: Thy Cross was my gain, thy death my life: thy
wonndes, my cures; thy Caluarie where thou wast hanged, my place of Glory,
whereto I shall be advanced.

Woe is me, that I should so long wander from the fold of the true
Shepherd: He that is the great Shepherd of our Souls: Long have I strayed
from these green and flourishing pastures of true consolation, following mine
own vanities erring in the pricking brakes of sensuality, briars and brambles
of all inordinate affections. Serote amaui Deus meus, serote amaui pulchritudo
mea. August:
But now my repentance purchased with much experience: my portion of comfort,
obtained with a great portion of Tears, my misereis ended by the sweetness of
thy mercyes diffused, respites my grief relisheth my distaste, and gives me
hope, as one addressed to conversion, so to taste the fruits of thy ineffable
consolations.

The Prodigals Faith strengthened, and joy expressed, in the rembrance of Gods
most loving receiving, and accepting of Sinners, into his favor.
I Know ( LORD,) the Acts 9. Luke 21. John 20. Luke 9.
greatest Conuerts have been grieuons sinners: Paul a persecutor, Peter a
denyer: Thomas incredulous: little Zaccheus covetous: Magdalene, an adultresse:
yet Paul stricken blind, leaves persecting: Peter put in mind by a Cock,
bewayles his denying: Thomas by his finger becoms a belieuer: Zacheus from the
fig tree becomes Christ's receiver, and Magdalen becomes a convert by hearing
her Savior. Sinners use to be touched, before they be converted: Manasses 2.
Chron. 33. 12. Jonas 1. 15. 2. Sa. 19. 2. 2. Kin. 5. 6. Dan. 4. 23. Exodus 9.
must be in prison before he feel himself, Jonah in the depth, before he
find himself: David must find some discomforts, or he will be above himself:
Na^man stricken with leprosy, ere he be converted: Nabuchadnezzar must feed
amongst beasts, ere Gods power must be acknowledged: Pharaoh must have many
plagues sent him, ere Gods people be dismissed. Yea Lord, and wherefore should
sinners murmr or repine at thy Judgments pronounced against them? Should the
pot ask the Potter, why he breaks it in pieces? Or should man expostulate
the cause with GOD? Oh far be it, that I which am but dust and ashes*
conceived in nothing but sin, drinking iniquity like water, should spurn at
the will and pleasure of GOD? No Lord, though thou leave me at Deaths door,
yet know I, thou will have mercy upon me: For thou art ever gracious to thy
servants. Touch me gently (O Lord) and let me feel thy correction, as thy
child, to salvation, not as the reprobate to confusion: and though my many
transgressions have deserved thy just ire and indignation against me, yet
Lord, intuere filium tuum toto corpore extensum: In Medit.
Behold thy Son suffering, and consider fot whom he suffers: not for
himself, for he was innocent, but for me (miserable wretch) that by my sins
nailed my Savior to the Cross; yet behold, I have recrucified him, adding
wound upon wound, by multiplying sin upon sin: It was not sufficient for me
to crucify my Savior upon earth, but I must move his indignation in heaven:
It was not enough for me to cast lots upon his garments: but I must make
Ibidem.
large rents in that garment of righteousness, which he clothed me withal
at his passion. Hence is it that I have lost Felicity, for which I was created,
and purchased my self misery, for which I was not created: And how is it
possible for me to redeem the time I have so vainly consumed, my Talent so
carelessly neglected, and those comfortable motions of thy divine Spirit ever
moving and in flaming me to goodness: and I perverting those excellent
motions* prostituting my self unto the sensual pleasures of the flesh,
altogether respectlesse of my souls health: so presently I may satisfy the
inordinate lusts and affections of the flesh.

The prodigal souls penance, or mourning weed.
Weep, weep, disconsolate soul, let those many hours which thou have spent
in feasting, be redeemed by fasting: let thy sensual meetings, nightly
carowsings, and thy daily rioting, be now supplied with incessant praying,
continual weeping, and charitable distributing First, render what thou have
taken by violence Ni restituatur ablatum non remittitur peccatum.
from any man: Oppression is a crying sin, and will be heard. Make
restitution with good Zacheus, divide thy goods, and give unto the poor: For`
better is one penny in the life time, then an hundred on thy deathbed.

Large testaments little avail the giver, they proceed from a miserable
spirit, that he cannot use it, is content to give it: But we are taught to
do Col. 3. 23.
all things heartily: not to delay our charity to our end, lest we be prevented
of our purpose before our end, It is little to give unto the poor, when it is
not in our power to detain it from them. And why be good wills, (since they
proceed not from good will) so highly commended? The best of our rich
worldlings give but a part, and they be praised: The worst worldling that ever
was, the Traitor Judas gave all, and he is condemned.

The Prodigals conclusion.
I Will distribute to the poor; For, who can endure to see CHRITS Image
contemned?

I am but Gods Almoner; I will then make use of mine own, and get Friends by
mine unrighteous Mammon. A Christian like conclusion fitting the observance of
the greatest mannager of States, who oftentimes hear the cry of the poor
obturatis Auribus: not imitating that excellent use of Phillip Prince of
Macedon: Qui alteram semper seruat aurem: A good Ear that is applied in the
hearing of Justice: employed in the discussion of Truth, and exercised in
performing due Judgment.

Sylambris his skin, was a good Caveat to temporizing justices, it was the
only memorable act that ever Cambyses did, and more worthy in him, because
worthless in all Acts save it: May that Princess of all Virtues, Vide Arist.
in Ethic.
long sit as President over the Princes of all Isles. So may Albion, as her name
is derived from Whiteness, receive a greater luster, by the color of Justice.

This Virtue is resembled by the Philosopher, unto the Euening-Starre, and
rightly so she may: She shynes the brightest when the Sable clouds of all
vices crawle the thickest: she expels darkness, makes the intellectual
part more piercing, gives us now to distinguish betwixt the Cymerian clouds
of error, and the true portraiture of Honor: teaching us to descend ere we
ascend, and that Scala Iacobi is, Hnmilitas Animi.

The Poet in the description of Tideus, who in the right of Polynices,
discomfited Etecles, and many valiant Thebes, to his immortal glory, writes,
that on the right hand of his Shield he had the Image of Justice, and a pair
of Scales in her Hand, with this Motto; -- Et causa pensare iuuat: And on the
left hand a Lion fierce and courageous, with this imprease: Vincere qui
nescit, pereat.

Here was one to discuss the cause, and an other to manage it: Equity
poising, Fortitude vanquishing, auspicious attendants for the brauest Champions.

The Prodigal condemning his Judgment.
But alas (poor Prodigal) thou art, me thinks, running as far from thy
wit, as thou rannest before from grace; what have thou to do with cardinal
virtues, that can truly distinguish of nothing but vices? These be fitter
objects for Statists, and best guardians of Thrones. I will descend into my
self, and unrip mine own vanities, that the source dried from whence they
were deryued, the Characters of Virtue may be imprinted, where vice was
cockered.

Nothing eases a melancholy soul bteter then comfort; Let the Physician but
say, his body is strong, and he is revived: the state of himself depends on
another word, he is not his own, for why he is slaued to his own
indigested passions.

But my disease has bin much otherwise; I was sick, and knew it not: had
Vlceres running and felt them not: For I was obdurate, and became as one that
heard not. Custom in sin, took away from me all sense of sin.

Often heard I the Lord inuiting, and his holy spirit inducing me to return
with the Shunamite; But behold, I cried with the Cant: 6. Prou: 10. 19
Sluggard: Yet a little, and then a little: presuming on mercy, and deferring
my return.

There was no portion of sacred Scripture mentioning mercy, but I had it: no
sentence of Justice, but I would turn Quideras and cras, cur non hodic? cur
non ha^ hora: finis turpitudinis tuae? Aug. in Re^.
from it: making the arm of his mercy longer then the arm of his justice,

I delayed from this day till tomorow, and I found my self more unapt too
morrow then today: For I was bound to the yoke of servile affections, and
turned my mind from correction; pampering my self with, Sure God will be
merciful; Am not I his Image? And will he see his own similitude defaced?
Did he not creatc me? and framed he me to destroy me? Though I have worthily
incensed my Creator, I can be no less then his creature.

Tush, tush. God has forgotten it: Let us eat, and drink, and be merry.
Miserable food that famisheth the eater: uncomfortable drink that poisons the
taster: and harsh melody that confounds the hearer.

The prodigals Resolution.
NOw (Father) will I change my diet: it John 4. 34. Ephesians. 5. 19. 2. Sa. 6. 14.
shall be meat and drink to me to do thy will: The melody which I make
shall be in my heart unto the Lord: and if I dance, it shall be as David did
before the Arc: and if I sing in this strange land, in this place of my
pilgrimage, it shall be the Lords Song.

Thus will I convert my self unto the Lord, and regaine my inheritance with
many tears. I will weep and weep bitterly, iudicium enim est quod ille
teneat qui pro amissione tui amare flebit: Is it a light thing for thee, O my
Soul, to be bereft of that sovereign Good which rules thee, and conducteth
thy feet in the ways of Peace? O no: Sell all thou have: here is a gemme of
an incomparable value: loose this, and thou make shipwreck of thy Soul,
depriues thee of all hope: the tempest is great, nor can the Port be attained,
except the Anchor be fixed. Rise then poor disconsolate spirit, and meet thy
Savior, that is walking upon the Sea as upon dry places, meet him, and
entertain him: for both Seas and winds obey him: he is the best Pilote: though
thy ship sincke, he will preserve thee. For he came not to wound, but to
heal, to save, not to kill.

He it is that is protection to the fatherless, a Castle of defense to the
desolate. For, who ever trusted in him and was left succourlesse? though my
friends forsake me, yet the Lord takes me up: Hence it is that my soul
reapeth comfort. It is not the high-towring Cedar of this world that expresses
his mind by his look, his spirt by his gate, shall deprive me of this
prerogative: he was ambitious here, he will be as despicable there. Humility
is the best step and directest path to this honor: she thinks none worse then
her self, and in that shows her own eminency: she never entertaines
comparison, confessing herself the miserablest of all creatures, without
comparison.

The prodigal desires Humility, to accompany him in his way to God.
SOueraignesse of Virtues, The Prodigal craves Humilities company.
let me have thy company, I shall more delight in thy aspect then the object of
Beauty. Thou have perfection in thee, and not knowing thy self, thou know
far above thy self.

Blessed Attendant, may thou live in the Court, free, without a writ of
Protection, at Princes instalments, may thou ever be in their Election: may
thou be (as thou should be) worn, but not out worn by greatness. Thou art
the best seruitour of Honor: elated minds can not possess thee, because
their sphere is far above thee. I wish (admiration of ages) that thou might
ride on thy foote-cloth: but I doubt it thou would change thy nature (with
thy honor) it is dangerous sitting in a poisoned saddle: Humility can ride
without stirrops.

Thou it was presented thy self, when I was not my self: Ambition had puffed
me up, Wantonness brought me on my knees, Self-conceit made me admire my
self, Emulation (not in virtue, for seldom appears it in the vicious, but in
the corriualship) possessed me of a frenzy, aloue-sicke fancy. I was made a
Cage of unclean Birds; no impiety to which I was not slaued.

Humility, I thank thee, thou readst a Lecture of Mortification unto me:
before I knew not what Mortality meaned: Thou Anatomizedst to me my
Constitution: keep me but company a little while longer, and I will answer
thy hopes.

But let me rip up mine own errors a little further: I know he deserves not
Humilities conuoy, that Apologizeth his sins. Two causes I have of inward
sorrow; one of outward. The two Two causes of tears to the prodigal.
inward have relation to my self only, the outward to others generally. The
first in my self instanced, the second to others traduced.

The inward motive causes of sorrow of sins committed, virtuous works
omitted. Many come into my remembrance which I am ashamed to express, yet
because maladies concealed are most augmented, I will augment my shame, that
the Lord may cover my sin.

The Prodigals hearty suite unto God, to pardon the sins of his youth.
Forgive (O Lord) my secret sins, and race out of thy memory the
exorbitances of my youth Spare the sprigge (O Lord) for it was tender, soon
wreasted from the primarie seeds of goodness, and drawn into the mazie
labyrinth of all errors. May not my crooked ways be once made straight, that
the oblation that I offer, might be accepted with Abel, and I find favor in
thy sight? Yes Lord, these penitent tears I offer will be able to appease thy
wrath: It is recorded, that Antipater on a time, charging in a Letter which he
wrote to Alexander, Vna materna lacrima multas huiusmodi delebit literas. Qui.
Curt.
his mother Olympias, with great crimes was answered again by Alexander, One
mothers tear will race out many of these Letters.

Though the mother should forgether child, or the child the mother that bare
him: yet Lord, will thou be mindful of our tears, and cancel that great Bill
thou have against us, if we return unfeignedly to thee, and in the sorrow of
our heart make confession of all our sins. Behold, Lord, I have committed
great folly; and from the bortome of my heart confess that I have worthily
deserved thy displeasure. My commissions and omissions, like two heavy poises
weigh me down: Erect my hope, (O Lord) for I have none to fly unto but thee.
Woe is me, what excellent works of mercy have I ommitted? and what shall I
answer (O Lord) when thou shall ask me, where is the naked thou clothed? the
afflicted which thou visited, the succourlesse which thou releiued, the
hungar-starued which thou fed? alas Lord I shall not be able to answer one for
a thousand. I have fared with the rich Glutton deliciously every day: I have
abounded with all dainties, replenished my heart with all delights, whilst my
poor brother, (silly Lazarus) cried at my gate for one small Alms. I shut my
ears to his cry, and comforted my self with Music, sick, and heart-sicke
was Lazarus, and I visited not him: hungry, yea hungerstarued was he, and naked
I did not cloth him: Impudent Beggar, was the best Livery I gave him.

Me thinks I see my self Homr. li. 7. Odiss. Iram vocabant quoniam si quis
vellet, Nuntium ferebat more Iridis, ibid.
seconded in Antinous: he was angry with poor Ulysses, coming in the form of
a Beggar to his own house, giving him no better entertainment then a knock
with a footstool: alas poor Ulysses, Irus has better welcome and reason
good, my pernicious Beggar can play the officious Pander. Christian charity
grows like a small brook in a dry Summer: not the least refreshing for the
wearied passenger, or comfort for the smothered traveler. The days of
hospitality run out: The Great man's chimny, that used to steame up with
English smoke, is transplanted to his Nose, and that like to a second AEtna,
breaths naught but Indian smoke. And where art thou, poor beggar, all this
while? thou may see monuments of honor, remains of hospitality: but coming
to his house, you shall find the Roman Aphorism to prove true, Pater patriae,
In perennij tempor.
is become Parasitus Curiae: no matter, a good outside will bear it.

But return my soul to thy own character: Hypparchion was stricken blind,
for saying there were moates in the Sun. And great men's errors must be wouen
up, or the spider will throw her web over them.

Thy outward motives of Outward motives of sorrow.
sorrow be traduced from thy self to others, as thy inward were engrossed to
thy self. These motives be exemplarie, giving occasion of offense to others,
or instructing others how to offend: of great force be examples, and far more
powerful then precepts: and excellent is the definition which that generally
generous Knight makes of Imitation, saying, it is a Globe of precepts, much am
I ashamed, that in the casting up of my accounts, I can find nothing, through
all the progress of my time worthy observation, deserving this Inscription at
my death, that merited no better in my life. Hic vir diu fuit: This Non diu
vixit.
man was long, only being without living. And hence is it which Seneca Seneca.
says.

There is no sight more unseemly, then to see a man in Age, that has no other
argument that he has lived long, save his Age. Many be old in years, that
are young in hours: which moved the Cinique to answer, unto a miserable
fellow, that said he had lived so many Vide Laert. in vitae Phylos.
years: No my friend thou have scarce lived so many hours.

This remembrance moves me to incessant lamentations, and inforceth me with
the Prophet, to roar out amain in the consideration of my many misspent
hours: both employed and idle, and worse when employed then when idle; For,
worse is not to do, then not to do well: as it is A Philosophers Aphor:
better to do well, then to do good: For, a man cannot offend in doing well,
but he may offend in doing good: if he do not well, the Intention making the
Action absolute.

But (woe is me) I am neither for the Primitive nor Diriuitiue, neither do I
well nor good: But if Jacob said unto Pharaoh: Genesis 47. 9.
Few and evil have my days been: How much more I, that have passed my days
altogether in vanity, may I say, Few be my hours of virtue, many the years
of vanity: which though few in number, yet many in respect of my crimes.

How many might I have instructed, how many wained from the love of this world,
if I had spent my Oil, in the service of my Creator? What excellent
Observations drawn from the lives of others, exemplified in my self,
communicated to others, with my self, might I have contracted unto one head,
to establish the inconstancy of human frailty, and make the Image of my own
life the representation of another.

The Pagan would in any case live for his Country, but I, a Christian, neither
live for my self, my Creator, nor my Country: nor as it seems, do I know my
Creation: from whence, or to what end: Man is ex terra, but not ad terram: But
I live as one secure Genes: 2. 7.
of Gods ordinance, Adam. rubra terra, ^^nxit Hominem de puluere terrae.
planting* my self on earth, as one ever made to dwell on earth: All tongues
(even from the Etimology of earth) teach me whereto I should trust, and of
what weak and infirm subsistence I am: yet neither Tongue not Nation, neither
Precept nor Example, can rightly teach me to know my self: but I must be ever
soaring, ever aspiring, raising my mind above my means.

Alas of vanity: What to this hour can I demonstrate in my self deserving
immitation? That worthy Prince Titus, the love and Darling of mankind, thought
that day to be lost, wherein he had not in some measure expressed Suet: in
vita Tit: and Anr: Sen. ibidem.
the royalty of his disposition by the bounty of his mind.

The very same rule should every Christian man observe; confirmed by the word
of Almighty God: Acts, the twentieth Chap. and the five and thirty verse, It
is more blessed to give then to take. Then cursed it is, ever to take, and not
to give.

He expresses his mind by his hand: If the one were as open as the other
there were hope in him, though his poverty could not away with bounty: for the
Widdowes-Mite is accepted.

A Gardner offering a Rape-roote, (being the best present the poor man had) to
the Duke of Burgundy, was bountifully rewarded by the Duke: which his Steward
observing, thought to make use of his bounty, presenting him with a very fair
Horse: the Duke, vt perspicaci erat ingenio, presently conceyues his Stewards
purpose: wherefore he thought good to receive the horse, and frustrate his
hopes, giving him nothing.

A singular reward, and accommodate unto your auariciously bountiful man: who
as the Comike says, Semper in dando versatur, vt priuatas opes augeat.

But (miserable wretch that I am) what can I give unto my CREATOR, in lieu of
his manyfolde Favors? Shall I weep? little enough, he is Senseless of
himself, that will not weep for himself.

How should I ( LORD) reconcile my poor distracted soul unto thee? with what
face ca^ I require for mercy? I have offered the prime of my days to the
service of Belial: my first Fruits be gone already: and will thou be content
with the gleanings? My years of ability, wherein I could have labored in the
Vineyard, and earned my penny, are gone over me, and I in the pensiveness of
mine own heart, seeing my disability, am forced to cry out with Mylo; at hi
Plutarch. in Moralib.
lacerti iam mortui sunt: Once was I apt for thy service: but behold, my
sinews are weakened, my strength impaired, and my eyes bedimmed, not for that
men keep not thy Law, but for that I have walked in unknown ways, and with
the Sodomites stumbled Genesis 19. 2.
in the Lake: every night will I therefore wash my couch with tears, and fall
down before thy foote-stoole. For what am I that I should persist in my
sins? or whence came I that I should promise to my self continuance? Esau
compares man's life to the Grass that soon withers: Job, to a Post, a
Shuttle, a Breath, a Vapor. David lengthens his days but to a Spanne: if then
as Grass, it must of necessity fade: if a Post, it must run: if a Shuttle,
it must pass: if a Breath, son blown over: if a Vapor, soon vanished: if
a Spanne, soon shortened. O that my feet were as hinds feet, that I might
walk the way of thy statutes; not looking back like Lots wife, nor behind the
plow-stilt with the sluggard, for cursed is he that does the business of God
negligently. Ier. 8. 10.
Herein, Lord, have I grievously offended, repairing to thy Temple, but
without reverence; praying but with small seruencie, trusting in thee but with
a doubtfulnesse. And how can these many obliquities be straightened, but by the
level of thy Word, that can make all things straight? It is true Lord, it is
true: that the general deprauednesse of all the World gives sin, upon earth,
a Pasport: But thou, O Lord, see thou the sins of men, and wilt be avenged.
Thou carriest thy Fan in thine hand, to sweep the ungodly from off the face
of the earth: And where then shall be a place for all the Inhabitants of the
earth? Lo all shall then become (says the Prophet Jeremy Ier. 48. 10.
in the same place) as a naked Tree in the wilderness, bereft of both flowers
and fruit: because like to the wild Figgetree it brought forth no fruit when
thou expectedst it should.

Lord I pray thee, though mine harvest be but yet in the blade, accept my
slender endeavors, and so ripen them that they may bring a plentiful croppe to
thee, in propagating thy Glory, the Churches Unity, and the benefit of such as
thou have joined to me in neighborhood, affection or affiance.

Much ado (thou know Lord) there was in the building of the material
Temple: and every one was enjoined to bring in something toward the erection
of it: My portion, O Lord, is but small, yet is my love with the greatest.

Though I can not bring 1. Reg. 5. 9
Gold from Ophyr, nor the Cedar and Fur from Lebanon, yet will I offer my
prayers in thy Temple, confessing thee before much people.

Marie rejoiced that she had a little oil to sprinckle upon Christ the widow
of Zareptah was joyful that she had a little food for the Prophet. I will
likewise be glad, and rejoice, if I can reserve but one small moity for the
Saints of God: for works of this nature never pass unrewarded. A cup of cold
water is as acceptable as the silks of Tire, or the Treasures of Egypt: happy
then am I if rich in spirit (though poor in state) purchasing for a Cup of
cold water, the water of Life.

But there must ever be something done by man, before the promise be performed
by God. The battle must be fought, ere the victory be achieved: the tree must
be planted ere it bring forth fruit: and the seed must be thrown into the
ground before it multiply. We must have a perfect knowledge of God, ere we can
dedicate our members servants to righteousness, offering them to GOD. But how
should we know God? there is an harbinger which goes always before the
knowledge of God, to prepare his house, and that is Love, the bond of
perfection. Now how should we love him whom we have not seen, being at
enmity amongst our selves whom we daily see? So good is our love now a days,
as the Italian Proverb may be verified of it: Tanto buon, che val niente. So
good as it is, good for nothing. Yet how poor and fruitless soener God
desires it, let him then have it, for he only deserves it.

I will love thee (my Lord) and will consecrate my vows unto thee, where I
mean thus to express them. In the humblenes of my spirit (without deiection)
and in the confidence of my heart, without presumption, will I humble my self
before thee with reverence, and offer up my vows unto thee with affiance. I
will come nearer thee in spirit, because removed from thee by the veil of my
flesh: the one shall caution me of my shame, the other put me in mind of my
glory. Hagar shall not get the vpperhand over her mistress: my flesh shall be
taught to obey, that if need were, she might safely govern. As there is but
Sal and Sol hominis dicitur.
one Sun to give light to the universal World, so there shall be but one
Son to enlighten my little world: and that is, the Sun of my Soul. This
Son shall observe the same course which the natural Sun observes. Her two
Tropickes shall be reduced to two remembrances of my birth, and of my death.
That as the Sun, by these two equal circles equally distant, turns either
higher, having bin at the lowest, or lower, having been at the highest: so my
Soul, transported too high with the remembrance of her dissolution (to wit)
her liberty, may be brought back to the remembrance of her birth, the very
original of her misery.

I will not have my flesh to intermeddle in these considerations: for she is
like an harsh Instrument that sounds nothing but discord: when the Soul tells
the flesh of a dissolution, she trembles and fears her accounts, like an
Usurer at the sight of deaths head: or as Felix hearing Paul dispute of Acts 24,
the last Judgment: Many objects of delight there be which captiuate the
flesh, being conversant only in outward things. I will have the flesh therefore
be put to silence, lest my soul conceive a difficulty in departing when so
harsh and disconsonant music sounds in her ear, the sun of my soul shall
purify the corruptions of my body: which impure metal must of necessity be
refined, or it will blemish the excellency and beauty of that is contained in
it.

I know a myrtle is a myrtle though planted amongst nettles: and at one time or
other the souls beauty will show it self, enlightening the poor case which
couers it. I know also that the cause of my long straying has proceeded from
my indirect disposing, preferring the bodies advice before the judgment of the
soul. But the Proverb shall be confirmed in my flesh; Evil council shall be
worse for the Counselor. I will chastise my flesh for her rash and
indiscreete aduising, and admire the resolution of my spirit, that ever stood
in opposition against her. Recollect your selves, you wandering and unsettled
thoghts of mine, fix your intention, where there is no further extension, the
fruition of perfect content. I know the time has been when vanity so
betwitched you, as like poor Ulysses companions, you were forced (too willing
a force) to hear the enchanted harmony of every Siren. But now Homer in Odiss.
you have that Moli, that herb of experience, that will charm the
inchantresse, and teach you true resolution. Shall a little taste, or distaste
rather of voluptuous affections, withdraw you from your primarie essence? you
proceed from the soul, and shall any extrinsecall object draw you from her?
alas it were pity: your founder the soul is imprisoned already, and one that
bears her small good will, a domestical enemy, that ever plants her battery
to overthrow the fair and beautiful structures of the said impudency it is,
and shameless boldness for the handmaide to dominiere over her Mistress: for the
case to be better esteemed then the instrument is in it: alas! what harmony
would a fair and curious case make without her instrument? silent music: if
Arion had played on such, he had never enchanted fishes, but had been as mute
as any fish. But the Body uses to say to the Soul, as our gallant to the
simple plain man: He is a good soul: seeming to disparage Goodness with the
Epethite of Simplicity. But these brave cutters are deceived: that
disparagement makes them worthy; It is the truest badge of a Christian to
walk in Truth and simplicity.

These simple shrubbes will find footing in the narrow ways, when our lofty
Cedars shall seek for broader passages. And whence I pray you comes this
haughtiness of mind, but from the corruption of the body?

Alas! if man would but consider, his composition: How weak in his birth, how
naked in his life, how perplexed, and in his Death ofte-times how irresolued,
he would fashion himself to an other form, neither how to imitate the Apish
fashions of the Spanyarde or Italian, but how to express himself in the duty
of a Christian.

The Prodigals contempt of the world, declared in condemning the
multiplicities, and varieties of fashions in the same.
IF GOD were in love with fashions, he could never be better served, then in
these our days: For, our World is like a Pageant, where every man's Apparel
is better then himself, where if our bodies did change forms, so often as
our Apparel changes fashions, they should have more shapes then fingers or
toes,

Miserable Age, when our best part is dis-valued, and the worst of man, like
Esaps Crow, so ridiculously varied with all colors. The soul being of more
tempered judgment, ca^ no way choose but laugh at the bodies foolery: and ask
her as the philosopher did Scylla. Whereto do all these tend? must these ever
be stripped off thee? Dare death affront one of such eminency?

Surely no: she will disspence with thee for a time, if it be but to instruct
the World in new vanities. O silly man! how much imputation thou aspersest on
thy self in affecting such trumperies?

Go but unto the first ordinance, and how far are these fashions altered
from the letherne coats which God made in Paradise? There were none of these
vanities, but the corruptions of these times have introduced many errors of no
less occurrence: When in reuolutions of times, we ever have observed the
following age to be worse then the precedent, and that of Homer to be true:
Homer: in Odiss:
Pauci nunc similes patribus nascuntur bonestis.

I will wish a better clothing for my body; not so obseruant to the eye, but
better fitting for her state: These outward couers often times make us forget
our imperfections, caring for no more then to garnish the body, whilst we all
together stand neglectfull of the state and condition of the soul. The
Ancients that were sequestered from the world, and only meditated of their
ends, though superstitiously devoted, yet in this respect to be admired. They
stood not upon earthly pomp, nor on outward garish vanities: their refectory
was a Cell, their companion a deathshead their remembrancer, an hour-glasse,
and their study how to dye.

And death certainly could not be terrible to such: fixing their minds on
nothing here in this life, which might trouble them in departure unto a better
life. It is true, the pomp of death more terrifieth then Death it self.

Objects of vanity make our dissolution heavy: and some I have seen pass
away with an indifferency of life: others, before representment of death
merry, but at their approach, when Resolution should have shown her self
best, proud recreants to themselves.

Causes I have conceived twofold; either for Two causes why men differ*
that their mind were seated on Earthly affairs, and could not pierce into 2.
Cause.
the excellency of their future hopes: or that oppressed with the heavy
remembrance of their sins they trembled to appear so unprovided or
grievously laden before a throane of justice, where they must of necessity
answer: their meditation, at the instant of death, is all of his Justice,
without recourse to his mercy.

O these (if they might) would sue a repriue at Deaths hands, with many
entreaties. I observed this (poor soul that I am,) and it has bin an
especial, motive to my conversion admonishing my self by their conversion and
life, to prevent their miserable end

I will therefore first desire to live well, before I will wish to die will: for
hard it is for him that will not live the life of the righteous, to die the
death of the righteous, life and death being in this nature concomitants, the
co^clusions ever seconding the beginning. I must observe S. Ieroms rule, who
whither he slept or wakt, ever thought that su^mons to be sounding in his ear,
Arise ye dead, and come unto Judgment: This preparation will address me to
think of my end, before I come to it: and the more welcome will it be when I
come to it.

I have wondered at men, when they desired one time after an other: for it makes
me weep, when I see my hour glass beside me, and see every drop of sand
follow other so speedily. How precious is that treasure which can never be
redeemed? and so precious is Time, showing State in himself, for he will stay
for no man: but offering his opportunity, (which accepted) yeeldes remedy to
any malady: if thou be sick in mind, no time so sinister or akward but will
show in some season, a cordial to thy discomforts: if in body, every day is
not canicular, there be some promising helps, even in days, if not to cure,
yet to allay thy infirmities. Change of Fortune, the worldlings greatest
sickness; is soon taken away by continuance, either by respect to our
selves, or to others; to our selves, considering they were but lent us, to
others, seeing the like accidents common unto them with us.

The Prodigal condemning the spent thrifts of time.
O That our worldling would but call to mind the preciousnesse of the Time!
He would not desire so speedyrunning horses for his pleasure, to soake the
poor, grate upon the bons of the needy, making spunges of them to enrich
himself: nor the ambitious wholly exposed to the insatiare desire of honor,
would abuse so inestimable good, with so indefinite an evil, in Courtiers
applause, spending the beauty of the day with the complements of an oily
tongue. That holy Father well observed this, who to put himself in mind of
his days task, would ever sommon himself in the Evening with this account: O
my soul! what have thou done to day? Have thou employed thy time in studies
well fitting Gods glory, thy brothers benefit, and thine own souls health?
Whom have thou oppressed? Whom have thou injured? O! these commemorations are
able to rowse up the sluggish soul from the sleep of sin and security, and
to bring him to the knowledge of himself and his own infirmities.

Alas! how many vain hours we spend with Nabuchadnezzar in walking Dan. 4.
26.
vainly in the pride of our hearts: nay even in the royal places of Babel?
strowting in the very height of our hearts, as vessels not composed of ordinary
substance, but admiring our own demerites, begin to boast of our own
actions: Here we glory in gorgeous buildings, when indeed our houses should
be like Obadiahs, temples Acts 26.
dedicated to Gods worship. There of our learning, yet for all our learning, we
are but Agrippaes halfe-christians. Here of the applause of people, and amidst
our glory, with Herod, become miserable. Vox Dei and non hominis.
There of policy, Act. 12. Esth 5. 7.
but Haman like, it becomes stark folly: vain be the imaginations of man,
full of vanities, falsehood, and untruths: and wherein can we glory of our own
strength? O then! since our times is so short, our hours so few, and our
constitution so weak: let us become respective of the time, lest having lost
it, we be never able to recall it again.

The Prodigalls care, to redeem his expense of time past.
O My soul! think thou of this: redeem that time thou have spent, if not in
hours (for many have been the hours of my vanity) yet in tears, that the
Lord God beholding thy contrition, may take thy repentance, in lieu of thy
times expense: Thou have a reckoning (O Lord, of all my idle hours; how
vainly I have consumed my days in the affections of vanity: O that I might
redeem the time with sorrowing! and yet there is some comfort appearing. For
as thou have a book of accounts, wherein my sins are set down, so I know
thou have a bottle wherein to put my tears: albeit I be unworthy to lift up
mine eyes to heaven, to pray to thee; yet am I not unworthy by blinding mine
eyes with tears to weep before thee.

True it is, that tears be the best and soueraignest Balm, to cure the wounds
of a sin-bleeding Soul, and never came tears from the heart, which cured not
the poison of sin. Mine eyes therefore, like plentiful fountains, shall
ever be sending forth water to rince the ulcers of my soul, and fire of zeal
to consume the thorny cares, in which I have been too long enwrapped. There
shall be no impediment now, if the progress of my pilgrimage do hinder me
from so heavenly an expedition. O that I had not eyes to see my follies before
this time! or having eyes, woe is me, I directed them not to the line and
level of wisdom: yet my comfort is, though, poenitentia sera Augustine.
raro est vera, yet, poenitentia vera nunquam est sera: Never too late
unfeignedly to forsake my evil ways: for thou will receive the thief, rather
then fail, even at the last hour, to express thy mercies and fatherly
compassion to penitent sinners: yet that example Ministers me a double use;
not to despair at the last, because there was one; nor to defer my
repentance to the last, because there was but one. Happy thief, happy theft,
the thief an heir in heaven, the thief an inheritance in heaven. Amongst
the Scythians, Luke 23. John 19. Matthew. 27 Mark 15.
no fact was with such severity punished as theft: for (says the Historian)
if it had been lawful to steal amongst them, what had been safe amongst
them: But I say no theft (in this kind) was lawful to this good thief, for
without it nothing at all had been safe unto him.

The Prodigals description, of the diversities of theft.
THe oppressors of the poor steal: for they suck the blood of the Orphans,
and treasure up vengeance for themselves.

The Monopolists steal, for they do ingrosse to themselves a peculiar gain,
enlarging the Garnars with the Rich man, to make their punishments the greater.

The Lawyer with his mental reseruations, for he who should procure his
Clients peace, prolongs his suite, because he has an Action to his purse, as
his adversary had to his land.

The proud Pharisee steals, for he means to steal Gods glory from him,
attributing that to his own merits, which is none of his; making himself the
Author and accomplisher of every deserving work; let me be none of these
(good Father) I see their miserable ends by their sinister means: For how
should vicious beginnings have virtuous ends? They perverted the ways of
Justice, walking in crooked by paths, where the Saints of God never traced; Be
it far from me, to be said to steal thy glory with the Pharisie, or protract
the poor widows cause with the trifling Lawyer, or hoord up vengeance for my
self with the covetous ingroser, or suck the blood of the needy with the
remorcelesse oppressor.

The Prodigal shows, wherein true content consists.
I Will desire one thing of thee, O my GOD, and that shall be all: to taste
true contentation, and not the worldlings seeming content, who profess
themselves to be fully satisfied, yet cry still more and more: that content
proceeds enforced, I would have Romans 13. 14.
mine enfranchised: let it be riches to me to possess thee: clothing to me
to put on my Lord Jesus: food unto me to feed on the bread of his word: and
life unto me to live for my Saviors glory: So shall my riches be eternal,
not subject to the casualties of Fortune or Chance, for no moates can corrupt
that treasure which is reserved in Heaven for the Elected: So shall my
clothing never be worn out, but like the Israelites garments, continue
evermore new: For they which put on Christ, shall continually have their
raiments renewed: So shall my food, for it is Spiritual Manna, feed my soul
with holy and heavenly meditations nourished: so shall my life never fade,
being by the Almighty preserved.

Alas (Lord) if I should continue in my old transgressions, and in the
hardness of my heart, assay to clime up to heaven (with the Giants) should not
I be soon destroyed? yea Lord, what am I, that I should be able to stand
against thee? Or is my house of Clay so firm, that it can support it self
without thee? When the King of Judah proclaimed war against the King of
Israel, the King of Israel returned 2. King. 14. 9.
answer, That the Thistle rebelled against the Cedar. And should I, that am
lighter then vanity, oppose my self against the Eternal power of the
Almighty? No Lord, I will rather humble my self before thy Throane, and with
tears of hearty remorce, purchase pardon. Thou have hung the white banner
out, to express thy mercy unto all such as will submit themselves. I will
descend therefore before the red signal of thy wrath, denounce Dan. 5. 3.
blood and vengeance. I have fore-slowed my return (O Lord) too long,
sleeping on the bed of security: I have carowsed Balthazar-like, ^n the
vessels of the Temple, profaning thy most Holy 2. Sam. 12.
Name: till thy terrible Hand appeared.

I have Dauid-like feasted on Beauty, and drunk deep in blood, till by a
Nathan, rowzed, and by a taste of thy judgments thoroughly awaked.

I have Manasses-like erected 2 Kings. 12 Et in Manass. orat.
High Places, although not publicly in the street, yet secretly in my heart,
till by captivity and bondage tamed,

Lastly, like the Prodigal as I am, have I wandered from my Fathers house, the
house of my spirituall-Father, till by penury I was enforced to Luke 15.
return home again. And what were the pleasures which drew me from the
obedience of my Father? Nothing but bitterness, anguish, and sorrow. How
tedious were those hours of my choycest delights, having ever for one minutes
sweetness an hours distaste: For what earthly joys be not attended by
repentance? and far worse be those joys, which be not attended by
repentance. Different be the sorrows of the just and unjust: as their joys,
the one continuate, the other abridged. The righteous man may be sorrowful for
a night, but joy comes in the morning. But the wicked sustain an Eternal
torment: their rest is but a seeming rest: their comfortes mere shadows, but
no real comcomforts. They have ever a worm gnawing and consuming them, the
reason is, their hearts be not fixed on the desire of Eternity, hut on
momentarie delights: which as they be short in continuance, so in the end they
yield repentance.

The Continent (says Vide August. in manual. ca. 25.
the Philosopher) must of necessity be greater then the contained: For
otherwise, how should it comprehend a substance ampler then it self?

But man planting the affections of his Soul upon a mundane delight: hoping
to satisfy her large Circumference with so straight a Center, erreth both in
Divine and humane phylosophie.

Of a thing so little in seeming, nothing so extended as the nature of the
soul: for it aspires higher and higher till it attain to that height, then
which nothing can be higher: the reason wherefore she can not come to her
expected, and indeed limited end, is the heavy mass and burden which she
carries ever about her, to wit, this unbridled Flesh, the which not brought
into subjection, like unto a turbulent and factious Soldier, makes head
against her Captain: and although she cannot utterly vanquish him, (yet by
her two Confederates.)

The Prodigal shows, how the Soul is annoyed with the Flesh, and her two
Confederates, the World* and the Devil, etc.
THe World and the Devil, she is ever annoying the Soul, now moving her to
elation of mind, presently to despair: now to forget her Creator, by
rep^esenting her own beauty, presently she expresses the severity of GODS
judgments, his wrath to sinners, and the multitude of her own transgressions.

And if the Soul do desire, dissolution with Paul, then comes the flesh,
and presents her with the deluding objects of Vanity, seeking to captiuate
her Guardian with new temptations.

This moved that devout Father to weep bitterly, who walking one day in the
field, chanced to epsy a Sheepheards boy, who had catched a Anselmus.
Bird, and tied a thread to the leg of her: The Bird was evermore flickering,
and endeavored to soar up, but the thread kept her back that she could not.
This poor Bird is my soul (says he) that desires to mount up, and live with
her Creator; but this thread, the flesh, holds her back that she can not. An
observation worthy of our consideration that lie manacled with the fetters of
sin, subjected to the slavish delights of the flesh, and exposed to miserable
servitude, by reason of the corruptions of our flesh. The best remedy I could
ever find, to set my soul at liberty, was the taming and macerating of my
body, to give her as little countenance as may be, lest whilst her fancy be
satisfied, the fortress of my soul be razed.

The Laconians ever had their government most flourishing, when their diet was
most sparing: I must deal so with my body, temper and moderate her affections,
if she suggest any thing into the ear of my Soul, presently to reprove her
for her boldness.

It is not for the Maid to profess her self a Counselor to her Mistress.
If she present unto her eye the sundry moving delights of the world, to
chastise her sharply, daring to seduce her Mistress from her allegiance
toward her Creator. No assay should pass unpunished: for impunitie confirms
sin, strengthening the means of sinning, through the want of punishing.

Choose not thou with Martha the worser part: set all household affairs aside,
let temporary delights vanish, and let such as set their minds upon them,
perish. I have but one sovereign end, at which my soul aymeth, let her
obtain that and it suffices.

The Prodigals relation of the destruction of the wicked.
THe candle of the wicked shall be soon put out, but the light of the Righteous
shall remain for ever, their flourishing shall abide, when the other fades:
for behold, though the wicked flourish like a green palm tree, and seem
happy in all outward blessings; though his Garnars be full, his fields
fruitful, his creatures abundant: though his pastures be fat, and his
children (man's greatest blessing) be like the Oliuebranches about his table:
yet do I know his fair buildings shall be destroyed, his Garnars, which he
enlargedd, consumed: his fair and fruitful fields laid waste, his treasures
rifled, his pastures with all his hierds dispersed, and his children utterly
rooted out and extinguished.

But the Righteous man, whose gain is godliness, whose profession is
vprightnes, and conversation holiness: provides for himself an estate of an
other nature: He has his eye ever fixed upon his end: he will not enrich
himself by oppression, or inhaunce his means by his brothers ruin. For he
knows that the Lord will see a convenient time to execute judgment. He
notes Psalm. 37. 2.
how many have bin taken tripping in their wickedness: Balthazar in his mirth,
Herod in his pride, the Philistines in their banqueting, the men of Ziglag in
their feasting, the Israelites in their rioting, with Manna and Quails, Jobs
children in their drunkenness, the Sodomites in their filthiness, the Steward
in his security, the churl in his plenty, the old world in their marrying, the
Aramites in their sensual living. Miserable end when men-end in their sin,
where judgment must receive them, where sin left them: woe and alas shall be
their best melody: sorrow and vexation their inseparable attendants: call to
mind this (O my soul) and tremble; sleep not in thy sins, lest the sleep
of death surprise thee; cast up thy accounts each Evening, let not thy soul
take her rest, till by the free confession of thy sins, thou find rest of
conscience: for when the night comes none can work, I will work therefore
while it is day.

The day has resemblance to man's life, as the night has to death: I will
imitate the Sun, that shines ever brightest when it sets, making the
period of my days a happy concluder of many toylsome hours which I have spent
in this vale of tears, that the remnant of my time may redeem the vanity of
my youth, lamenting to have committed that in the prime of my years, which
makes me grieve in the winter of mine age.

Yet in the very extent of my grief, there is one thing that comfort me: I
know Lord.

The Prodigals harmony, to the afflicted children of God.
THou never forsookst the man that resposed his confidence in thee, but when
the faithful Soul is plunged in greatest afflictions, contrary to all humane
expectation, thou forthwith deliuerest him.

Thou never shewedst thy self more merciful to Daniel, then in the Lions
den: nor to David, then when persecuted, and pursued by Saul: nor to Susanna,
then when she was falsely accused by the Elders: nor to thy chosen people the
Bethulians, then in the defeat of Holofernes Army Gods mercy is never better
expressed, then by the character of man's misery, where events above expectance,
make Gods people most blessed, where they were supposed to be most wretched.
Hence is it (Lord) that I admire thy mercies: I have wandered, and thou did
guide me, yea thou reducedst me to thine own sheepefold, when I had lost my
self in the deserts of sin: I was sick, and sick to death, for I labored
of the lethargy of sin, and thou came to the cave of my Sepulcher, the
place where I had been long sleeping in the grave of sin, and awaked my
soul, bidding her follow thee. She shall follow thee like the goat upon the
mountains, she shall not stay in the brakes of vanity, for thou have revived
my soul from death, and have renewed her like the Eagles feathers.

It is said, that the Eagles feathers consume all feathers that lie with them:
So shall the divine motions of my soul fixed upon the brazen Serpent, a type
of Christ curing all infirmities, dispell the unstable and wavering
representments of earths vanity, no comfort shall seem perfect, no delight
pleasant, no meditation Concordant to the ear of my soul, but the meditation
of my Christ crucified, that in imitation of his humility, I may not only
submit my self to the Cross, but make it both bread and drink to do my
Fathers will; so in the very comfort of my spirit, I may truly say; my yoke is
easy, and my burden light.

For well do I know Quatere non decutere: moliri non demoliri, bellare non
debellare etc.
(Lord) though thy servants be tempted, they cannot be tainted, though
assaulted, never surprised: and though the City of God be always besieged,
yet never ruined. Christians and persecutions close together like Christ and
his Cross. The Israelites before they came to their Land of Promise, their
temporal Canaan, endured many difficulties: and shall I that am in my journey
to a spiritual Canaan, suffer impatiently any affliction, any difficulty, or
anxiety whatsoever? No Lord, I know the more I suffer in this life, the greater
shall be my victory; for impediments attending a Conquest, makes the Conquest
more glorious. A City lightly assaulted may long hold out: but that City is
to be commended, that environed on every side, hemmed in with troops of
Assailants, enclosed with violent opponents, yet maugre the fury of war or
hostile incursions, fortifies her self with courage instead of walls, and
assures her self either of victory or a glorious end.

The Prodigals admonition to resolution, and constancy in the Battle, and
service of the Lord Jesus Christ.
REsolution must be a Aut vincam velaadepta gloria peream. Trag.
Christians best cognizance; he should not be amazed at any opposition, but in
the sincerity of his own cause, the integrity of his profession remain
constant, without wavering, resolved without dismaying, and patient in enduring
any occurrence that can any way befall him. Such was the resolution of those
three children, who rather then they would fall down before false gods,
willingly submitted themselves to the extremest torments, which either tyranny
could inflict, or flesh and blood endure. Such was the resolution and
magnanimity of all the Apostles, who went to death willingly to propagate Gods
glory. Yea even in all those persecutions, mentioned in the Ecclesiastical
History, We shall manifestly see portraied the patience of Martires
continually suffering, and the cruelty of Tyrants with all inhumanity
punishing. Rasis is renowned for his resolution in the Machabees, pulling out
his own bowels to intimate his contempt of life, which is taxed by Saint
Augustine, saying; That this fact was done Magne, non Been, But alas (Lord)
where is that Christian fortitude? we are now shaken with every wind of
contrarily working passion: every shadow, every fear, every perturbation does
now dismay us. We fear death, because we have deserved Death after Augustine.
death: we read of the constancy of the Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors,
and reading admire them, but are loath to imitate them: We say, they are good
Records, excellent Annalls, and worthy memory: yet those memorials be quickly
extinguished, those Annalls soon raced out of our memory.

Many suffer in mind, if they loose their goods: or if defamed, they will
endeavor to repurchase heir good name, with the expense of their blood. These
be imputations so impropriate to themselves, as they cannot hear them. Alas!
if man would consider the deprauednes of his own nature what aspersions, how
scandalous soever: what reproaches, how contumelious soever: or what inuectio^s
how bitter soever, ca^ give him a Title due, in regard of his natural
vileness.

Heirs of sin, slaves of sin, and champions of sin; what can such heirs
have, but an inheritance of shame? What can such slaves have, but the hire of
shame? And what can such champions glory of, but that they are boulsterers of
shame?

But if we will fight the Lords battle, for heirs of sin, we shall become
heirs of righteousness: For slaves of sin, servants in Christ's Family:
and for Champions of sin, Armourers, in the Lords Army.

Were not this a Battle worth fighting? when our Earthly Tents should be
translated to heavenly mansions, our tabernacles of clay, to sanctuaries of
eternity: where we putting on the whole co^pleat armor of resolved
Christians, may say with the Apostle, We have fought a good fight, and thanks
be to the Lord that has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Jesus Christ, a most Nunqua^ ve^nit Jesus sine saluatione, nunquam Christus
sine unction.
happy name indeed, where I never hear the name of Jesus, but I hear the
name of Salvation: nor of Christ, but I hear in it the name of Unction. Who
would not fight under this name, to purchase to himself an eternal name of
glory, not on earth, for that is vain, and temporary, but in heaven, for that
endures perpetually.

Rank me (O Christ The Prodigal craves to be ranged in the Lords battle.
amongst thy squadrons: Set me in the forefront of the battle, and let me
fight with that resolution, as no fury of Antichrist, though never so violent,
may daunt me, but as one prepared against the extremest of perils, not to
loose ground, nor play recreant to my faith, which I have always professed,
but to stand unto it manfully, till I have gotten the victory.

Cato termed it Nobile lethum, to die in the defense of ones Countries
liberty: And is it not a far more Noble and glorious death to die in defense
of our own Soul? where many temptations be daily and hourly assaulting,
perpetual induceme^ts ensnaring, and also not violent siege lying, we had need
have expert Captains to marshall our Troops: to wit, our passions; prepared
minds, to wit, all afflictions, and impregnable Bulwarks, to withstand the
violence of siege. To wit, preparatiues against all inducements.

A Soul thus Fortified, cannot well be surprised: The Enemy may well lie at
the gates, but it will be matter of greater difficulty for him to enter; A
poor man had need have no traiterous passions or motions within him, to render
up the castle and Fortress of his Soul.

He has enemies enough without, all should be faithful unto him at home: He
must have no effeminate appetite, lest like another Tarpeia, it seek to ruinate
her possessour, as that wantonly-amourous Maid would have betrayed the
Capitol to an Hostile usurper.

We should therefore have our passions in subjection, our illimited desires in
bondage: Vide Lucium Flor. in Sab: Bell. Sabinis, prodite junt nocte per
virginem.
lest they (being as they are) boundless in themselves, enforce the Soul, to
pass the bounds of discreet moderation.

It was excellently observed by that father of In Moral.
Morality Plutarch, esteeming him that could moderate his affections, to be
half virtuous, but he that had sovereign command over his passions, to be a
perfect man.

But as these days go, we take such to be good men, with Cicero, as have In
1. Offic.
only appearance of virtue in them. Perfection is too absolute for this time:
and inferior virtues, says one, be good enough for iron Ages. If with Balaam
we desire Number. 22. 22
to die the death of the righteous, it is enough.

No matter for the interim of our life: we ground upon an infalliable Axiom, A
good end is ever attended with a good life: it is true: But an evil life
seldom or never produces a good end: he therefore that means to die in Gods
favor, must live in his fear, for he that on the stage of this world, makes
not his entrance in his fear, seldom makes his Exit in his favor.

But I will dedicate my heart to God, that he who requires it may possess it:
so shall both his fear and favor lodge in the harbor of my heart: and
blessed is such a Temple as shall be thought worthy to receive so comfortable a
guest; he that has his heart possessed of God, can find no discordant passion
transporting him, no exhorbitant affection reigning in him, all things be safe,
all all secure: for the God of peace lives in him, the holy Spirit wholly
possesses him, and the Angels as ministering servants are deputed by GOD to
attend him, O then! let my heart enjoy thee, that the rest of my members may
follow thee whither soever thou go: For like as the poize of a clock turns
the wheels one way: so the heart, being the maine poize of every human
Composition, what manner of way soever it does turn, draws (by an attractiue
power) all the corporal motions with it.

Or like as the iron is At que vt Helio trophium, and flores quidam semper ad
Solemn, etc. Lyps. 1. de constable.
drawn by the Adamant, the Straw by the Ieate, and the Helyo trophic by the
Sun: Even so be the faculties of the body drawn by the attractiue power of
the heart: For, as they receive all life by her, so, like loyal subjects, they
render, as to their sovereign, their legeance unto her.

The Prodigals offering.
Go then* (O my heart) He gives God his heart.
I give* thee to my Maker, he craneth thee, and he only shall have thee.
Whilst thou wast mine, thou wast a wandering heart, a faithless heart, a
secure and carnal heart, a remorcelesse and impenitent heart; but being now
thy Creators, he will apparel thee anew, adorning thee with the excelent gifts
of his Spirit, that being clothed here with the ornaments of his grace, thou
may be transplanted hence to the Kingdom of Glory.

And what gift better or more acceptable then my heart, to my Maker that made
my heart? I will say with that blessed father, My heart (O Lord) was created by
thee, and it can find no rest till it come unto thee; no rest indeed. For what
rest or peace in this world? what comfort in this life: Fecisti Domine cormeum
ad te and inquietum est donec requiescat in te. August* in solil.
Quaequanto* magis procedit, tanto magis ad mortem accedit: Where there is of
that side fear, of this side trembling: here hunger, there thirst: here
heat, there cold: here grief, there anguish of mind abounds: and to all
these succeeds importunate death: which with a thousand kinds of diseases,
daily and suddenly seaseth upon wretched man: why then should man so
attentively set his heart upon the vain delights of this world? let him but
consider the certainty of it, and he shall confess nothing more inconstant,
light, and wavering: let him observe the vanity of it, and he will acknowledge
nothing so foolish, contemptuous or undeserving.

Well might Democritus laugh in these days, where the world, as that
Philosopher imagined, seems to be made of nothing but discords.

Many discords indeed, where there is no unity betwixt man and his conscience,
policy and religion, Church and Commonwealth, youth and age, and that I may
use the Churches very annexion, man and wife: where some esteem wife and
children as bills of charges. Which moved the wisemans answer, being
demanded when a man should marry? A young man not yet, an old man not at all.

Wherefore Arminus a Ruler of Carthage being importunately persuaded Opinions
of marriage.
to marry, answered: I dare not: for if I chance to light upon one that is
wise, she will be wilful, if wealthy, then wanton: if poor, then peevish: if
beautiful, then proud: if deformed, then loathsome: and the least of these is
able to kill a thousand men. A strange age, when our greatest comforts be
oftentimes perverted and made the indefinitest evils. What concord in so maine
oppositions? Esteem this for a life, let him that pleases: I have seen in my
few years expense, and many hours bitter experience, that the very greatest
comforts were but appearances, and where a promising event showed it self,
there some sinister occurrent ever thwarted the effect. I will so resolve to
live, that I may die cheerfully: without looking back to what I leave behind:
I The Prodigals resolution.
will judge of delights as impertinences, auailing little to my heavenly
voyage. What I have, I will use freely, without profuseness, and without
sparing, to show I am Master of mine own. Lauishly to consume what I may with
reputation keep, I will not: and to spare where Discretion bids me spend, I
scorn it: the one implies a Prodigal humor, exposed to observance: the other
a niggardliness indiscreetely parcimonious: for the pleasures of this life (I
thus resolve) if they had more permanence, and not such motive causes of
repentance, I should welneare as much doat on them, as I now loath them. But
to have delights immixed with such interchangeable courses of discontent,
falling to their ebb, before ever they come to their flow: I think every
wise man will conclude with that wisest of men: Vanity of vanities, and all
Eccles. 1.
is but vanity.

The Prodigal describes the manifold passions, and distractions of the heart
and mind.
LEt me descant on every Non ignaua mal^ miseris succurrere disco.
passion (for I my self am not ignorant of these distractions) which are
subjects of the mind, and in some minds soueraignesses: that in their
description, and those attending inconveniences, which ever wait on them, man
may learn to be wise, cautioning himself by others miseries.

I will begin with Love.
that passion which (in the purity of her own nature) is the perfection of all
virtues, the Accomplisher of the law, and the mystical Union betwixt Christ
and his members: yet perverted, an unmatched evil, laying open a breach to the
enemy (in What the sensual man's love is.
the fortress of the Soul) and exposing it unto all illimited and
undisciplined affections. It is the sensual man's love, who transported with
the unbridled desires of his flesh, seeks the essence of the refinest virtue,
to wit, love under the pretense of the detestablest vice, to wit, lust.

This is he that makes his heirs, heirs of Beggary: consumes his estate
upon painted Sepulchers: degenerates from himself, in hanting pleasures
unworthy of himself. This man respects Prouer. 22.
not his good Name, which Solomon prefers before great riches, and whose
beauty he esteems more of then gold or silver.

And yet what account makes the sensual lover of this so inestimable a good,
pawning it to harlots, letting out his house to shame, and that body which
should be the Temple of the holy Ghost, become a cage for unclean Birds.
Miserable blindness! when man falls with open eyes into the pit of perdition,
slauing his understanding, the best part of man, to appetite, which he has
common with beasts. He considers Two maine inconveniences.
not a two-folde inconvenience rising from this inordinate passion. First,
Repentance here, and if not entire, confusion elsewhere: Repentance is never
there entire, where we commit that again, and with a willingness, which we
desired before might be forgiven us with a seeming pensiveness. This
repentance is only a lippe-labour; far from the heart, for he that
returns to his old vomit, strengthens the arm of sin. Sickness at
the heart we know to be best cured by cordialls applied to the heart:
external remedies little avail inward maladies: The salve and the sore must
be of one nature: Pray therefore with David, that they eyes may not look after
a woman: but if thou can not prevent thine eyes, but they must look after a
woman; at least pray, that thou may so prevent thine eyes, that thy heart
lust not after a woman: so may thy A salve for this sore.
lustful affections be restrained, and thy understanding restored, which thou
wast so long berest off, as thou frequentedst the house of the strange woman;
be her house estranged to thee, and to thy steps: for (says Solomon) Prou.
6. 26.
Can a man hide fire in his bosom, and his clothes not burned? Or, can a man
walk upon coals, and not burn his feet? even so he that enters the house
of his neighbor, shall not be clean when he has toutched her.

Thou know, whatsoever thou be, that hauntest these vicious and odious
consorts, that the Adage which was written upon Lais, that famous strumpet of
Corinth, is verified in thy English Curtezan: He comes on a bootelesse errand
to Lais of Corinth, that has not to give so much as she requires. Hence then
by an unbridled appetite may thou sustain a double wrack: Ruin of soul
and body. Thy soul made the hire of baseness: thy body, which was created for
the service of her Creator, becomes servant (no vassal) to the dispicablest
of all his Creatures, let the Prodigalles Tears warn thee, who wishes from
his heart thy return with him; that is the best part of Beauty, which a
picture can not express. Look at the rare and exquisite workmanship of thy
soul, and thou will be loath to stain it, with the refuse of a painted
beauty.

Ambition is the great man's passion, who builds imaginary kingdoms in the
air, and climing for most part breaks his own neck, he is insatiate of
honor, nor can he cease from soaring, until his wings be singed.

This is an hereditary evil to great persons, and though they see by daily
experience, that the loftiest Cedars are subject to tempests, yet, rather then
they will loose honor, they will oppose themselves against all perils.

These men are ever for the greatest designs: managements of war, to raise
their glory, they undertake willingly, and growing once popular, they
apprehe^d every occasion that may answer their hopes.

It Is strange to see how vainly they be carried above themselves; how they
admire their own demerites, none be so fit followers for them as factious and
turbulent spirits: for Catiline must not want his Cethegas, How great is this
Frenzy, when man by striving to outstrippe him self, utterly overthrows
himself. Who is safe, and would be in danger? who at rest, and would subject
themselves unto the force of public dissentions?

These Absolon-like neither regard Nature nor Sex: they see the hooks of
honor hung out, and they are ever nibling, till they be choked.

There be always Achitophels that suggest matter of innovation, in these
ambitious heads, but the Council perishes with the counselor. These Salust:
in Iugurth: Bell.
men naturally speak much and do little, and not with Iugurth, Speak little,
and do much: for if they ouer-valewed not themselves, they could never fall to
such admiration of themselves. These spirits had need be cooled: til they taste
the bitter pill of repentance. An excellent portraiture of an ambitions man.


He portrayed the ambitious man rightly, that pictured him snatching at a
Crown, and falling, with this Motto, Sic mea fata sequor.

It is very true: For the Ambitious man ever follows himself to his own
end: the best remedy can be ministered, is consideration, drawn from
themselves, or experience from others: From themselves, in regard of their own
frailty: from others, in having an eye to their fall.

We are aptest to be moved to consideration of our selves, when we have an eye
rather to such as are below us, then above us: for the one does as Remedy to an
Auaricious mind.
much humble and abase us, as the other does transporte us above our selves.

CHRIST seeing his Disciples to strive among themselves, for pre-eminence said:
He that is the least amongst you, shall be as the greatest: and taking up a
Child, exhorts them to be humble, like that Child.

Alas! what has man to be proud on, that he so sets forth himself? Is he of
rarer composition then earth, that he should esteem of himself above Earth?

Many inferiors he has of less dignity then himself, many poorer: yet
which of these not equal to him in deserts? And shall there be but one Sun,
and like another indiscreet Phaeton, will he strive to have the regiment of it?
Remember thine Best honor that can be desired.
end, and thou will make it thy greatest honor, to Attribute all Honor to
thy Creator.

Consideration, drawn from others, I would have thee thus to apply to thy
self: Thou have seen, heard, or read, of many who have attained the end of
their hopes, and became sovereigns of their wishes: They desired a Kingdom,
and they possess it: Yet if thou consider those many indirect means, by which
they possessed it, thou will prefer the subject that lives on a poor Farm,
rightfully possessed, before that King who enjoys a Diadem wrongfully
usurped: For the one is engaged to great accounts, the other free of all after
reckonings: But if this Vid: Lycosthen. Apothegm.
will not humble thee, go to the ambitious man's grave, and see (as Diogenes
said) if the dust of honor have a better luster then the dust of the ignoble:
Nay, this also is vanity and vexation of Spirit. Exhortation to the ambitious
man.
Draw in then thy piecoulored, Sails, and now retire in harbor: Humility
though she go behind Ambition on earth, she shall go before her in heaven:
and better it is to be a dore-keeper in the house of the Lord, then to be
conversant with Princes: Use so thy honor in this life, that thou may have
honor in the life to come above measure: for God has said, I will honor
them, that honor me. The miserable The miserable man.
I would caution too: Virtue keeps a direct course (as in an even diameter)
betwixt excess and defect: the one inclining to Prodigality, the other to
Parcimony: of these two my opinion in brief is: That Prodigality is a vice
more transitiue, Avarice a vice of firmer and deeper root, and therefore
hardlier supplanted: We have an example of the Prodigals Examples in Scripture
of the Prodigals return.
return in Holy Scripture: but we read in the eighteenth of Saint Lukes
Gospel, when CHRIST willed the rich-man to sell all that he had, and
destribute to the poor, he went away sorrowful: For (says the Euanglist, He
was very rich: this Sell all was a hard speech, he could not digest it: this
was the cause why those that were invited could not come to the marriage feast:
they had their affections planted on an other object; one had a wife to marry,
an other a yoke of oxen to try, an other is for his farm: earthly respects
must be first sought after, for what can earthly minds relish, but earthly
affairs? he is blinded with the love of money, that sets his soul at sale
for money. Auidus a non videndo: and Mydas according to the Etymology of the
Greek is blind. Acts 19.
Gehezi will have the leaprosie with it, rather then he will loose it: Judas
will betray his Master, or have it: Long live Diana of the Ephesians, (say the
Siluer-smiths) so long as they gain by Diana of Ephesus.

Of all afflictions incident to the mind, for I may well term avarice, with
the Philosopher, an affliction, none so insupportable as this, yet none more
common. He charactered him rightly, that said; the miser was good to none, but
worst to himself: Worst to himself; for he macerates himself; and as the
Poets feign of Prometheus, Miser nemini est bonus, sibi pessimus.
that an Eagle is continually gnawing and feeding upon his heart: Even so this
poor Anatomy of man, feels ever a gnawing at his heart, he cannot sleep: for
cares will not let the rich man sleep: he can take no rest. For what rest unto
the wicked? He can take no recreation, Esaias 48. 22.
for though the air breath upon him, yet does it not refresh him. His mind
is disturbed and distracted with store of passions, as fear, desire, envy,
ire, and many others, which for want of better attendants, be of his meiny
continually. This man has, and has it not; he has state, but cannot use it:
if he give any thing, the one hand knows what the other hand does, and
wishes with all his heart, he had it again after he has given it: He
neither thinks of Death nor Resurrection: or at least, if there be a last
Judgment, he hopes to purchase a Writ of Remove with his money, or to find,
as on earth, so partial a Judge in heaven that will be corrupted, and dispense
with his crimes.

When he dies, he makes himself his own executor, and the Devil, who was his
purueiour living, he makes his superuisor dying. He leaves the world
sorrowfully, for like a man in a mist, he is roming he knows not whither.
Briefly, as he was esteemed a jolly provident fellow for this world, he has
proved himself a mere fool for the world he should go to. He got
himself not so much as one faithful friend, with all his unrighteous Luke 16.
Mammon: In this life he was a slave to his own; in the life to come he is
convicted by his maine indisposed passions attend his vice: for the love of
money is the root of all evil; I will pray that I may have a competence, and
with it a content: in want I would not be, for it drives many into deiection
of mind: nor too rich, lest transported above my self, by my estate, I forget
him that blessed me with that estate. Ever patient let me be (O Lord) in my
ebb, The Prodigal only wishes 2 competence.
as continent in my flow: he is not thankful which thanketh God for his
benefits; but he is thankful indeed that thanks him for his chasticements.

Every passion may be thus described, and by a sound sincere mind easily
remedied; I know we have a part in us that distasts all earthly things, and in
it self hates all irregular passions: but alas I see with Seneca, Partem in
homine diuini Inclytum Sen* dict. Vide Lyps. de constable. l. 1.
spiritus mersam: That part which resembled a divine power, drowned in the lees
and dregs of corruption, vassailed to an unworthy part, and contemned by the
sensible power, where it should be most respected: As those therefore, Ibidem.
that in rooting out a tyranny, first ceaze and raze his principallest Cities,
Castles, and Fortresses, whereby al means of retire may be prevented him: so in
this tyranny where the passions and affections of the mind seem to captiuate
and detain (in miserable servitude) the reasonable and operative faculties of
the soul: we must race down all those places of assistance, which like so
many fortresses give retire unto those tyrannical passions. Yea we must,
obstare princip^^s, lest by increase the arm of sin be strengthened.

David wounded the 1. Sa. 17. 49.
Philistin in the forehead, and so must we kill the serpent in the egg:
sins not come to their ripenes, are easier cut down then in their height:
and passions before they be firmly rooted, be quickly suppressed. Words spoken
in due time (says Solomon) are like apples of gold with pictures of silver:
and an occasion apprehended Ministers facility in dispatch.

Where delay is used, this opportunity can never be accepted: I have couenanted
therefore with my soul, that she use her time offered, chastise the flesh
whilst she is low, and will take chasticements; for being erected and
transported above the soul, she will hardly endure chasticing or reproof.

I will also with patience endure afflictions: that the worldlings delights may
seem to me vanities, and the rules of mortification my hourly directrices,
that in the Survey of this world, I may admire the follies of such as ever
desire to live in the world, every representment, how vain soever, distracteth
the mind of the carnal man; the the eyes of his understanding be darkened, he
cannot distinguish of transitory delights, and heavenly.

He cannot define of goodness that never heard of it.

The Prodigal shows, how Passions best cured by contraries.
that passions with there contraries are cured.
PAssions are best cured by their contraries: therefore, if my mind be
inclined to pride, I will presently expostulate the cause with my self: why I
should be proud: I will compare humility with pride, their means and ends. For
the means or mediate course I see humility more honored, less envied, more
prosperous in her affairs, and more absolute in her end. I see pride
oftentimes distasteful to herself: for friends she loses many, gets none.
And what desert or wilderness greater then to be without friends? She is
never observed, but either with laughter or hate: and what is that observance
worth which either purchases contempt or spite? but where humility goes, the
eyes of men follow, as if they had spied a mirror for themselves to imitate, or
some worthy Majesty shrouded in an humble cover.

This virtue I have ever The noblest borne ever most humble.
observed to descend lineally to the greatest and noblest borne: which moved
the Philospher to call it an Heroicke Virtue. We shall see an early mushrome
that is now grown to a little honor (bought perchance) for seldom merited)
put on a strange counterfeit face of seeming honor; smile he dare not beyond
a point, for fear to vnstarch his look. He holds this opinion, which is a
flat heresy, That pride is the best habilliment of Honor, where true honor
will show it self without a foot-cloth: thus will I compare these two several
subjects together; where if pride scorn to be compared to so poor a creature
as is humility, I shall love her the worse: for, comparisons to them that
deserve least, are ever most offensive.

If I find the disposition Of misery and her opponent.
of my mind naturally free, engaged to some miserable desire of having, I will
set against her Liberality, how worthily esteemed the one is, and how
contemptible the other; where, if Precepts will not do it, I will confirm my
Doctrine with Examples: if I find my mind hard to be weaned from miserable
sparing, I will first enforce a bounty: so in time my mind enforced to do that
she would not, will become willing and ready to do that I would; Of Envy,
and her opponent.
If Envy reign in me, I will oppose against her brotherly love; that mutual
love which is required, not only in humane society, but in the perfection of
Gods Law; Love one an other (says our Savior CHRIST.

The reason is confirmed by a blessed Father: The love of GOD (says he)
ingendereth love to our Neighbor, the love of our Neighbor increases our
love unto G^d.

This was the Serpents sin, and is to this day: he enuyed the welfare of our
first Parents in Paradise, and continues his envy to their race expulsed
Paradise.

Far be it that my Soul, having so loving a mirror to follow, as her
CHRIST, should harbor that vice which is most opposite to CHRIST:

The Jews Crucified CHRIST, through envy, and I should re-crucifie my dear
Savior, by lodging in my heart envy.

My Soul, which should be a temple for GOD, shall not be made a Sinagogue for
satan. The purer metal is to be chosen: Charity is of all others, a metal
most refined. Envy, of all others, most adulterate and corrupted.

Thus, opposing virtue against vice, Reason will direct me to prefer virtue
before vice: for where Sense becomes obedient to Reason, there the New-man is
more set by then the Olde-man: but where there is a conflict, which whilst we
subsist in this Tabernacle of clay, we must of necessity endure, and where the
New-man seems too weak for the encounter, then the worst part becoming
sovereign, all things seem confounded, and as in the first Chaos, without
order or disposition: To strengthen me in this encounter, I must incessantly
call upon God, that he would assist me with his grace, that inclining mine ear
to his Commandments, I may learn understanding, according to that of the
Psalmist, They which Psalm. 100, 1
observe them, have a good understanding: So by the light of my understanding,
I shall be able to discomfite sin, distinguish betwixt sense and reason,
re-ally my forces orderly, fight valiantly, and vanquish in the end.

I know (Lord) under whose banner I fight: the assaults therefore of the A
Christian resolution.
flesh shall not surprise me, nor the world ensnare me, nor the devil, though
he come from compassing the whole Earth, make a prey on me.

If the death of the Saints be precious in the Lords sight, much more the life
of the Saints, nor shall one hair fall from my head without thy permission.

Who would not be pressed to the Lords battle? he is that Lion of Judah: He it
was that bruised the head of the Serpent* he it was that discomfited death, and
became conqueror over hell, and shall I fear to follow such a Captain? if I be
in darkness, and in the Desert, he will send forth a fiery cloud to conduct
me: if so I be wayfaring, as I am, during this Earthly pilgrimage, he will
send a Raphael to guide me: To be short, having him, I have more with me then
against me. The thought of him made the Philistines fly, and say: God is come
into the Host: 1. Sam. 4. 7
Where he fights, all the Elements are united together, in his assistance
and aid.

When he fought against the Aramites, the Sun took his part: when he fought
against the Sodomites, Es. 1. 14. Josh. 3. 10. Genes. 16. Exodus 14. Numb. 26.
the fire took his part: when he fought against the Egyptians, the water
took his part: when he fought against the Murmurers, the Earth took his
part. No; as he is the Lord of the Forest, so the beasts of the Forest assist
him: When he fought against the Idolaters, Dan. 3.
the Lions took his part: when he fought against the Mockers, the Bears
took his part. 2 Kin. 2 24.


Thus all things make with God, for God made all things: and who can distrust
so puissant a Captain, so invincible a General? It was but a vain and
insolent brag, when the King of Judah proclaimed war against the King of Aram,
and said: no man shall deliver them out of my hands: but 2. King. 1. 9.
where the Lord says, No man shall deliver them out of his hands, it is true.
For the Author to the Hebrews says, It is Hebr. 10.
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of God. Let us fight therefore, not
with Philips silver words in Greece not with Artaxerxes golden Archers in
Persia, but with Pythagoras weapons, one mind, one heart, and one soul,
perpetual weapons these be, the triumphs whereof have everlasting Trophies.

Powers disnuited, be weaker then those which are knit together: and where the
powers and organs of our souls be not combined, there the castle is soon
ruined. There be three things observed 3. Things observed in discipline of
war.
served in managements of war, a discreet command in the General, an
unfeigned obedience in the Soldier, and a conuenience in the seat of the
Camp. These three should be observed in our spiritual warrefare; where the
Spirit is General, the motions or affections of the Soul be the soldiers:
and the camp the Theater of this world. As the General should command, so
should that sovereignty be mixed with a sweet attempered discretion: not too
violent in command, for that implies a tyranny, nor too soft, where the
present affairs requires a roughness: he is a good captain who can
distinguish of his soldiers dispositions, using lenity to men of easier
temper, severity, The properties of a good captain.
where a more intractable disposition is seated. We have passions of all
natures, some more equally temperates others more illimited: the one sort to be
cheered, the other chasticed. Those are to be cheered, which are either good,
or indifferently disposed, for semi-vertues, as this Quae rationis trutina
quasi norma quada^ and obrusa non sunt dispositae. Lyps. de Constable.
age goes, are to be made much of. Such are to be chasticed as oppose
themselves directly against the square of right reason, or which level not
themselves to the mark of reason. The best and most resolute soldiers use to
be placed in the fore-guard, so should the stayed affections: the recreantest
in the rereward, lest being set in the face of their enemy, the eminency of
danger makes them recoile.

The general, having thus ranked and ranged his soldiers in battle a ray,
fit for present encounter: the soldiers must (with an enforced obedience)
follow his command: for this obedience is an imperial obedience: cui parere,
imperare est: This impliethno servitude nor baseness, but a certain
Sovereignty in command: Now to the place where the conuenientest repose for
advantage, and retire for danger shows it self. The Camp where they must
really their forces.


The Camp is this world, where there be multitudes of perils continually
threatening ruin, store of Opponents offering us battle: We must either fight
or leave the field, and cowardly yield up our Arms to our enemy. Vid:
Volaterr. de castr. metam. and loc. Bellor. aptiss.
It is fit therefore that we choose the conuenientest place we can find for
advantage, both to offend and defend.

I do not like the mountain so well, the place is too eminent: the Valley is
more secure, and better for advantage in our Christian warfare: The Mountains
may seem to resemble our Courts, and places of eminence: where many objects
will seek to draw us from Resolution, to a more soft and sensual living:
There is too much vanity, too much admiration, and too little Discipline:
perfumes are not for soldiers: Such as will fight in this battle must lie
hard, fare hard, and fight hard: They must not satisfy their desires, but
repress them: for before the general victory be achieved, there must be a
victory in our selves.

Abstinence and continence 2. Excellent virtues required in a Soldier.
be the commendablest attendants for a Soldier, and such as promise Plutarch.
in vit. Phylop. In v^t. African.
an undoubted victory. Philopemen was his Countries best friend, and only
esteemed worthy to govern an army, because he abstained from riot, the
greatest ruin of Armies. So was Affricane reputed worthy to Rule, because he
could rule himself, teaching himself continence amidst his victories. If then
the place of advantage be not found in the eminent and spacious places of this
world, we must trauerse our ground and seek out a place of more conuenience:
where there is less danger, fewer enemies, and fitter retire: lets to the
Valley then, where we may take sure footing: private and sequestered lives, free
from popular concourse* singular in their use of spiritual discipline.

There is no affection to corrupt us, no object of honor to ensnare us: we may
be safe, because not observed.

Here we may cope with our enemy, upon advantage; we need fear no civil
mutinies within our selves, for all means of rebellion be cut off.

Here, whilst thou live, and enioyest thy self; thou can now say with
David I Psalm. 131. 1.
am not high-minded.

And what means better, to discomfite that man of Pride, that Serpent of
Pride, that prince of Pride, then in true Humility, lowlynesse of mind, and
meeknes of spirit, to cope with him: and say with the Royal Shepherd, In the
Name of the Lord, I will overcome him.

The Pride of man shall bring him low, but humility Pro. 29. 23.
shall exalt him: Let our passions therefore, brought in subjection to the
Spirit, and our Spirits subjected unto Almighty GOD, contract their power
together they have more with them then against them, and they are planted upon
advantage, they have cut off the head of our enemy by their ground, which they
have chosen to fight in, and with that many alies, it is the world I mean: for
being sequestered out of the world, how should any mundane objects or delights
move them* while we live in the world there is a necessity enjoined us, we must
be in it, but no necessity to be of it. Many Ethnickes we read on, that so
much contemned the love of this world, that they chose rather a private life,
with the fellowship and society of their mind, than any other earthly respect.

We have heard many of them wish for one thing or other, yet in all their
wishes we never read of any that wished for wordly preferment, among the
Philosophers. I dare say Plato gave God thanks for three things, for that he
was borne a man and not a beast; a Grecian and not a Barbarian: but above all,
for receiving the benefit of life in Socrates time. The like of Zeno, the
Cynicke In vita Philost* apud Laert.
Diogenes, Anaximenes: many, whose lives, though Pagan, yet in their contempt of
the world, memorable.

And shall we that have the seal of our adoption, and a more ample hope in
the world to come, debase our minds with the refuse of this world? No; as we
are pilgrims, so should we desire that these days of misery may be blown
over us. This place is an impediment to our better voyage: Those objects which
be in it, eye soars to our soul, darkening the luster of the inward man with
the clouds of error, presenting (in stead of true and real joys) mere
shadows, and appearances of delight. Let us fight therefore (out of the eye of
the world) that by the advantage of the place, and the ritirednesse of our
passions, we may discomfite all opponents, and obtain the palm of The fruit
of this victory.
that glorious victory, by which we may be translated from these camps of
earth to those celestial camps of eternity, where there is a measure above
measure of ineffable joys reserved for the elect of God: who would not fight
to purchase so inestimable a prize? If any earthly preferment be in our way,
what indefatigate means we make to purchase it. And shall any worldly respect
move us rather to follow it, then that necessary good by which we are made
happy in goodness.

I approve of his opinion that thought riches should be used, as a pilgrim
uses his staff: when it helps him he leanes upon it, but when it hinders
him in his journey, he throws it from him. Many have ouervalued them, and
thought man's beatitude to consist and have their dependencie upon them: these
be our earthly minded moles, that alter the form of their creation: They were
made with their face to look upward, but it seems they find more beauty
below, then hope to possess that beauty is above.

I will esteem riches, honors, and the like, as they are, earthly blessings,
but not by the use of them, to pervert them, and make them cursings. This
comes to pass when oftentimes men of immerited rank obtain honor: they
seem strangely transported above themselves: ancient acquaintance is dashed
out of date with their present raising: They An observation in honor bestowed,
and not deserved* Luke 18.
live as they might ever live to have supplicants, and never to be petitioners
themselves: if these hear a poor man's suit, and do him right, it is as the
unrighteous Judge did to the Widow, rather for importunacie, then fear either
of God or Man: These men no sooner attain honor, then they get some face
casten in a mould, which may suit with their honor. Too public access they
say, purchases contempt, the client must pay his entering penny, before he
approach his presence. It is a brave thing, will some think, to be a dorekeeper
to an honorable man, yet had I rather be a dore-keeper elsewhere: I will not
prostitute my self, for an unlawful gain, to the heauiest poyze of honor.
It is The Prodigals position.
enough for me, to observe and admonish my friend, of an after-accompt. This
has been my position, and I would not willingly forgo it: I will not
purchase me that estate pro termino vitae, which should forf^it my estate post
terminum vitae.

Providence has taught me many things, traduced to me from the silliest of
Gods creatures. For I think my self of far more excellency then the
Pismire; and should I then be outstript by her, in that which makes me most
excellent? I have passed too much of my Spring already: and now the Winter is
come, and my fruit should be ripe, and the great Husbandman expects it; yet
am I but where I was. It is a Rule in Christianity, Non progredi, est regredi:
and behold, I have not only not come forward, but made a cowardly retreat: yet
do I come to share the victory, that never was at the battle; to the
reaping, that never was at the sowing, and to taste the fruit of that Vine I
never planted. I will stand no longer idle* but with all feruencie of devotion,
heattie contrition, and integrity of heart, return with the good Shunamite,
and receive the blessing of my father.

If Esau will not, Jacob shall: the present delight of this world, though it
relish as well in the pallat of a carnal man, as ever Genesis 27.
Esaus pottage did, yet I find the substance of my soul created for another
end, a more excellent inheritance.

The remainder of my time shall be spent in weeping for the sins of my youth:
That mine age may express her self sorrowful in some proportion, as my youth
was joyful. Grant therefore The Prodigals request
holy Father, that the sensuality of my youth bring me not to a lethargy in
mine age: If my Spring was without flourish, let not my Winter be without
fruit. And though habit of sin take away from the reprobate all thought of
sin, where the Tree lies as it falls: yet let mine eyes be as continual
Lauers, to wash away the pollution of my soul: for a clean Lord always
requires a clean habitation.

How much I have erred in the vanity of my heart, supposing my self to stand
where I did fall, to go forward, where I made a retrograde in the course of
virtue: yet, when I was blind, thy Mercies directed me, when I was down, thy
Might supported me, and when I renewed my errors (by a new relapse) making my
sickness more dangerous. Thou (the great Physician of our Souls) bind up my
Wounds, power Balm into my Sores, and set me on my feet again.

The Prodigals Inquisition.
WHat shall I give Psalm. 119.
to the Lord for all that he has given to me? if I look into my creation, I
see my self created of nothing: if I look into my recreation, I see my self
renewed, that was become worse then nothing: if I look into my daily
conservation, I see my self, without Gods mercy, hourly return to nothing.
As there is no August.
moment, nor point of time, wherein I stand not in need of Gods providence, so
should there be no point of time, wherein I ought not to show my
thankfulness.

For that vice, of all others, is most hateful to the Almighty: it is called
Desiccans Ventus, drying up the fountains of Gods mercies.

Far be it from me, to stop the spring of Gods exceeding bounties, by my own
unthankfulness: but as I have received much, so to render unto the Almighty,
for that I have received.

In Athens, no vice was more extremely punished, then Unthankfulness: and
amongst the Persians, such as were more ready to receive, then give, were
marked with the note of infamy. Psalm. 147.


That Lord, who is good to all, and whose mercy is over all his works, should
be daily praised and glorified, in his works. But how should my soul praise
the Lord? Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner: I am a man of
polluted Lips, and uncircumcised Heart, exposed unto the vanities of the
World, conversant in things outward, satisfying the flesh and affections
thereof. How can I then praise the Lord? Or if I praise him, how should my
praise be acceptable unto him? But shall I therefore hold my peace, and cease
to praise him, who has prepared for my soul a Mansion of Peace? No, Lord, Vae
tacentibus: I will declare thy mercy betimes in the morning, and I will
prevent the evening Watch with my Meditations: my heart shall no longer be
divided from my Lord, for a heart divided, cannot live.

Saul said to Samuel, Honor me before this people.

The Prodigals treatise of the honourers of the Worldlings.
SO the Rich man says to his Riches, the Ambitious man to his Honors and
Preferments, carnal Man to his Temporary Delights: Honor me ye Riches, honor
me ye Preferment, honor me ye Delights, before this people. But my soul shall
disclayme these outward Honors: these, like the Pagans, adore their imaginary
Gods, which notwithstanding, will leave them miserable, wretched, and despicable.

Here the Italian has Baccbus in India. Thebes vid. Annal. Iul. Plutarch.
his Saturn, Candie her Jupiter, Samos her Juno, India her Baccbus, Egypt her
Isis and Osyris, old Troy her Vesta, Tritonia in Afric, her Pallas; France,
and Germany, their Mercury, under the name of Teuthe; Athens her Minerua,
Delphos Apollo, Delos Diana, Paphos Venus, Thrace her Mars, Lampsacho, of
Hellespont, her Priapus; and Lypara, with Lemnos, their Vulcan.

And what do our Christians else now adays? They erect Statues Charismata,
Numismata, etc.
in honor of riches: so does our worldling, whose Scriptures be his Sculpturae;
in honor of our great and eminent places, such be our ambitious men: others in
gorgeous edifices with a daring motto upon them.

Non norunt haec monumenta mori:
And these be our vain men, who built fair houses for their bodies, and let
the mansions of their Souls lie desolate; others do satiate their boundless
affections in the pleasures and delights of this world (where like Penelopes
wooers) they contriue their one subversion.

How miserably be these men led into captivity, and know it not: deceived by
Ismael, and see it not: slaued by the flesh, yet curb her not: taught better
things by the Spirit of God, yet believe them not. Pity it is, that creatures
of so promising a feature, should for the hardness of their hearts, hear like
stones, and go like snaile.

It is written of the Vide Plin. in Nature. histr.
Heart, that when he lifts up his ears, he is quick of hearing, and
hears every noise: but when he lays down his ears, he is deaf and
hears nothing: the worldlings ears be ever down, for the hearing ever
goes with the heart, and that is never fixed by a worldling on the tidings of
the Spirit or affections of the new man, but on a dear summer, a scarce
harvest, or such like public ill, whereby he may chance to reap a private
good. The ambitious and vainglorious man's ears be neither down nor up, but
about him: he looks for observance with his eyes, and listens for fame with
his ears.

The dissolute young man, he has his ears engaged to the report of Beauty:
not one of these will hear Wisdom, cry she never so loud in the open
streets. These know not that a divine Tongue, and an holy Ear make sweet
Music, but a deaf ear makes a dombe tongue.

Alas, What concord with Belial? when the Tongue should be conversant in
thanksgiving, the Ear in attentive listening, the faculties of the Soul in
uniformity of operation: the Tongue, for thanksgiving is employed in cursing:
the Ear for attentiue*hearing, is given to perverting* the faculties of the
Soul, for uniformity of operation, are strangely distracted by a preposterous
confusion.

Here may the Prophets of Almighty God pipe long, before any of these dance*
for why, the covetous man trembles at their doctrine, they talk too much of
Dives: and yet they like the history well, so long as this Dives was clad in
Purple, and fared deliciously every day: But when it follows, his soul was
carried to hell, there to be tormented for evermore, O there the end sounds not
so well as the beginning.

The Ambitious man, if he hear any thing which may be applied to his own
vanity: here an aspiring Absolon, there a politic Haman, a vaineglorious
Herod, and their miserable ends: though they tremble with Foelix, yet they will
say with Foelix, We will find some other time to hear thee. Oras, one of the
Polemarchi answered Archias Letter, wherein he was advertised of the
conspiracy intended against his Sovereignty: RES SERIAS ad crastinum
differamus. Plutarth in vita Felo.


The present time must be reserved for their private honor, the serious and
important state of their soul must be deferred.

The wantan, if he hear words of instruction or discipline, he presently
returns to his Glass, not to his houre-glasse, for then he should be put in
mind of the expense of his time, where seeing no riuells in his face, no
emblems of age, but all like the freshest of Autumnes Pulchrorum Autumnus
pulcherrimus, etc.
flowers: he thinks it pity so good a face, should be so soon mortified.
That it is hard for ambition, avarice, or sensuality to ascribe honor where
honor belongs: because they be partial followers, and give them honor only,
which they affect heartily: it agrees with Minius the Philosophers saying:
there is no honor or adoration which proceeds not from admiration.

O let us then only admire, that we only adore, the Sovereign of heaven and
earth: not any subject within the circumference of earth, for though it allay
perchance our desires, yet can it no way satisfy them. We see in the natures
of Elements they continue their own course, fire and air aspiring, earth and
water declining: each body tends to her proper center.

If our essential part Uniform mixtum simplex, secretum ab omni fece and
lentore etc. de constable.
were composed of earth or any other gross substance, then no marvel if we
tended to the place of our composition, but being of a purer, clearer, and
lighter nature, let not the viler and baser part deprive the better of her
Sovereign end.

The worse should be in subjection to the better, and not the better to the
worse. I have found two means as special motives, to reduce the body to the
subjection of the mind: the first by force, the second by awe: By force, when
all depraved motions be expelled, by a certain violence wrestling with the
rebellious flesh, and discomfiting it by the argument of reason, and
sovereignty of will: By awe, when she expresses her self, and the necessity
of her command; shaking only the rod of her discipline at the servile flesh,
to imply that she is Mistress: and if easier means will not prevail, then
rougher and seuerer chasticements must.

I read how the Scythians T^^g. Pom. libr. 2.
in their third expedition into Asia, having been absent for the space of
seven years from their wives and children, were entertained at their return
with a servile war: for their wives, wearied with expecting their husbands,
imagining them to be rather discomfited, then detained by war, married their
servants which were left at home to graze their cattle: the Masters at last
returning home with victory, were denied the entrance of their own provinces,
as if they had been strangers, by their own servants.

Long and doubtful was the victory, till the Scythians advised to change the
nature of the battle, calling to memory, how they fought not with enemies, but
with their vassailes, and therefore not to be vanquished by law of Arms, but
the awe and authority of masters: so they resolved, for weapons, to carry
whippes and other instruments of servile fear, where they no sooner assaulted
the enemy, then with the sight of their whippes, they became so dismayed, as
they took themselves to flight: so as that which (says the Historian) they
could not atchieue by the power of their swords, they achieved by the fear of
their whips.

I would have the spirit to deal so with the flesh; to put her in mind she is
but a servant, and must obey: and now and then to show the badge of her
authority, the symbol of her power, and the extent of her might.

Miserable do we account that State to be, where indiscreet Governors
manage the affairs of State: and subject to ruin must that Army needs be,
which is guided by an effeminate Leader. Alas then, poor Soul, wheresoever
thou be: for many of this sort I know there be, that transferreth the
government of thy State, the helm of thy Ship, to so dissolute a Guide, so
secure a Pilote, as the irregular passions of the flesh. These (like Jonah)
sleep in the ship, and provide not for a tempest; these never foresee
ruin, until it suddenly come upon them, and even in the imminencie of danger;
so securely be they rocked in the sleep of Oblivion, as they take it for a
dream.

That Sage of Greece thought no fool could be better charactered, then with
Non putaram: thinking least, when greatest apparancie of danger demonstrated
her self. Foolish flesh, that would gladly govern, yet knows not how: would
steer the Bark, and precious Vessel of my Soul, yet neither expert in
weighing anchor, nor how to ballase thy ship euenly, (to wit) with the
lastage of Reason, and poyse of Discretion, nor know thou thy Points and
Distances, and therefore hazardest thy Ship in Shelues and Sands continually.

Little know thou, that rocks be nearest, where the seas seem whitest. Not
a Sirens voice, but may tempt thee, and draw thee to folly: thou have no power
over thy self, and therefore unfit to have power or soueraignetie over
another. No, as thou wast created a servant, thou shall subject thy self to
the guidance of reason, the line and square of a discreet obedience. I will
see thee play the subject better before thou be King. Better is it for me, that
my flesh serve in a Turks galley, then in tyrannical discipline to dominiere
over my soul: poor and miserable soul, that has such a guardian.

The Prodigals desire unto God, for mortification of the Flesh, to enable him
to subdue it to the Spirit.
O Lord, let me (I pray thee) be rather imprisoned in my flesh, then by my
flesh: for the one endures but a moment, in comparison of the other. Peter was
in prison, and was delivered; Paul in prison, and was released; Manasses
pressed with many yrons, yet at last enfranchised. But when was Demas, that was
imprisoned to the World, freed: or the Sodomites* imprisoned to the filthy
lusts of their flesh, exempted; or the proud Pharisees, imprisoned to outward
Obseruances, public Reuerences, Hypocritical Semblances, when shall they be
dismissed?

Kill me in my flesh, so I may live in the spirit: for I know, Lord, that he
Matthew. 10. Luke 14.
who will save his life, must loose it: no affliction, no cross, no
perturbation, shall separate me from the love I bear to my Savior; and
little is it for me, to give him my life, now when he requires it, that gave
for me his life freely, before I did ask it.

Who would not go to Heaven, although it were (with Eliah) in a Whirlewinde?
When David speaks of Troubles, he speaks of Troops, and Heaps, and
Stars, and Sands; and rightly too: for fit it is, that our troubles in some
sort, answer the proportion of our sins. They are multiplied like the Stars
in the Firmament, or the Sands upon the Seashore, that cannot be numbered. Our
sins therefore, like Sands in number, should be seconded with troops
Exercent n^terrent, fidemque inflammant non d^primunt.
of Troubles, succeeding in order. The righteous never want them: they are so
inured with them, as they term them to be but exercises to try them, and not
Terrors, to the end to dismay them.

I know the Worldling makes not Troubles his exercises, nor Afflictions his
trialls: It is misery enough for him to loose his temporal estate, or to be
bereft of honor, or the like; and the reason is, for that he expects no
further, he finds his Non vltra here, the period of his hopes extend no
further, then to be rich, to be observed, that in the fullness of his estate,
his soul may be at peace.

Far be his peace from the mansion of my soul: Far be my hopes enlarged
above his: far be it from me to live with him in this World deliciously, and
staruing my soul in the World which is to come eternally.

Though I carry not so much with me living, I shall carry more with me
dying; a sincere Conscience, and the inestimable Treasures of an undefiled
Soul: And these will weigh down all earthly minds, being possessed by such
corrupt minds and opinions.

Socrates answered one wittily, being demanded, Who could carry a City about
with him (says he) Ciuitatem se ferret Mundanum, respondit, etc. Ibid.
the worldly minded man. Alas (poor rich man) haeret lateri laetales arundo:
Thou have bought thy many Possessions at a dear rate: when Earth shall receive
thee, those many acres of earth shall leave thee; and then must thy account be
made, for thou can be no longer Steward. Here the Prodigals Vow to Heaven,
his Legacy to Earth, that as he is resolved for his Creator in Heaven, thou
may be willing to be dissolved from the Tabernacle of the Earth. Thou will
not die one hour, to live for ever: but the Prodigal wishes, he may quickly
die, that he may live for ever. Nothing so sweet to thee as life, for life is
to thee advantage: but nothing more sweet to this poor Prodigal, then death,
for death is to him advantage.

Thou think of thy accounts in this life only; he of his accounts after
this life: Death to thee, is entrance to sorrow; Death to him, is ender of
sorrow: read but his Legacy, and thou shall hear him resolved for death.

If I could leave any The Prodigals Legacy.
thing (poor Earth) behind me, it should be my prayers, that the simple
honest-minded man may quickly leave thee: Virtue is no Tenant for thee, she
shall be shut soon out of doors, having no other Trade then honesty.

If I should give thee any thing, it should be that which thou need, less
vanity, more stayednesse, less hypocrisy, and more sincerenesse.

If I should beg any thing of thee, it should neither be fame, nor popular
praise, for I am mortified, and do not love it: it should be, that thou
would rumor my vices, that others hearing them may be cautioned.

If thou would have me do aught for thee, I will do it willingly, so it be
not to stay with thee. If I should ask any thing now at my farewell from thee,
it should be no curious monument: for what would that avail me? I have a
better monument provided for me, with this Imprease, Nec Vnde mihi lapidem:
Horac. The Prodigals Imprese.
spe, nec metu; will I tarry with thee. As I did once love thee, so am I
willing to leave thee; for I have observed such as loved thee, die in their
beds unquietly. As I made thee once my palace, be now my grave: I love thee
not so ill, but I will leave something with thee: my body thou shall have, for
thou fosteredst it, but my soul shall fly to him that made it.

This is all the legacy I will make to earth: it now rests that I make my
vows to heaven, this little which I gave to the first, is too much; this all
which I give to the second, is too little: yet will my vows be acceptable to
heaven, proceeding from him that willingly for heaven forsakes earth.

I have soiourned long enough upon earth, now am I for my war-fare to heaven;
having charity for my scrip, confidence for my staff, and desire for my guide:
charity toward my brother, confidence in God, and desire toward heaven: in my
abode here I have patience to endure, providence to retire, resolution to
conquer. Patience to endure afflictions, providence retiring to Christ's
compassion, and resolution to conquer all incursions. I will never so presume
on Gods mercy, as to forget he is a Judge, or despair on Gods mercy, to forget
he is a Father. I will rather with the servants of God suffer afflictions,
though with bitterness, then enjoy pleasures of sin for a season, and loose
my inheritance. My best Arithmeticke, shall be numbering of my days, that when
my days be summed up, I may receive for them length of days.

I am sorry I have reserved but my Winter for Christ, having spent my Spring in
the service of Antichrist.

Yet so much shall my feruencie appear now at my return, as it may
counterpoize my security, before my return. As I was clothed before with the
garment of vanity, I will put on me the simple robe of Christ's humility. I
will not wash my self in Syloe, nor in Jordan, but in the poole Bethesda of
Spiritual Syon. Thus am I to my Christ espoused, for my troth is plighted: I
will say therefore with the Spouse: I have washed my feet, how should I defile
them again? Now let the Prodigals tears end with the Pilgrims wish. I desire
to be dissolved: not as one willing to suffer afflictions, for his SAVIOVR, but
as one willing to leave the Earth, that he may live ever, in the arms of his
REDEEMER.

FINIS.

