AN EPItome of the Psalms, or brief meditacions upon the same, with diverse
other most christian prayers, translated by Richard Tauerner.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

1539

TO THE MOST MIGHTY, and most redoubted price HENRY the.VIII. King of England
and of France Defensor of the Faith, lord of Ireland, and in earth supreme
head immediately under CHRIST of the church of England, his most humble
servant Rychard Tauerner desires all felicity, joy and increase of lawful
posterity.
PLease it your excellent Majesty to understand, that where as, more then
three years passed, my very good lord and old master my lord Privy seal
for such qualities as he thought to have espied in me (which I my self
nevertheless acknowledge not) preferred and delivered me up unto your graces
service, and sythens that time, to the intent he would make me the more hable and
mete to serve your hyghnes in my calling, has enured me with diverse
translacions and other exercises: So it is most gracious and most redoubted
sovereign lord, that among other things, he has committed this book of
prayers to my pennynge and translatynge into the Englysh tongue. The selue
prayers, no doubt, be excellent, pure, sincere, godly and Christian. But my
translacion, I fear, is rude, base, unpleasant, gross, and barbarouse. I
fear, I say, lest according to the proverb I shall render pro aureis ferrea,
lest of good latin I have made evil English, lest I have turned wine into
water. My courage and good will is much, thexpectacion of mine old Mecoenas is
of me great, finally the celsitude of your majesty requires no base thing.
But I am sore afraid that mine industry herin employed shall answer nether to
your majesty's most royal dignity, nether to my said lords expectacion,
nether yet to mine own good will and desire. Nevertheless how so ever my
translacion is (for unto your majesty's most exact judgment and censure as
unto another Aristarchus I most humbly submyt it) certes the incomparable
benignity of your most gracious person, has impelled me with a bold spirit
to offer and dedicate the fruits of these my labors unto ye same, to the intent
that under the most noble patrocinie of your royal name, the book may the
more plausibly and gredely be devoured of your loving subjects. Truth it is,
that my poor degree and baseness of condition is far unmeet to offer any
thing unto your most excellent hyghnes. Howbeit, if Hethen kings have very
tha^kfully received of their subjects hands, Pome granates, ha^dfuls of
water, and such other tryflyng things, estemyng rather the prompt and ready
will of the gyuers, than the price of the things given, if also Christ himself
our mighty sheperde (whose vicare for the church and realm of England your
majesty is recognized) not only accepted but also preferred the two minutes
of ye poor wydowe before the precious oblacions of the rych personages, I doubt
not, but your majesty being a christian King and such a king, woll not
ingratelye receive at your humble servants hand, these his simple
lucubracions which tend to the high benefyte, edificacion, and commodity of
your graces people. But lest with my loquacitie I might be an impediment unto
your most serious occupacions, I make an end. The God of peace and of
consolacion grant, that like as your hyghnes most like unto the godly king
Ezechias ernestly go about the perfect instauracion of the true religion and
thauauncement of gods glory, all false religion destroyed: so he woll
vouchsaue, to send you the thing that the most wise king Salomo^ esteemed for
the swetest and best portion of man's life, and for a treasure inestimable,
that is to wit, a prudent and wise lady to your majesty's wife and to our
your most addicte subjects Queen, which according to the voice of the
prophet, may be as a frutfull vine in your majesty's house, furnyshed with
children like olyue branches round about your graces table. For lo thus shall
the man be blessed (says he) which fears the Lord. What shall we say?
God has already herd our most ardent vows and peticions. This lady most
excellent is prepared of thalmyghtye for your majesty, she is in journey
ready to be transported into your graces realm. The God of spirits might so
tempre and breath the weather and so graciously conducte her in her journey, as
she may most happily arrive at the time desired into your graces presens, to
the full contentacion of your hearts desire, to the plausible expectacion of
your graces subjects, and finally to the true honor and glory of almighty
God. For the accomplishmente whereof, we all with one accord might pour out
these prayers following and semblable to the Lord of all. Amen.

Domine saluum fac Regem. A General Confession of sins unto God, daily to be
said of the christen person.
O Most mercyful lord god, and most tender and dear father, vouche safe I
hertely beseech the, to look down with thy fatherly eyes of pytye upon me
most vile and wretched sinner, which lie here prostrate before the fete of thy
boto^les mercy. For I have sinned against the trone of thy glory and before the
o father, in so much yt I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Nevertheless,
forasmuch as thou art the god and father of al comfort, and again desyrest
not the death of the sinner, but like a true Samaritane take thought of my
sely wounded soul: make me I pray the, by infou^dyng thy preciouse oil of
comfort into my wounds ioyefully to ru^ne with the lost son unto the lap of
thine everlasting pytie. For lo, you art my hope, and trust in whom I only
repose my self having in the full confydence and faith, and so I say with very
heart. I believe in the o god the father, in the o god the son and in the o god
the holy ghost, three persons and one true and very god, beside whom I knowledge
none other god in heuin above nor in earth beneth. Yea and I accuse my self
unto the, dear father, that I have grievously offended thy almighty goodness and
majesty in the co^myttyng of mine aboundaunt and manifold sins. For I have
not kept the least of thy most godly commandments like as thy ryghteousnes
may demand the same of me. I have (I say) not honored the, like my god,
drad the, like my lord, loved the like my father, trusted in the like my
creator and savior. Thy holy and dradfull name, unto whom all glory and
honor belongs, have I used in vain. I have not sanctified the holy days with
works which be acceptable unto the, nor instructing my neygheboure in virtue
accordingly. I have not honored my parents nor been obedient unto them
through whom (as by an instrument) thou have wrought my coming into this
world. The high powers and rulers which take their authority of the, I have
not been wyllyngly obedient unto. I have not kept my heart pure from
manslaughter, yea had not thy grace defended me the better, I should have
committed the very deed also. In like wise I am not pure from theft, from
aduowtry, from false witness bearyng, but have in my heart wished and desired my
neighbors goods and things. I have followed the prince of this world Satan
(which has been a liar from the beginning) in concupiscence of the flesh,
in pride of living, in lyeng, in deceitfulnes, in lechery, in hatred and envy,
in backebytyng, in despair and misbeleue. My five wits have I foully
misspent, in hearing, seeing, smellyng, tasting and fealing, which thou have
given me to use unto thy honor and to the edification and profit of my
neighbor. But in what manner so ever that I have offended and sinned against
thy majesty (for noman knows thoroughly his sins as thy prophet witnesses)
whither it has been by day or by night even from my chyldhode unto this day
were it in words, works or thoughts secretly or openly, my mercyful god, I
am sorry for it, even from the very botom of my heart. Yea my soul mourns for
sorrow most merciful father that I am not a thousand times soryer then I am.
Howbeit in token of repentance (though all hertes be known well enough unto
the) I knock and stryke my breaste and say in bytternes of soul. Lord god
father have mercy, Lord god son have mercy, lord god holy ghost have mercy.
Spare me of thine infinite mercy dear lord now and at the days of my life,
and let me have part of thine aboundaunt grace, so as I may change my
sinful life and put out of me the old man with all his evil concupiscence,
and also that I may dye unto the world, and that the world may be unto me a
cross, and so go forth in a new life. Strengthen me (o lord) in a true
humble heart, in perfect love, hope, and trust in the. Give my soul the
grace to desire the only, in the only to rejoice and repose my self, and ye I
may utterly renounce and forsake the vain affyaunce of this world, so that
thou may find me ready with the good servant in the mydnyght of my death,
which shall suddenly steal upon me like a thief ere I be ware. Be thou unto me
at that time of need o lord a toure of strength a place of refuge, and a
defensable god namely against the face of the fend, who like a roryng lion
shall be then most ready to devour me and against desperacio^ which then shall
be busy to grieve me. Let then thy comfort cleave fast unto me, thy mercy keep
me, and thy grace guide me. Fetch then again, Lord god father, that which
thy puyssaunt might has shapen. Fetch then again lord son that which thou
have so wisely governed and bought with thy preciouse blood. Take again then,
lord holy ghost, that which thou haste kept and preserved so louyngly in
this region of sin and vale of misery, three persons and one very god, unto
whom be praise and honor for ever and ever.

AMEN.
THE EPITOME OF PSALMS TRANSLATED BY RICHARD TAVERNER.
A prayer for true Godlynes. PSALM. I.
O LORD god and father, I beseech the, by Christ our lord, that of thine
i^finite mercy thou keep me, so as at no time I follow the counsayles either of
the wicked, which know the not, or of hypocrytes which with heart seek the
not, and that I enter not in the way of sinners with a mind to fulfill the
desires and works of the flesh: But rather when so ever through fraylty of
this old and corrupt nature I shall chance to run a straye (as no man is
void of sin) thou will cause me to stey and pluck my foot back again.
Keep me that I sit not in the seat of pestilent scorners, which clokyng their
pharisaicall and deuelysh intentes condemn in other men thy verity and
gospel. Go to, bring to pass by thy holy spirit that I may bren in desire of
thy law, that upon thauauncement of thy word my mind may always be occupied,
yt I may evermore choose that is most pleasant to the, and hate that, both
in my self and in other, which to the is displeasaunt. Make, I pray the, that
I may be a tree planted by the sweet ryuers of gostly waters, to the intent I
may bring forth fruit to thy glory and profit of my neighbor, as often as
thou shalt ministre time and occasion thereunto, lest my leaves, that is, my
words and works should fade and fall away, but that al things may prospere,
whatsoever I shall do in thy name. Assyste me I pray the, that I may take rote
in the ground of life, least with the ungodly like chafe and duste I be
blown abroad by the most perniciouse wind of this world. And grant that I
may stand in the judgment and in the assembly of the ryghteouse, that I may
enter into judgment without punishment, and escape everlasting damnacion. Amen.

For the true knowledge of Christ. psalm. 2.
Lord if at any time for thy names sake this world shall furiously trouble
me, then with patience and strength of spirit, arm thou me, and be thou at
hand, that I may braste the bands and counsayles of the ungodly, and cast
away that unfruitful yoke of the sinful conscience and fear of damnacion,
which euyls thou o lord that haste thy residence in heaven doste scorn.
Grant that I may stand fast in ye statutes and precepts of thy son our
lord Jesus Christ, which be honest studyes to help my neighbor, procedyng
of faith unfeigned (ye which Jesus thou haste proclaimed king over Syon thy holy
hill, that is, among the faithful christians) so as he only may rule me, by
the spirit of his mouth, which to that intent was made thy son in time
appointed, that thou the father should adopt and choose me into thine eternal
heritage, by whom now I am partetaker of thy kingdom and coheyre with him.
Grant lord, that I may with true awe ever more serve the, but not with the
false and feyned service of the world neither yet co^streynedly, but of a
frank spirit and sincere truth, obeyeng nevertheless to all temporal
power and humane ordinances, while they be not against thy word, yt I may
attain unto the unspeakable joy of thy promises for thy words sake, not
doubtyng of my salvation, and that I may louyngly obey thy fatherly
chastiseme^t, for surely sharpenes of correccio^ makes that we lose not the
way of troth. Ah good god give me grace that in the, I may continually and
fastly hope, and of the look for all things by Christ our lord. So be it.

A commune prayer to the lord for healpe in adversity. psalm. 3.
Forasmuch as many (o Lord) rise maliciously against me, and say within the^
selves, there is surely no health to be looked for from god unto this fellow,
take thou me up I pray the, be thou my shylde, and my succor, and replenysh
thou me with true glory in thy sight, to the intent I may boste of the and be
joyful with a careless heart. Harken unto me from thy holy hill, as often as I
cry unto the: make me not to fear, yea though thousa^des of men stand against
me. Lord at thy hands only is aid and health to be received and blessyng over
thy people. Arise therefore lord, help me and endowe me with thy blessyng.

For the lyghtenyng of the holy ghost. psalm. 4.
Hear me when I cry for succor to the (o Christ which art my ryghteousnes
and innocency) and in adversity solace me with the joy of thy spirit. Pour
upon me thy grace and grant me my peticions, lift up over me ye light of thy
countenance (o lord) and thy favor, yt through thy spirit I may knoweledge
the, and with the same be hertely cherefull for ever. Grave within me (o lord
almighty) peace, fast hope brennyng love, and faith unfeigned evermore to
endure. So be it.

A prayer for grace in the morning. psalm. 5.
Lord hear thou my words, mark my cryeng, o my king and my god, for unto
ye only I come to pray, neither do I look for succor any where else, tha^ of
the. Thou shalt graciously harken unto my peticion (o lord) in the morning,
that is, that thy grace might spryng in mine heart with the morrow light of
comfort, the night of care and perturbacions being over passed. Suffer me not
to peryshe with ungodly folk, whom thou cursest. I come runnyng unto the, not
trustyng to mine own ryghteousnes, but to thine unspeakable mercy, and
toward thy holy temple I shall address my self to worship the with all
reverence and fear. Lord with the rule of thy justice thou shalt dyrecte me
for thy names sake, thou shall make plain thy way before me, and my way
before the, least ye spirit of malice turn me the^s. Let them rejoice which
repose them selves and trust always in thy succor, let the^ sing hymns and
psalms, which do glory and rejoice of the, let the^ tryumphe which love thy
name. Thou shalt defend us with thy grace, as with a shylde in time of
sclau^der and peril, to the intent, when we be assaulted of them, we may yet with
constau^t chere grow up into our full perfection.

In adversity for the comfort of the holy ghost. psalm. 6.
Lord in thy wrath reprove me not, neither in the heat of thy mind chasten
me, but rather pacify and aswage my troubled spirit and have compassyon on me,
for I am sore diseased. Oh lord play the physician upon me, for my bones are
grievously shaken and vexed. How long lord will it be thus? When shall I feel
comfort at thy hands? Return lord to thine accustomed mercy and deliver my
soul, healpe me for thy mercies sake, for in death noman remembers the,
neither they which be in hell or helly torments of heart do give worthy
thanks for benefits received of the. Succor my necessity, o lord, bring me
again and keep me, for else I shall peryshe and be utterly lost. Hear my
woeful and lamentable voice, give answer to my requests. Turn from me mine
enemies, and ryd me of all inco^modities and greuaunces. Amen.

A prayer that the children of god may be gathered together. psalm. 7.
O Lord my god, we have trusted in the, defend us therefore from persecutours,
keep us. For if thou ceasest, it is certain we shall be trode^ under foot. Arise
Lord and guide thy church assembled in spirit with a godly dispensyng of
mysteries, to the intent thy name might be glorified by the same in living and
cleauyng together. For these ungodly persons which be evermore snapping
against us, think thou haste no kingdom to govern, whereas it is certain
thou have received al power of thy father, and art always present in men's
doings. Oh my lord come forth at last with strength and power for their sake
which be as yet somewhat weak even ready to fall when any storm of adversity
suddenly arise least they utterly shrynke away. Let us se ones at last an end
of the malice of these ungodly. Auau^ce justice for thou (o my god) doste
search the hertes and the raynes. Bring comfort, and be our buckler, which
art wont to help me^ of upright heart. Make us (o lord) such, as we may
set forth thy name with loving hertes. For thy names sake deliver us from
perilles. SO BE IT.

In necessity a prayer according to the example of Christ. Psalm. 8
O LORD our ruler, for thy names sake (which is wonderful in the world) have
mercy on me, and deliver me out of al distress by Jesus Christ who^ after he
had sustained ye cross and foul death, thou dyddest crown with immortal
glory, making him lord over all the works of thy hands, and likewise have
auaunced us in him to the same dignity and power. This same Christ thou haste
given us and with him all things. In his name we give thanks unto the,
co^fessyng without end thy bou^tyful benefytes toward us. AMEN.

That the enemies of Christ might be spoiled of their power. Psalm. 9.
REplenysh my heart (lord) with joy and give me courage, for I will blow
abroad thy name which art most high. Stand on my side, and defend my quarrel
like a mighty patron, which in very deed is thy quarrel, O just judge. Unto
me pore wretch be thou a fortress and buckeler in this my trouble and vexacion
at time convenient which to the is best known. For thou lord never forsakest
them that seek the, neither wylt thou forget ye lamentable complaynt of the
pore. Be merciful unto me, and behold my wretchedness laid open to mine
enemies, yea let me rather rejoice, I beseech the, in thy sauegarde, defense,
and succor. AMEN

Against the enemies and persecutours of Christ. Psalm. 10.
FOR what cause (o lord) sta^dest thou so far from me and hidest thy face at
times troublesome? How great miseries suffer thy pore servants of the
wicked? What so ever them lusts, that proudly and stubburnly they dare do,
none otherwise then if thou had no knowledge of men's matters, or had
forgotten thy promises and threttes which be contained in thy law? Arise up
lord, put forth thine hand, forget not thy wretched servants, which can
not but se, what wretchedness and woe is every where, specially among us,
which refer all unto the, and dare not ones wyshe any thing after our own
will and pleasure, thou (I say) art the healper of the pore and frendles.
Consider ye long hope and awayting of the troubled, conducte their hertes,
that they may duly call on the, in such wise as they may be herd. From
wrongs revenge and defend them lord. Ame^.

That we shrynke not from the truth. Psalm. 11.
IN THE O lord I lay up my hope, let me not shrynke from the in adversity,
although my most sworn and hartiest fre^des give me counsel either to
dissemble or utterly to deny thy troth. Breathe in to me a mind to endure
even to my death that shall confess openly to al men thy word. For thine eyes
lord do try the children of men, as well the ryghteous as the unrighteous. Let
not, I pray the, the snares of blyndnes and despair fall down upon us,
neither yet the thunderboltes of vengeance and assaults of the conscience.
Lyghten mine eyes that they may se what is right, and what unright, to the intent
I may go forward constantly in the way of troth with a sure and perfect faith.
Ame^

For the increase of faith. Psalm. 12.
Increase o lord my faith, and help mine unbelieve. Help us thy children,
for among the children of men, few are holy and beleuyng, truth among
them is not found. Rise up my lord and herke^ to the gronynges of the pore
and succourles. Set up the way of comfort and health, play the valiant god,
spread abroad both far and wide, the pure and sincere word of thy kingdom.
Defend me from this maliciouse and wicked generation.

The prayer of him that is environed with trybulacions. Psalm. 13.
How long Lord will thou forget me? How long shalt thou hyde from me thy
most graciouse countenance? How long shall I be plucked in sondre with these
pensive thoughts? How long shall my heart consume for care? Come of lord,
remember me, cast thine eyes mercifully upon me, and hear me. O lord my god,
lyghten mine eyes lest with the ungodly they be indimmed, and least I dye in my
sins. Let not I pray the, mine enemies brag over me as conquerours, neither
ouerloke me as I were vanquyshed. Upon thy benevolence and grace do I trust.
Make yt my heart may rejoice in thy saving health, that I may sing praises
and thankful notes unto the, being by the, reposed and set in joy after my
fall. Ame^.

The prayer of a new begone Christian. Psalm. 14.
LORD ryd me out of mine ungodliness, pluck from me mine ignorance of the,
banysh my slouthfulnes of enserchyng the. For unto this wretchedness, we be al
naturally borne, neither is there any one person, which can of his own powers
wind him self out of this disease. Only thy grace is able to perform this
thing. I pray the, let me call on the, so often as I am assayed of cruel
adversity even with mine hole heart and with most steadfast faith which ever
might have the upper hand and obtain. Let me not shrynke ne quake at any
manner thing at all, save only at thy judgment, neither let there be any other
garriso^ or defense unto me, then thou O Lord. Out of thy heavenly Syon, send
him which may deliver thy people from the captivity of conscience, that we in
him may continually rejoice. AMEN.

For a life worthy a christian person psalm. 15.
THat I may inhabit thy tabernacles and have continual residence in thy holy
hill, pourge me o lord, and justify me by faith from sins. That done,
grant that without hypocrisy I may hertely affirm thy troth, detracte no
man, be greuouse or hurtful to no man, neither flatter ye evil and corrupt
persons, but that I may embrase and have in reverence such as fear the lord,
although ye ungodly take occasion thereby, to sclaunder and speak evil of me,
finally that not only I may grieve no man, but also that I may busely give my
self to all manner men unto their edificacyon by Christ. AMEN.

A commune prayer. psalm. 16.
KEEP me LORD that I peryshe not, for in the I trust. Be my god. Of my goods
thou haste no need being things unprofitable unto the. But I can not want thy
aid. It were evil with me, if thou were away. That I may please the (my
lord) lest at any time I should set up Idolles in my heart, be thou my only
weal, and heritage. By thy spirit counsel me in all matters. Stand at my
right hand that I slide not, disclose unto me thy way that leads unto life,
and by thy most amyable countenance replenysh me with joy. SO BE IT.

Against the enemies of Christ. Psalm. 17.
HEAR (O lord) ryghtwysnes, give ear to my cry and prayer flowyng out not
of a feyned mouth but out of a true heart, let my dome come forth from the,
yea defend thine own cause, let thine eyes behold that is right. When you
searchest me lord, let no untruth, no misbelefe be found in me, let not my
mouth swerve ne my steps straye from thy paths that my fete slyp not,
which doutles should else fall down right if thou barest me not up with thy
hand. To the I cry (o god) bow down thine ear unto me. Lysten to my
words, show in me a proof and experiment of thy wonderful bou^tie, that I
may know thou have helped me with thy hand, least I should ascribe thy gift
either to fortune or to man's aid. For thou art the only helper always of such
as trust in the. Keep me even as the ball of the eye, and under the shadow of
thy wings protecte me from persons ungodly and such as trouble me. Let me
appear rych in justice in thy sight, that I may be full saciate at the coming
of thy glory. AMEN

In adversity. Psalm. 18.
KEndel in me (lord) a brennyng love toward the. Be thou my strength, my
rock, my hold, my delyuerer, my god, my hope, my shylde, my horn of health.
And forasmuch as I call on the by thanks gyuing, deliver me (I pray the) from
mine ennemies, lead me out of these straites unto the largenes of thy solace,
be thou desirouse to dwell with me, let me keep certainly thy ways, that I be
not found before the in sundry sorts an ungodly person. Thy judgments and
pleasures might be always before mine eyes. Thy laws let not me despise.
Before the let me be sound, preserve me from all syn, to thy miserable people
be an help, humble the proud, expel darkness, kendell light, ryd me from all
temtacion, for thy ways be holy, and thy words pure and clear. There is none
other god but you, o lord, which art my praise: gyrde me with strength make my
ways sincere, and give me the buckeler of thy sauegarde. Let thy ryghtha^de
strengthen me, from the arrogant and rebels deliver thou me, show me thy
bou^tifull salvation, deal mercifully with me, for I am full assured that I am
of the seade of the true David our Lord Jesus Christ. AMEN.

For true ministers of the gospel that they auaunce the kingdom of Christ.
Psalm. 19.
New heavens, I mean preachers of thy word create thou excedyng many (O
Lord) so as they may royally set up thy glory, and declare euerywhere all the
wonderful works of thy hands, namely such as thou have wrought through thy
son Jesus Christ for our salvation. Christ is ye self ryghteousnes under
whose wings rests health, whom thou haste assigned, to have his residence in
these heavens. Suffer, I beseech the that by the beams of his grace most
louyngly spread abroad, he may cast his light into the world, and kyndle in the
hertes of men a fervor of spirit. Let him come forth as a brydegrome from his
chamber, let him appear couragiouse as a valiant champion to run through his
journey, which conducteth us even unto the heavens. Let us ones have a proof, I
beseech the, how fatherly thou do tender us (o father of heaven) for thy
well-beloved sons sake. Thy law unspotted might refreshe and wyn ye our
souls. Let thy records and couenau^tes pour down into us the spirit of
wisdom that we may be even as simple, incorrupt, and pliable of heart as
children. Let thy word that makes us ryghteouse delight our hertes, let thy
pure commandments clarify ye eyes of our minds, and pluck down the
muffler from our face, so as we may thoroughly se (into Moses faith) Christ
Jesus our lord. Season us with a pure and holy awe, not myxed with syn, but
flowyng, even of very love, not staggeryng, but evermore cleauyng within us.
Put away the fear of the flesh, which in prosperity vaynly reioyseth, and in
adversity desperately trembles. Let us fear the, only for thine own cause,
so as we neither displease the ne lose the. Make me to love thy judgments,
whereby thou sleyest the old Ada^ in us, for they be things tried, true,
just, and good. Cause us rather to delight in them, then in any treasure,
delices, or pleasures of this world. Make us busyly to express them in our
deeds. What person (O lord) thoroughly knows his preuy faults and secret
dissimulacyon? Take out of me as much as remains of the old Adam, keep me
thy servant (o lord) from these arrogant and proud men, and such as go
about to exempte themselves from thy true church, so as they reygne not in
mine heart through their hypocrisy and feyned holiness, and that I assent not
to their sediciouse minds. So shall I be pure and clean from these horrible
sins, rebellion, grudging, shrynkyng from thy testament, blasphemies of
heart. Be not weary of this my talk, but rather let these endeavors of my heart
be tha^keful and acceptable unto the o lord, my maker and redemer. So be it.

In adversity and grievous distress. Psam. 20.
IN this my tribulacion LORD hear me, for thy names sake help me, and send
me succors from thine holy place. Strengthen and comfort me o lord,
myndefull of my prayers and long awaytynge, that I may do sacrifice unto the,
and in my sacrifice doing rejoice. Or rather call to remembrance thou my god
that self same sacrifice, which Jesus Christ thy well-beloved son made unto
the his most loving father for me upon the cross, who prayed for me in the
days of his life, and for his humility and reverence was herd. For his sake,
I say, be mercyful unto me, and help me. Out of thy heavenly tower grant
that I ones anointed with thy soden and perpetual joy, may plenteously
displey abroad thy most excellent name. Ame^.

To know Christ and his kingdom. Psalm. 21.
Prevent me (O Lord my God) in all thy works by Jesus Christ our king, to
whom thou have given al power in heaven and in earth, he is my health and
blessing, he is thy derely beloved son, he is the only reconcilour, through
whom we be brought again into thy favor. Chere me with thy pleasant
countinaunce and with thy wholesome gift of repentance. Make me continue
stronglye for thy goodness O thou that art above all. Arise Lord, show thy
might, let the world feel thy power, set alofte Christ's kingdom, the kingdom
of spirit and life, the kingdom of the true innocencye, and ryghtuousnes of
God, destroy the adversaries hereof. Then shall we sing in spirit, praise thy
power, and give continual thanks to thy name without ceasynge. Amen.

In tribulacion to remember the passion of Christ. Psalm. 22.
MY God, my God, remember me, forsake me not, suffer me not to be lost, sith
both night and day I cry to the. Hear me my lord. Our fathers trusted in
the, and thou holpest them. When so ever they called on the, at no time thou
fayledst the^, but was always at hand to assyst them. Come forth father most
derely beloved in my heart, defend me from Satan's kingdom. Thou drewest me
forth of my mothers womb, and haste preserved me unto this day. Of thy
bountye and mercy (which I beseech the deny me not at this my need) go not
away from me, for anguyshe and pensyffenes of heart draw nigh unto me, and yet
is there none yt can help me, but thou only. Let me escape from these
dangers through thy Christ my savior who for my sake has suffered so spytfull
and bitter pains, who for me was sore vexed, cruelly scourged, wounded,
nailed, hanged on the cross. Let me escape I say for his bloudes sake, which
he so largely shed for us to cause us obtain forgeuenes of our sins, and
enjoy the new and everlasting couenaunte made between the and us. Stand not
far from me o lord, my refuge, and strength Come near and help me, deliver
my life from the sword, and my soul from the wood dogs, from the lions
jaws defend me, between the horns of unicorns hear me. Tha^ shall I blow
abroad thy name with all praises unto my brethren, and in the assemblye of the
holy persons I shall commend the. Despise not the prayers of the poor, turn
not away thy face, hear my cry, for I will record this thy goodness among the
miserable, distressed and troublesome consciences, that they thereof may take
heart of comfort, grow in hope, cleave more fervently unto the, and may
blow abroad thy most glorious name, and give the their hertie thanks for
their salvation. Amen.

For increase of faith in God. Psalm. 23.
Lord, my shepeherde, feed me thy poor catyfe sheep, then shall I lack
nothing, let me lie in the fedynge grounds of thy plenteous word, nygh unto
the pleasant ryuers of thy holy spirit, that I may be refreshed, and bow to
thy correccion and providence. Turn my soul unto the, and cool it with thy
sweet lycours when with sorrow it begynnyth to brenne, conducte me to the path
of righteousness for thy names sake, and if I shall happen to walk in the valey
of darkness and death, be thou present with me, that I may fear nothing at
all. The staff of thy word might bear me up, and I shall take comfort of it,
sprede the bourde of thy word before me, and I will feed of it to strengthen
and fortifye my mind against all Satan's powers, so as none of his souldyours
shall vaynquyshe me. Annoynte my head till it be fat with the oil of
gladness and hallowynge of spirit. Make me drunk with thy cup, that I may
forget my self, and utterly renounce mine own dreams and ryghteousnes, to
the intent only thy spirit may raygne within me. Let thy gracious mercy never
leave me in all this life, and let me abide continually in thine house, a sheep
enclosed in thy fold within the hurdles of thy grace and gifts, which art
the high and mighty shepeherde and graunter of al good things. Amen.

For grace to renew the hertes. Psalm. 24.
Renew me, shape me again (O Lord) for thine is the world and all that is
therein, that I may be able to clyme up unto thy mount, to abide in thine holy
city, to receive at thy hands health, blessing, mercy, and ryghteousnes. Let
me be as a person newborn of the, let me ensearch the always. O Christ, king
of glory, have thou an everlasting raygne in me, for thou art strong enough,
thou art puyssau^t and mighty in battle, and Lord of hoostes, yea let the
bounds and lymytes of thy kingdom stretch through the world. Cause all me^
to do their homage and suit unto the, as to the most glorious conqueror of
sin, death, and hell. Amen.

To be admytted one of Gods flock. Psalm. 25.
TO the (Lord) I lift up my heart and my soul, my God I trust in the, put
me not to reproach, that mine enemies have no cause to laugh at me. No man
shall be shamed, that trusts in the. Show me thy way, teach me thy paths,
preserve me from wickedness and unbelief, that I swerve not from the rule and
touch stone of thy word. Guide me in thy troth, and teach me, for thou art
the God of my health and sauetie, and daily do I long for the. Lord remember
not my faults and mysdemenours, which from my chyldhode I have committed one
upon another neck, neither call thou to remembrance my stony dulnes, and
blind ignorance, but rather think on thy tender mercy which thou have
continued toward those that thou haste chosen from the beginning of the
world, neither is there any man that can stop the from thine accustomed
wont. Wherefore I beseech the, that I also may be partaker of thy gracious
goodness, according to the depth of thy mercy, for thou (Lord) art ryghteous
and good, therefore thou can not but warn sinners, when they wandre from thy
way, that they ones taught by thy spirit should walk in spirit and truth,
and return from wylsomnes. Doubtless Lord thy ways be good and faithful, of
thy mere kyndnes thou do promise, and thy promise thou kepest faithfully to
all such as keep the conditions of thy covenant) I mean the ten
commandments) and whose hertes desire is set in ye and in thy words both
day and night. Go to, Lord call me to be one of this nombre, and for thy
names sake pardon me my gyltes, which be exceeding great. Make me to fear
the, teach me the way thou best allowest, make my soul to dwell in these
thy good pauillions. Let thy children being ones taught thy word and
embrasynge the true faith in the, be thine heirs according to thy promise,
which art Lord of heaven and earth. Be our stay, that we fall not from
faith, declare unto us thy heavenly secrets and thy covenant, unknown to
flesh and blood. This to do is thy most pure grace, which by faith we receive
as in a vessel, where by we attain to know ye, which knowledge of the,
undoubtedly no man can have, onles he has taken it of the by Jesus Christ. My
eyes be fixed always upon the, draw back my feet from the snare of sin,
from ignorance and from going astraye, look toward me, have mercy upon me,
for I am left alone very heavy. How exceeding great is the ignorance of my
heart? Lead me (I beseech the) out of these straytes and necessities. Lord
look upon my distress, and wype away my sins. Thou know how many
enemies I have lyenge in my neck, and which keep back the knowledge of the,
which have bytterly hated me. Fence therefore my soul in this strayte. Pluck
me out of this ignorance, for in the is my trust, otherwise I should utterly
fall to ground. All godly, honest, true herted, and ryghteous persons woll the
same that I woll, and make request unto the for ye same, I mean, that we
might be delivered from the gross darkness of our heart. Assuredly it came
only of thy goodness, that hitherto I fell not away from the company of the
godly, that yet daily I look for aid from the, and that I continue after a
manner in this trade of good living. Lord God, vouchsafe to deliver Israel thy
people, (which trusts to the, and hangs upon thy hands) from all their
tribulacions, by Christ our Lord. So be it.

For continuance in Christ. Psalm. 26.
Lord be thou my judge, and defend me from the wyckednes of mine adversaries,
strengthen my trust that I have toward the, that I slide not, pourge mine
heart and raynes, for I look only upon thy mercy, that by faith and trust
unto the truth I may please the, and continually walk therein. So order my
things as I have naught to do with the wicked, nor be of counsel with them,
but in ye church of innocents, of beleuers, and of saints keep thou me, in
which church O lord thou make thy abode and kepeste thy resydence, so that
I may hear the sweet voice of thanks gyuynge, of praise, and of the rehearsal
of thy maruelles and benefytes, to thyntent I also may thank and praise the.
Take not away my soul with ye ungodly, nor my life with the bloudye, let me
walk innocently in the safe conduyte of thy grace. Deliver me, have pytie on
me, let my feet stand fast in ye broad field at large out of the prison of
sin, that in all assebles I might praise and auaunce the my redemer and
savior for ever. Amen.

For strength and increase of faith. Psalm 27.
ILluminate my heart Lord and so help thou me, that I need to fear no man,
be thou my heart of comfort yt I be not dismayed, though the whole world
arise against me. In thy house let me still dwell, that I may behold and
enjoy thy delices and pleasures, I mean, that I may feel joy in the holy
spirit, as well concerning forgiveness of my sins as the inheritance of
heaven that is given me. Let me visyte thy holy temple, that is, thy chosen
flock, in whom thou dwell. Let me go about my busynes safly, protected
under thy wings and rered upon Christ my rock. Let me be found no churl,
for ye benefits I have taken at thy hands. Thy name let me honor with
cheerful heart in the church of saints. Herke^ O Lord, tenderly to my voice,
lamentably cryenge unto the, be pytyful, hear me graciously, for my heart
hunteth for the, and would God we might daily more and more trace the out, and
continually increase from faith to faith. Hyde not thy face from me. Me thy
servant in thine anger cast not away, be mine aydour and defensoure, fail me
not. Thy helping hand (O lord god of health) wythdrawe not from me in this my
syckenes and malady. My chief fre^des have forsaken me, but thou O Lord take
me, and let me feel sensibly that thou have taken me. Tell me thy ways, lead
me the most redye and gaynest way, because of mine enemies which be excedyng
many, against whom, if I be destitute and deuoyde of thine aid I can in no
wise make resistance. These men let drive at me with their unshamefast
sclaunders, but let me not be given up, I pray the, unto their will and
tyrannous lust. Lord, cause that I may se thy good things in the land of
the living persons, let me wait for the patiently, without tyrynge, being
filled with solace, and replenyshed with the true joy of heart. Amen.

A prayer of Christ in the name of the church. psalm. 28.
LOrd god, which art my praise, wax not defe unto me calling on the for
succors, lest I become like to them which approach to the graves of
damnacion. Give ear to the voice of my complaynt, behold I lift up my hands
toward thy holy temple, count me not among the wicked persons, which, where
as they appear to be friends in tongue to their neighbors but in heart mortal
enemies: be vnskylful and ignorant of gods works, and unfaithful in their
doings. Lord be thou my fortress, my help, and buckler. After this
greuaunce let me again be replete with joy, to thyntent I may cherefully
praise the, for thou art the everlasting strength of thy people, and the
preseruour of thine anointed and of his members. Help (Lord) thy people,
gather together thine heritage with thy word, bless it, and from faith to
faith auaunce it even to the full age of a perfect man. Let them live
perpetually in heavens, who so ever in this world despise the honor of
flesh for thy sake. Amen.

A prayer for the power of gods word. psalm. 29.
THy holy name O Lord let us always auaunce with honest praises and hymns,
and let us crowned with holy garlandes in spirit and truth worship the. Within
us be thy word strong and pythye to our comfort, make afraid the enemies
that we may profess and utter thy praises. Let thy word endure in us without
ceasynge, guide us, give strength to thy people, who^ vouchsafe thou to bliss
in peace, So be it.

In great tribulacions. Psalm. 30.
FOr as much as by the benefyte of redemption o lord thou ryddest me out of
aduersite, so as mine enemies triumph not over me presumptuously, therefore I
must needs brute and auaunce thy name with glory, honor, and gyuynge of
thanks. Lord God I lamentably require thy help, save me, rydde my soul out
of hell. Defend my life, that I fall not hedlyng into the pyt. Let me celebrate
thy praises, sanctifye thy name, and render unto ye due thanks myndefull of
thy holiness with most high pleasure of mind. All sorrow and pensiveness do away
from me, stryke of thyn anger against me, let my life please the. Let ye
evening of tears depart, and the morning of solace and joy come forth What
thing remains, but sorrow of heart, if thou wythdrawest thy face? for than al
things fall, and go to wreke. Shall there any advantage redounde unto the, by
my utter undoing? Shall thou not be more praised and solemnised, if I be
delivered out of hell? Lord hear my peticion, and have compassion on me,
turn my sorrow into joy. Strype me out of this greuaunce, and cloth me with
joy, to the^de my tongue may blase thy name, and give praises unto the without
stop. Ah Lord my God, deliver me out of these strayghtes, and unto the,
will I sing praises euerlastyngly. Amen.

In persecucion for Christ's cause. Psalm 31.
IN the (O Lord) is my confidence, wherefore I shall never be confounded. For
thy justice sake deliver me forthwith, for I know not any other hope, any other
righteousness, rock, fortress, refuge, then the, I have none other savior nor
helper besides ye, for thy name sake and for thine own selves sake succoure me
lord, that thou may be espied and known to be such one in deed, as I have
reported the to be. Help me, conduyte me from the snare of horror and death,
pluck me out from the perils, in which Satan mine enemy has maliciously
throwe^ me, deliver thou me. Lo into thy hands I holly betake me O faithful
and ryghteous God, aid thou me, let not thy promise, whereunto I have given
credyte and leaned, in any wise fail me, for everlastingly thou art
accustomed to help. Increase O Lord this my faith, let me forthwith joy and
boast in thy bountyfull goodness. Have eye to this my woo and mysery. Consider
my soul al ouerlayed with distress and ignorance, suffer me not to fall into
the hands of mine enemies, lead me, I say, forth of this straight prisonne
into open field. Pytie me, behold, I am grievously pressed with fear, for
both my soul and my body be even for very care consumed. Certes Lord my
God, thou have in thy hand my cause and my life. From the power of mine
enemies rescue me, and from my persecutours defend me, with thy most amyable
cou^tenau^ce look on me, which am now set within my conscience. Of thy goodness
unspeakable help me, let me feel some proof, some practyse of thy favor.
Suffer me not to be confounded in thy syghte, lest being deceived of my
purpose, I be sent away from the, for on the I call. How great goodness is
laid up to such as fear the? This now disclose and make open unto me, dear
father, heaviness and anguyshe of heart do utterly swallowe me up. From wicked
tongues through thy countenance protecte thou me. Bestow thy peculiar benefyte
upon me, for me seems I am a castawaye out of thy sight, so greatly I am
troubled. Therefore hearing my playnt and prayers, deliver me Lord by Jesus
Christ thy well-beloved son. Amen.

For pardon of sins. Psalm. 32.
PArdon my sins, hide my offenses, lay them not to my charge, from my
spirit, heart, and mouth, do away all doublenes and gyle. I am a sinner full
of iniquite, I confess, but I know well thou will forgive me, because I
dissemble not with the. For who is before the an innocent and gyltles person,
although he leads his life never so purelye in the eye of man? undoubtedly
no man, for all persons pray, saying: (Forgive us our sins) as often as they
come to them selves, and search more narowly the bottom of their hertes. For
this cause also my mind wylleth me to demand the same peticion of the, lest
the floudes of sorrow and tribulacio^ should unawares ouerwhelme me. My hope, my
fortress, my redemption art thou Lord, let me not be stryken with deadly
fear. Give me understanding, show the way wherein I shall walk, becken unto
me with thine eyes most graciously, lest I become brutysh and void of
understanding as is the horse and moyle. Let me flow in abundau^ce of joy
and mirth, lift up mine heart, make it careless and assured, to the end I may
always rejoice in the. So be it.

A gyuynge of thanks. Psalm. 33.
Most egall (no man can deny) and most ryghteous is thy word O Lord God
almighty. All thy works be certain, thou love justice and judgment, full
is the earth of thy goodness, with thy word the heavens were made, and all the
furniture of them, even with the breath of thy mouth. Thou dyddest gather into
the sea waters as in a bladder, and thou dyddest put the bottomless see in ye
depthes. Thou speak the word, and forth with the thing is made, thou
commau^dest and straight it is, thine everlasting counsel shall not be
changed, but all the counsels of men thou breakest in sonder, be they never so
well beset with worldly wisdom and power. O Lord be thou our God, cast thine
eyes upon us, for in the we trust and repose our selfs, ha^gyng of thy
goodness only. From death reserve our souls, and our hertes from sorrow. Feed us
when the famyn either of body or of spirit come upon us. Be thou our help
and buckler, let our hertes rejoice in the, which continually do awayte upon
thy holy name. Thy good will O Lord be upon us, as we have trusted in the.
Amen.

For the strengthynge of the spirit in necessite. Psalm. 34.
OUt of all distresses deliver me Lord, and at all times will I praise the.
Thy praise will I never leave of, which thing being my sauegarde, when the
troubled and miserable persons shall vndesta^de, they also se^blably shall
receive comfort and be glad. Let thine aungel wall me about, that he may
deliver me, let me feel thy gentleness. Give me a sure trust in the, and also
true awe of the. My tongue preserve thou from euel, yt I babble nothing amysse.
From evil defend me, work thou good in me by thy holy spirit. Give me peace
and a mind to deal peasably with all me^. Let thine eyes tender and regard
me, inclyne thine ears to my prayers, from all peril deliver me. Be at hand,
for I am bruised in heart and troubled in mind, set me at liberty according to
thy word, let me be fauteles and an innocent in thine eyes. AMEN.

Against the enemies and such as persecute other for Christ's sake. Psalm. 35.
COmmyt thou o lord battle with mine adversaries. Fight against mine
enemies, say thus to my soul: I am thy sauetie and defense, let my soul o
lord joy in the, and triumph in thy sauegarde. From the myghtier, thou
delyuerest the pore, and the neady from his spoylers. Depart not from me,
bestyre thy self, awake, address the to defend my ryghtouse cause, O Lord
and my god. According to thy ryghtousnes judge my cause, that my persecutours
rejoice not over me, I being of them destroyed and vaynquished, but rather for
my sauegard let the^ be put to shame by thy word which now they spytefully
reiagge me with. Again, as many as wysh that I may hold on in thy faith and
truth, let them rejoice and be made glad, for surely thy faith and truth is my
ryghteousnes, and such as wysh thy peace wol magnifye and auau^ce thy name,
gyuynge thanks for my delyuery, which thing I also shall do together with
them, if thou in deed shalt preserve and keep me. So be it.

For repentance and renuynge of life. Psalm. 36.
Lord iustifye thou me, and give me the true awe of the, lest I stand
proudely in mine own conceyte. Pluck from my mouth wyckednes and leasing,
make me wise to good works, so as I devise none ungodliness. Lead me into ye
right path. Grant me I may be ashamed of sin. Thy bountye (O Lord) is in
the heavens, thy faith and ryghteousnes reaches eue^ to the clouds, thy
justice surmounteth the mountains, thy judgments be as botomles sees. Ah
lovely father make thy beneuolens toward us bountyfull, which art ye helper
as well of brute beasts as of men. Under shadow of thy wings let us trust.
Fyl us with the fat of thy house, with the flood of thy spiritual deynties.
Banquet us, for with the, is the fountain of life, let us behold the light of
thy truth. Make plain over us always thy goodness and justice. Let us know the
for thonly living God, with vpryght heart. Let us repose our selves in the,
that the foot of pride overthrow us not, neither the hands of the ungodly
cast us hedlonge. Amen.

For resygnynge all into Gods hands. psalm. 37.
Grant me, O Lord, that the wealth of the wicked and malicious persons
trouble menot, though they flow in all riches, pleasure, and glory, for
suddenly as grass shall they wyther away. On the alone will I trust, and
study with honest occupacions to obtain thy love. Faith and truth thou shalt
increase in me, to the intent I may commytte all my matters to the, I being
with my self quiet, still, and saufe. My justice which is thy gift, displaye
abroad eue^ as a light to others, my ryghteous dealing set forth as the
noonedaye. With thy treasure norysh me. So shall I enjoy continual peace, and
in the euel day shall I not be ashamed. Of vytayle when other lack I shall
have plenty, my goynges thou shall keep that they trippe not, my way shall be
pleasant unto the. If I fall, lift thou me up with thy hand. Let my mouth
practyse wisdom, my tongue speak things semynge, in my heart thy law might
be engraven. The steps of my feet suffer not to be slypperye, to the sekers
of my heart blood let me not be given, neither when I am judged of them, do
not thou condemn me. Thou shall keep me up in honesty, and show me what is
right, that I may observe it. My health, fortress, and strength be thou O
Lord in the stormy times. Thou, I say, shall deliver me, thou shall save me,
because I trust in the So be it.

A prayer of one that is troubled both inwardly and outwardly. Psalm. 38.
Reprove me not in thine anger O lord, I beseech the, neither in thy fury
chastyse me, for thine arrows are fastened in me, thy hand presses me, on
every side is mortal war, on every side adversity assauteth me, both within
and without. Neither in my flesh nor yet in my mind is ought left hoole and
sou^de. In thy sight (Lord) be al my syghynges, yea my vexacion is much more
grievous, then can with tongue be expressed: Ah how greatly do I covet to be
ryd of it? In the (Lord) I trust, hear me my God. Lo many enemies lie upon
me, far stronger then I am. Causeles they have hated me, but leave me not
Lord my God, depart not far fro me. Bring succors unto me out of hand O
Lord, God of my health. So be it.

For one very evil entreated of his enemies. Psam. 39.
MY ways O Lord keep that neither in word nor deed I sin, whiles
spytefully I am thus trodden under foot and contemned. Refrain my mouth, that
I brag of nothing proudely. Let me bear always before mine eyes the
shortenes of this life, and what a vanity, what a thing of naught be as well
the me^ them selves, as al their things and doings. Be thou O Lord my hope,
ryd me from raungynge astraye, that I be not an example of reproach to the
ungodly. Keep me that I wyshe no evil, not so much as in thought to mine
adversary, but that I remember he is sent of the against me to my profit and
avail. Turn away from me destruction, lest by the dreadful stroke of thy
hand I utterly perysh. Hear Lord my humble prayers and requests, and let my
tears enter unto ye. Sit not still, for I am a stranger with ye, as were my
forefathers. Slack a little thy hand that thus preasseth me, so as being a
little eased I may yet ones look up before I dye. Grant me the comfort of thy
spirit, that I may espy thy fatherly kyndnes where as now thou she west even
the extremite of a judge unto me, which have most haynously (I can not but
confess) sinned against the. But have mercy on me O Lord for thy names sake.
So be it.

That in peril one should utterly offer him self to Christ. Psalm. 40.
Bow the O Lord unto me, for upon the is mine attendaunce, hear my
lamentable cry. Out of the horrible pytte of woo wherinto I am cast, deliver
me. Thy name be my hope, let me not bow aside to ye proud and holowe herted.
Have thou mercy on me (most dear father) for Jesus Christ thy sons sake,
which by the only everlasting sacrifice of his own body wyped away all our
sins on ye cross, brought us home again unto the, and made us of damned
persons, ryghteous. And this thy will by all the prophets was before declared.
This Christ thy son has taught us thy ryghteousnes (by which through thy
gracious favor we be justified) and has openly at the time appointed
performed the thing that long before was showed to the fathers under shadows
and fygures which be now passed and brought to an end, neither do thou
now require of us any other thing, but that in thy son we be hoole given,
offered, sanctified, and consecrate unto the. For this thy well-beloved sons
sake continue thy mercy toward me. Let thy good will and grace always defend
me, for lo innumerable dangers have assaulted me on every side. Exceadynge
many (I confess) be my offenses, and therefore am I clean void of counsel,
what to do. But o lord restore me again into my former degree. Haste^ the, I
say, to aid me. Such as couete to spyll the life of my soul, make them
depart from me. And again, let the^ be glad that seek the, and which love thy
salvation, wherwyth thou delyuerest us, so that we always may sprede abroad thy
name. Uyle and wretched am I Lord, but take thou charge of me, help me,
restore me. Thou shall not differ thy grace from me, o my god, for the glory
of thy name. Amen.

For a sweet and still heart. Psalm. 41.
THis favor and grace o lord show thou me, that all my life long I may
succoure and releue (to my power) ye necessite of the nedy as well with gostly
helps, as with corporal, and yt I may employ yt labor upon the. For doutles
what so ever is bestowed upon the^, the same thou rekenest bestowed on the.
Pytie thou me O Lord, heal the wounds of my soul, for against ye, have I
trespassed, deliver me from mine enemies, which busye them selves to noye me,
that they rejoice not over me. Hereby shall I understand thy good will toward
me, in that thou vouchsauest to cut mine enemies combs, so as they triumph
not over me, which had thought to have given me a foul fall. Therefore lord
God of Israel, to ye be glory, praise, and thankynges eternal. So be it.

A prayer of the vexed conscience. Psalm. 42.
Like as in a forest, the heart gapeth for thurst at the fou^taynes of waters,
O Lord God, so doutles my soul thursteth for desire of the. My soul, I say,
longs after the, that valiant and living God. But alas when shall I enter
in, to behold thy graciouse face? Show thy self my Lord. How often shall it
be said unto me, where is thy God? I being thus troubled, shall water my soul
with stremes of tears within my self, but nevertheless this grefe of heart thy
comfortable countenance shall aswage. Oh what ayleth the my soul? what thing
troubles ye? what toylest thou? what re^nest thou hither and thither? Se thou
trust in the Lord, to whom shortly (be thou right well assured,) I shall
have cause to render most loving thanks for my delyuery received at his
hands, according as himself has commanded, that in wealth and prosperity we
should praise his clemency and bountyfull goodness the worker thereof, and again
in aduersite we not forgetting his promyses, should pray for help. Suffer
that a day of comfort may spryng unto me, then shall I hyghly blow abroad
and auaunce thy name. In the mean season steye me up with continual
remembrance of thy promyses and former benefytes, that though I be oppressed
with euyls yet I dyspayre not. Teach me (O lord) the due form of prayer to
the intent my peticion may the better be herd. Amen.

For the edificacion of the church. Psalm. 43.
MY quarrel, O Lord, discuss thou against the ungodly panymes. From liars and
malicious wretches deliver me, for thou God art my strength. By the, I will set
my foot against the helly power: but O Lord why now do thou pusshe me
from the? why walk I thus heavy? why in this my trouble do thou not comfort
me? With the light therefore of thy spirit replenyshe my heart (O my Lord) in
such wise as having the experime^t of the thing in deed, I may give credit
to the truth of thy promise, and by the same be conduited to thy holy mou^te,
to the pauilions of thy chosen, to the realm of light, to the heritage
eternal, to the intent that I co^temnynge ye proud bragges and thretes of ye
ungodly may manfully hold on my journey unto the (o lord the well of my joy)
and so might blase thy name, and for the grace of thy continuau^ce render due
thanks accordyngly. So be it.

A prayer of the church for redemption. Psalm. 44.
HOw straungely Lord dydest thou auau^ce thy people in old time, when thou
gave the^ the land of behest, that thou dyddest promise them, and drove out
the Cananeys. For the children of Israel, not by their own powers, but by thy
favor conquered the land. In likewise thou haste made us heirs of the
heavenly country, not of our deserte, but of thy pure grace whom, in Christ
before the world was made thou chase. Wherefore to the we owe of right to render
continual thanks. But now thou have also driven us forth in such wise as we
be a reproach and mocking stock to the ungodly panyms, which count us
unworthy whom the earth should bear, who do grievously vex and torment us both
in body and mind. Many of us are wrapped in errors, all of us be ashamed,
when we consider how the ungodly have prevailed against us. Certes we may be
lykened to sheep ready to be slain. They think to please the by the
slaughter of us. What shall we attempt to do being thus environed with
tribulacions? Lord, we know nothing else what to do but to lift up our eyes
to the, and lame^tably to cry. Awake, O Lord, continue not thy slomber, pushe
us not thus from the. Why hidest thy face from me? How can you forget thus
long our woo and distress? For we be utterly oppressed and trodden under
foot. Rise Lord, help us, for thy goodness, for thy name, for thy glory, by
Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

To Christ king of glory. Psalm. 45.
Lord Jesus Christ, son of God, God and man, among the children of men most
fair. Gracious be thy lyppes, lovely art thou, gentle and courteous: there is
in the no crueltye, no bytternes, thou call most louyngly unto the, the
woeful sinners by name. The father gave the, the everlasting blessing, which
art the true sede of Abraham, where by all nations of the earth be blessed. Thou
art our king, gyrde our loins with the sword of thy goostlye word, to the
condemnynge of thine adversaries and saving of thy true subjects. Beat down
out of our heart ye old trade of living, which art mighty in glory, and
renown. Look upon us graciously, louyngly, comely, let thy workings toward
us take fruitful effect. Lord govern us in truth, myldnes, and justice Let
thy right hand work miracles for thy seat is eternal, thy scepter is
judgment, power, justice, and direction, thou love righteousness, and hate
wyckednes. Therefore thy father took the up to be king anointed with ye oil of
gladness, I mean the holy ghost before thy fellows the beleuers, and members of
thy body. Thy robes do smell of fragraunt odours, wherwyth thou pluckest up the
souls of beleuers, who again with their redolent smell, which they have
conceived of the, do delight the. The queen (I mean the church of Christians)
stands on thy right hand which art their brydegrome, decked and adorned
with gold of charity, beset with wisdom of spirit, crowned with sundry
gifts of grace, but inwardly. Of this bryde and brydegrome let me be the son
O Lord Jesus Christ. Cloth me with the wedding garment, which tire thou haste
pleasure in. The, O Lord, without ceasyng let me only hear, constantly
believe, forgetting all earthly things, make me worship the in spirit and
truth, which art with the father all one in substance. Let me be brought
thither where thou art, even unto thy temple with joy and reioysynge of
spirit, and myndefull of thy holy name. Let me worship, praise, and magnifye
the without end. Amen.

A general commendacion to the father by Jesus Christ. Psalm. 46.
THou only O Lord art our hope and fortress in necessity. Stre^gthe^ us
that we fear not, yea though heaven should fall, stay, solace, fortifye us,
abolyshe the kingdom of the ungodly company, let us feale the streams of thy
spirit, thy peace, joy, and tranquilite. Hallowe us for thy dwelling place
and continue in us still, so that we shrynke not away. Send thy word among
us, whereby the earth of our heart may quake and again relent and melt upon
the knowledge of our wyckednes. The lord of oostes be with us and be our
protection. Show us thy wonderful works, let us learn them, and cease from
works of the flesh, denyenge and utterly renou^cynge our selves and all our
things. Let us worship only the as our God, most mighty in heaven and
earth, our ryghteous maker, the worker of all goodness in such as believe in the,
the defensour and helper of body and soul. So be it.

For sendynge the ministers of the word. Psalm. 47.
Turn Lord the panymes unto the, which know the not, that together with us
they may joy and sing praises, that together with us they may be thy heritage,
chosen of favor. Give us that all we may record thy renomes, furnyshed with
knowledge and faith of thy word. Raise up many that may defend the land with
preaching thy word, and make sure the same against the bytynge and rage of ye
helly wolf, and against the ordinances of the lyenge prophets, for they
only seek their own gaynes. Amen.

A praysynge of God, and for the building of the church. Psalm. 48.
Among the Christians, O lord I pray, that thou may be most diuulged and
preached, for they be thy city and palace, which thou have stablyshed against
the gates of hell, which have received of thy goodness thine anointed Christ
Jesus, by whom thy renome is spread abroad, and which with praises continually
do auaunce thy most valiant right hand by thy judgments. Cheer this thy
flock and congregation by saving thy true subjects, and damnyng the wicked.
Unto the from all quarters let the people have concourse, that this thy city
may be builded with living stones, and enlarged in length and breadth.
Confirm it with thy power, govern and guide it as a tenderlynge, Amen.

For lowlynes against couetouse and vain glory. Psalm. 49.
Guide me lord that I stomble not on vain glory or power of this world, for
the lovers of such things do imbrase them as their gods and glory in the
same, therefore they shall perysh for ever. To such the death of Christ was
bestowed in vain, sith they shall never be partakers, through their mysbelefe,
of the merit thereof. Let me not be made like, I pray the, unto the brute
bestes, but instruct me in thy works, le^de me thy favor that I may always
thank ye for the honor thou have endowed me with, and that for the same I
stand not foolyshly in mine own conceyte. Amen.

For putting away of the old man. Psalm. 50.
OUt of ye forthest corners of the earth on every side, thou shall with a
mighty voice call me^ to judgment (Lord God omnipotent) to whom nothing is
hyd. Open thou our ears, that we may hear this thy promise, I shall be your
God. In the we constauntly believe, with thy foyson we be filled. Prudentely
thou do declare and testifye that of our goods and sacrifices thou have no
need, and thou do not either regard or measure them, for all be thine, and
in ye it lies to make the things we now possess to be ours or not ours. Thou
only requyrest sacrifices of thanks gyuinge. Let us therefore disclose the
botome of our hertes to the, let us knowledge ye our God, let us hallowe thy
name in all things, flow in thy word, render thanks in we will and woo,
require thy succor in straytes and necessity, at which time you haste promised
to help us, tha^ shall we being so delivered blase thy name. Lord God most
just, true of promise, and dearest father, the (beseech I) to send succors
unto me even of thine endless goodness, for thy renomes sake, for Jesus Christ's
sake thy beloved son, and for his precious blood largely shed for us on
the cross, so that being ones purged, we may come again in favor with the.
Pytie me, hear me out of the straytes of this sinful flesh, wherewyth on
every side I am hampered in. Set me at large again O Lord, and rydde me from
mine enemies, which seek to draw me away from thy true service. In thy
comfort let me rejoice and be full of spiritual joy, let me (I say) ever
brute thy name, not being vnmyndful of thy benefytes, and releue me most
pytifull God, according to thy word which is nothing but truth. Most tender
father show me that thy joyful health. So be it.

A prayer upon the psalm of Miserere, for the wypynge away of sins,
renuaunce of strength and spirit. Psalm. 51.
Have mercy on me, God, according to thy great tenderness of heart, for I am
sore pressed with sins, I can bear them no longer, of thy bountyful mercy
wype away my trespass. Ten thousand myllions of gold I owe the, Lord, I am
not able to pay, I can not discharge my self. Wash me clean from my
errors, cle^se me not only of my sins passed, but also of my hoole life to
come. With the ploungynge of spirit in the fire of thine illuminacion baptyse
me, which is the might and strength of baptism, which we received in our
chyldhod. The same spirit might always co^duyte us, till ye infeccio^ and vice
which we have dronke^ in by Ada^, be perfectly taken away in the mou^te of
flesh: I knowledge o lord my transgressio^, before mine eyes are my trespases, my
studies and doings be al together sin. Certes, unto the alone have I sinned,
just and true art thou in the word of thy promise, which Christ declared
unto us, I mean, that by him our sins be released. If either the ungodly
persons, or mine unfaithful conscience will strive against the, and hold plee
that thou forgeuest not the beleuer, undoubtedly thou shalt overcome them, and
prove the^ liars. Declare thy truth, grant grace so as my sins being
forgeuen, I may knowledge thy bountye and truth, for in wyckednes borne I was,
and in sins my mother conceived me, so that of my nature what so ever I am, I
am but sin. This my knowlegynge of the truth, I wot well is right acceptable
unto the, where as in ye most part of other persons thou have either hid the
same or made it unknown. Purge and sprynkle me with the blood of Jesus Christ
thyn unspotted lamb. If thou wash me, I shall be as white as snow, so shall I
receive these glad tidings into my heart, that my sins be forgeuen.
Replenysh my bones with the joy of spirit, which now, consyderinge thy sharp
judgments be al to shaken and bruised. For my spirit is stryken into a deadly
dompe, and therefore my bones be dried up. Turn away thy face from my sins,
and then for joy of thy favorable forgyuenes I shall forget the^. Mine own
proper works Lord examyne not roughly, which (I confess) be nothing but
sins. Yea if thou lay them to my charge as I have deserved, I must needs
abide the child of da^nacion. Thine unspeakable mercy with humble prayer I
demand and crave upon the, which thou have promised, saying: His sins I
will not remember. Do away therefore my sins. A clean heart (my god) make in
me, restore in me a willing and right spirit. Banysh me not from thy sight
blind not mine eyes. Let not an unrepentant heart grow in me, neither let me
despair on thy goodness Deny me not thy holy gooste, take not away again
from me yt which thou have ones given. Render solace unto me, for doubtless the
health and salvation which I look for in Christ does assuredly appease and
ascertayne my conscience upon remission of my sins. Stablysh me with the
spirit of liberty, so shall I being in faith and spirit purified and made
strong teach the wicked and such as know the not, the way that leads unto
the, so that they also shall be turned unto the. Lord God discharge me of my
hid and houge sins which be knyt to my corrupt nature, I mean, werynes of
thy word, grutchyng against thy commandments, and blasphemy. My tongue then
being furnyshed with boldness of spirit shall frankely and without
trembling teach, confess, and blow abroad thy ryghtuousnes, without which
no man is ryghtuous. Lord thou shall open my lyppes, and then my mouth shall
set forth thy praises and thy ways. Grant me such mouth and wisdom, as mine
adversaries shall not be able to strive against, namely in the quarrel of thy
word. Indowe me with grace, to thyntent I may offer sacrifices of thanks, for
nothing else verily requyrest thou. Albeit yet thou despysest not the oblacion
and sacrifyce of a contrite spirit, I mean, the mortifyenge of our own
lust and will, and of that old Adam, that soiourneth in us, until we may be
able to offer the sacrifice of thanks, and with glad semblaunt embrace and
celebrate thy ryghtuousnes espied in the releasynge of our sins. Wherefore for
as much as we of our selves can perform nothing that good is, bless thou O
Lord of thy benignity and fatherly benevolence thy Christen people. Let the
walls of Jerusalem be made up again by thine authority, let good workmen
be set on work, I mean, true teachers, pastors, and prophets, and let us
be fashioned for lively stones to the holy building, let them edifye the
people ryghtely, let us obey their instructions duly. Thou art the good man of
ye house, thurst thou out the workeme^ into the harvest, that they may gather
by thy word of faith the people now ripe and ready to be reaped into ye
heavenly barnes, which workmen onles thou send forth, shall run of
themselves vaynly. For how should they preach not being sent. Surely, in vain
we shall auaunce either our learning or habilite, if thou tempre not the
success of our things, if thou forther not our doings, if thou send us not.
Lo then thou shall receive continual sacrifices of ryghteousnes, for on thy
altar we shall then lay the bullockes and fat sacrifices of our lyppes, yea
and our own selfs thereto, praysynge and worshyppynge the without styntynge.
Amen.

For renouncing the company of hypocrites. Psalm. 52.
Most holy Lord, let us being instructed and furnyshed with thy grace cast up
the wyly and malicious me^, which ca^ bear no truth, but give the^ selves to
lies trustyng to the vain helps of this world. Brouse thou them O Lord, and
rote them out of the land of the lyuinge persons, which thing wha^ ye
ryghtuous folk shall se, they shall fear the and rejoice. Grant that with an
unconquerable trust we may always lean to the only, let us not resemble the
baren and corrupt trees, but let us be found like to ye rank and fruteful
olyues in thine house. Upon thy name let us set our hope, upon thy name, I
say, that is so good and that helps most redely all them that earnestly
call thereon, like as in thy holiness is euidentlye espied. Wherefore let us also
render unto the everlasting thanks, sith in us thou workest and heapest upon
us all those benefytes and commodities. So be it.

For delyueraunce out of the deuyls bondage. Psalm. 53.
FOr as much as (O Lord our God) not one of us all has wrought of himself
any goodness for all we even of birth be spotted and corrupted, grant us thy
ryghtuousnes, and be thou workynge through thy holy breath in us (keeping the
godly rest of the new Saboth), such things as thou allowest and be pleasant
unto the, lest at any time we proudly seek our own honor and not thine in
all our doings, and that being raunsomed and delivered by the out of
bondage, anguysh, peril, and trouble, we might joy euerlastyngly. Amen.

A prayer of the congregation against enemies. Psalm. 54.
Aid me Lord for thy names sake, according to this thy promise. Who so ever
calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saulfe. Take on the my quarrel against
my pursuers, defend it by thy might and prowess, for my powers are utterly
none at all. Harken Lord to my prayers, ponder the words of my mouth,
strangers and such as utterly despyce ye, have assauted me and do cast how to
bring me to death. Succor me Lord, be at hand keep me, fight for me. Let the
things which they go about to work against me, fall on their own heads in
case thou iudgest them unworthy to be converted and to forthynke them selves,
otherwise although they be at this season mine enemies, yet of thy great
bounty and mercy pardon them their sins, and give them ye spirit of
repentance, to the intent they may ones at last be made my true and hertye
friends. For the same thy benefyte, I shall imploye my self to be thankful
and serviceable unto the, specially sithe thy name is so loving, and thou art
so at hand and present in extreme necessities. This, I say, shall be bruted by
the mouths of men and blown abroad with most high praises. So be it.

A prayer of Christ's church. Psalm. 55.
O My god hear me in my prayer abhor not my doleful plaint, take charge of
me, and give ear. For certes, I shall never stynte most lame^tably to cry unto
the, till time thou hear my peticion. Lo our enemy makes proud resistance, he
lets as much as in him lies thy quarrel, yea and all things yt should be
helthfull and profitable unto us he hyndreth, he stops, he furiously
condemns. I am accused wrongfully, the ungodly persons lie in awayte of my
life. From them O lord deliver me, set the^ beside their purpose, divide their
tongues, let the^ disagre and be confused among them selves, rescue my soul
out of their hands into peace, cut their combs, abate their pride, bring
the^ down They woll not turn themselves, they wol not forthynke them of their
folyes, for they be quyte departed from thy fear and past all shame. My hoole
cause and grieve I cast upon the, provide thou for me, forse that I myscary
not, keep, defend, co^serue me, let me have at last some end of these hurlye
burlyes and troubles, let me not hereafter reuolue ydel counsels with my self,
let me not be counted a castawaye, a slave, a mockyng stock any longer as
heretofore I have been. These things I pray the I may obtain, sweet Savior
for thy holy names sake, according to the word of promise, whereunto I have
respect with fast and sure trust continually. Amen.

In bitter tribulacions. Psalm. 56.
GOd be thou mercyful unto me, for on me they rage and make havoc
vnmercyfully. But to the alone I flee, thou art my refuge, in the only I
trust, from thy word let me not shrynke, but styfly auowe it and glory in it.
Consider my salt tears, take compassion on me, cause mine enemies to recule,
let me feel at last that thou art my god, my Savior, my buckler. Rydde my
soul from death, mine eyes from bitter tears, my heart from care, my feet
from slydyng, so as I may walk before the, in the light of life, and that for
ever more I may give the, worthy thanks accordyngly. Amen.

Against the suppressours of the troth. Psalm. 57.
Have mercy on me God, have mercy on me, for in the trusts my soul, under
shadow of thy wi^ges I flee, till the wyckednes wherwyth I am pressed be passed
from me. Unto the (O God most high) I cry, raise me up that am fallen to
ground which thing is most easy for the to do. From thy heaven send
succors unto me. Out of their hands that intend to suppress me, pluck me
away. Send thy bountyfull goodness, which is so trustye and certain, whereby
thou sauest us freely without our own deserte. This bountyfull goodness O Lord
we claim as due to us by thine own fre promise. From the lions defend my
soul, and also from the mortal souldyours and satellites of darkness, whose
teth be spears, whose to^ges be two edged sweardes. Mou^te above the heavens,
that thou may be known to be the great and mighty God, sith these ungodly
hell hou^des thus by their doings, deny that thou do govern any kingdom
in heaven. I say, lift up thy self, and show what thou can do in thy
son Christ, who of long time even through the devises and dreams of men
has been wrongfully banyshed, dryue^ out, and excommunicate. Declare that he is
our only mercy stock and redemption, the treasure of riches, thy co^pagnion
of divine glory and power. Thy goodness and grace be endless even as the
botomles sees in abundaunce among men, by powrynge upon the^ thy treasures
and benefytes. Amen.

For remyssion of daily trespases. psalm. 58.
INdowe us with this grace lord that we may always speak things plesau^t
unto ye, yt we may allow with our sentence things just and true in thine eyes,
let there be no ungodliness in our heart. That if any of us through brycklenes
of the corrupt nature by thy sufferau^ce shall fall, yet Lord let not such
person harden his heart against the, while like a father thou pluckest him
back, neither suffer him to stop his ears against thy minister chastisynge
him by thy word, but rather let him gladly hear and quycquely turn again.
Be it notifyed and made plain unto men that we bear away some commodity of
the justice of our faith, and that thou art nevertheless the just judge of ye
earth, to the glory of thy name. Amen.

Against the bloody Phariseys. Psam 59.
Deliver me sweet Lord from mine enemies, from these blood soupers and wicked
Pharisees deliver me, for behold they lie in awayt of my soul most slyly, with
all the power they can make. They cast their heads against me, being styred
up with hatred of thy word. In this my trouble, namely in the defense of thine
own quarrel help me, let this their deadly malice displease the, let their
counsels take none effect. Be thou my fense, enuiron me with thy goodness, let
the day star of thy solace rise unto me, so yt cherfully I may advance thy
mercy. Be thou my refuge, and rescue me in all mine aduersite (o my god) which
art my aid, succoure and health. Ame^.

For strength of mind to bear the cross. Psalm 60.
HOw have thou O Lord humblyd and pluckte me down? I dare now uneaths make
my prayers unto the, for thou art angry with me, but not without my deseruyng.
Certainly I have sinned Lord, I confess it, I will not deny it. But oh my
God pardon my trespasses, release my dettes, re^dre now thy grace again unto
me, stop my wou^des for I am all to plaged and beaten, yet Lord this not
wythstandynge I abide patiently, and give mine attendau^ce on the, continually
waiting for relefe at thy hand, and that not without skyll, for I have
received a toke^ of thy favor and grace toward me, I mean thy word of
promise concerning Christ, who for me was offered on the cross for a
ransom, a sacrifice, and penyworth for my sins. Wherefore according to that
thy promise defend me lord by thy ryghthande, and give a gracious ear to my
requests, be thou my steye in peryls, for all ma^s stays are but vain. Beat
down therefore mine enemies thine own self with thy power, which art mine only
aydour and protector O Lord God almighty. Amen.

For comfort and virtue of spirit. Psalm. 61.
MY complayntes hear thou, O merciful God, mark my suits and demau^des. My
heart is stryke^ full of heaviness, set me on an high rock al at large and
liberty. Thou art my only succoure and refuge, thy name is as a strong
tower against mine enemies. Let me dwell in thy pauilions evermore, and under
thy wings let me lead a merry and careless life. This my longyng and peticion
grant me, O Lord. Give everlasting enheritaunce to such as fear thy name.
Give us goodness to this end that we may always keep thy troth. Then shall we
still praise thy majesty with mystical songs and psalms. Amen.

For patience and denial of a man's own self. Psalm. 62.
MY soul without ceasynge rejoice in the o Lord, which by thy word have
offered us health and salvation. For surely of the only flows and proceeds
all health. Thou art my God, my shoteanker, health and proteccion. I receive al
yt good is at thy hand, if thou be my defensour, I shall not fail but have
the upper hand. Protecte thou me, that I trust neither to power nor to riches,
but to the only. Thou have power, I can not gaynsaye, to damn me, and again
thou have a loving will to save me. Let me be nu^bred I beseech the, not among
the cursed and disalowed persons, but among thy chosen and faithful
subjects. Amen.

For goostly gifts and heavenly riches. psalm. 93.
MY God doutles art thou, early in the morning I rise up in my heart, and seek
the, my soul and my very flesh thyrsteth and even longs after the
exceadyngly, I covet to se thy power (Lord) which sauest me, and thy glory,
most glorious king, which stayest me up what time I am oppressed. Thy goodness
verily is better unto me then life. This goodness if thou show me, I shall not
leave to magnify and brute thy renome every where, for I shall not cease
continually to yield unto the due and worthy thanks and to sanctifye thy
name. Fill therefore mine heart (o my God) with grace, and stuff it with
swetenes of spirit, even as the body is stuffed with bread and foyson of
meats. Then shall my mouth extolle, praise, and hallowe ye, not with feigned
lyppes but with a full glad courage and quyck spirit. O Lord be thou mine
help and refuge, and so under the sauegarde of thy wings I shall lead out my
life peacybly. My soul might still cleave fast unto the, let thy ryghthande
hold me up, by thy name and to the glory thereof let me swear. The undoubted
troth that I confess let me ascribe and impute to the only. The mouths of
the^ Lord which can utter nothing but errors and leasynges stop myghtely.
So be it.

Against the enemies of Christ. psalm 64.
THe voice of my lamentacion and playnyng hear O Lord. From danger of
enemies deliver my life. Wythdrawe me from the assemblye of evil persons and
from the conspiracy of the ungodly, which whette their tongues as sharp as
rasours sendynge out their enuenomed darts as it were to the mark, to
thyntent they may shote through the innocent and harmeles persons, and that
covertly, God be thou my shild, my stay, and ransom. Endowe me with joy,
peace, and hope, so as euerlastyngly I may boast and glory of the. Amen.

For the obtaynynge of favor. Psalm. 65.
Praises O Lord are semynge and comely for the, which devout and godly persons
should record and sing in thy congregation. Lysten to my prayers, and attend
to my humble suit. What fleshly body, what earthly person owes not to approach
unto thy presence, to become a suter unto the? My sins, my sins, Lord be
wonderfully increased, but forgive me, most mercyful Lord, have mercy on me,
let me content and please thy mind, account me O Lord almighty among thy
chosen servants, grant me access and coming unto thy presence, to
thynte^t I may dwell in thy heavenly palace. Fill me with the goods of thy
house, and with the holy gifts of thy temple. In thy justice hear me, O God
of my health, which art ye only succor and refuge of all the inhabitau^tes,
as well of the land, as of ye see, which repose themselves in the, be they
never so far asounder. With thy goodness thou vysetest the earth which thou
enrychest and make fat. Both to man and beast thou gyuest food. Praises
therefore and thanks we give the again on our behalf without ceasynge and
end O Lord almighty as to our duty belongs.

For thanks gyuynge a prayer. Psalm. 66.
Wonderful are thy works O Lord among the children of men. Lo, thou
turnest the sea into dry land, that the beleuers may pass through the
waters of tribulacions with mirth and joy, which they have conceived of the.
Thou haste drawn me even through fire and water, thou have loded me with
affliccio^. O lord bring me again into fulness of joy, that I may give the
due thanks, like as in the point of necessity thou have promised. I will
tell every body what benefits and goodness thou have heaped upon me without my
deserte, to thynte^t other may be moved in like case to setle themselves in ye
wc sure and full trust, when they be greuouslye oppressed. Repel not my
humble requests (o my god) nether yet change thine accustomed goodness for thy
names sake. Amen.

For the light and blessing of Christ. Psalm. 67.
THy mercy and blessing (most mighty god,) we crave and require of the full
instantly. Let thy countenance shine on us, have compassion upon us, that here
in earth we may find out the way which leads unto the, and may attain
thy salvation among the Gentyls. O that al peoples would confess the with
loving hertes, for the manyfold benefytes and pleasures which they have
received at thy hands, which with justice do govern men, and art their
leader upon earth. Pour down Lord thy goodness, so shall the earth yield unto
the, glory and praise, and unto us fruits for our food and sustenau^ce. Thou
God the father bless us, thou God the son bless us, and thou god ye holy
ghost bless us. O yt all the costs of the earth (Lord God) would fear and
stand in awe of the. Would God also that I might study to work noma^ either
pleasure or displeasure, yt should be against thy will. Amen.

For consolacion and concord of Christ's church. Psalm. 68.
Arise Lord, let thine enemies be scattered, thy haters put to flight, the
ryghtuouse and Christ's disciples made pleasant and merry. Let them sing
praises and pleasant songs unto the, let them blow abroad thy magnifice^ce,
let the^ most hyghly auau^ce thy Majesty, let thy glory grow, let the
kingdom of Christ from heaven among ye chosen be enlarged, be thou the father
of the fatherless, the judge of the wydowes, and the protector of them namely
whom the world forsakes, whose consciences be troubled, whom the world
pursues for Christ's sake, which be nedye and wrapped full of myserye. In thy
house O Lord let us dwell in peace and concord, give us al one heart, one
mind, one interpretacion upon thy word. Pluck of, the ba^des as well from the
consciences as from the bodies of the miserable captyues, and of them also
which as yet be hedged in within the lystes of death and unadvisedly strive
against grace. How dry (Lord) is thine heritage? I pray the, pour down
largely the showers of thy graces, let a more plenteous frutfulnes chance, let
thy people be strengthened with spirit. Grant us Lord thy word abou^dau^tly
so as there may be many preachers of thy Gospel, which may within themselves
holyly co^spyre. Let thy church the spouse of Christ deal large spoils of
the conquered Satan. All that believe in the by Christ (O Lord God of health)
might lift the up with praises, might renoume the, and extol the. We be
entered into the viage of salvation, conduyte us luckely unto ye port, that
being delivered by the from the very death we may escape and come to the very
life. Fynysh ye thing thou haste begone in us, make us increase from faith to
faith. Leave us not to our own will and choice, for it is slyppery and ready
to fall. To the thunderboltes of thy word put violence yt we may give ye
glory to the all only. Give to thy people courage and power to wythstande
sin, and to obey thy word in all things O Lord God most glorious and
excellent over al. Ame^.

In persecucion. Psalm. 69.
O god succor me, for I am drowned with the surges and waves of adversities, I
am without al helps. Help me my lord Jesus Christ, which ones not with like,
but with passing greater myseries wast pressed, and dyddest pay that which
thou never owedest, dyddest restore that whereof thou never was wrong doer,
thou redemedst the sins of all men, for which Lord I still continually
thank the. Most mylde and tender Lord Jesus Christ rydde me of this distress
for thy passion and deaths sake. Lord of strength let them not be shamed,
which with a certain and sure hope seek for the. In time convenient I make my
prayers O Lord unto the. According to thy bountyfull mercy and troth of thy
promise succoure me. Rydde me out of these strayghtes, hear me, for surely thy
tenderness and gentle heart toward sinners is very pleasant. Turn thy face
unto me even of thy deep cleme^cy and pety, which can never be spent nor
wasted, hyde not thy countenance from me which am thine humble and liege
servant, for certes I am exceeding careful and all full of wauerynge and
perplexity, wherefore I beseech ye vouchsaue to receive spedely my humble
peticions, join with my soul (O Lord my Savior and defensour,) at the least
for mine enemies sake, which be so extreme and contrary both against the and
me, and always ready to work us al kinds of displeasure. Truly I am at this
present succourles, without comfort, and full of anguysh. Oh God most
mercyful, let thy saving help fense me. And tha^ I make a vow I shall not
cease to magnify, to brute, to extolle, and glorifye thy name, and with high
praises I shall serve the, with ernest thanks gyuyng, to the intent that other
folk being brought in to the like mysery, may learn to flee for succors
unto the, to seek and find the, which art the only life and relief of our
hertes. It is thou (who knows not?) that hear the poor, thou do not
despise the oppressed and prisoners. Succor the Christian church, build it,
so that full many may inhabyte it, which love thy holy name. Amen.

A prayer of the church of Christ. Psalm. 70.
COme help me at ones Lord. Let them depart with shame and reproach, which
wyshe me all myschief, they that ymagen and daily lie in wait to bring me to
utter destruccio^. Again, let them rejoice which seek the, and desire my
edificacion and furtheraunce, let them always say: Praised be God on high. How
impotent and miserable am I O Lord? Make have (O my god) unto me, stand at
mine elbowe, assyste me, and deliver me. Linger no longer, but with all have
and expedicio^ come help me O Lord and my God. Amen.

A prayer of the faithful in aduersyte. Psalm. 71.
AL mine hope and hole affiau^ce most pytyfull Lord have I cast on the, let
me be no more, I pray ye, shaken of, for that were sore to my rebuke and shame
among mine enemies. Deliver and succor me of thy justice. Bow down thine
ears to me, mark my supplicacion more attentyfly and more surely, then I my
self can conceive or utter it, and of thy boto^les mercy help me. Be thou to
me a shoteanker and sure refuge, let me wade hence unto the, for I am round
about beset on every side with euels. I know thou wylt help me, because thou
haste promised to assyste all that call upon the. Thou alone assuredly art my
fortress and defense, out of ye ungodly men's hands therefore rescue me lord
my god Even from my chyldhode thou have ben the author and foundour of my hope,
my solace, and sauetie, even from the time that my mother bare me, thou have
kept me. O Lord, thou art mine only glory and assurance. My mouth might
even flow and run full of this thy glory. Cast me not away from the in this
mine infirmity and weakness, forsake me not thou, though the strength either of
my body or of my soul forsake me. Go not far away most mercyful father
from me. Make quycke speed to aid and succoure me, for constantly I abide and
tarry for the only. By reason whereof I shall not stynte to increase day by day
thy praises, still ready to declare and set forth even to all the world thy
ryghtuousnes and salvation, knowing certaynlye that thou art still present
and at hand with me in all mine adversities and mysfortunes, with thy heavenly
grace to help and protecte me accordynly. Amen.

For increasynge the knowledge concerning the kingdom of Christ. Psam. 72.
SEt alofte (O God) the kingdom and power of Christ thy son and our king,
to thinte^t it may floryshe and sprede both far and wide, thy goostly
justice and judgment flowynge in our hertes, so as thy poor and miserable
people may be releaued and kept in perpetual peace, the graund enemy Satan
with his ympes and accomplices being subdued, and the foundation of health upon
earth establyshed, and consequentlye the fruits multiplied and enlarged among
us. By this mean the name of Jesus Christ our Savior shall be blessed and spread
abroad in to much generacions of people, for by it shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed, yea all the land with the majesty of it shall be filled when
all persons shall be true Christians, eue^ of the right making. Amen.

For patience and despysynge of the world. Psalm. 73.
HOw good and graciouse art thou O God of Israel, to all such as be of vpryght
heart, which think no evil of the, though they see the godly persons
pressed with adversity, and the ungodly flowynge in all wealth and pleasure.
Stey my fete O Lord, that at no time they slyppe with any euel zele or envy
which I might have at the ungodly, who for the most part pass their lives
quietly, and dye more quietly. I beseech the, let not thy chosen persons be
discouraged, or offended by this godly providence in orderyng of worldly
things, nor shrynke from the by reason thereof. But rather let us remember in
what dangers in very deed those ungodly be, and with how unhappy a conclusion
and term they close their happy course, and on the contrary part what
pleasauntnes of conscience, what comfort and quyetnes shall follow this our
unquietness. Let me (O Lord) delight in nothing else, save only in the. Be thou
my lotte, my portion, my enheritaunce for ever and ever without end. Let me
not wandre like a vagabounde far from the, let me not defyle my self with
the stynkynge sin of adultery, let me stycke fast to ye only, In the, I
say, only let me repose and setle my self, praysynge the without ceasynge.
Amen.

For the forsaken church of Christ. Psalm. 74.
Wherefore, o god, have thou thus driven us away, thus banyshed us? why boyleth
thy a^ger thus against the sheep of thy fold? Remember thy church, which thou
have chosen before the creacion of ye world, which thou redemedest by Christ's
blood, and which is the habitacle of thy name. From her deforsours and
spoylers defend her, wythdraw not thy helping hand. Look how the enemies
make havoc of altogether, deliver not up the soul of the doleful turtyll
thy people unto the ravenous beasts, and forget not thus the souls of the
poor. Remember thy leage, thy testamente, thy covenant, which art the self
troth. Be, I say, at hand with us, namely for thine own cause, eue^ that we
may glorifye thy name. Arise and debate our cause. Consider what spyte, what
wrongs, the ungodly folk work against the, forget not the complaynt of thy
sely congregation. For lo, the hurly burly of thy enemies grow daily more and
more. I grant you have put us back for our deserts, but yet the regard of
thyn own glory why do thou neglect? Thine own glory therefore O my Lord
defend thou in us thy children, deliver us so that the enemies may espy thy
power, and we may have a proof and feeling of thy fatherly pytie toward us.
Amen.

For avoiding of sclaunders. psalm. 75.
The benefit of my rede^ptio^ lord god which I feel, let me knowledge and
confess unto the ever more and more. For what time so ever I called upon the,
lo, the power of thy majesty and grace was present with me. Wherefore unto the
let us give thanks, declarynge thy wonderful deeds. Keep us, that we work no
wyckednes, that we stand not proudely and peuyshly in our own conceytes, that
we grutch not stubburnly against the. And for as much as, O Lord, it is thy
determinate will and sentence, that we be now scourged and punyshed, go to, of
the cup of tribulacions make us largely to drink. Only herein spare us that
the dregs of thy wrath we drink not together with the ungodly, but raise
thou up the horn of our comfort in the. Amen.

A prayer for the disperpled flock pressed with persecucion. Psalm. 76.
HEretofore thy name was only bruted in Iewry, but now (O Lord) thy majesty
most glorious is most wide and largely solemnised throughout ye hole world.
Thou art mighty and a passing diligent ouerseer of all those that belo^ge unto
the. The sclaunderous enemies of thy glory, wene thou have forsaken us, which
be thus wrapped in adversities. They lie spytefully ever in my neck, no man
releuynge me. But thou O Lord know the time when to help, and for ye most
part unlooked for, thou declarest wonderfully the power of thy majesty, in that
thou at length delyuerest such as believe in the, eue^ to the utter confusion of
ye ungodly. Wherefore now I pray the make quycke speed to deliver us out of
this present danger and distres, for thy names sake, that is so holy, so
recommended and auaunced of all godly persons. So be it.

A prayer of the troubled conscience. Psalm. 77.
TO yt I cry, O God, hear me. Night and day I trace and hunte after the, by all means I can. To the only for help I call, according as thou have given me
in commandment. Well assured I am, that at length thou wolt hear me, verelye
my heart can never be merry, whiles thou hydest thy self from it, yea I quake
to think upon the, my spirit fails me, so sore am I afraid of thy
judgment. When I call to mind the time of my life euel spent, I am well nygh
in despair. No wrytinges of comfort can chere me. Oftentimes say I to my
self, oh is God now an other person the^ he was before time? sith now we lack
those his benefytes, wherwyth our forfathers were so hyghly enriched? Why has
God thus wythdrawen from us all his pytie? is now the strength of the word of
life waxen feeble, where it ought to have continued for ever? has God forgotten
his gifts of grace? or is his power to have compassion, waxen so faint that he
can not put back his wrath again from us? These and such other be ye fansyes
of my wekenesse, where the matter in deed (o lord) is nothing so, as he may
easily perceive who so ever well pondereth the process of thy grace. Certes I
know well, thou wylt turn again, and change me into a better case, and set
me up alofte again with thy right hand, o most high king and savior. For
thou my God art such one as alone can work wondrous things, so that
nothing can resyst it, March forward on my side in all have with thy power
spedely to deliver me from this strait for thy holy names sake

For grace and ryghteousnes of heart. Psalm. 78.
FOr as much, Lord God, as thou haste showed many wondrous signs in rescuyng
and delyuering thy people Israel forth from Egypt and thereto wroughte no small
miracles in conduytyng them through the wyldernes, whereby thou have declared
that in thine hands is an incomparable power both to save and slaye: grant us
grace always both in word and in deed to follow thy law. Bow our ears to
the words of thy mouth. And let thy words so work in us, yt we may teach
other ye same, let us evermore trust on the alone, remembrynge thy works and
valiant deeds, lest either we forsake the, or be negligent and rechles in our
service toward the, but rather through thy spirit, which graciously thou
shall pour on our hertes, cause that faithfully and busely we may make suit
unto the in both times, as well in prosperity as in adversity. Feed us
continually with angels fode, that is with thy holy word, whereby our hertes
may be made ryghtuouse and strong to our Lord Jesus Christ. Be not ever
more angry with us sith thou know we be but flesh and as a puf of wind
that suddenly vanysheth* and never returns. Grant that ye true David Jesus
Christ, may be our herdman, to guide us through innocence and pureness of
heart, and to govern us as his gracious hand knows best to be done. Amen.

How the chylden of God ought to pray in their mysfortune and adversity.
Psalm. 79.
How long wylt thou O lord bear us such displeasure, how long shall thy
fume thus be hot as fire? come home I beseech the again to us, bringing with
the thy loving favor and gifts, look not narowly on the offenses of our
ancestors and forfathers, nor yet of our own life, yea rather let thy mercy
increase upon us, for we are become very caytyfes and wretches, meruelously
vexed of the ungodly persons, because thou wollest it so to be. Help God,
for only thou have power to deliver us, not yt we have deserved the same, for
surely no favor have we deserved at thy hands, neither can we claim of
duty any thing of the, but rather after our deserts we be the children of
da^nacion and castawayes, yet have thou O Lord respect to thy holy name that
it may be glorified through us. Forgive us, I say, our sins, eue^ for thy
holy names sake, that we may have occasion thereby to hallowe it, to the intent
we may according to thy worthynes, and as thou art of thine own nature
report the to be even our God, savior, father, kind herted, meke, merciful,
our only comfort, trust, defense, and ransom. Suffer the gronynges and
co^plaintes of thy prisoners to come to the, deliver them, preserve thy devout
and sworn subjects, as many as be appointed to be of thy flock. Then shall
we the pytious sheep of thy pasture without ceasynge endure in setting forth
thy praises, and evermore we shall rejoice of thy great benefytes. Amen.

For building of the poor church greatly fallen in decay. psalm. 80.
Lord that art hedman over thy people hear us, raise up thy power, come and
help us, Lord of hoostes bring me astray and vagarau^t person home again,
let thy countenance shine on us, and we shall be hole. How long will thou not
regard our prayers? how long shall we feed our selves with tears? thou have
caused our neighbors to rage and wonder on us, our enemies laugh us to
scorn, and extremely deal with us. Lord call us home again, let thy amiable
countenance, I say, shine upon us, and so we shall be perfectly hole. Return,
look, behold, and come se thy church of Christ, this thy vyneyarde, for lo,
how it is fowlye spoiled by the servants of Satan. Lord repare thy
vyneyarde a new, bring it in to a goodly fashion again, hedge it round
about on every side, enclose the vyneyarde that thou haste planted with thy
ryghtha^de, dygge it up afreshe, provide that it may bring forth fruit,
ouerse it yet again, maynteyne and defend it from villainy and al harms.
Lord God of hoostes, bring us home again from our wylsome wandering, let thy
loving face glyster on us, and so we shall be save and sound. Ame^.

That God would vouchsafe to teach us. Psalm. 81.
Lord be thou our strength and our sauegarde, that of pleasure and courage we
may auaunce the, and set forth thy name, deliver us from dangers, for we call
only upon the, And sythens of thy goodness we be admitted to thy scole, let us
hear the alone. Suffer no strange god to meddel any thing among us, let us
know none other scoolemayster but the, let us make divine suit and homage to
none other, fyl our mouths with the swetnes of thy word, for we open them to
the only, Grant us those peticions that be profitable both to body and soul,
leave us not to the fancies of our heart, suffer us not to be wedded, ne given
to our own will, but let us fashion al things unto thy sure word, to ye
praise and honor of thy name. Amen.

For faithful workmen to the edifyenge of Christ's kingdom. Psalm. 82
Lord set trustye princes and judges over thy people, that they may ministre
justice and equity to the poor, miserable, nedy, fatherles, and wydowes, to
thyntent they may rescue and deliver such thy poor folks from the wicked
men's hands, but for lack of such princes and judges, (of which for the more
part is always great skasetie) thou thy self O most dear father take in hand
to defend thy people, for myserably of a surety they be oppressed, provide
thou conning teachers to be put in authority over thy church, that through
thy word they may mollify the hard hertes, swage the troubled consciences,
and stablysh the same in grace, such preachers, I say, as will busely search
not their own profyt and worldly luker, but our health and felicity. Amen.

Against Christ's enemies and the pharisaycall doctrine. Psalm. 83.
WHo may be like to the, o god? noman verily, noman. Then hold thy peace no
longer, nor do not dissemble in my cause, for it is thy cause rather then mine.
Lo how thine enemies triumph and wax proud in stomach, they lay snares for
thy people, they conspire against thy holy and chosen persons, which be
unknown to the world, to the intent to rob them of their good reputacion and
fame. Lord this matter pertayneth properly to ye, for they be confederate and
knyt as it were in a leage against the. Wherefore repress their myscheuous
inte^tes, put them to shame, so as they may at last espy and have experience
that thy name is puissau^t, almighty, lordely, and that thou alone art the
highest and chief ruler through out all the earth. Amen.

For the despysynge of this world. Psalm. 97.
How pleasant, O Lord, be thy dwelling places? and again how vgsome, how
vnpleasau^t is the tyranny of this world, and ye treason of naughty
persons? Wherefore my soul lo^geth sore to come to thy court and heavenly
palace. And herin most tender Lord, I beseech the that this desire may wax
in me every day hoter and hoter, so that through the desire which I have to
come to thy heavenly ma^sion, I may set at naught al erthly things. Let all my
heart and all my body in the only the living God be glad, merry, and joyful, O
my father, Savior, and delyuerer. For doubtless from ye only comes my
strength and all my defense. Let me not be given to earthly and temporal
things, but rather ernestly and only look on things godly and everlasting,
and thereafter to fashion al my deeds of this life. Let strength and faith in
the increase, and every gift of grace better then other, so that every day I
may amend and grow unto better. Lord of armies hear my prayers, god of
Jacob understand them. Look (O God, our defensour and father) on the face of
thine anointed and dearest son, for whose sake deal mercifully with us, and
grant us that favor and grace that our sins may be forgyuen so, that I may
be chosen to this honor to be one of thy sons, make me clean and vpryght in
heart, strong in faith toward the, immouable from that trust which I have to
be saved, hot in love toward my neighbor, for thy bounteous goodness and
troth. Amen.

For the holy ghost and the assemblynge of the church. Psalm. 85.
THy nation and those Christianes, in whom thou dwelleste take unto ye, and as
thy dearly beloved bless them, restore unto lyberty thy presoners bound not
only in conscience, but also in body, take away their wickedness, cover their
sins, sith Christ has satisfied for them even with his blood. Pluck away
thy wrath and displeasure, refreshe us again, for our health depends only on
the. Assuage thy malice. O Lord will thou never be pleased? Will thou still
be grieved against us? No not so lord, not so, give us heart of grace, restore
us our life, that we thy people may always rejoice in the. Show us (Lord)
thy goodness, show us thy saving health, speak to me within me, speak how
thy people ones shall have peace, so that they cluster not to vanite, but
rather be strong toward the, let thy health be even at hand, so as we need
not to stand in dread. Thy praise Lord and magnificence might abide among
us, thy bounty and thy faythfulnes be heaped up in us, let thy ryghtuousnes,
whereby we be frelye made ryghtuous, and peace of consciences mete together
within us, and kiss one the other. Give us Lord the goodness of thy spirit,
grant that the earth of our hertes may bring forth much fruit of
ryghteousnes, let thy ryghtuousnes go before when thou co^mest to us, by grace
purifye us, and co^duyte us in ye straight way

A prayer of Christians in their perils. Psalm. 86.
Turn hither thine ear, and hear me, lord, for a very pore and a miserable
person am I, keep my soul, sith thou have hallowed it with the word of thy
troth, help thy servant, for none other succor know I but of the, nor any
other I will seek, neither feed my mind with vain hope. Have pity on me, for
every day I call upon the, and shall do till the heat of this trouble be
abated. Comfort my soul, for unto the, O most tender Lord, I lift up mine
heart, to the I flee, for thou art gentle and mercyful, and can not deny
them thy help that seek it at thy hand. Lord understand my prayers,
consider well my pytious complaynte, specially in this time of my trouble. The
supersticious fools and fond ypocrites busely hunt here and there for their
defense and sauegarde, but undoubtedly their help and leanyngstocke can not be
compared with thy hand neither can it work the wonderful acts that thou
workest. Their own invention they repute as God, yea and worship it before
God. But it is thou that art on high, thou do the wo^derous deeds, thou
alone art God, helper in all necessities, fountain and hedsprynge of al
goodness, the only I call on as my God in all straytes and dangers, thou only
shall help me, for this thou may. Inform me Lord in those ways that
conduyte men to the, to thinte^t I may walk in thy troth, and so fashion my
heart as I may rejoice in the holy fear of thy name, then shall I give the,
thanks, and with all mine heart contynually praise thy name. Thine endless goodness
be shed upon me, from the deep do^geon pluck out my soul. And whereas the
proud men O God, and the puyssau^t lords who hate and belie thy word, be
styffe against me and make cruel pursuyte after my soul, give thou me grace
not to faint. Certes, thou Lord god art mercyful, soft, and longsufferynge,
full of goodness and credit, turn to me, have compassion of me, make me thy
servant strong and hardy, that I might withstand mine enemies boldly, and
constantly cleave unto the, preserve me which am the son of the church thine
handmayde, show me some good token to the praise of thy name that those yt
hate me for thy cause, may se with their eyes yt thou sta^dest on my side, and
do comfort and solace me.

For the building of Christ's church. Psam. 87.
Lay not the foundation of thy church Lord on the sand, nor on the low and
plashy ground, but on the holy hills and in heavens, where Christ is the
corner stone. Lord be thou always resyent in that church, let; I say, thy
resting place be in yt church, through thy spirit declare thy wo^derous
factes, whereunto me^ may repare to obtain thy favor, to the intent the said
church may be buylt and increased by preaching the word of promise and
comfort, as thou have ordained the same for all men.

In extreme danger. Psalm. 88.
FOr what cause (my Lord God) have thou put me back, seeing now thou ru^nest
from me, and thou wylt not hear though I cry night and day to the. Suffer me
ones Lord to exhibyte my supplicacion up unto the, bow down thine ear to my
request, ponder in thy mind how I am in a pecke of troubles, even drowned in
mysery and nyghe unto death. Death, I say, and hell are even before mine eyes,
neither am I much unlike unto dead me^, nay I am even a very dead man, I had
almoost said, that I am thrown down eue^ into hell, such horrible fear has
enuyroned and assaulted my conscience, for lo no man cares for me, no man is
sorye for my loss and damage, yea even thou on whom I hang all together
do in like manner as they do, thy displesure is very hot against me, thou
ouerwhelmest me with waves and hole sees of troubles, I am well nygh drowned, I
am holly caught and hedged in with aduersite. I know not how to escape, neither
have I any place to flee to. Mine eyes dasell through great sorrow, always I
cry holding up mine humble hands unto the. What profit I beseech the O
Lord, or what praise gettest thou of mine harm? How can I pray the being
thus destitute and left in sins, in darkness, in death, in hell? Set forth and
brute thy merciful acts, thy troth, credit, and ryghtuousnes, wherwyth
franklye without our deserts thou make us ryghtuous. Why do not rather O
Lord shyfte me from darkness to light? from peryshynge unto sauegarde, from
death to life, from hell to heaven? Thus doing I shall have occasion to praise
thy name. Why do not thou hear him that cries to the so erly before the
son rise? Why do thou so discourteously pussh back thy client calling on
the after the daysprynge? Why do thou so roughly turn thy face always from
me? Long time have I lain in prison, and found no remedy, in so much that I
was clean destitute both of Gods help and ma^s Thou take away from me all the comfort I might have against death, all the trust of life, and all that
might succor me in adversity, and again thou sendest me all mysfortune,
damage, and calamite. Thus plainly me thinks thou workest me more spyte then
al enemies in the world could do, where as heretofore thou stodest my
synguler good Lord, friend, and defense against al mine adversaries. Thy wrath
has lain over heavy on my sholders, and thyn awe has kept my courage low.
Lord God I beseech ye ones again hear my humble peticion, help me now in my
most need for thy wondrous holy names sake, where by thou orderest all
things. Amen.

An admonicion of the promyses made in Christ. Psalm. 89.
THy credit and troth are prepared in the heavens, that is, in thy saints, O
Lord, with who^ thou have made an everlasting covenant. Thou have sworn to
that same David Jesus Christ that thou wylt prepare him sede for ever, that is
to say, true beleuers in him. There is none like unto the, thou art drad
among the congregation of the holy, thou art wonderful, and in might thou
do pass all other. All things be thine, thou haste made all together. But
remember thy troth and promise, O Lord. Help us in this distress. In trust
and love toward the, buyld the a dwelling house in us, teach us to be merry in
the, that we may walk in the light of thy countenance, that we may rejoice
in thy name, and be exalted through thy righteousness. Be thou the praise of our
strength, for through the, we be able to all things, at thy pleasure we may
do all by Jesus Christ thy only begotten son, for he is thy derely beloved,
and we also for his sake be counted thy beloved sons, heirs, kings, and
prestes. Thy grace and couenaunte be with us ever more. When thou shall punysh
us according to our deserts, yet leave us not under the scourge, turn not
thy mercy from us, bring us not down to utter destruction, but after thou
have chastised us, show thy favor on us again. Remember our corrupt
nature, and that thou made not man for naught. No man can deliver himself
from death, no man can save his own soul from hell, thou only must do it,
namely to such as believe in the. Remember the spytefull reproaches that thy
Christ suffered for us, for his sake show thy mercy upon us. Praised be thou O
Lord for ever. Amen.

For the necessities of man's life a thanking. Psalm. 90.
Lord thou art our continual shote anchor, for thou art God for ever. Short
is our life, always some of us dye, and other some come into the world, and
with the a thousand years be but one day, yea as the lest minute of an hour.
This life passes as does a dream, even as grass in the field, grene to day
and dry to morrow, if thou be displesed, the^ we be lost, if thou chafe, the^
shrynke we for fear, for through sins we be dead unto the. Certes Lord, if
thou have respect to our sins, who shall stand fast, show us how many be
the days of our life, that we may spend them wisely to ye praise of thy
name, lest we foolyshly trustyng on long life, suddenly come unto our death.
Come Lord unto us, and comfort thy people. In the morning replenysh us with
thy goodness, that after this long sorrow we may take heart of comfort
again. Declare thy good will upon us, and set forward our handworkes every
day unto better So be it

A prayer against goostly temptacion. psalm. 91.
TRustyng on thy grace o lord, all my hope I put in the, hyde my life with
Christ within the, underneath the shadow of thy wings defend me, do my God as
my trust is in the, deliver me from the snare of Satan's guard, they hunte how
to pluck me from the. From the perilous poyso^ of false doctrine, from their
wyly practices so subtilye forged by grievous threatenynges and sweet words,
thy truth be my sheld Let me not stand in fear of ye night evil of unbelieve
and of thy strayte judgment, neither let me be afraid of the flyenge arowe on
ye day time, let me not be in fear of that horrible pestilence crepynge in
through darkness, I mean, let me not be ignorant how detestable and horrible
my sins be, that I dissemble them not, nor qualifye them. Let me not dread
that mydday devil, which abuses thy church under a title and pretense of
holiness. Nether let Satan, though he change himself in to an angel of light,
stryke any fear in me. Both on the right side and on the left, as well in
prosperity as in adversity, as well in gostly business as in corporal, let thy
angels diligently wait on me, that I do not stomble. Then shall I tread under
foot that helly dragon. How gredely have I longed after the? Lord deliver
me, according to thy word, preserve me for thy holy names sake Of long time
have I called on the, hear me therefore (most merciful God) be with me in
this and other mine adversities, rescue me, make me regarded in the syghte of
mine enemies, to the intent I may at large extol thy goodness. Put me unto
Christ, that I may be one of his, for he is the everlasting life. Merciful
Lord let me se some spedy remedy in these dangers, and after it thy
everlasting health. Amen.

For the true forsakynge of thy self. Psalm. 92.
OF duty we be bound always with coragious spirit to praise and hallow thy
name. In the morrow of joy when al things shall chance to our hertes desire,
we shall ascribe al to thy goodness without any deseruynge on our behalf, and
so shall we praise thy mere and special grace, But in the night of trouble and
adversity, we shall call to remembrance thy most faithful and trustye
promyses, that we despair not. Certainly Lord we knowledge all things to be
in thine hands, for thou made all things, thou conseruest, and gouernest
all yt thou have wrought, give us therefore grace both to put to our good will,
and to work that thou wyllest, for this ca^ not be done by man's power. Inform
us with knowledge, stablysh us with remembrance of all good works, prouyd that
we thus being planted in thy house, may so spring and floryshe as do the
palms and cedre trees in mount Libane. Amen.

Of Christ's kingdom. Psalm 93
Lord thou art our king, thou have taken upon the all power, might, and
honor, be thou chief master in our hertes, bring the deuell down. Chase
far from us the world, sin, death, and hell, and what so ever our old Adam
has heretofore possessed by any title or claim. Cancel and stryke out the
rygoure of the law by the blood of Christ thy son. O Lord, let the
streams of thine holy ghost braste forth on us, and that with a great sound
and noise, much stronger then the ragynge waves of worldly wisdom chief
schoolmayster of fleshly trust and affiance. Thine holy word which is
Christ's gospel, might overcome and throw down to the ground all fleshly
wisdom, that all men may give credence to thy scripture, for it is true,
just, and certain. Let us be found ryghteous and holy in thy house. Amen.

Against false preachers of the law. Psalm. 94.
GOd sith punishment and vengeance is thine, show thy self, arise thou which
art the ryghteous judge of the world, deliver us from these malicious enemies.
Lord, how long shall they triu^phe? how long (I say) shall they thus
scornefully spyt at thy ryghteousnes? how long shall they thus like tyrauntes
entreat thy people? I beseech the ones at last make an end of this our
trouble and affliccion. Lord be thou our schoolmayster. Happy is he doubtless
that may be taught and corrected at thine hand, wherefore let us know the. In
this time of adversity grant us patience, drive not thy people from the,
forsake not thine enheritau^ce, let thy iudgeme^te be set up again, that we
may follow it always with an vpryght heart. Refresh us through thy comfort
in our trouble. And god be our defense and our sauegarde. Amen.

For the schoolers of faith. Psalm. 95.
How glad shall we be to thank the, we that setle our selves in the? how
greatly shall we rejoice as many of us as knowledge our selfs to be of thy
schole? our trust and health art thou, take us to thy proteccion, that we may
be thy people and thy sheep to be fed at thine hands and on thy pastures. Make
the beams of thy benevolence to shine on us, and so work in us, that our
hertes be never stubburne against the voice of thy word, nor that we be found
at any time unbelieving, but that we may enter into thy rest, both here and else
where, through Christ our captain and mighty shepherde.

For the same. Psalm. 96.
PUt a new song into our mouth that as new men we may sing unto the and
worthily auaunce thy Savior Jesus Christ, by whom wonderfully thou have
wrought our health. To the with the same Christ id due all honor, praise, and
glory, for thou through him gouernest thy people in troth. Amen.

For to love Christ and to be glad in him. Psalm. 102.
Lord Jesus Christ our king, grant us grace, that ever we may be iocunde
and merry in the, for thou art exalted above all other gods in every land,
defend our souls, that we may evermore love the, and hate that evil is.
Preserve us from the hands of the wicked, spring thou that art the true light
into our hertes, let us rejoice in the that sauest and iustifiest us. Then
shall we continually sing praises to thy name, geuynge thanks for benefytes
and gifts taken of the.

A commune prayer to Christ. Psalm. 118.
Grant us (sweet Lord Jesus Christ) that we as new men may give the new
thanks in spirit, for doubtless thou have wrought wonderful feats, thou
haste delivered thy self in peryls, thou have raised thy self from death,
even by thy heavenly power. Thine health and saving power be known abroad to
the world, thy ryghteousnes be spread forth to all sorts of men, for thereby
only we be taken for ryghteous persons in thy sight. Remember O Lord thy
gracious favor and promise toward us, to thinte^t all the world may
approve the, praise the, extol the, and give the continual thanks. Amen.

For Christ's kingdom. Psalm. 99.
Lord thou surely art the king (though the wicked Jews and Pharisees never
so proudly deny ye) thou allone gouernest the consciences and hertes of men,
and makeste us ryghtuouse, even of thy mere grace by our faith and belefe
only. Thou furtherest, thou set alofte those that believe in the, and again
thou pardonest none that despise the, thou alone gyuest righteousness and
judgment, whereby we be allowed and counted good. Increase tha^ O Lord our
faith, defend and deliver us from the hole route of our enemies, and from all
our anguysh and tribulacion. So be it. sweet Savior Jesus Christ.

For the true seruyes of God. Psalm. 100.
Lord God take thou yet mercy on us, grant us thy grace, so as we may be
glad, and fresh in spirit to serve the purely, syncerely, and hertely, but not
to the boastyng and setting forth of our own selves in men's eyes. Declare thy
self to be a friend to us thy propre people sore oppressed, and the forsaken
sheep of thy fold, stablysh thy goodness and troth on us o lord for ever.
Amen.

To be new and goostly persons. Psalm. 101.
Lord so shape and renew us that we may always walk before the in an innocente
and pure heart, that we may interpryse none euel, that we may hate the breach
of thy commandments, and that we cleue to no man yt has a malicious heart,
nor that we rail against no man with despytful words, and that we have no
proud lokes, or covetous heart, nor that we do any evil what so ever it be,
but that we may love every one another with pure heart, kyndled with a
feruente zele to set forth the glory of thy name. Amen.

The prayer of the sinner knowlegynge his own sins. Psalm. 102.
Lord, hear my lowly prayer, let my cry come unto thine ears, In this time
of aduersite hyde not thy face, bow down thyn ear when I call on the. Hear
me quyckely, I pray the, for loo my days vanish as does the smoke. I am O
Lord a silly poor catyffe, and naught can do. On what side so ever I turn
me, anon I mete with thy judgments and with despair. No where I find any
gentleness, favor, or help. Men be displeased with me, because I can not
follow their appetites, nor brook them, I am as a Pellicane in wilderness.
Behold, I have no taste neither in meat nor drink, so sore am I charmed with
thy wrath and displeasure. I was of this opinion, yt I thought you tokeste mine
enemies part against me, so luckely after their hearts lust al adversity came
upon me every one evil in others neck. My days slide away as does the shadow,
but thou Lord art for ever. No doubt, thy memorial continues world with out
end. Tokens there be excedyng many on every side which may put us in mind of
the, for thou show us a prove of thy goodness and mercy by thy creatures, by
scriptures, by miracles, but chefely by our savior and Lord Jesus Christ thyn
anointed, wherefore if he fail me in peryls, utterly am I lost. Arise Lord,
have mercy on thy church, have pytie on me, which am a sely member of christ's
body, for surely I am an outcast every where. It is time o lord to show
compassion. Now I say, it is time to show us thy mercy o lord. Harken tha^
to our prayer, despise it not. Lo I am a miserable p^soner, hear therefore my
gronynges, deliver me, and then with great thanks I shall not stynt to glorifye
and blase thy name. In thassemblie of all people shall I in full large and
goodly wise make reaporte of the. O Lord my god pluck me not hence suddenly,
but in the mids of my days let me remember mine end, lest by my soden
departure from this life, I be deprived of that everlasting life. Be therefore
merciful to me, even for thine holy names sake. Amen.

A prayer to cast of the old man. Psalm. 103.
Lord, it is semely that my soul should praise ye, and all ye might that is
in me should magnify thy holy name, for the great benefits and loving kindness
which thou haste done unto me. Pardon Lord my wyckednes, heal ye re^nauntes
of syn which as yet be in this my corrupt nature, deliver my life from death,
keep me well fensed from mine enemies in peryls, in death, and in hell. Enuiron
me with goodness and mercy, that I may be strong against sin, death, and
the deuell, and against all the force of mine adversaries. Fyl my mouth with
goods profitable both to body and sprete, yea though all the world be against
me yet stand thou on my side. Let me wax yo^ge through comfort of thine holy
ghost. Make me courageous and bold in all that good is. O Lord, of thy
judgment, ryghtuousnes, and mercy, help all those that suffer wrong. Long
forbear us in our sins, punyshe us not long, though we have deserved it, be
not ever more angry, nor let not our innumerable sins, suffer their worthy
punyshme^t, but remove them far away from us. Be our father, take us in the
number of thy children. Oh how frail a work be we? even very dust and
ashes, our days be as the flower in the field: Lord teach us to fear the, so
as we may perform thy commandments and the conditions of thy covenant. Thy
goodness be evermore with us present, and deliver us sweet Lord from all evil.
Amen.

That God may be known by his creatures. psalm. 104.
Give me this grace O Lord, that with my hole body and soul, with my hole
might and spirit, I may always praise the by the knowledge and belefe of thy
heavenly predestinacion made in Christ Jesus by a wondrous workmanshyppe of
all things in heaven, in earth, and in the sea, and that by consyderyng the
nature of all things I may be rauyshed eue^ unto the, ye maker of them, and
that here upon I may be encoraged to trust unto ye in all things, so as I may
be well assured to receive al commodities at thine hands, both these that I
already have, and that I may have in time to come, what thing so ever I shall
stand in need of. Surely, at thine hand look al beasts for their fode, every
one in his due time. Al things will go to naught, if thou turn thy face away.
To the, therefore, be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

To know Christ. Psalm. 105.
Through thy bou^teous goodness let us continually blow abroad thy praises.
Grant us only to call on thy name, let us remember thy most famous deeds, let
us talk of reason of them, so that in the only we may rejoice, for in the,
evermore we be glad, we search the, believe the, yea and to the only we pray,
and through thy power we be conserved. At all times therefore let us remembrynge
thy benefits be not churlish nor ingrate unto the o Lord, sith you with infinite
benefits endowest both us and the hole world. Amen.

In peryls for help. Psalm. 106.
TO thy goodness evermore we give thanks, Lord, besechyng the also that we
may do justice and judgment. Grant us always to fear the, to give credit
unto the, to trust fastly unto the. Remember us like as thou art wont to be
favorable unto thy people. Uisyte us with thy saving health, for both we and
our fathers have sore sinned, we have done wickedly and ungodly. And now for
our sins we be brought low and made even the driuels of ye world. But O
Lord look upon our need, hear our playnte, and remember us for that
couenauntes sake, which thou made with us. Have remorse at length of this
affliction and trouble sent from the, as thou art most meke and mercyful,
take away this scourge, show thy self frendfull. Let thy mercy defend us
from our enemies, help us, Lord, our God, that we may give true and most
deserved thanks to thine holy name. Praised be thou o Lord God for ever. Amen.

For comfort, good officers and faithful ministers of Gods word. Psalm.
107.
THy goodness, Lord God, has none end, ofte^tymes thou have redeemed,
delivered, and rescued thy people of Israel forth of a thousand dangers, even
as often as they cried unto the, though their sins were never so great. O
Lord have mercy on me, for I am in great danger. Trusting upon thine
infinite goodness, I call to the, hear me, help me spedely for thine holy names
sake. Bring me from this black darkness, brast asonder my bonds, send unto
me thy word, whereby thou made all things, and relieve me thy poor wretch.
O Lord send ge^tell Princes and such as be dilligent in their authority and
office in as much as they do that pleases the, and in nothing swerve from thy
ways. Save me from myserye and utter damage. Make me also have delight and
pleasure in thy works, and that by understanding thine unspeakable goodness, I
may be thoroughly glad at mine heart, for ever more have I full good cause to
praise thy goodness, and to render due thanks unto thy godly Majesty. So I
have most gentel and benign Lord.

To be raunsomed and delivered from bondage of conscience. Psalm. 108.
Lord god almighty mine heart is at this present season ready to sing praises
unto the, and to render unto the most worthy thanks. Only I desire the, thou
wol vouchsaue to deliver me from these grievous peryls in which I am now
wrapped. Surmount Lord above the heavens and spread thy glory over all the
earth. Show thy loving kyndnes, auaunce thy truth so high, that it may
reach unto the heavens. Help me through thy right hand, aid and assyste me,
for surely al man's help is but vain. Let me be strong in the, and for thy
names sake, o lord, bring down mine enemies, nay thy enemies rather, and
make them to stoop. Amen.

The prayer of Christ's church. psalm. 109.
THou, O Lord (of whom is al my glory and praise,) suffer not this shame and
villanye to be laid upon me. The wicked and wyly foxes of this world have
gaped upon me with their lyenge tongue they sclander me and speak spytefull
words of me every where. Do for me now for thy holy names sake, I think
long after thy goodness, deliver me Lord, for I am poor and succourles, be at
hand Lord God, and of thy goodness help me, to thintente they may know that
this is thine hand, and so learn to fear the. When they curse me, tha^
bless thou me. I pray the, stand on my right hand to help and defend me
against my most fearce and cruel enemies.

Of the benefyte of redemption and Christ's office. Psalm. 110.
O Most dear Jesus Christ our Lord and our God, to the verily said the
father, sit on my right hand until I put thine enemies a fotestole under thy
fete, which father also made the to be Lord and King over all things that be
contained in heaven, in earth, and in the sea. Lord, play ye parts of a King
among thine enemies, which pursue us, and would confound the in us, let
therefore thy royal power proceed against them. Subdue this flesh in us unto
our profit, put down al lettes and stomblyng stocks which the world lay
against us. Uanquyshe Satan, so as we may have contynuall peax in the
according to thy promise. Thy father also by his oath has anointed the his
everlasting priest, after the order of Melchisedec, to thinte^t thou moughtest
always be a mediator and suter unto him for us. Sweet Lord remember this thy
name of office taken upon the in our cause. I beseech the, stand my good
Lord, make thy father our gracious God, though not without just cause he be
angry with our sins. Show him thy wounds that thou sufferedest for the
ransom of our sins, offer him thy blood so ple^teouslye shed for the
forgyuenesse of our trespasses, which blood as yet is fresh in his eyes, and
with that same blood through thy word in spirit wash and cleanse us. Thou that
art the blessed sede of Abraham, bless us for ever. By thy holy spirit teach
us in our hertes, for these be the offices of thy presthode. Anoynte us with that
most holy breathynge, so that for thy sake we may be esteemed both kings and
prestes, and in especial pure in conscience before the, that we thy true
levites and prestes may offer goostly sacrifices, which thy father shall
allow and take in worth for thy sake, yt every one of us may teach other thy
holy word, and every one pray for other. Furthermore for as much as thou, o
Christ Jesus most dearly beloved in our heart, art named ye judge of quyck and
dead: revenge us of our enemies, and after ye shame of this life, promote us
in an other world to everlasting honor, and we shall re^dre unto ye
everlasting thanks and praises. Amen.

For forgeuenes of sins. Psam. 111.
ASsyst me O Lord God, and I shall thank the with all my heart, by auancynge
thy works in ye metynge of the holy persons, for all thy deeds be glorious and
myghtie, and like as al our works be vain and of no strength: so be al thy
works excellent, strong, and puissau^t, Remember me as thou have couenau^ted
evermore to do. Grant that we may be delivered from this body of sin, and
that in spirit I may be new shapen again even for thy names sake which is
right holy and reverend. Grant me to fear the, so that I may be rych in
wisdom and understanding, and that I may know the, believe the, and trust to
the evermore. Amen.

For works of charity. Psalm. 112.
Lord nurture and bring me up in the true awe of the, that al my delight may
rest in thy word and in thy will and commandments. Lyghten mine heart (O
thou true light) in this my darkness, for thou art most mercyful and
ryghtuouse. Make me also merciful and tender upon my neighbor. Grant me
abundaunce of substance, so that lyberally I may give unto the nedy, and that
also indifferently, that I have no cause to fear any unequal judgment. Make
that my heart be always ready to trust and rest in the, and be evermore full of
comfort and ryghteousnes. Amen.

For the building of Christ's church. Psalm. 113
THy name Lord be praised always and every where. Look upon us thy poor and
miserable subjects. Thou art of all the highest, none is checkmate with ye,
promote thy little ones the outcastes of the world from the dust, and the nedye
from ye durte. Thy church of Christ which is reputed of the ungodly persons,
as a baren mother make her fruteful, so as she may bring forth many children
in thy house. Amen.

To be chosen one of Christ's children. Psalm. 114. and.115.
IN wonders and tokens which thou shewedst Lord God by great force, thou
deliueredst thy people Israel out of Egypt. Now also according to thy great
and bounteous goodness help us, that the hole glory undiminished may be
referred to thy name and not to us in all thy valiant acts. Be thou our aid
succoure and defense. Bless us, that we may be found blessed at the
judgment, that without end we may praise and sprede abroad thy most
blessed name among thy chosen holy ones. Amen.

To be delivered from error. Psam. 116.
Lord how sore do I long for thine aid and assystence, hear my complaynt.
Bow down (I say) thine ear to my requests, I have long called upon the.
Snares of death entangled me, dread of hell stroke me to the heart. I was
drowned in waves of troubles on every side. Lord behold I call on thy name,
deliver therefore my soul, for thou art a gentell, ryghtuouse, and mercyful
God. Keep me thy simple servant, help me, for in the world surely I am
esteemed but as a vile person and am nothing regarded. Bring my soul to rest
through thy sweet comfort, pull it away, that death arrest it not, keep mine
eyes from weeping, my fete from slydynge, so as in the living land I may
quietly walk before the. So be it. Grant me O Lord in heart to believe unto my
iustificacion, and with mouth to confess unto my salvation. Thou art only
true, thy word is troth, all tokens among men, al beckes, words, and
works be very vanities and lies. Wherefore O Lord inspire that same thy word
into my heart, yt I might be garnyshed with truth unto thy glory. Grant me
patience, that I may drink of thy cup of tribulacion with a glad and
willing mind, yea though it be full unto the brynke, but provide thou that
this cup of drink may be to my salvation. When it shall be thy pleasure to
take me from this mysery, or to lowse these bonds of extreme need, where with
I am as yet fast tied: then let me not be found unkind nor churlysh to the by
forgyttynge thy benefytes, but cause that I may offer unto the pleasant
sacrifices, while I knowledge thy loving kindness, and extol thy most large
and imperial name. Uouchsafe to hear me, sithe I call upon thy name O Lord
god almighty. Amen.

A blessing. Psalm. 117.
Lord thy fre goodness and troth be evermore hangyng over our heads, and
always abide within us, thus shall we praise and magnifye the for ever and
ever. Amen.

For goostly strength. Psalm. 118.
AMiable art thou O Lord, thy goodness shall endure for ever, set me at
large forth of all these straytes. Be thou with me, the^ shall I fear noman,
but boldlye defye mine enemies, and ernestlye cleave to the. Wherefore let me not
fall wha^ they assaute me. Se yt I shrink not nor flee one foot, but be thou my
strength and sauegard. Thy mighty and strong ryghthande hold me up, and if
thou chastise me, yet slay me not. Fasten me in the cornerstone Christ, who
was refused of ye master buylders, I mean, of ye proud hypocrites, but he
was hyghly preferred at thy hand. Lyghten me, I beseech the, with the perfect
knowledge of him. And I beseech the for thy rau^som, which for me thou have
paid that that day of gladness and joy might ones shine upon me. Help me
with thy good luck and furtheraunce, so as with a courageous heart I may say,
blessed be he that comes in the lords name. Amen.

For continuance in the way and word of the Lord. Psalm. 119.
LOrd keep me vpryght, holly bent and wedded to thy law and scripture, so that
I may do nothing but that is agreeable unto thy word This I know thou
requyrest of me yet it passes my power to perform it. Se therefore that either
I be able to do thy commandments, or at the lest way supply thou in me, yt
which lacks on my behalf to ye acco^plishment of thy requests. All my
doings, studyes, and endeuores I employ (as much as in me is) to observe thy
commandments, to thinte^t I be not found faulty. Ah my lord god do not thus
leave me, reform my ways sith I am attendaunt upon thy word and promise, yea
and though I be sore ouercharged, yet deprive me not of my good hope, Hyde and
faste^ in my heart thy comfortable words of promise, that I fall not. Teach me
thy statutes, laws, and judgments. Lord to the intent I may boldly reason and
talk of thy law: grant me a constant will to follow and to do it in deed,
restore thy servant unto his old dignity, after this storm bring me to
quietness and solace, that I may live, and do thy words. Open mine eyes, so
that in ye word of thy pleasure I may behold thy wondrous ways, which
pass all man's wit and capacity. Purge me of this infamye and sclaunder,
whereby I am bylyed of the wicked folk only for thy words sake: Save the life
of thy poor servant according to thy promise. Mine old ways and fashions
of life (I can not deny) be evil. Forsake not yet a repentant heart, point
me the ways that lead unto the, tha^ shall I report thy worthy acts. Behold
my soul waxes faint by reason of so many crimes laid to my charge, but
strengthen thou me upon thy word, let mine heart be set on thy word only,
and not given neither to couetyse, nor yet to foolysh pride, prycke me forward
in thy way. Thy word be with me, so as I may dread the, than shall I neither
stomble, nor slide. Ah most mercyful Lord, for thy words sake, let thy
goodness and preseruacion shine upon me, that with thy word I may answer all
mine euel willers and adversaries. Pluck not ye troth from my mouth, remember
thy comfortable word made for thy servants sauegarde, which only is my
comfort in these my outrageous pains and anguishes, let me never forget it,
but talk of it night and day. Lord, be thou my heritage, lotte and portion,
for thy promise sake have pytie on me, that I may be partaker among those that
fear the. For the earth is plenteous through thy goodness. Show me thy
iugementes, do well with thy servant, as thy promise is, and teach me to
know that good is. Where as thou have brought me to a low ebb, and dydest
set me on me knees: thou did dest well O Lord to me, for by this means I
recognize and knowledge the to be my promoter and setter forth unto
ryghteousnes. Let the devout and godly se how thou have preserved and kept
me, yt they also may hervpon rejoice, for them also wolt thou help in like
manner. Thy goodness be my comfort according to thy promise. Be thou mercyful to
pardon my life, mine heart be without blemysh and spotte al together in thy
ryghtuousnes. Se that I never be put to confusion. Oh how sore long I for
thine help and comfort? how long shall I trust upon thy promise? Mine eyes
dasell lokynge after thy word, and awayt, when thou shall release my pains.
How long shall I be beaten thus in this rorynge see? how long shall mine
enemies pursue me without cause? Lord assyste me of thy goodness, encorage me,
and cause that I may keep the words of thy mouth. Truly Lord thy word is
everlasting, by it be al things made and preserved, yea by it thou made me
also. Lord God help me. Thy word be a lantern to my fete, and light in all
my ways. Thou see Lord I am brought down very low, and had as a vile
slave, wherefore go to, by thy word restore me unto life, vouchsafe, I beseech
the, acceptably to take the fre offrynges of my mouth. And teach me thy
judgments, by thy word co^serue me, so yt mine hope deceive me not, Make me
strong, O my God, that I may escape. Than shall I delight in thy ryghteousnes,
mystrustynge all that is of flesh. Let me learn by thy secret inspiracion to
fear the, and to shrynke as often as I shall remember thy judgment, deliver me
not into mine adversaries hands. Take me to thy defense, be thou only my
succor, favor him that favors the, and is busy to help his neghboures.
Provide that men hurt me not by power and force. Mine eyes tryckle through
long awaytynge for thine aid, and that thou should be thy words master.
Deal favorably with me, as thou art good thy self, teach me thy judgments.
Turn to me, show thy self merciful and gracious, as thou art wont to be
to those that love thy name, and after thy word reform my steps. Let no
wyckednes raygne in me, no adversity overcome me, from violence of men rescue
me, that I may keep thy commandments. Show thy face unto thy servant, have
co^passio^ on me. O Lord thou art right, and al thy iugeme^tes be straight,
straightly thou haste given in commandment, that all ye words of thy mouth be
kept. Ah Lord, grant me grace diligently to do all thy commandments, even
with all my heart. Lo this thing I crave of the, hear me for thy goodness,
nygh thou art to all that call on the. Thy promyses be just, yea they be troth
it self, look to my wretchedness, deliver me, pluck thou me from al dangers.
Truly I shall never forget thine unspeakable goodness. Take, I say, Lord my
matter into thy hands. Ryd me forth of trouble, quycke^ me like as thou have
promised to do. Let my humble supplicacio^ come in before the, save me even to
make thy word good. Thine hand be with me, and let me never leave thy word,
but bring about, yt my soul may perpetually live and praise the, rendrynge
unto the most hertye thanks for thy continual kyndnes. Thy right hand, I
say, help me. I am as a sely sheep that strayeth in wilderness. Doutles of
my self I am not able to turn to thy high way again. Wherefore (most
gentell herdman and Lord) seek thou me out, bring me again unto thy fold
Never suffer that thy memorial, thy way, witness, judgment, ryghteousnes,
troth, word, pleasure, and ordinance at any time should perysh, or be of no
effect, strength, or valor. Cause that my flesh always may quyuer and be adrad
of thy threatenynges, so that my spirit in the mean time be never hindered nor
disturbed from the constaunt trust of thy promyses made and performed unto us,
for Christ Jesus sake thy dearly beloved son. Amen.

Against evil tongues. Psalm. 120.
IN this my grievous trouble lord I call on the, wherefore hear me O most
gracious Lord. Lord, I say deliver me from evil tongues, unshamefastly
raylyng against thy holy troth as well as against me, yet do I knowledge thy
troth and wol do unto death. Woe is me that I am constrained to lead my life
among these foreners and such as be not thy natural children borne, I mean
among those, yt be enemies unto thy peace and pursuers of thy most hallowed
name, from such pestilencies save and keep me, I the pray, O most gracious
Lord.

To put thy self in Gods hands. Psalm. 121.
I Lift up mine eyes unto heaven, cryenge and calling for assystence of thy
grace. My god help me, truly this is easy for the to do, for thou made both
heaven and earth. I beseech the so to keep me, that my foot slide not, but have
thou a watchyng eye upon me. Shadow me about through thy right hand, be thou
my bulwark and fortress against the ungodly, suffer not the mighty to lay
cruel hands on me. And (o thou most gentel and benign Lord) I pray the,
let not mine heart be set on the vain pleasures of this world, neither yet
let me cowardly fall and shrynke, when I am brought to adversity and trouble.
Deliver me from all evil, be thou thassuraunce and warrant to my soul, cast
thy tender eye toward me, whether I go in or out O Lord. Amen.

For the building of Christ's Church. Psalm. 122.
I Have surely great cause to reioise even from my heart root, in that I se so
many men daily reformyng their life unto better, being illumined by faith,
and making great prease to enter into ye Lords house. Enlarge therefore
through thy word the precinct and bounds of thy city Jerusalem. Repare
again concord, peace and true love in us to ye perpetual honor of thy name.
Let thy spirit shine by a true and certain judgment, make thy cytizens
welthy in all goods. Let the gates of hell have no power against thy city so
that thy church may live in rest quietly and saffely, defend it from all
imminent dangers, send us many that may preach us peace in this city, and
that by all means wol do their endeavors to further it. Ame^.

Constantly to endure under Christ's cross. Psalm. 123.
TO the lift I up mine eyes, O God, that dwell in heaven. Consider that as
the servants have a ready eye toward their master, and the maidens also
upon their maystresse: even so be mine eyes continually fixed upon the, to
thyntent at length I may win thy most gracious favor. Merciful lord,
now pytie us, for all the world has us in greuouse disdain. The rich
spytefully scorn us even to ye teeth, and the proud persons do reiecte us.
But thou O Lord pluck us forth of their hands, and make a rescue of us
again, to thinte^t we may become subjects to thy most gracious goodness
which might be to the praise of thy most puyssant and glorious name. Amen.

To be delivered from bondage of conscience. Psam. 124.
ONles thou had continually abyden with us O Lord: verily we had been
quyte lost in this ragyng see of troubles, and had been caught with these preuye
snares, where with our enemies have beset all the way whereby we should pass for
none other intent than to wind us in their myschiefe, and to carry us with them
unto hell. Brast their snares a so^der o Lord, set us at large, draw us forth
from this deep water. Thy name be our help and defense, for thou have made
both heaven and earth.

To be rydde from imminent danger. Psalm. 132.
Grant us grace O Lord styffely to cleave unto the, so as we shrynke not, but
that we stand for ever, even as mount Sion in that same thy new city
Jerusalem, which is Christ. And (O thou most tender and dear Lord) cast a
strong bulwarcke about us, so as the wicked have no power against us. Further
more leave us not unto our selves, nether yet suffer us ons to put forth our
arm to do unrighteous. Be gracious and free to all such as believe in the,
sith they be of honest and true hertes. Rest, quyete, and peace be unto
Israel, even to as many as live after the spirit, and not after the flesh.
Amen.

For him that is imprisoned either in spirit or in body. Psalm. 126.
Lord god almighty deliver me from this bondage, comfort me, O my God, and
fyl my mouth with joy, replenysh my tongue with gladness, even from mine heart.
Show some wondrous feate for my sake, that thy suitors may se it, and come
with me to render unto the worthy thanks. Certes, thou should by this
means give them occasion the more constantly to suffer adversity, and to
trust assuredly upon the. O Lord God, rau^some me I say, from this paynfull
bondage, destroy this captivity, even as the hot son co^sumeth and dries
up the dew that falls by night. Turn my weping unto gladness, even for thy
names sake, as I shall ever more auaunce and magnifye it.

To be admytted unto Christ's Sabbath or resting day. Psalm. 127.
Build us O Lord, watch and keep us, for onles thou vouchsaue to do it:
doubtless we spe^de our wind in waste. Let us, I say, ones cease from this
hurlye burlye, this toylynge and drudgynge in the vain trumpery of this
world, so as ones at last we may religiously hallowe thy holy Saboth, and
with long sufferynge a wait for thy joyful coming, casting al our thought
and care, on the only, albeit in the mean season we ought to labor
diligently, for truly so we have in commandment of the, where as yet the
increase and furtheraunce of our labors to the mayntenaunce of our living
while we be in this body, we look for at thine hands, and not by our own
pains taking. Take away Lord al couetyse and vain study of riches from
our hertes. Let us be found like unto the arrows shot from a bow, even
ernestly bent and constant in thy word. Let our quyuers and heart strings be
found full of hot and fervent zeal, always by peticio^ shotynge unto the, so
that in face of our enemies we never be steyned with any blot of reproach.

To be blessed of the Lord. Psalm. 128.
Give us grace, sweet Lord, to fear the, to walk in thy ways and
fotesteppes, and well to prosper in our journey. Moreover vouchsaue to bless us
and all things belonging unto us, so as we also may se many children of
faith and peace in Israel. Amen.

For defense against our enemies. Psalm. 129.
Lord many there be that conspire against us, full many that invade us, that
make hurly burlies among us and fyersly assault us, but suffer them not to
prevail neither to have ye vpperhande on us, O our most merciful God, cut a
sonder their ropes and snares. Let them return with shame as many as work us
any trouble, but bless thou us O Lord for thine holy names sake. Amen.

For the troubled conscience. Psalm. 130.
Lord I cry unto yt, eue^ in mids of al my troubles. Wherefore I beseech the,
merciful Lord hear my voice. Bow down thine ears unto my pyteous
co^playnt, if thou lay to our charge our horrible and innumerable faults, who
shall escape or go quyte, when thou shall sit as judge? who shall be able to hold
plee with the? yea who is he, that shall not be forced unto utter despair?
Truly then should we all peryshe. This notwythsta^dyng there is yet in thine
hands Lord both power and also a good will to forgive us our sins which
thing I know thou wolt do if it were but to perform thy promise made by thy
son Christ our Lord and pressed, who assuredly has paid a sufficient
rau^some for our sins, even the most dear sacrifice of his own body, to
thintente you might be our soueraygne Lord God, and yt we might knolege our
sins, and make suit unto ye for pardon thereof. Lord grant me to wait for
thy gracious pardon, long to trust and hang on the, even so long, till at
length thou dispetche me, as my trust is in thy promise. From daysprynge to
daysprynge diligently I wait, Lord our god, without dout thy mercy is great,
great pardon still remains in thyn hands, yea thy mercy can never be spent
Again thy promises can not be undone nor made void. Deliver me then, pluck
from me this incommodite, and other casualtyes of this wretched life, Preserve
all true Israelites in spirit, I mean all the beleuers in ye, from these
remnauntes of sins naturally buddyng forth of our heart. Defend us also from
all adversities of flesh, O Lord, of thy most gracious clemencye, mercy and
pytye. Amen.

For the auoydyng of spiritual pride. Psalm. 131.
SUffer not my heart to swell in pride, nor mine eyes to show any proud lokes,
that I take not to much upon me, neither arrogantly auaunce my self above
Christ our head, but make, yt I may gredyly covet to have good sauoure in
thy word only, as much as thou shalt vouchsaue to open unto me. And in case
thou wythholdest the milk of comfort which streameth from Christ well
understood and known: yet let us not Lord despair, but trust with a quiet
heart always upon the. So be it.

To obtain Christ's benefits. Psalm. 132
THou son of David Jesus Christ arise, take seasin of thy resting place, which I
beseech ye it may be among us, for asmoche as by thy promise we be entytled
and recognized to be thy court and dwelling place. God thy father which can not
deceive, has made us an ernest promise, confirming also the same by his
solemn oath, that thou should be our savior, maynteynour, and defe^sour.
Truly it is not possible for him to go back, and not to stand by his word,
yea even now has he (such is his fidelity) performed it in deed, and what
so ever health he has sent us: the same also has he confirmed by sure and
substantial witness, as well of his own word as of his sacraments, Thou also
(most dear Lord Jesus) have forther promised, yt thou wolt abide with us even
until the worlds end. This thy word is our assured joy and comfort, for we
know that evermore sythens thy death and bodylye departing, thou art
thobteyner of our remission and pardon, wherefore O most gracious Lord,
through thy favor and in the let us find mercy, and that for ever. In all our
works, and procedynges prosper us, save us, and fill us with joy. Thine
halowynge might shine clear upon us, thy kingdom and crown abide with us, and
in thy peax evermore preserve us. Amen.

For Christian charity and communion of saints. Psalm. 133.
INspire us i^ such wise, O Lord, yt as most loving brethren quietly and
peaciably we may dwell to gether in thine house. Bring to pass, I say, that
by true and faithful love, we may be joined and fastened every one to other,
as members of Christ's body. Thine oil of hallowynge, I mean, even thine holy
ghost might wax hot and fragrant among us, upon us let fall thy dew of
blessing, and the plentyfull increase of all things, both bodily and
goostly, to the intent according unto thy most fre promise, we may obtain
everlasting life.

For continuance of grace. Psalm. 134.
Grant us thy servants always to auaunce ye our Lord, and in thine house
to walk vpryghte without blemish or cause of reproach yea in our trouble and
affliccion to lift up innocente and pure hands unto the, prayenge on this
manner unto the. Bless us O God, for thou art the maker of heaven and earth.
Amen.

A general prayer of Christians for help from God. Psalm. 135
DYspose our hertes Lord, that we thy servants may worthily praise and lift
up thy name, for we know thou art gentle, meke, merciful, and free. Thy
name is gracious, frendfull, and right amyable to all that call on the in time
of their aduersite, of thy mere goodness thou have chosen us to be thine own
several people. Thou alone art the great and very God, thou made both
heaven and earth, even according to thyn own pleasure thou dealtest thy
benefytes and gifts of grace to every one of them, namely to thy elect and
chosen, even against Satan and the hole kingdom of ye ungodly. Wherefore,
Lord, let the remembrance and praise of thy name evermore be fervent among
us. Reason thou, debate thou, judge thou thy peoples cause, surely they suffer
passing great wrongs. But stand thou, I say, good and gracious Lord unto
thy servants, be mercyful to them. Ryd them from their greuouse dangers, so
as in most large wise thou may be bruted and auau^ced in Sion, and in thine
holy Jerusalem. Amen.

A prayer to put God in mind of his accustomed goodness. Psalm. 136.
Most gentell Lord, thy goodness and mercy surely abides for ever, though we
never so much fall and vanyshe away, thy grace does nothing wydder nor
decay. This thy grace O Lord by many tokens and proves thou have plentyfully
declared unto us, eue^ from the beginning of the world. And even now at this
day do thou not cease largely to hepe these thy manyfolde benefytes on us,
Stablysh therefore thy goodness and abou^dau^t grace toward us, O Lord, and
with no sode^ displeasure turn not away from us. But be thou mercyful and
tender upon our myserie. And from our enemies and all adversity for thine
everlasting goodness sake defend us O Lord. Amen.

For the captives under Antichrist. Psalm. 137.
Lord we be refuse persons brought under captivity, thralle and bond under
the power of thyn adversary. And yet this our lamentable and pyteous complaynt
thou semest not to ponder, thou regardest not our supplicacion, and that not
without good cause, for we grant we have trespased heinously against the.
Howbeit sith the ungodly thus laugh us to scorn, condemnynge the songs that
we sing the, and ye praises that we give the, yea ye word also that we preach
of the: O Lord I beseech the, show some proof of thy self, declare thy name
and power among those thy spyteful enemies. Bring down Antichrists
kingdom with all his ungodly sects for surely ouerlonge it has oppressed us,
yea and at this day it still lets and holds underfoot very many, which
else spedelye would have run to the kingdom of fredome. Pull it therefore
down O Lord with al his sto^blynge blocks, evil examples, and crooked
doctrine, never suffer it to recover again. Than shall we being quyetly set
at rest serve ye even with heart al our lives long.

For delyueraunce in peryls. Psalm. 138.
Lord let me feel by experience how good thou art, and how trustye. Deliver
me eue^ to make thy promise good, than shall I never cease to thank the with
all mine heart, and to magnify thy most glorious name, for by thy open word
thou haste made it exceeding glorious beyond all other things. Certes, my god
and father upon the do I call. Give my soul perfyte strength, in such wise as
I may set forth and blow abroad thy praises to the high auauncement of thy
name. Cause thou (O my God) that all kingdoms of the earth may hear thy
word, may walk in thy ways. Hallowe thy name, and blow abroad thine
excellent glory. Grant to governors and other in authority this grace, that
they may knowledge the to be above them all. Lord look upon ye lowly hertes,
that thou may promote them. Mark well the proud hertes afar from the, to
the intent thou may bring them low, and cast them forth of thy presence. In
this straight save my life, strengthen thine hand against mine enemies, and
take my part against them. Lord thy goodness is everlasting, cast not away
thine own ha^dyworke, have pytie on me, and help me. Pluck me forth of these
peryls, for thine holy names sake.

For denyenge of thy self, and holly to yield the unto Christ. Psalm. 139.
Lord thou know me so well as any man does else, lo I and all that ever I
have, be holly in thy hands. Thou made me, thou fashionedst me, thou have
endowed me with all things necessary, even from my birth unto this day. I can
not praise enough thy wondrous provision thus practiced among all creatures,
it is more then is possible for man, ones to conceive it in his thought. What
other thing do thou require of us, than to yield up our self with all
that is ours unto the? I mean holly to resign unto thy pleasure all that
belong to the necessary relief either of body or of soul, and the same
again humbly to require at thine hands, for Christ Jesus sake. Wherefore my
God, I beseech the, for thine holy names sake, take charge of me. Grant me
constantly to trust on the, utterly refusyng my self, so as in all peryls I sue
for no help, but only at thine hands, like as thou haste in right large manner
made me a promise of the same. Make a trial of me, prove mine heart. Take from
me all evil thoughts, disceyt, double dealyng, and lies, thus shall you clean
purge mine heart, and mercyfullye lead me on the way of perpetual felicite.

Against the enemies of Christ's troth. Psalm. 140.
Deliver me, O Lord, from the ungodly and styfe necked persons, for thou
see how in their hearts they ymage^ mischeue, and have great pleasure to
pycke quarrels, their tongues be more sharp then any adders styng. And under
their lyppes lurketh poysone of adders. But O merciful Lord, let me not fall
in their hands, that they handle me not after their own lust, Thou only art
my God, thou must hear my pyteous playnte. Lord yt rulest al to gether, yt
art the strength and power of my defense, be thou as a sallet on my head,
when so ever ye ungodly shall assault me, neither suffer thou ye wicked thus
to prosper in their matters. Increase not their crooked and malicious stomachs,
lest they take heart of grayse and spytefully revile the. Look upon thy poor
wretches cause, and rydde me out of these daily greuaunces, then shall I with a
right up heart and pleasant countenance extol and magnify thy name. Amen.

To keep thy tongue, and to eschew the infection of the world. Psalm. 141.
TO the I cry, O Lord, hear me spedely, let my prayer be as a sweet taste
and sauoure in thy presence, and the lyftynge up of mine hands as an evening
sacrifice. Lord set a watch about my mouth, keep my lyppes and my tongue also,
that they speak nothing amiss (as do ye ungodly) but that they call purely
and syncerelye upon the, and report thy worthy praises. Bow not mine heart to
lust after evil, nor to follow the fashion of ye wicked and abominable
sinners, lest I happen to cloak my wyckednes with other sins, as hypocrites
do. Let me not live as they would have me do, but rather as it shall best
please the. Let me not approve neither their counsels, nor their deeds, though
they cast never so goodly a show and fair face to the world. Let me not
herke^ to the tyessynges and sweet beytes of the ungodly which counsel me to
fylthy and unclean things, but rather let me give good ear to ye rightuouse
and godly man, though he sharply correct and chyde me, let me always have a
ready eye toward the, only in the to trust, and to apply my self unto the.
Cast not away my soul, neither suffer thou it to perish Keep me, that I be not
tangled with the snares of the ungodly, and from the privy trappes of
malicious persons save me. Defend me, Lord, through thy grace only, for in all
our deuyses and works can nothing be found sure for us to trust upon.

The prayer of any captive according to the form of David when he was hyd in
the cave. Psalm. 142.
WIth my voice I cry to the, before the I open my lamentations in thy bosom I
disclose the secret word of mine heart, my dolours and greafes I show unto ye.
Mine heart is almooste like to braste, so great is my discomfyture. Thou
know all my fashions, O Lord, and thou seeste well enough how the ungodly
have laid their snares for me. Lo, I cast mine eye on this side, and yt side,
as well on my fre^des as on my kynsfolkes, but all in vain, none of them all
helps me. And again I can not ru^ne away, I am so laden and ouercharged with
yrons. O Lord my maker and father, now unto the I cry, you art my only
shoteanker, defense, and help. Thou art my portion and heritage in all
contreyes, yea I have none other possession but the only. To the therefore I
stycke altogether, knowing certainly that so nothing can go amysse with me.
Consider then my lamentable complaynt, behold, how I am low brought. From the
cruel pursuers, which be much more of power then I am, defend me. Deliver me
from this prison, and horrible fear of sin and death, that I may set out
thy name. All the holy ones as well Angels as men make suit for me, desiring
the for my comfort. They shall not cease until they obtain their request, I
mean, until thou forgive me my sins, and send me comfort in this
distress, with patience and long sufferynge This ones obtained, the godly
shall flock about me, and shall not stynte to give the thanks, wha^ they se
that you ryddest me forth of these dangers to ye high praise of thy name. Lord
be merciful unto us, take part with us, then shall we for ever lift up and
magnify thy glorious name, Ame^.

In great trouble of conscience. Psalm. 134.
Lord hear my prayer, receive my supplication, harken to my playnt for thy
ryghtuousnes. Try not the law with thy servant, for truly then shall no
living man be found vngyltie, yea not one of thy saints should escape quyte
at thy bar, oneles thou grant him thy gracious pardon, in so much even the
very stars be not pure and faultlesse before the. In the angels thou foundest
sin. Now mine enemies hu^te for my soul, they beat and drive it down, they
thrust it into dark dou^geons where felons convict and condemned to death,
were wont to be kept. My spirit is sorrowful, my heart is heavy and sad
within my breast. To the I hold up my hands, requyrynge the of mercy: for like
as ye dry ground longs for a shoure of rain, so my soul thinks long
till it have thine help and succor. Hear me spedely: if you do not, I am in
despair. My spirit is al weary of this bondage, I have bid my life farewell.
Wherefore O god, hyde not thy face, yt I be not like unto those, that be hurled
into the pytte of damnacion. After this night of myserye ouerpassed, let the
pleasant morning of comfort luckely shine on me, that by time I may hear
and feel thy goodness, for in the is all my trust. Point me the way that I
shall walk in, for if you be not my guide, I must needs wander and straye out
of the way. To the, Lord, I lift up my soul, and that with al mine heart. I
beseech the, take me forth of mine enemies hands. Thou only art my succor
and sauegarde. Teach me to work, what so ever shall be thy pleasure, for thou
art my God. Let thy good spirit conduyte me into the living land, encourage
my spirit for thy names sake. Forth of these troubles for thy ryghtuousnes
deliver me. Destroy mine enemies, as thou art gracious and favorable toward
me. Those that woll work me sorrow and grief, pluck forth of the way, for I
am thy servant, and for thy sake suffer I all this hurly burly. As thou art
God, so help thou me.

To be exempt from this world through the spirit. Psalm. 144.
FOr all thy benefytes we shall auaunce the with praise and glory for ever, O
Lord our God, namely sith thou have kept us in thy faith, and in the
confession of thy word This goodness, O Lord, continue thou still in me,
increase and strengthen thou my faith every day more and more. Compel my flesh
through thy spirit to his bounden duetye and obedience. Be thou my defense, my
buckler, bulwark, rescuer, and raunsomer. Lord bow down the heue^s, and come
down, put forth thine hand from above, to draw me from these deep waters,
from the cruelty of these boystouse strangers, who be none of thy children.
Deliver me, and with all mine heart I shall sing the a new song, and render
ye new thanks. And hereof I am right well assured yt I ca^ lack no goodness, o
lord God if I have the my gracious Lord and defender.

Of the kingdom of God, and that Christ may dwell in our hertes by faith.
Psalm. 145.
I Will exalt the my sovereign, O God, and praise thy name for ever. I shall
report thy wonderful praises from time to time, for thou art of great power,
and worthy to be praised, neither can any man attain to the knowledge of thy
most excellent majesty. Thy works shall be spoken of for ever, I mean thy
endless power, thy miracles, and glory, in that thou have done to us thy pore
folks manyfolde and bou^teous benefits only of thy mere love, favor,
mercy, long forbearynge, and ryghteousnes. In all thy deeds the holy persons
shall praise the for ever, specially for the magnificence of thy power royal,
and for that power which thou practisest to the subduynge of all things for
our sauegarde and life. Thy mercy excedeth al thine other works. In words
that thou promysest thou art trusty and true, and in all thy works, right
holy. Lord have mercy on me, and be my father for Jesus Christ sake, bow to my
peticion, for thine endless mercy, fidelite, and holiness. Lord govern my
heart, I am weak, but make me strong. I am spente and decayed, but make me
lustye again, I am pyned and famyshed, but feed thou me with thy goodness. O
herdman and nurse of all things living, which of thy mere goodness fyllest al
creatures that have life in them and which in all thy doings dealest
ryghteously: with all mine heart O Lord I call on the, be at hand, be my joy
and comfort according to thy promise. Preserve me always from the snares and
trappes of Satan, that I be not wrong led, but that my mouth may continually
brute thy praises and give worthy thanks unto thy name.

For lyberty of faith. Psalm. 146.
MY soul, and what so ever thing is in me, shall praise and auaunce thy name,
o Lord god. God be thou my refuge, and helper, for thou createdst all things
and performest ducly all that ever thou have promised to those that put their
trust in the. When thou shall sit as judge, than shall they have right, which
now be oppressed by wrongful power. Thou geuest fode in time of ho^ger, where
and when so ever we have need thereof. Louse us that be bound, louse us through
thy fre word. Carry us unto the fredome of the true faith, (which surely
perteyneth not to all men,) give us light, for we be blind, set us up, for we
be thrown down, make us ryghteouse, for we be wicked. Be thou O Lord
favorable unto us, though we deserve it not, have regard of the sely
strangers, poor men, wydowes, fatherles and other miserable persons of the
world, which be sore hongry and thursty, longing for thy ryghteousnes. Keep
them and provide for them all things necessary, led them from ye ungodly
ways. Obtain O Lord an everlasting raygne in us. Amen.

A fervent prayer of the dysperpled church. Psam. 147.
IT is convenient and semyng O Lord, yt thy praises be recorded and thy name
hallowed, for thou buyldest, gatherest together, and enhauncest the company of
thy chosen, and know how to call every one of them by his proper name.
Heal, o Lord, those that be broused in heart, comfort the comfortles, bind
up our grene wounds, that we may escape this syckenes, both of soul and of
conscience. Lord, thou art wondrous great, and by reason of the excellency
of thy bottomless knowledge, no man can worthily esteem thy majesty, as it is
in deed. Govern and save us thy poor catyffes, praise and thanks be unto the
for ever, for as much as of thine endless goodness thou make such large
provision for all things. And now, O Lord, let us always perfectly dread
the, trusting evermore on thy goodness. Amen. Lord God, we shall without end
glorifye thy majesty, in case we may be sure and safe in thy kingdom, Let us
be content with thy blessing, whereby we have things necessary unto our
living. Grant us thy word, send it us by trustye and faithful workmen,
for ye word is fruteles and bare^, onles it be sent from the. Cause it to run
hastily and with great power, so as it may melte the hard frosen hertes,
mollifye the stubburne stomakes, make ye cold minds warm, comfort the heavy,
inform the ignorant, admonysh the strayers, and bring them to the right way
again, and finally raise up the dead to life everlasting. Amen.

Of the making, fall, and restorynge of man. Psalm. 148.
Grant O Lord that we thy servants being moved by thy synguler gifts of
grace might magnifye the, as you art most worthy, by beholdynge of thy
creatures be they in heaven, in earth, or in the sea, for unto them al by one
certain trade and course of governance, thou ministreste things necessary to
their use and co^modite thorough thy word, and by yt same self word thou
conseruest them, whereby thou first createdst them, even by Jesus Christ. Every
thing acco^plysheth that work, whereunto thou first ordeynedst it, even after
thine own hearts lust, only man rebelleth, and that to his own harm, he
alone is against thy gracious pleasure and nothing remembrynge thy glory
gredely seeks his own glory, by reason of which misdemenour he was utterly
cast away, and all his posterite with him. This notwithstanding (most
loving father) thou have recoueryd him again by means of thy word, which
word now at length (the time appointed fullye complet and finyshed) was made
flesh, even Jesus Christ our Lord. Grant us, we beseech the, to have a lively
faith in him, reform, renew, and restore us in him, slaye thou in us, what so
ever nature planted in us by our generation, shape us new men, through that
same power, whereby Jesus Christ rose again to life in the holy ghost, that we
forgetful of our selfs may seek thine honor only, enhaunsynge thy name, for
thou set alofte the horn of thy people. Let us come unto the, and in the
continue for ever.

Of the true worship in spirit and truth Psalm. 149.
PUt into our mouth a new song and renew our hearts by grace. Let us
contynually sing it abroad in the coming to gether of holyones, let us
rejoice and be glad in ye our maker and redemer. In gladness of spirit with
fre and willing heart, let us praise the. Be content Lord and well pleased
with thy people, endowe them with gifts, and in sauegard promote them, in thy
glory let thy holyons be glad, yea and be proud of the in their consciences.
Their hearts might auau^ce the, let them myghtely lay on and stryke being
armed with thy word and with the sword of thy spirit, against all that wrestle
against thine holy name. Amen.

A praysynge of God. Psalm. 150.
THe, O Lord, in thine own self we praise, which far excedest all praise.
In thy holiness we praise the, for thou alone art holy, by whom and none other,
we also be made holy. In ye defense of thy right hand we praise the, for it
shall stand sure for ever, yea it is our strong warrante and sauegarde, and
evermore shall be. In thy power we praise the, whereby thou blessest and cursest.
In thy glory so exceeding great we praise the, whereby in Christ thou make
us also right gloriouse. Breath upon us thy grace and spirit, that we may for
ever do this our duetye, and that we may by ye same spirit be ruled, led,
ordered, moved, and taught. Amen. Lord, it is their duties, even as many as
have breath within them, to blow abroad thy praises, for of the they all have
life, but thy chose^ have everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
with whom thou the father of heaven in the holy gooste art God lauded and
praised world without end. Ame^.

The seven peticions of the Pater noster.
OUr father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name.

Thy kingdom come.

Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven.

Give us this day our daily bread.

And forgive us our trespaces, as we forgive them yt trespass against us And
let us not be led into te^ptacion But deliver us from evil. Amen.

The Creed, or the.xij. artycles of the Christen faith.
I Believe in God the father almighty, maker of heaven, and earth. And in Jesus
Christ his only son our Lord. Which was conceived by the holy ghost, borne
of the virgyne Mary. Suffered under Ponce Pylate, was crucified, dead, buried,
and disce^ded into hell. And the third day he rose again from death. He
ascended into heaven, and sytteth on ye right hand of God the father almighty.
From thence he shall come to judge the quycke and the dead. I believe in the
holy ghost. The holy catholyke church. The communion of saints: the forgyuenes
of sins. The resurrection of the body. And the life everlasting. Amen.

The ten commandments of almighty God.
THou shalt have none other gods but me.

Thou shalt not make to thy self any graue^ Image, nor any lykenes of any
thing, yt is in heaven above, or in earth beneth, nor in ye water under the
earth, thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them.

Thou shall not take ye name of thy Lord God in vain.

Remember that thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

Honor thy father, and thy mother.

Thou shall do no murder.

Thou shall not commit adultery.

Thou shall not steal.

Thou shall bear no false witness against thy neighbor.

Thou shalt not desire thy neighbors house, thou shalt not desire thy
neighbors wife, nor his servant, nor his maid, nor his Ox, nor his Ass,
nor any thing that is thy neighbors.

FINIS.
THE PRINCIPAL PRAYERS OF the BIBLE most necessary for christen men, gathered
out by RICHARD TAVERNER.
The prayer of Moises to the Lord for the sins of the people. Exodus 32.
Lord why hoyleth thy wrath against thy people, whom thou haste brought
forth of the la^d of Egypt? (that is to wete out of ye captivity and bondage
of the devil) Let not these Egyptia^s (I mean these ungodly and deuelishe
persons) say, God deals craftily with them even to rydde the^ out of the
world. Let thy wrath be assuaged ouerthe wickedness of thy people. Amen.

An other prayer of Moses to the some entente. Exodus 32.
OH, this people have sinned an heynouse syn, and have made the^ golden gods.
Either forgive them this offense, or else wipe me out of this book, which thou
have written, Amen.

For the sin of the people grudging against god, a prayer of Moses. Number. 14.
THe Lord is pacient and full of mercy, bearing away sin and trespase, and
leauyng none gyltles. Thou do visit the unrighteousness of the fathers upon
the children eue^ to ye third and fourth kyndred Forgive (I beseech the) the
sin of these thy people, according to thy great mercy, as thou haste been
merciful unto them coming out of Egypt even unto this place.

An other of Moses and Aaron for the people Number. 16.
MOst mighty god of spirits of all flesh. Will you for the syn of one be wroth
with all the multitude?

For the stubbernes of the people, the true p^acher on this wise as Moses did,
may make his prayer unto god. Deuteronomy. 9.
Destroy not (Lord) thy people and enheritau^ce, whom thou haste delivered
through thy greatness and whom thou have brought out of the Egypt of this
world. Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, look not unto the
stubbernes of this people, neither to their wyckednes and offe^ses, for it is
thine own people and enheritau^ce which thou have chale^ged for thine own in
thy great might and stretched out arm, Amen.

A prayer of Esdras for the sins of the people. 1. Esd. 9.
MY God, I am confounded, and dare not lift up mine eyes unto the my god, for
our wyckednes is grown over our head, and our trespaces are waxen great unto
the heaven, even from the time of our fathers. yea and our selves also have
grievously sinned unto this day, and because of our wyckednes have we, our
kings, and priests been delivered into the hand of the kings of the nations,
into the sword, into captivity, into spoil, and into confusion of face, as
it is come to pass this day. But now is there a little and sudden
graciousnes come from the Lord our God, so that some of us are escaped, to
thinte^te he may give us his peace in his holy place, that our God may light
our eyes, and give us a little life in our bondage For we are bond men, yet our
god has not forsaken us in our bondage but has inclined mercy unto us in the
sight of the hethen kings yt he should give us life, and promote the house of
our God, and so set up the desolacion thereof, and give us an hedge i^ Judah and
Jerusalem. And now O our God, what shall we say after this, for we have
forsaken thy commandments, which thou have commanded by thy servants and
Prophets, and said. The land whereunto ye go to possess it, is an unclean
land, through the fylthynes of the people of the lands, in their
abominacio^s, wherewith they have made it full of uncleanness on every side.
Therefore shall ye not give your daughters unto their sons, and their
daughters shall ye not take unto your sons, and seek not their peace and
wealth for ever, that ye may be strong, and enjoy the good in the land, and
that ye and your children may have the inheritance of it for evermore. And
after all this that is come upon us because of our most naughty deeds and our
great trespace: thou our god have spared our wickedness, and have given us a
deliverance as it is come to pass this day, to ye entente we should not turn
back, and let go thy commandments neither be joined i^ matrimony with the
people of these abominacions. Will thou then be wroth at us, till we be utterly
consumed, so that nothing remain, and till there be no delyuerau^ce? O lord
of Israel thou art righteous, for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day.
Behold in thy presence are we i^ our trespace, for hereupon is there no
standinge before the.

The prayer of Nehemias for the sins of the people before the Lord. Nehem. 1.
O Lord God of heaven, you great and terrible God thou that kepest couenaunte
and mercy with them that love the, and keep thy commandments: let thine
ears harken, and thine eyes be open, that thou may hear ye prayer of thy
servant which I pray now before the, day and night for the children of
Israel thy servants, and knowledge the sins of ye children of Israel, which
we have committed against the. And I and my fathers have sinned also, we have
been led out of the way by vanities i^ that we have not kept thy
commandments, statutes, and laws which thou commaundedst thy servant
Moses. And they are thy servants and thy people whom thou have delivered
through thy great power and mighty hand. I beseech the lord let thine ear
bow down to the prayer of thy servants whose desire is to fear thy name.
Amen.

A confession and solemn prayer of the levites and of the church for sins
with a rehearsal of the benefytes of God. 2. Esd. 9.
LOrd thou alone have made heaven, and the heaven of heavens with all their
company, the earth and all that is thereupon, the sea and all that is contained
therein, thou gyuest life unto all, and the host of heaven bow them selves unto
the. Thou art the Lord god, that did chose Abraham and foundest his heart
faithful before the, and madeste a covenant with him to give him and his sede
the land of the Cananites, Hethytes, Amorites, Pheresites, Iebusites, and
Gergesites, And thou made good thy words, for thou art righteous, and dydest
consydre the mysery of our fathers in Egypt, and herdest their co^playnte by
the red see, and shewedst tokens and wonders upon Pharao, and on al his
servants, and on all the people of his land.

For thou knew that they were presumptuous and cruel against the^, and so
made thou the a name, as it is this day. And the red see dyddest thou deuyde
before the^, so that they went through the mids of the sea dry shoed. As
touching their persecutours thou threwest them in to the deep as a stone, into
the ragyng waters, and leddest thy people on the day time in a clowdye pyller,
and on ye night season in a pyller of fire to show them light in the way that
they went. Thou ca^mest down also upon mount Sinai, and spakest unto them
from heaven, and gaueste them right judgments, true laws, good
commandments and statutes, and declaredst unto the^ thy holy Sabbath and
commaundedst them precepts, ordinances, and laws by Moses thy servant, and
gave them bread from heaven, when they were hungry, and broughtest forth
water for them, out of the rock when they were thirsty, and promisedst the^,
that they should go in and take possession of the land, over which thou had
lift up thine hand, for to give the^. But they and our fathers were proud and
hardnecked, so that they followed not thy commandments, and refused to hear,
and did not remember the wonders that thou dyddest for them, but became
obstinate and hedy, in so much that they turned back to their bondage in
their disobedience. But thou my God forgauest, and wast gracyous, merciful,
pacient, and of great goodness and forsokest them not. And though they made a
molten calfe and said: this is thy god that brought the out of the land of
Egypt and did great blasphemies, yet forsokest thou the^ not in the
wilderness, according to thy great mercy. And the cloudy pyller departed not
from them, on the day time to lead them the way, neither the pyller of fire
i^ the night season, to show them light in the way that they went. And thou
gave the^ thy good spirit to inform them, and withheldest not thy Manna
from their mouth, and gave them water when they were thirsty. Forty years
long made thou provision for them in the wilderness, so that they lacked
nothing. Their clothes waxed not old, and their fete swelled not, and thou
gave them kingdoms and nations, and thou dyuidedst them according to their
porcions. And their children multipliedst thou as the sterres of heaven, and
broughtest them into the land whereof thou had spoken unto their fathers
that they should go into it, and have it in possession, And the children went
and possessed the la^d and thou subduedst before them the inhabitauntes of the
land, and gave the^ into their hand, and their kings and the people of the
land, yt they might do with them what they would. So they wan their strong
cities and the fat land, and took possession of howses that were full of all
manner goods, wells dygged out, vyneyardes, oylegardens, and many fruteful
trees, and they did eat, and were filled, and became fat, and lived in wealth
thoroughe thy great goodness. But this notwithsta^dinge they were disobedient,
and rebelled against the, and threw thy law behind their backs, and slew
thy Prophets which exhorted them so earnestly that they should convert unto
the, and did great blasphemies. Therefore thou gave them over, into the hand
of their enemies that vexed them, But i^ time of their trouble they cried unto
the, and thou herdest them from heaven, and of thy great mercy thou gave
them saviors, which helped them out of their enemies hands, But when they
came to rest, they turned back again to do evil before the. Therefore leftest
thou them i^ the hand of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over
them. And then they converted and cried unto the, and thou hardest the^ from
heaven, and many times have thou delivered the^ according to thy great mercy,
and warnedst them, that they should turn again unto thy law But all this
notwithstanding, they were proud and herkened not unto thy commandments, but
sinned against thy laws (which a man should do and live in them) and they
turned the shulder away, and becam styfnecked and would not hear.

And many years dydest thou forbear them, and warnedest the^ thoroughe thy
spirit even by thoffice of thy prophets, and yet would they not hear.
Therefore gave thou the^ into the hand of the nations in the lands. But for
thy great mercyes sake thou did not utterly consume the^, neither did
thou forsake the^, for thou art a gracyous and mercyful god. Now therefore our
god, thou great god, mighty and terrible, thou that kepest covenant and
mercy, turn not away thy face from all the travail that has happened unto
us, and unto our kings, Princes, Priests, Prophets, Fathers and all thy
people, sythens the time of the kings of Assure unto this day. Thou art
righteous in all that thou have brought upon us, for thou have done truly. But
we on our behalf have been ungodly, our kings, princes, prestes, and fathers
have not done after thy law, nor regarded thy commandments, and thy earnest
exhortacions, wherewith thou have exhorted them, and have not served the in
their kingdoms, and in thy great goodness that thou sauedst them.

A prayer of the church for sins Sap. 15.
THou (O our God) art sweet, long sufferyng and true, and with mercy ordrest
thou all things Though we syn, yet are we thine, for we know thy greatenes.
If we syn not, then are we sure that with the we be allowed. For to know the,
is perfect ryghteousnes, yea and to know thy righteousness and power, is the
rote of immortality.

An other for sins. Hier. 3.
LO we are thine, for thou art the Lord our God, the hills fall, and all the
high pride of the mountains, but the sauegarde of Israll stands only upon
god our Lord Confusion has devoured the labor of our fathers from our youth
up, yea their sheep and bullockes, their sons and daughters, So do we also
sleep in our confusion, and shame covers us, for we and our fathers eue^ from
our youth unto this day have sinned against the Lord our God and have not
obeyed the voice of the Lord our god.

The lamentations of Hieremye for the sins of the people. Hiere 13.
PIteously let me weep, and let the tears gusshe out of mine eyes. For the
lords flock is taken. say therefore unto the king and the rulers, humble
your selves, set you down on the earth, for the crown of your glory shall
fall from your head. Lift up your eyes, and behold the^ that come from the
North, where is the flock that was given the: thy noble catell, to whom will
thou make thy move, when he come upon the, for thou have taught them thy self
against thy self and made them masters over the. Shall not sorrow come upon
the, as on a woman trauelyng with child? And if thou would say in thy heart,
wherefore come these things upon me, surely even for the multitude of thy
wyckednes, thy hinder parts and thy fete be discovered. If ye man of Inde can
change his skyn, and the cat of the mountain her spots, then may ye that
be exercysed in evil do good. Therefore will I scattere you (says the lord)
like as the stouble that is taken away with the southe wind. This shall be
your lot and the portion of your measure, wherewith ye shall be rewarded of me,
says the lord, because ye have forgoten me, and put your trust in
disceytefull things. Therefore have I turned thy clothes over thy head and
discovered thy thyghes, yt thy priuities might be seen, thy aduoutrye, thy
deadlye malice, thy beastlynes, and thy shameful horedome. For upon feldes and
hills I have seen thy abominacions. Woe be to the o Jerusalem, will thou not be
cleansed, sith thou art yet unclean?

The prayer that Baruch prescribed unto the captyues in Babylon for their
sins. Baruch. 23.
THe Lord our God is ryghtous and we with our fathers are brought to open
shame, as it is to se this day. And as for these plages that are come upon us
alredye, the lord had devised them for us, yet would we not pray unto the
Lord our God, that we might every man turn from his naughty ways. Therefore
the Lord has caused such plages to come upon us, for he is ryghteous in all his
works, that he has commanded us, which we also have not done nor harkened
unto his voice, for to walk in the commandments of the Lord, that he had
given unto us. And now O Lord God of Israel thou that have brought thy people
out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, with tokens and wonders with
thy great power and out stretched arm and have gotten thy self a name, as it
is come to pass this day, O Lord our god we have sinned, we have don
wickedly, we have behaved our selves ungodly in all thy ryghtousnesse. Turn
thy wrath from us (we beseech the) for we are but a few left among the
Heythen, where thou have scatered us. Hear our prayers (O Lord) and our
peticions, bring us out of bondage, for thine own sake, get us favor in the
sight of them which have led us away, that allandes may know that thou art
the Lord our god, and that Israel and his generacio^ calls upon thy name. O
Lord look down from thy holy house upon us, incline thine ear and hear us.
For the dead that be gone down to their graves, and whose sowles are out of
their bodies, give unto the Lord neither praise nor ryghteousmakyng, but the
soul that is vexed for the multitude of her sins, which walks heuely and
weakly, whose eyes begin to fail, such a soul gives praise and
righteousness unto the lord, O Lord we power out our prayers before the,
and require mercy in thy sight, not for any godlynes of our forefathers, but
because thou have sent out thy wrath and indignacion upon us, according as
thou dydest threaten us by thy servants the Prophets. O Lord our God thou
have entreated us after all thy goodness and according to all thy great loving
mercy, like as thou spakest by thy servant Moses in the day when thou
dyddest command him to write thy law before the children of Israel, saying.
If ye will not harke^ unto my voice then shall this great multitude be turned
into a very small people for I will scatter them abroad, notwithstanding I am
sure that this folk will not hear me, for it is an hardenecked people, but in
the land of their captivity they shall remember the^ selves, and learn to
know that I am the lord their god, when I shall give them an heart to
understand, and ears to hear: then shall they praise me in the land of
their captivity, and think upon my name. Then shall they turn them from
their hard backs, and from their ungodliness. Then shall they remember the
things that happened unto their fathers, which sinned against me. So will I
bring them again in to the land, which I promised with an oath unto their
fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and they shall be lords of it, yea I will
encreace them, and not minishe them. And I will make an other couenaunte with
them, such one as shall endure for ever, namely that I will be their God, and
they shall be my people, and I will no more drive my people the childern of
Israel out of the land that I have given them. And now O Lord almyghtye,
thou god of Israel, our soul that is in trouble and our spirit that is
vexed, cry unto the. Hear us (o lord) and have pity upon us, for thou art a
merciful god. God be gracyous unto us for we have sinned before the. Thou
endurest for ever, should we then utterly peryshe? O lord almighty thou god of
Israel: hear now the prayer of the dead Israelites and of their children,
which have sinned before the, and have not harkened unto the voice of ye lord
their god, for which cause these plages hang now upon us. Oh lord remember not
the wickedness of our forefathers, but think upon thy power and name now at
this time, for thou art the lord our God, and the (o lord) will we praise For
thou have put thy fear in our hearts, to the intent we should call upon thy
name and praise the in our captivity and that we might turn from the
wyckednes of our forefathers that sinned before the. Behold we are yet this day
in our captivity whereas thou have scatered us to be an abominacion, curse, and
syn, like as it has happened unto our forefathers, because of all their
wyckednes and departinge from the, even from the that art the Lord our
God. Amen.

The prayer of Daniel the prophet for his own sins and for the sins of
the hole nation. Daniel. 9.
O Lord thou great and fearful god, thou that kepest covenant and mercy with
them that love the and keep thy commandments, we have sinned, we have
trespassed, we have been disobedient and have gone back, we have departed from
thy precepts, and judgments, we would never follow thy servants ye
prophets, that spoke in thy name to our kings and princes, to our
forefathers and to all the people of the land. O lord righteousness belongs
unto the, but to us open shame, as it is com to pass this day unto all Israel
(that is to say thy church or congregation) whyther they be far or nyghe,
through all lands, wherein thou haste scatered them because of the offenses
they did against the. O lord unto us to our kings and princes, to our
forefathers even to us all that have offended the, belongs open shame. But
unto ye (o lord god) perteyneth mercy and forgyuenes, where as we on our behalf
are gone back from the, and have not obeyed the voice of the lord our god, to
walk in his laws which he laid before us, by his servants the prophets,
yea all Israel have gone back from thy law so that they have not harkned unto
thy voice, wherefore the curse and oath, that is written in the law of Moses
the seruau^te of god (against whom we have offended) is poured upon us. And he
has performed his words, which he spoke against us, and against our judges
that judged us, to bring upon us such a plage as never was under heaven, like
as it is now come to pass in Jerusalem, yea all this plage, as is written in
the law of Moses, is come upon us. Yet we never made any supplicacion before
the, o lord, that we might turn again from our wickedness, and think upon
thy troth Therefore has the lord made have to bring this plage upon us, for
the lord our god is ryghtwyse in all his works which he does, for we would not
harken to his voice. And now O lord our god, thou that with a mighty hand
have brought thy people out of Egypt to get thy self a name (as thou have at
this day) we have sinned O lord and done wickedly against all thy
rightousnesse.

Let thy wrothfull displeasure be turned away I beseech the from us, for
through the haynouse offense of us and our forefathers, is thy church
abhorred of all them that are about us. Now therefore O our god hear the
prayer of thy seruau^te and let thy face shine over thy Sanctuary yt lies
wast. O my god bow down thine ear and harken, at least for thine own sake,
open thyn eyes and see, how we be spoiled, for we do not cast our prayers
before the in our own ryghtousnes, but only in thy great mercyes, O lord
hear, O lord forgive, O lord consydre, tarry not over long, but for thine
own sake do it.

PRAYERS IN TIME OF ADVERSITY AND FOR A MAN'S OWN SINS
A prayer and an open confession of the people of Israel to be delivered from
their ennemy. Iudic. 10.
WE have sinned against the, for we have forsaken our own god, and have served
Baalym. Lord we have sinned, do thou unto us, what so ever please the, and
deliver us only at this time. Amen.

In wars against Turks and inuadours, the prayer of king Asa. 2. Paral 14.
Lord it is all one with the to help them that have no power with few or
with many. Help us o lord our god, for we trust to the, and in thy name be
we come against this multitude. Thou art the lord our God, let no man
prevail against the. Amen.

If god send the trouble either for a punishment of thy sins or to prove thy
pacyence therewith, pray thus. Tobia. 3.
O Lord thou art rightous, and all thy judgments are true, yea all thy
ways are mercy, faythfulnes and judgment. And now o lord be myndefull of
me, and take no vengeance on my sins, neither remember my misdeeds, neither
the misdeeds of my elders, for we have not been obedient unto thy
commandments, therefore are we spoiled, brought in to captivity, in to
death, into derision and shame unto all nacyons. And now O lord thy
judgments are great, for we have not done according to thy commandments,
neither have we walked innoce^tly before the. Wherefore now o lord deal with
me according to thy will, and command my spirit to be received in peace,
for more expedient were it for me to dye, then to live,

The prayer of Manasses king of Judah when he was in prison, for remission of
sins, and for gods favor and delyueraunce. 2. Paral. 36.
O Lord almighty, god of our fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of the
ryghteouse sede of them, which have made heaven and earth with all the ornament
thereof, which haste ordained the sea by the word of thy commandment, which
haste shut up the deep, and haste sealed it for thy fearful and laudable name,
drad of all men and honorable before the face of thy virtue, the fearse anger
of thy threteninge is above measur heavy to sinners. But the mercy of thy
promise is great and unsearchable, for thou art the lord god most high above
all the earth, long sufferinge and exceeding merciful and sorry for the malice
of men. I have provoked thine anger and have done evil before the, in
committing abominacyons and multiplieng of offenses. And now I bow ye knees of
my heart requiringe goodness of the o lord. I have sinned lord I have sinned
and know my wyckednes, I desire the by prayer o lord forgive me, O lord
forgive me, and destroy me not with mine iniquities, neither do thou always
remember my euels to punyshe the^, but save me (which am unworthy) after thy
great mercy and I will praise the everlastingly, all the days of my life,
for all ye virtue of heaven prayseth the, and unto the belongs glory, world
without end. Amen.

The prayer of Mardocheus in the pursuit of Haman, whom the bishop of Rome at
this day resembles. Hester. 15.
O Lord, thou valiant and mighty king (for all things are in thy power) if
thou will help and deliver Israel, there is no man can with stand the, for thou
have made both heaven and earth, thou art lord of all, and there is none can
resist the o lord. Thou know al, thou wotest lord it was neither of malice
ne of presumption, neither for any desire of glory, yt I would not bow down
my self and worship the most proud Haman, for I would gladlye if it might have
turned Israel to good have kyste even his fotesteppes, but I feared lest I
should have given Gods glory unto a man, and because I would worship none but
only the. Wherefore, O Lord, thou God and king have mercy on thy people, for
they ymagen how to bring us to naught, yea their desire is full set to
destroy and overthrow the people that have ever been thine. Oh despise not
thin own good which thou have delivered and brought forth of Egypt even for
thine own cause. Hear my prayer, be mercyful to thy people, whom thou haste
chosen for an heritage to thy self, Turn our complaynte and sorrow into
joy, so as we may live, o lord, and praise thy name. O Lord suffer not the
mouths of them that praise the to be destroyed,

The oration and blessing of Job in his most grievous adversity and loss of
goods. Job. 1.
NAked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return again. The
lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, as it has pleased the lord so is
it done Now blessed be the name of the lord. Amen.

A prayer that we may be delivered from our adversaries. Esai. 37.
O Lord of hoostes, thou god of Israel which sit upon cherubin, thou art
the god alone of all the kingdoms of the world, thou only have created heaven
and earth. Enclyne thine ear Lord and consider, open thine eyes and se,
deliver us from the hand of our adversaries to thinte^t all the kingdoms of
the earth may know that thou only art the lord. Amen.

The prayer of Esaye when the people were sore plaged Esaye. 65.64.
Look down from heaven, and behold the dwelling place of thy sanctuary and
thy glory, How is it that thy gelousy, thy strength, the multitude of thy
mercyes and thy loving kyndnes will not be entreated of us? yet art thou our
father. Abraham knew us not, neither was Israel acquaynted with us. But thou
Lord art our father and redemer, and thy name is everlasting. O lord
wherefore haste thou led us out of thy way? Wherefore have thou hardened our
hertes that we fear the not? Be at one with us again for thy servants sake,
which be of the generation of thine heritage Thy people has had but little
of thy sanctuary in possession, for our enemies have taken it in. And we are
become even as we were at the beginning, what time we were not under thy
dominion nor called on thy name. O that you would cleave ye heaven in sonder,
come down: and that the mountains might melt a way at thy presence, like as
an hot fire, and that the malicious might boil as the water does upon the
fire, whereby thy name might be known among thine enemies, and that the
panyms might tremble before ye, that you myghtest come down with thy wondrous
strange works, tha^ should the hills melt at thy p^sence, for sythens the
beginning of the world, was none (except thou o god) yt hard or perceived,
neither has any eye seen what you doste for them that put their trust in the.
Thou helpest him that does right with cherefulnes, and them that think upon
thy ways. But lo thou art angry, for we have sinned and have been ever in
sin, yea there is not one hole, we are all as an unclean thing, and al our
ryghtuousnesses are as clothes stained with ye flowers of a woman, we fall
eueryone as the leaf, for our sinners carry us away as the wind. There is no
man that calls upon thy name, and that stands up to take hold by the.
Therefore hydest thou thy face from us, and co^sumest us because of our sins.
But now o lord thou that art our father, we are the clay and thou art our
potter, and we are all the work of thy hands. Be not to sore displeased (o
lord) and keep not our offenses to long in thy remembrance but consydre that
we all are thy people. The cities of thy sanctuarye lie wast. Syon is a
wyldernes, and Jerusalem a deserte. Our holy house which is our beuty, wheare
our fathers praised yt is burnt up, yea all our commodities and pleasures are
wasted away, wilt you not be e^treated (Lord) for all this? wylt thou hold thy
peax, and scourge us so sore?

An other prayer of Hieremye Hierem. 17.
Heal me (o lord) and I shall be hole, save thou me and I shall be saved, for
thou art my praise. Be not thou terrible unto me, O Lord, for thou art he in
whom I hope, when I am in peril. Let my persecuters be confounded, but not me,
let them be afraid and not me. Thou shall bring upon them the fyme to their
plage, and shall destroy them right sore, Amen.

An other prayer of Hieremye. Hier. 31.
O lord thou have chastened me, and thy chastenynge have I received as an
untamed calfe, Convert thou me and I shall be converted, for thou art my
lord God, for as soon as thou tournedst me I repented my self, And when I
understood I smote upon my thyghe, I confessed and was ashamed, because I
suffered reproach of my youth.

A prayer of Hieremye under the person of Christ which every Christen may say
in time of adversity. Lamenta. 3.
THou haste herd my voice, O lord and haste not turned away thine ears
from my sighyng and cryeng, Thou haste approached nere me, when I called upon
the and have said, fear not. Thou (O lord) haste maynteyned the quarrel of my
soul, and haste redeemed my life, O lord thou have seen my blasphemers take
thou my quarrel upon ye. Thou haste well considered how they go about to do me
harm, and that all their counsayles are against me. Thou haste herd their
dispytefull words (o lord) yea and al their imaginacions against me. Thou
seyst also their sitting down and their rysynge up, they make their songs of
nothing but of me. Reward them o lord according to the works of their
hands. Give them the thing, yt their own heart is afraid of, even thy curse.
Persecute them, o Lord, with thine indignacion, and rote the^ out from under
ye heaven. Ame^

The prayer of Judas Machabeus when he should encountre with his enemies. 1.
Machab. 4.
BLessed art thou o sauyoure of Israel, which dydest destroy the violent
power of the gyaunt in the hand of thy servant David and gave the host of
the heythen into ye hand of Ionathas the son of Saul, his weapen bearer, put
this hooste now into the hand of thy people Israel, and let them be
confounded in their multitude and horsemen. Make them afraid and discomfyte
the boldness of their strength, that they may be moved through their
destruction. Cast them down through the sword of thy lovers, then shall al
they that know thy name, praise yt for ever with tha^kesgyuyng, Ame^.

The prayer of Nehemias for the people oppressed of the Heythen. 2. Machab. 1.
O Lord god maker of al things thou fearful and strong, thou ryghteous and
merciful, thou that art only a gracious king, only lyberal, only just,
almighty and everlasting, thou that delyuerest Israel from all trouble, thou
that have chosen the fathers and haste hallowed them, receyuinge the offringe
for the hole people of Israel, preserve thyn own portion and halow it. Gather
those together yt are scatered abroad from us. Deliver them that are under the
heythens bondage, look upon them which are despised and abhorred, that the
heythen may know and se, how thou art our god. Punyshe them that oppress
and proudlye put us to dishonor. Amen.

OF THE BIBLE THANKESGYVYNges and praises unto God, of the fathers.
The song of Moses and the children of Israel for their delyueraunce from.
Pharao. Exodus 15.
LEt us singe unto the lord, for he is become glorious, the horsman he has
overthrown in the se. The lord is my strength and my song, and is become my
salvation, he is my god and I will glorifye him, he is my fathers god and I will
extolle him upon high. The lord is as a strong man of war, almighty is his
name. Pharaos charettes and his host, has he cast into the sea. His pyked
capitaynes were drowned in the red see, the deep waters have covered them, they
sonk to the botome as a stone. Thy hand lord is gloriouse in power, thine
hand has all to shaken thine enemies, and with thy great glory thou have
destroyed thine adversaries. Thou senteste forth thy wrath, and it consumed
the^ even as stubble with the brethe of thyn anger. The water gathered together
and the floudes stood still as a rock, and the deep water co^geled together in
the myddest of the sea. The enemy said I will follow and overtake them and
will deuyde the spoil, I will satisfye my lust upon them, I will draw my
sword, and mine hand shall destroy them. But thou bluest with thy breath, and
the sea covered them, they sanke as lead in the mighty waters. Who is like
unto the o lord among the gods? who is like the so glorious in holiness,
fearful, laudable, and which show wonders? Thou stretchedst thy right
hand and the earth swalowed them, with mercy thou caryedst thy people which
thou delyueredst, and broughtest them with thy strength unto thy holy land.
The nations heard, and were afraid, panges came upon the Philestines. Then
the Dukes of the Edomites were amassed, and trembling came upon the myghtyest
of the Moabytes, all the inhabitauntes of Canaan waxed faynte hearted. Let fear
and dread fall upon them, through the greatness of thine arm, while thy
people pass thoroughe, O Lord. Bring them in and plant them in the
mountains of thyn enheritau^ce, the place lord which thou have made to dwell
in, the sanctuary lord which thy hands have prepared. The lord raygne ever
and always, For Pharao went on horseback with his charettes and horsemen into
the sea, and the lord brought the waters of the sea upon the^, But the
children of Israel went on dry land through the sea.

Anna thankyng the lord for his benefyte, on this manner syngeth to god. 1.
Kings. 2.
MY heart reioyseth in the lord, mine horn is high in the lord and my mouth
is wide open over mine enemies for I rejoice in thy sauinge. There is none so
holy as thou o lord, no there is none save thou. Neither is there any
strength like unto our God. Talk not to much proudely, let old things
depart out of your mouths, for the lord is god of knowledge and judges the
thoughts. The bows of the strong are broken and the weak be endued with
strength. They that of late were full, have let forth them selves for bred, but
the hongry be satisfied, in so much the baren has borne seven, and she that
had many childern is waxed feeble. The lord kylleth and quickens again, he
brings down to hell and fetteth up again. The lord makes poor and makes
rych, brings low and heueth up on high, he rayseth up the poor out of the
dust, and lyfteth up the beggar from the dongehyll, to set him among princes,
and make him hold the seat of glory. For the pyllers of the earth are the
lords, and he has set the round world upon the^. He will keep the fete of
his saints, but the wicked shall keep syle^ce in darkness. For noman in his
own might shall be strong. The lords adversaries shall be made to fear him
and out of heaven he shall thunder upon them. The lord shall judge the costs
of the world and shall give might unto his king, and exalte the horn of his
Christ. Amen.

A song that David sounge unto the lord in the day that the lord delivered
him out of the hand of his enemies 2. Reg. 22.
THe lord is my rock, my castle and my delyuerer. God is my strength and in
him woll I trust, my shylde and the horn that defends me, mine high hold
and refuge, O my sauyoure save me from wrong, I will praise and call on the
Lord, and so shall I be saved from my enemies, for the waves of death have
closed me about, and the floudes of Beliall have feared me, the cords of hell
have compased me about, and the snares of death have ouertake^ me. In my
tribulacion I called to the lord, and cried to my god, and he herd my voice
out of his temple, and my cry entered in to his ears. The earth trembled and
quoke, and the fundations of heaven moved and shoke because he was angrye.
Smoke went out of his nosethrylles and consumyng fire out of his mouth that
coals were kyndled of it, he bowed the heaven and came down, and darkness was
underneath his fete. And he rode upon Cherub and flewe, and appeared upon the
wings of the wind, and he made darkness a tabernacle round about him with
water gathered together in thycke clouds. Of ye bryghtnes that was before him,
coals were set on fire. The Lord thundered from heaven, and the most high put
out his voice, and he shot arowes and scattered them, and hurled lightening
and turmoyled them. The botom of the Sea appeared, and the foundations of the
world were seen, by reason of the rebuking of the lord, and thorough
blastinge of the breath of his nosethrylles, he sent from above and fet me and
plucked me out of mighty waters. He delivered me from my mighty enemy and
from them that hated me and were to strong for me. When they had compased me
in the day of my tribulation, the lord stayed me up and brought me out into
roumth, and delivered me because he delyted in me. The lord rewarded me
according to my ryghteousnes, and according to the pureness of my hands he
dealt with me. For I kept ye ways of the lord, and did no wickedness nor
forsook my God, But I had all his laws in my sight, and turned my face from
none of his ordinances. I was pure unto him ward, and kept my self from
wickedness, and ye Lord did to me again according to my ryghtuousnesse, and
after my pureness that I had in his sight. With ye holy thou shalt be holy,
and with the man that is incorrupt, thou shall be vncorrupt, with the pure,
thou shall be pure, and with the froward thou shall be froward also. Certaynely
the people that are in adversity thou shall help, and on the proud shall thou
cast thyn eyes. Thou art my light O lord, and the lord shall lyghten my
darkness. Loo with thyn help I will run thorough an host of men, and by the
aid of my god I will spryng over a wall. The way of god is undefiled, and the
word of the lord fined as gold, and he is a shylde to all that trust in him.
Who is a god save the lord, and who mighty save our god? God is my strength in
war, and ryddeth the way before me. He makes my fete as swyft as an hyndes,
and sets my fete fast upon my hold. He teaches my hands to fight, that a
bow of brass is to weak for mine arm. And thou have saved me with thy
shylde, and kepest me for ever in mekenes. Thou made me rowme to walk in,
that my fete should not stumble, I followed mine enemies and destroyed them,
and turned not again until I had consumed the^ I wasted them and so clouted
them that they could in no wise arise, but fell underneath my fete. Thou
compasedest me about with might to batell, and made them that rose against
me to stoop under me. Thou madeste mine enemies to turn their backs to me,
and them that hated me, and I destroyed them. They looked for help, but none
came to save them, unto the lord they cried but he herd them not. The lord
might live, and blessed be he my strength, and exalted be god the strength
that saves me. It is god that auengeth me, and that brings down ye people
under me, and delyuereth me from my enemies. Thou lyftest me up on high from
them that rise against me and delyuerest me from the wicked men. Therefore I
will praise the O lord among the heythen, and will singe unto thy name.

A blessing of Tobias the elder, wherewith he blessed the lord in the end of
his life. Tob. 13.
Great art thou, o lord for ever more, and thy kingdom world without end.
For thou scourgest and healest, thou ledest unto hell and bryngest out again.
Yea there is none that may escape thine hand. O ye chyldern of Israel, give
thanks unto the lord, and praise him in the syghte of the heythen. For among
the heythen which know him not, has he scatered you, that ye should show
forth his marvelous works, and cause them to know, that there is none other
god almyghtye, but he. He has chastened us for our misdeeds, and for his own
mercyes sake, shall he save us. Consider then how he has dealte with you, and
praise him with fear and dread, and magnify the everlasting king in your
works. Certes I will praise him even in the place of my captivity, for he
has showed his majesty unto a synneful people. Turn you therefore o ye
sinners, and do ye righteousness before god, trustinge verily he will show
his mercy upon you. Assuredly I and my soul wolle rejoice in god. Praise the
Lord all ye his chosen, hold the days of gladness and be thankeful unto him.
Oh my soul bless thou the lord. Amen.

The blessing of Seraphin Esaias. 6.
HOly art thou, holy art thou, holy art thou, thou art the lord god of
hosts, all the earth is full of thy glory.

Thankinges. Esaias. 23.
O Lord, thou art my god I will praise the, and magnifye thy name, for thou
bryngest meruelouse things to pass, according to thyn old counselles truly
and steadfastly.

An other of the same. Esaias. 26.
O Lord give us peax, for thou workest in us all our works. O lord our god,
though such lords have dominacion upon us as know the not, yet grant, yt we
may hope only in the and keep thy name in remembrance. Amen.

A blessing with an admiration of the meruelouse counsels of god. Hiere. 32.
O Lord god, it is thou that have made heaven and earth with thy great power
and high arm, and there is nothing to hard for the. Thou sheweste mercy upon
thousands, thou do recompense the wyckednes of the fathers, into the bosom
of the childern that come after them. Thou art the great and mighty god, whose
name is the lord of hosts great in counsayll, and infinite in thought.
Thine eyes look upon all the ways of men's children, to reaward every one after
his way and according to the fruits of his inventions.

The song and thankesgyuynge of the blessed virgin Mary. Luc. I.
MY soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit reioyseth in God my savior. For
he has looked upon the pore degree of his handemayde, Behold now from hense
forth shall all generacions call me blessed, for he that is mighty has done to
me great things, and holy is his name. And his mercy on them that fear him
thorowout all generacions. He uttered strength with his arm, he disperpled the
proud in the imaginacion of their hertes. He deposed the mighty from their
seats, and advanced them of low degree. He filled the hungry with good
things and sent away the rich empty. He remembered mercy, and helped his
servant Israel, Even as he promised to our fathers, Abraham and to his sede
for ever.

The prophecy and gyuynge of thanks of zachary. Luc. 1.
Praised be the lord god of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people. And has raised up an horn of salvation unto us in the house of his
servant David, Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which
were sythens the world began, that we should be delivered from our enemies
and from the hands of all that hate us, To the intent he might fulfill the mercy
promised to our fathers and remember his holy covenant. And perform the oath
which he swear to our father Abraham, to give us, that we being ones delivered
out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, all the
days of our life, in holiness and ryghtousnes before him. And thou child shall
be called the Prophet of the hygheste, for thou shall go before the face of
the Lord to prepare his ways, To give knowledge of salvation unto his people
for the forgyuenes of sins, Through the tender mercy of our god, whereby the
day spring from above has visited us, to give light to them that sat in
darkness and in shadow of death, and to gyde our fete in the way of peax.

Thanks of Paul for his conversion unto Christ. 1. Tim. 1.
Unto God king everlasting immortal, invisible, and wise only, be honor and
praise for ever and ever. Amen.

A song of the triumphers over the beast. Apoc. 15.
Great and meruelouse are thy works, Lord god almighty, just and true are
thy ways, king of saints. Who shall not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy
name? For thou only art holy, and all gentyles shall come and worship before
the, for thy judgments are made manifest.

A blessing of the people by king Solomon. 3. Reg. 8.
BLessed be the Lord, that has given rest unto his people Israel according to
all that he promised, so that there is not one word escaped of all ye good
promyses which he promised by the hand of Moses his servant. The Lord our
God be with us, as he was with our fathers and forsake us not, neither leave us,
but let him bow our hertes unto him, yt we walk in all his ways and keep his
commandments, ordinances, and rites which he commanded our fathers. And
let these my words which I have prayed before the lord, come nygh unto the
lord our god day and night, that he defend the quarrel of his servant and of
his people Israel evermore to thintente all nations of the earth may know
that the lord is God, and none other but he, and let our hertes be sound
with the lord our god, that we may walk in his ordinances and keep his
laws. Ame^.

PRAYERS FOR SVCcours and reliefes of life, for wisdom, for humylitie and for
other natural gifts
A prayer of Solomon for a competency of life. Proverb. 30.
TWo things I require of the, that thou will not deny me before I dye.
Remove from me vanity and lies, give me neither poverty nor riches, only
grant me a necessary living, least if I be to full I might happily deny the,
and say what fellow is the lord? or constrained through poverty, I might fall
unto stealyng, and forswear the name of my god. Amen.

A prayer for obteynyng of wisdom. Sap. 9.
GOd of my fathers, and lord of mercyes, thou that haste made all things with
thy word, and ordined man thoroughe thy wisdom, that he should have dominion
over the creature which thou haste made that he should order the world
according to equity and ryghteousnes and execute judgment with a true
heart, give me wisdom, which is ever about thy seat, and put me not out from
among thy children. For I thy servant and son of thy ha^demayde am a feeble
person, of a short time, and to young to the understanding of judgment and of
thy laws. Yea though a man be never so perfect among the childern of men, yet
if thy wisdom be not with him, he shall be nothing worth. Oh send her out of thy
holy heavens, and from ye trone of thy majesty, that she may be with me and
labor with me that I may know what is acceptable in thy sight. For she
knows and understands al things, and she shall conducte me right soberly
in my works, and preserve me in her power. So shall my works be acceptable.
Amen.

A prayer for mekenes and the obteyning of chastity Eccle. 23.
O Lord thou father and god of my life, let me not have a proud look. But
turn away all voluptuousnes from me. Take from me the lusts of the body,
let not the desires of uncleanness take hold upon me, and give me not over into
an unshamefast and obstinate mind. Amen.

The prayer of Jesus the son of Sirache, in necessity and for wisdom.
Eccle. the last.
I Thank the O Lord and king, and praise the o god my savior I will yield
praises unto thy name, for thou art my defender and helper from the snare of
traitorours to^ges, and from them that are occupied in lies. Thou have been my
helper from such as rose against me, and haste delivered me according to thy
great mercy, and for thy holy names sake. Thou have delivered me from the
roarynge of them that prepared the^ selves to devour me, out of the hands of
such as sought after my life, from the multitude of them that troubled me and
went about to set fire upon me on every side, so that I was not brent in the
mids of the fire. From the deep of hell, thou delyueredst me, from the
unclean tongue, from lyenge words, from the wicked judge, and from the
vnryghteouse tongue. My soul shall praise the Lord unto death, for my life
drew nigh unto hell. They compased me round about on every side, and there was no
man to help me, I looked about me, if there were any man that would socoure me,
but there was none. Then thought I upon thy mercy, O Lord, and upon thy acts
that thou haste done ever of old, namely that thou delyuereste such as put
their trust in the, and ryddest them out of the hands of the false panims.
Thus lyfted I up my prayer from the earth, and prayed for delyueraunce from
death, I called upon the lord my father, that he would not leave me with out
healpe in the day of my trouble, and in the time of the proud. I praised thy
name continually, yelding honor and thanks unto it, and so my prayer was
herd. Thou sauedst me from destruction and delyueredst me from the
unrighteous time. Therefore will I knowledge, and praise the, and auau^ce the
name of the Lord. When I was yet but young, or ever I went a straye, I desired
wisdom openly in my prayer, I came therefore before the temple and I sought her
very busyly. Then floryshed she unto me as a grape that is sone ripe. My heart
reioysed in her, then went my foot ye right way, yea from my youth sought I
after her, I bowed down my ear and received her, I found in my self much
wisdom and prospered greatly in her. Therefore will I give ye glory unto him
that gives me wisdom, for I am advised to do thereafter, I will be gelouse to
cleave unto that is good, so shall I not be confounded. My soul has wrestled
with her, and I have been diligent to be occupied in her. I lyfted up mine
hands on high, then was my soul lyghtened thorough wisdom so that I
knowledged my folyshnes. I ordered my soul after her, she and I were one heart
from the beginning, and I found her in clennesse, and therefore shall I not be
forsaken. My heart longs after her and I gate a good treasure. Thorough her
the lord has given me a new tongue, wherewith I will praise him Oh come unto
me ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of wisdom, with draw not your selves
from her, but talk and common of these things, for your souls are very
thursty. I opened my mouth and spoke, Oh come and bye wysdom without money, bow
down your neck under her yoke, and your soul shall reaceyue wisdom, she is
even at hand and is content to be found. Behold with your eyes, how I have had
but little labor, and yet have found much rest. Oh receive wisdom, and ye
shall have plenty of silver and gold in your possession. Let your mind
rejoice in her mercy, and be not ashamed of her praise, work her work by
times, and she shall give you your reward in due time.

The prayer of Abacuc the prophet for ignorancies Abacuc. 5.
O Lord when I herd speak of the, then I was afraid. The work that thou
have taken in hand shall thou perform in his time, O Lord when thy time
comes thou shall declare it. In thy very wrath thou think upon mercy. The
lord God is my strength, he shall make my fete as ye fete of an heart, and he
which gives the victory, shall bring me to my hye places syngyng upon psalms.
Amen.

A prayer of the faithful congregation that they may speak the word of god
boldly Actu. 4.
Lord thou art god, which have made heaven and earth, the sea and all that in
them is, which by the mouth of thy servant David have said, why did the
heathen rage, and the people ymagyne vain things? The kings of the earth
stood up, and the rulers came together against the Lord and against his
Christ. For suerly against his holy son Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both
Herod and also Poncius Pylate with the Panyms and the people of Israel
gathered them selves together to do even what so ever thyn hands and thy
counsel determined before to be done. And now Lord behold their
threatenynges, and grant unto thy servants with all confidence to speak thy
word, and that thou wolt stretch forth thine hand, to thintente that healyng,
signs, and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy son Jesus. Amen.

A PRAYER UNTO THE Lord Jesus for the peax of the church, made by the most
excellent clerk Erasmus.
Lord Jesus Christ which of thine almyghtynes made al creatures both
visible and invisible, which of thy godly wisdom gouernest and set al
things in most goodly order, which of thyn unspeakable goodness, kepest,
defendest, and furderest al things, which of thy botomles mercy restorest the
decayed, renewest the fallen, raysest the dead, vouchesaue (we pray the) at
last to cast down thy countenance upon thy beloved spouse the church but let
it be that amyable and mercyful countenance wherewith thou pacifyest al things
in heaven, in earth, and that be above heuens and under the earth, vouchesaue to
cast upon us those tender and pytiful eyes with which thou ones dydest behold
Petre that great shepeherd of thy church, and forthwith he remembered himself
and repented, with which eyes, thou ones dydest vewe the skattered multitude
and were moved with compassion that for lack of a good shepeherd they wa^dred
as sheep disperpled and strayed a sunder. Thou seist (O good shepeherd) what
sundry sorts of wolves have broken into thy shepecotes, of whom every one
cries, here is Christ, here is Christ, so that if it were possible the very
perfect persons should be brought into error. Thou see with what wyndes, with
what waves, with what storms thy sely ship is tossed, thy ship wherein thy
little flock is in peril to be drowned, And what is now left but that it utterly
synke and we all perish? Of this tempest and storm we may thank our own
wyckednes and sinful living, we espy it well and confess it. We espy thy
righteousness and we bewail our unrighteous, but we appele to thy mercy
which (according to the psalm of thy prophet) surmounteth all thy works. We
have now suffered much punisheme^t being sowsed with so many wars, consumed
with such losses of goods, skourged with so many sorts of diseases and
pestilencies, shaken with so many floudes, feared with so many strange sightes
from heaven, and yet appear there no where any haue^ or port unto us being thus
tyered and forlorn among so strange euyls, but still every day more
greuouse punishementes and more seem to ha^ge over our heddes. We complain not
of thy sharpenes most tender Savior, but we espy here also thy mercy,
forasmoche as much greuouser plages we have deserved. But O most mercyful Jesus,
we beseech the that thou will not consider ne weygh, what is due for our
deserui^ges, but rather what becomes thy mercy, without which neither the
Angels in heaven can stand sure before the, much les we sely vessels of clay.
Have mercy of us O redemer which art easy to be entreated, not that we be
worthy of mercy, but give thou this glory unto thine own name. Suffer not,
that the Iues, the Turks, and the rest of Panyms, which either have not known
the, or do envy thy glory, should continually tryumphe over us, and say, where
is their god, where is their redemer, where is their savior, where is their
brydegrome that they thus bost on? These opprobrious words and vpbraydinges
redownde unto the O lord while by our evils men weygh and esteem thy goodness,
they think we be forsaken whom they se not amended. Ones when thou slepst in
the ship, and a tempest suddenly arisyng thretned death to all in the ship,
thou awookest at the out cry of a few disciples, and straight weye at thyn
almighty word the waves couched, the wyndes fell, the storm was suddenly turned
into a great calm. The dombe waters knew their makers voice. Now in this
far greater tempest, wherein not a few men's bodies be in danger, but
innumerable souls, we beseech the at the cry of thy hole church which be in
danger of drowning that you wolt awake. So many thousands of me^ do cry,
lord, save us, we perish. The tempest is past man's power, yea we se that the
endeavors of them that would help it do turn clean a contrary wey. It is thy
word that must do the deed Lord Jesus. Only say thou with a word of thy mouth,
Cease o tempest, and forthwith shall the desyered cawme appear. Thou would
have spared so many thousands of most wicked men, if in ye city of Sodom had
been found but ten good men. Now here be so many thousands of men, which
love the glory of thy name, which syghe for the bounty of thy house, and
will thou not at these men's prayers let go thine anger and remember thine
accustomed and old mercyes? Shalt thou not with thy heavenly policy turn
our folly into thy glory? Shalt thou not turn the wicked men's euels to thy
churches good? For thy mercy is wont then most of al to succoure when the
thing is with us past remedy, and neither the might, nor wisdom of me^ can
help it. Thou alone bryngest things that be never so out of order into order
again, which art the only author and maynteyner of peax. Thou framedst that
old confusion which we call Chaos, wherein with out order, without fashion
confusely lay the discordaunt seeds of things, and with a wonderful order the
things that of nature fought together thou dyddest alye and knytte in a
perpetual band. But how much greater confusion is this, where is no
charity, no fidelity, no bonds of love, no reverence neither of laws nor
yet of rulers, no agreement of opinions, but as it were in a mysordred quere
every man syngeth a contrary note? Among the heavenly planetes is no
dissension, al four elements keep their place, every one do their office
whereunto they be appointed. And wylt thou suffer thy spouse, for whose sake all
things were made, thus by continual dyscordes to perysh and go to wreke?
Shall thou suffer the wicked spirits, which be authors and workers of
discord to bear such a swing in thy kingdom vnchecked? Shall thou suffer
that strong captain of myschefe, whom thou ones ouerthrewest, again to
invade thy te^tes and to spoil thy souldyours? When thou were here a man
conuersaunt among men, at thy voice fled ye deuels. Send forth, we beseech
the o Lord, thy spirit, which may drive away out of the breasts of al the^
that profess thy name the wicked spirits, masters of ryotte, of couetise, of
vain glory, of carnal lust, of mischief and of discord. Create in us, O our
God and king, a clean heart, and renew thy holy spirit in our breasts pluck
not from us thy holy ghost. Render unto us ye joy of thy saui^g health, and with
thy princypal breath strengthen thy spouse and the herdmen thereof. By this
spirit thou reconciledst the erthly to the heavenly, by this thou did frame
and reduce so many tongues, so many nations, so many sundry sorts of men into
one body of a church, which body by the same spirit ha^geth to the their head.

This spirit, if thou wol vouchesaue to renew in all men's hearts, tha^ shall
also these foreign miseryes cease or if they cease not, at lest they shall turn
to the profit and avail of them which love the. Stey this confusion set in
order this horrible Chaos (O Lord Jesus) let thy spirit stretche out it self
upon these waters of evil waueryng opinions. And because thy spirit, which
according to thy prophets sayng conteyneth al things, has also ye science of
speaking, make, yt like as unto al them which be of thy house is al one light,
one baptism, one God, one hope, one spirit: so they may have also one voice,
one note and song, professing one catholic troth. When thou did mount up
to heaven triumphauntlike thou threwest about from above thy precious things,
thou gave gifts among men, thou dealtest sundry rewards of thy spirit.
Renew again from above thy old bowntifulnes, give that thing to thy church
now feyntynge and growyng downward, that thou gave unto her shoting up at
her first begynyng. Give unto princes and rulers the grace to stand in awe of
the, that they so may guide the common weal, as they should shortly re^dre
acco^ptes unto the that art king of kings, give wisdom to be alweyes
assiste^t unto them, that what so ever is best to be done, they may espy it
in their minds and pursue the same in their doings. Give to thy bishops the
gift of prophecye, yt they may declare and interpret holy scripture not of
their own brayn but of thine inspyring. Give them the threfold charity, which
thou ones demaundedst of Peter what time you did betake unto him the charge
of thy sheep. Give to thy prestes the love of sobernes and of chastity.

Give to thy people a good will to follow thy commandments and a redynes to
obey such persons, as you have appointed over the^. So shall it come to pass,
if through thy gift thy princes shall command that thou requyrest, if thy
pastors and herdmen shall teach the same, and thy people obey them both,
that the old dignity and tranquillity of the church shall return again with
a goodly order unto the glory of thy name. Thou sparedst the Ninevites
appointed to be destroyed as soon as they converted to repentance. And will thou despice thy house falling down at thy fete, which instead of sack cloth
has syghes, and instead of ashes tears? Thou promisedst forgiveness to such
as turn unto the, but this self thing is thy gift, a man to turn with his
hole heart unto the, to the intent al our goodness should redou^d unto thy glory.
Thou art ye maker, repare thy work that thou have fashioned. Thou art the
redemer, save that thou have bought Thou art the Savior, suffer not them to
perish that do hang on the. Thou art the Lord and owner, chaleng thy
possession. Thou art ye head, help thy members, Thou art the king, give us a
reverence of thy laws. Thou art the prince of peax, breath upon us brotherly
love. Thou art the god, have pytie on thy humble besechers, be thou according
to Paul's sayng, al things in all men to thinte^t ye hole quere of thy church
with agreyng minds and consonaunt voices for mercy obtained at thy hands may
give thanks to ye father, son and holy ghost, which after the most perfect
exemple of concord be distincted in property of persons and one in nature, to
whom be praise and glory eternally. Amen.

A prayer before thou take bodily sustenaunce
WE wretched and alweis nedynge bodies, for this meat which thou have hallowed
and given us for the relief and suste^tation of our bodies do reverently give
thanks unto the O God almighty and heavenly father, beseching the also here with,
to bestow and comunicate unto us ye meat of Angels, that true heavenly bread,
I mean our Lord Jesus Christ, so as with him our mind may be fed, and that by
his flesh and blood we may be fostered, nourished, and made strong. Amen.

A prayer after thou have taken bodily sustenaunce
Forasmoch as O Lord almighty and most merciful God thou have with thy gifts
liberally fed us and refreshed our bodies: cause that after this repast, we
may dilige^tlie observe what thing you would have done by us and what not,
and also fulfill and execute in deed the same with a redye and pure mind
accordingly, By Jesus Christ our Lord. So be it.

For spiritual joy.
LOrd Jesus, thou that art the redemer and confortor of mankind, which to such
as renounce and abhor for love of the all the vain and false pleasures of
this world haste prepared by thy holy ghost far better and higher pleasures
which the world knows not, and do tempre the greuaunce and incommoditie
of this life with inward and preuye consolations by renewyng unto us ever
among some token and ynklyng of the bless to come, whereby we being refreshed
and recreate might with more cherefull minds run unto the. I beseech the
that the annoyntyng of thy holy spirit may evermore shake of from me the
werines of this wretched world and cheer my heart with a blessed and holsom
joy, which said spirit did also annoynte the O Lord what time thou were here
co^uersaunt among us with the oil of joy before thy felawes and brethern
which with the father and ye same spirit do live and raygne for ever and
ever. Ame^.

For the keeping and defense of a good name and fame.
THat wise man which was privy of thy secrets O heavenly father) taught us yt
an honest fame is a treasure right preciouse, when he says, Better it is to
have a good name then preciouse oyntmentes. But this so excellent and good
thing we neither can get nor keep but by thy aid and help. Now suerly the well
and fountaign of a good name is a fautles lief. This therefore in especial we
demand and crave of ye O Lord almighty. Yet nevertheless forasmoch as
oftentimes innocence and fautles living is not enough neither yet a suer
buckler and defense namely against such as under their lyppes bear the poison
of serpents, yea and oftentimes it happens that when we suppose to be
among our trusty fre^des we dwell with Ezechiel among scorpions and
venemouse serpents: we cry with thy holy prophet, O Lord deliver my soul
from wicked lyppes and a gylefull tongue. But if nevertheless it be seen to thy
goodness to exercise thy servants also with this affliction to the intent they
may the better be brought to godlynes and perfection: grant (we the pray)
that with Paul thy most valyau^t Cha^pion we may by reproach and glory by
infamye and good name abide still in thy commandments through Jesus Christ
which also himself wha^ he walked here in earth, was reviled, sklau^dered, evil
spoken of, and called to his tethe a Samaritane, a wine drynker, a deceyuer of
the people, and one that had a devil. The same now reigns with the in glory
together with the holy ghost Amen.

THE TABLE OR Contents of this present book
First a general confession of sins unto God daily to be said of every
Christian person. AN Epitome that is to say an abbrigement or brief meditacion
upon every one of the hundredth and fyfty Psalms in order, drawn out most
christianly by a right excellent learned man for the edificacion and profit of
the right christians. After these meditacio^s we have added the Lords prayer
called the Pater noster. ^ The articles of the christian faith or religion
called the Creed. The ten commandments THe principal prayers of the Bible
most necessary for christian persons to pray daily. A very sweet and devout
prayer unto the Lord Jesus for the peace of the church, made by the most
excellent clerk Erasmus. A prayer before thou take bodily sustenaunce. A
prayer after meat. A prayer for spiritual joy. A prayer for the keeping and
defense of a good name and fame.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the white heart. 1539.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


