SIONS SONETS.

Sung By SOLOMON the King, And PERIPHRAS'D By FRA. QVARLES.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Thomas Dew, and are to be sold at his
shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1625.



TO THE TRVLY NOBLE AND NO LESS GOOD THEN GREAT LORD, JAMES, MARQVES Hamleton.
SIR,
HAd these Lines been loose, and lascivious, I had either picked out a less
honorable Patron, or stood to the courtesy of every wanton Reader; But being
(as they are) of a divine subject, therefore subject to the ill-digested
humors of light heads, by your favor (thrice noble Lord) you are bound to
protect it, being the known Patron to goodness. There are too few such: This
makes glorious Vice so bold, and bashful Virtue so inglorious. You are a
bright Star in our Orb; on which, all good eyes are fixed, and by the
special influence of which, these presented Lines, had their conception, their
birth, their being; and now crept forth, repay themselves to You, hope to
receive honor from You, and sue for protection under You. So I commit them to
the honor of so great a fortune.

SIR, The true honourer of your admired worth, FRANCIS QVARLES.

To the Readers.
REaders, now you have them. May the end of my pains be the beginning of your
pleasures. Excuse me for soaring so high, else give me leave to excuse my
self; Indeed I flue with Eagles feathers; otherwise I had not flowne, or
fallen. It is the Song of Songs, I here present you with: The Author, King
SOLOMON, the wisest of Kings; The matter mystical, the diuinest of subjects:
The Speakers, CHRIST, the Bridegroom; the CHVRCH, the Bride; The end, to
invite you all to the wedding. Farewell.

AN EPITHALME TO THE BRIDEGROOM.
HOSANNA to the Highest. Joy betide
The heavenly Bridegroom, and his holy Bride:
Let Heaven above be filled with songs,
Let Earth triumph below;
For ever silent be those tongues,
That can be silent now.
You Rocks, and Stones, I charge you all to break
Your flintie silence, if men cease to speak.
You, that profess that sacred Art,
Or now, or never show it,
Plead not, your Muse is out of heart,
Here Is that creates a Poet.
Be ravished Earth, to see this contract driven,
'Twixt sinful Man, and reconciled Heaven.
Dismount you Quire of Angels; come,
With Men, your joys divide;
Heaven never showed so sweet a GROOM,
Nor Earth, so fair a BRIDE.
SIONS SONETS.
BRIDE. SONET I.
1.
O That the bounty of those lips divine, CAP. 1.

Would seal their favors, on these lips of mine,
That by those welcome Sensible graces.
kisses, I might see
The mutual love, betwixt my Love and me,
For truer bliss, no worldly joy allows,
Then sacred Kisses, from so sweet a Spouse,
With which, no earthly pleasures may compare,
Rich Wines are not so delicate as thay're.
2.
NOr Myrrh, nor Cassia, nor the choice perfumes
Of unctious Narde, or Aromatic fumes
Or hot Arabia, do enrich the air
With more delitious sweetness, then the fair
Reports, that crown the merits of thy Name,
With heavenly Laurels of eternal fame,
Which makes the Pure in heart.
Virgins fix their eyes upon thee,
And all that view thee, are enamored on thee.
3.
O, Let the beauty of thy Sunne-like face
Inflame my soul, and let thy glory chase
Disloyal thoughts; Let not the World allure
My chaste desires, from a Spouse, so pure;
But when as Time shall place me on thy The Kingdom of Heaven.
Throne,
My fears will cease, and interrupt by none,
I shall transcend the style of Transitory,
And full of glory, still be filled with glory.
4.
But you, my curious (and too nice) Allies,
That view my fortunes, with two narrow eyes,
You say my face is Through apparent infirmities.
black, and foul; it is true;
I Am beauteous, to my Love, though black to you,
My censure stands not upon your esteem,
He sees me as I Glorious in him.
am; you, as I seem;
You see the Clouds, but he discernes the Sky;
Know, It Is my Weakness of the flesh.
Mask that looks so black, not I.
5.
What if Afflictions do dis-imbellish
My natural glory, and deny the relish
Of my adjourned beauty, yet disdain not
Her, by whose necessary loss, you gain not;
I was enforced to swelter in Afflictions.
the Sun,
And Forced to Idolatrous superstitions.
keep a strangers Vine, left mine alone;
I left mine own, and kept a strangers Vine;
The fault was By reason of my weakness.
mine, but was Being seduced by false prophets.
not only mine.
6.
O Thou, whose love I prize above my life,
More worthy far to enjoy a fairer wife,
Tell me, to what cool shade, do thou resort?
Where graze thy Sheep, where do thy Lambs disport
Free from the scortching of this Persecutions.
sowltrie weather?
O tell thy Love, and let thy Love come thither:
Say (gentle Shephard) fits it thee, to cherish
Thy private Flocks, and let thy true Love By Idolatry.
perish?
BRIDEGROOM. SONET. II.
ILlustrious Bride, more radiant and more Through my merits and thy
sanctification.
bright,
Then the eye of Noone, thrice fairer then the light;
Thou dearest offspring of my dying blood,
And treasure of my soul, why have thou stood
Parching so long in those ambitious beams?
Come, come and cool thee in these silver The doctrine of the true Prophets.
streams;
Vnshade thy Face, cast back those golden Locks,
And I will make thee Teacher of my Congregations.
Mistress of my Flocks.
2.
O Thou, the Center of my choice desires,
In whom I rest, in whom my soul respires;
Thou art the flower of beauty, and I prize thee
Above the World, how e're the World disprize thee:
The blind imagins all things black, by kind;
Thou art as beautiful, as they are blind:
And as the fairest troops of Pharoes Steeds
Exceed the rest, so Thou, the rest exceeds.
3.
THy Thy most visable parts.
Cheek (the garden where fresh beauty plants
Her choysest flowers) no adorning wants;
There wants no relish of Sanctification
diuiner grace,
To sum compleatnesse, in so sweet a face;
Thy Neck, without a blemish, without blot,
Then pearle's more orient, clear from stain or spot;
Thy Gemmes and Jewels, full of curious art,
Imply the sacred treasures of thy heart.
4.
THe Sunne-bright glory of thy resounding fame,
Adds glory, to the glory of my Name;
The more's thy honor (Love) the more thou striu'st
To honor me; Thou gaynest, what thou give:
My Father (whom our Contract has made thine)
Will give thee large endowments of The riebes of his holy Spirit.
divine,
And everlasting treasure; Thus by me
Thou shall be rich, that am thus rich, in Thee.
BRIDE. SONET III.
OH, how my soul is ravished with the joys,
That spring like fountains from my true loves voice!
How cordial are his lips! How sweet his tongue!
Each word, he breathes, is a melodious song;
He absent (ah) how is my glory dim!
I have no beauty, not derived from Him;
What e're I have, from Him alone, I have,
And He takes pleasure in those gifts, he gave.
2.
AS fragrant Myrrh, within the bosom hid,
Sents more delitious, then (before) it did,
And yet receives no sweetness, from that breast,
That proves the sweeter, for so sweet a guest;
Even so, the favor of my dearest Spouse,
Thus prized, and placed in my heart, endowes
My ardent soul, with sweetness, and inspires
With heavenly rauishment, my rapt desires.
3.
Who ever smelt the breath of morning flowers,
New sweerned with the dash of twilight showers,
Or pounded Amber, or the flowring Thyme,
Or purple Violets, in their proudest prime,
Or swelling Clusters, from the Cypress tree?
So sweet's my Love; I, far more sweet is He:
So fair, so sweet, that heavens bright eye is dim,
And flowers have no sent, compared with Him.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET IIII.
O Thou, the joys of my suff^^ed heart,
The more thou think me fair, the more thou art;
Look in the Crystal mirrours of mine eyes,
And view thy beauty; there thy beauty lies:
See there, th'vnmated glory of thy Face,
Well mixed with Spirit, and diuinest grace;
The eyes of Doves, are nor so fair, as thine:
O, how those eyes, instanie these eyes of mine The holy Prophets.

BRIDE. SONET V.
MOst radiant, and refulgent Lamp of light,
Whose midday beauty, yet never found a night,
It Is thou, it is only thou art fair; from Thee
Reflect those The holy Spirit.
rays, that have englightned me,
And as bright Cynthia's borrowed beams do shine
From Titan's glory, so do I, from thine;
So daily flourishes our fresh delight,
In daily In giving grace and receiving glory.
giving, and receiving light.
2.
NOr does thy glory shine to me alone;
What place, wherein thy glory has not shone?
But o, how fragrant with rich odor, smells
That The Congregation of Saints
sacred House, where thou my true Love dwells?
Nor is it strange; How can those places be
But filled with sweetness, if possessed with Thee!
My heart's a Heaven, for Thou art in that heart,
Thy presence makes a Heaven, where e're thou art.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET VI.
THou sovereign Lady' of my select desires, CAP. II.

I, I am He, whom thy chaste soul admires;
The Rose, for smell; the Lilly, to the eye,
Is not so sweet, is not so fair as I;
My veiled beautie's not the glorious prize
Not in outward glory.
Of common sight; In inward graces.
within, my beauty lies;
Yet ne'rethelesse, my glory were but small,
If I should want, to honor thee withal.
2.
NOr do I boast my Excellence alone,
But thine (dear Spouse) as whom, the world has none
So true to Faith, so pure in love, as whom
Lives not a Bride so fits, so chaste a Groom;
And as the fairest Lilly does exceed
The fruitless Bramble, or the foulest weed,
So far (my Love) do thou exceed the rest,
In perfect beauty, of a loyal breast.
BRIDE. SONET VII.
Look how the fruitful Tree (whose laden boughs,
With swelling pride, crown Autumnes smiling brows
Surpasses idle shrubs; even so, in worth,
My love transcends the Worthies of the earth:
He was my Shore, in Shipwreck; and my Shelter
In Storms; my Shade, when I began to Swelter;
If hungry, he was Food; and if oppressed
With wrongs, my Advocate; with toil, my Rest.
2.
I Thirsted; and, full charged to the brinke,
He gave me The holy Scriptures.
boules of Nectar, for my drink,
And in his Sides, he broacht me (for a sign
Of dearest love) a Sacramental wine;
He freely gave; I freely drank my fill;
The more I drank, the more remained still:
Did never Soldier, to his Colors prove
More chaste, then I, to so entire a Love.
3.
O How his beauty sets my soul on fire!
My spirits languish, with extreme desire;
Desires, exceeding limits, are too lavish,
And wanting means to be effected, ravish;
Then let thy Thy sweet Promises.
breath, like flaggons of strong wine,
Relieve and comfort this poor heart of mine;
For I am sick, till time (that does delay
Our Marriage) bring our joyful Marriage day.
4.
TIll then, o let my dearest Lord, by whom,
These pleasing pains of my sweet sorrows come,
Perform his vows, and with his due resort,
Bless me, to make the sullen time seem short:
In his sweet presence, may I still be blessed,
Debarred from whom, my soul can find no rest;
O let all times be prosperous, and all places
Be witness to our vndefil'd Embraces.
5.
ALl you, whose seeming favors have professed
The true affection of a loyal breast,
I charge you all, by the true love you bear
To friendship, or what else ye count most dear,
Vex not his Spirit with your sins.
Disturb ye not my Love; O do not reiue
Him of his joys, that is so apt to grieve;
Dare not to break his quiet slumbers, lest
You rowze a raging Lion from his rest.
6.
Hark, hark, I hear that thrice-celestiall voice,
Wherein my spirits, rapt with joys, rejoice;
A voice, that tells me, my beloued's nigh;
I know the Music, by the Majesty:
Behold he comes; It Is not my The imperfections of my present state.
blemished face,
Can slake the swiftness of his winged pace;
Behold he comes; His Trumpet does proclaim,
He comes with speed; A truer love never came.
7.
BEhold the fleetnesse of his nimble feet;
The Roe-bucke, and the Heart were never so fleet:
The word I spoke, flue not so speedy from me,
As He, the treasure of my soul comes to me;
He stands behind my Wall, as if in doubt
Of welcome; Ah, this The weakness of my flesh.
Wall debarres him out:
O, how injurious is this Wall of sin,
That bars my Lover out, and bolts me in!
The BRIDE in the person of the BRIDEGROOM. SONET VIII.
Hark, hark, me thinks I hear my true Love say,
Break down that envious bar, and come away;
Arise (my dearest Spouse) and dispossess
The soul of doubtful fears, nor ouer-presse
Thy tender spirits, with the dull despair
Of thy demerits; (Love) thou art as fair,
As earth will suffer; Time will make thee clearer;
Come forth (my Love) then whom, my life's not dearer.
2.
COme forth (my Joy;) What bold affront of fear
Can fright thy soul, and I, thy Champion, here?
It Is I that calls, it is I, thy Bridegroom, calls thee,
Betide it me, what ever evil befalls thee:
The winter of thy sharp Affliction's gone;
Why fear thou cold, and art so near the Sun?
I am thy Sun, if thou be cold, draw nearer;
Come forth (my Love) then whom, my life's not dearer.
3.
COme forth (my dear) the spring of joys inuit thee,
The The Elect.
Flowers contend for beauty, to delight thee,
Their sweet ambition's only, which might be
Most sweet, most fair, because most like to thee:
The Angels.
Birds (sweet Heralds of so sweet a Spring)
Warble high notes, and Hymenaeans sing;
All sing, with joy, t'injoy so sweet a Hearer;
Come forth (my Love) then whom, my life's not dearer.
4.
THe prosperous The Congregation of the faithful.
Vine, which this dear hand did pla^t,
Tenders due service to so sweet a Saint:
Her hidden Clusters swell with sacred pride,
To To offer up the frist fruits of obedience.
kiss the lips of so, so fair a Bride;
Masqu'd in their leafes, they lurk, fearing to be
Discryde by any, till first seen by Thee;
The Clouds are past; the Heavens cannot be clearer;
Come forth (dear love) then whom, my life's not dearer.
5.
MY Dove, whom daily Persecutions.
dangers teach new shifts,
That, like a Dove, do haunt the secret Clifts
Of solitary Rocks; How e're thou be
Reserved from others, be not strange to me,
Call me to rescue, and this brawnie Arm
Shall quell thy Foe, and fence thy soul, from harm;
Speak (Love;) Thy voice is sweet; What if thy face
Be drencht with tears? Each teare's a several grace.
6.
ALl you, that wish prosperity, and peace,
To crown our Contract, with a long increase
Of future joys, o shield my simple Love,
From those that seek her ruin, and remove
The base Opposers of her best designs;
Destroy those Foxes, that destroy her Vines;
Her Vines are fruitful, but her tender grapes
Are spoiled by Foxes, clad in humane shapes:
The BRIDE in her own person. SONET IX.
WHat greater joy can bless my soul, then this,
That my Beloued's mine, and I am His!
Our souls are knit; the world cannot untwine
The joyful union of His heart, and Mine;
In Him, I live; in Him, my soul's possessed
With heavenly solace, and eternal rest:
Heaven only knows the bliss, my soul enjoyes;
Fond earth's to dull, to apprehend such joys.
2.
THou sweet perfection of my full delights,
Till that bright The day of Judgment.
Day, devoted to the rites
Of our solemnized Nuptials, shall come,
Come live with me, and make this heart, thy Home:
Disdain me not: Although my face appear
Deformed and clowdie, yet my heart is By sanctification.
clear;
Make haste: Let not the swift-foot Roe-buck flee
The following Hounds so fast, as thou, to me.
3.
I Thought my Love had taken up his rest, CAP. III.

Within the secret In my soul.
Cabin of my breast;
I thought the closed Curtains did immure
His gentle slumbers, but was too secure;
For (driven with love) to the false bed I By strict examination.
stepped,
To view his slumbring beauty, as he slept,
But he was gone; yet plainly there was seen
The curious dint, where he had lately been.
4.
IMpatient of his absence, thus bereauen
Of him, then whom, I had no other heaven,
I rau'd a while; not able to digest
So great a loss, to lose so fair a Guest:
I left no path vntrac'd; no Amongst the wisest worldlings.
place unsought;
No secret Cell unsearched; no way unthought;
I asked the Shade, but shadows could not hide him;
I asked the World, but all the World denyde him.
5.
MY jealous Love, distemp'red with distraction,
Made fierce with fear, unapt for satisfaction,
Applies fresh fuel, to my flaming fires,
With Eagles wings supplies my quick desires;
Up to the walls I rambled, where I spyde
The The Ministers of the Word.
City watch, to whom, with tears, I cryde;
Ah gentle Watchmen, you aloft descry
What Is dark to us; Did not my Love pass by?
6.
AT length, when dull despair had gained the ground
Of tired hopes, my Faith fell in a swound;
But He, whose sympathizing heart did find
The tyrant passion, of my troubled mind,
Forthwith appeared; What Angels tongue can let
The World conceive our pleasures, when we met?
And till the joys of our espoused hearts
Be made At the Resurrection.
complete, the World never more shall part's.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET X.
NOw rests my Love: Till now, her tender breast
Wanting her joy, could find no peace, nor rest:
I charge you all, by the true love, you bear
To friendship, or what else you count most dear,
Disturb her not, but let her sleep her fill;
I charge you all, upon your life's, be still:
O, may that laboring soul, that lives oppressed
For me; in me, receive eternal rest.
2.
What curious face is this? What mortal birth
Can show a beauty, thus Through sanctification by my merits.
vnstayn'd with earth!
What glorious Angel wanders thus alone,
From earths foul Dungeon, to my Fathers Throne!
It is my Love; my love that has denyde
The world, for me; It is my fairest Bride:
How fragrant is her breath! How heavenly fair
Her Angel face! Each glorifying the Air.
BRIDE. SONET XI.
O, How I Am By heavenly contemplation.
ravished with eternal bliss!
Who e're thought heaven a joy, co^par'd to this?
How do the pleasures of his glorious Face,
Add glory to the glory of this place!
See, how Kings Courts surmount poor Shephards cells,
So this, the pride of Solomon, excells;
Rich wreathes of glory crown his royal Head,
And troops of Angels wait upon his Bed.
2.
THe Court of Princely Solomon was guarded
With able men at arms; their faith rewarded
With fading honors, subject to the fate
Of Fortune, and the jealous frowns of State;
But here the harmonious Quire of heaven attend,
Whose prize is glory, glory without end,
Unmixed without doubtings, or degenerous fear;
A greater Prince, then Solomon, is here.
3.
THe Bridal bed of Princely Solomon,
(Whose beautie' amazed the greedy lookers on,
Which all the world admired to behold)
Was but of Cedar; and her Sted of gold;
Her Pillars silver; and her Canopie
Of silks, but richly stayn'd with puple die;
Her Curtains wrought in works, works rarely led
By the needles art; such was the bridal bed.
4.
SVch was the bridal bed, which Time, or Age
Durst never warrant from the opprobrious rage
Of envious fate; Earths measure's but a minit;
Earth fades; all fades upon it; all, within it;
O, but the glorie' of this diuiner place,
No Age can injure, nor yet Time deface;
To bright an object, for weak eyes to bide,
Or tongues to express: Who ever saw't, but did?
5.
Who e're beheld the royal Crown, set on
The nuptial brows of Princely Solomon?
His glorious pomp, whose honor did display
The noysed Triumphs of his Marriage day?
A greater Prince, then Solomon, is here,
The beauty of whose Nuptials, shall appear
More glorious far, transcending his, as far
As heavens bright Lamp out-shines the obscurest Star.
BRIDEGROOM SONET XII.
HOw orient is thy Through the gifts of my Spirit.
beauty! CAP. IIII.
How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
Thy veiled The modesty and purity of thy judgment.
eyes outshine heavens greater light,
Unconquered by the shadie Clowd of night;
The curious Ornaments of necessary ceremonies.
Tresses dangle, all unbound
With unaffected order, to the ground:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
2.
THy Iuorie Sincere Ministers.
Teeth in whiteness do out-goe
The down of Swans, or Winters driven snow,
Whose even proportions lively represent
The harmonious Music of unite consent,
Whose perfect witness, Time could never blot,
Nor Age (the Canker of destruction) not:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
3.
THe rubie Portalls of thy ballane'd Doctrine of thy holy Prephets.
words,
Send forth a welcome relish, which affords
A heaven of bliss, and makes the earth rejoice,
To hear the Accent of thy heavenly voice;
The maiden blushes of thy Modest graces of the Spirit.
Cheeks, proclaim
A shame of guilt, but not a guilt of shame:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
4.
THy Magistrates.
Neck (vnbeautifyde with borrowed grace)
Is whiter then the Lillies of thy face,
If whiter may; for beauty, and for power,
It Is like the glory of David's princely Tower:
What vassal spirit could despair, or faint,
Finding protection from so sure a Saint?
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to Thine!
5.
THe deare-bought fruit of that forbidden Tree,
Was not so dainty, as thy Apples be,
These curious Apples of thy snowy The old and new Testaments.
breasts,
Wherein a Paradise of pleasure rests;
They breathe such life into the ravished The sanctified and zealous reader.
Eye,
That the inflamed beholder, cannot The second Death.
die:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to Thine!
6.
MY dearest Spouse, I Will I will withdraw my bodily presence.
hye me to my home,
And till that long-expected The day of judgment.
Day shall come,
The light whereof, shall chase the night, that showdes
Thy veiled beauty, in these envious Infirmities of the flesh.
Clouds;
Till then, I go, and in my Throne, provide
A glorious welcome, for my fairest Bride;
Chapplets of conquering Palm, and Laurel boughs
Shall crown thy Temples, and adorn thy brows.
7.
Would beauty feign be flattered with a grace
She never had? May she behold thy face:
Envy would burst, had she no other task,
Then to behold this face, without a Mask;
No spot, no venial blemish could she find,
To feed the famine of her ranc'rous mind;
Thou art the flower of beauties Crown, and thay're
Much worse then foul, that think thee less then fair.
8.
Fear not (my Love) for when those sacred bands
Of wedlock shall conjoyne our promised hands,
I Will come, and quit thee from this redious This vale of misery.
place,
Where thou art forced to sojourne for a space;
No foreign Angle of the utmost Lands,
Nor seas Abyss shall hide thee from my hands;
No night shall shade thee from my curious eye,
I Will rowze the graves, although grim Death stand by.
9.
ILlustrious beams shot from thy flaming Thime eye of Faith.
eye,
Made fierce with zeal, and sovereign Majesty
Have scorcht my soul, and like a fiery dart
Transfixt the Center of my wounded heart;
The Virgin sweetness of thy heavenly grace
Has made mine eyes glad prisoners to thy face;
The beauty of thine eye balls has bereft
Me of my heart: O sweet, o sacred theft!
10.
O Thou, the dear Inflamer of mine eyes,
Life of my soul, and hearts eternal prize,
How delectable is thy love! How pure!
How apt to ravish, able to allure
A frozen soul, and with thy secret fire,
TO affect dull spirits with extreme desire!
How do thy joys (though in their greatest dearth)
Transcend the proudest pleasures of the earth!
11.
THy lips (my dearest Spouse) are the full treasures
Of sacred Divine harmony.
Poesy, whose heavenly measures
Ravish with joy the willing heart, that hears,
But strike a deafness in rebellious ears:
Thy words, like Milk and Honey, do requite
The seasoned soul, with profit and delight:
Heavens higher Palace, and those lower places
Of dungeon-earth are sweetened with thy graces.
12.
MY Love is like a Garden, full of flowers,
Whose sunny banks, and choice of shadie bowres
Give change of pleasures, pleasures walled about
With armed Angels, to keep Ruin out;
And from The two Testaments.
her Breasts Riddles to profane readers.
(enclosed from the ill
Of looser eyes) pure Celestial comforts.
Crystal drops distill,
The fruitful sweetness of whose gentle showers
Enrich her flowers with beautie', and banks with flowers.
13.
MY love is like a Paradise, a beset
With rarest grifts, whose fruits (but tender yet)
The world nere tasted, dainties far more rare
Then Edens tempting Apple, and more fair:
Myrhe, Alloes, Incese, and the Cypress tree
Can boast no sweetness, but is breathed from thee;
Dainties, for taste; and flowers, for the smell
Spring all from Thee, whose sweets, all sweets excel.
BRIDE. SONET. XIII.
O Thou (my dear) whose sweets, all sweets excel,
From whom my fruits receive their taste, their smell,
How can my thriuing The Faithful
Plants refuse to grow,
Thus quickened with so sweet a The Son of righteousness.
Sun as thou?
How can my flowers, which thy Ewers nourish
With showers of living waters, choose but flourish?
O thou, the Spring, from whence these waters burst,
Did ever any taste thy streams, and thurst?
2.
AM I a Garden? May my Flowers be
So highly honored to be smelt by Thee,
Inspire them with thy sacred breath, and then
Receive from them, thy borrowed breath again;
Frequent thy Garden, whose rare fruit inuites
Thy welcome presence, to his choice Delights;
Taste where thou list, and take thy full repaste,
Here Is that will please thy smell, thine eye, thy taste.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET XIIII.
THou sacred Center of my soul, CAP. V.
in whom
I rest, behold thy wisht-for Love is come;
Refresht with thy delights, I have repasted
Upon thy Obedience.
pleasures, my full soul has tasted
Thy Strong works of Faith.
rip'ned dainties, and has freely been
Pleased with those Fruits, that are (as yet) but The new born fruits of the
Spirit.
green:
All you that love the honor of my Bride,
Come taste her Vyands, and be diefide.
BRIDE. SONET XV.
IT was a Too much security.
night, a night as dark, as foul
As that black Error, that entraunc'd my Soul,
When as my best beloved came and knoct
At my My heart.
dull gates, too too securely locked;
Vnbolt (said he) these churlish doors (my Dove,)
Let not false The pleasures of the Flesh.
slumbers bribe thee from thy love;
Hear him, that for thy gentle sake came hither,
Long injured by this Thy hardhearted unkindness
nights ungentle wether.
2.
I Heard the voice, but the perfidious pleasure
Of my sweet slumbers, could not find the leisure
To open my drowsy doors; My Spirit could speak
Words fair enough; but ah, my flesh was weak,
And fond excuses taught me to betray
My sacred vows to a secure delay:
Perfidious slumbers, how have you the might
To blind true Pleasures, with a false delight!
3.
WHen as my Love, with often repeated knocks
Could not avail, shaking his dewie locks,
Highly displeased, he could no longer bide
My slight neglect, but went away denyde;
No sooner gone, but my dull soul discerned
Her drowzie error; my grieved spirit Repented.
yearn'd
To find him out; these seiled eyes that slept
So soundly fast, awaked, much faster wept.
4.
THus raised, and rowz'd from my deceitful rest,
I opened my doors, where my departed Guest
Had been; I thrust the churlish Portalls from me
That so denyde my dearest Bridegroom to me;
But when I smelt of my returned hand,
My soul was rapt, my powers all did stand
Amazed as the The sweetness of his graces.
sweetness they did find,
Which my neglected Love had left behind.
5.
I Opened my door, my Myrrhe-distilling door,
But ah, my Guest was gone, had given me over:
What curious Pen, what Artist can define
A matelesse sorrow; Such, ah, such was mine;
Doubts and despair had of my life deprived me
Had not strong hopes of his return revived me,
I sought, but he refused to appear,
I called but he would nor be heard, nor hear.
6.
THus, with the Tyranny of grief distraught,
I ranged around, no place I left unsought,
No ear vnask'd; The False teachers.
Watchmen of the City
With their false doctrines.
Wounded my soul, without remorse or pity
To Virgin tears; They taught my feet to stay,
Whose steps were apt enough to lose their way,
With taunts and scorns they check me, and derided,
And called me Whore, because I walked, unguided.
7.
YOu hallowed Virgins, you, whose tender hearts
Ere felt the impression of Divine love.
loves secret darts,
I charge you all, by the dear faith you owe
To Virgin pureness, and your Vestall vow,
Commend me to my Love, if ere you meet him,
O tell him, that his loue-sicke Spouse does greet him,
O let him know, I languish with desire
TO enjoy that heart, that sets this heart on fire.
VIRGINS. SONET XVI.
O Thou the fairest flower of mortal birth,
If such a beauty may be borne of earth,
Angel or Virgin, which? or both in one,
Angel by beauty, Virgin by the moon,
Say, who is He that may deserve these tears,
These precious drops? Who is it can stop his ears
At these fair lips? Speak Lady, speak at large,
Who is it? For whom give thou so strict a Charge?
BRIDE. SONET XVII.
MY Love is the perfection of delight,
Roses, and Doves are not so red, so white,
Vnpattern'd beauty summoned every grace
To the composure of so sweet a face;
His body is Heaven, for in his breast,
The perfect Essence of a God does rest;
The brighter eye of heaven did never shine
Upon an other glory, so divine.
2.
HIs His Deity.
Head is far more glorious, to behold,
Then fruitful Ophyres often refined gold,
It Is the rich Magazen of secret treasure,
Whence Graces spring in vnconfined measure;
His curled and dangling His Humanity.
Tresses do proclaim
A Nazarite, on whom never Rasor came,
Whose Rauen-black color gives a curious relish
To that, which beauty did so much imbellish.
3.
LIke to the eyes of Doves are his fair His judgment and care of his Church.
Eyes,
Wherein stern Justice, mixed with Mercy, lies;
His eyes are simple, yet Majesticall,
In motion nimble, and yet chaste withal,
Flaming like fire, and yet burn they not,
Unblemished, vndistayned with a spot,
Blazing with precious beams, and to behold,
Like two rich Diamonds in a frame of gold.
4.
HIs The discovery of him in his Word.
Cheeks are like two fruitful beds, o're-growne
With Aromatic flowers newly blown,
Whose odours, beauty, please the smell, the sight,
And doubling pleasures, double the delight:
His His promises.
lips are like a Crystal spring, from whence
Flow sweetened streams of sacred Eloquence,
Whose drops into the ear distilled, do give
Life to Those that die to sin.
the Dead, true joys to That live to righteousness.
them that live.
5.
HIs His actions.
Hands are decked with rings of With pureness.
gold; the rings,
With costly Jewels, fitting none but Kings.
Which (of themselves though glorious, yet) receive
More glory from those fingers, then they gave;
His His secret counsels.
Breast's like Iuorie, circled round about
With Inwardly glorious.
veins, like Sapphires, winding in and out,
Whose beauty is (though darkened from the eye)
Full of divine, and secret Majesty
6.
HIs His ways constant, firm, and pure.
Legs like purest Marble, strong and white,
Of curious shape, (though quick) unapt for flight:
His Feet (as gold that is often refined) are
Like his upright proceedings, pure and fair;
His His whole carriage.
Portis Princely, and his Stature tall,
And, like the Cedar, stout, yet sweet withal:
O, who would not repose his life, his bliss,
Upon a Base so fair, so firm as this!
7.
HIs Mouth-But stay; What need my lips be lavish,
In choice of words, when one alone will ravish?
But shall, in brief, my ruder tongue discover
The speaking Image of my absent Lover?
Then let the curious hand of Art refine
The race of Virtues moral, and divine,
From whence, by heaven let there extracted be
A perfect Quintessence; Even such is He.
VIRGINS. SONET XVIII.
THrice fairer then the fairest, whose sad tears,
And smiling words, have charmed our eyes, our ears;
Say, whither is this prize of beauty gone,
More fair then kind, to let thee weep alone?
Thy tempting lips have whet our dull desire,
And till we see Him, we are all on fire;
We Will find him out; if thou will be our guide:
The next way to the Bridegroom, is the The Church is the way to Christ
Bride.
BRIDE. SONET. XIX.
IF Error lead not my dull thoughts amiss, CAP. VI.

My Genius tells me, where my true Love is;
He Is busy laboring on his flowrie Congregation of the faithful.
banks,
Giving graces.
Inspiring sweetness, and Receiving glory.
receiving thanks,
Wat'ring those plants, whose tender roots are Despairing souls.
dry,
And pruning such, whose Crests aspire Not yet thoroughly humbled.
too high,
Transplanting, grafting, reaping fruits from some,
And covering others, that are Strengthening the weak in spirit.
newly come.
2.
What if the frailty of my feebler part,
Locked up the Portalls of my drowsy heart?
He knows the weakness of the flesh incumbers
Th'vnwilling spirit, with sense-bereauing slumbers;
My hopes assure me, in despite of this,
That my Beloued's mine, and I am His;
My hopes are firm, (which Time shall never remove)
That He is mine, by Faith; I, His, by love.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET XX.
THy timely grief, (my teares-baptized Love)
Compels mine ears to hear, thy tears, to move;
Thy blubbered beauty, to mine eye appears
More bright then't was: Such is the The force of Repentance.
strength of Tears:
Beauty, and Terror, meeting in thine eye,
Have made thy face the Throne of Majesty,
Whose awful beams, the proudest heart will move
To love for fear, until it fear for love.
2.
Repress those flames, that furnace from thine eye,
They ravish with too bright a Tyranny;
Thy fires are too too fierce: O turn them from me,
They pierce my soul, and with their rays overcome me,
Thy curious * Tresses dangle, all unbound
With unaffected order, to the ground:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to Thine!
3.
THy Iuorie Sincere Ministers.
Teeth in whiteness do out-goe
The down of Swans, or Winters driven snow;
Whose even proportions lively represent
The harmonious Music of unite consent;
Whose perfect whiteness, Time could never blot,
Nor Age (the envious Worm of Ruin) rot:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
4.
THy Thy visible parts.
Temples, are the Temples of chaste love,
Where beauty sacrifis'd her milke-white Dove,
Upon whose Azure paths, are always found
The heauen-borne Graces dancing in a round:
Thy maiden Modesty, and zeal.
Blushes gently do proclaim
A shame of guilt, but not a guilt of shame:
How orient is thy beauty! How divine!
How darke's the glory of the earth, to thine!
5.
YOu, you brave spirits, whose imperial hand
Enforces, what your looks cannot command,
Bring forth your pampered Queens, the lustful prize,
And curious wrecks of your imperious eyes;
Surround the Circle of the Earth, and levy
The fairest Virgins in loves fairest beuie,
Then take from each to make one perfect Grace,
Yet would my Love out shine that borrowed face.
6.
I Thou art she, corriuall'd with no other,
Thou glorious Daughter of thy glorious Mother
The new Jerusalem, whose Virgin-birth
Shall Diefie, the The pure in heart.
Virgins of the earth:
The Virgins of the Earth have seen thy beauty,
And stood amazed, and in a prostrate duty
Have sued to kiss thy hand, making thine eyes
Their Lamps to light them, till the Bridegroom rise.
7.
Hark, how the Virgins hallowed with thy fire
And wonder smitten with thy beams, admire.
Who, who is this (say they) whose cheeks resemble
Aurora's blush, whose Eye heavens lights dissemble?
Whose face is brighter then the silent Lamp
That lights the earth, to breathe her nightlie dampe;
Upon whose brow sits dreadful Majesty,
The frown whereof commands a Victory.
8.
Fair Bride, why was thy troubled soul dejected,
When I was absent? was my Faith suspected
Which I so firmly plighted? Could thou think
My love could shake, or such a Vow could shrink?
I did but walk among my tender Plants,
To smell their Odours, and supply their wants,
To see my Stocks, so lately grifted, sprout,
Or if my vines began to burgen out.
9.
THough gone was I, My Spirit.
my heart was in thy breast,
Although to thee (perchance) an unknown guest,
'T was that, that gave such wings to thy desire,
TO enjoy thy love, and set thy soul on fire;
But my return was quick, and with a mind
More nimble (yet more constant) then the wind,
I came; and as the winged shaft does fly
With vndescerned speed; Even so did I.
10.
Return, (O then return) thou child of Peace
To thy first joys, O let thy tears surcease;
Return thee to thy Love; let not the Security.
night
With flattering Worldly pleasures.
slumbers, tempt thy true delight;
Return thee to my bosom, let my breast.
Be still thy Tent; Take there eternal rest;
Return, o Thou, in whose enchaunted eye,
Are Darts enough, to make an army fly.
11.
Fair Daughter of the highest King, CAP. VII.
how sweet
Are the unaffected graces of thy Thy wages.
Feet!
From every step, true Majesty does spring,
Fitting the Daughter of so high a King:
Thy Waste is circled with a The girdle of truth.
Virgin Zone,
Imbellisht round with many a precious The precious gifts of the (...)pirit.
Stone,
Wherein the curious Workman did fulfill
The utmost glory of his Diuiner skill.
12.
THy Whereby there is a receipt of spiritual Conceptions.
Navel, where thy holy Embrion does
Receive sweet nourishment, and heavenly growth,
Is like a Crystal spring, whose fresh supply
Of living waters, Sun, nor Drought can dry:
Thy Increase of the Faithful.
fruitful Womb is like a winnow'd heap
Of purest grain, which heavens blessed hand did reap,
With Lillies fenced: True Emblem of rare treasure;
Whose grain denotes increase; whose Lillies, pleasure.
13.
THy dainty The Old and New Testament
Breasts, are like fair Twins, both swelling
In equal Majesty; in hue excelling
The new-falne Snow upon the untrodden Mountains,
From whence there flows, as from exub'rous Fountains,
Rivers of heavenly Nectar, to allay
The holy thirst of Souls: Thrice happy they,
And more then thrice, whose blessed affections bring
Their thirsty palats to so sweet a Spring.
14.
THy Magistrates.
Neck does represent an yuorie Tower,
In perfect pureness, and munited power,
Thine Teachers.
Eyes (like pooles at a frequented gate
For every commer, to draw water at)
Are common treasures, and like Crystal glasses,
Shows each his lively visage, as he passes:
Thy Glorious in all parts.
Nose, the curious Organ of thy Sent,
Wants nothing more, for use, for ornament.
15.
THy Tyres of gold (inricht with glorious Gemmes, The Ceremonies of the Church.

Rare Diamonds, and Princely Diadems,)
Adorn thy brows, and with their native worth
Advance thy glory, and set thy beauty forth;
So perfect are thy Grace, so Divine,
And full of heaven, are those fair looks of thine.
That I Am inflamed with the double fire
Of thy full beauty, and my fierce desire.
16.
O Sacred Simetrie! O rare Connection
Of many perfects, to make one perfection!
O heavenly Music, where all parts do meet
In one sweet strain, to make one perfect sweet!
O glorious Members, whose each several feature
Divine, compose so, so divine a Creature!
Fair soul, as all thy parts united, be
Entire, so summed are all my joys in thee.
17.
THy curious Fabric, and erected stature
Is like the generous Palm, whose lofty nature
In spite of envious violence, will aspire,
When most suppressed, the more it mounts the higher:
Thy lovely Breasts, (whose beauty reinuites
My often remembrance to her often delights)
Are like the swelling Clusters of the vine,
So full of sweetness are those breasts of thine.
18.
ARt thou my Palm? My busy hand shall nourish
Thy fruitful roots, and make thy branches flourish:
Art thou my Vine? my skillful arm shall dress,
Thy Despairing souls.
dying Plants; my living Springs shall bless
Thy Young Conuerts.
infant Buddes; my blasting breath shall quell
Opposers of the Truth.
Presumptuous weeds, and make thy Clusters swell:
And all that love thee, shall attain the favor
To taste thy sweetness, and to smell thy savor.
19.
THose Oracles that from thy lips proceed,
With sweet Euangels, shall delight and feed
The attentive ear, and like the Trumpets voice
Amaze faint hearts, but make brave Spirits rejoice:
Thy breath, whose Dialect is most Divine,
Incends quick flames, where Ember'd sparks but shine;
It strikes the Pleaders Reth'ricke with derision,
And makes the dullest Soul a Rethoritian.
BRIDE. SONET XXI.
MY Faith, not merits has assured thee, mine,
Thy Love, not my Desert has made me, thine:
Unworthy I, whose drowsy soul rejected
Thy precious favors, and (secure) neglected
Thy glorious presence, how am I become
A Bride befitting so divine a Groom!
It is no merit, no desert of mine,
Thy love, thy love alone, has made me thine.
2.
SInce then the bounty of thy dear election
Has styled me thine, o let the sweet reflection
Of thy illustrious beams, my soul inspire,
And with thy Spirit, inflame my hot desire;
Unite our Souls; O let thy Spirit rest
And make perpetual home within my breast;
Instruct me so, that I may gain the skill,
To suite my service to thy sacred will.
3.
COme, come (my Souls preserver) thou that art
The united joys of my united heart,
Come, let us visit, with the morning light
Our prosperous Congregation of the Faithful
Vines; with mutual delight
Let Us view those Grapes, whose Clusters being By afliction.
pressed,
Shall make rich wines, to serve our Marriage feast,
That by the thriuing plants it may appear,
Our joyes-perfecting Marriage draws near.
4
BEhold my Young Conuerts
new disclosed Flowers present
Before thy gates, their tributarie Sent,
Reserve themselves for Garlands, that they may
Adorn the Bridegroom, on his Marriage day:
My Assemblies.
Garden's full of Faithful.
Trees, and every Tree
Laden with Faith and good Works.
Fruit, which I deuote to thee,
Eternal joys betide that happy guest,
That tastes the dainties of the Bridgroomes feast.
5.
O Would to God mind eyes, CAP. VIII.
(these fainting Eyes
Whose eager appetite could never devise
A dearer object) might but once behold
My love (as I am) clad in fleshly mold,
That each may corporally converse with other,
As friend to friend; as sister to her brother,
O how mine eyes could welcome such a sight;
How would my soul dissolve, with ore-delight!
6.
THen should this hand conduct my fairest Spouse
To taste a Banquet at my Mothers The universal Church.
House;
Our fruitful Garden should present thine eyes
With sweet delights, her trees should sacrifice
Their early fruits to thee; our tender Vine
Should cheer thy palate with her vnprest Wine;
Thy hand should teach my living Plants to thrive;
And such, as are a dying, to revive.
7.
THen should my Soul enjoy within this breast,
A holy Sabbath of eternal Rest;
Then should my Cause that suffers through despite
Of Error, and rude Ignorance, have right;
Then should these Tears and sorrows.
streams, whose Tides so often rise,
Be ebbed away, from my suffused eyes;
Then should my spirits, filled with heavenly mirth,
Triumph over Hell, and find a Heaven on Earth.
8.
ALl you, that wish the bountiful increase
Of dearest pleasures, and diuinest peace,
I charge you all (if ought my charge may move
Your tender hearts) Not to vex and grieve his holy Spirit.
not to disturb my Love;
Vex not his gentle spirit, nor bereiue
Him of his joys, that is so apt to greiue;
Dare not to break his quiet slumbers, lest
You rouse a raging Lion from his rest.
9.
WHo ever loved, that ever loved as I
That for his sake renounce my self, deny
The worlds best Joys, and have the world forgone?
Who ever loved so dear, as I have done?
I sought my Love, and found him In humility.
lowly laid
Beneath the tree of Love, in whose sweet shade
He rested; there his eye sent forth the fire,
That first enflamed my amorous desire.
10.
MY dearest Spouse, O seal me on thy heart
So sure, that envious Earth may never part
Our joined Souls; let not the world remove
My chaste desires, from so choice a Love;
For, O, my love's not slight, her flames are serious,
Was never Death so powerful, so imperious;
My jealous zeal is a consuming fire,
That burns my soul, through fear and fierce desire.
11.
FIres may be quenched, and flames, though never so great,
With many drops shall faint, and lose their heat;
But these quick fires of love, the more suppressed,
The more they flame, in my inflamed breast;
How dark is Honor! how obscure and dim
Is earths bright glory, but compared with Him!
How foul is Beauty! what a toil is Pleasure!
How base is Wealth! how base a thing is Treasure?
12.
I Have a The Church of the Gentiles then uncalled.
Sister, which by thy divine
And bounteous Grace, our Marriage shall make thine;
She is mine own, mine only Sister, whom
My mother bare, the youngest of her Womb:
She Is yet a Vncall'd to the Truth.
Child, her beauty may improve,
Her breasts and small, and yet too green for love;
When Time and Years shall add perfection to her,
Say (dearest Love) what honor will thou do her?
BRIDEGROOM. SONET XXII.
IF she be fair, and with her beauty, prove
As chaste, as loyal to her virgin-Loue,
As thou have bin, then in that high degree
I Will honor her, as I have honored thee:
Be she as constant to her Vestall vow,
And true to her devoted Faith, as Thou,
I Will Crown her head, and fill her hand with Power,
And give a Kingdom to her for a Dower.
BRIDE. SONET XXIII.
WHen Time shall ripen these her green desires,
And holy Love, shall breath her heavenly fires
Into her Virgin breast, her heart shall be
As true to love, as I am true to thee:
O, when thy boundless bounty shall conjoyne
Her equall-glorious Majesty, with mine,
My joys are perfect; then, in Sacred bands
Wedlock shall couple our espoused hands.
BRIDEGROOM. SONET. XXIIII.
I Am thy Gardener, Thou my fruitful. Vine,
Whose rip'ned Clusters swell with richest Wine;
The vines of Solomon were not so fair,
His Grapes were not so precious, as thine are;
His vines are subject, to the vulgar will
Of hired hands, and mercinarie skill;
Corrupted Carles are merry with his Vines,
And at a price, return their battered Wines.
2.
But mine is a Vineyard, which no ruder hand
Shall touch, subjected to my sole command;
My self, with this laborious arm, will dress it,
My presence with a busy eye shall bless it;
O Princely Solomon, thy thriuing vine
Is not so fair, so bountiful as mine;
Thy greedy sharers claim an earned hire,
But mine is reserved, and to my self entire.
3.
O Thou, that dwell In the great Congregation.
where the eternal fame
Of my renown so glorifies my name,
Illustrious Bride, in whose celestial tongue,
Are Sacred spells t'enchaunt, the ruder throng;
O let thy lips, like a perpetual story
Diuulge my graces, and declare my glory;
Direct those hearts, that Error leads astray,
Dissolve the The penitent.
Wax, but make obdure the The presumptious.
Clay.
BRIDE. SONET. XXV.
MOst glorious Love, and honorable Lord,
My heart's the vowed Servant of thy Word,
But I am weak, and as a tender Vine
Shall fall, vnpropt by that dear hand of thine:
Assist me therefore, that I may fulfill
What thou command'st, and then command thy will;
O leave thy sacred Spirit in my breast,
As earnest of an everlasting Rest.
FINIS.

