A REFORMATION OF A CATHOLIC DEFORMED: BY M.W. PERKINS. WHEREIN THE CHIEF
CONTROVERSIES IN RELIGION, ARE METHODICALLY, and learnedly handled. Made by
D.B.P. THE FORMER PART.

Take ye great heed of false Prophets, which come to you in the clothing of
sheep, but inwardly are ravening Wolves. By their fruits you shall know them.
MATH. 7.15. Printed with Privilege. 1604.

TO THE MOST PVISSANT, PRVDENT, AND RENOWNED PRINCE, JAMES THE FIRST, BY THE
GRACE OF GOD, KING OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE, AND IREland, Defendor of the
Faith, etc.
MOST GRACIOUS AND DREAD SOVEREIGN. Albeit, my slender skill cannot afforde
any discourse worthy the view of your Excellency, neither my deadded, and
daily interrupted, and persecuted studies, will give me leave to accomplish
that little, which otherwise I might undertake and perform: Yet being
enboldened, both by your high Clemency, and Gracious favor, ever showed unto
all good litterature, especially concerning divinity: and also urged by mine
own bounden duty, and particular affection; I presume to present unto your
highness this short ensaying treatise. For your exceeding Clemency, mildness,
and rare modesty, in the most eminent estate of so mighty a Monarche; as it
cannot but win unto your great love, in the hearts of all considerate
Subjects: so on the other side does it encourage them confidently to open their
minds, and in dutiful manner to unfold themselves unto their so loving and
affable a Sovereign. And whereas (to the no vulgar praise of your Majesty's
piety) you have made open and often profession of your Vigilancie and care, to
advance the divine honor of our Savior Christ, and his most sacred Religion:
Then what faithful Christian should stagger, or fear to lay open, and deliver
publicly, that which he assures himself to be very expedient, necessary, and
agreeable toward the furnishing, and setting forward of so heavenly a work?
Moreover, if I your Majesty's poor subject, have by study at home, and
travail abroad, attained unto any small talent of learning, and knowledge: to
whom is the use and fruit thereof more due, then unto my so gracious, and
withal, so learned a Liege? Finally, for a proof of my sincerity, affection,
and dutiful love toward your Majesty, this may I justly say, that in time
of uncertain fortune (when assured friends are most certainly tried) I both
suffered disgrace, and hinderance for it, being styled in Print, A Scotist in
faction: therein farther employing my pen in A two-folde discourse (which I
hope has been presented to the view of your Majesty) the one containing a
defense of your Highness honor: the other of your title, and interest of the
Crown of England. And if then my zeal and love of truth, and obligation to
your Majesty, drew me out of the compass of mine own profession, to treat
of law courses: I trust your benign Grace will now license me, out of the
same fountain of feruencie and like zeal unto Gods truth, no less respecting
your Majesty's eternal honor, and heavenly inheritance, something to say in
matters of divinity: having been the best part of my study, for more then
thrice seven years.

Whereinto I may conveniently enter with that golden sentence, with which your
Majesty began the Conference, holden in January last, between certain of
your subjects, about some controversy in Religion: A love principium: Apoc.
cap. 1.8.
or conformable to that in holy writ, I am Alpha, and Omega, that is, The
beginning, and the end, says our Lord: And applying it unto Princes, I may be
bold to say, that nothing is more expedient, and necessary for Kings: nothing
more honorable, and of better assurance for their estate, then that in the
very beginning of their reign, they take especial order, that the supreme,
and most puissant Monarch of heaven and earth, be purely, and uprightly served,
as well in their own exemplare lives, as throughout their Dominions. For of
Almighty God his mere bounty and great grace, they receive and hold their
Diadems and Princely Scepters: and cannot possess and enjoy them (their
mighty Forces, and most prudent Counsels notwithstanding) one day longer,
then during his divine will and pleasure. Which that wise King witnesses,
Proverb. 4
speaking in the person of Gods wisdom, Per me Reges regnant. By me Kings
do reign. And Nabuchodonozer sometime King of Babylon, Dan. 4.
was turned out to grase with beasts, for seven years, and made to know and
confess, that the highest does command over the Kingdoms of men, and
disposes of them, as pleases his divine wisdom. But I need not stand upon
this point, being so well known, and duly confessed by your Majesty.

But since there be in this our most miserable age, great diversities of
Religions, and but one only, wherewith God is truly served and pleased, as
says the Apostle. One body, one Spirit, Ephesians. 4.
as you are called into one hope of your vocation, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism: My most humble suite and supplication, to your high Majesty is, that
you to your eternal good, will embrace, maintain, and set forth that only
true, Catholic, and Apostolic faith, wherein all your most royal progenitors
lived and died: or if you cannot be won so soon, to alter that Religion in
which it has been your misfortune, to have been bredde and brought up: That
then in the mean season, you will not so heauely persecute, the sincere
professors of the other.

Very many urgent, and forcible reasons might be produced, in favor and
defense of the Catholic Roman Religion, whereof diverse have bin in most
learned treatises, tendered to your Majesty already. Wherefore I will only
touch three: two of them chosen out of the subject of this book: The third
selected from a sentence of your Majesty's, recorded in the aforesaid
Conference.

And because that argument is, as most sensible, so best assured, which
proceeds from a principle that is either evident in it self, or else
granted, and confessed for true: My first proof shall be grounded upon that
your Majesty's own resolute, and constant opinion (as it appears in the said
conference) to wit: Page 75.
That no Church ought farther to separate it self from the Church of Rome,
either in doctrine or ceremony, then she has departed from her self, when
she was in her flourishing, and best estate. From whence I deduce this reason:
The principal Pillars of the Church of Rome in her most flourishing estate,
taught in all points of Religion, the same Doctrine, that she now holds and
teaches; and in express terms condemns for error and heresy, most of
those Articles, which the Protestants esteem to be the principal parts of
their reformed Gospel: Therefore if your Majesty will resolutelie embrace,
and constantly defend that doctrine, which the Roman Church maintained in her
most flourishing estate; you must forsake the Protestant, and take the
Catholic into your Princely protection.

To demonstrate unto your Majesty, that we now hold in all points, the very
same Doctrine, which the most approved ancient Doctors, and holy Fathers held
and delivered: Because it is to long for an Epistle, I reserve it to the book
it self, for the points it handles; and will here briefly note out of it,
some such old reproved errors, that the Protestants do revive, receive, and
avowe, as the very sinnewes of their Gospel. Martin Luther the ringleader of
the new pretended reformation, lays for the groundwork of his Religion,
That man is justified by only faith: and in this he is applauded and followed
of all Protestants: and yet as testifies the most sound witness of antiquity,
Au de side and operibus ca. 14.
S. Augustine, that only faith is sufficient to Salvation, was an error sprung
up in the Apostles days; against which, the Catholic Epistles of S. Peter,
and S. James, and S. John, were principally directed. And the author of that
error was that infamous Sorcerer Simon Magus; Cap. 20.
as the blessed Martyr Ireneus has recorded in his first book against
heresies.

Test. Socr. ib. 1. hist. cap. 17. S. Hier. pref. lib. cont. Pela. and S. Aug.
de fide cont. Manich. Epiph. her. 64. PERKIN. Page 29. Aug. retra. lib. 2 c 22.
and here. 82. PERKIN. Page 163.
An other principal pillar of Friar Luthers Religion, consists in Denial of
free will; wherein he jumpeth with the old rotten heretic Manes, of whom the
Manicheans were named.

One Proclus an erronyous Origenist taught that sin was not taken away in
Baptism, but only covered, as is recorded by that holy man, and ancient
Father Epiphanius. M. PERKINS (in the name of Church of England) affirms in
like manner, the original sin remains still, and reigns in the
regenerate, albeit it is not imputed unto them.

Iouinian was accounted a Monster by S. Augustine, for defending honest
Marriage to be of equal virtue, and meritte with chaste Virginity: and says
further that this heresy was so sottish and fleshly; that it could not deceive
any one learned Priest, but only some few simple and carnal women. Yet this
our English champion blusheth not to affirm that marriage is not only equal,
but better also in diverse respects then Virginity.

The same old reprobate heretic, barked also against approved feasts and
fasting days, so do most of our Ministers at this time.

Vigilantius was sharply reproved by Saint Hierome, in a book written against
him, and has been ever since unto this day, esteemed a wicked heretic, for
denying prayer to Saints, and honor to be done unto their Relikes: And yet,
what point of Doctrine is more current among the Protestants, then this.

In like sort, one Aerius to the Arrian heresy, added this of his own; That
we must not pray for the souls of our friends departed; Aug. ad q. vult
here is. 53.
as S. Augustine has registered. And do not all Protestants embrace and
earnestly defend the same;

A common custom it was of the Arrians, and of other more ancient heretics,
to reject all Traditions, and to rely only upon the written word, Lib. 3. c.
20 Lib 1. con. Maximinu.
as testifies S. Ireneus and S. Augustine. Do not ours the same, rejecting
all Traditions, as Man's Invention.

Xenaias a Barbarous Persian indeed, yet in show a counterfeited Christian; is
noted for one of the first among Christians, that inueyed against the Images of
Saints, and the worship done by true Christians unto them; Niceph li. 10.
cap. 27.
as both Nicephorus, and Cedrenus in compendio do record. The reprobate Jews
indeed before him, and after even until this day, the miscreant Turks
(enemies of all Christianity) do dwell still in the same error: And yet is not
this most vehemently auerred by our Protestants, and all Caluinists; although
they cannot deny but that above 900. years ago, in the second general
Council holden at Nice, they are by the consent of the best, and most learned
of the world, for ever accursed, that do deny reverence and worship, to be
given unto the Images of Saints.

I will omit sundry other heads of the Protestants Religion, by all
approved antiquity reproved, and condemned, that I pass not the bounds of an
Epistle, and seem over tedious unto your Majesty. Especially considering that
these are sufficient, to convince that those points (wherein the Protestants
affirm the present Church of Rome, to have so far degenerate from the
ancient) are the very essential parts of faith, then maintained by the
Romans: And the contrary opinions nothing else, but wicked heresies, of old
invented, and obstinately held against the same Roman See, even as they are
now in our time: and of old also condemned by the same Church in her most
flourishing and best estate. Wherefore your most excellent Majesty, being
resolute in that singular good opinion, (that no Church ought farther to depart
from the Church of Rome, then she is departed from her self in her
flourishing estate,) must needs recall the Church of England, from such
extrauagant opinions, to join with the Roman church in the aforesaid articles,
which she in her best time held for parts of pure faith: And in all others
also which they cannot directly prove (in a lawful disputation before your
Majesty) to have been altered by her, particularly naming the point of
Doctrine; the author of the change: the time and place, where, and when he
lived: who followed him, who resisted him, and such other like circumstances,
which all be easily showed in every such reuolte or innovation: because the
vigilant care of the Pastors of Christ's flock, have bin always so great, as
no such things could be unknown, let slip, or vnrecorded.

Thus much for my first reason, collected from the untruth of the Protestants
religion.

The second shall be grounded upon the ungodliness of it, where I will let pass
that high point of impiety, that they make God (who is goodness it self) the
author of all wicked actions, done in the world: And will besides say nothing
of that their blasphemy against our Savior JESUS CHRIST, that he overcome
with the pains of his passion upon the Cross, did doubt, (if not despair) of
his own salvation: being unwilling to touch any other points, then such as
are afterward discussed in this book.

The triumphant Citizens of heaven (who enjoy the presence of God, and happiest
life that can be imagined) are by Protestants disdaynefullie termed, Deadmen,
and esteemed neither to have credit with God to obtain any thing, nor any care
or compassion on men, among whom they once lived and conuersed so kindly.

And as for the poor souls departed, who in Purgatory fire pay dear for
their former delights and pleasures: they deprive them of all humane succor,
by teaching the world to believe that there is no such matter.

Concerning us Christians yet living on earth, there is no less impyetie in
their opinions: For they teach that the best Christian is no better in effect,
then a whited Sepulcher, being inwardly full of all wickedness, and mischief;
and only by an outward imputation of Christ's righteousness unto them, are
accepted of God for just. To think that there is inherent in the soul of Man,
any such grace of God, as does cleanse it from sin, and make the man just in
his sight; is with them, to raze the foundation of Religion, and to make
Christ, a Pseudochrist: wherein, I know not whether they be more envious
against the good of Man, then they are injurious, either to the inestimable
value of Christ's blood, as though it could not deserve any better estate for
his favorites: or unto the virtue and efficacy of the holy Ghost; as not
being able (by likeliehood) to purge men's souls from sin, and endue them
with such Heavenly qualities. I omit the disgrace thereby done to the
Blessed Godhead it self, making the Holy of Holies, rather willing to cover
and cloak our iniquity, then to cure it: And contrary to his infinite
goodness, to love them whom he sees defiled with all manner of abominations.

Unto these paradoxes, impious against God, and slanderous to Man. If it will
please your Majesty to add, the profane carnallity of some other points of
the Protestant Doctrine; you will (doubtless) in short time loath it. As for
example: That it is as good and godly, by eating, to feed the body, as to
chastize it by fasting. That it is as holy, to fulfill the fleshly desires of
it by Marriage, as by Continency, to mortify them; yea that it is flat
against the word of GOD to vow Virginity: And also contrary to his blessed
will to bestow our goods on the poor, and to give our selves wholly to
prayer, and fasting. All which, this Advocate of the English Congregation
teaches expreslie. Page 132. 162. 166.


Is this the purity of the Gospel? Or is it not rather the high way to
Epicurisme, and to all worldly vanity, and iniquity.

I need not join hereunto, that they teach it to be impossible to keep Gods
Commandments; and therefore in vain to go about it: And farther, that the
best work of the righteous man, is defiled with sin. Wherefore, as good for
him to leave all undone, as to do any.

Nay, if this position of others were true, it would follow necessarily, that
all men were bound under pain of damnation, never to do any good deed, so
long as they live: for that their good deed being stained with sin, cannot
but deserve the hyre of sin, which according to the Apostle is: Death
everlasting. If your Majesty's important affairs, Romans 6.
would once permit you to consider maturely of these impieties, and many
other like absurdities, wherewith the Protestant Doctrine is stuffed: I dare be
bold to say that you would speedely either command them, to reform
themselves, and amend their errors; or fairly give them their Congie. I will
close up this my second reason, with this Epiphoneme. That it is impossible for
a Protestant, firmly cleaving to the grounds of his own Religion, to hope
for any salvation. For they do, and needs must grant, that no man can be
saved without a lively faith; and also that a lively faith cannot be without
charity, for otherwise it were dead: Now then to the purpose; No Protestant can
have charity: for as witnesses S. John. 1. Epis. cap. 5. 3.
This is the charity of God, that we keep his commandments. But it is
impossible (according to the Protestants) to keep the commandments:
therefore also impossible to have charity; Which is the fulness of the law:
Romans 13.
and consequently impossible to have a lively faith, which cannot be without
charity. And so finally through want of that lively feeling faith, whereby they
should lay hold on Christ's righteousness, to hale and apply that unto
themselves, they can have no hope at all, of any favor, and grace at Gods
hands: Without which they must needs assure themselves of eternal damnation,
in steed of their pretended certayntie of salvation. To these two arguments,
gathered out of the treatise following, I add a third, collected from these
your own memorable words related in the above named conference: viz. Are we
now come to that pass, Page 69.
that we must appeache Constantine of Popery and superstition? Which argues
that your Majesty judges them, to have little regard of either piety or
ciuility, that would admit such a thought into their mind, as that the first
Christian Emperor (our most renowned countriman, should be nousled and brought
up in superstition: wherein your Majesty has great reason, for he was most
carefully instructed, and taught the Christian Religion, by such holy
Confessors, whose sincerity in faith had bin tried in the hot furnace of many
strange persecutions: And he farther had the good hap to see, and hear
together in the first general Council of Nice, many of the holiest, and best
learned Bishops of Christendom. Therefore, is it most unlikely that so Royal
a Person, devoted to Religion, and having so good means to attain to the
perfect knowledge thereof, as no man could have better; should nevertheless in
the purest time of it, be mis-ledde into error, and superstition. If then, it
may be proved, that this most Christian Emperor (the glittering ornament of our
noble Island) did believe such articles of the present Roman Church, as the
Protestants teach not to be believed: Will not your Majesty rather join in
faith with so peerles a Prince, who by the consent of all antiquity, was for
certain right well informed, then with these, whom (doubtless) most men deem
to be pitifully deceived? Now that Constantine was of the same opinion, in
matter of Religion, with the present Church of Rome, may evidently be gathered
out of this that follows.

First, he was so affectionate unto the sign of the Cross, that he would have
it gloriously appear, both abroad in his banners, and at home in his Palace:
Eusebius. de vita Constan. lib. 3. cap. 2. Lib 2. c. r 4. Lib. 4. c. 26.
and in the midst of the City of Rome, with this Poesy: In this sign of
salvation, I have delivered the City. With it also he blessed his visage.

With fasting and other corporal affliction, he chastized his body, that he
might please God.

He with incredible admiration, honored professed Virgins, and made laws in
their favor.

Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 47. and alibi. Chry. hom. 66. ad pop. Antioch.
He builded many Churches in honor of the Apostles, and Martirs.

And as S. Chrysostom records: He that was reuested in purple, went to
embrace the Sepulchers of S. Peter, and S. Paul, and all Princely state laid
aside, stood humbly praying unto the Saints, that they would be intercessors
for him unto God.

He farther took order for the burying of his own body, in the midst of the
Tombs of the twelve Apostles, that after his death he might be partaker of the
prayers, Eusebius. in vita Constable. lib. 4. ca. 60. Ibid cap. 71.
which should be there offered in the honor of the Apostles. Neither was he
frustrated of his holy desire, for as it follows in the 71. Chapter of the
same book, at his funerals, the people joining with the Priests, with many
tears, and great sighs, powered out prayers for the good Emperors soul.

Again, at a solemn feast which he held at the dedication of the Church
built by him in Jerusalem; some of his clergy preached and expounded the holy
Scriptures: Ibidem de vita Constable. lib. 4. ca 45.
and other some with unbloody Sacrifice, and Mystical consecrations, appeased
the Godhead, and prayed for the health of the Prince.

Zozom. lib 1. hist. Eccl. cap 21.
Moreover this zealous Emperor reprehended Acasius, (a Nouatian heretic) for
saying, that it was not in the power of Priests, but of God only to forgive
sins.

Finally, toward true Bishops, the lawful Pastors of Christ's Church, he
carried such a reverend respect: Socr. hist. lib 1. cap. 5.
that being in the Council of Nice, he would not sit down, before they had
beckned unto him so to do. And was so far from taking upon him to be
supreme judge, in causes Ecclesiastical; that he openly there professed, that
it did not belong to him to judge of Bishops, but to be judged by them. Ruffi
lib. 1. hist. cap. 2.


If then this right Puissant Emperor, and most sincere Christian, reverenced
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and believed that there was power in Priests to
remitte sins, that Saints were to be prayed unto, and that prayer was to be
made for the dead, and such like, as appears by the evident testimony, of
most approved Authors, that lived with him: has your Majesty any cause to
doubt, but that in matters of faith, he agreed with the present Roman Church?
Wherefore my hope and trust in Almighty God is, that you in your high wisdom,
upon mature and due consideration, how many old condemned errors the
Protestants hold; and with all well weighing that the whole frame of their
Doctrine tends to the disgracing of God, and his Saints, to the
discouragement of men, from well doing, and does (as it were) loosen the
reins unto all fleshly liberty: will in time make a most Godly resolution, to
imitate that famous Emperor Constantine. He contrary to his former education,
embraced with all his power that same Roman Religion, which we now profess:
And (which is worthy to be observed) he feared nothing the contrary disposition
of the multitude, or greater part of his subjects, that were wholly led
another way. But following the blessed example of his most virtuous Mother S.
Helena, reposed himself in the powrefull assistance of the Almighty, and
chased all other Religions into corners, setting up and firmly establishing
the Roman. There can be no cause aleadged, why your Majesty may not do the
like, if it shall please God effectually to stir up your gracious mind, and
to bend your heart to undertake it: for at that time there was more likelyhoode
of resistance, then now: and now much more help at hand, if any resistance
should be offered.

Pardon me dear Sovereign, if before I finish this argument, I seem
ouer-bold here to present unto your memory, that all your most gracious and
Godly Progenitors, and all our holy Predecessors, who now (assuredly) stand
before the tribunal of God; do demand and expect no less at your hands.
For they founded not Bishoprics, Deaneries, and other spiritual liuinges:
they builded not Colleges, and Schools, for Protestants or their favorers.
Ponder well therefore I beseech your Majesty, whether they do not, or may not
justly challenge of you, (to whom the administration of justice belongs,) to
see and provide: that such Churches, Church-liuinges, and spiritual rewards
of learning, as they erected and bequeathed to Roman Bishops, and Priests, be
disposed of, and bestowed according to their erections, and foundations. If it
shall please the Protestants to erect any new Churches, or bestow any other
reuennues toward their Ministers mayntenance, let them have them hardly, and
enjoy them quietly: only let them be content, out of their equity: to leave us
that which was provided for us, and bequeathed unto us by our most Religious
Ancestors.

If all these reasons, and exceeding many other which might be mustered, and
produced to the same purpose, will not suffice to effect in your Majesty, a
love and desire, to embrace that ancient Roman faith, which all your Renowned
Progenitors, so highly reverenced, loved, and esteemed. Yet let me (prostrate
on my knee) most humbly beseech your highness, in the name of thowsandes: that
so far forth they may prevail with you, as you will not permit those
rigorous laws, framed against recusant Catholics, to be put in practice and
executed. For how can it seem conformable to reason, in your Majesty's deep
wisdom, and judgment? that your loving Subjects should by compulsion and
constrainte, under that intolerable penalty of loss of all their goods,
conform them selves to such articles of Religion, that by the purest
antiquity were censured to be erroneous and execrable? And what misery, and
pity were it, to drive them perforce, either to swallowe down the deadly
poison of their souls, or else to endure besides the disgrace of the state,
the loss of their worldly wealth and liberty. Consider, and weigh with your
self, my most gracious Liege, whether it will not be thought over great
severity, to press men (even against humane nature and condition,) with
patience to hear their own profession and belief, both untruly slaundered,
and most bitterly reuyled and inueighed against: as in most Ministers sermons
it is commonly. Yea to give patient ear to them that blush not publicly, to
call our blessed Saviors body in the holy SACRAMENT, an abominable Idol; his
glorious and immortal Saints, senceles dead Men; his Vicar and Vicegerent on
earth Antichrist, and every Catholic an Idolater. With infinite other
intolerable reproaches; Our constant hope, even yet, (though against hope) is,
that your Majesty out of your own sweet natural disposition, and most mild
carriage in government hitherto, will not only moderate, but suspende all such
extremity: And not suffer it to be extended against them, who in former
doubtful times, were (in manner) the only men, that defended and made manifest
to the world, your Title and interest to the Crown of England; and were no
less willing to receive you, when the time came: and as forward to have
assisted you (if need had required) as any sort of Subjectes within the
land. And never since wittingly offended your sacred Majesty in any thing. It
may be objected that they do not conform themselves unto a statute law, made
against their Religion: Be it so. Then their Religion toward God, not any
contempt of their lawful Superior, does command them from the conformity,
which is pardonable. Considering that they be no inuenters, or followers of
novelties, but only hold on and persevere in the faith of their forefathers.
And what subject is the among the most duetifull, that does not often
transgress and give offense to one statute law or other: yet for no other
law, men are so hardly dealt withal, albeit they violate many of them
together. Only Catholics are for the transgressing of one, huspeled and
handled as though they were some heinous rebbels, and traitors: Who (be it
spoken without disparagement to others) are (by them that live near them)
esteemed commonly, the most orderly subjectes; as true of their words, as
sound in their deeds, of as great charity and hospitality toward their
neighbors, and compassion of the poor: briefly, of as moderate and civil
carriage and behavior, as most men in their Country: So that to beggar and
undo them (as the execution of that law established, must needs do the
poorer sort of them,) would be little less then undo and destroy all good
order, and Discipline in the common weal.

Before I make an end, I beseech your Majesty, that the old worthy saying of
Cassian may diligently examined: Cui bonum? For whose commodity, to what end
and purpose must such numbers of most civil subjectes, be so grievously
molested? What is the cause, why your peaceable and joyful government, should
be so mingled with such bitter storms of persecution. Is it to extinguish the
Catholic faith? It lies not in man's power to suppress and destroy that,
which the Almighty supporteth and maintayneth. Matthew. 16.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against the Catholic Church. And let but
those grave and wise counsailers, (who have managed the state in our late
Queens days) inform your Majesty whether all those terrible persecutions
that then were most vehemently pursued, did any whitte at all, diminish the
number of recusantes: or rather did not greatly multiply and increase them,
from one at the first to an hundred and more in continuance. But it may be, they
entende by those penal laws, to enrich your Majesty, and to fill your
coffers: Surely the receipts will fall out much to short, to grow to any such
reckoning. And what delight to enrich your treasury, and stuff your coffers
with regrets, and out cries of the husband, wife, children, widows, and poor
infantes, when as the best and most assured treasury of a King, (is by the
prudent esteemed) to consist in the love, and hearty affection of his people? Or
are these penal laws, and forfaitures ordained for rewards unto such
dependents, as for these or the like do follow you? But the reuennues,
preferments, and offices, belonging to your crown of England, are abundantly
able to content and reward them, that shall deserve well of the common weal,
without that so heavy agrieuance and heart bleeding of others your Majesty's
good subjectes. And your Majesty's high wisdom, and long experience in
government, can best remember you, that such men are not so mindful of
benefits received, as the daily want and misery, will continually renew and
revive the memory of the oppressed.

And when they shall see no hope of remedy, the state being now settled, and a
continual posterity like to ensue of one nature and condition: God knows
what that forceable weapon of necessity may constrayne and drive then unto at
length.

If then there be no greater reason of weight and moment, why such dutiful and
well deserving Subjects, should be so grievously afflicted for their
conscience. Let others conceive as they shall please, I will never suffer my
self to be persuaded, that your Majesty will ever permit it, before I see
it done: If it be further objected, why should not your Majesty as well punish
Catholics in your Kingdoms, as Catholics do Protestants in some other
Countries: I answer, that in all Countries where multitudes of both sorts are
mixed, as it is in England: The Protestants are tolerated, as in France,
Polonia, Bohemia, the Catholic states of Germany, and Cantounes, according to
that of the Gospel. Suffer both the wheat and cockle to grow until harvest.
Math. 13.
In Spain, and Italy, where scarce any Protestants be, the case is otherwise.
But what is that to England? Where are very many Catholic Recusants, and
Catholikely affected in every degree, not only of the Temporalty, but in the
Clergy also, hardly of the highest degrees of honor to be excepted: therefore
for their number and quality to be tolerated.

Lastly, if there were no other cause, but the innumerable benefittes which
every degree and order of men throughout England, have, and do daily receive
from our most Catholic Ancestors: As the constituting of so many wholesome
laws; founding of so many honorable, and rich rewards of learning, as
Bishoprics, Cathedral Churches, Deaneries, Arch-deaconries, Residencies,
Prebendes, and Benefices: the erecting, and building, of so goodly Schools,
Colleges, and Hospitalles, and endowing of them with so ample possessions,
which all proceeded out of the bowelles of the true wisdom, piety, and
virtue of their Catholic Religion: Is not this much more then a sufficient
motive why their heirs in faith, should be most benignely, and lovingly dealt
with? and not for the profession of the same Religion, so severely afflicted?
Let the Protestants in those countries, where they are most molested, appear
and show, that their predecessors in belief, have been so beneficial unto
the public weal: And I dare undertake, that for their Ancestors sake, they
shall find much more favor, then we sue for. Wherefore they can have no just
cause, to repine at your Majesty's goodness, if upon men of that Religion, which
has been so beneficial unto your whole Realm, you take extraordinary
compassion.

It lying then in your Majesty's free choice and election, whether you will
enlarge and extend your Royal favor, unto an infinite number of your most
dutiful and affectionate Subjects, who are the most unwilling in the world to
transgress any one of your laws, were they not thereunto compelled by the
law of God: or else utterly to beggar and to undo, both them, and theirs, for
their constant profession of the Ancient Roman faith. My confidence in the
sweet providence of the Almighty is, that he will mercifully incline your
Royal heart, to choose rather to pardon, then to punish; because the way of
mercy, consorteth better with your kind and tender nature: it is of better
assurance to continue your peacible and prosperous Reign: it will purchase
mercy at Gods hands, according to his own promise. Blessed be the merciful,
Math. 5.
for they shall obtain mercy.

I need not add what a Consolation, and Comfort it will be, to many score
thousands of your subjects, and the greatest obligation that can be devised, to
bind them to you, and yours for ever: Now what applause, and congratulation
from foreign Catholic countries, would follow this your famous Fact.
Undoubtedly all the glorious company of Kings and Queens, (now in heaven) of
whom your are lineallie descended: and among all the rest, namely, your most
sacred and dear Mother, that endured so much for her constancy in the same
Catholic faith, cannot but take it most kindly, if for God and their sakes,
you take into your Princely protection their folowers in the Roman faith, and
defend them from oppression.

Thus most humbly craving pardon of your Highness, if I have in any thing
exceeded the limittes of my bounden duty, I beseech our blessed Savior to
endue you, both with the true knowledge of his divine verity, and with the
spirit of Fortitude, to embrace and defend it constantly; or that at the least,
graciously to tolerate and permit it.

Your most Excellent Majesty's, most obedient, and loyal subject, and servant.
W.B.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
GENTLE READER, I mean not here to entertayne thee with many words: the
principal cause that moved me to write, was the honor and glory of God, in
defense of his sacred verity, then the employing of his talent bestowed upon
me: as well to fortify the weaker sort of Catholics in their faith, as to
call back and lead others (who wander up and down like to lost sheep, after
their own fancies) into the right way.

I took in hand particularly the confutation of this book, not only for that
I was thereunto requested, by a friend of good intelligence and judgment, who
thought it very expedient: but also because perusing of it, I found it penned
more Schollerlike, then the Protestants use to do ordinarily: For first the
points in controversy, are set down distinctly, and for the most part
truly. Afterward in confirmation of their opinion, the chief arguments are
produced from both Scriptures, Fathers, and reason: Which are not vulgar, but
culled out of their Rabbis, Luther, Peter Martyr, Calvin, Kemnitius, and such
like, though he name them not. Lastly, he places some objections, made in
favor of the Catholic Doctrine, and answers to them as well as he could. And
(which I speak to his commendation) does perform all this very briefly and
clearly. So that (to speak my opinion freely) I have not seen any book of
like quantity, published by a Protestant, to contain either more matter, or
delivered in better method. And consequently more apt to deceive the simple:
especially considering that he withal counterfeiteth to come as near unto the
Roman Church, as his tender conscience will permit him, whereas in deed he
walks as wide from it, as any other noueller of this age.

Wherefore I esteemed my spare time best employed about the discovering of it,
being (as it were) an abridgement of the principal controversies of these
times, and do endeavor after the same Scholasticall manner, without all
superfluity of words, no less to maintain and defend the Catholic party:
then to confute all such reasons, as are by M. PERKINS alleged for the
contrary.

Read this short treatise good Christian diligently, for thou shall find in it
the marrowe and pith of many large volumes, contracted and drawn into a
narrow rowme. And read it over as it becomes a good Christian, with a desire
to find out, and to follow the truth, because it concerns thy eternal
salvation: and then judge without partiality, whether Religion has better
grounds in Gods word, more evident testimony from the purest antiquity, and
is more conformable unto all Godliness, good life, and upright dealing, (the
infallible marks of the best Religion) and speedely embrace that. Before I end
this short preface, I must entreat thy patience to bear with the faults in
Printing, which are too too many, but not so much to be blamed, if it be
courteously considered; that it was Printed far from the Author, with a
Dutch composer, and ouerseene by an unskillful Corrector, the greatest of them
shall be amended in the end of the book.

Before the Printing of this part was finished, I heard that M. PERKINS was
dead. I am sorry that it comes forth to late, to do him any good. Yet, his
work living to poison others, a preservative against it, is never the less
necessary.



MASTER PERKINS IN THE EPISTLE DEDICATORIE.
It is a policy of the Devil, to think that our Religion, and the Religion
of the present Church of Rome, are all one in substance, or that they may be
reunited.
BEFORE I am to deliver my opinion concerning this point, I had need to be
informed, what this Author means by these words our Religion: For there
being great diversities of pretended Religions current in the world, all
contrary to the Church of Rome, how can I certainly know, whether of them he
professes? Wherefore (good Sir) may it please you to declare, what Religion
you understand, when you say our Religion? Is it that which Martin Luther (a
licentious Friar) first preached in Germany? or rather that, which the martial
Minister Zwinglius, contended with sword and shield, to set up in Zwitzerland?
or perhaps that, which John Calvin, by sedition wrought into Geneua, expelling
the lawful Magistrate thence, and by the aid of Beza (a dissolute
turne-coate) spread into many corners of France? Or if by your Religion, you
mean only to comprehend the Religion now practiced in England, yet are you
farther to show, whether you understand that established by the State, or the
other more refined (as it is thought by many) and embraced by them, who are
called Puritans, for of their leaven, sauoureth that position of yours: That
the article of Christ's descent into hell, crept into the Creed by negligence;
and some other such like in this book. These principal divisions of the new
Gospel (to omit sundry sub-diuisions) being famous, and received of diverse
in England, according to each man's fantasy, it is meet you express, whether
of them you speak of, that it may be duly considered, how the Roman Religion
and it agree, and what union may be made between them. Now if you mean the
hotchpotch and confusion of all these new Religions together, as by the
opposition here unto the Church of Rome, and by the articles following may be
gathered: then I am clear for you in this, that there can be no more concord
between these two Religions, then there is between light and darkness, faith
and infidelity, Christ and Beliall. Notwithstanding I think that the reason by
you produced to prove the impossibility of this union, is of no value, to wit,
that they of the Roman Church have razed the foundation, for though in words
they honor Christ, yet in deed they turn him into a Pseudochrist, and an
Idol of their own brain: A very sufficient cause (no doubt) of eternal
breach and division, if it could be verified. But how prove you, that we Roman
Catholics, who believe Jesus Christ to be perfect God, and perfect Man, and
the only Redeemer of Mankind, make him a false Christ, and an Idol? or before
you go about to prove it, tell me I pray you, how this can well stand with
your own definition of a reformed Catholic in your preface? There you affirm
him to be a Catholic reformed to your liking, that holds the same necessary
heads of Religion, with the Roman Church. Now, can there be any more
necessary head of Religion, then to have a right faith in Christ? can any
other foundation be laid besides JESUS Christ? 1. Cor. 3.
If then your reformed Catholic must agree with the Roman Church, in
necessary heads of Religion, as you hold he must: either the Roman Church
razeth not the foundation, and makes not Christ a Pseudochrist, as you say
here, or else you teach your disciples very pernitiously, to hold the same
necessary heads of Religion with it. But to leave to you the reconciliation of
these places, let us examine briefly, how you confirm your paradox, that the
Church of Rome makes Christ a false Christ: which you go about to prove by
four instances. The first is, because the servant of his servants may change
and add to his commandments, having so great power that he may open, and
shut heaven to whom he will, and bind the very conscience with his own
laws, and consequently be partaker of the spiritual kingdom of Christ. Here
are diverse reasons hudled up in one, but all of little moment: for all these
several faculties, which the Pope enjoys, being received by the free gift of
Christ, and to be employed in his service only, and to his honor and glory:
are so far off from making Christ a Pseudochrist, that they do highly
recomme^d his most singular bounty toward his followers, without any
derogation to his own divine prerogatives. The particulars shall be more
particularly answered in their places hereafter. Now I say in a word, that
Christ's Vicar cannot change any one of Gods commandments, nor add any
contrary unto them: but may well enact and establish some other conformable
unto them, which do bind in conscience: for that power is granted of God to
every sovereign governor, Romans 13.
as witnesses S. Paul saying. Let every soul be subject to higher powers. And
that (as it is in the 5. verse. following) of necessity, not only for wrath,
but also for conscience sake. So that to attribute power unto one that is under
CHRIST, to bind our consciences; is not to make CHRIST a Pseudochrist, but to
glorify him, much acknowledging the power, which it has pleased him to give
unto men. In like manner, what an absurd illation is that, from the power to
open and shut heaven gates, which all (both Catholics and Protestants,
confess to have been given to Saint Peter, and the rest of the Apostles,) to
infer: that CHRIST is made a Pseudochrist; as who should say, the master
spoiled himself of his supreme authority, by appoynting a steward over his
household, or a porter at this gates, he must be both Master and Man to,
belike. And thus much of the first instance.

Come we now to the second: It is, that we make Christ an Idol, for albeit we
call him a Savior, yet in us, in that he gives his grace to us, that by our
merits we may be our own saviors, etc. I marvel, in whom he should be a
savior if not in us: What, is he the Savior of Angels or of any other
creatures? I hope not, but the mischief is, that he gives grace to us, that
there by we may merit and so become our own Saviors. This is a phrase
unheard of among Catholics, that any man is his own Savior, neither does it
follow of that position that good works are meritorious; but well that we
apply unto us the salvation, which is in CHRIST JESUS, by good works; as the
Protestants avouch they do by faith only: In which sense the Apostle S. Paul
says to his dear Disciple Timothe. Tim. 4.
For this doing thou shall save both thy self, and them that hear thee. And
this does no more diminish the glory of our Sovereign Saviors infinite
merits, then to say that we are saved by faith only: good works no less
depending, if not more advancing Christ's merits, then only faith, as shall be
proved hereafter more at large in the question of merits. Now that other good
men's merits may steed them, who want some of their own, may be deduced out of
an hundred places of the Scriptures, namely out of those where God says, that
for the sake of one of his true servants, he will show mercy unto thousands,
as is expressly said in the end of the first commandment.

In like manner I answer unto your third instance, that for Christ to have
taken away by his blessed Passion the eternal pain due unto our sins, and
to have left a temporal to be satisfied by us, is not to make himself a false
Christ, but a most loving, kind, and withal a most prudent Redeemer. Wiping
away that by himself, which passed our forces, and reserving that to us, which
by the help of his grace, we well may and ought to do: not only because it
were unseemly, that the parts of the body, should be disproportionable to the
head: but also because it is reasonable (as the Apostle holds, Romans 8.
) that we suffer here with Christ before we reign with him in his Kingdom.
In your last instance you say, that we make Christ our mediator of intercession
to GOD, thinking out of your simplicity, that therein we much magnify him, and
sing Osanna unto him. Whereas we hold it for no small disparagement unto his
divine dignity, to make him our Intercessor; that is to pray him to pray for
us, who is of himself, right able to help us in all we can demand; being
as well God, as Man. And albeit one in thought singling out the humanity of
Christ from his divine nature and person, might make it an intercessor for us;
Yet that being but a Metaphisical co^ceipt, to separate the nature from the
person; since the Arrian heresy (which held Christ to be inferior to his
Father) it has not been practiced by Catholics, who always pray our Savior
Christ to have mercy upon us, never to pray for us. And consequently make him
no mediator of intercession, but of redemption.

And to come to your grievous complaint, that withal his Mother must be Queen
of heaven, and by right of a mother command him there: Who can sufficiently
marvel at their unnatural gross pates, who take it for a disgrace to the
Son, to advance his own good Mother? or else who well in his wits,
considering Christ's bounty to strangers and his enemies; will not be persuaded,
that on his best beloved mother, he did bestow his most special favors? For
having taken flesh of her, having sucked her breasts, and received his nuriture
and education of her in his tender years, and being as well followed of her, as
of any other. Is it possible that he should not be as good to her, as to
others; unto whom he was not at all beholding? Again the very place of a
mother, requiring pre-eminence, before all servants and subjects, of what
dignity soever: does not the right rule of reason lead us to think, that
Christ the fountain of all wisdom, replenished the B. Virgin Marie his dear
Mother with such grace as should make her fit for that place? it lying in his
hands, and free choice to do it. And therefore is she truly termed, of holy
and learned Antiquity, our Lady and Queen, exalted above all quyers of Angels.
That which you impute unto us farther, that she must in the right of a mother
command her Son, is no doctrine of the Roman Church, nor said in all her
service: We say. Show thyselfe to be a mother: but it is not added by
commanding thy Son: that is your gloss, which is accursed, because it
corrupts the text, for it follows in that place, Sumat per te preces, etc.
Present our prayers to him, that vouchsafed to be borne of thee, for us. If any
private person by meditation, pearcing more profoundly into the mutual love and
affection, of such a Son toward so worthy a Mother; do deem her prayers
as forcible in kindness as if they were commandments, and in that sense call
them commandments, according to the French phrase. Vos priers me sont des
commandments, that may be done without derogation to Christ's supreme
dignity, and with high commendation of his tender affection, unto his reverent
and best beloved mother. Wherefore to conclude this Epistle, if there be no
waightier cause then this by you here produced, why you and your adherents, do
not reconcile your selves unto the Church of Rome: you may shortly (by Gods
grace) become new men. For we are so far off, from making our Savior Christ
a Pseudochrist, or from drawing one jote of excellency from his sovereign
power, merits, or dignity: that we in the very points by you put down, do
much more magnify him then you do. For in maintayning the authority by him
imparted unto his deputies, our spiritual Magistrates, and of their merits and
satisfaction: We first say, that these his servants prerogatives be his free
gifts, of more grace bestowed on whom he pleases; which is no small praise of
his great liberality: And withal affirm, that there is an infinite difference
between his own power, merits, and satisfaction, and ours: Wherein his
sovereign honor is preserved entire to himself, without any comparison. Now
you make Christ's authority so base, his merits and satisfaction so mean, that
if he impart any degree of them unto his servants, he loses the honor of all
from himself. Whereupon it follows inuincibly, if you unfeignedly seek
CHRIST JESUS his true honor, and will esteem of his divine gifts worthelie,
you must hold out no longer, but unite your self in these necessary heads of
Religion unto the Catholic Church of Rome, which so highly exalts him, both
in his own excellency, and in his singular gifts to his subjects.

AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE.
UPON your preface to the reader I will not stand, because it touches no point
of controversy: let it be declared in your next, what you mean, when you
desire your reformed Catholic to hold the same necessary heads of Religion
with the Roman Church: for if the Roman Church does err in the matter of
faith, and justification; in the number and virtue of the Sacraments; in the
books and interpretation of the word of God; if she raze the foundation and
make Christ a Pseudochrist, and an Idol; to omit twenty other errors in
substantial points of faith, as in this your small discourse you would
persuade: there will remain very few necessary heads of Religion for them
to agree in. And be you well assured, that you are so wide from winning
Catholics by this your work, to a better liking of your Religion: that you
have taken the high way, to lead them to a far greater dislike of it; by
teaching, that in so many material points it differs so far from theirs.
For all Catholics hold for most assured, that which the most ancient, learned
and holy Doctor Athanasius in his creed delivers in the 2. verse: Which
Catholic faith unless every man observe wholly and inuiolably, (not omitting,
or shrinking from any one article of it) without doubt he shall perish
everlastingly. If S. Basil that reverent and blessed Father of the Church, does
hold it the duty of every good Christian, rather to loose his life, then to
condescend to the alteration of any one syllable in matter of faith: Theod. 4.
his. cap. 17.
you may be sure that we Catholics cannot but carry a very base co^ceipt of
your doctrine: who go about under the ouerworne and threedbare cloak of
reformation, to deface and corrupt the purer and greater part of Christian
Religion: specially when they shall perceive the most points of your pretended
reformation, to be nothing else but old rotten condemned heresies, new scoured
up and furbushed, and so in show made more saleable unto the unskillful, as in
this treatise shall be proved in every Chapter.

THE THEME OF M. PERKINS PROLOGVE.
And I heard an other voice from heaven say, go out of her my people, that you
be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues. Reuelat. 18.3.
ANSWER TO THE PROLOGVE. Exordium Commune.
THE learned know it to be a fault, to make that the entry unto our discourse,
which may as properly fit him, that pleads against us: but to use that for
our proeme, which in true sense has nothing for us, nay rather bears
strongly for our adversary, must needs argue great want of judgment: Such
is the sentence above cited out of S. John by M. PERKINS: for it being truly
understood, is so far off from terrifying any one from the Catholic Roman
Church, as it does vehemently exhort all to fly unto it, by forsaking their
wicked company that are banded against it. For by the purple Harlot in that
place is signified (as shall be proved presently,) the Roman Empire, as then it
was, the slave of Idols, and with most bloody slaughter persecuting Christ's
Saints: Those of the Church of Rome being as nearest unto it, so most subject
to that sacrilegious butcherie. Wherefore that voice which S. John heard say.
Go out of her my people, that you be not partakers of her sins, etc. can
have none other meaning; then that all they who desire to be Gods people, must
separate themselves in faith and manners from them, who hate and persecute the
Roman Church, as did then, the Heathen Emperors, and now do all Heretics:
Unless they will be partakers of their sins, and consequently of their
plagues. This shall yet appear more plainly in the examination of this
Chapter. Where I will deal friendly with my adversary, and advantage him all
that I can; that all being given him, which is any way probable; it may appear
more evidently, how little he has to any purpose out of this place of the
Apocalipse, whereof all Protestants vaunt and brag so much both in their
books and pulpits. Well then I will admit that in the 17. and 18. Chapters
of the revel. by the whore of Babylon, is understood the Roman state and
regiment: which in lawful disputations, they are not able to prove: the most
juditious Doctor S. Augustine, and diverse others of the ancient Fathers, with
the learned troop of later Interpreters, expounding it of the whole corpse and
society of the wicked: And as for the 7. hills on the which they lay their
foundation, they are not to be taken literally: The Angel of God in the very
text it self interpreting the 7. heads of the beast, to be as well 7. Kings,
as 7. hills: But this notwithstanding to help you foreward, I will grant it
you, because some good writers have so taken it. And therefore omit as
impertine^t that which you say in proof of it. What can you infer hereupon?
Mary that the Roman Church is that whore of Babylon: fair and soft good Sir,
how prove you that? thus. The whore of Babylon is a state of the Roman
regiment, ergo the Roman Church is the whore of Babylon. What form of arguing
call you me this? By the like sophistication, you may prove that Romulus and
Remus were the purple Harlot, which to affirm were ridiculous, or (which is
impious) that the most Christian Emperors, Constantine, and Theodosius, were
the whore of Babylon, because these held also the state of the Roman Empire
and regiment, to make short, the feeble force of this reason lies in this:
that they who hold the state, and govern in the same Kingdom, must needs be
of like affection in Religion; which if it were necessary, then did Queen
Mary of blessed memory, and her sister Elizabeth carry the same minds
toward the true Catholic faith, because they sat in the same chair of
estate, and ruled in the same Kingdom. See I pray you what a shameful cavil
this is, to raise such outcryes upon. A simple Logician would blush to argue in
the paruies so loosely: and yet they that take upon them to control the
learned in the world, often fall into such open fallacies. Well, then
admitting the purple Harlot to signify the Roman state, we do say that the
state of Rome must be taken as it was then, when these words were spoken of
it; that is, Pagan, Idolatrous, and a hot persecutor of Christians. Such it had
been a little before under that bloody Tyrant Nero, and then was under
Domitian: which we confirm by the authority of them, who expound this passage
of the Roman state. The commentary on the Apocalips, under Saint Ambrose name
says, the great whore sometime does signify Rome, specially which at that
time when the Apostle wrote this, did persecute the Church of GOD: but
otherwise, In c. 178.
does signify the whole City of the Devil. And Saint Jerome who applies the
place to Rome affirms, Libr. 2 cont. Iouin.
that she had before his days blotted out that blasphemy written in her
forehead, because then the state was Christian, which before had been Heathen:
so that unto the party Pagan, and not unto the Church of God, he ascribes
these works of the wicked Harlot: which also the very text it self does
convince: Verse. 6.
for it has That she was drunk with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. Now
the Church of Rome has not then by the confession of all men, drawn any blood
of Christ's Saints, but in testimony of his truth, had powered out abundance of
her best blood. Wherefore it is most manifest, that the harlot could not
signify the Church of Rome, so pure and free from slaughter: but the Roman
Empire, which was then full gorged, with that most innocent and holy blood.
Again that whore is expounded, Verse. 18.
To be a City which had kingdom, over the Kings of the earth. But the Church
of Rome, had then no kingdom over the earth, or any temporal dominion at all;
but the Roman Emperors had such sovereign commandment over many Kings:
wherefore it must be understood of them, and not of the Church. Now to take
Kingdom not properly for temporal sovereignty, but for spiritual
Jurisdiction, as some shifters do; is to fly without any warrant, from the
native signification of the word, unto the fantastical, and voluntary
imagination. And whereas M. PERKINS says, page 5. that Ecclesiastical Rome in
respect of state, princely dominion, and cruelty against the Saints, is all one
with the heathenish Empire; he both seeks to deceive, and is greatly
deceived: he would deceive, in that he does apply words spoken of Rome, above
1500. years ago, unto Rome as it is at this day: and yet if that were
granted him, he erreth foulie in every one of his particles. For first,
touching princely dominion, the Roman Empire held then, all Italy, all France,
all Spain, all England, a great part of Germany, of Asia, and also of Afrike:
having their Proconsulles, and other principal Officers in all those
Countries, drawing an hundred thousand millions in money, and many other
commodities out of them: Wherefore in princely dominion, and magnificall state,
it surmounted Ecclesiastical Rome (which has not temporal dominion over the
one half of that one kingdom of Italy) more then an hundred degrees. And as
for persecution, the Empire slew, and caused to be slain, more Saints of God
in one year; then the Church of Rome has done, of reprobates and obstinate
heretics, in 1600. years.

Having thus proved, that the whore of Babylon, signifies the heathen state
of Rome, and not the Ecclesiastical: let us now hear what you ay against it.
Marry that the distinction of the Empire of Rome, and Church of Rome is
foolish, and coined of late to serve our turn: which to be far otherwise, I
prove out of those very Authors, who do interpret that harlot to signify
Rome; who are neither foolish, nor of late days: you have heard it before out
of S. Ambrose commentaries. And farther, we gather it out of S. Hierome, in the
Epistle which you cite: for he having resembled Rome unto Babylon, for the
multitude of the wicked, which yet remained in it: points out a more pure
part, saying; There is in deed the holy Church, there are the triumphant
monuments of the Apostles and Martirs, there is the true confession of Christ,
there is the faith praised by the Apostle, etc. Be not there expressed two
distinct parts of Rome? Again, Tertullian who lived in the second hundredth
year, under those persecuting Emperors, says in one place, that Babylon is a
figure of Rome, Lib. cont. Iud. De prescript. c. 16
in respect of her proud Empire and persecution of the Saints. And in an
other, that Rome was most happy for her holy Church, unto which the Apostles
with their blood had poured forth their whole doctrine: see a plain
distinction between the Heathen Empire and the holy Church of Rome; Which
finally may be gathered out of the express word of God. Where the Church in
Babylon coelect, 1. Pet. 5.
is distinguished from the rest of that city, which was Pagan. You say (but
without any author) that Babylon there does not signify Rome, but either a
city in Egypt, or Assyria: But Eusebius lib. 2. his. c. 14. and S. Ierom de
Eccles. script. verse. Marcus, with other Authors more worthy of credit, do
expound it of Rome. And you your selves take Babylon for Rome, where you
think that any hold may be taken against it, as in the 17. of the revel. but
in S. Peter's Epistle they will none of it, because it would prove too playnlie,
that S. Peter had been at Rome.

Well, M. PERKINS is content in fine, to allow of that distinction, of
Heathenish and Ecclesiastical Rome, which before he esteemed so foolish: And
then will prove that not the Heathenish, but Ecclesiastical Rome is resembled
to the purple Harlot. See what confidence this man has in his own shutle wit,
that now will prove this, and shorty after disprove it: but let us give him the
hearing in the 3. verse. Cap. 18.
The holy Ghost says plainly, that she has made all the world drunk with
the wine of the wrath of her fornication, and yet adds: that she has
committed fornication with the Kings of the earth: But this cannot be
understood of heathenish Rome, for that left all the Kingdoms of the earth
unto their own Religion and Idolatry: and did not labor to bring them, to
worship the Roman Gods. Ergo, it must be understood of Papal Rome. I
answer. The Roman Empire being the head and principal promoter of all kind
of Idolatry, and maintayning, and advancing them, that most vehemently opposed
themselves against the Christian Religion; who with any show of reason can
deny, but they chiefly committed spiritual fornication with the Kings of the
earth, if not by persuading them to forsake their own false Gods, which the
Pagan Romans worship as well as they: Yet by encouraging and commanding them
to persevere in that filthy Idolatry, and to resist, and oppress the Christians
wheresoever. Neither is that true that the Roman Emperors did not labor to
bring other Nations to worship new Gods, when Nero and Domitian would be
worshipped as Gods, and for fear of Adrian, one Antinous his servant, was
worshipped as a God of all men: as Justinius Martyr testifies in his Apol. to
Antonine. Eusebius. li. 4. is it. cap. 8.
These words of the text then, agree very well with the Emperors, who both
were Idolaters, and the chief Patrons of Idolatry: but can in no sort be
applied to the Roman Church, which was then (as the Protestants cannot deny) a
pure Virgin, and most free from all spiritual fornication. But that it is now
become Idolatrous, M. PERKINS does prove by his second reason, gathered also (I
warrant you, right learnedly) out of the text it self, Cap. 17. verse. 16.
where it is said, that the ten Horns, which signify ten Kings, shall
hate the whore, and make her desolate and naked: which (as he says) must be
understood of Popish Rome: For whereas in former times, all the Kings of the
earth did submit themselves, to the whore: now they have begun to
withdraw themselves, and to make her desolate: as the Kings of Bohemia,
Denmark, Germany, England, Scotland, and other parts. In these his words is
committed a most foul fault, by gross oversight and ignorance in the very
text. What, be England, Scotland, Denmark, (as for Bohemia ruled by a
Catholic Emperor it must be omitted, as also many states of Germany,) be
these Kingdoms your principal pillars of the new Gospel, comprehended
within the number of the ten, mentioned there in S. John, which hate the
harlot. Yes marie. Why then they are enemies of Christ, and Satan's soldiers;
for in the 13. verse. it is said of these, that they shall deliver their power
unto the beast, (which signifies either the Devil or Antichrist,) and shall
sight with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome them, because he is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings. Is not this doting in an high degree, to infame so
notoriously them, of whom he would speak most honor? and to make the special
Patrons of their new Gospel, the Devils Captains, and fiercely to wage
battle against CHRIST JESUS. See, how heat of wrangling blinds men's
Judgments. But you proceed and say Page 7. that we further hold, that the
blood of the Saints and Martirs, was not shed in Rome, but in Jerusalem.
Here is a confusion of Men, and matters; for we say that the blood of many
Saints, rehearsed in the Apoc. was shed in Rome, Cap. 17.
by the tirannicall Emperors, but the martiring of those two principal
witnesses, Enoch and Elias, (recorded in the eleauenth of the same) shall be at
Jerusalem, as well, because the text is very plain for it; Verse. 8.
specifying that their bodies shall lie in the streets of that great City,
where their Lord was crucified; as for that the ordinary interpreters of that
place do so take it. But M. PERKINS holds that the place where Christ was
crucified, signifies here not Jerusalem, but Rome; because Christ was
crucified there in his members: so it might as well signify any other place of
persecution as Rome: the reason therefore being naught worth, he fortifieth it
with the name of S. Jerome, but cites in the margent a letter of two virtuous
matrons, Paula and Eustochium. Epist. 17 Epist. 17
Good Sir, if S. Jerome had meant that the Epistle should have had his
authority, he would have set it out in his own name, which seeing he thought not
expedient, set the authority of it aside, and urge his reasons, if you
think it worth your labor, and you shall be answered. In the mean season, (I
hope) all sober Christians, will take the place where our Savior Christ was
nailed on the Cross, to signify rather Jerusalem, then Rome. And
consequently, all that you have alleged out of Scripture, to prove the whore
of Babylon to figure the ecclesiastical state of Rome, not to be worth a
rush. Now let us come to the ancient and learned men, whom you cite in favor
of your exposition. The first is S. Bernard, who says, that they are the
ministers of Christ, but they serve Antichrist. Of whom speaks that good
religious Father? forsooth of some officers of the court of Rome. Good, who
were (as he says) the ministers of CHRIST, because they were lawfully
called by the Pope to their places, but served Antichrist; for that they
behaved themselves corruptly in their callings. And so this, makes more
against you, then for you, approving the lawful officers of Rome, to be
Christ's ministers. The second place is alleged out of him yet more
impertinently, your self confessing presently, that those words were not
spoken of the Pope, but of his enemy: The reason yet there set down, pleases
you exceedingly: which you vouch so clearly that it seems to bear flat
against you; for you infer that that Pope, and all others since that time be
usurpers, out of this reason of Saint Bernard. Because forsooth, that the
Antipope called Innocentius, was chosen by the King of Almaine, France,
England, etc. and their whole clergy, and people. For if Innocentius were an
Antichrist and usurper, because he was elected by so many Kings and people:
then belike he that had no such election, but is chosen by the Cardinals of
Rome only is true Pope. This, your words declare, but your meaning (as I take
it) is quite contrary. But of this matter and manner of election shall be
treated hereafter, if need require; It suffices for this present, that you
find no relief at all in Saint Bernard, touching the main point, that either
the Pope, or Church of Rome, is Antichrist. And all the world might marvel,
if out of so sweet a Doctor, and so obedient unto the Pope, any such poison
might be sucked: Lib. 2. de Cons. ad Fugea.
specially weighing well, what he has written unto one of them, to whom he
speaks thus. Go to, let us yet enquire more diligently, who thou art, and
what person thou bear in the Church of God, during the time. Who art thou? A
great Priest, the highest Bishop: thou art the Prince of Bishops, the heir
of the Apostles, and in dignity, Aaron, in authority, Moses, in Power, Peter,
thou art he to whom the Keys were delivered, to whom the sheep were
committed: There are indeed also other Porters of Heaven, and Pastors of
flocks; but thou art so much the more glorious, as thou have inherited a more
excellent name above them: they have their flocks allotted to them, to each man
one: but to thee all were committed, as one flock, to one man: thou art not
only Pastor of the sheep, but of all other Pastors, thou alone art the Pastor.
And much more to this purpose, which being his clear opinion of the Pope, how
absurd is it, out of certain blind places, and broken sentences of his to
gather, that he thought the Pope of Rome to be neither sheep, nor Pastor of
Christ's Church, but very Antichrist himself.

There is a gross fault, also in the Canon of Pope Nicolas as he cites it:
that the Popes was to be created by the Cardinals, Bishops of Rome. As though
there were some 30. or 40. Bishops of Rome at once, but of the matter of
election else where.

M. PERKINS having lightly skirmished with a broken sentence or two, out of one
Catholic Author flies to a late heretic, called Ioachim, and quoteth Jewel
for relator of it. A worshipful testimony of one heretic, and that upon the
report of an other: and he the most lying Author of these days. As for the
late Poet Petrarke his words might easily be answered, but because he quoteth
no place, I will not stand to answer it. But to close up this first combat, a
sentence is set down out of the famous Martyr Ireneus, that Antichrist should
be Lateinos, a Roman. Here be as many faults, as words. That learned ancient
Doctor discoursing of Antichrist his proper name, Cap. 13.
out of these words of the revel. the number of the beast is 666. And
observing the letters of the greek Alphabet, (by which they do number, as we
do by ciphers) says: that among others the word Lateinos does contain those
letters, which amount just to the number of 666. and consequently that
Antichrists proper name perhaps might be Lateinos, but more likely it is to be
Teitan, as he says there, and lastly that it is most uncertain what his name
shall be. See the place (gentle reader) and learn to beware of such
deceiptfull merchants, as make no conscience, to corrupt the best Authors: and
being often warned of it, will never learn to amend. Ireneus leaves it most
doubtful what shall be Antichrists name: And among diverse words esteems
Lateinos, to be the unlikeliest. And yet M. PERKINS reports him to say
resolutely that his name shall be Lateinos: and then to make up the matter
turns Lateinos, a proper name with S. Ireneus; into Roman, an appellatiue,
which notes only his country. Fie upon that cause, which cannot be vpholden
and maintained, but by a number of such paltry shifts. Thus come we at length
to the end of M. PERKINS proofs, and reproofs in his prologue, where we finding
little fidelity in his allegations of the fathers, badde construction and foul
oversight in the text, of holy Scripture, briefly great malice, but slender
force against the Church of Rome, we are to return the words of his theme to
all good Christians. Go out of her my people. Forsake the enemies of the Roman
Church. And as our Ancestors did the Pagan Emperors, who drew out her most
pure blood, so let us fly in matters of faith, and Religion, from all
heretics that of late also spared not to shed abundance of the same most
Innocent blood, unless to your greater condemnation, you had leifer be
partakers of her sins, and receive of her plagues. And because I purpose (God
willing) not only to confute what M. PERKINS brings against the Catholic
doctrine, but some what also in every Chapter to fortify and confirm it: I
will here deliver what some of the most ancient, most learned, and most holy
Fathers do teach, concerning joining with the Church, and Pope of Rome: from
whose society Protestants labor tooth, and nail to withdawe us. And because
of this we must treat more amply in the question of supreamacie, I will use
here their authority, only whom M. PERKINS cites against us. S. Bernard is
cited already, S. Ireneus Scholar of S. Policarpe, and he of S. John the
Evangelist of the Church of Rome writes thus. To this Church, Lib. 3. c. 3.
by reason of her more mighty principality, it is necessary that every Church,
that is the faithful on all sides, to condescend and agree; in, and by which,
always, the tradition of the Apostles has been preserved of them, that be
round about her.

Saint Jerome writing to Damasus Pope of Rome, says: I following none as
chiefest, but Christ, do in participation join with thy blessedness, that
is, with the chair of Peter, I know the Church to be builded upon that Rock.
Whosoever does eat the Paschall Lamb out of this house, is a profane fellow,
he that is not found within the Ark of Noah, shall when the floudes arise
perish: And a little after, I know not Vitalis, I refuse Meletius, I take no
notice of Paulinus: he that gathers not with thee, scatters; that is, he
that is not with Christ, is with Antichrist.

Mark and embrace this most learned Doctors Judgment, of joining with the Sea
of Rome, in all doubtful questions: he would not trust to his own wit and
skill which were singular; nor thought it safe to rely upon his learned and
wise neighbors: he durst not set up his rest with his own Bishop Paulinus,
who was a man of no mean mark but the Patriarch of Antioch: but made his
assured stay upon the sea of Rome, as upon an immovable Rock, with which
(says he) if we do not communicate in faith and Sacraments, we are but
profane men, void of all Religion: In a word, we belong not to Christ, but be
of Antichrists train. See, how flat contrary this most holy ancient Father is
to M. PERKINS. M. PERKINS would make us of Antichrists band, because we cleave
unto the Bishop of Rome. Whereas S. Hierome holds all to appertain to
Antichrist, who be not fast lincked in matters of Religion, with the Pope and
See of Rome. And so to conclude with this point, every true Catholic must say
with S. Ambrose. Lib. 3 de Sacra. c. 1.
I desire in all things to follow the Church of Rome. And thus much of his
prologue. Afterward he takes upon him to prescribe and show us how far
forth we may join with the Church of Rome, by proposing many points in
controversy, between us, and them, and in each showing in what points we
consent together, and in what we differ. I mean by Gods grace to follow him,
step by step, although he has made many a disorderly one, as well to
discover his deceipts and to disprove their errors, as also to establish the
Catholic Doctrine, the which I will endeavor to perform (by the help of God)
with all simplicity of language, and with as much breuity as such a weighty
matter will permit. Yet (I hope) with that perspicuity, as the meaner learned
may understand it, and with such substance of proof, both out of the holy
Scriptures and ancient Fathers, as the more iuditious (to whose profit it is
principally dedicated) may not contemn it.

CHAPTER. I. OF FREE WILL. OUR CONSENTS.
THAT I be not thought captious, but willing to admit any thing that M. PERKINS
has said agreeable to the truth, I will let his whole text in places
indifferent, pass, paring of only superfluous words, with adding some
annotations where it shall be needful, and rest only upon the points in
controversy. First then concerning free will, wherewith he begins, thus he
says: Free will both by them and us, is taken for a mixed power in the mind
and will of man, whereby discerning what is good, and what is evil; he does
accordingly choose or refuse the same.

ANNOT. If we would speak formally, it is not a mixed power in the mind and
will, but is a free faculty of the mind and will only, whereby we choose or
refuse, supposing in the understanding, a knowledge of the same before. But let
this definition pass as more populer.

M. PERKINS. 1. Conclusion. Man must be considered in a fourefould estate: as
he was created, as he was corrupted, as he is renewed, as he shall be glorified,
in the first state, we ascribe unto man's will liberty of nature, in which he
could will or nill, either good or evil; note that this liberty proceeded not
from his own nature, but of original Justice, in which he was created.

In the third liberty of grace, in the last liberty of glory.

ANNOT. Carry this in mind, that here he grants man in the state of grace
to have free will.

M.P. 2. Conclusion. The matters whereabout free will is occupied, are
principally the actions of men, which be of three sorts, Natural, Humane,
Spiritual. Natural actions are such, as are common to men and beasts, as to
eat, sleep, etc. In all which we join with the Papists, and hold that man
has free will even since the fall of Adam.

M.P. 3. Conclusion. Humane actions are such, as are common to al men, good and
bad, as to speak, to practice any kind of art, to perform any kind of
civil duty, to preach, to administer Sacraments, etc. And hither we may
refer the outward actions of civil virtues, as namely Justice, Temperance,
Gentleness, and Liberality, and in these also we join with the Church of Rome,
and say (as experience teaches) that men have a natural freedom of will, to
put them, or not to put them in execution. S. Paul says. The gentiles that have
not the law, do the things of the law by nature, Romans 2.14
that is by natural strength: And he says of himself, that before his
conversion touching the righteousness of the law, he was unblameable. Phil.
3.6. Mat. 6.5. Ezech. 29.19.
And for this external obedience, natural men receive reward in temporal
things. And yet here some caueats must be remembered.

First, that in humane actions (he should say moral) man's will is weak, and
his understanding dim, thereupon he often fails in them. This caveat is no
caveat of the Protestants, but taken out of S. Thomas of Aquines. Sum. 1. 2.
q. 109. art. 4. and 8.
And in all such actions with S. Augustine (you might have quoted the place) I
understand the will of man, to be only wounded or half dead.

2. That the will of man, is under the will of God, and therefore to be ordered
by it: Who knows not this.

M.P. 4. Conclusion. The third kind of actions, are spiritual more nearely,
and these be two fold, good, or bad. In sins we join with the Papist, and
teach that in sins man has freedom of will. Some, perhaps will say that we
sin necessarily, because he that sins, cannot but sin, and that free
will and necessity, can not stand together: In deed the necessity of
compulsion and free will, can not stand together, but there is an other kind
of necessity (or rather infallibility) which may stand with free will, for some
things may be done necessarylie, and also freely.

ANNOT. The example of a close prisoner is not to the purpose, for it puts
necessity in one thing, and liberty in an other. The solution is, that
necessary lie must be, is taken for certaynlie, not that a man is at any time
compelled to sin, but his weakness and the craft of the Devil are such, that
he is very often over reached by the Devil, and induced to sin, but with
free consent of his own will.

M.P. 5. Conclusion. The second kind of Spiritual actions be good as
repentance, Faith, Obedience, etc. In which we likewise in part join with
the Church of Rome, and say that in the first conversion of a sinner, man's free
will co^curreth with Gods grace as a fellow or co-worker in some sort, for in
the conversion of a sinner, three things are required, the word, Gods spirit,
and Man's will, for Man's will, is not passive in all and every respect, but
has an action in the first conversion and change of the soul: when any man
is converted, this work of God is not done by compulsion, but he is converted
willingly, and at the very time when he is converted by Gods grace, Sermon. 15.
de verb. Apost.
he wills his conversion; to this end says S. Augustine, He which made thee,
without thee, will not save thee, without thee. Again, that it is certain
that our will is required in this, that we may do any thing well, (it is not
only then required in our first conversion, if it be required to all good
things which we do,) but we have it not from our own power, but God works
to will in us. For look at what time God gives grace, at the same time he
gives a will to desire and will the same: As for example when God works faith,
at the same time, he works also upon the will, causing it to desire faith, and
willingly to receive the gift of believing: God makes of the unwilling will, a
willing will, because no man can receive grace utterly against his will,
considering will constrained, is no will. But here we must remember that
howsoever in respect of time, the working of grace by Gods spirit, and the
willing of it in man go together: Yet in regard of order grace is first
wrought, and man's will must first of all be acted and moved by grace; and then
it also acts, wills, and moves it self: And this is the last point of
consent, between us and the Roman Church, touching free will: neither may we
proceed farther with them. Hitherto M. PERKINS.

Now before I come to the supposed difference, I gather first that he yields
unto the principal point in controversy, that is freedom of will, in civil,
and moral works in the state of corruption, and all good works in the state
of grace, for in his first conclusion distinguishing four estates of man, he
affirms that in the third, of man renewed, or (as we speak justified) there
is liberty of grace, that is, grace enableth man's will to do if it please
such spiritual works, as God requires at his hands. Yet lest he be taken to
yield in any thing, Page 16.
he does in show of words contradict both these points in an other place: For
in setting down the difference of our opinions, he says: that man's will in
his conversion is not active, but passive, which is flat opposite unto that
which himself said a little before in his first conclusion; that in the
conversion of a sinner, man's will concurreth not passiuely but is co-worker
with Gods grace.

The like contradiction may be observed in the other part of liberty in moral
actions: for in his third conclusion he delivers playnlie man to have a
natural freedom, even since the fall of Adam to do, or not to do the acts
of wisdom, Justice, Temperance, etc. Page 19.
and proves out of S. Paul, that the Gentiles so did: Yet in his first reason,
he affirms as peremptorily out of the 8. of Genesis, that the whole frame of
man's heart is corrupted, and all that he thinks, deuiseth, or imagines, is
wholly evil, leaving him no natural strength to perform any part of moral
duty. See how uncertain the steps be of men that walk in darkness, or that
would seem to communicate with the works of darkness. For if I mistake him
not, he agrees fully in this matter of free will, with the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church: For he putting down the point of difference, Page. 1
says that it stands in the cause of the freedom of man's will, in
spiritual matters: allowing then freedom of will with us, in the state of
grace, whereof he there treats; for he seems to dissent from us, only in
the cause of that freedom. And as he differs from Luther, and Calvin, with
other sectaries, in granting this liberty of will: so in the very cause also
he accords with Catholics, as appears by his own words. For (says he)
Papists say man's will concurreth with Gods grace by it self, and by it own
natural power: we say that Man's will works with grace; yet not of it self,
but by grace: either he understands not what Catholics say, or else accuses
them wrongfully: For we say that Man's will then only concurreth with Gods
grace, when it is stirred and helped first by Gods grace. So that Man's will by
his own natural actions, does concur in every good work, otherwise it were
no action of Man: But we farther say, that this action proceeds principally
of grace, whereby, the will was made able to produce such actions: for of it
self it was utterly unable to bring forth such spiritual fruit. And this I
take to be that, which M. PERKINS does mean by those his words, that the will
must be first moved and acted by grace, before it can act or will. He
mistook us, thinking that we required some outward help only to the will, to
join with it, or rather, that grace did but as it were untie the chains of
sin wherein our will was fettered: And then will could of it self turn to
God. Luc. 10.
Not understanding how Catholics take that parable of the man wounded in the
way, between Jerusalem and Ierico who was (not as the Papists only say, but as
the holy Ghost says) left half, and not stark dead. Now the exposition of
Catholics is not, that this wounded man, (which signifies all Mankind) had
half his spiritual strength left him; but was robbed of al Supernatural
riches, spoiled of all his original Justice, and wounded in his natural
powers of both understanding and will, and therein left half dead, not being
able of his own strength, either to know all natural truth, or to perform
all moral duty. Now touching supernatural works, because he lost all power
to perform them; not being able so much as to prepare himself conveniently to
them; he in a good sense may be likened unto a dead man, not able to move one
singer that way of grace; Luc. 15.
and so in holy Scripture the Father said of his prodigal Son, he was dead,
and is revived. Yet as the same son lived a natural life, albeit in a deadly
sin: so man's will after the fall of Adam, continued some what free in actions
conformable to the nature of man, though wounded also in them, as not being
able to act many of them, yet having still that natural faculty of free
will, capable of grace, and also able, being first both outwardly moved, and
fortified inwardly by the virtue of grace, to effect and do any work
appertayning to salvation: which is as much as M. PERKINS affirms. And this to
be the very Doctrine of the Church of Rome, Cap. 1.
is most manifestly to be seen in the Council of Trent, where in the Session
are first these words in effect, concerning the unableness of man to arise
from sin of himself. Every man must acknowledge, and confess, that by
Adams fall we were made so unclean and sinful, that neither the gentiles by
the force of nature, nor the Jews by the letter of Moses law, could arise
out of that sinful state. After it shows, how our deliverance is wrought,
and how freedom of will is recovered in special, and wherein it consists,
saying. The beginning of justification, in persons using reason, is taken from
the grace of God, preventing us through JESUS CHRIST, that is, from his
vocation, whereby without any desert of ours we are called, that we who were by
our sins turned away from God, may be prepared by his grace, both raising us
up, and helping us to return to our own Justification, freely yielding our
consent unto the said grace, and working with it. So as God touching the heart
of man by the light of the Holy Ghost, neither does man nothing at all,
receiving that inspiration, who might also refuse it: neither yet can he
without the grace of God, by his free will, move himself to that, which is
just in Gods sight. And that you may be assured, that this Doctrine of the
Council, is no other then that which was taught three hundred years before,
in the very midst of darkness, as heretics deem: 1.2. q. 109. art. 6.
See what Saint Thomas of Aquine one of her principal pillars has written of
this point in his most learned Sum. Where, upon these words of our Savior,
No man can come to me, unless my Father draw him. He concludes it to be
manifest, Joan. 6.
that man cannot so much as prepare himself to receive the light of grace, but
by the free and undeserved help of God, moving him inwardly thereunto. And
this is all which M. PERKINS in his pretended dissent auerreth here, and goes
about to prove in his five reasons following: the which I will omit, as being
all for us. And if any man desire to see more to that purpose, let him read
the most learned works of that famous Cardinal, and right Reverend
Archbishop Bellarmine.

Now the very point controuersed, concerning free will, M. PERKINS has quite
omitted, which consists in these two points, expressed in the Council:
First, whether we do freely assent unto the said grace, when it is offered us,
that is, whether it lie in our power to refuse it; And secondly, when we
concur and work with it, whether we could if we listed refuse to work with
it. In both which points we hold the affirmative part, and most sectaries of
this time the negative. Of which our Author is silent: only by the way in his
fourth reason, touches two textes out of Saint Paul, which are commonly
alleged against free will.

The first. I have (says he) labored more abundantly then all they, yet not
I, 1. Cor. 15
but the grace of God, which is in me, attributing the whole work to grace. To
which I briefly answer, that they do corrupt the text, to make it seem more
current for them: the greek has only He sun emoi which is, with me, not,
which is in me, so that the word in true construction make much more for us,
then against us: Saint Paul affirming the grace of God, which was working with
him, to have done these things: And so Saint Augustine whom they pretend to
follow most in this matter, expounds it. Yet not I, but the grace of God with
me; that is, not I alone, Degra. and lib. arb. ca 15.
but the grace of God with me. And by this, neither the grace of God alone:
neither he alone, but the grace of God with him, thus Saint Augustine. The like
sentence is in the book of wisdom. Send that (wisdom) from thy Holy heaven,
that it may be with me, Cap. 9.
and labor with me.

The second text is. It is God that works in us, both to will and to
accomplish. Phil. 2. v. 13.
We grant that it is God, but not he alone without us, for in the next words
before, Saint Paul, says. Work your salvation with fear and trembling. So
that GOD works principally by stirring us up by his grace, and also helping
foreward our will, to accomplish the work; but so sweetly and conformably to
our nature, that his working takes not away, but helps foreward our will to
concur with him. Again, the whole may be attributed unto God, considering
that the habits of grace infused, be from him as sole efficient cause of them,
our actions endued also with grace, being only dispositions and no efficient
cause of those habits: but this is an high point of school Divinity, very
true, but not easily to be conceived of the unlearned.

One other objection may be collected out of Master PERKINS third reason,
against free will, which is touched, as he says, by the holy Ghost, in these
words. When we were dead in sins. Ad Ephesians. 2.2.
If a man by sin become like a dead man, he can not concur with GOD, in his
rising from sin.

Answer Sure it is, that he can not before God by his grace has quickened, and
as it were revived him, to which grace of God, man gives his free consent. How
can that be, if he were then dead? Marry, you must remember what has been
said before: that albeit man in sin be dead in the way of grace, yet he
lives naturally, and has free will in natural and civil actions: which will
of his being by grace fortified, and as it were lifted up unto a higher degree
of perfection, can then concur and work with grace to faith, and all good
works necessary to life everlasting. (As for example,) a crab-tree stock
has no ability of it self, to bring forth apples, and therefore may be
termed dead in that kind of good fruit: Yet let a siance of apples be grafted
into it, and it will bear apples: even so albeit our sower corrupt nature of
it self be unable to fructify to life everlasting, yet having received into it
the heavenly grafte of Gods grace, it is enabled to produce the sweet fruit of
good works: Cap. 1.
to which alludeth S. James. Receive the ingrafted word, which can save our
souls: again what more dead then the earth? and yet it being tilled and
sowed, does bring forth, and bear goodly corn: now the word and grace of God
is compared by our Savior himself unto seed, Math. 13.
and our hearts unto the earth that received it: what marvel then if we
otherwise dead, yet revived by this lively seed, do yield plenty of pleasing
fruit.

Having hitherto explicated the state of the question, and solued such
objections as may be gathered out of M. PERKINS against it, before I come to
his solution of our arguments, I will set down some principal places, both
out of the Scriptures, and ancient Fathers, in defense of our Doctrine,
because he proposes but few for us, and misapplieth them too.

Genes. 4.
First then, God says to Cain. If thou do well, shall thou not receive a
reward? But if thou do evil, thy sin will presently be at the gates, but
the appetit of it, shall be under thee, and thou shall bear dominion over it.
Here is plain mention made of the power, which that evil disposed man Cain,
had not to sin, if he had listed; which was (no doubt) by the assistance of
Gods grace, and on the other side, that grace did not infallibly draw him to
good, but left it to his free choice, whether he would follow it or no. And
because they, who seek out all manner of starting holes, wrest these words of
ruling and bearing sway, as spoken of his brother Abel, and not of sin: first
to see their iniquity, mark the text, where is no mention of Abel, neither in
that verse, nor in the next before; but express mention is made of sin in
the next words before: therefore those pronounes, (that are to be referred to
the words next before) must needs in true construction be referred to sin,
and not to his brother. Besides, this plain construction of the text, Saint
Augustine follows, Lib. 15. de ciuit. c 7.
saying as it were to Cain. Hold thy self content, for the conversion of it,
shall be to thee, and thou shall rule over it. What (says he) over his
brother? God forbid, that so wicked a man should rule over so good: Over what
then? but he shall rule over sin. See how manifestly that worthy Doctor has
prevented their cavil. And if it were need, I might join with him that most
skillful Father in the Hebrew text, S. Jerome, In quest. Hebraice.
who in the person of God expounds it thus. Because thou have free will, I
admonish and warn thee, that thou suffer not sin to overcome thee, but do
thou overcome sin.

The second is taken out of this text of Deuteronomy. Cap. 30.19
I call this day (says Moses) heaven and earth to witness, that I have set
before you, life, and death, benediction, and malediction, therefore choose
life, that thou may live and thy seed. Which words were spoken in vain, if
it had not been in their power, by the grace of God, to have made choice of
life: or if that grace would have made them do it infallibly, without their
consent. Unto these two places of the old Testament, (one under the law of
Nature, and the other under Moses law) let us couple two more out of the new
Testament.

The first may be those kind words of our Savior unto the Jews. Math. 23.
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. how often would I have gathered together thy
children, as the hen does her chickens under her wings, and thou would not:
Which do playnlie demonstrate that there was no want, either of Gods help
inwardly, or of Christ's persuasion outwardly, for their conversion: and that
the whole fault lay in their own refusing, and withstanding Gods grace, as
these words of Christ do playnlie witness, and thou would not.

The last testimony is in the Reuelat. where it is said in the person of God. I
stand at the door and knock, Cap. 3.
if any man shall hear my voice and open the gates, I will enter in to him,
and will suppe with him, and he with me. Mark well the words: God by his
grace, knockes at the door of our hearts, he does not break it open, or in any
sort force it, but attends, that by our assenting to his call, we open him
the gates, and then, lo he with his heavenly gifts will enter in: otherwise he
leaves us. What can be more evident in confirmation of the freedom of man's
will, in working with Gods grace.

To these express places taken out of Gods word, let us join the testimony
of those most ancient Fathers, against whose works the Protestants can take
no exception. The first shall be that excellent learned Martyr Justinius in his
Apology, who unto the Emperor Antonine speaks thus. Unless man by free
will could fly from foul dishonest deeds, and follow those that be fair and
good; he were without fault, as not being cause of such things as were done.
But we Christians teach that mainkinde by free choice, and free will, does both
do well, and sin.

To him we will join that holy Bishop and valiant Martyr Ireneus, who of
free will writes thus, not only in works, but in faith also, Lib. 4. c. 72.
our Lord reserved liberty, and freedom of will unto man: saying, be it done
unto thee, according to thy faith.

I will add to that worthy company, S. Cyprian: who upon those words of our
Savior, will you also depart, discourses thus. Joan. 6. Lib. 1. Ep. 3
Our Lord did not bitterly inueigh against them, which forsook him, but rather
used these gentle speeches to his Apostles, will you also go your way: and why
so? Marry observing and keeping (as this holy Father declares) that decree by
which man left unto his liberty, and put unto his free choice, might deserve
unto himself, either damnation, or salvation. These three most ancient, and
most skillful in Christian Religion, and so zealous of Christian truth, that
they spent their blood in confirmation of it, may suffice to certify any
indifferent reader; what was the judgment of the ancient and most pure
Church, concerning this article of free will: specially when the learned of
our Adversaries, confess al Antiquity, (excepting only S. Augustine) to have
believed and taught free will. Hear the words of one, for all. Mathias
Illyricus in his large, long lying history, having rehearsed touching free
will, the testimonies of Iustine Ireneus and others, Cent. 2. c. 4. col. 59.
says. In like manner Clement, Patriarch of Alexandria, does every where teach
free will, that it may appear (say these Lutherans) not only the Doctors of
that age to have been in such darkness, but also that it did much increase in
the ages following. See the wilful blindness of heresy. Illyricus confessing
the best learned in the purest times of the Church, to have taught free will:
yet had rather believe them to have been blindly led, by the Apostles and
their best Scholars, who were their Masters: then to espy and amend his own
error. These principal pillars of Christ's Church were in darkness belike as
Protestants must needs say: and that proud Persian and most wicked heretic
Manes (of whom the Manichees are named) who first denied free will, began to
broach the true light of the new Gospel.

Here I would make an end of citing Authorities, were it not that Calvin
says, 2. Just. ca. 2. q. 4.
that albeit al other ancient writers be against him, yet S. Augustine as he
vaunteth, is clearly for him in this point, but the poor man is foully
deceived, as well in this, as in most other matters. I will briefly prove, and
that out of those works which S. Augustine wrote after the Pelagian heresy
was a foot; for in his others, Calvin acknowledges him to have taught free
will. Of our freedom in consenting to Gods grace, he thus defines, De spirit.
and lit. 34. De gra. Chri. 14. Ad simpli. q. 2. Tract. 72. in Joan Ep 47.
to consent to Gods calling, or not to consent, lies in a man's own will.
Again: Who does not see every man to come, or not to come, by free will? but
this free will may be alone, if he do not come, but it cannot be but helped,
if he do come. In an other place, that we will (do well) God will have it to
be his and ours; his, in calling us; ours, in following him. Yea more: To
Christ working in him, a man does cooperate, that is, works with him, both
his own justification, and life everlasting: will you here him speak yet more
formally for us. We have dealt with your brethren and ours, as much as we
could: that they would hold out and continue in the sound Catholic faith; the
which neither denies free will, to evil or good life, nor does attribute so
much to it, that it is worth any thing without grace. So according to this most
worthy Fathers judgment, the sound Catholic faith does not deny free will, as
the old Manichees and our new Gospellers do; nor esteem it without grace
able to do any thing toward salvation, as the Pelagians did. And to conclude,
hear S. Augustines answer unto them, who say, that he, when he commends
grace, denies free will. Lib. 4. con Iul. c. 8.
Much less would I say, that which thou lyingly do affirm me to say free
will to be denied, if grace be commended, or grace to be denied, if free will
be commended.

Now in few words I will pass over the objections which he frames in our
names. But misapplieth them.

First Objection. That man can do good by nature, as give alms, do Justice,
speak the truth, etc. And therefore will them without the help of grace. This
argument we use to prove liberty of will in civil and moral matters, even in
the corrupted state of man, and it does demonstrate it: and M. PERKINS in his
third conclusion does grant it. And his answer here is far from the
purpose, for albeit (says he) touching the substance of the work it be good,
yet it fails both in the beginning, because it proceeds not from a pure
heart, and a faith unfeigned: and also in the end, which is not the glory of God.

Answer. It fails neither in the one nor other: for that alms may issue out
of a true natural compassion, which is a sufficient good fountain to make a
work morally good: faith and grace to purge the heart, and are necessary only
for good and meritorious works: Again being done to relieve the poor man's
necessity, GOD his Creator and Master, is thereby glorified. And so albeit the
man thought not of GOD in particular: yet GOD being the final end of all good,
any good action of it self, is directed toward him, when the man puts no
other contrary end thereunto.

2. Objection. God has commanded all to believe and repent, therefore they
have natural free will, by virtue whereof being helped by the spirit of God,
they can believe. The force of the argument consists in this, that GOD being
a good Lord, will not command any man to do that, which he is no way able to
do.

Ans. M. PERKINS answers in effect (for his words be obscure) that GOD
commands that, which we be not able to perform, but that which we should
do: Then I hope he will admit that he will enable us by his grace to do it,
or else how should we do it. God surely does not bind us by commandment to
any impossible thing, he is no tyrant, but tells us, that his yoke is sweet,
and his burden easy. Mat. 11.
And S. John witnesses, that his commandments are not heavy. Ioh. 5.
He was far off from thinking that GOD would tie any man by law, to do that
which he was altogether unable to perform. This in the end M. PERKINS himself
approves.

3. Ob. If man have no free will to sin, or not to sin, then no man is to be
punished for his sins, because he sins by a necessity, not to be avoided.

He answers, that the reason is not good; for, though man cannot but sin,
yet is the fault in himself, and therefore is to be punished. Against which, I
say that this answer supposes that which is false, to wit, that a man in
sin, cannot choose but sin: For by the help of God, who desires all
sinners conversion, 1. Pet. 3.
and thereunto affords grace sufficient; a sinner in a moment, may call for
grace and repent him: and so choose whether he will sin or no, and
consequently has free will to sin or not to sin: And that example of a
bankerupt is not to purpose, for he cannot when he will, satisfy his
creditours, who content not themselves with his repentance, without repay of
their money, as God does.

Now concerning the force of this argument, hear Saint Augustines opinion. De
duab. animab. contr. Manich. in these words. Neither are we here to search
obscure books to learn, that no man is worthy of disprayse or punishment,
which does not that, which he cannot do: for (says he) do not shepheardes
upon the downs, sing these things? do not poets upon the stages, act them?
Do not the unlearned in their assemblies, and the learned in their libraries
acknowledge them? Do not masters in the schools, and Prelates in the pulpits,
and finally al mankind throughout the whole world, confess and teach this? to
wit, that no man is to be punished, because he did that, which he could not
choose but do. Should he not then (according to S. Augustines censure) be
hissed out of all honest company of men, that denies this so manifest a
truth; confessed by all Mankind? How gross is this heresy, that so hoodeth a
man, and hardneth him, that be he learned, yet he blusheth not to deny roundly,
that which is so evident in reason, that even natural sense, does teach it
unto sheepheards. God of his infinite mercy, deliver us from this strange
light of the new Gospel.

CHAPTER. 2. OF ORIGINAL SIN.
OUR CONSENTS. M. PERKINS FIRST CONCLUSION.
Page 28.
THEY say, natural corruption after Baptism is abolissed, and so say we: but
let us see, how far forth it is abolissed. In original sin are three
things. First, the punishment: which is the first and second death: second,
guiltines, which is the binding up of the creature unto punishment: third, the
fault, or the offending of God: under which I comprehend our guiltines in Adams
first offense, as also the corruption of the heart, which is a natural
inclination and pronesse to any thing that is evil, or against the law of God.
For first we say that after Baptism in the regenerate, the punishment of
Original sin is taken away: Romans 8.1.
For there is no condemnation (says the Apostle) to them that are in CHRIST
JESUS.

For the second, that is guiltines, we further condescend and say, that it is
also taken away in them that are borne anewe. For considering there is no
condemnation to them, there is nothing to bind them to punishment. Yet this
caveat must be remembered, namely, that the guiltines is removed from the person
regenerate, but not from the sin in the person. But of this more hereafter.

Thirdly, the guilt in Adams first offense is pardoned. And touching the
corruption of the heart, I avouch two things. First, that the very power and
strength, whereby it reigns in man, is taken away in the regenerate.
Secondly, that this corruption is abolished (as also the fault of every
actual sin past.) So far forth as it is the fault and sin of the man in
whom it is. In deed it remains till death, and it is sin, considered in it
self, so long as it remains; but it is not imputed to the person. And in that
respect, is as though it were not, it being pardoned. Hitherto M. PER.

Annotations upon our Consent.

First, we say not, that the punishment of Original sin is in it, or any
part of it, but rather a due correction, and as it were an expulsion of it:
this is but a peccadilio: but there lurketh a Serpent in that caveat; that the
guiltines of Original sin is removed from the person regenerate, but not
from the sin in the person. The like he says afterward of the fault, that it
is a sin still in it self remaining in the man till death, but it is not
imputed to him, as being pardoned. Here be quillets of very strange Doctrine:
the sin is pardoned, and yet the guiltines of it, is not taken away. Does not
a pardon take away from the fault pardoned, all bond of punishment due unto it,
and consequently all guiltines belonging to it? Who can deny this, unless he
know not, or care not what he say: If then Original sin be pardoned, the
guiltines of it is also removed from it self. Again, what Philosophy, or
reason, allows us to say, that the offendour being pardoned for his offense,
the offense in it self remains guilty? as though the offense separated from
the person, were a substance, subject to law, and capable of punishment: can
Original sin in it self die the first and second death, or be bound up to
them? What senseless imaginations be these? Again, how can the fault of
Original sin remain in the man renewed by Gods grace, although not imputed?
can there be two contraries in one part of the subject at once? can there be
light and darkness in the understanding, virtue and vice in the will at the same
instant? can the soul be both truly converted to God, and as truly auerted
from him at one time? is Christ now agreed to dwell with Belial? and the holy
Ghost content to inhabit a body subject to sin? all which must be granted
contrary to both, Scripture, and natural sense, if we admit the fault and
deformity of sin to remain in a man renewed, and endued with Gods grace:
unless we would very absurdly imagine that the fault and guilt of sin were
not inherent and placed in their proper subjects, but were drawn thence, and
penned up in some other odd corner.

Remember also gentle Reader, that here Master PERKINS affirms the power,
whereby the corruption of the heart reigns in man, is taken away in the
regenerate: which is clean contrary unto the first proposition, of his first
reason following, as shall be there proved.

OUR DISSENT.
LET us now come unto the difference, which is between us. The Catholics
teach, that Original sin is so farreforth taken away by Baptism, that it
cease to be a sin properly: the effects of it remaining, are an
inperfection and weakness, both in our understanding, and will, and a want of
that perfect subordination of our inferior appetite unto reason, as was, and
would have been, in Original justice: which make the soul apt and ready to
fall into sin, like unto tinder, which although it be not fire of it self,
yet is fit to take fire: yet say they, that these relics of Original sin
be not sins properly, unless a man do yield his consent unto those evil
motions: Master PERKINS teaches otherwise. That albeit Original sin be
taken away in the regenerate in sundry respects, yet does it remain in them
after Baptism, not only as a want, and weakness, but as a sin, and that
properly, as may be proved by these reasons, Saint Paul says directly: 1. Romans
7.
It is no more I, that do this, but sin that dwells in me, that is
Original sin; The Papists answer, That it is called there, sin
improperly, because it comes of sin, and is an occasion of sin. I approve
this interpretation of Saint Paul, as taken out of that ancient and famous
Papist Saint Augustine: Li. 1. cont. duas Epist. Pelag. cap. 10. Lib. 1. de
nuptiis and Concup. cap. 23.
who says expressly: Concupiscence, (whereof the Apostle speaks) although it
be called sin, yet is it not so called, because it is sin, but for that it
is made by sin: as writing is called the hand, because it is made by the
hand. And in an other place repeating the same, adds. That it may also be
called sin, for that it is the cause of sin: as cold is called sloathfull,
because it makes a man sloathfull: so that the most profound Doctor Saint
Augustine is styled a formal Papist by M. PERKINS, and shall be as well
coursed for it by the plain circumstances of the place: For says he, that
Saint Paul there takes sin properly, appears by the words following, That
this sin dwelling in him, made him to do the evil which he hated. How
proves this, that sin there must be taken properly: it rather proves, that it
must be taken improperly: for if it made him do the evil, which he hated:
then could it not be sin properly, for sin is not committed, but by the
consent and liking of the will: But Saint Paul did not like that evil, but
hated it, and thereby was so far off from sinning, that he did a most
virtuous deed in resisting and ouercomming that evil. As witnesses Saint
Augustine, saying: Reason sometimes resists manfully, Lib. 2 de Genesis cont.
Manich. cap. 14.
and rules raging concupiscence; which being done, we sin not, but for that
conflict are to be crowned.

This first circumstance then alleged by M. PERKINS, does rather make against
him, then for him. Now to the second.

O wreatched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Here
is no mention of sin: how this may be drawn to his purpose, shall be
examined in his argument where he repeateth it: so that there is not one poor
circumstance of the text which he can find, to prove Saint Paul to take sin
there properly: Now I will prove by diverse, that he speaks of sin
improperly.

First, by the former part of the same sentence: It is not I that do it: All
sins is done and committed properly by the person in whom it is: but this
was not done by Saint Paul. ergo.

Second, out of those words, I know there is not in me that is in my flesh,
any good: And after. I see an other law in my members, resisting the law of
my mind. Thus: sin properly taken is seated in the soul: but that was
seated in the flesh, ergo it was no sin properly.

The third and last, is taken out of the first words of the next Chapter:
There is now therefore no condemnation to them that are in CHRIST JESUS, that
walk not according to the flesh, etc. Whence I thus argue: there is no
condemnation to them, that have that sin dwelling in them, if thy walk not
according unto the fleshly desires of it: therefore it is no sin properly:
For the wages of sin is death, this is eternal damnation: Romans 6.
Now to M. PERKINS Argument in form as he proposes it. That which was once
sin properly, and still remaining in man, makes him to sin, and intangleth
him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable, that is sin
properly: But Original sin does all these. ergo.

The Mayor, which (as the learned know) should consist of three words,
contaynes four several points, and which is worst of all, not one of them
true.

To the first; that which remains in man after Baptism, commonly called
Concupiscence, was never a sin properly: but only the material part of
sin, the formal and principal part of it, consisting in the deprivation of
Original justice, and a voluntary auersion from the law of GOD, the which is
cured by the Grace of GOD, given to the baptized, and so that which was
principal in Original sin, does not remain in the regenerate: neither does
that which remains, make the person to sin, (which was the second point.)
unless he willingly consent unto it, as has been proved heretofore: it
allureth and intiseth him to sin, but has not power to constrayne him to it,
as M. PERKINS also himself before confessed. Now to the third, and intangleth
him in the punishment of sin: how does Original sin entangle the
regenerate in the punishment of sin; If all the guiltines of it be removed
from his person, as you taught before in our Consent. Mendacem memorem esse
oportet: Either confess that the guilt of Original sin is not taken away
from the regenerate, or else you must unsay this, that it intangleth him in the
punishment of sin: now to the last clause that the relics of Original
sin make a man miserable, a man may be called wreatched and miserable, in
that he is in disgrace with God, and so subject to his heavy displeasure: and
that which makes him miserable in this sense, is sin: but S. Paul takes not
the word so here, but for an unhappy man exposed to the danger of sin, and to
all the miseries of this world, from which we should have been exempted, had
it not been for Original sin, after which sort he uses the same word. 1.
Cor. 15.
If in this life only we were hoping in Christ, we were more miserable then
all men: not that the good Christians were farthest out of Gods favor, and
more sinful then other men: but that they had fewest worldly comforts, and
the greatest crosses, and thus much in confutation of that formal argument.
Now to the second.

Infantes Baptized, die the bodily death before they come to the years of
discretion: but there is not in them any other cause of death, besides
Original sin, for they have no actual sin: Romans 5. and Romans 5.
and death is the wages of sin as the Apostle says, death entered into the
world by sin.

Answer. The cause of the death of such Innocents, is either the
distemperature of their bodies, or external violence: and God who freely
bestowed their lives upon them, may when it pleases him as freely take their
lives from them, especially when he means to recompense them with the happy
exchange of life everlasting. True it is, that if our first parents had not
sinned, no man should have died, but have been both long preserved in
Paradise, by the fruit of the wood of life, and finally translated without
death into the Kingdom of heaven: and therefore is it said most truly of S.
Paul. death entered into the world by sin. Romans 5.
But the other place, Romans 6.
the wages of sin is death, is foully abused, for the Apostle there by death
understands eternal damnation, as appears by the opposition of it to life
everlasting: and by sin there means not Original, but Actual sin, such
as the Romans committed in their infidely, the wagis where of if they had not
repented them, had bin hell fire: now to infer that Innocents are punished
with corporal death, for Original sin remaining in them: because that
eternal death is the due hire of Actual sin, is either to show great want
of judgment, or else very strangely to preuert the words of Holy scripture.
Let this also not be forgotten, that he himself acknowledged in our Consent:
that the punishment of Original sin was taken away in Baptism from the
regenerate: how then does he here say, that he does die the death for it?

M. PERKINS third reason: That which lusts against the spirit, and by
lusting tempts, and in tempting intiseth and draws the heart to sin, is
for nature sin it self: but concupiscence in the regenerate is such: ergo.

Answer. The first proposition is not true: for not every thing that intiseth
us to sin, is sin: or else the Apple that allured Eve to sin, had been
by nature sin: and every thing in this world one way or an other tempts us
to sin: according unto that of S. John. All that is in the world, 1. Epl. 2.
is the Concupiscence of the flesh, and the Concupiscence of the eyes, and
Pride of life: So that it is very gross to say, that every thing which
allureth to sin, is sin it self, and as wide is it from all moral
wisdom to affirm, that the first motions of our passions be sins. For even
the very heathen Philosophers could distinguish, between sudden passions of
the mind and vices: teaching that passions may be bridled by the
understanding, and brought by due ordering of them into the ring of reason, and
so made virtues rather then vices. And that same text which M. PERKINS brings
to persuade these temptations to be sins, proves the quite contrary. God
tempts no man; but every man is tempted, Jacob 1.
when he is drawn away by his own concupiscence, and is allured: afterward
when concupiscence has conceived, it brings forth sin: Mark the words
well. First, Concupiscence tempts, and allureth by some evil motion, but
that is no sin, until afterward it do conceive, that is, obtain some
liking of our will, in giving ear to it, and not expelling it so speedely as
we ought to do the suggestion of such an enemy: the which that most deep
Doctor Saint Augustine, sifteth out very profoundly in these words. Lib. 6. in
Iul. cap. 5.
When the Apostle Saint James says, every man is tempted, being drawn away
and allured by his Concupiscence, and afterward Concupiscence, when it has
conceived, brings forth sin: Truly in these words, the thing brought
forth is distinguished, from that which brings it forth. The damme is
concupiscence, the fool is sin. But concupiscence does not bring sin forth,
unless it conceive, (so then it is not sin of it self) and it conceiueth
not, unless it draw us, that is, unless it obtain the consent of our will,
to commit evil. The like exposition of the same place, and the difference
between the pleasure tempting, that runs before, and the sin which
follows after, Unless we resist manfully, may be seen in S. Cirill, Lib. 4.
in Johan. ca. ^1.
so that by the judgment of the most learned ancient Fathers, that text of S.
James cited by M. PERKINS, to prove concupiscence to be sin, disputes it
very soundly: to that reason of his, Such as the fruit is, such is the Tree: I
answer, that not concupiscence, but the will of man is the Tree: which
brings forth, either good, or badde fruit, according unto the disposition of
it: concupiscence is only an intiser unto badde.

Lib. 5 con. Iulianum cap. 3.
But S. Augustine says, That concupiscence is sin, because in it there is
disobedience against the rule of the mind, etc. I answer, that S. Augustine
in more then twenty places of his works teaches expressly, that concupiscence
is no sin, if sin be taken properly: wherefore, when he once calls it
sin, he takes sin largely as it comprehends, not only all sin, but
also all motions and intisements to sin; in which sense concupiscence may be
termed sin: but is so called very seldom of S. Augustine, but more commonly
an evil, Lib. 6. cap. 5.
as in the same work, is to be seen evidently: where he says; That grace in
Baptism does renew a man perfectly, so farreforth as it appertains to the
deliverance of him from all manner of sin; but not so, as it freeth him from
all evil: so that concupiscence remaining after baptism, is no manner of
sin, in S. Augustines judgment: but may be called evil, because it
provoke us to evil, to this place of S. Augustine I will join that other
like, Tract. 41. in Johan.
which M. PER. quiteth in his 4. reason: where he says, that sins dwells
always in our members. The same answer serves that sin there, is taken
improperly: as appears by that he seats it in our members: for according
unto S. Augustine and all the learned, the subject of sin being properly
taken, is not in any part of the body, but in the will and soul, and in the
same passage he signifies plainly, that in baptism all sins and iniquity is
taken away, and that there is left in the regenerate, only an infirmity or
weakness.

M. PERK. 4. reason is taken from the record of the ancient Church: Charity in
some is more, Aug. Epis. ^9.
in some less, in some none, the highest degree of all which cannot be
increased, is in none, as long as a man lives upon earth: and as long as it may
be increased, that which is less then it should be, is in fault: by which
fault it is, that there is no just man upon earth, that does good and sins
not, etc. For which also though we profit never so much, it is necessary for us
to say, forgive us our debtes, though all our worst deeds and thoughts be
already forgiven in Baptism. Answer. That here is never a word touching
concupiscence, or to prove original sin to remain after baptism, which is
in question: but only that the best men for want of perfect Charity, do often
sin venially, which we grant. M. PER. having thus strongly (as you see)
fortified his position with that one sentence of S. Augustine (which has also
nothing for his purpose) in steed of all antiquity: confesses ingenuously,
that S. Augustine in sundry places denies concupiscence to be sin: but
expoundes him to mean, that it is not sin in that person, but in it self:
which is already confuted: for sin that it is an accident, and so properly
inherent in his subject, cannot be at all, if it be not in some person, and the
sin of the same person. But if the protestant reader desire to be well
assured of S. Augustines opinion in this point: let him see what their
Patriarch John Calvin says of it: where thus he writes. Lib. 3. Instit. cap.
3 number. 10.
Neither is it needful to labor much in searching out what the old writers
thought of this point, when one Augustine may serve the turn: who with great
diligence has faithfully collected together all their sentences. Let the
readers therefore take out of him, if they desire to have any certainty of the
judgment of antiquity. Hitherto somewhat honestly: What follows? Moreover
between him and us, this is this difference: that he truly dares not call the
disease of concupiscence a sin, but to express it, is content to use the
word of infirmity, then lo does he say, that it is made sin, when the act
of our consent does join with it. But we hold that very thing to be sin,
wherewith a man is in any sort tickled. Observe first, good Reader, that S.
Augustines opinion with him carries the credit of all antiquity: Which is the
cause that I cite him more often against them. Secondly, that he is flatly on
our side: teaching concupiscence not to be sin, unless we do consent unto
it. Lastly, learn to mislike the blind boldness of such Masters: who having so
highly commended S. Augustines judgment in this very matter, and advised all
men to follow it: Does notwithstanding fly from it himself. Presuming that
some would be so shalowe-witted as not to epsy him, or else content to rely
more upon his only credit, then upon the authority of all the ancient
Fathers. For a taste of whose consent with S. Augustine in this question, I will
here put the sentences of some few, that I need not hereafter return to
rehearse them.

S. Chrysostom says, Passions be not sins of themselves, Homil. 11. in
epist. ad Romans
but the unbridled excess of them does make sins: And that I may for example
sake touch one of them: concupiscence is not a sin; but when passing measure
it breaks his bounds, then lo it is adultery; not in regard of
concupiscence, but in respect of the excessive and unlawful riot of it.

S. Bernard (whom M. PERKINS often cites against us, and these may sometimes
be alleged for us) has these words: Sin is at the door, Sermon. de sex
tribul.
but if thou do not open it, it will not enter in: lust tickleth at the heart;
but unless thou willingly yield unto it, it shall do thee no hurt: withholde
thy consent, and it preuayleth not.

S. Aug. and S. Cirill, have been cited already, S. Hier. and S. Greg. shall
be hereafter: who with the confession of Calvin, may serve sufficently to
prove, that approved antiquity is wholly for us. And if any desire to know the
founder of our adversaries Doctrine in this point: let him read the 64.
heresy recorded by that ancient and holy Bishop Epiphanius: where he
registreth one Proclus an old rotten sectary to have taught, that sins are
not taken away in Baptism, but are only covered, which is as much to say, as
sin remains still in the person regenerate, but is not imputed to him.
Which is just M. PERKINS, and our Protestants position.

Now let us come unto the arguments, which the Church of Rome (as M. PERKINS
speaks) alleges to prove Concupiscence in the regenerate, not to be sin
properly.

1. Objection. In Baptism men receive perfect and absolute remission of sin:
Which being pardoned, is taken quite away, and therefore after Baptism,
cease to be sin: M. PERKINS answers, that it is abolished in regard of
imputation, that is, is not imputed to the person, but remains in him still.
This answer is sufficiently (I hope) confuted in the Annotations upon our
consent: in confirmation of our Argument, I will add some textes of holy
Scripture: Johan. 13.
First, He that is washed, needs not but to wash his feet, for he is wholly
clean. Take with this, the exposition of Saint Gregory the great, Lib. 9. Ep.
39.
our Apostle; He cannot (says he) be called wholly clean in whom any part
or parcel of sins remains. But let no man resist the voice of truth, who
says, he that is washed (in Baptism) is wholly clean: therefore, there is not
one dram of the contagion of sin left in him, whom the cleanser himself,
does profess to be wholly clean. The very same does the most learned Doctor S.
Jerome affirm: Epist. ad Oceanum. Psalm. 50.
saying. How are we justified and sanctified, if any sin be left, remaining in
us? Again if holy king David say. Thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter
then snow: how can the blackenes of hell still remain in his soul? briefly
it cannot be but a notorious wrong unto the precious blood of our Savior, to
hold that it is not as well able to purge and purify us from sin, as Adams
transgression was of force to infect us. Yea the Apostle teaches us directly,
that we recover more by Christ's grace, Romans 5.
then we lost through Adams fault, in these words: But not as the offense, so
also the gift, for if by the offense of one, many died; so much more the grace
of God, and the gift in the grace of one man Jesus Christ, has abounded upon
many. If then we through Christ, receive more abundance of grace, then we lost
by Adam, there is no more sin left in the newly baptized man, then was in Adam
in the state of innocence, albeit other defectes, and infirmities do remain
in us, for our greater humiliation, and probation: yet all filth of sin is
clean scoured out of our souls, by the pure grace of God powered abundantly
into it in Baptism: and so our first Argument stands insoluble. Now to the
second.

2. Object. Every sin is voluntary, and not committed without the consent of
man: but this concupiscence whereof we talk, has no consent of man, but
rises against his will: therefore is no sin. M. PERKINS answers; That such
actions as are used of one man toward an other, must be voluntary, but sin
toward God, may be committed without our consent. For every want of conformity
unto the law even in our body, although against our will, be sins in the
Court of conscience. Reply: full little knows this man what belongs to the
Court of conscience: there secret faults in deed be examined, but nothing is
taken for sin by any one learned in that faculty, which is done without a
man's free consent: all of them holding with S. Augustine. Lib. 3. de lib. arb.
cap 17.
That sin is so voluntary an evil, that it cannot be sin, which is not
voluntary: And to say with M. PERKINS that any want of conformity to reason in
our body is sin, is so absurd: that a man might (that were true) be damned
from a dream, how well soever disposed he went to sleep: if he chance to
dream of uncleanness, whereupon does ensue any evil motion in his flesh. This
paradoxe of sinning without a man's consent is so contrary unto both, natural,
and supernatural reason that S. Augustine auerreth. Li. de vera Relig. c. 14.
Neither any of the small number of the learned, nor of the multitude of the
unlearned to hold, that a man can sin without his consent. What unlearned,
learned men then are start up in our miserable age, that make no bones to deny
this, and greater matters too.

The third reason for the Catholics is this: Where the form of any thing is
taken away, there the thing it self cease: but in baptism, the form of
original sin is taken away: ergo. M. PERKINS shifteth in assigning a wrong
form: affirming us to say, that the form of original sin is the guiltines
of it: which we hold to be neither the form, nor matter of it, but as it were
the proper passion following it. See S. Thomas: 1. 2. q. and art. 3.
who delivers for the form of original sin, the privation of original
justice, which justice made the will subject to God.

The deordination then of the will, Mistres and commander of all other points
in man, made by the privation of original justice: is the form of original
sin, and the deordination of all other parts of man, (which by a common name
is called concupiscence, as that learned Doctor notes,) is but the material
part of that sin, so that the will of the regenerate being by grace through
Christ rectified, and set again in good order toward the law of God, the
form of original sin, which consisted in deordination of it, is taken quite
away by baptism, and so consequently the sin it self, which cannot be
without his proper form, as the argument does convince.

4. Object. Lastly says M. PERKINS for our disgrace they allege that we in
our Doctrine teach, that original sin after baptism is only clipped or
pared like the hear of a man's head, whose roots remain in the flesh, growing
and increasing after they be cut as before. His answer is, that they teach in
the very first instant of the conversion of a sinner, sin to receive his
deadly wound in the root, never after to be recovered. Confer this last
answer with his former Doctrine (good Reader,) and thou may learn what
credit is to be given to such Masters: no more constant then the winter. Here
sin is deadly wounded in the root, there it remains still with all the
guiltines of it, although not imputed, there it still makes the man to sin,
intangleth him in the punishment of sin, and makes him miserable: All this
he comprehended before in this first reason, and yet blusheth not here to
conclude, that he holds it at the first: Neither clipped nor pared, but
pulled up by the roots: In deed they do him a favor, who say that he
holds sin to be clipped, and as it were razed, for albeit hair razed grow
out again, yet is there none for a season: but this original sin of his is
always in his regenerate, in vigor to corrupt al his works, and to make them
deadly sins. But let this suffice for this matter.

CHAPTER. 3. OF THE CERTAYNTIE OF SALVATION.
OUR CONSENTS. M. PERKINS FIRST CONCLUSION.
Page 37.
WE hold and believe, that a man in this life, may be certain of salvation: and
the same does the Church of Rome teach.

M. P. 2. Conclu. We hold, that a man is to put certain affiance in Gods
mercy, in Christ for the salvation of his soul: and the same holds the
aforesaid Roman Church.

M. P. 3. Conclu. We hold, that with assurance of salvation in our hearts is
joined doubting, and there is no man so assured of his salvation, but he at
sometime doubts thereof, especially in the time of temptation: and in this
the Papists agree with us. Not so Sir.

M. P. 4. Conclu. They go further and say, that a man may be certain of the
salvation of men, and of the Church, by Catholic faith: and so say we.

M. P. 5. Conclu. They hold, that a man by faith may be assured of his own
salvation, through extraordinary revelation: In this sense only the first
conclusion is true.

M. P. 6. Conclu. The sixth, and second be all one: that we may be assured of
our salvation, in regard of God that promises it: though in regard of our
selves, and our own indispotion we cannot.

THE DISSENT.
1. WE hold, that a man may be certain of his salvation in his own conscience
even in this life, and that by an ordinary and special says. They hold, that
a man is certain, of his salvation, only by hope, both hold a certayntie, we
by faith, they by hope.

2. We say our certayntie is infallible: they, that it is only probable.

3. Our confidence in Gods mercy, in Christ comes from certain and ordinary
faith, theirs from hope: false. Thus much of the difference, now let us come to
the reasons, too and fro.

Here M. PERKINS contrary to his custom, gives the first place to our
reasons, which he calls objections, and endeavors to supplant them: and
afterward planteth his own. About the order I will not contend, seeing he
acknowledges in the beginning that he observes none, but set down things as
they came into his head. Otherwise he would have handled Justification before
Salvation. But following his method, let us come to the matter.

The first Argument for the Catholic party is this.

1. Objection. Where is no word of God, there is no faith, for these two are
Relatiues. But there is no word of God: saying, Cornelius believe thou Peter,
believe thou that thou shall be saved: therefore there is no such ordinary
faith, for a man to believe his own particular salvation.

M. PERKINS answer.

Although there be no word of God to assure us of our particular salvation: Yet
is there an other thing as good, which counteruailes the word of God, to wit,
the Minister of God applying the general promises of salvation unto this and
that man. Which when he does, the man must believe the Minister, as he would
believe Christ himself, and so assure himself by faith of his salvation.

Reply. Good Sir, seeing every man is a liar, and may both deceive, and be
deceived, and the Minister telling may err: how does either the Minister
know, that the man to whom he speaks is of the number of the elect? or the
man be certain that the Minister mistaketh not, when he assures him of his
salvation. To affirm as you do, that the Minister is to be believed as well as
if it were Christ him self, is plain blasphemy. Equalling a blind and lying
creature, unto the wisdom and truth of God. If you could show out of Gods
word, that every Minister has such a commission from Christ, then had you
answered the argument directly, which required but one warrant of Gods word:
but to say that the assurance of an ordinary Ministers word counteruailes Gods
word, I can not see what it wants of making a pelting Minister Gods mate. On
the other side to auerre that the Minister knows who is predestinate (as it
must be granted, he does if you will not have him to lie when he says to
Peter, thou art one of the elect,) is to make him of GODS privy Council,
without any warrant for it in Gods word: Yea Saint Paul not obscurely
signifying the contrary in these words. The sure foundation of God stands
having this seal: Tim. 2.13
our Lord knows who be his. And none else, except he reveal it unto them. M.
PERKINS then flies from the assurance of the Minister, and leaves him to
speak at randon, as the blind man casts his clubbe; and attributes all this
assurance unto the party himself, who hearing in Gods word, Seek ye my
face, in his heart answers. Lord I will seek thy face: And then hearing God
say, Thou art my people, says again. The Lord is my God. And then lo without
al doubt he has assurance of his salvation. Would ye not think that this
were rather some seely old Woman's dream, then a discourse of a learned Man?
How know you honest man, that those words of God spoken by the Prophet 2000.
years past, to the people of Israel, are directed to you? Mine own heart,
good Sir, tells me so. How dare you build upon the persuasion of your own
heart any such assurance? When as in holy writ it is recorded. ^etem. 17.
Wicked is the heart of man, and who shall know it? Are you ignorant how Saul
before he was S. Paul, being an Israelit, to whom those words appertayned,
persuading himself to be very assured of his faith, was notwithstanding foully
deceived, and why may not you far more unskillful then he be in like manner
abused. Moreover suppose that this motion comes of the holy Ghost, and that
he truly says, The Lord is God, how long knows he that he shall be able to
say so truly? When our Savior CHRIST JESUS assures us that many be called,
Math. 22.
but few of them are chosen to life everlasting. How knows he then
assuredly, that he being once called, is of the predestinate? M. PERKINS
says, that he who believes, knows that he believes. Be it so; if he
believe aright, and meddle no further then with those things, which be
comprehended within the bounds of faith: But that the certayntie of salvation
is to be believed, is not to be begged, but proved, being the main question,
he says further that he who truly repe^teth, knows that he repents: he
knows in deed by many probable conjectures, but not by certainty of faith:
as witnesses that holy person. Job. 9.
If God come to me, (as he does to all repentant sinners,) I shall not see him,
and if he depart away from me, I shall not understand it: Which is sufficient
to make him thankful, yea if he received no grace at all, yet were he much
beholding unto God, who offered him his grace, and would have freely bestowed it
upon him, if it had not been through his own default. And thus our first
Argument stands in his full strength and virtue, that no man can assure
himself by faith of his salvation, because there is no word of God that
warranteth him so to do.

The second is. It is no article of the creed, that a man must believe his
own salvation, and therefore no man is bound thereunto.

M. PERKINS answers. That every article of the Creed contaynes this
particular faith of our own salvation, namely three: First (says he) to
believe in God, is to believe that God is our God, and to put our trust in him
for our salvation. Answer. I admit all this, and add more (that M. PERKINS
be no longer ignorant of the Catholic knowledge of the creed,) that we must
also love him with all our heart and strength: thus we understand it more fully
then he: Yet find not out that thirteenth article, Thou must believe thine
own particular salvation. For albeit, I believe and trust in God, yet not
being sure of my love toward him, I am not assured of salvation, for as S.
John testifies. He that loves not, abides in death. 1. John. 3.


So I answer to the second article, named by M. PERKINS, that is, I believe
that God of his infinite mercy, through the merits of Christ's passion does
pardon all those, who being heartily sorry for their sins, do humbly confess
them, and fully purpose to lead a new life: that I my self am such a one, I
do verily hope, because I have as farreforth as I could, to my knowledge
performed those things, which God requires of me, but because I am but a
frail creature, and may perhaps not have done all that so well as I ought, or
am not so well assured of that, which by Gods help I have done, I can not
believe it, for in matter of faith (as you shall hear shortly,) there can be
no fear or doubt.

The like answer is given to the article of life everlasting. I believe that I
shall have life everlasting, Math. 19.
if I fulfill that which our Savior taught the young man, demanding what he
must do to have life everlasting: to wit, if I keep all Gods
commandments, but because I am not assured that I shall so do (yea the
Protestants (though falsely,) assure us that no man by any help of Gods grace
can so do.) I remain in fear. But (says M. PERKINS) the Devil may so
believe the articles of the creed, unless we do apply those articles to our
selves. First, I say the Devil knows to be true all that we do believe, and
therefore are said by Saint James to believe, but they want a necessary
condition of faith, that is a Godly and devout submission of their
understanding unto the obedience of faith, and so have no faith to speak
properly. Again they trust not in God for salvation, nor endeavor not any
manner of way to obtain salvation, as Christians do, and so there is great
difference between their belief in the articles of the creed, and ours.

M. PERKINS in his first exception grauntes. Page 54.
That commonly men do not believe their salvation, as infallibly as they do
the articles of the faith (yet says he) some special men do.

Whereof I infer by his own confession, that our particular salvation is not
to be believed by faith: for whatsoever we believe by faith, is as infallible
as the word of God, which assures us of it. Then if the common sort of the
faithful do not believe their salvation, to be as infallible as the articles
of our creed, yea as Gods own word, they are not by faith assured of it. Now
that some special good men, either by revelation from God, or by long exercise
of a virtuous life, have a great certainty of their salvation, we willingly
confess: but that certainty does rather belong to a well grounded hope, then
to an ordinary faith.

The third reason for the Catholics, is, that we are bidden to pray daily for
the remission of our sins. Mat. 6.
But that were needelesse, if we were before assured, both of pardon and
salvation.

M. PERKINS answers, First, that we pray daily for the remission of new
sins committed that day. Be it so. What needs that, if we were before
assured of pardon? Marry (says he) because our assurance was but weak and
small, our prayer is to increase our assurance. Good Sir, do you not see how
you overthrow your self? If your assurance be but weak and small, it is not
the assurance of faith, which is as great, and as strong, as the truth of God.

We give God thanks for those gifts, which we have received at his bountiful
hands, and desire him to increase, or continue them, if they may be lost. But
to pray to God to give us those things we are assured of by faith, is as fond,
and frivolous, as to pray him to make Christ our Lord to be his Son, or that
there may be life everlasting to his Saints in heaven, of which they are in
full and assured possession. And so these three Arguments by M. PERKINS
propounded here for us, are very substantial and sufficient, to assure every
good Christian, that he may well hope for salvation doing his duty, but may
not without great presumption, assure him by faith of it. To these I will add
two or three others, which M. PERKINS afterward seeks to salve, by his
exceptions as he terms them. To his first exception, I have answered before.
The second I will put last for orders sake, and answer to the third first,
which is:

Page 56.
The Catholics say, we are indeed to believe our salvation on Gods part, who
is desirous of all men's salvation, very rich in mercy, and able to save us, but
our fear rises in regard of our selves, because the promises of remission of
sins depend upon our true repentance: Luke 13.
Unless you do penance, ye shall all perish. And the promises of salvation,
is made upon condition of keeping Gods commandments. Mat. 19. 2. Tim. 2.
If thou will enter into life keep the commandments. Again, No man shall be
crowned, except he combat lawfully. Now we not knowing whether we shall well
perform these things required by God at our hands, have just cause to fear,
lest God do not on his part, perform that which he promises upon such
conditions. To this M. PERKINS answers, That for faith, and true repentance,
every man that has them, knows well that he has them. To which I reply,
that for faith being rightly taken, it may be known of the party that has it,
because it is a light of the understanding, and so being like a lamp, may be
easily seen: but true repentance requires besides faith, both hope, and
charity, which are seated in the dark corners of the will, and can not by
faith be seen in themselves, but are known by their effects: which being also
uncertain do make but conjectures and a probable opinion, so that place of S.
Paul may be omitted where he says. 2. Cor. 13.
Prove your selves whether you be in faith or no. Because we accord that it may
be tried by us, whether we have faith or no: although I know well, that S.
Paul's words carry a far different sense. But let that pass as impertinent.
To the other. That we have received the spirit, which is of God, 1. Cor. 2.12.
that we might know the things which are given of God. What things these are
which the spirit reuealeth to us, S. Paul teaches in the same place, That
which the eye has not seen, nor ear has heard, etc. God has prepared for
them, that love him: but to us, God has revealed by his spirit: All this is
true: but who they be that shall attain to that blessed Banquet by God so
prepared, God only knows, and by his spirit reuealeth it to very few. And
will you learn out of S. Jerome that ancient Doctor, the cause why: In 3.
caput. Ione.
Therefore (says he) it is put ambiguous and left uncertain, that while men
are doubtful of their salvation, they may do penance more manfully, and so
may move God to take compassion on them.

An other reason of this uncertainty, De cor. and gra. cap 13.
yields Saint Augustine in these words: In this place of temptation, such is
our infirmity, that assurednes, might engender pride. To this agrees S.
Gregory, saying: Lib. 9. moral. cap. 17.
If we know our selves to have grace, we are proud. So that to strike down
the pride of our hearts, and to humble us, and to make us travail more
carefully in the works of mortification, God does not ordinarily assure men at
the first of their own salvation: but to cheer up their hearts on the other
side, does put them in great hope of it, like to a discreet and good Lord, who
will not at the first entrance into his service; infeafe his servant in the fee
simple of those lands, which after upon his good deserts he means to bestow
on him. This is an other kind of Doctrine, then that which M. PER. in his last
supply delivers, to wit: That if we regard our own indisposition, we must
despair, because we be not worthy of his mercy. Not so good Sir. Because we
know that he bestows mercy upon the unworthy, at the first justification of
a sinner, but will not admit into the Kingdom of heaven any unworthy, but
gives men grace while they live to work, that they are made worthy of his
heavenly Kingdom according to that: They shall walk with me in whites, Apoc.
3.4.
because they are worthy, but of this more fully in the chapter of merits.

The fifth reason for our opinion is taken out of M. PER. second exception, to
wit; howsoever a man may be assured for his present state, yet no man is
certain of his perseverance to the end. And therefore, although we might be
assured of our Justification, yet can we not be certain of our Salvation. For
he only that perseuereth to the end, shall be saved. M. PERK. answer is, that
prayer does assure us to persevere to the end: for God biddes us pray, that we
fall not into temptation, and promises an issue forth: 1. Cor. 10.
So then the assurance dependes upon prayer, and not upon our former faith.
What then if we do not pray so as we should? may not the enemy then, not only
wound, but kill us to? it cannot be denied: and therein, as in diverse other
works of piety, many have bin too too slack, as the pitiful fall of
thousands have taught us. Oh says M. PERKINS, it cannot be, that he which was
once a member of Christ, can ever after be wholly cut off. O shameless
assertion, and contrary to many plain textes, and examples of holy Scriptures:
Does not our Savior say in express words, That every branch in me not bearing
fruit, Ioh. 15.
he will take it away? And again, If any abide not in me, he shall be cast
forth as the branch, and shall wither, and be cast into the fire: which does
demonstrate, that some which were members of Christ, be wholly cut off, and that
for ever. Are we not by faith made members of Christ by our adversaries own
confession? and does not our blessed Savior say, Luke 8.
expounding the parable of the sower, That the seed which fell upon the rock,
does signify them, who with joy receive the word, and these (says he) have no
root, but for a time they believe, and in time of temptation, revolt. 1. Tim.
1.19. 1. Tim. 4. 2. Tim. 6.
Does not Saint Paul in express terms say, That some having faith and good
conscience, expelling good conscience, have made shipwreck of their faith: of
whom were by name, Hymenaeus, and Alexander. The like, That in the the last
days, some should revolt from the faith: Again, That some for couetuousnesse
sake, had erred from the faith. And for example amongst other, take Saul the
first King of Israel, who was at his election (as the holy Ghost witnesses)
so good a man, 1. Reg. 19.
that there was no better then he in Israel, and yet became reprobate, as is
in the Scripture signified. The like is probable of Solomon, 2. Reg. 15. and 16.
and in the new Testament of Judas the traitor, and Simon Magus whom S. Luke
says, that he also himself believed, and after became an Arch-heretike, Act.
8.
and so died: the like almost may be verefied of all Arch-heretikes, who before
they fell, were of the faithful.

But what need we further proof of this matter, seeing that this is cosen
german, if not the very same, with one of that infamous heretic Iouinians
erroneous articles, Here Is. 82. Li. 2. cont. Iouin.
condemned, and registered by S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, who held, that just
men after Baptism could not sin, and if they did sin, they were indeed
washed with water, but never received the spirit of grace: his ground was, that
he which had once received the spirit of grace, could not sin after, which is
just M. PERKINS proposition: so that to uphold an error, he falls into an
old condemned heresy. And which is yet more absurd, in the next confirmation,
he lets slip at once a brace of other heresies, these be his words. And
if by sin one were wholly severed from Christ for a time, in his recovery he
is to be baptized the second time. Where you have first rebaptizing, which is
the principal error of the Anabaptists, and withal the heresy of the
Nouatians, who held that if any in persecution denied Christ after baptism,
there was no remedy left in Gods Church, for their recovery: but must be left
to God; so says M. PERKINS, for that of rebaptizing he seems to bring in ex
absurdo: so that the common saying is, verified in him, (one absurdity being
granted, a thousand follow after.) But does he know no other means then
Baptism to recover one cut off from Christ? has he forgotten that corrupted
sentence of the Prophet, wherewith they begin their common prayer? What hour
soever a sinner does repent him of his sin, etc. With them repentance, and
with us the Sacrament of Penance, serve a man at any time of his life to be
reconciled to Christ.

But we must answer unto that of S. John. They went out from us, 1. Joan. 2.
but they were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have
continued with us. I answer. If they went out from us, they were before with
us: which confirms our assertion, that men may depart from their faith, and
Christ's profession: but such men were not indeed of the number of the elect,
of which S. John was, for then either they would have continued with them in
the Christian faith, or else by hearty repentance would have returned unto it,
back again, which is S. Augustines own exposition. De bono perse. c. 8.
And these be the Arguments for the Catholics, which M. PERKINS through his
confused order touches here, and there. To which I will add, one taken out of
the words of S. Paul. But thou by faith do stand, be not to highly wise,
Romans 11.20. Phil. 2.12.
but fear, if God has not spared the natural boughs lest perhaps he will
not spare thee neither. And again. Work your salvation, with fear and
trembling. There be above an hundred such textes in holy write, wherein the
Holy Ghost exhorts us to stand in fear of our salvation, out of which I thus
frame my argument.

No man must stand in fear of that, of which he is by faith assured. But the
faithful must stand in fear of their salvation. Ergo, they be not assured of
it by faith.

The Minor or second proposition is playnlie proved by these places, cited
before the Mayor is manifest: there is no fear in faith, he that fears,
whether the thing be assured or no, can not give a certain assent thereunto:
Dubious in fide infidelis est. Put the case in an other article, to make it more
evident: He that fears, whether there be a God or no, do we esteem that he
believes in God. So he that fears whither JESUS CHRIST be God? is he a
Christian? has he a true faith? You must needs answer no. So he that fears
whether he shall be saved or no, can have no faith of his salvation.

To these invincible reasons grounded upon Gods word, let us join some plain
testimonies, taken as well out of the holy Scripture, as out of the ancient
Fathers. First, what can be more manifest to warrant us, that the faithful
have not assurance infallible of their salvation, then these words of the Holy
Ghost. Eccles. 9.
There be just (and therefore faithful) and wise men, and their works be in
the hand of God, and nevertheless a man does not know whether he be worthy of
hatred or love, but all things are kept uncertain for the time to come. Where
is then the Protestants certayntie. And because one heretic cauilleth against
the Latin translation, saying that a word or two of it may be otherwise
turned, hear how S. Jerome, who was most cunning in the Hebrewe text, Coment.
in ^unc lo^um.
does understand it. The sense is, (says he) I have found the works of just
men, to be in the hand of God, and yet themselves not to know, whether they be
loved of God or no.

An other plain testimony is taken out of S. Paul, where he shows that it
is not in us to judge of our own justice, but we must leave to God the
judgment of it, ^. Cor. 4.
these be the words. I am not guilty in conscience of any thing, but I am not
justified herein, but he that judges me is our Lord, therefore judge not
before the time until our Lord do come, who also will lighten the hidden
things of darkness, and will manifest the council of the heart, and then the
praise shall be to every man, of God. So that before Gods judgment by Saint
Paul's testimony, men may not assure themselves of their own justice, much
less of their salvation, how innocent soever they find themselves in their
own consciences. Sermon. 5 in Psalm. 118. De constitut. monas. c. 2.
See upon this place S. Ambrose, S. Basil, Theodoret on this place, who al
agree, that men may have secret faults, which God only sees, and therefore
they must live in fear, and always pray to be delivered from them. For the
rest let Saint Augustines testimony, (whom our adversaries acknowledge to be
the most diligent and faithful register of all antiquity) be sufficient. This
most judicious, and holy Father thus defines this matter: De verb. Domini.
ser. 35. De ciuit. Dei lib. 11. c. 12.
As long as we live here, we our selves can not judge of our selves, I do not
say what we shall be to morrow, but what we are to day. And yet more directly.
Albeit holy men are certain of the reward of their perseverance, yet of their
own perseverance, they are found uncertain. For what man can know that he
shall persevere, and hold on in the action and increase of justice until the
end, unless by some revelation he be assured of it from him, who of his just,
but secret judgment does not inform all men of this matter, but deceives
none: So no just man is assured of his salvation by his ordinary faith: by
extraordinary revelation, some man may be assured, the rest are not. Which is
just the Catholic sentence. And because S. Bernard is by our adversaries,
cited for them in this point, take his testimony in as precise terms as any
Catholic at this time speaks. Thus he writes. Sermon. 1. de Septuag.
Who can say, I am one of the elect, I am one of the predestinat to life, I am
one of the number of the children? Who (I say) can thus say, the scripture
crying out against him. Eccles. 9.
A man knows not, whether he be worthy of love or hatred. Therefore we have
no certayntie, but the confidence of hope does comfort us, that we be not vexed
at all with the perplexity of this doubt. The word of GOD (according to Saint
Bernard,) cries out against all them, that certaynlie assure them selves of
their salvation: whereon then do they build their faith that believe it.

If it may be permitted to join modern opinions with ancient, badde men,
with good, I could prove by the testimony of every principal sect of this
time, that all other sectaries were deceived in this their persuasion of their
salvation. For both, Lutherans, Caluinists, and Anabaptists (to omit the
rest) do hold every one of themselves assured of their salvation, and yet
each sect holds every one not of his own band assured of damnation: so that
by the sentence of the Lutherans, all Caluinists, and Anabaptists, are
miserably deceived when they assure themselves of their salvation: In like
manner if the Anabaptists be true censurers, both Lutherans, and Caluinists and
all other, not of their heresy, err foully, when they bear themselves in hand
that they shall be saved. Certain it is therefore by the consent of all the
world, that very many who assure themselves of salvation, are in deed assured
of damnation.

With the testimonies of the ancient Doctors for us, I pray thee gentle
Reader, Page 57.
confer those which M. PERKINS in his sixth reason alleges against us.
First, Saint Augustine in these words. Of an evil servant, De verb. Domini.
sermon. 28.
thou art made a good child, therefore presume not of thine own doing, but of
the grace of Christ. It is not arrogance, but faith to acknowledge, what thou
have received, it is not pride, but devotion. What word is here of certayntie
of saluauation? but that it belongs to a faithful man, to confess himself
much bound to God, for calling of him to be his. Which every Christian must
do, hoping himself so to be, and being most certain, that if he be not in
state of grace, it is long of himself, and no want on Gods part. The second
place has not so much as any show of words for him, thus he speaks. Let no
man ask an other man, Tract. 5. in Epis. Joan.
but return to his own heart, and if he find Charity there, he has security
for his passage, from life to death. What need was there to seek charity in
his heart, for security of his salvation, if his faith assured him thereof,
therefore this text makes flat against him.

The next Author he cites is Saint Hylarie in these words. Sup. 5 cap. Mat.
The Kingdom of heaven which our Lord professed to be in him self, his will
is that it be hoped, for without any doubtfulnes of uncertain will (at all, is
an addition) otherwise there is no justification by faith, if faith it self be
made doubtful. First, he says, but as we say, that the Kingdom of heaven is
to be hoped for, without any doubtfulnesse; for we profess certayntie of
hope, and deny only certayntie of faith, as M. PERKINS confesses before. And
as for faith, we say with him also it is not doubtful, but very certain. What
makes this to the purpose, that a man must believe his own salvation when S.
Hilary speaks there of faith of the resurrection of the dead. His last Author
is S. Bernard: Epist. 107.
Who is the just man, but he that being loved of God, loves him again? which
comes not to pass but by the spirit, revealing by faith the eternal promise
of God, of his salvation to come, which revelation is nothing else, but the
infusion of spiritual grace, by which the deeds of the flesh are mortified,
the man is prepared to the kingdom of heaven, together receiving in one
spirit, that, whereby he may presume, that he is loved, and loves again. Note
that he says the revelation of the spirit, to be nothing else, but the
infusion of spiritual graces, and comfort, whereby a man has some feeling of
Gods goodness toward him, by which (as he says) he may presume, but not
believe certainly, that he is loved of God. But let S. Bernard in the same
place interpret himself, there he speaks thus, as I cited once before. It is
given to men to taste before hand, somewhat of the bliss to come, etc. Of the
which knowledge of our selves now in part perceived, a man does in the mean
season glory in hope, but not yet in security. His opinion then is expressly,
that for all the revelations of the spirit made by faith unto us, we are not
assured for certainty of our salvation, but feel great joy, through the hope
we have hereafter to receive it.

This passage of testimonies being dispatched, let us now come unto the five
other reasons which M. PERKINS produces in defense of their opinion.

The first reason is, That in faith there are two things, the one is an
infallible assurance of those things which we believe: This we grant, and
therehence prove (as you heard before) that there can be no faith of our
particular salvation, because we be not so fully assured of that, but that we
must stand in fear of losing of it, Apoc. 3.
according to that, Hold that which thou have; least perhaps an other receive
thy crown. But the second point of faith, puts all out of question. For (says
M. PERKINS) it does assure us of remission of our sins, and of life
everlasting in particular. Prove that Sir, and we need no more. John. 1.
It is proved out of S: John: As many as received him, he gave them power to be
made the sons of God, namely, to them that believe in his name. This text
comes much too short: he gave them power to be the sons, that is, gave them
such grace, that they were able, and might if they would, be sons of God, but
did not assure them of that neither, much less that they should so continue
unto their lives end. I omit his unsavory discourse of eating, and believing
Christ, and applying unto us his benefittes, (which he might be ashamed to make
unto us, that admit no part of it to be true.) I confess that therein faith
has his part, if it be joined with charity, and frequentation of the
Sacraments. This is it which S. Paul teaches, Gal. 3.
That not by the works of Moses law, but by faith in Christ Jesus we receive
the promises of the spirit, and shall have hereafter the performance, if we
observe those things which Christ has commanded us. But what is this to
certainty of Salvation? But (says he) it is the property of faith, to apply
Christ unto us, and proves it out of S. Augustine, Believe and thou have eaten:
Again, Send up thy faith, and thou may hold Christ in heaven: etc. To
which, Tract. 25. in Ioh.
and such like authorities, I answer, that we find Christ, we hold Christ,
we see Christ, by faith, believing him to be the son of God, and redeemer of
the world, and Judge of the quick and the dead: and we understand, and
digest all the mysteries of this holy word. But where is it once said, in any
of these sentences, that we are assured of our salvation? we believe all these
points and many more: but we shall be never the near our salvation, unless
we observe Gods commandments, The servant which knows his Masters will, and
does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes. Luke 12. Ioh. 15.
Then you are my friends (says our Savior) when you shall do the things
which I command you: which we being uncertain to perform, assure not our
selves of his friendship, but when to our knowledge we go as near it as we
can, and demand pardon of our wantes, we live in good hope of it.

The second reason is, Whatsoever the holy Ghost testifies unto us, that
certainly by faith we must believe: but the holy Ghost does particularly
testify unto us our salvation: ergo, the first proposition is true. The second
is proved thus, S. Paul says, the spirit of God bears witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of God. The Papists to elude this reason,
allege, that it does indeed witness our adoption, Romans 8.
by some comfortable feeling of Gods favor toward us, which may often be
mistaken, whereof the Apostle warns us when he says, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits, whether they be of God or no. But (says M.
PERKINS) by their leave, 1. Ioh. 4.
the testimony of the spirit, is more then a bare feeling of Gods grace. For
it is called the pleadge and earnest of Gods spirit in our hearts. And therefore
it takes away all doubting, as in a bargain, the earnest given, puts all out
of question. 1. Cor. 1.
I answer first out of the place it self, that there follows a condition on
our parts to be performed, which M. PERKINS thought wisdom to conceal. For
S. Paul says that the spirit witnesses with our spirits, that we are the
sons of God, and coheires of Christ, with this condition, If yet we suffer
with him, that we may be glorified with him. So that the testimony is not
absolute, but conditional, and then if we fail in performance of the
condition, God stands free of his promise, and will take his earnest back
again. And so to have received the earnest of it, will nothing avail us, much
less, assure us of salvation.

This is the direct answer to that place, although the other be very good,
that the testimony of the spirit, is but an inward comfort and joy, which
breeds great hope of salvation, but brings not assurance thereof. This M.
PERKINS would refute, by the authority of S. Bernard, in the place before
cited, Epist. 107.
see the place, and my answer there.

The third reason is, That which we must pray for by Gods commandment, that
we must believe: but every man must pray for salvation, therefore we must
believe that we shall have salvation. The proposition he confirms thus: in
every petition must be two things, one a desire of the thing we ask, an other
a particular faith to obtain it, which is proved by Christ's words: Whatsoever
you shall request when you pray, Mark 11.
believe that you shall have it, and it shall be done.

This Argument is so proper for their purpose, that we return it upon their
own heads: We must pray for salvation, therefore we are not yet assured of
it: For who in his wits prays God to give him that, whereof he is assured
already? And a godly act of faith it is, in that prayer to believe that God
will give that, which he is assured of before hand: such foolish petitions
cannot please God, and therefore after their doctrine it is to be denied, that
any faithful man may pray for his salvation, but rather thank the Lord for
it. But to answer directly, he who prays, must believe he shall obtain that
which he prays for, if he observe all the due circumstances of prayer, which
be many, but to this purpose, two are required necessarily: the one that he who
prays be the true servant of God, which first excludes all those that err
in faith, touched in these words. What you of the faithful shall desire when
you pray, shall be given you: The other is, when we request matters of such
moment, that we persevere in prayer, and continue our suite day by day, of these
suites of eternal salvation, we must take these words of our Savior to be
spoken. Luke 18.
We must always pray, and never be weary. And then no doubt, but we shall in
the end receive it. But because we are in doubt, whether we shall observe those
necessary circumstances of prayer or no, therefore we can not be so well
assured to obtain our suite, although we be on Gods part most assured, that
he is most bountiful, and readier to give them, we are to ask.

1. Joan 5.
But says M. PERKINS, S. John notes out this particular faith, calling it, Our
assurance, that God will give unto us, whatsoever we ask according to his
will. But where find we that it is Gods will, to assure every man at the
first entrance into his service, of eternal salvation? is it not sufficient to
make him an assured promise of it, upon his faithful service and good
behavior toward him?

The fourth reason is, Whatsoever God commands, that a man must and can
perform. But God commands us to believe our salvation: ergo, we must
believe it.

The proposition is true, yet commonly denied by all Protestants, for God
commaundes us to keep his commandments, and they hold that to be impossible:
but to the assumption: That God commaundes us to believe our salvation, is
proved (says M. PERKINS) by these words: Repent and believe the Gospel:
Spectatum admissi, risum teneatis amici: Where is it written in that Gospel,
believe your own particular salvation? show us once but one clear text for
it, and we will believe it. I do believe in Christ, and hope to be saved,
through his mercy and merits, but know well, that unless I keep his words,
I am by him likened to a fool, Math. 7. Math. 26. Math. 25.
that built his house upon the sands. He commaundes me to watch and pray,
least I fall into temptation: and else where, warns me to prepare oil to
keep my lamp burning against his coming, or else I am most certain to be
shut out with the foolish Virgins. An hundred such admonitions find we in holy
Scriptures, to shake us out of this security of our salvation, and to make us
vigilant to prevent all temptations of the enemy, and diligent to train our
selves in godly exercises of all virtue.

The fifth and last reason is this, The Papists teach assurance of hope, Romans 5.
even hence it follows, that he may be infallibly assured, for the property
of a true and lively hope is never to make a make a man ashamed. Answer, hope
indeed of heaven makes a man most courageously bear out all storms of
persecution, and not to be ashamed of Christ's Cross, but to profess his faith
most boldly before the most bloody tyrants of the world, our hearts being by
charity fortified and made invincible. And this is that which the Apostle
teaches in that place: and says before, Ver. 2.
that the faithful glory in the hope of the sons of God. And do not vaunt
themselves of the certainty of their salvation. This certainty of hope, is
great in those that have long lived virtuously, specially when they have also
endured manifold losses, much disgrace, great wrongs and injuries for Christ's
sake, for he that cannot fail of his word, has promised to requite all such
with an hundred fold: But what is this to the certainty of faith, which the
Protestants will have every man to be endued with at his first entrance into
the service of God. When as S. Paul insinuates, that godly men partakers of
the holy Ghost, Heb. 6
yea after they have tasted the good word of God, and the power of the world to
come, that is, have received besides faith, great favors of Gods spirit, and
felt as it were the joys of heaven, have after all this so fallen from God,
that there was small hope of their recovery.

CHAPTER 4. OF JUSTIFICATION.
M. PERKINS.
Page 60.
FIRST, I will set down the Doctrine on both parts, that it may be seen how
farreforth we agree.

Secondly, The main differences, wherein we are to stand against them, even to
death.

Our Doctrine touching the justification of a sinner, I propound in four
rules.

The first Rule. That justification is an action of God, whereby he absolueth a
sinner, and accepts him to life everlasting for the righteousness, and merits
of Christ.

2. Rule. That justification stands in two things: First, in the remission of
sins by the merit of Christ's death: Secondly, in the imputation of Christ's
righteousness, which is an other action of God, whereby he accounts and
esteems that righteousness which is in Christ, as the righteousness of that
sinner, which believes in him: By Christ's righteousness we are to understand
two things: first, his sufferings specially in his death and passion:
secondly, his obedience in fulfilling the law: both which go together; for
Christ in suffering obeyed, and obeying suffered. And the very shedding of his
blood, to which our salvation is ascribed, must not only be considered, as it
is passive, that is a suffering, but also as it is active, that is an
obedience, in which he showed his exceeding love, both to his father, and us,
and thus fulfilled the law for us.

3. Rule. That justification is from Gods mercies and grace, procured only by
the merit of Christ.

4. Rule. That man is justified by faith alone: because faith is that alone
instrument created in the heart by the Holy Ghost, whereby a sinner lays hold
of Christ's righteousness, and applies the same to him self. There is neither
hope, nor love, nor any other grace of God within man, that can do this, but
faith alone, now of the Doctrine of the Roman Church.

Because M. PERKINS settes not down well the Catholics opinion, I will help
him out, both with the preparation and justification it self, and that taken
out of the Council of Trent. Where the very words concerning preparation are
these. Sess. 6. c. 6.
Men are prepared and disposed to this justice, when being stirred up, and
helped by Gods grace, they conceiving faith by hearing, are freely moved
toward God, believing those things to be true, which God does reveal and
promise, ^^^^ely, that he of his grace does justify a sinner through the
redemption, that is in CHRIST JESUS. And when knowledging them selves to be
sinners, through the fear of Gods judgments, they turn them selves to
consider the mercy of God, are lifted up into hope, trusting that God will be
merciful unto them for Christ's sake: and beginning to love him as the
fountain of all justice, are there by moved with hatred and detestation of all
sins. Finally they determine to receive baptism, to begin a new life, and
to keep all Christ's commandments.

After this disposition, or preparation, follows Justification, and for that
every thing is best known by the causes of it, all the causes of Justification
are delivered by the Council in the next Chapter, which briefly are these. The
final cause of the Justification of a sinner, is the glory of God, the glory
of Christ, and man's own justification: the efficient is God, the meritorious,
CHRIST JESUS Passions, the isntrumental, is the Sacrament of Baptism, the
only formal cause, is inherent justice, that is, Faith, Hope, and Charity,
with the other gifts of the Holy Ghost, powered into a man's soul, at that
instant of justification. Of the justification by faith, and the second
justification shall be spoken in their places.

So that we agree in this point, that justification comes of the free grace
of God, through his infinite mercies, and the merits of our Saviors Passion,
and that all sins, when a man is justified, be pardoned him.

The point of difference is this: that the Protestants hold that Christ's
Passion and obedience imputed unto us, becomes our righteousness: (for the
words of justice and justification, they seldom use,) and not any
righteousness, which is in our selves. The Catholics affirm, that those
virtues powered into our souls, (speaking of the formal cause of
justification) is our justice, and that through that, a man is justified in
Gods sight, and accepted to life everlasting. Although as you have seen
before, we hold that God of his mere mercy through the merits of CHRIST JESUS
our Savior, has freely bestowed that justice on us. Note that M. PERKINS
comes to short in his second rule, when he attributes the merits of Christ's
suffringes to obedience; whereas obedience if it had been without charity,
would have merited nothing at Gods hands.

And whereas M. PERKINS does say, that therein we raze the foundation, that is
as he interprets it in his preface, we make Christ a Pseudochrist, we auerre,
that herein we do much more magnify Christ, then they do, for they take
Christ's merits to be so mean, that they do but even serve the turn to deface
sin, and make men worthy of the joys of heaven. Nay it does not serve the
turn, but only that God does not impute sin unto us. We contrariwise, do so
highly esteem of our Saviors inestimable merits, that we hold them well able
to purchase at Gods hands, a far inferior justice, and such merits as
mortal men are capable of, and to them do give such force and value, that
they make a man just before God, and worthy of the Kingdom of heaven, as shall
be proved. Again, they do great injury to Gods goodness, wisdom, and
justice, in their justification, for they teach, that inward justice, or
sanctification, is not necessary to justification; Yea their Ringleader Luther
says. That the justified can by no sins whatsoever, (except he refuse to
believe) lose their salvation. Wherein, first they make their righteous man,
Like (as our Savior speaks) to sepulchers whited on the out side, with an
imputed justice, but within, full of iniquity, and disorder. Then the wisdom
of GOD must either not discover this mass of iniquity, or his goodness abide
it, or his justice either wipe it away, or punish it: But (say they) he sees
it well enough, but covers it with the mantle of Christ's righteousness. Why?
can any thing be hid from his sight? it is madness to think it. And why does
he not for Christ's sake deface it, and wipe it clean away, and adorn with
his grace that soul, whom he for his sons sake loves, and make it worthy
of his love and kingdom. What? is it because Christ has not deserved it? So
to say, were to derogate from the infinite value of his merits. Or is it, for
that God cannot make such justice in a pure man, as may be worthy of his love
and his kingdom? And this were to deny Gods power in a matter that can be
done, as we confess that such virtue was in our first father Adam, in state
of innocence. And M. PERKINS seems to grant, Page 77.
That man in this life at his last gasp, may have such righteousness. If then
we had no other reason for us, but that our justification does more exalt the
power, and goodness of God, more magnify the value of Christ's merits, and
brings greater dignity unto men: our doctrine were much better to be liked,
then our adversaries, who cannot allege one express sentence, either out of
holy Scriptures, or ancient Fathers, teaching the imputation of Christ's
righteousness unto us, to be our justification as shall be seen in the
reasons following, and do much abase both Christ's merits, and Gods power,
wisdom, and goodness. Now to their reasons.

M. PERKINS first reason is this, That which must be our righteousness before
God, must satisfy the justice of the law, which says, do these things and
thou shall live, Gal. 5.
but there is nothing that can satisfy that justice of the law, but the
righteousness and obedience of Christ. ergo.

This reason is not worth a rush, for when he requires that our justice must
satisfy the justice of the law, I demand what law he means? If Moses
law: Gal 5. Gal. 5.
of which those words, Do this and thou shall live, are spoken. Then I
answer with the Apostle. That you are euacuated, or abolished from Christ,
that are justified in the law. that is, he is a Jew and no Christian, that
would have Christian Justice answerable to Moses law.

If M. PER. would only that men justified, must be able to fulfill Christ's law,
I then grant, that they so be, by the help of Gods grace, which will never
fail them, before they fail of their duties. But says M. PER. That justice
of man is imperfect, and cannot satisfy the justice which God requires in his
law, and proves it out of Esaias, who says, All our righteousness is as a
menstruous, Isay. 64
or defiled cloth. I answer that the holy Prophet speaks those words in
the person of the wicked, and therefore are maddely applied unto the righteous.
That he speaks of the the wicked, of that nation, and of that time: appears
playnlie by the text it self. For he says before, But lo thou have been
angry, for we have offended, and have been ever in sin, and after; There is
no man that calls upon thy name, and stands up to take hold by thee. And
although the words be general, and seems to the unskillful to comprehend
himself also, yet that is but the manner of preachers, and specially of such
as become Intercessors for others, who use to speak in the persons of them,
for whom they sue: for if he had reckoned himself in that number, he had
lied, when he said: There is none that call upon thy name, when as he
immediately calls upon him in most vehement sort for mercy, all which the
best learned among them marking, Lu^^ Ca^^ thi^^
confess that this sentence can not be alleged against the virtue of good
works. Hence, gather how dexterously M. PERKINS handles Holy Scripture. That
which the Prophet spoke of some evil men, of one place, and at one time: that
he applies unto all good men, for all times, and all places.

But he will amend it in the next, where he proves out of Saint Paul, 1. (...)
that a clear conscience (which is a great part of inherent justice,) can
nothing help to our justification. I am privy to nothing by my self, and yet
I am not justified thereby. Here is a very pretty piece of cousinage. What, does
the Apostle say that he was not justified by his clear conscience, nothing
less: but that albeit, he saw nothing in himself to hinder his
justification, yet GOD who has sharper ey-sight, might epsy some iniquity in
him, and therefore durst not the Apostle affirm himself to be justified, as
if he should say, if there be no other fault in me in GODS sight, then I can
find by mine own insight, I am justified, because I am guilty of nothing,
and so the place proves rather the uncertain knowledge of our justification,
as I have before showed.

But M. PERKINS adds, that we must remember, that we shall come to judgment,
where rigor of justice shall be showed. We know it well, but when there is no
condemnation to those that by Baptism be purged from original sin, as he
confesses himself, P^^
the Apostle to teach in our consents, about original sin, what then needs
any justified man greatly fear, the rigorous sentence of a just judge. And
Saint Paul says himself in the person of the just: That he had ran a good
race, etc. and therefore, there was a crown of justice laid up for him, by
that just judge, and not only to him, but all them that love Christ's coming.
And concerning both, inherent justice, and the ability of it, to fulfill the
law. And what law, S^^ d^^
hear this one sentence of S. Augustine.

He that believes in him, he has not that justice, which is of the law,
albeit the law be good, but he shall fulfill the law, not by justice which he
has of himself, but which is given of God, for charity is the fulfilling of
the law, and from him is this charity powered into our hearts, not certaynlie
by our selves, but by the Holy Ghost which is given us. Now to the second
argument.

He which knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God, ^. Cor. 5.
which is in him: Hence M. PERKINS reasons thus. As Christ was made sin for
us, so we are made the righteousness of God in him: but Christ was made sin by
imputation of our sins, he being most holy: Therefore a sinner is made
righteous, in that Christ's righteousness is imputed unto him. I deny both
propositions, the former because it has a comparison in the manner of our
justification, with the sin which Christ was made for us: for in the text of
the Apostle, there is no signification of a similitude that Christ was so made
sin, as we are made just. That is then M. PER. vain gloss, without any
likelihood in the text. The other proposition is also false, for Christ was not
made sin by imputation, for sin in that place is taken figuratively, and
signifies according to the exposition of ancient Fathers, An host or
Sacrifice for sin: Which, Christ was truly made: his body being sacrificed on
the Cross for the discharge of sin, and not by imputation.

How these words of the Apostle, Justice of God, are to be understood, see
Saint Augustine. Tract. 26. in Joan. Item Epist. 120. ad honorat. cap. 30. Item
in Psalm. 30. Conc. 1. De spirit. and lib. c. 9.
One place I will cite for all. The justice of God (says he) through the faith
of CHRIST JESUS, that is by faith wherewith we believe in Christ: for as that
faith is called Christ's, not by which Christ believes, so that Justice is
called Gods, not whereby God is just, both of them, faith and justice, be ours,
but therefore they are termed Gods, and Christ's, because through their
liberality they are given to us. Which interpretation may be confirmed out of
that place of Saint Chrysostom, which M. PERKINS cites, saying: It is called
Gods Justice, because it is not of works, but of his free gift. So that it is,
not that which is in God himself, but such as he bestows upon us. And that
justice of it self is pure, and wants no virtue to work that, for which it
is given, to wit, to make a man righteous. S. Anselme a right virtuous and
learned Catholic Arch-bishoppe of ours shall be answered, when the place is
quoted.

Romans 5.
M. PERKINS third reason. As by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so
by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous, mark here a comparison
between the first and second Adam, hence I reason thus; As by the disobedience
of Adam men were made sinners, so by the obedience of Christ, are they made
righteous: but men are made sinners by imputation of Adams sin unto them, and
not only by propagation of natural corruption, ergo: by imputation of Christ's
justice we are made righteous.

Answer. The comparison I allow, because it is the Apostles, and deny that
men are made sinners by imputation of Adams fault. And say that every one
descended of Adam by natural propagation, has his own personal iniquity
sticking in them, which is commonly called Original sin, and an high point of
Pelagianisme is it, to deny it. For albeit we did not taste of the forbidden
fruit in proper person, yet receive we the nature of man, polluted with that
infection really, and not by imputation. And so the comparison serves not at
all M. PERKINS turn, but bears very strongly against him, it being thus
framed: As by Adams disobedience many were made sinners, even so by Christ's
obedience many shall be justified: This is his Mayor. Now to the Minor. But by
Adams disobedience they were made sinners, by drawing from him, every one his
own proper inherent iniquity, in like manner we are justified by Christ, not
by imputation of his justice, but by our inherent justice, which is powered into
our souls, when we are in Baptism borne a new in him. See what penury of
poor arguments they have, that to make some show of store, are forced to
propound such as make manifestly against them.

His fourth reason. The Papists make Christ's obedience their satisfaction, but
satisfaction is equal to justice, therefore they must make it as well their
justice as satisfaction. For the Mayor he cites Bellarmin. I have read the
Chapter, Lib. ^ Iusti^^
and find no such words, further I say, there is a great difference between
satisfaction for mortal sins, and justification: for satisfaction can not be
done by us; for the guilt of mortal sin is infinite, being against an
infinite Majesty, and so no creature can make full satisfaction for it:
wherefore the infinite valor of Christ's satisfaction is necessarily required,
who having taken away the guilt of eternal punishment, due to sins, leaves
us his grace to satisfy for the temporal pain of it, as shall be in his due
place, declared more at large.

Again, a man must needs have his sins pardoned, and grace given him,
before he can make any kind of due satisfaction, for he must be in the state
of grace before he can satisfy, wherefore he must needs fly to the benefit of
Christ's satisfaction: There is nothing like in justification, for first to make
a man just in Gods sight, requires no infinite perfection, but such as a mere
man is very well capable of, as all must needs confess of Adam in the state
of Innocence, and of all the blessed Souls in heaven who be just in Gods
sight. Neither is it necessary to be infinite, for to be worthy of the joys of
heaven, which be not infinite as they are enjoyed of Men or Angels, either who
have all things there in number, weight, and measure. Briefly, it is a most
easy thing for one man to pay the debts of an other, but one man can not
bestow his wisdom or justice on an other, and not credible, that God (whose
judgment is according to truth) will repute a man for just, who is full of
iniquity: no more then a simple man will take a Black-moore for white, although
he see him clothed in a white suit of apparel.

M. PERKINS last reason, is taken from the consent of the ancient Church, And
yet cites (saving one two lives) nothing out of any ancient writer, nor out
of any other, but out of only S. Bernard, who lived 1000. year after Christ,
so that he signifies that there is little relief to be had in Antiquity. Which
Calvin declares more playnlie, for he commonly setting light by all other in
this question, rejects also S. Augustine saying. Yea not the sentence of
Augustine himself is to be received in this matter, Li. 3. instit. ca. 11. number
15.
who attributes our sanctification to grace, wherewith we are regenerate in
newnes of life by the spirit. And Kennitius in the first part of his
examination of the Council of Trent, says: We contend not how the Fathers
take justification, and a little after. I am not ignorant that they spoke
otherwise then we do of it. Therefore M. PERK. had reason to content himself
with some few broken sentences of later writers. But was S. Bernard trow you
in this one point a Protestant? Nothing less his words be these. Epist. 190.
The justice of another is assigned unto man, who wanted his own: man was
indebted, and man made payment, etc. But better let his own reason there
cited, serve for exposition of his former words, which is this. For why may
not justice be from an other, as well as guiltines is from an other: Now
guiltines from Adam is not by imputation, but every one contractes his own, by
taking flesh from him, even so justice is from Christ powered into every man,
that is borne again of water and the holy Ghost. In the second place he says:
That man's justice is the mercifulnes of God: that is, by Gods free grace and
mercy it is bestowed upon us. With S. Bernard in the third place, we
acknowledge that we have no justice of our own, that is from our selves, but
from the goodness of God, through the merits of our blessed Saviors passion,
read his first sermon, upon these words of the Prophet Isaie. Ser. 1. super
Isaiam.
Vidi Dominum, etc. There you shall see him speak playnlie of inherent
justice, and how it is a distinct thing from the justice of Christ. An other
broken piece of a sentence, there is cited out of S. Augustine. Christ made his
justice our justice. In psalm. 22. Tract. 27. in Joan.
That is, by his justice, he has merited justice for us, as he expounds
himself. What is this, the justice of God, and the justice of man? The justice
of God is here called that, not whereby God is just, but that which God gives
to man, that man may be just through God.

Now let us come to the reasons of Catholics, which M. PERKINS calling the
objections, proposes for them, to prove, that the justice which God bestows
upon us, is inherent, and not imputed.

OF INHERENT JUSTICE.
FIrst object. As one man can not be made wise, valiant, or continent by the
wisdom, valor, or continency of an other, so one man can not be made just,
by the justice of an other, M. PERKINS answers, That one man's justice cannot
be made an others, no more then life or health, but Christ's justice may, who by
covenant of grace is made every man's own, with all his gifts.

Reply. This answer solueth not the difficulty any whit at all, for Christ's
wisdom, power, and other gifts are not imputed unto us, as it is evident. Why
the^ is his justice more then the rest, we confess that in a good sense all
Christ's gifts are ours, that is, they were all employed to purchase our
redemption, and we do daily offer them to God that he will for his Sons sake
more and more, wash us from our sins, and bestow his graces more plentiful
upon us: thus are all Christ's riches ours, so long as we keep our selves
members of his mystical body, but this is nothing to the point which the
argument touched, how one man may formally be made just by the justice of an
other, rather then wise, by the wisdom of an other.

2. Object. If we be righteous, or just by the righteousness of Christ imputed
unto us, then is every just man as righteous as Christ himself, having the
same justice his, which is Christ's, but that is too too absurd, ergo: M. PERK.
answer. Christ's righteousness is not applied unto us in the same measure, as it
is in Christ, in him it is infinite, but of it so much is applied to this, or
that man, as will serve for his justification. And to help this answer
foreward, I will add his marginall note, even as any star partakes the whole
light of the Sun, with the rest so farreforth as the light makes it to shine.

Reply. That which is applied of Christ's justice, to this, or that man; is
either infinite, and then the man is as just as Christ: for there can be no
greater then infinite in the same kind. Or it is not infinite, but in a certain
measure as he seems to grant, and then it is no part of Christ's infinite
justice, for all the parts of an infinite thing, are infinite: according unto
true Philosophy. It remains then that a certain limited portion of justice
is derived out of Christ's infinite justice, and powered into this, or that man,
as in his own example, The light of every star is received from the Sun
beams. Yet is not the light in the star, the same which is in the Sun, for
one accident cannot be in two subjects so far distant, neither is it of like
virtue to lighten the skies, as it is evident: but is a far dimmer light,
somewhat like unto that of the Sun from whence it came. Even so in our
justification from the Son of justice CHRIST JESUS, certain beams of
particular justice are conveyed into this, or that man's soul, whereby it is
both lighned by faith, and inflamed by charity: but there is exceeding
difference between their two justices, more then there is between the light
of the sun, and the light of a star; which S. August. in express terms
delivers, saying. How much difference there is between the light that does
lighten, Li. 12. conf. cap. 15.
and that which is lightened, that is the sun and the star light, so much
difference is there between the justice that does justify, and that justice
which is made by that justification: to wit, between the justice of Christ,
and that which is in every good Christian.

The third reason for the Catholic party. If men be made truly and really
just by Christ's justice, imputed unto them, in like manner Christ should be
made really unjust, by the iniquity and sins of men imputed unto him. For
there is no reason to the contrary, but one may as well be made unjust by
imputation, as just; especially considering that evil is made more easelie,
and more ways then good. M. PERKINS answer is, that we may say Christ was a
sinner truly, not because he had sin in him, but because our sins were
laid on his shoulders. That reason is naught, for he is not truly a sinner,
that paies the debt of sin, which an innocent and most just person may
perform: but he that either has sin truly in him, or is so by imputation
stricken, that the sins are made his own really, and he in all cases to be dealt
with all, as if he sinned himself: as they hold that one justified by
imputation of Christ's justice, is really in Gods sight just, and is both loved
in this life, and shall be rewarded in the next, as if he were truly just
indeed: But to avouch our Savior Christ to be so a sinner, is to say that he
was auerted from God, the slave of the Devil, and son of perdition, which is
plain blasphemy. That sentence out of the Prophet, Isay. 53.
He was counted with sinners, is expounded by the Evangelists, that he was so
taken indeed, but by a wicked Judge, and a reprobate people. And therefore if
you allow of their sentence, range your self with them, as one of their
number. S. Chrysostom by him produced, confirms the same, saying that God
permitted him to be condemned as a sinner, not that he was one truly. Christ I
know is called sin by S. Paul, but by a figure, signifying that he was a
sacrifice for sin, as has been before declared. The same blessed Apostle
when he speaks properly, Heb. 4
affirms in plain terms, that Christ was tempted like unto us, in all
things excepting sin.

4 Object. If a man be righteous only by imputation, he may together be full of
iniquity, whereupon it must needs follow, that God does take for just and
good, him that is both unjust and wicked: but that is absurd, when Gods
judgment is according to truth. Here M. PERKINS yields, That when God does
impute Christ's justice unto any man, he does together sanctify the party,
giving original sin a deadly wound. Of orig. sin. page 31.
And yet else where he said, That original sin, which remained after
justification in the party, did bear such sway, that it infected all the
works of the said party, and made him miserable. etc. But it is good hearing
of amendment, if he will abide in it: Let us go on.

5 Object. or fifth reason, is invented by M. PERKINS, but may be rightly
framed thus. Christ restored us that justice which we lost by Adams fall, but
by him we lost inhehent justice, ergo By him we are restored to inherent
justice. The Mayor is gathered out of S. Paul, Romans 5.
who affirms, that we receive more by Christ, Lib. 3. c. 20. li. 6. de genesis
24. 26. 26.
then we lost by Adam: And is S. Ireneus, and S. Augustines most express
doctrine, who say, How are we said to be renewed, if we receive not again
which the first man lost. etc. Immortality of body we receive not, but we
receive justice from the which he fell through sin.

The sixth and last reason for Catholics is, The justice, of the faithful is
eternal, dureth after this life, and is crowned in heaven, but Christ's imputed
justice cease in the end of this life. ergo.

M. PERKINS answers. First, that imputed righteousness continues with us for
ever, and that in heaven, we shall have no other. Secondly, that perhaps in the
end of this life, inward righteousness shall be perfect, and then without
perhaps it shall be most perfect in heaven. So that one part of this answer,
overthrows the other. Wherefore I need not stand upon it, but will proceed
to fortify our party, with some authorities, taken both forth of the Holy
scriptures, and ancient Fathers: The first place I take out of these words of
S. Paul. And these things certes, were you, 1. Cor. 6.
( Dronkers, Covetous, Fornicators, etc.) But you are Washed, you are
Sanctified, you are Justified in the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and in the
spirit of our Lord: Here justification by the best interpreters judgment is
defined, S. Chrysos Ambro. and Theophil in hunc locum. Tit. 3.
to consist in those actions of washing us from our sins, and of infusion of
Gods Holy gifts by the holy Ghost in the name, and the sake of CHRIST JESUS.

The like description of our justification is in S. Paul. Of his mercy he has
saved us by the lauer of regeneration, and renuinge of the Holy Ghost, whom he
has powered into us abundantly, through JESUS CHRIST our Savior, that being
justified by his grace, we may be heirs in hope (and not in certayntie of
faith) of life everlasting. Where the Apostle inferring that being justified by
his grace, declares that in the words before he had described the same
justification, to consist in our new birth of Baptism, and the renewing of our
souls, by the infusion of his heavenly gifts, which God of his mercy did
bestow upon us for his Son Christ's sake. Many other places I omit for
brevity sake, and will be content to cite few Fathers, because the best
learned of our adversaries do confess that they be all against them, as I
have showed before.

First, S. Augustine says, That this justice of ours, De peccat merit. and re
miss. cap. 15 Epist. 85. Lib. 12. de Trinit. cap 7. Lib. 6. de Trinit.
(which they call righteousness) is the grace of Christ, regenerating us by the
Holy Ghost; And is a beauty of our inward man. It is the renewing of the
reasonable part of our soul. And twenty other such like, whereby he manifestly
declares, our justice to be inherent, and not the imputed justice of Christ.
Let him suffice for the Latin Fathers. And S. Cyrill for the Greeks, who of
our justification writes thus. The spirit is a heat, who as soon as he has
powered charity into us, and has with the fire of it, inflamed our minds, we
have even then obtained justice,

THE SECOND DIFFERENCE ABOUT THE MANner of Justification.
WE all agree in general, that faith concurreth to our justification, but
differ in three points. 1. How faith is to be taken. 2. How it works in our
justification. 3. Whether it alone does justify.

Concerning the first point, Catholics hold a justifying faith, to be that
Christian faith, by which we believe the articles of our Creed, and all other
things revealed by God. The Protestants auerre it to be a particular faith,
whereby they apply to themselves the promises of righteousness, and of life
everlasting by Christ. This to be the true justifying faith, M. PERKINS says
he has proved already: he should have done well, to have noted the place,
for I know not where to seek it: but he will here add a reason or twain.

1 Reason. The faith whereby we live, is the faith whereby we are justified:
but the faith whereby we live, is a particular faith, whereby we apply Christ
to our selves, as Paul says, Gal. 2.20.
I live, that is spiritually, by the faith of the son of God: which faith he
shows to be a particular faith in Christ, in the words following: Who has
loved me, and given himself for me particularly.

Answer. The Mayor I admit, and deny the Minor: and say that the proof is
not to purpose. For in the Minor he speaks of faith, whereby we apply Christ's
merits unto our selves, making them ours, in the proof S. Paul says only, that
Christ died for him in particular. He makes no mention of his apprehending of
Christ's justice, and making of it his own, which are very distinct things.
All Catholics believe with S. Paul, that Christ died, as for all men in
general: so for every man in particular, yea and that his love was so
exceeding great, toward mankind, that he would willingly have bestowed his
life, for the redemption of one only man. But hereupon it does not follow,
that every man may lay hands upon Christ's righteousness, and apply it to
himself (or else Turks, Jews, Heretics, and evil Catholics, might make
very bold with him) but must first do those things which he requires at
their hands, to be made pertakers of his inestimable merits: as to repent them
heartily of their sins, to believe and hope in him, to be baptized, and to have a
full purpose to observe all his commandments. Which M. PER. also confesses
that all men have not only promised, Page 152.
but also vowed in Baptism. Now because we are not assured that we shall
perform all this, therefore we may not so presumptuously apply unto our
selves, Christ's righteousness, and life everlasting, although we believe that he
died for every one of us in particular. That which follows, M. PER. has no
color of probability: that S. Paul in this manner of belief, that is, in
applying to himself Christ's merits: was an example unto all that are saved. 1.
Tim. 1 16 Phil. 3.15.
See the places good Reader, and learn to beware the bold unskillfulness of
sectaries. For there is not a word sounding that way, but only how he having
received mercy, was made an example of patience.

M. PERKINS 2. Reason. That which we must ask of God in prayer, that we must
believe shall be given us: but in prayer me must ask the merits of Christ's
righteousness to our selves. ergo.

Answer. Of the Mayor much has been said before, here I admit it, all due
circumstances of prayer being observed, and deny that we must pray, that our
Savior Christ Jesus merits may be made ours in particular, for that were
greatly to abase them: but good Christians pray, that through the infinite
value of those his merits, our sins may be forgiven, and a justice
proportionable unto our capacity, may be powered into our souls, whereby we may
lead a virtuous life, and make a blessed end. But it is goodly to behold, how
M. PERKINS proves that me must pray, that Christ's righteousness may be made our
particular justice, because says he, We are taught in the Pater noster, to
pray in this manner: forgive us our debts, and to this we must say Amen, which
is as much to say as our petition is granted. I think the poor man's wits
were gonne a pilgrimage, when he wrote thus. Good Sir, cannot our sins or
debts be forgiven, without we apply Christ's righteousness to us in particular?
we say yes. Do not then so simply beg that which is in question, nor take
that for given, which will never be granted. But a word with you by the way.
Your righteous man must ouer-skippe that petition of the Pater noster (forgive
us our debts) for he is well assured, that his debts be already pardoned. For
at the very first instant that he had faith, he had Christ's righteousness
applied to him, and thereby assurance both of the pardon of sins, and of life
everlasting. Wherefore he can not without infidelity, distrust of his former
justification, or pray for remission of his debts: but following the famous
example of that formal Pharise, in liew of demanding pardon, may well say.
Luc. 18.
O God I give thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners,
unjust, aduouterers, as also these Papists: Fearing the remission of my sins,
or the certayntie of my salvation, but am well assured thereof, and of Christ's
own righteousness too, and so forth. But to go on with M. PERKINS discourse.
Here we must note, that the Church of Rome cutteth off one principal duty of
faith, for in faith (says M. PERKINS) are two things: first, knowledge
revealed in the word, touching the means of salvation: Secondly, an applying
of things, known unto our selves, which some call affiance: the first they
acknowledge. So then by M. PERKINS own confession, Catholics have true
knowledge of the means of salvation; (then he and his fellows err
miserable.) The second which is the substance and principal they deny.

Answer. Catholics teach men also to have a firm hope, and a great
confidence of obtaining salvation, through the mercy of God, and merits of
Christ's Passion. So they perform their duty toward God, and their
neighbor, or else die with true repentance. But for a man at his first
conversion, to assure himself by faith of Christ's righteousness, and life
everlasting; without condition of doing those things, he ought to do, that we
Catholics affirm to be, not any gift of faith, but the heinous crime of
presumption, which is a sin against the Holy Ghost, not pardonable, See S.
Tho 22. q. 21. ^rt. 1.
neither in this life, nor in the world to come.

M. PERKINS third reason, is drawn from the consent of the ancient Church, of
which for fashion sake to make some show, he often speaks, but can seldom
find any one sentence in them, that fits his purpose, as you may see in this
sentence of Saint Augustine, cited by him. Augustine says. De verbis Domini.
^erm. 7.
I demand now, do thou believe in Christ, O sinner? thou say I believe:
what beleeuest thou that all thy sins may freely be pardoned by him, thou
have that which thou beleeuest. See, here is neither applying of Christ's
righteousness unto us by faith, nor so much as believing our sins to be
pardoned through him, but that they may be pardoned by him. So there is not one
word for M. PERKINS. But S. Bernard says playnlie: That we must believe that
our sins are pardoned us. But he adds not by the imputed righteousness of
Christ. Again, he adds conditions on our party, which M. PERK. craftily
concealeth. For S. Bernard grants that we may believe our sins to be
forgiven, if the truth of our conversion meet with the mercy of God preventing
us, for in the same place he has these words: So therefore shall his mercy
dwell in our earth, that is, the grace of God in our souls, if mercy and truth
meet together, if justice and peace, embrace and kiss each other. Which is as
S. Bernard there expounds it, if we stirred up by the grace of God, do truly
bewail our sins and confess them, and afterward follow holiness of life and
peace. All which M. PERKINS did wisely cut off, because it dashed clean the
vain gloss of the former words.

His last authority is out of S. Cyprian, who exhorts men, passing out of
this life, not to doubt of God promises, but to believe that we shall come to
Christ with joyful security.

Answer. S. Cyprian encouradgeth good Christians dying, to have a full
confidence in the promises of Christ, and so do all Catholics, and bid them
be secure too on that side, that Christ will never fail of his word and
promise, but say that the cause of fear lies on our own infirmities: And yet
biddes them not to doubt, as though they were as likely to be condemned as
saved, but animates them, and puts them in the good way of hope, by twenty
kinds of reason.

M. PERKINS having thus confirmed his own party, why does he not after his
manner confute those reasons, which the Catholics allege in favor of their
assertion? Was it because they are not wont to produce any in this matter?
Nothing less: It was then belike, because he knew not how to answer them. I
will out of their stoare take that one principal one, of the testimony of holy
Scripture, And by that alone sufficiently prove, that the faith required to
justification, is that Catholic faith, whereby we believe all that to be true,
which by God is revealed, and not any other particular believing Christ's
righteousness to be ours. How can this be better known then if we see, weigh,
and consider well, what kind of faith that was which all they had, who are
said in Scriptures to be justified by their faith.

S. Paul says of Noe, That he was instituted heir of the justice, which is,
by faith. Heb. 11.7.
What faith had he? That by Christ's righteousness he was assured of salvation?
No such matter, but believed that God according to his word and justice, would
drown the world, and made an Arc to save himself, and his family, as God
commanded him.

Abraham the Father of believers, and the Pattern and example of justice by
faith, as the Apostle disputes to the Romans: Romans ca. 4.
What faith he was justified by. Let S. Paul declare, who of him and his faith,
has these words. He contrary to hope believed in hope, that he might be made
the Father of many Nations, according to that which was said unto him. So
shall thy seed be as the stars of heaven, and the sands of the Sea: and he
was not weakened in faith, neither did he consider his own body, now quite
dead, whereas he was almost an hundred years old, nor the dead Matrice of
Sara, in the promise of God he staggered not by distrust, but was strengthened
in faith, giving glory to God, most fully knowing, that whatsoever he
promised, he was able also to do, therefore was it reputed to him to justice.
Lo, because he glorified God in believing, that old and barren persons might
have children, if God said the word, and that whatsoever God promised, he was
able to perform, he was justified. The Centurions faith was very pleasing unto
our Savior, who said in commendation of it, That he had not found so great
faith in Israel? What faith was that? Marry, that he could with a word cure
his servant absent. Math. 8.
Say the word only (quoth he) and my servant shall be healed.

S. Peter's faith so much magnified by the ancient Fathers, and highly
rewarded by our Savior, was it any other, Then that our Savior was Christ,
Math. 16
the Son of the living God? And briefly let S. John that great secretary of
the Holy Ghost, tell us what faith is the final end of the whole Gospel. Ioh,
20.
These things, (says he) are written that you may believe that JESUS is
CHRIST the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name. With
the Evangelist the Apostle S. Paul accords very well, saying: Romans 10.
This is the word of faith which we preach, for if thou confess with thy mouth
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him from
death, thou shall be saved. And in an other place. ^. Cor. 15.
I make known unto you the Gospel, which I have preached, and by which you
shall be saved, unless perhaps you have believed in vain. What was that
Gospel? I have delivered unto you that which I have received, that Christ died
for our sins, according to the Scriptures, was buried, and rose again the
third day, etc. So by the verdite of S. Paul, the belief of the articles of
the creed, is that justifying faith, by which you must be saved. And neither
in S. Paul, nor any other place of Holy Scriptures is it once taught, that a
particular faith whereby we apply, Christ's righteousness to our selves, and
assure our selves of our salvation, is either a justifying, or any Christian
man's faith, but the very natural act, of that ougly Monster presumption: Which
being laid as the very corner stone of the Protestants irreligion, what moral
and modest conversation, what humility and devotion can they build upon it.

The second difference in the manner of justification, is about the formal act
of faith, which M. PERKINS handles as it were by the way, cuttedly I will be
as short as he, the matter not being great. The Catholics teach as you have
heard out of the Council of Trent, in the beginning of this question, that
many acts of faith, fear, hope, and charity do go before our justification,
preparing our soul to receive into it from God, through Christ that great
grace.

M. PERKINS Doctor like resolves otherwise, That faith is an instrument,
created by God in the heart of man, at his conversion, whereby he apprehends
and receives Christ's righteousness, for his justification.

This joylie description is set down without any other probation, then his
own authority that delivered it: and so, let it pass as already sufficiently
confuted. And if there needed any other disproofe of it, I might gather one
more out of this own explication of it, where he says that the covenant of
grace is communicated unto us, by the word of God, and by the Sacraments. For
if faith created in our hearts, be the only sufficient supernatural
instrument, to apprehend that covenant of grace, then there needs no
Sacraments for that purpose, and consequently I would feign know by the way,
how little infants, that can not for want of judgment, and discretion have any
such act of faith, as to lay hold on Christ his justice, are justified? Must we
without any warrant in Gods word, contrary to all experience, believe that they
have this act of faith, before the come to any understanding.

But to return unto the sound doctrine of our Catholic faith, M. PER. finds
two faults with it, one that we teach faith to go before justification,
whereas by the word of God (says he) at the very instant, when any man
believes first, he is then both, justified and sanctified. What word of God so
teaches? Marry this. He that believes, eats and drinks the body and blood
of Christ, and is already passed from death to life. Io. 6.54.
I answer that our Savior in that text speaks not of believing, but of
eating his body in the blessed Sacrament, which who so receives worthily,
obtayneth thereby life everlasting, as Christ says expressly in that place.
And so this proof is vain.

Now will I prove out of the holy Scriptures, that faith goes before
justification, first by that of S. Paul. Whosoever calls on the name of our
Lord, Romans 10.
shall be saved, but how shall they call upon him, in whom they do not
believe, how shall they believe without a preacher, etc. Where there is this
order set down to arrive unto justification. First, to hear the preacher,
then to believe afterward to call upon God for mercy, and finally mercy is
granted and given in justification: so that prayer goes between faith and
justification. This S. Augustine observed, when he said. Faith is given first,
De prede^ sanct. ca. 7 De spirit. and lit. cap. 30
by which we obtain the rest. And again: By the law is knowledge of sin,
by faith we obtain grace, and by grace our soul is cured. If we list to see
the practice of this recorded in holy write, read the second of the acts, and
there you shall find, how that the people having heard S. Peter's Sermon, were
stricken to the hearts and believed, yet were they not straight way justified,
but asked of the Apostles what they must do, who willed them to do penance,
and to be baptized, in the name of JESUS, in remission of their sins, and
then lo, they were justified, so that penance and baptism went between their
faith, and their justification.

In like manner Queen Candaces Eunuch, having heard S. Philippe, announcing
unto him Christ, believed that JESUS CHRIST was the Son of God (no talk in
those days of applying unto himself Christ's righteousness,) yet was he not
justified, before descending out of his chariot he was baptized. Act. 8.
And three days passed between S. Paul's conversion and his justification, as
does evidently appear by the history of his conversion. Act. 9.


The second fault he finds with our faith, is that we take it to be nothing
else, but an illumination of the mind, stirring up the will, which being so
moved and helped by grace, causes in the heart many good spiritual motions.
But this (says M. PERKINS) is as much to say, that dead men only helped, can
prepare themselves to their resurrection. Not so good Sir, but that men
spiritually dead, being quickened by Gods spirit, may have many good motions,
for as our spirit gives life unto our bodies; so the spirit of God by his
grace animateth, and gives life unto our souls. But of this it has been
once before spoken at large, in the question of free will.

Page 84.
THE THIRD DIFFERENCE CONCERNING FAITH, IS this. The Papists say, that man is
justified by faith, yet not by faith alone, but also by other virtues, as the
fear of God, hope, love, etc. The reasons which are brought to maintain their
opinion, are of no moment: well let us hear some of them, that the indifferent
Reader may judge whether they be of any moment or no. M. PERKINS first Reason.
Luke 7.47.
MANY sins are forgiven her, because she has loved much: whence they gather
that the woman there spoken of, had pardon of her sins, and was justified by
love. Answer. In this text, love is not made an impulsive cause, to move God
to pardon her sins, but only a sign, to show that God had already pardoned
them.

Reply. Observe first, that Catholics do not teach, that she was pardoned for
love alone, for they use not (as Protestants do) when they find one cause of
justification, to exclude all, or any of the rest: But considering that in
sundry places of holy write, justification is ascribed unto many several
virtues, affirm that not faith alone, but diverse other divine qualities
concur unto justification, and as mention here made of love, excludes not
faith, hope, repentance, and such like: so in other places, where faith is only
spoken of, there hope, charity, and the rest, must not also be excluded. This
sinner had assured belief in Christ's power to remitte sins, and great hope
in his mercy that he would forgive them, great sorrow and detestation of her
sin also she had, that in such an assembly did so humbly prostrate her self
at Christ's feet, to wash them with her tears, and to wipe them with the
hairs of her head. And as she had true repentance of her former life, so no
doubt but she had also a firm purpose, to lead a new life. So that in her
conversion, all those virtues met together, which we hold to concur to
justification, and among the rest, the pre-eminence worthily is given to love,
as to the principal disposition. She loved our Savior as the fountain of all
mercies, and goodness, and therefore accounted her precious oyntements best
bestowed on him; yea, and the humblest service, and most affectionate she could
offer him, to be all too little, and nothing answerable to the inward burning
charity which she bare him. Which noble affection of hers, toward her divine
Redeemer, no question, was most acceptable unto him, as by his own word is
most manifest: for he said, That many sins were forgiven her, because she
loved much. But M. PERKINS says, that her love was no cause that moved Christ
to pardon her, but only a sign of pardon given before: which is so contrary to
the text, that a man not past all shame, would blush once to affirm it. First
Christ says expreslie, that it was the cause of the pardon: Because she had
loved much. Secondly, that her love went before, is as playnlie declared, both
by mention of the time past: Because she has loved, and by the evidence of her
fact of washing, wiping, and anointing his feet: for the which says our
Savior, then already performed: Many sins are forgiven her. So that here
can be no impediment of believing the Catholic Doctrine, so clearly delivered
by the holy Ghost, unless one will be so blindly led by our new Masters,
that he will believe no words of Christ, be they never so plain, otherwise
then it please the Ministers to expound them. And this much of the first of
those reasons, which M. PERKINS said were of no moment.

2. Reason. Neither Circumcision, nor prepuce, avails any thing, Gal. 5.6.
but faith that works by charity. Hence Catholics gather, that when the
Apostle attributes justification to says, he means not faith alone, but as
it is joined with charity, and other like virtues, as are requisite to prepare
the soul of man, to receive that complete grace of justification. M. PERKINS
answers that they are joined together. But it is faith alone that
apprehends Christ's righteousness, and makes it ours. It uses charity as an
instrument to perform the duties of the first and second table, but it has no
part with faith in the matter of our justification.

Reply. That it has the chiefest part, and that faith is rather the instrument
and hand maid of charity. My proof shall be out of the very text alleged,
where life and motion is given to faith by charity, as the greek word
Energoumene being passive, does playnlie show, that faith is moved, led, and
guided by charity. Which S. James does demonstrat most manifest, saying that.
Even as the body is dead without the soul, so is faith without charity: Making
charity to be the life, and as it were the soul of faith: Now no man is
ignorant, but it is the soul that uses the body, as an instrument, even so
then it is charity, that uses faith as her instrument and inferior, and not
contrariwise: which S. Paul confirms at large in a whole chapter, proving
charity to be a more excellent gift then faith, or any other, concluding with
these words. Now there remains faith, hope, and charity, 1. Cor. 13.
these three, but the greater of these is charity? Whereupon S. Augustine
resolves thus. Nothing but charity makes faith it self auaylable, Li. de
Trinit. cap. 18.
for faith (says he) may be without charity, but it can not be auaylable
without it: So that first you see that charity is the mouer, and commander,
and faith, as her instrument, and hand maid.

Now that in the work of justification, it has the chief place, may be thus
proved, I demand whether that work of justification by faith be done, for the
love of God, and to his honor or no? If not, as it is void of charity, so it
is a wicked and sinful act, no justification, but infection, our own
interest being the principal end of it: now if it comprehend and conclude Gods
glory, and service in it, that is, if they apply Christ's righteousness to them,
to glorify God thereby, then has charity the principal part therein: for the
directing of all, to the honor and glory of God, is the proper office and
action of charity. All this reason that charity both concurreth to
justification, and that as principal, S. Augustine confirms in these words:
Sermon. 22. de verbis Apostol.
The house of God, (that is, a righteous and Godly soul,) has for his
foundation faith, hope is the walls of it; but charity is the roof and
perfection of it.

The third of these trifling reasons, is peruersly propounded by M. PER. thus.
Faith is never alone, therefore it does not justify alone: That this argument
is fondly framed, appears playnlie in that, that Catholics do not deny, but
affirm that faith may be without charity, as it is in all sinful
Catholics, we then form the reason thus. If faith alone be the whole cause of
justification, then if both, hope and charity were removed from faith (at least
by thought, and in conceit,) faith would nevertheless justify. But faith
considered without hope, and charity will not justify: ergo, it is not the
whole cause of justification. The first proposition can not be denied of them,
who know the nature and propriety of causes, for the entire and total cause
of any thing, being (as the Philosophers say) in act, the effect must needs
follow, and very sense teaches the simple, that if any thing be set to work,
and if it do not act that which it is set too, then there wanted some thing
requisite. And consequently that was not the whole cause of that work.

Now to the second proposition. But their imagined faith can not apply to
themselves, Christ's righteousness without the presence of hope and charity. For
else he might be justified without any hope of heaven, and without any love
toward God, and estimation of his honor, which are things most absurd in
themselves: but yet very well fitting the Protestants justification, which is
nothing else but the plain vice of presumption, as has been before declared:
Yet to avoid this inconvenience which is so great, M. PE. grants that both,
hope and charity must needs be present at the justification, but do nothing
in it, but faith does all, as the head is present to the eye, when it sees,
yet it is the eye alone that sees. Here is a worthy piece of Philosophy, that
the eye alone does see, whereas in truth it is but the instrument of seeing, the
soul being the principal cause of sight, as it is of all other actions, of
life, sense, and reason: and it is not to purpose here, where we require the
presence of the whole cause, and not only of the isntrumental cause. And to
return your similitude upon your self, as the eye cannot see without the
head, because it receives influence from it, before it ca^ see, so cannot
faith justify without charity, because it necessarily receives spirit of life
from it, before it can do any thing acceptable in Gods sight.

The fourth reason, if faith alone do justify, then faith alone will save,
but it will not save, ergo. M. PERKINS first denies the proposition, and
says. That it may justify, and yet not save: because more is required to
salvation, then to justification. Which is false, for put the case that an
Innocent babe dye shortly after his baptism wherein he was justified, shall he
not be saved for want of any thing? I hope you will say yes: even so any man
that is justified, if he depart in that state, no man makes doubt of his
salvation, therefore this first shift was very friuoulous. Which M. PERKINS
perceiving flies to a second, that for faith alone we shall also be saved, and
that good works shall not be regarded at the day of our judgment. Then must
those words of the holy Ghost so often repeted in the Scriptures be razed out
of the text. God at that time will render unto every man, according to his
works. But of this more amply in the question of merits.

5. Reason. There be many other virtues, unto which justification and salvation
are ascribed in Gods word: therefore faith alone suffices not. The Antecedent
is proved, first of fear it is said. He that is without fear, Ecclesias. 1.
Romans 8. Luc. 13. 1. Joan. 3.
cannot be justified. We are saved by hope. Unless you do penance, you shall
all in like sort perish. We are translated from death to life, (that is
justified) because we love the brethren. Again of baptism. Unless you be
borne again of water, and the holy Ghost, you cannot enter into the Kingdom
of heaven: Lastly we must have a resolute purpose to amend our evil lives.
Romans 6.
For we are buried together with Christ by baptism into death, that as Christ
is risen from the dead, etc. So we may also walk in news of life: To all
these and many such like places of Holy Scripture, it pleased M. PERKINS to
make answer in that one. Romans 8.
You are saved by hope: to wit; that Paul's meaning is only, that we have not
as yet salvation in possession, but must wait patiently for it, until the
time of our full deliverance, this is all. Now whether that patient
expectation, which is not hope, but issues out of hope, of eternal salvation,
or hope it self be any cause of salvation, he says neither yea nor nay, and
leaves you to think as it seems best unto your self. S. Paul then affirming
it to be a cause of salvation, it is best to believe him: and so neither to
exclude hope or charity, or any of the foresaid virtues, from the work of
justification, having so good warrant as the word of God, for the confirmation
of it.

To these authorities and reasons, taken out of the holy Scriptures, let us
join here some testimonies of the ancient Church, reserving the rest unto
that place, wherein M. PER. cites some for him. The most ancient and most
valiant Martyr S. Ignatius, of our justification writes thus. Epist. ad Philip.
The beginning of life is faith, but the end of it is charity, but both united
and joined together, do make the man of God perfect.

Clement Patriarch of Alexandria says. Faith goes before, Libr. 2. strom.
but fear does build, and charity brings to perfection.

Saint John Chrysostom, Patriarch of Constantinople has these words: Least
the faithful should trust that by faith alone they might be saved, Hom. 70. in
Mat.
he disputes of the punishment of evil men, and so does he both exhort the
Infidels to faith, and the faithful to live well.

Lib. 3. hypognost.
S. Augustine cries out as it were to our Protestants, and says: Hear O
foolish Heretic, and enemy to the true faith. Good works, which (that they
may be done, are by grace prepared, and not of the merits of free will) we
condemn not: because by them, or such like, men of God have been justified,
are justified, and shall be justified. De side and oper. c. 14.
And, Now let us see that which is to be shaken out of the hearts of the
faithful: Least by evil security they lose their salvation, if they shall
think faith alone, to be sufficient to obtain it.

Now the doctrine which M. PERKINS teaches, is clean contrary. For (says he)
A sinner is justified by faith alone, that is, nothing that man can do by
nature or grace, concurreth thereto as any kind of cause, but faith a lone.
Farther he says, That faith it self is no principal, but rather an
isntrumental cause, whereby we apprehend and apply Christ and his righteousness
for our justification. So that in fine, we have that faith so much by them
magnified, and called the only and whole cause of our justification, is in the
end become no true cause at all, but a bare condition, without which we cannot
be justified. If it be an isntrumental cause, Conditio sine qua non.
let him then declare what is the principal cause, whose instrument faith is?
and choose whether he had leifer to have charity, or the soul of man without
any help of grace.

But to come to his reasons. The first is taken out of these words. As Moses
lift up the serpent in the desert, Ioh. 3.
so must the son of man be lift up, that whosoever believes in him, shall
not perish, but have life everlasting. True, if he live accordingly, and as his
faith teaches him: but what is this to justification by only faith? Marry M.
PERKINS draws it in after this fashion. As nothing was required of them who
were strong by serpents, but that they should look upon the brazen serpent: So
nothing is required of a sinner, to deliver him from sin, but that he cast
his eye of faith upon Christ's righteousness, and apply that to himself in
particular. But this application of the similitude is only man's foolish
invention without any ground in the text. Similttudes be not in all points
alike, neither must be streatched beyond the very point wherein the similitude
lies, which in this matter is, that like as the Israelites in the Wilderness
stoung with serpents, were cured by looking upon the brazen serpent: so men
infected with sin, have no other remedy, then to embrace the faith of Christ
Jesus: All this we confess, but to say that nothing else is necessary, that is
quite besides the text, and as easily rejected by us, as it is by him obtruded
without any authority, or probability.

His 2. reason is collected of exclusive speeches (as he speaks) used in
Scriptures. Gal 2.16.
As we are justified freely, not of the law, not by the law not of works,
not of our selves, not of the works of the law, but by faith: all boasting
excluded: Luke 8.50:
only believe. These distinctions whereby works and the law are excluded in the
work of justification, include thus much, that faith alone does justify.

It does not so: for these exclusive speeches do not exclude fear, hope and
charity, more then they exclude faith it self. Which may be called a work of
the law, as well as any other virtue, being as much required by the law as any
other. But S. Paul's meaning in those places is, to exclude all such works, as
either Jew or Gentile did, or could brag of, as done of themselves, and so
thought that by them, they deserved to be made Christians. For he truly says,
that all were concluded in sin, and needed the grace of God, which they were
to receive of his free mercy, through the merits of Christ, and not of any
desert of their own: And that to obtain this grace through Christ, it was not
needful, nay rather hurtful to observe the ceremonies of Moses law, as
Circumcision, the observation of any of their feasts, or fastes, nor any such
like work of the law, which the Jews reputed so necessary. Again, that all
moral works of the Gentiles could not deserve this grace, which works not
proceeding from charity, were nothing worth in Gods sight. And so all works,
both of Jew and Gentile, are excluded from being any meritorious cause of
justification, and consequently, all their boasting of their own forces, their
first justification being freely bestowed upon them. Yet all this
notwithstanding, a certain virtuous disposition is required in the Jew and
Gentile, whereby his soul is prepared to receive that great grace of
justification: that say we, is faith, fear, hope, love, and repentance, that
(say the Protestants) is faith only. Wherefore say we as the excluding of
works, and boasting exclude not faith, no more do they exclude the rest,
faith being as well our work, and a work of the law as any of the rest, and
all the rest being of grace, as well as faith, and as far from boasting of,
as faith it self. Now that out of S Luke, believe only, is nothing to the
purpose. For he was bid believe the raising of his daughter to life, and not
that Christ's righteousness was his: and faith alone may be a sufficient
disposition to obtain a miracle, but not to obtain justification, of which
the question only is.

Consider now good Reader, whether of our interpretations agree better, with
the circumstances of the text, and the judgment of the ancient Fathers. The
texts see thou in the Testament. Take for a taste, of the Fathers judgment, S.
Augustines exposition of those places of S. Paul, of one of the chiefest of
which, thus he speaks. Men not understanding that which the Apostle says, We
esteem a man to be justified without the law, De gra. and lib. a^b. c 7.
thought him to say, that faith sufficed a man althoug he lived evil, and had
no good works: which God forbid, that the vessel of election should think.
And again.

De predest. sanct. c 7.
Therefore the Apostle says, that a man is justified by faith, and not of
works, because says is first given, and by it the rest (which are properly
called works, and in which we live justly) are by petition obtained.

By which it is manifest, that S. Paul excluding the works of the law, and
the works done by our own only forces, does not mean to exclude good
works, which proceed from the help of Gods grace

THAT FAITH ONLY DOES NOT IVSTIFIE.
MASTER PERKINS third Argument. Very reason may teach us thus much: that no
gift in man is apt as a spiritual hand to receive and apply Christ and his
righteousness unto a sinner, saving faith, love, hope, fear, repentance, have
their several uses, but none of them serve for this end of apprehending, but
faith only.

Amswere. Man's reason is but a blind mistress in matters of faith, and he that
has no better an instructor in such high mysteries, must needs know little.
But what if that also fail you in this point? then every man cannot but see
how naked you are of all kind of probability. I say then, that reason rather
teaches the contrary. For in common sense, no man apprehends and enters
into the possession of any thing, by believing that he has it. For if a man
should believe that he is rich, of honor, wise, or virtuous: Does he thereby
become presently such a one? nothing less. His faith and persuasion is no
fit instrument to apply and draw these things to himself, as all the
world sees. How then does reason teach me, that by believing Christ's
righteousness to be mine own, I lay hand on it, and make it mine. Again
Christ's righteousness (according to their own opinion) is not received into us
at all, but is ours only by Gods imputation, what need we then faith, as a
spiritual hand to receive it? If they say (as M. PERKINS does) that faith is
as it were a condition required in us, which when God sees in us, he presently
imputes Christ's righteousness to us, and makes it ours. Then will I be bold
to say, that any other virtue is as proper as faith, to have Christ applied
unto us: there being no other aptness requisite in the condition it self, but
only the will and ordinance of God: then every thing that it shall please him to
appoint, is alike apt: and so M. PERKINS had small reason to say, that faith
was the only apt instrument to apply to us Christ's righteousness.

Moreover, true divine reason teaches me, that both hope and charity, do much
more apply unto Christians all Christ's merits, and make them do then faith:
For what faith assures me of in general, that hope applies unto me in
particular: by faith I believe CHRIST to be the Savior of all mankind: by hope
I trust to be made partaker of that salvation in him. But charity does yet give
me a greater confidence of salvation: for by the rule of true charity, as I
dedicate and employ my life, labors, and all that I have to the service of
God, so all that God has is made mine, so far forth as it can be made mine:
according unto that sacred law of friendship: Amicorum omnia sunt communia.
And therefore in true reason, neither by faith, nor any other virtue, we take
such hold on Christ's merittes, nor have such interest in his inestimable
treasures, as by charity: which S. Augustine understood well, when he made it
the model, and measure of justification: saying, That Charity beginning, De
not. and gra. c. vlt.
was Justice beginning: Charity increased, was Justice increased: great
Charity, was great Justice: and perfect Charity, was perfect Justice.

M. PERKINS fourth Reason, is taken from the judgment of the ancient Church:
They are blessed, to whom without any labor or work done, Ambros. in Romans 4.
iniquities are remitted. So no works or repentance is required of them, but
only that they believe. To these and such like words, I answer.

First, that it is very uncertain, whether these Commentaries be Saint
Ambroses.

Secondly, that, that Author excludes not repentance, but only the works of
Moses law, which the Jews held to be necessary: as circumcision, and such
like, see the place, and confer with it, that which he has written in the
same work, upon the fourth to the Hebrews: where he has these words. Faith
is a great thing, and without it, it is not possible to be saved, but faith
alone does not suffice: but it is necessary, that faith work by charity, and
converse worthy of God.

M. PERKINS next authority is gathered out of S. Augustine. De verb. Ap. ser.
40.
There is one propitiation for all sinners to believe in Christ; True, but
where is it, that we need nothing else, but to believe.

Hesichius says, Grace which is of mercy, is apprehended by faith alone,
Leuit. li. 1. cap. 2.
and not of works: that is, we do not meritte by our works done before
grace, anything at GODS hand, but of his mercy receive both, faith and
justification.

4. Bernard has: Whosoever thirsts after righteousness: let him believe in
thee: Sup. cant. sermon. 22.
that being justified by faith alone, he way have peace with God.

Answer. By faith alone, he excludes all other means, that either Jew, or
Gentile required, but not charity: Which his very words include for how can
we abhor sin, and thirst after justice, without charity: and in the same
work: Sermon. 24.
He declares plainly that he comprehends always charity, when he speaks
of a justifying faith: saying. A right faith does not make a man righteous, if
it work not by Charity. And again: Neither works without faith, nor faith
without works is sufficient to make the soul righteous.

Gal. 3.
5. Chrysostom they said, he who rested on faith alone, was accursed: but Paul
shows, that he is blessed who rested on faith alone. Answer. He speaks of
the Jews who held Christians accursed, because resting on the faith in Christ
would not observe withal Moses law: the Apostle contrary wise denounces them
accursed, Gal. 5.
who would join the ceremonies of Moses law, with Christian religion, and so
faith alone, there excludes only the old law, not the works of charity, so
he mangleth pitifully a sentence of S. Basils, saying: De humil.
Let man acknowledge himself to want true justice, and that he is justified
only by faith in Christ: If a man know him self justified by faith in
Christ, how can he acknowledge that he wants true justice? His words truly
repeted are these. Let man acknowledge that he is unworthy of true justice:
and that his justification comes not of his desert, but of the mere mercy of
GOD through Christ. So that by faith alone S. Basil treating of humility,
excludes all merit of our own, but no necessary good disposition, as you may
see in his Sermon, de fide, where he proves by many textes of Holy Scripture,
that charity is as necessary as faith.

Romans 3.
M. PERKINS last testimony is out of Origin: Who proves (as M. PER. said) that
only believing without works justifies, by the example of the Thief on the
Cross, of whose good works there is no mention.

Answer. Origin excludes no good disposition in us to justification but
says, that a man may be saved, without doing outwardly any good works; If he
want time and place: as the Thief did, who presently upon his conversion was
put to death, which is good Catholic Doctrine: but that you may perceive how
necessary the good dispositions before mentioned, be to justification, you
shall find if you consider well all circumstances, not one of them to have
been wanting in that good Theefes conversion. First, that he stood in fear of
Gods just judgment, appears by these his words, to his fellow, Do thou
not fear God, etc. He had hope to be saved by Christ, out of which he said: O
Lord remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom: By both, which speeches
is showed also his faith both in God, that he is the gouuernour and just judge
of the world, and in Christ, that he was the Redeemer of mankind. His
repentance and confession of his fault, is laid down in this: And we truly
suffer worthily: His charity toward God and his neighbor, in reprehending
his fellows blasphemy, in defending Christ's innocence: and in the midst of
his greatest disgraces, and raging enemies, to confess him to be King of the
world to come: out of all which we may gather also, that he had a full purpose
to amend his life, and to have taken such order for his recovery, as it should
please Christ his Savior to appoint. So that the lacked not any one of those
dispositions, which the Catholic Church requires to justification. Now that,
that great Doctor Origin meant not to exclude any of these good qualities out
of the companies of faith; is apparent: by that which he has written on the
next Chapter: where he says. Romans 4.
That faith cannot be imputed to justice, to such as believe in Christ, unless
they do withal put of the old man, and a little before more playnlie saying:
I think that faith is the first beginning of salvation, hope is proceeding in
the building, but the top and perfection of the whole work, is charity.

THE THIRD DIFFERENCE ABOUT JUSTIFICATION, how far forth good works are
required thereto.
MASTER PERKINS says, Page 91.
That after the doctrine of the Church of Rome there be two kinds of
justification: the first, when of a sinner one is made just: the which is of
the mere mercy of God, through Christ, without any merit of man, only some
certain good devotions of the soul, (as the acts of Faith, Fear, Hope,
Charity, Repentance) go before, to prepare as it were the way, and to make it
more sit to receive that high grace of justification.

The second justification is, when a just man by the exercise of virtues, is
made more just: as a Child new borne, does by nuriture grow, day by day
bigger: of this increase of grace, Catholics hold good works to be the
meritorious cause.

M. PERKINS first grants, that good works do please God, and have a
temporal reward.

2. That they are necessary to salvation, not as the cause thereof, but either
as marks in away to direct us toward salvation: or as fruits and signs of
righteousness, to declare one to be just before men: all which he shuffleth in,
rather to delude our arguments, then for that they esteem much of good works,
which they hold to be no better then deadly sins.

The maine difference then between us, consists in this, whether good works
be the true cause indeed, of the increase of our righteousness, which we call
the second justification, or whether they be only fruits, signs, or marks of
it.

M. PERKINS pretendes to prove, that they are no cause of the increase of our
justice: and yet frames not one argument directly to that purpose: but repeates
those objections, and proposes them now at large, which he made before,
against the first justification: the which although impertinent to this place,
yet I will solue them first, and then set down our own.

We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the law.
2 Romans 3.
Answer. The Apostle there speaks of the justification of a sinner: for he
says before, that he has proved, both Jew, and Greek, to be under sin;
and that all have sinned, and need the glory of God: Wherefore this place
appertaynes not unto the second justification: and excludes only either works
of the law, as not necessary unto the first justification of a sinner: against
the Jews who thought and taught them to be necessary: or else against the
Gentiles any work of ours, from being any meritorious cause of that first
justification: for we acknowledge very willingly (as you have heard often
before) that every sinner is justified freely of the mere grace of God,
through the merit of Christ only, and without any merit of the sinner
himself: and yet is not a sinner (being of years of discretion,) merely
passive in that his justification, as M. PERKINS very absurdly says: for in
their own opinion he must believe (which is an action:) and in ours not only
believe but also, Hope, Love, and Repent: And this kind of justification
excludes all boasting in our souls, as well as theirs. For as they must
grant, that they may not brag of their faith, although it be an act of
theirs so necessarily required at their justification, that without it, they
could not be justified: even so let them think of the rest of those good
preparations, which we hold to be necessary, that we cannot truly boast of
them, as though they came of our selves, but we confess all these good
inspirations, as all other good, to descend from the bounteous liberality of
the father of lights: and for the yielding of our consent to them; we can no
more vaunt, then of consenting unto faith, all which is no more then if a man
be mired in a lake, and unable of himself to get out, would be content that an
other of his goodness should help him out of it. Yet observe by the way: that
Saint Paul forbids not all glorying or boasting: Romans 5.
For he gloryeth in the hope of glory of the Son of GOD, 2. Cor. 10.
and in his tribulations: Again. He defines that we may glory in measure, and
that he might glory in his power. And that he was constayned to glory in his
visions and revelations: 2. Cor. 12.
So that a good Christian may glory in our Lord, and in his heavenly gifts, so
it be in measure, and due season. Acknowledging them from whence they come. But
to boast and say that either GOD needed us, or that our good parts were cause,
that GOD called us first to his service, is both false, and utterly unlawful.

Ephesians. 2.
So that by grace yea are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it
is the gift of God: not of works least any man should boast himself. Is
nothing against our Doctrine of justification, but too too ignorantly or
maliciously cited against it: and note also with Saint Augustine, that faith is
there mentioned, Lib. 83. q. 76.
to exclude all merits of our works, which went before and might seem to the
simple to have been some cause why God bestowed his first grace upon us: but
no virtuous dispositions requisite for the better preparation to the same
grace: and therefore very fondly does M. PERKINS infer, that in that sentence
Saint Paul speaks of works of grace: because in the text following he
mentioned good works. Whereas the Apostle puts an evident distinction
between those two kind of works, signifying the first: To be of ourselves.
The second, To proceed from us as Gods workemanshippe, created in CHRIST
JESUS, and the first, he calls Works simply: the second, Good works,
prepared of God for us to walk in after our first justification. What gross
ignorance then was it, to take these two so distinct manner of works, for the
same, and to ground himself so boldly upon it.

Now to his second reason. If you be circumcised, Gal. 9.
you are bound to the whole law. Hence thus he argues: If a man will be
justified by works, he is bound to fulfill the whole law, according to the
rigor of it. That is Paul's ground: But no man can fulfill the law, according
unto the rigor of it: ergo. No man can be justified by works. He can apply
the text prefixed unto any part of the argument. Erit mihi magnus Appollo:
Saint Paul only says in these words: That if you be circumcised, yea are
bound to keep the whole law of Moses. M. PERKINS, That if a man will be
justified by works, he must fulfill the rigor of the law: Which are as just
as Germains lips, as they say: But M. PERKINS says that it is Saint Paul's
ground: but he is much deceived, for the Apostles ground is this. That
circumcision is as it were a profession of Iudaisme, and therefore he that
would be circumcided, did make himself subject unto the whole law of the
Jews. Of the possibilities of fulfilling the law, because M. PERKINS touches
so often that string, shall be treated in a distinct question, as soon as I
have dispatched this.

M. PERKINS third Argument. Election to salvation is of grace without works:
wherefore the justification of a sinner is of grace alone without works:
because election is the cause of justification.

Answer. That election is of grace without works, done of our own simple
forces, or without the works of Moses law: but not without provision of good
works issuing out of faith, and the help of Gods grace, as shall be handled
more largely in the question of merits.

OF THE SECOND JUSTIFICATION.
THE fourth argument. A man just be fully justified, before he can do a good
work: and therefore good works can not go before justification. True, not
before the first justification of a sinner. But good Sir, you having made in
the beginning of this last Article a distinction between the first and second
justification: And having before discussed the first, and the second now
remaining, and expecting you, why did you not say one word of it, the matter
being ample and well worthy the handling? albeit you will not willingly
confess any second justification as you say: Yet had it been your part at
least to have disproued such arguments, as we bring to prove a second
justification: Ye acknowledge that there be degrees of sanctification: But
these degrees must be made downward of evil, worser and worst: for if all our
sanctification and best works be like unto defiled cloutes, and no better then
deadly sins as you hold, and else where, Page 76.
let any wise man judge what degrees of goodness can be lodged in it. Again,
how absurd is that position, that there is but one justification, whereby they
take fast hold on Christ's righteousness, which can never after, be either loosed
or increased. Why then do you with your brother Iouinian, maintain, that all
men are equally righteous? If it so be: Lib. 2. con Iouin. Epist 81. Epist 57.
Hom. 15. in Ezech.
let him that desires to see you well coursed, read. S. Hier. S. Amb. S.
August. S. Greg. At least we must needs uphold that a man is as just and
righteous at his first conversion, as at his death, how Godly a life soever he
lead: against which I will put down these reasons following.

First that of the revelations. Let him that is just be yet justified: or as
your text has it. Cap. 22.
He that is righteous, let him be more righteous: and that of, fear not to be
justified even until death: Eccles. 18.
do convince, that there are more justifications then one, and that a man may
increase in justification, and righteousness until death. Which is confirmed,
where it is said: That the path of a just man proceeds, Prob. 4.
as the light does until it be perfect day; Which is degrees more and more:
And S. Paul teaches the same, where he says to men that give alms
plentifully. 2. Cor. 9.
That God will multiply their seed, and augment the increases of the fruits of
their justice. Further, S. James does most effectually prove this increase of
righteousness, and the second justification, in these words. Abraham our father
was he not justified by works, offering Isaac his Son upon the Altar. Cap.
2.
That he speaks of the second justification is evident: for Abraham was
justified before Isaac was borne, as it is most manifest by the Scripture it
self: and by that heroical act, of not sparing his only and entirely beloved
Son, Genes. 15. Romans 4.
his justice was much augmented. And the Apostle himself seems to have
forseene all our adversaries cauillation, and to have so long before prevented
them: First, that common shift of theirs (that this work was a sign, or the
fruit only of his faith, and no companion of it, in the matter of
justification) is formally confuted: for the holy Ghost speaking distinctly of
both, his faith, and work, and joining them both in this act of justification,
attributes the better part of it, unto his work: thus; See thou that faith
did work with his works, and by the works the faith was consummate and made
perfect. Which he does after fitly declare by a similitude, comparing faith to
the body, and good works to the soul: which give life and luster to faith,
otherwise faith is of little value and estimation with God. Which S. Paul also
teaches at large, among other speeches including this: That if he should have
all faith, and wanted charity, 1. Cor. 13
he were nothing: And comparing faith and charity together, defines expressly,
that charity is the greater virtue: Which charity is the fountain of all good
works. And so by this preferring these works of charity, before faith, he
does stop the other starting hole of the Protestants, that Abraham forsooth was
justified before God, by only faith: but was declared just before men by his
works: For if God esteem more of charity, then of our faith, a man is more
justified before God by charity, then by faith: Again, in the very place where
this noble fact is recorded, to show how acceptable it was to God himself, it
is said in the person of God: Genesis 22.
Now I know that thou love me: and to convince all obstinate cauilling, is
it not said that his faith did in this very fact cooperate with his works, and
that the work made his faith perfect: which conjunction of both of them
together, does demonstrate that he speaks of his justification before God:
adding also, That he was therefore called the friend of God. Which could not
have been, if thereby he had been only declared just before men, and thus
does S. Augustine reconcile the two places of the Apostles, S. Paul, and S.
James, which seem contrary. S. Paul saying that a man is justified by faith,
without works, and S. James, that a man is justified by works, and not by
faith only. That S. Paul speaks of works, which go before faith, such as
we of our own forces, without the help of grace are able to do: and such he
says not to deserve our first justification. But S. James disputes of works,
which follow faith, and issue out of our souls, now garnished with grace,
and such he holds us to be justified by, that is, made more and more just:
See the place. He says directly, L. 83. quest q. 76. Sermon. 16. de verb. Apos.
that we are justified, and that this justice does increase, whiles it does
proceed and profit.

Nothing then is more certain and clear, then that there our justification
may daily be augmented: and it seems to me, that this also be granted in
their opinion: For they holding faith to be the only instrument of
justification, cannot deny, but that there are many degrees of faith, it is so
plainly taught in the word: O ye of little faith. Math. 8. Luc. 19.
And then a little after, I have not found so great faith in Israel: And O
Lord increase our faith: and many such like, where many different degrees of
faith are mentioned. How then can the justification which dependes upon that
faith, not be correspondent unto that diversity of faith, but all one? Page 54.
Again, M. PERK. delivers plainly, That men at the first, are not so well
assured of their salvation, as they are afterward; If then in the certainty of
their salvation, which is the prime effect of their justification they put
degrees, they must perforce allow them in the justificatio^ it self. And thus
much of this question: Page 200.
the objections which M. PERKINS makes for us in this Article: do belong
either to the question of merits, or of the possibility of fulfilling the law,
or to the perfection of our justice: and therefore I remitte them to those
places: and will handle the two latter points, before I come to that of merits.

WHETHER IT BE POSSIBLE FOR A MAN IN GRACE, to fulfill Gods law.
Page 95. Gal. 5.
MASTER PERKINS argues, that it is impossible: First, for that Paul took it
for his ground, that the law could not be fulfilled. Admit it were so. I
then would answer, that he meant, that a man helped only with the knowledge of
the law, cannot fulfill the law: but by the aid of Gods grace, he might be
able to do it. Which I gather out of S. Paul, Romans 8.
where he says, That, that which was impossible to the law, is made by the
grace of Christ possible.

2 Object. The lives and works of most righteous men, are imperfect and
stained with sin; ergo quid? Of this, there shall be a several Article.

3 Object. Our knowledge is imperfect, and therefore out faith, repentance, and
sanctification is answerable. I would to God all our works were answerable to
our knowledge, then would they be much more perfect then they are, but this
Argument is also impertinent, and does rather prove it possible to fulfill the
law, because it is possible to know all the law: Then if our works be
answerable to our knowledge: we may also fulfill it.

4 Object. A man regenerate, is partly flesh, and partly spirit, and therefore
his best works, are partly from the flesh. Not so, if we mortify the deeds
of the flesh by the spirit, Romans 8.13.
as the Apostle exhorts. But these trifling arguments belong rather unto the
next question. I will help M. PERKINS to some better, that the matter may be
more thoroughly examined. Why go ye about to put a yoke upon the Disciples
necks, Act. 1.15.
which neither we, nor our Fathers were able to be are? these words were
spoken of the law of Moses: therefore we were not able to fulfill it.

I answer first, that, that law could not be fulfilled by the only help of
the same law, without the further aid of Gods grace.

Secondly, that it was so burdensome and comberous, by reason of the multitude
of their Sacrifices, Sacraments, and Ceremonies, that it could hardly be kept
with the help of ordinary grace: and in that sense, it is said to be such a
yoke, as we were not able to bear. Because things very hard to be done, are
now and then, called impossible. Now that Iosue, Ios. 11.3. Reg. 14. Act. 13.
4. Reg. 23. Luke 1.
David, Josias, Zachary, Elizabeth, and many others, did fulfill all the law,
is recorded in holy Scripture: Wherefore it is most manifest, that it might be
kept.

To will is in me, but I find not how to perform. Romans 7.
If S. Paul could not perform that which he would, how can others?

Answer. He speaks there of avoiding al evil motions, and temptations, which
he would willingly have done, but he could not: Marry he could well by the
assistance of Gods grace, subdue those prouocations to sin, and make them
occasions of virtue: and consequently, keep all the commandments, not
suffering those passions to lead him to the breach of any one of them. The
like answer we make unto that objection, that one of the ten commandments
forbids us to covet our neighbors goods, his wife, or servants, which as they
say is impossible: but we hold, that it may be well done, understanding the
commandment rightly, which prohibiteth not to have evil motions of
couetuousnes and lechery: but to yield our consent unto them. Now it is so
possible for a man by Gods grace to refrain his consent from such wicked
temptations, Libr. 10. conf c. 7. Iac. 3.2. 1. Joan. 1.
that S. August thinks it may be done of a mortified virtuous man, even when
he is a sleep. And testifies of himself, that waking he performed it. We
do all offend in many things. And if we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves. But if we could observe all the law, we should offend in nothing, nor
have any sin. ergo.

Answer. I grant that we offend in many things: not because it is not
possible to keep them, but for that we are frail, and easily led by the
craft of the Devil into many offenses which we might avoid, if we were so
wary and watchful as we ought to be: again, although we cannot keep our
selves from venial offenses, yet may we fulfill the law, which is not
transgressed and broken, unless we commit some mortal sins. For venial
sins, either for the smalnesse of the matter, or want of consideration, are
not so opposite to the law, as that they violate the reason, and purport of
it, although they be somewhat disagreeing with it. But of this matter more
fully in some other place.

Lastly, it may be objected that the way to heaven is strait, and the gate
narrow: which is so true, that it seems impossible to be kept by flesh and
blood: but that which is impossible to men of themselves, is made possible, and
easy too, by the grace of God: which made S. Paul to say, I can do all
things in him, that strengthens and comformeth me: Philip. 4. Psalm. 118,
And the Prophet David, after thou O Lord hadest dilated my heart (and with thy
grace set it at liberty) I did run the ways of thy commandments: that is,
I did readely, and willingly perform them. Of the loving of GOD with all our
heart, etc. shall be treated in the question of the perfection of justice.

Having now confuted all that is commonly proposed to prove the impossibility
of keeping Gods commandments, let us now see what we can say in proof of the
possibility of it: First, S. Paul is very playnlie for it, Romans 8.
saying. That which was impossible to the law, in that is weakened by the
flesh, God sending his Son in the similitude of flesh, of sin, damned sin
in the flesh, that the justification of the law might be fulfilled in us, who
walk not according to the flesh; but according unto the spirit. See how
formally he teaches, that Christ dying to redeem us from sin, purchased us
grace to fulfill the law, which before was impossible unto our weak flesh.
Again, how far S. John was from that opinion, of thinking Gods
commandments to be impossible, may appear by that Epistle. cap. 5. lath. 11.
And his commandments be not heavy. Which is taken out of our Saviors own
words. My yoke is sweet, and my burden is light. The reason of this is, that
although to our corrupt frailty, they be very heavy: Yet when the virtue of
charity is powered into our hearts by the holy Ghost, then lo, do we with
delight fulfill them. For as the Apostle witnesses. Romans 13.
Charity is the fulness of the law. And, He that does love his neighbor, has
fulfilled the law: Which Christ himself teaches, when he affirms, ^lath.
22.
That the whole law, and Prophets depend upon these two commandments, of
loving God, and our neighbor: Now both according unto our opinion and the
Protestants, a man regenerate and in the state of grace has in him the virtue
of Charity: we hold it to be the principal part of inherent justice: they say
that their justifying faith can never be separated from it: So that a righteous
man, being also endued with charity, is able thereby to fulfill the whole law.
Let us adjoyne unto these Authorities of holy write, the testimony of one
ancient Father or two, Sermon. in il^ud, Atten^ie tibi De not. and gra. cap. 69.
S. Basil affirms. That it is impious and ungodly, to say that the
commandments of the spirit be impossible.

S. Augustine defines, That we must believe firmly, that God being just and
good, could not command things that be impossible for us to fulfill: The
reason may be, that it is the part of a tyrant, and no true lawemaker, to
command his subjectes to do that under pain of death, which he knows them
no way able to perform: for those were not to be called laws, (which are to
direct men, to that which is just) but snares to catch the most diligent in,
and to bind them up to most assured perdition. Wherefore it was afterward
decreed in an approved Council of Aransican, 2. Can. vlt.
as an article of faith in these words. This also we believe according to the
Catholic faith, that all men baptized by grace there received, with the help
and cooperation of Christ, both can, and ought to keep and fulfill those
things, which belong to salvation. The principal whereof are after our
Saviors own determination to keep the commandments. Math. 19.
If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments.

This by the way concerning the possibility of fulfilling the law.

THAT GOOD WORKS BE NOT STAINED WITH SIN.
NOW that just men's works be not sins: which I prove first, by some works
of that pattern of patience, Job. Of whom it is written, that notwithstanding
all the Devils power and craft in tempting of him, He continued still a single
hearted, and an upright man, departing from evil, Cap. 2.
and preserving his innocence. If he continued and innocent, he sinned not:
Again, if in all these instigations to impatience, he remained patient: these
his works were perfect. For S. James says, Esteem it my brethren, Cap. 1.
all joy, when you shall fall into diverse temptations: knowing that the
probation of your says, works patience: And let patience have a perfect
work, that you may be perfect and entire, failing in nothing.

2 King David thus by the inspiration of the holy Ghost speaks of himself
Thou have (O Lord) proved my heart, thou have visited me in the night, Psalm. 16.
thou have tried me in fire, and there was no iniquity found in me. It must
needs then be granted, that some of his works at least were free from all
sin and iniquity. And that the most of them were such, if you hear the holy
Ghost testifying it, I hope you will believe it: read then, where it is of
record, That David did that, 3. Reg. 15.
which was right in the sight of our Lord (and not only in the sight of men)
and turned from nothing that he commanded him, all the days of his life,
except only the matter of Vrias the Hethite.

3 The Apostle affirms, 1 Cor. 3.
That some men do build upon the only foundation Christ Jesus, gold, silver,
and precious stones: that is, being choice members of Christ's Catholic
Church, do many perfect good works, such as being tried in the furnace of
Gods judgment, will suffer no loss or detriment, as he there says expressly:
Wherefore they must needs be pure, and free from all dross of sin,
otherwise having been so proved in fire, it would have been found out.

4 Many works of righteous men please God. Romans 12. 1. Pet. 2.
Make your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God: the same
offering spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God: And S. Paul, calls alms
bestowed on him in prison, Phil. 4.
an acceptable sacrifice of sweet savor, and pleasing God. But nothing
infected with sin (al which he hates deadly) can please God and be
acceptable in his sight: God of his mercy through Christ does pardon sin, or
as the Protestants speak, not impute it to the person: but to say that a
sinful work is of sweet savor before him, and a grateful sacrifice to him,
were blasphemy: wherefore we must needs confess, that such works which so
well pleased him, were not defiled with any kind of sin.

Finally, many works in holy write be called good, as, Math. 5. 1. Tim. 6.
Ephesians 2.
That they may see your good works: to be rich in good works: We are created
in CHRIST JESUS to good works: but they could not truly be called good
works, if they were infected with sin. For according to the judgment of all
learned Divines, it can be no good work, that fails either in substance, or
circumstance, that has any one fault in it: For, Bonum ex integra causa malum,
exquolibet defectu. Wherefore we must either say, that the H. Ghost calls
evil good, which were blasphemy, or else acknowledge, that there be many good
works free from all infection of sin.

In lieu of the manifold testimony of Antiquity, which does nothing more then
recommend good works, and paint out the excellency of them: I will set down
one passage of S. August. wherein this very controversy is distinctly
declared, and determined: thus he begins: The justice (through which the
just man lives by faith) because it is given to man by the spiritte of grace
is true justice: Li. 3. cont. duas epist. Felag. c. 7.
the which although it be worthily called in some men perfect, according to the
capacity of this life, yet it is but small in comparison of that greater,
which man made equal to Angels shall receive. Which (heavenly justice) he
that had not as yet said himself to be perfect, in regard of that justice that
was in him; and also imperfect; if it be compared to that which he wanted. But
certainly this lesser justice, or righteousness, breeds, and brings forth
merittes, and that greater, is the reward thereof. Wherefore he that pursues
not this, shall not obtain that: Hitherto S. Augustine. Note first, that he
defines the justice which we have in this life, to be true justice, which is
pure from all injustice and iniquity: Then, that it is also perfect, not
failing in any duty, which we be bound to perform. Lastly, that it brings
forth good works, such as merit life everlasting. True it is also, that this
justice although perfect in itself, so far as man's capacity in this life
does permit: yet being compared unto the state of justice which is in heaven,
it may be called imperfect, not that this is not sufficient to defend us from
all formal transgression of Gods law: but because it keeps not us sometimes
from venial sin: and has not such a high degree of perfection as that has.
De spir. and lit. vlt. cap.
S. Augustine has the like discourse, where he says directly, that it
appertains to the lesser justice of this life, not to sin. So that we have
out of this oracle of Antiquity: that many works of a just man are without
sin.

To these reasons taken partly out of the Scriptures, and partly out of the
record of Antiquity, let us join one or two drawn from the absurdity of our
adversaries doctrine, which teaches every good work of the righteous man to
be infected with mortal sin: Which being granted, it would follow
necessarily, that no good work in the world, were to be done under pain of
damnation: thus: No mortal sin is to be done under pain of damnation: Romans
6.
for the wages of sin is death: but all good works are stained with mortal
sin. ergo no good work is to be done under pain of damnation. It follows
secondly, that every man is bound to sin deadly. For all men are bound to
perform the duties of the first and second table: but every performance of any
duty is necessary linked with some mortal sin: therefore every man is
bound to commit many mortal sins: and consequently to be damned. These
are holy and comfortable conclusions, yet inseparable companions, if not sworn
brethren of the Protestants doctrine. Now let us hear what Arguments they
bring against this Catholic verity.

THAT GOOD WORKS BE FREE FROM SIN.
FIRST they allege these words, Enter not O Lord, Psalm 141.
into judgment with thy servant, because no living creature shall be justified
in thy sight. If none can be justified before God, it seems that none of their
works are just in his sight. Answer. There are two common expositions of this
place, among the ancient Fathers: both true, but far from the Protestants
purpose. The former is S. Augustines, S. Hieromes, De perfect iustitie.
Epistol. ad Otesiph.
S. Gregory's in his Commentaries upon that place: who say, that no creature
ordinarily lives without many venial sins, for the which in justice they
may be punished sharply, either in this life, or else afterward in Purgatory.
Wherefore the best men do very prouidently pray unto God, not to deal with
them according unto their deserts: for if he should so do, they cannot be
justified and cleared from many venial faults. And therefore they must all
crave pardon for these faults, or else endure Gods judgments for them, before
they can attain unto the reward of their good deeds. The second exposition is
more ordinary, with all the best writers upon the Psalms: as S. Hilary, S.
Hierome, S. Arnobius, S. Euthimius, and others: Li. ad Crosium c. 10. Lib. 9.
moral cap. 1.
Which is also S. Augustines, S. Gregory. All these say, that man's justice, in
comparison of the justice of God, will seem to be no justice at all: and so
take these words, No creature, neither man nor Angel, shall be justified in
thy sight: that is, if his justice appear before thine, and be compared to it.
For as the stars be bright in themselves, and shine also goodly in a clear
night: yet in the presence of the glittering sun beams, they appear not at
all: even so man's justice, although considered by it self, it be great and
perfect in his kind, yet set in the sight and presence of Gods justice, it
vanishes away, and is not to be seen. This exposition is taken out of Job,
where he says: Job. 9.
I know truly it is even so, that no man compared to God, shall be justified.
Take the words of the Psalm in whether sense you list (that either we have
many venial faults, for which we cannot be justified in Gods sight, or else
that in the sight of Gods most bright justice, ours will not appear at all)
and it cannot be thereof justly concluded, that every work of the righteous
man is stained with sin. And consequently, the place is not to purpose.

Esaias 64.
One other ordinary hackney of theirs, is that out of the Prophet. All our
righteousness is as a menstruous or defiled cloth. The which I have already
rid to death in the beginning of the question of justification, where it was
alleged: The answer is briefly, that the Prophet praying for the sins of
the people, speaks in the person of the sinful. Such as the common sort of
them were, who had more sins then good works, and so their righteousness was
like unto a spotted and stained cloth. Now this disproueth not, but that their
good works although but few, yet were free for all spots of iniquity: it
only proves, that with their few good, they had a great number or evil,
which defiled their righteousness, and made it like a stained cloth.

3. There is not a man, who does not sin: And, blessed is the man, whose
sins be not imputed to him. And such like, I answer that the best men sin
venially, and are happy when those their sins be pardoned: but all this is
clean besides this question, where it is only enquired, whether the good
works that the just do, be free from sin, and not whether they at other
times do sin, at the least venially. This is all, which M. PERKIN'S here and
there objecteth against this matter: but because some others do allege also,
some dark places out of the fathers, I think it not amiss, to solue them
here together.

S. Cyprian says: That the beseiged mind of man, can hardly resist all
assaults of the enemy: for when couetuousnes is overthrown, up starts lechery
and so forth. Answer. All this is true, that the life of man is a perpetual
warefare: yet man assisted with the grace of God, may perform it most
valiantly, and never take any mortal wound of the enemies: although through
his own frailty he may be sometimes foiled.

Dial. 1. cap. Pelag.
S. Hierome affirms: That then we are just when we confess our selves to be
sinners.

Answer. That all just men confess themselves to sin venially: but neither
of these places come near the point in question, that not one good deed of
the just man, is without some spot or stayne of sin.

Epis. 29.
S. Augustine has these words: Most perfect charity, which cannot be
increased, is to be found in no man in this life: and as long as it may be
increased, that which is less then it ought to be is faulty, of which fault it
proceeds, that there is no man who does good, and does not sin. All this
we grant to be true: that no man has so perfect charity in this life, but
that sometimes he does less then he ought to do: and consequently does not so
well, but that now and then he sins at the least venially, and that
therefore the said holy Doctor had just cause to say. Li. 9. confess. c. 13.
Woe be to the laudable life of a man, if it be examined without mercy. Al
which notwithstanding just men may out of that charity, which they have in this
life do many good works, which are pure from all sin as has been proved.
They allege yet another place out of S. Augustine. That belongs unto the
perfection of a iustman, Lib. 3. conduas Epist. Pelag. c. 7.
to know in truth his imperfection, and in humility to confess is. True: that
is as he teaches else where. First, that the perfection of this life is
imperfection, being compared with the perfection of the life to come. Again,
that the most perfect in this life, has many imperfections, both of wit and
will, and thereby many light faults.

Now come we unto S. Gregory our blessed Apostle, out of whose sweet words ill
understood, they seem to have sucked this their poison. Lib. 9. moral. cap. 1.
He says. The holy man Job, because he did see all the merit of our virtue to
be vice, if it be straightly examined of the inward judge does rightly add, if
I will contend with him, I cannot answer him one for a thousand.

I answer that by our virtue in that place is to be understood, that virtue
which we have of our own strength, without the aid of Gods grace; which we
acknowledge to be commonly infected with some vice, that S. Gregory so took
it, appears by the words, both going before and following: before he writes
thus. A man not compared to God, received justice: but compared unto him, he
leeseth it. For whosoever compares himself unto the author of all good,
leeseth that good which he had received: for he that does attribute the good
unto himself, does sight against God, with his own gifts: And after thus. To
contend with God, is not to give to God the glory of his virtue, but to take it
to himself. And so all the merit of this our virtue, which comes not of God,
but is attributed unto our self, as proceeding only from our selves, is the
very vice of pride, and cannot be prejudicial unto true good works, al which
we acknowledge to proceed principally from the grace of God, dwelling in us.
He says further with S. Augustine that in this life we cannot attain unto
perfect purity, such as shall be in heaven, read the beginning of his first and
second book of Morales, and there you shall find him commending Job to the
skies, as a good and holy man, by his temptations not foiled, but much advanced
in virtue.

Now before I depart from this large question of justification, I will handle
yet one other question, which commonly arises about it: it is.

WHETHER FAITH MAY BE WITHOUT CHARITY.
I PROVE that it may so be: first out of these words of our Savior. Many
shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, Math. 7.
have we not prophesied in thy name, have we not cast out Devils, have we not
done many miracles, to whom I will confess, that I never knew you depart
from me, all ye that work iniquity. That these men believed in Christ, and
persuaded themselves assuredly to be of the elect appears, by their confident
calling of him, Lord, Lord, and the rest that follows: Yet Christ declares
manifestly that they wanted charity, in saying that they were workers of
iniquity.

Math. 22.
2. When the King went to see his guestes. He found there a man not attired in
his wedding garment: and therefore commanded him to be cast into utter
darkness. This man had faith, or else he had not been admitted unto that table
which signifies the Sacraments: yet wanted charity, which to be the wedding
garment, besides the evidence of the text is also proved, where in express
terms. Apoc. 19.
The garments of Christ's Spouse is declared to be the righteousness and good
works of the Saints. And that with great reason: for as S. Paul teaches. 1.
Cor. 13.
Faith shall not remain after this life: With what instrument then (trow you)
will the Protestants lay hold on Christ's righteousness.

That charity is that wedding garment, S. Hierome upon the same place does
witness, saying: That it is the fulfilling of our Lords commandments. And
S. Gregory does in express words define it. Hom. 38. in Euang.
What (says he) must we understand by the wedding garment, but charity: So do
S. Hilary, and Origin: and S. Chrysostom upon that place. Can. 22. in Math.
Tract. 20. in Math. Math. 25.


3. The like argument is made of the foolish Virgins. Who were part of the
Kingdom of God, and therefore had faith, which is the gate and entrance into
the service of God. Yea in the house of God, they aspired unto more then
ordinary perfection. Having professed Virginity, yet either carried away with
vain glory, as S. Gregory takes it. Or not giving themselves to the works of
mercy, spiritual, and corporal, as S. Chrysostom expoundes it: briefly not
continuing in their former charity (for faith once had, cannot after the
Protestants doctrine be lost) were shut out of the Kingdom of heaven, albeit
they presumed strongly on the assurance of their salvation, as is apparent: By
their confident demanding to be let in, for they said. Lord, Lord, open unto
us.

Ioh. 12.
4. Many of the princes believed in Christ, but did not confess him, for they
loved more the glory of men then the glory of God. What can be more evident,
then that these men had faith: when the H. ghost says expressly that they
believed in christ which is the only act of faith. And yet were destitute of
charity, which prefers the glory and service of God, before al things in
this world.

Cap. 2.
5. This place of S. James. (What shall it profit my brethren if any man say
that he has faith, but has not works: what, shall his faith be able to
save.) Supposes very playnlie, that a man may have faith without good works,
that is, without charity, but that it shall avail him nothing: Calvin says
that the Apostle speaks of a shadow of faith, which is a bare knowledge of
the articles of our creed, but not of a justifying faith. Without doubt he was
little acquainted with that kind of faith, by which Protestants be justified:
but he directly speaks of such a faith, as Abraham was justified by: saying.
That that faith did work with his works, and was made perfect by the works.
Was this but a shadow of faith: but they reply that this faith is likened unto
the faith of the Devil, and therefore cannot be a justifying faith: that
follows not, an excellent good thing, may be like unto a badde in some
things, as Devils in nature are not only like, that the very same as Angels
be: even so a full Christian faith may be well likened unto a Devils faith,
when it is naked and void of good works in two points: First, in both there
is a perfect knowledge of all things revealed: Secondly, this knowledge shall
not stead them any whit, but only serve unto their greater condemnation,
because that knowing the will of their master, they did it not. And in this
respect S. James compares them together: Now there are many points wherein
these faithes do differ, but this one is principal. That Christians out of a
goodly and devout affection, do willingly submit their understanding unto
the rules of faith, believing things above humane reason, yea such as seem
sometimes contrary to it. But the Devil against his will, believes all that
God has revealed: Because by his natural capacity he knows that God can
teach, nor testify any untruth. Again that faith may be without charity is
proved out of these words of the same second Chapter. Ever as the body without
the spirit is dead, so also faith without works is dead. Hence thus I argue:
albeit the body be dead without the soul: yet is it a true natural body in it
self, even so faith is perfect in the kind of faith, although without charity
it avail not to life everlasting. Lastly in true reason it is manifest that
faith may be without charity, for they have several seats in the soul, one
being in the will, and the other in the understanding: they have distinct
objectes, faith respecting the truth of God, and charity the goodness of God.
Neither does faith necessarily suppose charity, as charity does faith, for we
cannot love him of whom we never heard. Neither yet does charity naturaly flow
out of faith, but by due consideration of the goodness of God, and of his
benefits and love toward us, into which good and devout considerations, few
men do enter, in comparison of them who are led into the broad way of iniquity
through their inordinate passions. This according to the truth, and yet more
different in the Protestants opinion: for faith lays hold on Christ's
righteous, and receives that in. But charity can receive nothing in, Page 85.
as M. P. witnesses. But gives it self forth in all duties of the first and
second table. Now sir, if they could not apply unto themselves Christ's
righteousness, without fulfilling all duties of the first and second table: they
should never apply it to them, for they hold it impossible to fulfill all those
duties, so that this necessary lincking of charity with faith: makes their
salvation not only very evil assured, but altogether impossible, for charity
is the fulness of the law, which they hold impossible, and then if the assurance
of their salvation, Romans 12.
must needs be joined with such an impossibility, they may assure themselves,
that by that faith, they can never come to salvation.

Let us annex unto these plain authorities of holy Scripture, one evident
testimony of Antiquity: That most incorrupt judge S. Augustine says flatly,
Lib. 15. de trin. c. 17. Con crescen lib. 1. cap. 29.
That faith may well he without Charity, but it cannot profit us without
Charity. And, That one God is worshipped sometimes out of the Church, but that
unskillfully, yet is it he. Also that one faith is had without charity, and that
also out of the Church, neither therefore is not faith: For there is one God,
one Faith, one Baptism, and one immaculate Catholic Church: in which God is
not served only, but in which only, he is truly served: neither in which
alone, faith is kept; but in which only, faith is kept with charity. So that
faith, and that only true faith, of which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4.
One God, one faith, may be, and is in many without charity.

The Protestants bold asseuerations, that they cannot be parted, are great:
but their proofs very slender, and scarce worth the disproouing.

THAT FAITH MAY BE WITHOUT GOOD WORKS.
1. Tim. 5.
THE first, He that has not care of his own, has denied his faith: therefore
faith includes that good work, of providing for our own:

Answ. That faith there seems to signify, not that faith whereby we believe
all things revealed, or the Protestants the certainty of their salvation: but
for fidelity, and faithful performance, of that which we have promised in
Baptism, which is to keep all Gods commandments: one of the which, is to
provide for our children, and for them that we have charge of: so that he who
has no such care over his own charge, has denied his faith: that is, violed
his promise in Baptism. There is also another ordinary answer supposing faith
to be taken there for the Christian belief, to wit, that one may deny his
faith two ways: either in flat denying any article of faith, or by doing
some thing that is contrary to the doctrine of our faith. Now he that has no
care of his own, does not deny any article of his faith, but commits a fact
contrary to the doctrine of his faith: so that not faith, but the doctrine of
faith, or our promise in Baptism, includes good works.

Ioh. 6.
2 There are among you that believe not; for he knew who believed, and who was
to betray him: Opposing treason to faith, as if he had said: faith contained in
it self fidelity. This Argument is far fetched, and little worth. For albeit
faith has not fidelity and love always necessarily joined with it, yet
falling from faith, may well draw after it, hatred and treason: yea ordinarely
wickedness goes before falling from faith, and is the cause of it: which was
Judas case, whom our Savior there taxed, for he blinded with couetuousnes,
did not believe Christ's Doctrine of the blessed Sacrament, and by incredulity
opened the devil a high way to his heart, to negotiate treason in it.

3. They object that. Who says he knows God, and does not keep his
commandments is a liar. 1. Ioh. 2.


Answer. He is then a liar in grain who professing the only true knowledge of
God, yet blusheth not to say, that it is impossible to keep his
commandments: but to the objection, knowing God in that place, is taken for
loving of God, as. I know ye not: that is, I love you not. Math. 7. and 25.
Psalm. 1. Ioh. 14.
Our Lord knows the way of the just: that is approues it, loves it, so he that
knows God, kepes his commandments, as Christ himself testifies. If any
love me, he will keep my word. And he that loves me not, will not keep my
words.

Lastly, they say with S. Paul. That the just man lives by faith. But if faith
give life, then it cannot be without charity.

Answer. That faith in a just man is not without hope and charity, by all
which conjoined he lives, and not by faith alone. But faith is in a sinful
and unjust man, without charity: who holding fast his former belief, does in
transgressing Gods commandments, break the bands of charity. And so it
remaynes most certain, that faith may be and too too often is without the
sacred society of charity.

CHAPTER. 5. OF MERITTES.
MASTER PERKINS says. By meritte understand any thing or work, whereby Gods
favor and life everlasting is procured, and that for the dignity and
excellency of the work, or thing done, or a good work binding him that
receives it, to repay the like.

Observe that three things are necessary to make a work meritorious. First,
that the worker be the adopted Son of God, and in the state of grace.
Secondly, that the work proceed from grace, and be referred to the honor of
God. The third, is the promise of God through Christ, to reward the work. And
because our adversaries either ignorantly or of malice do slander this our
Doctrine, in saying untruly, that we trust not in Christ's merittes, nor need
not Gods mercy for our salvation, but will purchase it by our own works: I
will here set down what the Council of Trent does teach, concerning merittes.
Sess 6. cap. vlt.
Life everlasting is to be proposed to them that work well, and hope well to
the end: both as grace, of mercy promised to the Sons of God through CHRIST
JESUS, and as a reward by the promise of the same God to be faithfully rendered
unto their works and merittes. So that we hold eternal life to be both a
grace, as well in respect of Gods free promise through Christ, as also for that
the first grace (out of which they issue) was freely bestowed upon us. And that
also it is a reward in justice, due partly by the promise of God, and in part
for the dignity of good works. Unto the worker, if he persevere and hold on
unto the end of his life, or by true repentance rise to the same estate again.
In infantes baptized there is a kind of meritte, or rather dignity of the
adopted Sons of God, by his grace powered into their souls in baptism,
whereby they are made heirs of the Kingdom of heaven, but all that arrive to
the years of discretion, must by the good use of the same grace either meritte
life, or for want of such fruit of it, fall into the miserable state of death.

OUR CONSENTS.
WITH this Catholic Doctrine M. PER. would be thought to agree in two points.
First, That merits are necessary to salvation. 2. That Christ is the root and
fountain of all meritte. But soon after like unto a shrewd cow, overthrows
with his heel the good milk he had given before. Renouncing all merits in
every man, saving only in the person of Christ: whose prerogative (says he)
it is, to be the person alone, in whom God is well pleased: Then he adds,
that they good Protestants, by Christ's merittes really imputed to them, do
merit life everlasting. Even as by his righteousness imputed unto them, they are
justified and made righteous.

To which I answer that we most willingly confess our blessed Saviors
merittes to be infinite, and of such divine efficacy that he has not only
merited at his Fathers hands. Both pardon for all faults, and grace to do
all good works: but also that his true servants works should be meritorious
of life everlasting, as for the real imputation of his meritte to us, we
esteem as a feigned imagination, composed of contrarieties: For if it be really
in us, why do they call it imputed, and if it be ours only by Gods imputation,
then is it not in us really. Further to say that he only is the person in whom
God is well pleased, is to give the lie unto many plain textes of holy
Scriptures. Abraham was called the friend of God: therefore God was well pleased
in him. Iac. 2.
Moses was his beloved. David was a man according unto his own heart. Eccles.
45. Act. 13. Ioh. 16. Romans 1.
God loved Christ's Disciples, because they loved him. Briefly all the
Christians at Rome, were truly called of S. Paul, the beloved of God. And
therefore although God be best pleased in our Savior, and for his sake is
pleased in all others, yet is he not only pleased in him, but in all his
faithful servants. Now to that which he says that they have no other meritte
then Christ's imputed to them, as they have no other righteousness, but by
imputation, I take it to be true: and therefore they do very ingenuously and
justly, renounce all kind of merittes in their stained and defiled works. But
let them tremble at that which thereupon necessarily follows. It is; that as
they have no righteousness nor meritte of heaven, but only by a supposed
imputation, so they must look for no heaven, but by imputation: for God as a
most upright judge will in the end repay every man, according to his worth:
wherefore not finding any real worthiness in Protestants, but only in conceipte:
his reward shall be given them answerably, in conceipte only: which is
evidently gathered out of S. Augustine, where he says. Lib. 1. de morib.
Eccles cap. 25
That the reward cannot go before the merit, nor be given to a man before he
be worthy of it: for (says he) what were more iniust then that, and what is
more just then God. Where he concludes that we must not be so hardy as once to
demand, much less so impudent as to assure our selves of that crown, before
we have deserved it. Seeing then that the Protestants by this their proctour
renounce all such meritte and desert, they must needs also renounce their part
of heaven, and not presume so much as once to demand according unto S.
Augustines sentence: until they have first renounced their erroneous opinions.

But M. PERKINS will nevertheless prove, and that by sundry reasons, that
their doctrine is the truth it self, and ours falsehood.

First, by a sorry short sillogisme co^tayning more then one whole page. It is
taken out of the properties of a meritorious work: Which must be (says he)
four. First, That the work be done of ourselves, without the help of another.
Secondly, That it be not otherwise due debt. Thirdly, That it be done to the
benefit of an other. Fourthly, That the work and reward be equal in
proportion. These proprieties he sets down pithagorically without any proof.
But infers thereon, as though he had proved them inuincibly, that Christ's
manhood separated from the Godhead cannot meritte: because whatsoever he does,
he does it by grace received, and should be otherwise due. He might in like
manner as truly say, that Christ's manhood united to the Godhead could not
merit neither: for he received his Godhead from his father, and whatsoever he
does is therefore his Fathers by due debt. And so the good man, if he were let
alone, would disapoint us wholly of all merits, as well the imputed of Christ's,
as of all ours done by virtue of his grace. Wherefore we must a little sift his
four forged proprieties of merit: and touching the first. I say that one may
by the good use of a thing received by free gift, merit and deserve much even
at his hands that gave it. For example the Father bestows a farm upon his
Son freely: Who may by often presenting his Father of the pleasing fruits
growing on the same, deserve his further favor: Yea, he may by the
commodities, reaped out of that farm, buy any thing that it shall please his
father to set to sale, as well as if he had never received the farm from his
fathers gift. Which is so common a case, and so sensible, that every man of
mean wit, may easily reach unto it: even so by good manuring the gifts
which God freely bestows upon us, we may both merit the increase of them, and
according to his own order and promise, purchase thereby the kingdom of
heaven, which is plainly proved by that parable, Mat. 25.
Of the talents given by a King to his servants; the which they employing well,
and multiplying, were therefore esteemed worthy of far greater, and withal
to be made pertakers of their Lords joys.

M. PERKINS then was not a little ouerseene, to put for the first propriety of
merit, that it must be done by a man, and of a man himself.

The second, That a man must do it of his own free will and pleasure, and not
of due debt: carries in show an opposition. but in deed there is no
contradiction in it: for a man may, and every honest man does, of his own free
will and pleasure, pay his due debt: but let us pardon the disorder of words:
his meaning being nothing else, but that the payment of that which is otherwise
due debt, cannot be any meritorious work, to which S. Augustine does answer
in these words. Sermon. 3. de verb Apost
O great goodness of God, to whom when we did owe service by condition of our
estate, as bondmen do to their Lord, yet has he promised again and again,
the reward of friends. In which there is couched a comparison, which being
laid in the light, will much help to the understanding of this matter. He
that has a slave, or bondman, may lawfully exact of him all kind of service,
without any wages: Bread and a whippe (says a Philosopher) serve for a slave:
Now suppose the Master to be sovereign governor of a state: then if it please
him to make his man free, and withal a member of his common weal, the same
man by performing many good offices to the state, may justly deserve of his
prince as great reward and promotion, as any other of his subjects: and yet
may his Lord and old Master say truly to him, all this that thou have done,
or could do, is but due debt unto me, considering that thou wast my bond
man. so fares it with us in respect of God: all that we can do, is due debt
unto him, because he has made us, and endowed us, with all that we either be,
or have: yet it has pleased him, as a most kind Lord, to set us at liberty
through Christ, and to make us Citizens of the Saints, and as capable of his
heavenly riches, as the Angels, if we will do our endeavor to deserve them:
and whereas he might have exacted all that ever we could do, without any
kind of recompense: yet he of his inestimable goodness toward us, does
neither bind us to do all we can do; and yet for doing that little which he
commands, has by promise bound himself to repay us a large recompense: by
which we may well understand those words of our Savior: Luke 17.
When you have done all these things that are commanded you, say that you
are unprofitable servants: we have done that we ought to do. True. By our
native condition we were bound to perform, not only all these things, that
be now commanded, but whatsoever else it should have pleased God to command:
and this we must always confess, to preserve true humility in us: yet God
has bettered our estate through Christ, and so highly advanced us, that we
not only be Citizens of the Saints, but his sons and heirs, and thereby in
case to deserve of him, a heavenly crown, and this is S. Ambrose exposition
upon the place. S. Chrysostom pondering these words let us say, takes it for
a wholesome counsel for us to say, that we be unprofitable servants, least
pride destroy our good works: and then God will say, that we be good and
faithful servants, as it is recorded. Mat. 25. verse. 21.


Again, we may truly say, when we have done all things commanded, that we
are unprofitable servants, as venerable Bede our most learned countriman
interprets: Because of all that we do, In Luc. 17.
no commodity rises unto God our Lord in himself: who is such an infinite
ocean of all goodnesses, that he wants nothing: Whereupon David says, That
thou art my God, because thou stand in need of no good that I can do.
Psalm. 15.


And thus we fall upon the third property of M. PERKINS meritorious work.
Which is, That it be done to the profit of another: and say that albeit God in
himself receive no profit, by our works: yet does he in the administration of
his holy common weal the Church, wherein good men's services do much pleasure
him. Andin this sense is it said of S. Paul, That by cleansing our selves from
wicked works, 2. Tim. 2. Math. 5. Ioh. 15. v. 8.
we shall become vessels sanctified, and profitable unto our Lord. Again,
God is glorified by our good works, That seeing your good works, they may
glorify your father which is in heaven. Finally, God does rejoice at the
recovery of his lost children. Luke 15.
If then good men trauayling painefully in Gods Vine-yarde, do yield him
outwardly both honor, joy, and commodity: that may suffice to make their work
meritorious.

M. PERKINS fourth property is, That the work and reward, be equal in
proportion: If he understand Arithmeticall proportion, that is, that they be
equal in quantity, to wit, the one to be as great, or of as long continuance
as the other: then we deny this kind of equality to be requisite to meritte:
there is another sort of proportion, called by the Philosopher S. Athic.
Geometrical: and the equality of that is taken by a reasonable correspondence
of the one unto the other: as when a good office is given unto a Citizen of
desert, it may be, that the honor and commodity. of the office is far
greater, then was the meritte of the man: yet he being as well able to
discharge it as another, and having better deserved it, is holden in true
justice worthy of it: In like manner in a game where masteries are tried, the
prize is given unto him that does best, not because the value of the reward,
is just as much worth, as that act of the man who wins it: but for that such
actiuity is esteemed worthy of such a recompense. Now the crown of heavenly
glory, 1. Cor. 9.
is likened by Saint Paul, unto a Garland in a game: where he says, That we
all run, but one carries away the prize. And He that strives for the
mastery, 2. Tim. 2.
is not crowned, unless he strive lawfully. It is also resembled unto places
of honor. Math. 25. Ioh. 14. Mat. 13. 1. Ioh. 3.
I will place thee over much. And I go to provide you places.

Grace is also in many places of Scripture, compared to seed: For the seed of
God tarrieth in him. But a little seed cast into good ground, and well
manured, brings forth abundance of corn. Briefly, then such equality as
there is between the well deserving subject, and the office, between him that
strives lawfully, and the crown, between the seed, and the corn, is
between the reward of heaven, and the merit of a true servant of God.

And thus much of M. PERKINS first Argument, more indeed to explicate the
nature and condition of merit, then that his reason nakedly proposed, did
require it.

Exodus 20.
His second testimony is, God will show mercy upon thousands, in them that
love him, and keep his commandments. Hence he reasons thus: Where reward
is given upon mercy, there is no merit: but reward is given upon mercy, as the
text proves, ergo.

Answer. That in that text is nothing, touching the reward of heaven, which is
now in question: God does for his loving servants sake, show mercy unto their
children or friends, either in temporal things, or in calling them to
repentance, and such like: but does never for one man's sake; bestow the
kingdom upon another, unless the party himself be first made worthy of it.

That confirmation of his, that Adam by his continual and perfect obedience,
could not have procured a further increase of Gods favor, is both besides the
purpose, and most false: for as well he, as every good man sithence, by good
use of Gods gifts, might day by day, increase them: And that no man think that
in Paradise it should have bin otherwise, S. Augustine says expressly, That in
the felicity of Paradise, righteousness preserved, should have ascended into
better. In Inchir. cap. 25.
And Adam finally, and all his posterity (if he had not fallen) should have bin
from Paradise translated alive into the Kingdom of heaven: this by the way.
Now to the third Argument.

Romans 6.
Scripture condemns merit of works: The wages of sin is death. True. But
we speak of good works, and not of badde, which the Apostle calls sin:
where were the man's wits? but it follows there, That eternal life, is the
grace or gift of God. This is to purpose: but answered 1200. years past, by
that famous Father S. Augustine, in diverse places of his most learned works. I
will note one or two of them.

First, thus here arises no small doubt, De gra. and li. arb. c. 8.
which by Gods help I will now discuss. For if eternal life be rendered unto
good works, as the holy Scripture does most clearly teach (note) how then can
it be called grace: when grace is given freely, and not repaide for works:
and so pursuing the points of difficulty at large, in the end resolves: that
eternal life is most truly rendered unto good works, as the due reward of
them: but because those good works could not have been done, unless God had
before freely through Christ, bestowed his grace upon us, therefore the same
eternal life, is also truly called grace: because the first root of it, was
Gods free gift.

The very same answer does he give, where he has these words. Epist. 106.
Eternal life is called grace, not because it is not rendered unto merittes:
but for that those merittes to which it is rendered, were given, in which place
he crosses M. PERKINS proportion most directly, affirming, that S. Paul might
have said truly, eternal life is the pay or wages of good works: but to
hold us in humility partly, and partly to put a difference between our
salvation, and damnation, choose rather to say, that the gift of God, was life
eternal: because of our damnation, we are the whole and only cause, but not of
our salvation, but principally the grace of God, the only fountain of merit,
and all good works.

Now to those textes cited before about justification, Ad Ephesians. 2.
We are saved freely, not of our selves, or by the works of righteousness,
which we have done. Ad Tit. 3.
I have often answered that the Apostle speaks of works done by our own
forces, without the help of Gods grace: and therefore they cannot serve
against, works done, in, and by grace.

Now to that text which he hudleth up together with the rest, although it
deserved a better place, being one of their principal pillars in this
controversy: It, is The sufferings of this life, are not worthy of the glory
to come. Romans 8.
The strength of this objection, lies in a false translation of these words,
Axia pros tein doxan, equal to that glory, or in the misconstruction of them:
For we grant (as it has been already declared) that our afflictions and
sufferinges be not of equal in length, or greatness, with the glory of heaven:
for our afflictions be but for the short space of this life, and they cannot be
so great, as will be the pleasure in heaven, notwithstanding, we teach, that
this shorter, and lesser labor employed by a righteous man, in the service of
GOD, does meritte the other greater, and of longer continuance: and that by the
said Apostles plain words, for (says he. 2. Cor. 4.
) That tribulation which in this present life, is but for a moment and light,
does work above measure exceedingly an everlasting weight of glory in us. The
reason is, that just men's works issue out of the fountain of grace, which
gives a heavenly value unto his works. Again, it makes him a quick member
of Christ, and so receiving influence from his head, his works are raised to
an higher estimate: it consecrateth him also a temple of the holy Ghost, 2.
Pet. 1.
and so makes him partaker of the heavenly nature as S. Peter speaks. Which
adds a worth of heaven to his works. Neither is that glory in heaven, which
any pure creature attayneth unto of infinite dignity, as M. PERKINS fableth;
but has his certain bounds and measure, according unto each man's merittes,
otherwise it would make a man equal to God in glory: for there can be no
greater then infinite, as all learned men do confess.

M. PERKINS 4. reason: Whosoever will meritte must fulfill the whole law: for
if we offend in one commandment, we are guilty of the whole law, but no man
can fulfill the whole law. ergo.

Answer. I deny the first proposition: for one good work done with his due
circumstances does bring forth merit, as by all the properties of meritte may
be proved at large: and by his own definition of meritte set down in tne
beginning. Now if a man afterward fall into deadly sin, he leeseth his former
meritte: but recovering grace, he rises to his former meritte, as the learned
gather out of that saying of our Savior, in the person of the good Father.
Luc. 15.
Do on him (that is on his prodigal son returning whom) his former
garment. His second proposition is also false as has bin proved at large in a
several question. To that of S. James, although it belong not to this matter, I
answer that he who offends in one, is made guilty of all: that is, he shall
be as surely condemned, as if he had broken all; Epis 29. ad ^lieron.
See S. Augustine.

His 5. reason. We are taught to pray on this manner. Give us this day our
daily bread: where we acknowledge every morsel of bread, to be the mere gift
of God: much more must we confess heaven to be.

Answer. M. PERKINS takes great delight to argue out of the Lords prayer: but
he handles the matter so handsomely, that a man may think him to be so
profou^dly learned, that he does not yet understand the Pater noster: for who
takes our daily food to be so merely the gift of God, that we must not
either make it ours with our penny, or travail, we must not look to be fed
from heaven by miracle, by the mere gift of God: but according unto S. Paul's
rule, either labor for our living in some approved sort, or not eat. Yet
because our travails are in vain, unless God bless them, we pray to God
daily to give us our nuriture, either by sending or preserving the fruits of
the earth, or by prospering our labors with good success: or if they be men
who live of alms, by stirring up the charitable to relieve them. So we pray,
and much more earnestly that God will give us eternal life: Yet by such means
as it has pleased God to ordain, one of which and the principal is by the
exercise of good works, which God has appointed us to walk in, to deserve
it. And it cannot but savor of a Satannicall spirit, to call it a Satannicall
insolency (as M. PERKINS does) to think that eternal life can be merited:
when S. Augustine and the best spirit of men, since Christ's time so thought and
taught in most express terms.

But let us hear his last argument, which is (as he speaks) the consent of
the ancient Church: and then begins with S. Bernard, who lived 1000. years
after Christ: He (in I know not what place, the quotation is so doudtfull)
says. Those things which we call merittes, are the way to the Kingdom, but
not the cause of reigning. I answer, that merittes be not the whole cause, but
the promise of God through Christ, and the grace of God freely bestowed on us,
out of which our merittes proceed. Which is Bernards own doctrine. Sermon. 68
in Cantica. Manuali. c. 22.


Secondly, he cites S. Augustine. All my hope is in the death of my Lord: his
death is my meritte. True in a good sense: that is, by the virtue of his death,
and passion, my sins are pardoned, and grace is bestowed on me to do good
works, and so to meritte.

3. Basil. Eternal life, is reserved for them that have striuen lawfully, In
Ps. 114.
not for the meritte of their doing, but upon the grace of the most bountiful
God. These words are untruly translated: for first, he makes with the
Apostle, eternal life to be the prize of that combat, and then adds that it
is not given according unto the debt, and just rate of the works, but in a
suller measure, according unto the bounty of so liberal a Lord: Where hence is
gathered that common and most true sentence. That God punishes men under their
deserts, but rewards them above their merittes.

4. M. PERKINS turns back to Augustine upon the: Psalm. 120.
Where he says (as M. PERKINS reports.) He crowns thee, because he
crowns his own gifts, not thy merittes.

Answer. S. Augustine was to wise to let any such foolish sentence pass his
pen: What congruity is in this. He crowns thee, because he crowns his
own gifts, not thy merittes. It had been better said: He crowns thee not,
etc. But he mistook belike this sentence of S. Augustines. When God crowns
thee, he crowns his gifts, not thy merittes. Which is true, being taken in
that sense, which he himself declares. To such a man so thinking (that is, De
great. and l b. arb. c. 6.
that he has merittes of him self, without the grace of God,) it may be most
truly said: God does crown his own gifts, not thy merittes. If thy merittes
be of thy self, and not from him: but if we acknowledge our merittes to
proceed from grace working with us, then may we as truly say, that eternal
life is the crown and reward of merittes.

Psalm. 142.
His other place on the Psalm, is not to this purpose: but appertaynes to the
first justification of a sinner, as the first word, quicken and revive me
shows playnelie: now we confess that a sinner is called to repentance and
revived, not for any desert of his own, but of Gods mere mercy.

Having thus at length answered, unto all that M. PERKINS has alleged against
merittes: Let us see what can be said for them, following as near as I can M.
PERKINS order.

Objections of Papists, so he terms our reasons.

First, in sundry places of Scripture, promise of reward is made unto good
works. Genes. 4. Prouer 11. Eccles. 18. Math. 5.
If thou do well, shall thou not receive. To him that does well there is a
faithful reward. Fear not to be justified unto death, because the reward of
God remains for ever; and. When you are reviled and persecuted for my sake,
rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven. And a hundredth such like:
therefore such works do meritte heaven, for a reward supposes that there was
a desert of it.

M. PERKINS answers first, that the reward is of mere mercy without any
thing done by men. But this is most apparently false: for the Scripture
expresses the very works whereof it is a reward: Again, a reward in English
supposes some former pleasure, which is rewarded, otherwise it were to be
called a gift, and not a reward: and much more the Latin, and Greek word,
Misos, Merus, which rather signify a man's hier and wagis, then a gift or
reward: Wherefore M. PERKINS skippes to a second shift: that forsooth eternal
life is an inheritance, but not a reward.

Reply. We know well that it is an inheritance, because it is only due unto
the adopted Sons of God: but that hinders not it to be a reward, for that it
is our heavenly fathers pleasure, that all his Sons coming to the years of
discretion, shall by their good carriage either deserve it, or else for their
badde behavior be disinherited.

M. PERKINS having so good reason to distrust his two former answers, flies to
a third: and grants that eternal life is a reward, yet not of our works,
but of Christ's merits imputed unto us: This is that Castle wherein he holds
himself safe from all Canon shot, but he is foully abused, for this answer
is the most extrauagant of all the rest, as being furthest off from the true
sense of the Scripture: examine any one of the places, and a babe may discover
the incongruity of it. Namely Christ says that great is their reward, who are
reviled and persecuted for his sake. Assigning the reward unto their constant
bearing and enduring of tribulation for Gods sake; and not to his own merittes
imputed, and if you desire a formal sentence, fitting this purpose, take this.
1. Cor. 3
Every man shall receive his reward, according unto his own proper labor: And
not according to Christ's merittes imputed unto him. So a doer of the work
shall be blessed in his deed. And not in the imputation of an others deed.
Jacob. 1.


In stead of our second reason, blindly proposed by M. PERKINS, I will confirm
the first with such textes of Holy write, as specify playnelie our good works
to be the cause of eternal life. Math. 25
Come unto me ye blessed of my father, possess a Kingdom prepared for you:
And why so? For when I was hungry, ye gave me meat. And so forth: the like is
in the same Chapter of the servants, who employed well their talentes: for
their Lord said unto them. Because you have been faithful in few things, I
will place you over many. And many such like; where good works done by the
parties themselves are expressly said to be the very cause, why God rewards
them with the Kingdom of heaven: Therefore he must needs be holden for a very
wrangler, that does seek to pervert such evident speeches, and would make the
simple believe, that the cause there formally specified, is not to be taken for
the cause, but does only signify an order of things. But if any desire
besides the evidence of the text, to see how the ancient Fathers take it. Let
him read Saint Augustine: Where he thus briefly handles this text. Come ye
blessed of my Father, In psalm. 49
receive: What shall we receive? A Kingdom. For what cause? Because I was
hungry, and you gave me meat, etc. Of the real imputation of Christ's
merittes, there was no tydinges in those days: And that iuditious Doctor,
found that good works was the cause of receiving the Kingdom of heaven. Here
by the way Master PERKINS redoubleth that common slander of theirs: that we
take away a part of Christ's mediation. For says he, if Christ's merittes were
sufficient, what need ours? It has been often told them, but they will never
learn to understand it: I will yet once again repeat it. We hold our
Saviors merits to be of infinite value, and to have deserved of God all the
graces and blessings, which has or shall be bestowed upon all men, from the
beginning of the world unto the end of it: yet his divine will and order, is
that all men of discretion, having freely received grace from him, do meritte
that crown of glory, which is prepared for them, not to supply the want of his
merittes, which are inestimable, but being members of his mystical body, he
would have us also like unto himself in this point of meriting: and further
desirous to train us up in all good works, he best knew, that there could be
no better spur to prick our dull nature forward, then to ordain and propose
such heavenly rewards unto all them, that would diligently endeavor to deserve
them. The man seems to be much ignorant in the matter of Christ's mediation: I
will therefore help him a little. It consists in reconciling man to God:
which he performed by paying the ransom of our sins, in purchasing us Gods
favor, and in ordayning means how all mankind might attain to eternal
life: in the two first points, we do for the most part agree: to wit, that
our sins are freely pardoned through Christ's passion: and that we are as
freely justified, and received, first into Gods grace and favor: although we
require other preparation then they do, yet we as fully deny any merit of ours
to be cause of either, as they do. Marry about the means of attayning to
heaven, we differ altogether: for they say that God requires no justice in us,
nor merit at all on our parts, but only the disposition of faith, to lay hold
on Christ's righteousness and merittes: but we say that Christ's righteousness
and merit, are incommunicable unto any mere creature: but that through his
merittes, God does power into every true Christian, a particular justice,
whereby he is sanctified, and made able to do good works, and to merit
eternal life. Which ability we receiving of Gods free gift, through Christ's
merits, does much more magnify both Gods grace, and Christ's merittes: for the
greater that the gift is, the greater is, the glory of the giver. And to argue
that to be a derogation unto his mediation and merits, whith he has appointed
to be very instrument of applying the virtue of them to us, is indeed under
color of magnifying Christ's merittes, to undermine, and blow out all the
virtue of them. But says M. PERKINS, what should we talk of our merittes, who
for one good work we do, commit many bad, which deface our merits, if we
had any.

True it is, as it was once before said, that every mortal sin, blotteth out
all former justice and merit: but by repentance, both are recovered again: but
must we not speak of any good, because we may hap to do evil? that is a
fair persuasion, and well worthy a wise man.

Let us to our third Argument? God has by covenant and promise, bound himself
to reward our works with life everlasting: Therefore good works do in
justice deserve it: for faithful promise makes due debt. Math. 20.
The covenant is plainly set down: where God in the person of an householder
agrees with his workmen, for a penny a day: that is, to give them life
everlasting for trauayling in his service during their life time, as all
ancient interpretours expound it. Whereupon Saint Paul infers, Heb. 6.
that God should be unjust, if he should forgette their works, who suffered
persecution for him: 2. These. 1.
And says, If it be just with God, to render tribulation to them that
persecute you, and to such as are persecuted, rest with us: Upon the same
ground S. Hierome says, Li. 2. cont. Iouin. c. 2.
Great truly were the injustice of God, if he did only punish evil works, and
would not as well receive good works. To all these, and much more such like,
M. PERKINS answers, that covenant for works was in the old Testament, but
in the new, the covenant is made with the workman, not with the work.

Reply. All that I cited in this Argument, is out of the new Testament, where
express covenant is made for working, and works, as you have heard. And as it
was said in the old law, Math 19.
Do these things and thou shall live: so is it said in the new, If thou will
enter into life, keep the commandments: and life eternal, is the hire, and
wages, for laboring in Gods vineyard, and not of the imputed justice, or
merittes of Christ: but look about you, and behold the goodly mark which M.
PERKINS sets up: Mark says he, that it is said, God will render unto every
man according to his works: not to the work, or for the work. O sharp and
ouer-fine wit? does he render according to the works, and does he not render
for the works? if the rate of the works be the measure of the reward, that
for fewer or lesser works, there is a lesser reward, and for many and
worthier, a greater: surely, in my simple understanding, he that gives
according unto the works, gives for the works that other addle invention
(that works are there mentioned, not because they are rewarded, but because
they are tokens, that the doer is in CHRIST, for whose obedience God promises
the crown of life) is not worth the confuting, it is so flat contrary to the
text: which ascribes distinctly that reward unto the workman for his works,
and not for Christ's obedience imputed unto him.

M. PERKINS fourth objection for us, is proposed unskillfully, yet could he not
answer it, but by relying upon that which is most untrue, that forsooth no one
action of the best man is without fault: which has been already confuted,
and might be by instances of Abrahames oblation of his son, S. John Baptists
preaching, and reprehending of Herod (...) Stephens martyrdom, with infinite
such like, in which M. PERKINS, nor any else will be able to show in
particular, what fault there was: Again, our Savior says: That if the eye
be simple, the whole body is lightsome, not having any part of darkness in
it: Mat. 6. Luke 11.
and very reason teaches us, that a man's action, for substance and all due
circumstances, may be perfect. It was then a very seely shift to say, that
never any man did any one action, with all his due circumstances.

But in steed of that fourth Argument, I will put this: If a greater reward
be due unto them that do better works, then a reward is due unto them that
do good works, which is evident in reason: But a greater reward is provided
for them that do better as S. Augustine grounded upon Gods word, proves in
sundry places: namely, upon that, For star differs from star in glory,
Sermon. 46. de verbis Dom. 1. Cor. 15. Sermon. 95. Li. de virg. cap. 44.
so shall be the resurrection of the dead: specifying that virginity shall
shine after one sort, chastity in wedlock after another, and holy widdowhood
yet after another: all (says he) shall be there, but they shine diversely: And
of the same work affirms, That martyrdom, shall be higher rewarded, then
any other work. The like does he upon those words, One ground shall yield
thirty fold, another threescore fold, an other an hundred fold: Comparing
chastity in wedlock to the thirty, in widows to the sixty, and in virgins
to the hundred. But most directly in his sixty seven treatise upon Saint
John's Gospel upon this verse: In my fathers house are many mansions: where he
says, that albeit some be holier, juster, and more valiant then others, yet
there shall be fit rooms for them all, where every one is to receive his place
according unto his merit. That penny spoken of (by which says he is signified
eternal life) shall be given to every man equally: Math. 20.
because every one shall live for ever, and not one longer then another: but
many mansions do signify the different dignities of merits in the same
everlasting life.

And S. Gregory in most express terms, does teach the same doctrine, saying:
Li. 4. mor. cap. 42.
Because in this life there is a difference of works amongst us, there shall
be in the other life without all doubt a distinction of dignities: that as one
here exceeds another in meritte, so there one surpasses another in reward.
Finally, S. Augustine, De here is. her. 82. Li. 2 cont. Iouin.
and S. Hierome, condemn it as an heresy, to hold that there is diversity of
merittes in this life, and rewards in the next: Whereon follows most
manifestly, that there be merittes and rewards.

The first reason is taken out of those textes, which teach that men are worthy
of eternal life: Apoc. 3. Sap. 3. 2. These. 1. Luke 20 35
They shall walk with me in whites, because they be worthy. God proved them,
and found them worthy of himself. That you may be esteemed worthy of the
Kingdom of God: Now if men be worthy of eternal life, it must needs be
granted, that they have deserved it.

M. PERK. answers: that they were indeed worthy, but not for their own
merittes, but for Christ's imputed unto them. This is his only refuge, yet has
he not, nor cannot show any one text in Scripture that speaks so. But to
refell him, turn only to the places, and there you shall find, that this
worthiness rose of good works, as Christ says: I know thy works, Apoc. 3.
and find them not full: yet there be some amongst you, who have not desiled
their garments (but have their works full) they shall walk with me in whites,
2. These. 1.
because they be worthy: And By sustayning persecutions, they were made worthy
of that kingdom. And in the words following, the Apostle signifies, that it
is as just for God to requite good works with the joys of heaven, as he does
punnish wicked, with the pains of hell.

The sixth reason M. PERKINS delivers thus: 2. Tim. 4
Eternal life is termed a crown, and a crown of righteousness to be given
by a just judge: therefore in this life it must be justly deserved, otherwise
it were not well called a crown of justice, nor could be said to be rendered by
a just judge. M. PERKINS answers, that it is called a crown by resemblance,
because it is given in the end of the life, as the crown is given in the end
of the race.

Reply. If that were all the cause, and that there were no respect to be had to
former desartes, it might then as well be called a halter by resemblance,
because that also is given in the end of life: and in their opinion, more
properly: because all their works are defiled like a menstruous cloth: and a
halter is the end of such wicked works. But as a halter is due to a thief, so
is a crown of glory the just reward of the righteous man.

Secondly he answers, that it is called a crown of justice, because God has
bound himself by his promise to give it: here then at length we have by his
own confession, that by Gods promise, eternal life is due debt unto the
righteous: but as having ouer-shot himself, he adds, not for any desert of
theirs, but only for the promise sake. But as you have heard before, out of S.
Matthew, Mat. 20.
that promise was made for working the time of our life in his vineyard, and
so there was some desert on their part: and, the servants were rewarded, Mat.
25.
because they employed their talents well: and in this very place, S. Paul
reckons up his good services, for which the just judge would render him a
crown of justice: and therefore the justice is not only in respect of Gods
promise. And if you will not believe me, proving that I say out of the very
text, rather then M. PERKINS on his bare word, let S. Augustine be arbitrator
between us: who most deeply considers of every word in this sentence: Let
us hear (says he) the Apostle speaking, Li. 50. hom Hom. 4.
when he approached near unto his passion, I have (quoth he) fought a good
fight, I have accomplished my course, I have kept the faith: concerning the
rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice, which our Lord will render
unto me in that day, a just judge: And not only to meet, but to them also that
love his coming: He says that our Lord a just judge will render unto him a
crown: he therefore does owe it, and as a just judge will pay it. For the
work being regarded, the reward cannot be denied. I have fought a good fight,
is a work: I have accomplished my course, is a work: I have kept the faith,
is a work. There is laid up for me a crown of justice, this is the reward.
So that you see most clearly by this most learned fathers judgment, that the
reward is due for the work sake, and not only for the promise of God See him
upon that verse of the Psalm. I will sing unto thee O Lord, Psalm. 100.
mercy and judgment. Where he concludes, that God in judgment will out of his
justice crown those good works, which he of mercy had given grace to do. And
that the reader may understand, that not only Saint Augustine does so
confidently teach this doctrine of merittes, (which M. PERKINS blushed not to
term the invention of Satan.) I will fold up this question with some
testimonies of the most ancient and best Authors.

Epist. ad Roman.
S. Ignatius the Apostles auditour says. Give me leave to become the food of
beasts, that I may by that means meritte and win God.

Apolog. 2. ^ntemed.
Iustine a glorious Martyr of the next age has these words, speaking in the
name of all Christians. We think that men who by works have showed them
selves worthy of the will, and counsel of God, shall by their merittes live
and reign with him, free from all corruption, and perturbation.

Lib. 4. con. ^erel c 72.
S. Ireneus says. We eesteme that crown to be precious, which is gotten by
combat and suffering for Gods sake.

Ora in ini^ium prou. Li de Spir. ^ancto c. 24
S. Basil. All we that walk the way of the Gospel, as Merchants do, buy and
get the possession of heavenly things, by the works of the commandments.
A man is saved by works of justice.

Sermon. de eleemos. ^nsine.
S. Cyprian. If the day of our return shall find us unloaded, swift, and
running in the race of works, our Lord will not fail to reward our merittes.
He will give for works, to those that win in peace, a white crown, and for
Martyrdom in persecution, he will redouble unto them a purple crown.

C^n. 5. in M^th.
S. Hilarie. The Kingdom of heaven, is the hier and reward of them that live
well and perfectly.

Lib. 1. de offic. c. 15.
S. Ambrose. Is it not evident, that there remains after this life, either
reward for merittes, or punishment.

S. Hierome. Now after baptism it appertains to our trauails, according unto
the diversity of virtue to prepare for us different rewards.

Sermon. 68. ^n Cant.
S. Bernard. Provide that thou have merittes, for the want of them is a
pernicious poverty.

Briefly that this was the universal Doctrine of all good Christians, above a
thousand year past, is declared in the Council of Aransicane. Reward is debt
unto good works, Can 18.
if they be done, but grace which was not debt, goes before that they may be
done. These testimonies of the most ancient, and best learned Christians may
suffice, to batter the brazen forehead of them that affirm the Doctrine of
merittes, to be a Satannicall invention, and to settle al them that have care
of their salvation, in the most pure doctrine of the Catholic Church.

CHAPTER. 6. OF SATISFACTION.
MASTER PERKINS. Acknowledges first civil Satisfaction: Page 117
that is, a recompense for injuries or damages any way done to our neighbor:
such as the good Publican Zacheus practiced, who restored fourfold the things
gotten by extorsion and deceit. This is, Luc. 19.
wittily acknowledged by him, but little exercised among Protestants, for where
the Sacrament of Confession is wanting, there men use very seldom to
recompense so much as onefold, for their extorsion, bribes, usury, and other
crafty ouer-reaching of their neighbors. But of this kind of Satisfaction,
which we commonly call restitution, we are not here to treat: nor of that
public penance. Which for notorious crimes is done openly: but of such
private penance, which is either enjoined by the confessor, or voluntarily
undertaken by the penitent, or else sent by Gods visitation to purge us from
that temporal pain, which for sins past and pardoned, we are to endure,
either in this life, or in purgatory, if we die before we have fully satisfied
here.

M. PERKINS in his third conclusion, decrees very solemnly, That no man can
be saved, unless he made a perfect satisfaction, unto the justice of God, for
all his sins. Yet in the explication of the difference between us defines
as peremptorily, that no man is to satisfy, for any one of all his sins, or
for any temporal pain due to them: Which be flat contradictory propositions,
and therefore the one of them must needs be false. But such odd broken
rubbish does he commonly cast into the ground work of his questions, and
thereupon raises the tottering building of his new doctrine: and lets not,
like a blind man, to make an out cry, that in this matter the Papists err in
the very foundation and life of religion: Which in his first argument he goes
about to prove thus.

Imperfect satisfaction, is no satisfaction at all: But the Papists make
Christ's satisfaction imperfect, in that they do thereunto add a supply of
humane satisfaction: ergo. they make it no satisfaction at all.

Answer. This is a substantial argument to raise the cry upon: which has
both propositions false. The first is childish: for he that satisfies for
half his debts, or for any part of them, makes some satisfaction, which
satisfaction is imperfect, and yet cannot be called no satisfaction at all, as
every child may see. His second is as untrue: but man's satisfaction is not to
supply the want of Christ's satisfaction, but to apply it to us, as Master
PERKINS says, his faith does to them, and to fulfill his will and ordinance.

God does in baptism for Christ's sake pardon both all sins, and takes fully
away, all pain due to sin, so that he who dies in that state, goes
presently to heaven. But if we do afterward ungratefully forsake God, and
contrary to our promise transgress against his commandments, then lo the
order of his divine justice requires, that we be not so easily received again
into his favor: But he upon our repentance pardoning the sin, and the
eternal punishment due unto it, through Christ, does exact of every man a
temporal satisfaction, answerable unto the fault committed: not to supply
Christ's satisfaction, which was of infinite value, and might more easily have
taken away this temporal punishment, then it does the eternal. But, that by
the smarte and grief of this punishment, the man may be feared from sinning,
and be made more careful to avoid sin: and also by this means be made
members conformable to Christ our head, that suffering with him, we may reign
with him. And therefore he having satisfied for the eternal punishment, which
we are not able to do, does lay the temporal pain upon our shoulders, Gal.
6.
that according unto the Apostle. Every man do bear his own burden.

Nay (says M. PERKINS,) we must then be new Christ's, and Redeemers, and
Priests of the same order with himself: Nothing so, but having grace from
him, we may in virtue thereof satisfy, not for the crime it self, or
everlasting punishment, which is lincked with it: because that would require an
infinite virtue: But for the temporal pain of it, one endued with grace may
satisfy, for the measure of stripes must not exceed the rate of the fault,
the punishment then resting unsatisfied being limited, a creature may pay it.
And that the Reader may better perceive what we mean by the temporal pain:
Let him consider that in sin are two things, the one is the turning away
from God, whom we offend, the other is the turning unto the thing, for the
love of which we offend: as for glory, lust, lucre, or such like the sinner
transgresses: Now when he is by the grace of God converted, his turning away
from God, both the sin and the eternal pain due unto it, are freely through
Christ pardoned, but for the pleasure which he took in the sin, the man
himself is to satisfy: and so according unto the greatness of that his
pleasure, he is to do penance.

But Christ (says Master PERKINS) said. On the Cross it is finished:
Wherefore all satisfaction was at CHRIST'S death ended: as well temporal as
eternal.

Answer. That those words have a far different sense: To wit, that Christ
had then ended his course, and fulfilled all prophecies, and endured all such
torments, as he pleased God to impose upon him for the redemption of mankind:
of satisfaction temporal there is no mention, neither can any thing be drawn
thence against it: No more can be out of this other. Christ made sin for us:
That is, 2. Cor. 5.
the punishment of sin, as Master PERKINS gloseth it: but the learned say, an
host or sacrifice for sin. But we grant that he suffered the punishment for
our sin, and say consequently: that all sin is pardoned freely for his
sake, and the pain of hell also, which is punishment of sin: but not other
temporal pains, such as it has pleased the justice and wisdom of God, to
reserve unto every sinner, to bear in his own person. And after this sort,
and no other was God in Christ, reconciling the world to him self: And that
Saint Paul understood well, that Christ's sufferinges did not take away ours,
may be gathered by these his words. I rejoice in suffering for you, Collos. 1.
and do accomplish those things, that want of the Passions of Christ, in my
flesh for his body, which is the Church.

But of this point more, when we come unto the Arguments for the Catholic
part.

Now to M. PERKINS second reason. In sundry places (says he) of Scripture, we
are said to be redeemed, justified, and saved freely: but this word freely
imports that we are saved without doing any thing our selves in that matter
of salvation.

Answer. Not so good Sir, for even in your own Doctrine, it is necessary that
ye believe, and bring forth the fruits of repentance, and that now and
then, ye make some short prayers, and receive the communion, and do many
other odd things in that matter of salvation: Wherefore the word freely does
not exclude all our working, and suffering in that matter.

M. PERKINS third reason. We pray daily forgive us our sins: Now to plead
pardon, and to satisfy for our sins, are clean contrary.

Answer. If our sins be mortal, we crave pardon both of the sin, and the
eternal punishment annexed, and do willingly withal satisfy for the
temporal pain: as the man who is convicted of high treason, and having both
his life, honor, lands, and goods, pardoned and restored unto him, does very
joyfully endure three months imprisonment, and any reasonable fine set on
his head. If our sins be venial: then that prayer is a special mean, both
to obtain pardon of the fault, and release of all the pain, as witnesses S.
Augustine, saying. In Enchirid c. 71.
That for the daily, short, and light offenses, without which this life is not
led, the daily prayer of the faithful does satisfy. And that is not true
which Master PERKINS adds, that we are taught in that prayer, wholly and only,
to use the plea of Pardon. For in the same petition, we are taught also to
pardon others, even as we will look to be pardoned. Again, if there were only
a plea of pardon, it would not serve M. PERKINS purpose. For who would say,
that within the compass of the Pater noster, all things necessary to
salvation be contained: besides prayer is one part of satisfaction, as shall be
proved hereafter: and so by often praying for pardon, we may well satisfy for
much temporal punnishment.

M. PERKINS fourth Argument is taken out of certain odd fragments of ancient
writers.

Turtul. de Bapts.
Guiltines being taken away, the punishment is also taken away. True: he that
is guilty of nothing, cannot justly be punished: for guiltines is a binding up
to punishment (as M. PERKINS defines) then if the band to punishment be
cancelled, Page 28.
the party is freed: but all this is nothing to the purpose, for guiltines of
temporal punishment does remain after the sin and guilt of eternal be
released.

De verb. Apost. ser. 37. In Enchir. cap. 70.
Augustine says, Christ by taking upon him the punishment and not the fault,
has done away both fault and punishment: Just: the eternal punishment which
was due to that fault, not the temporal: as S. Augustine himself declares.
God of compassion does blot out our sins committed, if convenient
satisfaction be not on our parts neglected.

Tom. 10. Hom. 5.
To that other sentence out of him: When we are gonne out of this world, there
will remain no compunction or satisfaction: It is easy to answer without the
help of any new edition. For it will he too late then to repent, and so there
is no place lest to compunction, that is, contrition of heart: neither
consequently to confession, or satisfaction: as if he had said, before we go
out of this world, there is place for both compunction, and satisfaction, and
so that place is rather for us.

Trem. in Esa.
Now to Chrysostom, who says, That God so blotteth out our sins, that there
remaynes no print of them: which thing befalles not the body: for when it is
healed, there remains a skarre, but when God exempteth from punishment, he
gives thee justice: All this is most true, and much against M. PERKINS doctrine
of the infection of original sin: but nothing touching satisfaction: for we
hold that the soul of a sinner when he comes to be justified, is washed
whiter then snow: so that there is no stayne or print left in it, of the filth
of sin. It is also freed from all eternal punishment, but not from some
temporal. Now gentle Reader, prepare thy self to behold a proper piece of
cousonage. Luke 22.
Ambrose says, I read of Peter's tears, but I read not of his satisfaction:
The color of the craft, lies in the ambiguity of this word Satisfaction,
which is not always taken for the penance done to satisfy for the former
fault. But is sometime used for the defense, Act. 24.10.
and excuse of the fact: So speaks S. Paul, Bono animo pro me satisfaciam,
with good courage I will answer in defense of my self, or give you
satisfaction: 1. Pet. 3.
in like manner Ready always to satisfy every one that asks you a reason of
that hope which is in you: In this sense does S. Ambrose use the word as is
most plainly to be seen to them that read the place: and confer it with
the very like of his, Lib. 10. in Luc.
I find not (says he) what Peter said, but I find that he wept: I read his
tears, but I read not his satisfaction: but that which cannot be defended,
may be washed away. So that nothing is more manifest, then that satisfaction in
this, and the like places, is taken for defense and excuse of his fault, which
Peter used not, but sought by tears and bitter weeping, to satisfy in part
for it, for this bewayling of our sins, is one special kind of satisfaction
as S. Ambrose testifies, saying: That he who does penance, Libr. 2. de penit.
ca. 5.
must with tears wash away his sins. The other place cited out of S.
Ambrose, de bono mortis, let us adore Christ, that he may say unto us, fear
not thy sins, nor the waves of worldly sufferinges, I have remission of
sins: is rather for us then against us: for if by adoring and serving of God,
we may be put out of fear of our sins, and the punishment of them: then does
it follow, that prayers, and such like service of Christ, does acquit us of
sin, and satisfy for the pain due to them.

Hierome says, The sin that is covered is not seen, not being seen, In
psalm. 31.
it is not imputed, not being imputed, it is not punished.

Answer. To wit, with hell fire: which is the due punishment of such mortal
sin, whereof he speaks: or sin may be said to be covered, when not only
the fault is pardoned, but all punishment also due unto it is fully paid.

So does S. Ambrose take that word covered, saying: Libr. 2. de penit. ca. 5.
The Prophet calls both them blessed, as well him, whose iniquities is
forgiven in Baptism, as him, whose sins are covered with good works: For he
that does penance, must not only wash away his sins with tears, but also
with better works cover his former sins, that they be not imputed unto him.

Now we must back again unto Chrysostom, belike he had forgotten this, when
he cited the other, or else this was reserved to strike it dead. He says, Some
men endure punishment in this life, and in the life to come: Hom. 44. sup. Math.
others in this life alone: others alone in the life to come: other neither in
this, nor in the life to come: there alone, as diverse here alone, the
incestuous Corinthian: neither here, nor there, as the Apostles and Prophets,
as also Job and the rest of this kind, for they endured no sufferings for
punishment, but that they might be known to be conquerours of the fight.

Answer. Such excellent holy personages sufferinges as are mentioned in the
Scriptures, were not for their sins: for they committed but ordinary light
offenses, for which their ordinary devotions satisfied abundantly: the great
persecutions which they endured were first to manifest the virtue and power of
God, that made such frail creatures so invincible, then to daunt the
adversaries of his truth, and with all, to animate and encourage his followers.
Finally, that they like conquerours triumphing over all the torments of this
life, might enter into possession of a greater reward in the kingdom of
heaven. All this is good doctrine, but nothing against satisfaction, that their
surpassing suffering, were not for their own sins: and thus much in answer
unto M. PERKINS Arguments against satisfaction. Now to the reasons which he
produces for it.

And albeit he like an evil master of the camp, rang our Arguments out of
order, Li. 3. instit. cap. 4. number. 29.
placing that in the forefront of our side, which Calvin presses out against
us, yet will I admit of it, rather then break his order.

Leui. 4.5.6
1. Moses according to Gods commandment prescribed several sacrifices, for
the sins of several persons, and ordained, that they should be of greater
and lesser prices, according unto the diversity of the sins. Whence we argue
thus: These men's faults upon their true repentance, joined with faith and hope
in CHRIST to come were pardoned: Therefore their charges in buying of
sacrifices to be offered for them, their pains, and prayers in assisting
during the time of the sacrifice, being painful works done to appease GODS
justice, were works of satisfaction.

M. PERKINS answers, many things as men do commonly when they cannot well
tell what to say directly to the purpose: First, that those sacrifices, were
tipes of Christ's suffering on the cross: what is this to the purpose?
Secondly, that those sacrifices were satisfactions to the congregation, and
what needed that, when they had offended God only, and not the congregation, as
in many offenses it happens. Again, if satisfaction must be given to the
congregation, how much more reason is it, that it be made to God? Read those
Chapters, and you shall find, that they were principally made, to obtain
remission of God: as these words also do witness: Leuit. 4. verse. 20.
And upon that sacrifice, the sin shall be forgiven them: So that sacrifices
were to satisfy God, who thereupon forgave the sin, and all pain due to it.

The reason for us (which indeed is the very ground work of satisfaction) may
thus be framed: many after pardon obtained of their sins, have had temporal
punishment laid upon them for the same sins, and that by Gods own order:
wherefore after the forgiveness of the sin, and the eternal punishment of it
through Christ's satisfaction, there remains some temporal pain to be
endured by the party himself for the same sin: which is most properly that
which we call satisfaction. They deny that any man has been punished
temporally for any sin, which was once pardoned: we prove it first by the
example of the Israelites, whose murmuration against GOD, Numb. 14.
was at Moses intercession pardoned: yet all the elder sort of them, who had
seen the miracles wrought in Egypt for their deliverance, were by the sentence
of God deprived of the sight of the Land of promise, and punished with death in
the wilderness, for the very same their murmuration. The like judgment was
given against Moses himself and Aaron, for not glorifying God at the waters
of contradiction: Numb 20. Deuteronomy. 32.
both of them had their sin pardoned, yet were they both afterward for the
same debarred from the entrance into the holy land.

To this M. PERKINS answers, first, that man must be considered in a two
fold estate, as he is under the law, and as he is under grace: In the former
estate, all afflictions were curses of the law: in the latter, they are turned
unto them that believe in Christ, from curses into triales, corrections,
preuentions, admonitions, instructions, and into what you will else, saving
satisfaction. Now to the purpose: Whereas God (says he) denied the believing
Israelites, with Moses and Aaron to enter into the land of Canaan, it cannot
be proved that it was a punishment, or penalty of the law laid upon them: the
Scripture has no more but that it was an admonition unto all ages following,
to take heed of like offenses, as Paul writes: All these things came unto
them for examples, 1. Cor. 10.
and were written for our admonition.

Reply. He that will not be ashamed of this audatious assertion, needs not to
care what he says: Has the Scripture no more of their fact, then that it was
an admonition to others? Turn to the original places, where the whole matter
in particular is related: First their murmuration, then Moses intercession for
them, and the obtaining of their pardon, and lastly, after all the rest, Gods
sentence of deprivation of them from entering into the land of promise, for that
their murmuration: Numb. 14. Numb. 20. verse. 24. Deuteronomy. 32.51.
Again, Aaron shall not enter into the land, because he has been disobedient
to my voice: and of Moses Because he has trespassed against me at the waters
of strife. So that nothing is more clear even by the testimony of the holy
Ghost, then that their days were shortened, and their hope of entrance into
the land of promise cut off, in punishment of those offenses, which were
before forgiven them. And these things being recorded as S. Paul testefieth,
for our admonition and instruction: we are to learn thereby, that God so
deals daiely with all those sinners that he calls to repentance.

Now to the next example, which M. PER. makes our third reason. King David was
punished for his aduoultry after his repentance, for the child died, 2. Reg. 12.
and was plagued in the same kind of incest by Absolon. And when he had
numbered the people, 2. Reg. 24.
he was after his own repentance, punished in the death of his people.

M. PERKINS answers, that the hand of God was upon him after his repentance:
but those judgementes which befell him, were not curses to him properly, but
corrections of his sins.

Reply. What dotage is this to grant the very same thing, which he would be
thought to deny: but yet in other terms, that the simple (whom only he can
beguile) may not perceive it: If the hand of God were upon David correcting him
for his sin, and that after his repentance: did not David then suffer
temporal punishment for his sins before forgiven: Which is most properly to
satisfy for them. Yea over and beside this punishment inflicted by God, he of
his own devotion performed far greater satisfaction, by putting on
sacke-cloath, lying one the bare ground, by watering his couche with tears,
and making ashes his food, and in this most pitiful plight, he made most
humble supplication unto God, to wash him more and more from his iniquity: he
never dreamed that this his satisfaction, should be any derogation unto the
satisfaction of his Lord and Savior: Psalm. 50.
but in the Psalm says. That such an humble and contrite heart, is a sweet
sacrifice unto God. We deny not but the punishing of one, is a warning and
admonition unto an other, to take heed of the like: so may not they deny, but
that correction is to the party himself, as an admonition to beware afterward,
so a correction and punishment of the fault past. Psalm. 50.
Which S. Augustine upon this verse of the Psalm. Thou have loved truth,
teaches most playnelie: saying. Thou have not left their sins whom thou
did pardon, unpunished: for thou before did so show mercy, that thou
might also preserve truth: thou do pardon him, that confesses his fault,
thou do pardon him, but so as be do punish himself: and by that means
both mercy and truth are preserved.

Our fourth reason: the Prophets of God, when the people were threatened with
Famine, the Sword, the Plague, or such like punishments for their sins, did
commonly exhort them to works of penance, as fasting, prayer, haire-cloath,
and the like to appease Gods wrath justly, kindled against them: which being
performed by them, God was satisfied. So (for example sake) the Nimuites at
Jonas preaching, doing penance in sacke-cloath and ashes, turned away the
sentence of God against them.

M PERKINS answers, that famine, the plague, and such like scourges of God,
were not punishments of sins, but corrections of a Father.

Reply. This is most flat against a thousand express textes of the Scripture:
which declare that for the transgressions of Gods commandments, he has sent
those punishments upon the people of Israel. And what is the correction of a
Father, but the punishing of a shrewde son for some fault committed, yet in a
mild sort? Or does the Schoolmaster (which is Caluins example) whippe the
Scholar, or strike him with the ferula, but to punish him for some fault? So
that great Rabbis seem not to understand, what they say them selves, when
they admit those scourges of God to be the corrections of a Father, but not
the punishment for a fault. As though Fathers used to correct those Sons, who
never offended them? Or Masters to beat such Scholars as commit no faults.

But says M. PERKINS, these punishments be tending to correction, not serving
for satisfaction: what senceles ryming is this? By due correction of the fault,
the party is satisfied in justice: and when he that has offended, does abide
such punishment as the grieuousnes of his offense did require, there is both
due correction of the offendour, and due satisfaction unto the party offended.

M. PERKINS finally flies unto his old shift of imputative satisfaction: that
forsooth our sufferinges do not satisfy, but the party punished, by faith
lays hold on the satisfaction of the Messiah, and testify the same by their
humiliation, and repentance.

Reply. As we first grant that all satisfaction has his virtue, from the
grace of God, dwelling in us, which is given us for Christ's sake: so to say
that Christ's satisfaction takes away all other satisfaction, is just to beg
the principal point in question, and therefore an old triuants trick, to give
that a final answer, which was set in the beginning to be debated: look upon
the forenamed example of the Ninevites, of whom it is not certain that they
had any express knowledge of the Messiah, and therefore were far enough off
from laying hold on his satisfaction. But most certain and evident it is in
the text, that God upon the contemplation of their works of penance, took
compassion on them, and was satisfied; as by turning away the threatened
subuertion is most manifest.

Our fifth reason: Daniell gives this counsel to Nabuchodonosor. Daniell 4.
Redeem thy sins with alms, and thy offenses with mercy on the poor. If by
such good deeds our sins may be redeemed, as Holy write does testify, then
it follows that such works yield a sufficient satisfaction for them, for
redemption signifies a full contentment of the party offended, as well as
satisfaction.

M. PERKINS answers, The skillful in the Caldey teach, that the word
imports rather a breaking off, then redeeming.

Reply. To Authors in the air, without any pressing of the propriety of the
word no answer can be given: but let us admit that it be broken off; ^i^
sin not being couetuousnes, but pride and lack of acknowledging all
Kingdoms to depend upon God, as the text it self does specify. To break off
this sin by alms, and compassion of the poor, is nothing, else but by such
works of charity, in some sort to satisfy Gods justice, there to move him to
take compassion of him. And that by alms deeds we are cleansed from our
sins, our Savior himself does teach, saying. Luc. 11.
Give alms, and behold all things are clean unto you. Our sixth. Bring forth
the worthy fruits of penance. Math. 3. Luc 3.
That is, do such works, as become them who are penitent: Which (as Saint
Chrysostom expounds) are: He that has stolen away another man's goods, Hom.
10. in Math.
let him now give of his own: he that has committed fornication, let him
abstain from the lawful company of his own wife, and so forth. Recompensing
the works of sin, with the contrary works of virtue: Hom. 10 in Euang. In
Psalm. 4.
The same exposition gives Saint Gregory, and to omit all others, venerable Bede interprets them thus. Mortify your sins by doing the worthy fruits
of penance, to wit, by afflicting your selves so much for every offense, as
worthy penance does require, which will be a sacrifice of justice, that is, a
most just sacrifice.

To this M. PERKINS answers, that this text is absurd, for the word repent,
signifies, only change your minds from sin to God, and testify it by
good works.

Reply. His answer is most absurd, for we argue out of these words (Worthy
fruits of penance?) And he answers to the word going before, repent: which we
use not against them; and for his gloss or testifying our repentance, is
sufficiently confuted, by the Fathers before alleged.

And S. John expressly makes them the means to escape the wrath of God:
saying, that the Axe was set to the root of the Tree, and unless by worthy
fruits of penance they appeased God, they should be cut up, and cast into hell
fire: and seems to confute the laying hold on Christ's satisfaction by faith:
saying, it will not help you to say that ye are the Sons of Abraham, who
was Father of all true believers: as much as if he had said, trust not to your
faith, hand off ye generation of vipers. For notwithstanding ye be the Sons
of the faithful, unless ye amend your lives, and for the evil works, which
ye have done heretofore, make recompense, and satisfy the justice of God
with good, ye shall be cast into hell fire.

2 Cor. 7.10
The 7. objection with M. PERKINS. Paul sets down sundry fruits of
repentance, whereof one is revenge, whereby repentant persons punish themselves
to satisfy Gods justice, for the temporal punishment of their sins.

M. PERKINS answers. A repentant sinner must take vengeance of himself, and
that is, to use all means to subdue the corruption of nature, and to bridle
carnal affections, which kind of actions are restraynements properly, but no
punishments directed against the sin, but not against the person.

Reply. I never saw any writer so contradict himself, and so dull, that he
does not understand his own words. If this subdueing of our corrupt nature,
be restraynements only from sin hereafter, and not also punishments of sin
past, how then does the repentant sinner take vengeance of him self, which you
affirm that he must do? Revenge as every simple body knows, is the
requital of evil past: We grant that all satisfaction is directed against
sin, and not against the person, but for the great good of the man, albeit
that for a season it may afflict, both his body and mind too, as Saint Paul's
former Epistle did the Corinthians, but this sorrow being according unto God,
does much benefit the person, as the Apostle declares. For besides this
revenge taken on himself to appease Gods wrath, it breeds (as it is in the
text following) in our corrupt nature, that loves not such chastisement, A
fear to return to sin, least it be again punished, for where there is no
fear of pains, and much pleasure, thither our corruption will run headlong.
It sturreth up also in us, Indignation against sin, and all the wicked
instruments of it, A defense and clearing of our selves, with the honester
sort, And an emulation, and desire to fly as far from sin as other our
equals, and consequently, A love of virtue and honest life, which freeth us
from that sorrow and all other troublesome passions, all which are playnelie
gathered out of the same text of Saint Paul.

Lastly says M. PERKINS. They make three works of satisfaction, Prayer,
Fasting, and Almesdeedes.

For the first, it is mere foolishness to think, that a man by prayer can
satisfy for his sins, it is all one as if you had said, that a beggar by
asking an alms can deserve the alms, or a debtor, by requesting his creditor
to pardon his debt, should thereby pay his debt.

That Prayer does appease Gods justice, and obtain pardon, God him self is
witness, saying. Call upon me in the day of tribulation, Psalm. 49.
and I will deliver thee. Prayer cannot be made without faith in Gods power,
and hope in his goodness, and therefore must needs be pleasing in Gods sight:
by prayer we humble our selves before God, and acknowledge his omnipotency, and
our infirmity. By prayer we lament with bitter tears our own ingratitude,
folly and wickedness, and bewail the grieuousnes of our sins: such prayer
made King David (as his Psalms do testefie) water his couch with tears,
making them his food day and night: and by them he satisfied for his former
offenses. So did a far greater sinner then he, King Manasses: who falling
into tribulition, 2. Paral. 33.
prayed unto the Lord his God, and did great penance before the God of his
fathers, and prayed, and entreated earnestly, and God heard his prayers, and
brought him back again to Jerusalem into his Kingdom. Now to M. PERKINS
Similes. A beggar does not deserve his alms, because he makes not this former
kind of prayer, but the short slight one of the Protestants from the lips
outward: The like we say of a debtor, whose creditor being a needy man, will
not be paid without money, but God who needs none of our goods, highly
esteems of an humble and contrite heart, grieved much for having sinned in the
sight of God, and humbly suing unto him for pardon. To such a one he said.
Math. 18.
Did I not forgive thee all thy debt, because thou besoughtest me.

Secondly, says M. PERKINS. Fasting is a thing indifferent, of the same nature
with eating, and drinking, no more conferring to the Kingdom of heaven, then
eating, and drinking does. What an Epicurian, and fleshly Doctrine is this?
Why then did the Ninevites fast, put on sackcloth, and lie on the ground (all
which bodily afflictions are reduced to fasting) rather then eat, and drink,
and presume of Gods mercy, if the one had been as acceptable to God as the
other? Why is S. John Baptist commended for his rough garments and thin diet,
if chearishing the flesh please God as well, as punishing of it? Math. 6.
Christ says expressly. That if we fast in secret, his heavenly Father will
repay us openly: Will he reward eating, and drinking so liberally? but of
fasting we shall have a whole Chapter hereafter. Therefore briefly I here
conclude, that this Doctrine tends to the establishment of the Kingdom of
Atheists and Epicures, whose sweet speech is. Let us eat, and let us drink,
for after death there is no pleasure. True: for such Belly-gods and their
followers.

Lastly he says, that Almesdeedes cannot be works of satisfaction for sins.
For when we give them as we ought, we do but our duty, and we may as well say,
that a man by paying one debt, may discharge an other, as to say by doing his
duty, he may satisfy Gods justice for the punishment or his sins. A man
might suppose, that this man were pretely well seen in Carolo Buffone, that
thus ruffleth in grave matters with his simple Similes.

That Almesdeedes redeem our sins, purge us from them, and make all things
clean unto us, has been already proved out of holy Scriptures, I will join
thereunto this one testimony of that worthy Martyr S. Cyprian. Sermon. de opere
and cleemos.
Our frailty could not tell what to do, unless the goodness of God, by
teaching us the works of justice and mercy, had showed us a certain way of
preserving our salvation, which is, that with Almesdeedes we might wash clean
away the filth of sins, which we had contracted after Baptism. The holy
Ghost speaks in the Scripture, and says. Sins are purged by almesdeedes
and faith.

Now to M. PERKINS Simile. We deny that a man is bound to give all the alms
that he can: We are bound to give that which we may well spare, when there is
great want: But alms (which is a part of satisfaction) is not given out of our
superfluity, but spared from our necessary uses. And is many times bestowed,
when there is no such great need, upon building Schools, Colleges,
Hospitals, and Chapels. And this may serve to answer M. PERKINS Similes
against these three works of satisfaction: If any man desire to know why we
make special rekoning of these three works, it is principally for two causes:
First, we being to satisfy, must perform it with such things, as be our
own, which be of three sorts, either they belong to our soul, or to our
body, or to our external goods, the goods of our mind, we offer to God by
prayer, by fasting, and other reasonable bodily discipline, we exhibit unto
him, A living hoaste, holy and pleasing God. Romans 12.1.
By Almesdeedes we make him an agreeable present of our goods. Secondly, all
sin as S. John teaches, 1. Epis 2.
may be reduced to three principal heads. The concupiscence of the flesh:
that is Leachery, which is cooled by fasting and such like afflicting of the
body; Concupiscence of the eyes, Covetousness, which is purged and chased away
by almesdeedes: And pride of life, which is suppressed by humble prayer, and
often meditation of our own miseries.

But now to knitte up this question. Let us hear briefly what the best
learned, and purest antiquity has taught of this satisfaction done by man, and
because M. PERKINS began with Tertullian, omitting his ancients. Let us
first hear what he says of it in his book of penance. How foolish is it
(says he) not to fulfill our penance, and yet to expect pardon of our sins,
this is not to tender the price, and yet to put out a hand for the reward: for
God has decreede to set the pardon at this price: he proposes impunity to be
redeemed with this recompense of penance.

His equal in standing, and better in learning Origin, thus discourses. See
our good Lord tempering mercy with severity, Hom. 3. in lib. iudic.
and weighing the measure of the punishment in a just and merciful balance: he
delivers not up a sinner for ever. But look how long time thou know thy
self to have offended, so long do thou humble thy self to God, and satisfy
him in the confession of penance.

That glorious Martyr, and most learned Archbishop S. Cyprian, is wonderful
vehement against them, that would not have severe penance done, by such as fell
in persecution, saying. That such indiscreet men, labor tooth and nail, that
satisfaction be not done to God, highly offended against them. And says
further, That he who withdraws our brethren from these works of
satisfaction, does miserably deceive them, causing them that might do true
penance, and satisfy God their merciful Father, with their prayer and works,
to perish daily. Lib. 1. Ep. Li 3. Ep. 14 Orat. in illa verba attend tibi.
And to be more and more seduced to their further damnation.

S. Basil says. Look to thy self, that according to the proportion of thy
fault, thou may hence also borrow some help of recovering thy health. Is it
a great and grievous offense? it has then need of much confession, bitter
tears, a sharp combat of watching, Idem Am. ad virg. lap. cap. 8. Orat. in
sanct. lum.
and incessant and continued fasting: if the offense were light and more
tollerahle, yet let the penance be equal unto it.

S. Gregory Nazianzen says, It is as great an evil to pardon without some
punishment, as to punish without all pity. For as that does loose the bridle
to all licentiousnes, so this does strain it too much.

Idem de paup. amor
By compassion on the poor and faith, sins are purged, therefore let us be
cleansed by this compassion, let us scour out the spots and filth of our
souls with this egregious herb, that makes it white, some as woole, others as
snow, according to the proportion of every man's compassion and alms.

De helia and ^^eiun.
S. Ambrose says, We have many helps whereby we may redeem our sins, have
thou money? Redeem thy sin, not that our Lord is to be bought and sold, but
thou thyselfe art sold by thy sins, redeem thy self with thy works,
redeem thee with thy money. Epist. 82.
And, How could we be saved, unless we washed away our sins by fasting.

S. Hierome makes Paula a blessed Matron say, My face is to be disfigured,
which against the commandment of God I painted: my body is to be afflicted,
that has taken so great pleasure: my often laughter, is to be recompensed with
continual weeping: Ad Eusioch de obitu Paul.
my silks and soft clothing, is to be changed into rough hair. Read
another Epistle of his to the same Eustochium, about the preserving of her
virginity, and see what penance himself did, being a most virtuous young man.

Epist. 54.
S. Augustine says, He that is truly penitent, looks to nothing else, then
that he leaves not unpunished the sin which he committed: For by that means,
not sparing our selves, he whose high and just judgment no contemptuous person
can escape, does spare us.

Li 50. hom Hom. 50. cap. 11. Cap. 15.
And he shows how that a penitent sinner does come to the Priest, and receive
of him the measure of his satisfaction. And says directly against our
Protestants position, That it is not sufficient to amend our manners, and to
depart from the evil which we have committed, unless we do also satisfy
God, for those things which we had done.

Lib. 6. in 1. Reg.
S. Gregory says, That sins are not only to be confessed, but to be blotted
out with the austerity of penance.

I will close up these testimonies, with this sentence of our learned
countriman venerable Bede: In Psalm. 1.
Delight (says he) or desire to sin, when we do satisfaction is lightly
purged by almesdeedes, and such like: but consent is not rubbed out, without
great penance: now custom of sinning is not taken away, but by a just and
heavy satisfaction.

And if you please in few words, to hear the Protestants works of penance
and satisfaction: In steed of our fasting, and other corporal correction:
they fall to eating, and that of the best flesh they can get, and take in the
Lord, all such bodily pleasure, as the company of a woman will afforde. In lieu
of giving alms unto the poor, they pill them by fines and unreasonable rents:
and by usury and crafty bargains, are not ashamed to cosen their nearest
kin. Finally, in place of prayer, and washing away their own sins by many
bitter tears, they sing merely a Geneua Psalm, and rail, or hear a railing
at our imagined sins, or pretended errors. And so leave, and lay all pain
and sorrow, upon Christ's shoulders, thinking themselves (belike) to be borne
to pleasure and pastime, and to make merry in this world.

FIRST, OF TRADITIONS.
M. PARK. page 134. Traditions are doctrines delivered from hand to hand,
either by word of mouth or writing, besides the written word of God.
OUR CONSENT.
WE Hold that the very word of God was delivered by Tradition from ADAM to
MOSES, who was the first Penman of holy Scripture. Item, that the History of
the New Testament, (as some for eight, not eighty, or as other think for
twenty years) went from hand to hand by Tradition, till penned by the
Apostles, or being penned by others, was approved by them. Hitherto we agree
(but not in this which he interlaceth) that in the state of Nature, every man
was instructed of God immediately in both matters of faith and religion: For
that God then as ever since used the ministry as well of good fathers, as godly
masters; as ENOCH, NOE, ABRAHAM, and such like, to teach their children and
servants the true worship of God, and true faith in him; otherwise, how should
the word of God pass by Tradition from ADAM to MOSES, as M. P. affirms: If
no child learned any such thing of his Father, but was taught immediately from
God, but M. P. seems to regard little such petty contradictions.

His 2. concl. We hold that the Prophets, our Savior Christ, and his Apostles,
spoke, and did many things good and true, which were not written in the
Scriptures, but came to us by Tradition: but these were not necessary to be
believed: For one example he puts; that the B. Virgin MARY lived and dyed a
Virgin: but it is necessary to salvation to believe this, for HELVIDIVS is
esteemed by S. AUGUSTINE an Heretic, for denying it. De haeres. ad Quod. li.
84.


His 3. Concl. We hold that the Church of God has power to prescribe
Ordinances and Traditions touching time and place of Gods worship: And touching
order and comeliness to be used in the same. (mary with these four caueats)
First, that it prescribe nothing childish or absurd: See what a reverent
opinion this man carries of the Church of God, governed by his holy spirit,
that it nevertheless may prescribe things both childish and absurd. But I
must pardon him, because he speaks of his own Synagogue, which is no part of
the true Church. Secondly, that it be not imposed as any part of Gods worship:
This is contrary to the conclusion, for order and comeliness to be used in
Gods worship, which the Church can prescribe, is some part of the worship.
Thirdly, that it be severed from superstition, etc. This is needelesse; for if
it be not absurd, which was the first prouiso, it is already severed from
superstition. The fourth, touching multitude may pass; these be but mere
trifles: That is of more importance, that he terms the decree registered, in
the xv. of the Acts of the Apostles, a Tradition: whereas before he desined
Traditions to be all doctrine delivered, besides the written word. Now the
Acts of the Apostles is a parcel of the written word, as all the world
knows: That then which is of record there, cannot be termed a Tradition.

THE DIFFERENCE.
Catholics teach, that besides the written Word, there be certain unwritten
Traditions, which must be believed and practiced, as both profitable and
necessary to salvation. We hold that the Scriptures contain in them all
doctrine needful to salvation: whether it concern faith or manners, and
acknowledge no Traditions for such, as he who believes them not, cannot be
saved.

Before we come to the Protestants reasons against Traditions; observe that we
divide Traditions into three sorts: The first we termed Divine, because they
were delivered by our blessed Savior, who is God: The second, Apostolical, as
delivered by the holy Apostles: The third, Ecclesiastical, instituted and
delivered by the Governors of the Church, after the Apostles days. And of
these three kinds of Traditions, we make the same account, as of the writings
of the same Authors: to wit, we esteem no less of our Saviors Traditions,
than of the sour Gospels, or any thing immediately dictated from the holy
Ghost. Likewise as much honor and credit do we give unto the Apostles doctrine
unwritten, as written. For incke and paper brought no new holiness, nor gave any
force and virtue unto either Gods on the Apostles words; but they were of the
same value and credit uttered by word of mouth, as if they had been written.
Here the question is principally of divine Traditions, which we hold to be
necessary to salvation, to resolve and determine many matters of greater
difficulty. For we deny not but that some such principal points of our Faith,
(which the simple are bound to believe under pain of damnation) may be
gathered out of the holy Scriptures: as for example; that God is the Creator
of the world, Christ the Redeemer of the world, the Holy Ghost the Sanctifier:
and other such like Articles of the Creed, M. P. goes about to prove by
these reasons following; that the Scriptures contains all matter of belief
necessary to salvation. Testimony, Deuteronomy. 4.2
Thou shall not add to the words that I command thee, nor take any thing there
from. Therefore the written word is sufficient for all doctrine pertaining to
salvation. If it be said, that this is spoken as well of the vn-written as
written word; for there is no mention in the text of the written word: then
M. P. adds, that it must be understood of the written word only, because
these words are as a certain preface set before a long Comentarie made upon
the written Law.

ANSWER.
Let the words be set where you will, they must not be wrested beyond their
proper signifycation. The words cited signify no more, then that we must not
either by addition or subtraction, change or pervert Gods commandments,
whether they be written or unwritten. Now to infer, that because they areas a
preface unto MOSES Law, that therefore nothing must be added unto the same Law,
is extreme dotage. Why then were the books of the Old Testament, written
afterward, if God had forbidden any more to be written or taught, besides that
one book of Deuteronomy? Shall we think that none of the Prophets that lived
and wrote many volumes after this, had not read these words; or that they
either understood them not; or that understanding them well, did wilfully
transgress against them? one of these the Protestants must needs defend, or
else for very shame surcease the alleging of this text for the
all-sufficiencie of the written word.

M. P. His testimony: Esa. 8.2. ^
To the Law and testimony, if they speak not according to this word it is,
because there is no light in them: Here the Prophet teaches (says M. P.) What
is to be done in cases of difficultly? men must not run to the Wizardes and
Soothsayers, but to the Law and to the Testimony, commending the written word
as sufficient to resolve all doubts whatsoever.

ANSWER.
By the Law and testimony in that place; the five books of MOSES are to be
understood, if that written Word be sufficient to resolve all doubts
what-so-euer: What need we then the Prophets? what need we the Evangelists
and the Epistles of the Apostles? What Wizarde would have reasoned in such
sort? The Prophet wills there, that the Israelites who wanted wit to
discern whether it be better to fly unto God for council, than unto Wizardes
and Soothsayers, to see what is written in the Law of MOSES concerning that
point of consulting-Wizards: which is there plainly forbidden in diverse
places. Now out of one particular case, whereof there is express mention in
the written word, to conclude that all doubts and scruples whatsoever are
thereby to be decided, is a most unskillful part, arguing as great want of
light in him, as was in those blind Israelites.

3. Testimony, John 20.31.
These things were written, that ye might believe that JESUS is the CHRIST: and
in believing, might have life everlasting. Here is set down the full end of the
Gospel, that is, to bring men to faith, and consequently to salvation: to
which, the whole scripture alone is sufficient without Traditions.

ANSWER.
Here are more faults than lines. First the text is craftily mangled: Things
being put insteede of Miracles. For S. JOHN says, Many other Miracles CHRIST
did, etc. but these were written, etc. Secondly, S. JOHN says not that for
faith we shall be saved, but believing we should have salvation in his name,
which he clipped off: thirdly, remember to what faith S. JOHN ascribes the
means of our salvation, not to that whereby we apply unto our selves Christ's
righteousness, but by which we believe JESUS to be CHRIST the MESSIAH of the
Jews, and the Son of God, which M. P. also concealed.

Now to the present matter, S. JOHN says, that these miracles recorded in his
Gospel, were written, that we might believe JESUS to be the Son of God;
and believing, have salvation in his name, etc. Therefore the written word
contains all doctrine necessary to salvation.

ANSWER.
S. JOHN speaks not a word of doctrine, but of miracles: and therefore to
conclude sufficiency of doctrine out of him, is not to care what one says.
But M. P. sore-seeing this, says, it cannot be understood of miracles only;
for miracles without the doctrine of CHRIST, can bring no man to life
everlasting: True, and therefore that text speaking only of miracles,
proves nothing for the sufficiency of the written Word. CHRIST'S miracles
were sufficient, to prove him to be the Son of GOD, and their MESSIAH: But
that proves not Saint JOHN'S Gospel, to contain al Doctrine needful to
salvation: For many other points of faith must be believed also. And if it
alone be sufficient; what need we the other three Gospelles, the Acts of the
Apostles, or any of their Epistles, or the same S. JOHN'S Revelations. Finally,
admit that S. JOHN'S Gospel were all-sufficient, yet should not Traditions be
excluded; for Christ says in it in plain terms, Ioh. 16.
that he had much more to say unto his Apostles, but they as then being not
able to be are it; he reserved that to be delivered unto them afterward; of
which high mysteries S. JOHN records not much in his Gospel after Christ's
resurrection; and so many of them must needs be delivered by Tradition
unwritten. This place of S. JOHN, M. P. patcheth up with an other of S. PAVL.
Gal. 1.^.
If we or an Angel from heaven preach unto you any thing besides that which
we have preached, let him be accursed: And to this effect he blames them that
taught but a diverse doctrine, to that which he had taught. 1. Tim. 1.3.


ANSWER.
Now we must look unto this Gentle-mans singers: There were three corruptions
in the text of S. JOHN: here is one, but it is a soul one. In steed of
Preaching unto them an other Gospel, he puts (preach unto them any other
thing:) when there is great difference between an other Gospel, and any other
thing. The Gospel comprehends the principal points of faith, and the whole
work of Gods building in us: which S. PAVL like a wise Architect 1. Cor. 3 12.
had laid in the Galathians; others his fellow-work-men, might build upon it,
gold, silver, and precious stones, with great merit to themselves and thanks
from S. PAVL: Mary if any should dig up that blessed and only foundation,
and would lay a new one, him S. PAVL holds for accursed. So that, that
falcification of the text is intolerable; and yet when all is done, nothing
can be wringed out of it, to prove the written word to comprehend all doctrine
needful to salvation: for S. PAVL speaks there only of his Gospel, that
is, of his preaching unto the Galathians, and not one word of any written
Gospel: No more does he in that place to TIMOTHY: And so it is nothing to
purpose.

The fourth Testimony. 2. Tim. 3.16.
The whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct to righteousness, that the man
of God may be absolute being made perfect unto every good work. In these words
are contained (says M. P.) two arguments to prove the sufficiency of
Scripture: The first; that which is profitable to these four uses, to teach
(al necessary truth is not in the text) to confute errors, to correct faults
in manners, to instruct (all men in all duty, is M. P. his addition to the
text) that is sufficient to salvation: But the Scriptures serve for all these
uses. etc.

ANSWER.
This text of holy Scripture, is so far from yielding our adversaries two
Arguments, that it affoordeth not so much as any probable color of half one
good argument. In searching out the true sense of holy Scriptures; we must
observe diligently the nature and proper signifycation of the words; as M. P.
also notes out of S. AUGUSTINE, in his sixth objection of this question; which,
if the Protestants did here perform, they would make no such account of this
text: for S. PAVL says, only that all Scripture is profitable, not sufficient,
to teach, to reprove, etc. How are they then carried away with their own
partial affections: that cannot discern between profitable and sufficient.
Good Timber is profitable to the buylding of an house, but it is not
sufficient, without stones, mortar, and a Carpenter. Seed serves well, yea, is
also necessary to bring forth corn: but will it suffice of it self, without
manuring of the ground, and seasonable weather? And to fit our purpose more
properly; good laws are very profitable: yea, most expedient for the good
government of the commonwealth: But are they sufficient without good customs,
good governors, and judges, to see the same Laws and customs rightly
understood and duly executed? Even so the holy Scripturs (S. PAVL affirms)
are very profitable; as containing very good and necessary matter, both to
teach, reprove, and correct: but he says, not they are sufficient, or that
they do contain all doctrine needful for these four ends: And therefore, to
argue out of S. PAVL, that they are sufficient for all those purposes; when he
says only, that they are profitable to them, is plainly not to know, or not
to care what a man says: And to press such an impertinent cauil, so often and
so vehemently as the Protestants do, is nothing else but to bewray (unto the
indifferent reader) either their extreme ignorance, or most audacious
impudency, that think they can face out any matter, be it never so
impertinent. The same answer I make unto M. P. his second argument, out of the
same place: that the holy Scriptures be profitable to make the man of God
absolute, but not sufficient.

I say more-ouer; that M. P. does falsely English these words (...) into the
whole Scriptures: when it signifies all Scripture, that is, every book of
Scripture: and is there put to verify, that the Old Testament only serves to
instruct to salvation: For, in the words next before, S. PAVL shows, how that
TIMOTHY from his infancy, had been trained up in the knowledge of the holy
Scriptures: which, says he, can instruct thee to salvation: And annexeth, as
the confirmation thereof the Text cited: All Scripture inspired of God, is
profitable to teach, etc. Now, in TIMOTHYS infancy, no part of the New
Testament was written, and therefore, all Scripture which is here put, to
prove that Scripture which TIMOTHY in his Infancy knew; cannot but by
unreasonable wresting, signify more than all the books of the Old Testament.
So that there are three soul faults in this the Protestants Achilles: The
first, in falsification of the text, that it might seem to be spoken of the
whole, which is spoken of every part. The second, in applying that which is
spoken of the Old Testament, unto both the Old and New. The third, in making
that to be all-sufficient which S. PAVL affirms only to be profitable. And
this is all they can say out of the Scripture, to prove that the written
word contains all doctrine needful to salvation: Where-upon, I make this
invincible argument against them out of this their own position.

Nothing is necessary to be believed, but that which is written in holy
Scripture. But in no place of Scripture is it written, that the written word
contains all doctrine needful to salvation, as has been proved.

Therefore, it is not necessary to salvation to believe the written word, to
contain all doctrine needful to salvation. And by the same principle, I
might reject all testimony of Antiquity as needelesse, if the Scriptures be
so all-sufficient as they hold. Yet let us here what testimony M. P. brings out
of antiquity, in favor of his cause.

TERTVLLIAN De resur. carnis.
says, Take from Heretics the opinions which they defend with the Heathens,
that they may desende their questions by Scripture alone, and they cannot stand.

ANSWER.
Here Scripture alone is opposed (as every one may see) unto the writings of
Heathen Authors, and not to the Traditions of the Apostles; and therefore
makes nothing against them. Again, (says M. P. out of the same Author:) We
need no curiosity after JESUS CHRIST, nor inquisition after the Gospel, when
we believe it, we desire to believe nothing besides it: for this we must
believe that there is nothing else which we may believe.

ANSWER.
By the Gospel there, is understood all our Christian doctrine, written and
unwritten; and not only the written word of the four Evangelists, else we
should not believe the Acts of the Apostles, or their Epistles, no more than
Traditions: which Christian doctrine, written and unwritten, we only believe
by divine faith; to all other Authors, we give such credit as their writings do
deserve. If any man desire to see TERTVLLIANS judgment of Traditions, let him
read his book of prescriptions against Heretics, where he auerreth, that
Traditions serve better than the Scriptures themselves, to confute all
Heresies, Heretics always, either not allowing all the books of Scripture,
or else perverting the sense and meaning of the Scriptures. And in his book De
Corona militis, he formallie proposes this question: Whether Traditions
unwritten are to be admitted or no? and answers by many instances, that they
must be received; concluding thus: For these and the like points, if thou
require law out of the Scriptures, thou shall find none: but Tradition is
alleged to be the Author of them, Custom the confirmer, and Faith the
obseruer. So that nothing is more certain than that TERTVLLIAN thought
unwritten Traditions necessary to be believed.

Come we now unto his second testimony out of S. IEROM In cap. 23 Mat.
who writing (as he says) of an opinion that S. JOHN Baptist was killed
because he foretold the coming of Christ (the good man would say, ZACHARY S.
JOHN'S Father, for the Scripture shows plainly why S. JOHN lost his head Mat.
14
) But S. IEROM there says this, Because it has not authority from
Scriptures, may as easelie be contemned as approved: But of which particular,
M. P. (showing himself a doughtie Logician) would enforce an universal, that
sorsooth all may be contemned, that is not proved by Scripture. As if you would
prove no Protestant to be skillful in the art of true reasoning, because M.
P. behaues himself in it so unskillfully. But S. IEROM in the same place
declares why that might be as easily reproved as allowed, not having any
ground in the Scripture, because (says he) It is taken out of the dreams of
some Apocryphal writings, opposing Scripture to other improoued writings, and
not to approved Traditions; to which (he says in his Dialogues against the
Luciferians, before the middle) That the Church of God does attribute the like
authority, as it does unto the written Law.

M. P. His third Author is S. AUGUSTINE. Lib. 2. de doct. Chri. cap. 9.
In those things which are plainly set down in Scriptures, are found all
those points which contain faith and manners of living well.

ANSWER.
All things necessary to be believed of every simple Christian, under pain
of damnation, that is, the Articles of our Belief, are contained in the
Scriptures, but not the resolution of harder matters, much less of all
difficulties, which the more learned must expressly believe, if they will be
saved, which distinction S. AUGUSTINE elsewhere does signify: De peccatoru^
meritis cap. vlt.
And is gathered out of many other places of his works, as in that matter of
rebaptizing them, who became Catholics after they had been baptized by
Heretics. He says, Lib. 5. de bapt. contra Donat. cap. 23.
The Apostles truly have commanded nothing hereof (in their writings) but that
custom which was laid against S. CYPRIAN, is to be believed to have flowed
from an Apostolical tradition, as there be many things which the universal
Church holds, and therefore are to be believed. The same says he of the
custom of the Church in Baptizing infants. De genes. ad litra. lib. 10. cap.
23.
And in his Epist. 174. of the word (...) that is not in the holy Scripture,
and yet nevertheless is defended to be used in the assertion of faith. As also
(says he) we never read in those books that the Father is unbegotten, and
yet we hold that he is so to be called. Lib. 3. cap 3. cont. max Arianum.
And S. AUGUSTINE holds that the holy Ghost is to be adored, though it be not
written in the word. The like of the perpetual Virginity of our B. Lady,
Haeresi 4.
out of which and many more such like, we gather most manifestly that S.
AUGUSTINE thought many matters of faith, not to be contained in the written
word, but to be taken out of the Churches treasury of Traditions.

M. P. His last testimony is taken out of Vincentius Lirinensis, who says (as
he reports) that the Canon of the Scripture is perfect and fully sufficient
for all things.

ANSWER.
I think that there is no such sentence to be found in him; he says by way of
objection: What need we make recourse unto the authority of the
Ecclesiastical understanding, if the Canon of the Scripture be perfect? He
affirms not that they be fully sufficient to determine all controversies in
religion, but throughout all his book he proves the clean contrary, that no
heresy can be certainly confuted and suppressed by only Scriptures, without
we take with it the sense and interpretation of the Catholic Church.

Thus M. P. having ended with the Law and Testimony, adds in a postscript,
two other slender reasons unto his former: The first, that Christ and his
Apostles used always to confirm their doctrine, with the testimonies, of
Scriptures, and not with Tradition.

ANSWER.
Fist, for our Savior CHRIST JESUS, he out of his divine wisdom delivered his
doctrine most commonly in his own name, (But I say unto you) And very
seldom confirms it with any testimony out of the Law. The Evangelists do
often note how CHRIST fulfilled the old prophecies; but never, or very seldom
seek to confirm his doctrine by testimonies: their own they do sometimes;
but to say they never wrote any thing out of Tradition, proceeds of most
gross ignorance. Where had Saint MATTHEW the adoring of the Sages? S. JOHN
Baptists preaching? briefly, that was done before his own conversion, but by
Tradition? S. MARK wrote the most part of his Gospel out of Tradition,
received from S. PETER, as witnesses EVSEBIVS, Lib. 2. hist cap. 14.
S. LVLE testifyeth of himself, that he wrote his whole Gospel, Cap. 1.
as he had received it by Tradition, from them who were eyewitnesses. What
desperate carelessness was it then to affirm that the Apostles never used
Tradition, to confirm any doctrine? when some of them built, not only
parcels, but their whole Gospels upon Traditions. His other reason is; that if
we believe unwritten Traditions were necessary to salvation, then we must
as well believe the writings of the ancient Fathers, as the writings of the
Apostles: because, Apostolical Traditions are not elsewhere to be sound, but
in their books; but that were absurd, for they might err.

ANSWER.
That does not follow for three causes: First, Apostolical Traditions, are
as well kept in the mind of the learned, as in the ancient Fathers writings:
and therefore have more credit than the Fathers writings. Secondly, they are
commonly recorded of more than one of the Fathers, and so have firmer
testimony than any one of their writings. Thirdly, if there should be any
Apostolical Tradition, related but of one ancient Father, yet it should be of
more credit than any other thing of his own invention, because that was
registered by him, as a thing of more estimation. And again, some of the rest
of those blessed and godly personages, would have reproved it, as they did all
other false-hoods, if it had not been such indeed as it was termed: Which when
they did not, they gave a secret approbation of it for such; and so that has
the interpretatiue consent at least of the learned of that age, and the
following for Apostolical Tradition.

But M. P. proves the contrary by S. PAVL, who says, Act. 26.22.
That I continue to this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying no
other thing then that which the Prophets and MOSES did say should come. Why
make you here a full point: let S. PAVL make an end of his speech, and tell us
for what points of doctrine he alleges MOSES and the Prophets: Marry to
prove that CHRIST should suffer death, and rise again, and that he should
give light to the Gentiles. For these and such like, which were evidently
fore-tolde in holy writ: he needed not to allege any other proof, but when
he was to persuade them to abandon MOSES Law, he then delivered to them the
decrees of the Apostles, and taught them to keep them: Act. 16.
As also when he instructed the Corinthians in the Sacrament of the Altar, he
begins with Tradition, saying: 1. Cor. 12
I deliver unto you as I have received from our Lord, not in writing, but by
word of mouth. And in the same Chapter puts down the contentious
scripturist, with the custom of the Church, saying, If any man lust to strive,
we have no such custom: so that out of S. PAVL, we learn to allege
Scriptures, when they be plain for us, and when they bear not so clear with
us, to plead Tradition, and the custom of the Church.

Hitherto I have confuted what M. P. brought against Traditions. Now to that
which he says for them in our behalf.

First, says he, the Catholics allege, 2 These. 2.15.
Where, the Apostle bids the Church to keep the Ordinances which he taught
them, either by word of mouth, or by Epistle: Hence they gather that besides
the written word, there be unwritten Traditions that are necessary to be
kept and obeyed.

M. Perkens ANSWER.
It is likely, that this, Epistle to the Thessalonians, was the first that ever
PAVL wrote to any Church: and then some-things needful to salvation might de
delivered by word of mouth: but that was afterward written in some others of
his Epistles.

REPLY.
Observe first, that insteede of Traditions (according to the Greek and Latin
word,) they translate (...).
Ordinances; ever flying the word Tradition, where any thing is spoken in
commendation of them. But if any thing sound against them, then thrust they in
the word Tradition, although the Greek word bear it not. See for this their
corruption, and many other, a learned Treatise, named, The Discovery of false
translations, penned by Master GREGORY MARTIN, a man most singulerly
conversant in the Greek and Hebrew tongues.

Secondly, is it not plain dotage, to avouch that this second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, was the first that ever he wrote? Surely, if none of his other
were written before it, yet his first to the same Church must needs have
been written before it. But let us give the man leave to dream sometimes. To
the point of the answer, that all was written after in some other of his
Epistles, which before had been delivered by word of mouth. How proves M. P.
that? the man has such confidence in his own word, that he goes not once
about to prove it. Good Sir, hold you not here; that nothing is needful to
be believed, which is not written in the word? Show us then where it is written
in the word, that Saint PAVL wrote in his later Epistles, that which he taught
by word of mouth before? or else by your own rule it is not needful to
believe it. But yet for a more full satisfaction of the indifferent reader, I
will set down the opinions of some of the auncientest and best Interpreters of
this place of the Apostle, that we may see whether they thought that S. PAVL
committed all to writing, and left nothing by Tradition.

S. CHRYSOSTOM in his most learned and eloquent Comentaries upon this text,
concludes thus. Hereupon it is manifest that the Apostles delivered not all in
their Epistles, but many things also unwritten; and those things are as well to
be believed, as the written. OECVMENIVS and THEOPHILACTVS upon that place
teach the same.

S. BASIL De spu. cap. 27.
speaks thus, I hold it Apostolical to persevere in Traditions not written:
for the Apostle says, I commend you that ye are mindful of my precepts: and,
do hold the Traditions, even as I delivered them unto you: and then alleges
this text: Hold the Traditions which you have received of me either by Word or
Epistle.

S. JOHN DAMASCEN accords with the former saying, Lib. 4. De fide cap. 17
That the Apostles delivered many things without writing. S. PAVL does
testify, when he writes, Therefore brethren stand and hold the Traditions
which have been taught you either by word of mouth or by Epistle. These holy
and judicious expositors of S. PAVL, free from all partiality, gather out of
this text of his, that many things necessary to be believed, even until their
days remained unwritten, and were religiously observed by Tradition; which
throws flat to the ground M. P. his false supposition (fenced with neither
reason nor authotie) that S. PAVL put in writing afterward all that he had
first taught by word of mouth.

Moreover S. PAVL immediately before his death in one of the last of his
Epistles, commands his dear disciple TIMOTHY, 2. Tim. 2.
To commend unto the faithful, that which he heard of him by many witnesses;
and not that only which he should find written in some of his Epistles, or in
the written Gospel.

The second Argument for Traditions, is this, to believe that there be so many
books of holy Scripture, and no more: and that those be they which are
commonly taken so to be, is very necessary to salvation; now this is not to be
found written in any place of holy Scripture, but is received only by
Tradition, wherefore it is necessary to salvation to believe some Tradition.
M. P. answers that the books of the Old and New Testament, be Scripture, is
not believed on bare Tradition, but by the books themselves on this manner. Let
the man who is endued with the spirit of discerning, read the books and
consider first the Author of them, who is God; then the matter contained, which
is divine; the manner of speech, which is full of majesty in simple words:
Lastly, the end aimed at, which is Gods honor, and by this means he shall
discern any part of Scripture from the writings of men whatsoever.

REPLY.
A Wise and deep observation I warrant you, and well-worthy a grave Author:
Let us examine it briefly; first he will have his man endued with the spirit of
discerning: Who shall endue him with that spirit? M. P. seems to say, that
every Sheep of Christ has his spirit. But S. PAVL 1. Cor. 12
teaches plainly the contrary; that some certain only have the judgment
to discern. And touching this matter of discerning which books are
Canonical, which are not: Not the learned in the Primitive Church would take
upon him to discern which they were, three hundred years after CHRIST, was
left undefined by the best learned, whether the Catholic Epistles of S. JAMES
and IVDE: the second of S. PETER: the second and third of S. JOHN, and his
Apocalips, were Canonical or no, as is confessed on all parts: has then every
Christian this spirit of discerning, when the best Christians wanted it? Who
more prosound, more skillful to discern, than that subtle and sharp Doctor
S. AUGUSTINE, and yet the Protestants will not allow him the true spirit of
discerning which books be Canonical. For he, in diverse places of his works,
De doct Christ. c. 8 18. de ciui dei 36. lib. cont. ep. gaudent. 2
holds the books of the Machabees, to be Canonical Scriptures; and
expressly proves the book of Wisdom so to be. De prae dest. Sanc^ 14.
And yet our Protestants will not admit them. See therefore how foolish and
vain his first rule is: Come to the second.

His second is, that he who goes about to discern whether the book be
Canonical or no, must consider the Author, who is God. If he must at the first
take God to be the Author of the book, what needs any further labor? It must
needs be Canonical that has God for the Author. This man's wits were surely
from home, when he discoursed thus; and therefore it should be but folly to
stand upon his particularities; let this one reason in general serve to
confute him: all this manner put together, serves only to help particular men
to discern which books are Canonical, who may easily after their diligent
inquiry err and be deceived in this point, because every man is a liar. Romans
And if there be no more certain means to assure them of this which is the
ground of all their Religion, then every particular man's discretion and
judgment, then out of doubt their whole Religion is most unwisely builded upon
meane-mens inventions and discretion: who also for the most part do neither
understand the language in which they were first penned, nor the usual phrases
of Scriptures translated; that, I say nothing of the figures, parables,
prophecies and controversies which seem to be; and many other difficulties,
and yet these men need not doubt having learned some halfe-dozen-lines of M. P.
but that reading any book, they shall be able presently to discern whether
it be Canonical or no. A goodly mockery: Men were not so taught in the
Primitive Church, but the most skillful and wisest in discerning Canonical
books, trusted not unto their own judgment, but learned always upon
Apostolical Traditions. So did CERAPION an ancient holy writer (as EVSEBIVS
reports) reject certain books set out in the Apostles names, because they
had not received from their Predecessors any such. The like does CLEMENT of
Alexandria, Cap. 11.
and that famous ORIGIN Cap. 1^.
of the same book, who observe the Ecclesiastical Canon, as he had learned
and received by Tradition. So does he deliver his opinion of the four
Evangelists, and other books of Canonical Scripture, and not relying on his
own wit, which was excellent, or learning which was singular in all manner of
languages and matters: That S. AUGUSTINE was of the same mind, may be
gathered out of these words of his, Lib. 35 cap. 6.
Contra Faustum. Of what book can there be any assurance, if the letters,
which the Church propagated by the Apostles, and by such excellency declared
throughout all Nations, does teach and hold to be the Apostles, should be
uncertain, whither they be the Apostles or no. So that he makes the
declaration of the Church descended of the Apostles, to be a sure pillar to
rest upon, for the certain knowledge of Canonical Scripture and other spirits
whatsoever, if they follow not that rule to be rejected; so far is he off from
encourageing every sheep of Christ's sold, to take that weighty matter upon
himself as M. P. does. And what can be more against the most prudent
providence of the divine wisdom, than to permit every one to be a judge of
the books of Canonical Scripture. For if all those books, and no others
should pass current for Canonical, (which any Christian taking upon him the
spirit of discerning, would censure to be such) then away with all the Old
Testament, because diverse esteemed it to proceed of some evil spirits, as
witnesses Freueus Lib. 1. ca. 20.21 22.
and Ephiphanius: Haeres 6.6
Yea, not only all the Old must be abrogated, but all the New also, because it
has many false-hoodes mixed with the truth; as some presuming greatly of their
spirit and skill in discerning did teach: so testifyeth S. AUGUSTINE, Lib. 32.
cap. 2.
Cont. Faust. Some would have had but one of the sour Gospells, some five,
some six, some seven; some rejected all S. PAVLS Epistles: Many, and those of
the faithful did not admit for Canonical some of the other Apostles Epistles,
nor the Revelations. If then the divine sore-sight of our Savior had not
prevented this most soul inconueniencie by instituting a more certain means
of discerning and declaring which books were penned by inspiration of the holy
Ghost: which not then by leaving it unto every man's discretion, he might be
thought to have had but slender care of our salvation, which euey true
Christian heart does abhor to think: and therefore we must needs admit of
this most holy and provident Tradition of them from hand to hand: as among the
Protestants Brentius does in his Prologemenis, and also Kemnitius, handling the
second kind of Traditions, in his examination of the council of Trent; albeit
they reject all other Traditions, besides this one.

The two next arguments for Traditions, be not well propounded by M. P. The
third is to be framed thus:

Either all the books of holy Scripture contain all needful doctrine to
salvation, or some certain of them without the rest; not some of them without
the rest, for then the other should be supersluous, which no man holds:
therefore all the books of holy Scripture put together, do contain all
necessary instruction. Now then the argument follows, but some of those
books of holy Scripture have been lost; therefore, some points of necessary
doctrine contained in them, are not extant in the written word, and
consequently to be learned by Tradition. M. P. answers: First supposing some
of the books to be lost, that all needful doctrine, which was in them, is in
some of the others preserved. But why did he not solue the Argument proposed?
were then those books supersluous? Does the Holy Ghost set men to pen
needelesse discourses? which this answer supposes: Therefore he gives a
second more shameful, that none be perished, which is most contrary unto the
plain Scriptures: 1. Paral. vlt. 2. Paral. 9.
as S. JOHN CHRYSOSTOM proves: Hom. 9. in Mat. E^ Hom. 7. in priorem ad
Corinth.
where he has these express words: That many of the Prophetical books are
lost may be proved out of the history of Paralipomeneon (which they translate
Cronicles.) Now as for M. P. gesses, that some of them are yet extant, but
otherwise called: some were but little rolls of Paper; some profane and of
Philosophy, I hold them not worth the discussing, being not much pertinent,
and avowed one in word only, without either any reason or authority.

M. P. His fourth objection of the Jewish Cabala, is a mere dream of his
own: our Argument is this; MOSES who was the Penman of the Old Law,
committed not all to writing, but delivered certain points needful to
salvation by Tradition, nor any Lawmakers that ever was in any Country
comprehended al in letters, but established many things by customs, therefore
not likely that our Christian law should be all written.

That MOSES did not pen all, thus we prove. It was as necessary for women to
be delivered from Original sin as men. Circumcision the remedy for men,
could not possible be applied to women, as every one who knows what
circumcision is can tell; neither is there any other remedy provided in the
written law, to deliver women from that sin: Therefore some other remedy for
them was delivered by Tradition.

Item, if the Child were likely to die, before the eight day, there was
remedy for them, as the most learned do hold, yet no where written in the
Law: Also, many Gentiles, during that state of the Old Testament, were saved, as
JOB, and many such like, according to the opinion of all the ancient Fathers:
yet in the Law, or any other part of the Old Testament, it is not written, what
they had to believe, or how they should live: wherefore, many things needful
to salvation, were then delivered by Tradition.

To that reason of his; that God in his providence should not permit such a
loss of any part of the Scripture: I answer, that God permits much evil:
Again, no great loss in that, according to our opinion, who hold that
Tradition might preserve what was then lost. Now insteede of M. P. his fifth
reason for us of milk and strong meat, wishing him a Mess of Pappe for his
childish proposing of it: I will set down some authorities out of the written
word, in proof of Traditions.

Our Savior said, being at the point of his passion Ioh. 16.12.
that he had many things to say unto his Apostles, but they could not as then
bear them. Act. 10.
Our Savior after his resurrection, appeared often unto his Disciples,
speaking with them of the kingdom of God, of which little is written in any of
the Evangelists.

1. Cor. 11
I commend you brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
Traditions, even as I have delivered them to you.

1 Timothy 6.
O TIMOTHY, keep the dispositum that is true, which I delivered thee to keep,
2. Tim. 1
Hold fast by the holy ghost, the good things committed unto thee to keep:
which was as S. CHRISOSTOM and THEOPHILACT expound the true doctrine of
CHRIST, the true sense of holy Scriptures, the right administration of the
Sacraments, and government of the Church: To which alludeth, that ancient
holy Martyr, S. IRENEVS, Lib. 3. c. 4
saying, that the Apostles laid up in the Catholic Church, as in a rich
treasury, all things that belong to the truth.

S. JOHN, who was the last of the Apostles left alive, said, Epi. 3.13
that he had many other things to write, not idle or superfluous, but would
not commit them to ink and pen, but referred them to be delivered by word of
mouth.

And to specify for example sake, some two or three points of greatest
importance; where is it written that our Savior, the Son of God, is (...),
that is, of the same substance with his father? Where is it written, that the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Son, as well as from the Father? Where is it
written, that there is a Trinity, that is three persons reallie distinct in
one, and the very same substance? And that there is in our Savior CHRIST
JESUS, no person of man, but the substance of God and man, subsisting in the
second person of the Trinity: Be not all and every of these principal
articles of the Christian faith, and most necessary to be believed of the
learned, and yet not one of them in express terms written in any part of
the holy Bible. Wherefore we must either admit Traditions, or leave the
highest mysteries of our Christian faith, unto the discretion and courtesy of
every wrangler, as shall be more declared in the argument following.

The sixth and last reason for Traditions: Sundry places of holy Scriptures be
hard to be understood, others doubtful whether they must be taken liberally or
figuratively: If then it be put to every Christian to take his own exposition,
every several sect, will coin interpretations in favor of their own opinions:
and so shall the word of God, ordained only to teach us the truth, be abused
and made an Instrument to confirm all errors. To avoid which inconvenience,
considerate men have recourse unto the Traditions and ancient Records of the
Primitive Church, received from the Apostles, and delivered to the posterity,
as the true copies of Gods word; see the true Exposition and sense of it, and
thereby confute and reject all private and new glosses, which agree not with
those ancient and holy Comentaries: So that for the understanding of both
difficult and doubtful texts of Scripture, Traditions are most necessary,

M. P. His answer is, that there is no such need of them, but in doubtful
places, the Scripture it self is the best gloss: If there be observed; first
the analogy of faith, which is the sum of religion, gathered out of the
cleerest places. Secondly, the circumstance of the place, and the nature and
signifycation of the words. Thirdly, the conference of place with place; and
concludes, that the Scripture is falsely termed the matter of strife, it
being not so of it self, but by the abuse of man.

REPLY.
To begin with his latter words, because I must stand upon the former: Is the
Scripture falsely termed matter of strife, because it is not so, of his own
nature? why then, is CHRIST truly called the stone of offense or no, to them
that believe not? S. PETER says, Yes, 1. Pet. 2.
No says M. P. because that comes not of Christ, but of themselves. But
good Sir. Christ is truly termed a stone of offense, and the Scripture,
matter of strife, albeit there be no cause in them of those faults, but because
it so falls out by the malice of men.

The question is not wherefore it is so called, but whether it be so called or
no truly: That which truly is, may be so called truly: But the Scripture
truly is matter of great contention, every obstinate Heretic understanding
them according to his own fantasy, and therefore may truly be so termed,
although it be not the cause of contention in it self, but written to take
away all contention.

But to the capital matter; these three rules gathered out of Saint AUGUSTINE,
be good directions, whereby sober and sound wits may much profit in study of
divinity, if they neglect not other ordinary helps of good instructiors, and
learned Comentaries: But to affirm that every Christian may by these means
be enabled to judge which is the true sense of any doubtful or hard text is
extreme rashness and mere folly. S. AUGUSTINE himself well conversant in
these rules, endued with a most happy wit, and yet much bettered with the
excellent knowledge of all the liberal Sciences; yet he having most diligently
studied the Holy Scriptures, for more than thirty years, with the help also
of the best Comentaries he could get, and counsel of the most excusit; yet he
ingeniouslie confesses, That there were more places of Scripture, that after
all his study, he understood not, then which he did understand, Ep. 119. cap.
21.
And shall every simple man furnished only with M. P. his three rules of not
twice three lines be able to dissolve any difficulty in them whatsoever. Why
do the Lutherans (to omit all former Heretics) understand them in one sort,
the Caluenists after an other, The Anabaptists a third way, and so of other
sects.

And in our own Country, how comes it to pass that the Protestants find
one thing in the holy Scriptures, the Puritans almost the clean contrary? Why
I say is there so great, bitter, and endless contention among brothers of the
same spirit, about the sense and meaning of Gods word: If every one might, by
the aid of those triuiall notes, readily disclose all difficulties, and
assuredly boult out the certain truth of them; It cannot be but most evident
to men of any judgment, that the Scripture it self can never end any doubtful
controversy, without there be admitted some certain Judge to declare what is
the true meaning of it. And it cannot but redound to the dishonor of our
blessed Savior to say, that he has left a matter of such importance at
random, and has not provided for his servants an assured mean to attain to
the true understanding of it. If in matters of Temporal justice it should be
permitted to every contentious smatterer in the Law, to expound and conster
the grounds of the Law and statutes, as it should seem fittest in his
wisdom, and not be bound to stand to the sentence and declaration of the
Judge, what iniquity should not be Law, or when should there be any end of
any hard matter; one Lawyer defending one part, an other the other: One
counselor assuring on his certain knowledge, one party to have the right, an
other, as certainly auerring, not that, but the contrary to be Law, both
alleging for their warrant some texts of Law: What end and pacification of
the parties could be devised, unless the decision of the controversy be
committed unto the definitive sentence of some, who should declare whether
counselor had argued justly and according to the true meaning of the Law:
none at all, but bloody debate and perpetual conflict, each persuing to get or
keep by force of arms, that which his learned counsel avouched to be his
own.

To avoid then such garboyles and intestiue contention, there was never yet
any Lawmakers so simple, but appointed some governor and Judge, who should see
the due observation of his Laws, and determine all doubts that might arise
about the letter and exposition of the Law, who is therefore called the quick
and lively law; and shall we Christians think that our divine Lawmakers, who
in wisdom, care, and providence, surmounted all others, more than the heavens
do the earth, has left his golden laws at random, to be interpreted as it
should seem best unto every one pretending some hidden knowledge from we know
not what spirit: no no, It cannot be once imagined without too too great
derogation unto the sovereign prudence of the Son of God.

In the Old Testament, which was but a state of bondage, and as it were an
introduction to the New, yet was there one appointed unto whom they were
commanded to repair for the resolution of all doubtful cases concerning the
Law: yea, and bound (were they under pain of death) to stand to his
determination; and shall we be so simple as to suffer our selves to be
persuaded, that in the glorious state of the Gospel, plotted and framed by the
wisdom of God himself, worse order should be taken for this high point of
the true understanding of the Holy Gospel it self, being the life and soul of
all the rest.

Give me leave gentle Reader, to stay somewhat longer in this matter, because
there is nothing of more importance, and it is not handled any where else in
all this Book. Considder then (with your self) that our Celestial Lawmakers
gave his Law, not written in Ink and Paper, but in the hearts of his most
faithful subjectes, endowi^ng them with the blessed spirit of truth, Ierem.
31 2 Cor 3.
and with a most diligent care of instructing others, Ioh. 16.
that all their posterity might learn of them all the points of Christian
doctrine, and give credit to them as well for the written as unwritten word,
and more for the true meaning of the word, than for the word it self. These
and their true successors be lively Oracles of the true and living God, then
must we consult in all doubtful questions of Religion, and submit our selves
wholly to their decree. S. PAVL (that vessel of election) may serve us for a
singular model and pattern of the whole; who having received the true
knowledge of the Gospel from God, yet went up to Jerusalem with BARNABY, to
confer with the chief Apostles, the Gospel which he preached, least perhaps
he might run in vain, and had run, as in express words he witnesses
himself. Gal. 2
Upon which fact and words of S. PAVL, the ancient Fathers do gather, that the
faithful would not have given any credit unto the Apostles doctrine, unless by
S. PETER and the other Apostles, it had been first examined and approved.
Tertal. li. 4. in M rc. Hierom. ep 89. que est 11. inter ep. Augustin^. August.
lib 28. cont. fa^st c. 4
Again, when there arose a most dangerous question of Abrogating MOSES Law:
Was it left to every Christian to decide by the written Word? Or would many
of the faithful believe S. PAVL, that worthy Apostle in the matter? Not so,
but up they went to Jerusalem, to hear what the Pillars of the Church would
say: Where, by the decree of the Apostles in counsel, the controversy was
ended: Which S. PAVL afterward delivered in his Preaching, commanding all to
observe and keep the decree and ordinance of the Apostles Act. 16.
. And if it would not be tedious, I could in like manner show, how in like sort,
every hundredth year after, errors and heresies rising by misconstruction of
the written Word, they were confuted and rejected, not by the written Word
only, but by the sentence and declaration of the Apostles, Scholars, and
successors.

See Cardinal BELLARMINE, Tom. 1 lib 3. cap, 6
I will only record two noble examples of this recourse unto Antiquity, for
the true sense of Gods word, The first, out of the Ecclesiastical History,
Lib. 11. cap. 9
whereof Saint GREGORY NAZIANZEN and Saint BASIL, two principal lights of the
Greek Church, this is recorded: They were both noble men, brought up together
at Athens: And afterward for thirteen years space, laying aside all profaine
books, employed their study, wholly in the holy Scriptures. The sense and
true meaning whereof they sought, not out of their own Judgment and
presumption, (as the Protestants both do, and teach others to do) but out of
their Predecessors writings and authority: namely, of such as were known to
have received the rule of understanding from the Tradition of the Apostles:
These be the very words.

The other example shall be the principal pillar of the Latin Church, S.
AUGUSTINE, who not only exhorts and advises us to follow the decree of the
ancient Church, if we will not be deceived with the obscurity of doubtful
questions, Lib. cont. Crescon. cap. 33.
but plainly affirms, That he would not believe the Gospel, if the
authority of the Church did not move him unto it. Cont. ep. fund. c. 5.
Which words, are not to be understood as Calvin would have them: that S.
AUGUSTINE had not been at first a Christian, if by the authority of the
Church, he had not been thereunto persuaded: but that when he was a learned
and Judicious Doctor, and did write against Heretics; even then he would not
believe these books of the Gospel to have been penned by divine inspiration,
and no others, and this to be the true sense of them; unless the Catholic
Church (famous then for antiquity, generallity, and consent) did tell him,
which and what they were: So far was he off from trusting to his own skill
and judgment in this matter, which notwithstanding was most excellent. This
matter is so large, that it requires a whole question: but being penned up
within the compass of one objection, I will not dwell any longer in it, but
here fold-vp this whole question of Traditions, in the authorities of the
ancient Fathers; out of whom, because I have in answering M. P. and
elsewhere, as occasion served, cited already many sentences; I will here be
brief.

S. IGNATIUS the Apostles Scholar, does exhort all Christians, Eusebius. lib
30.36.
To stick fast unto the Traditions of the Apostles, some of which he committed
to writing.

POLICARPVS, by the authority of the Apostles words, which he had received
from their own mouths; confirmed the faith full in truth, and overthrew the
Heretics. Ibid. lib 5 cap. 20.


S. IRENEVS, who imprinted in his heart Apostolical Traditions, received from
POLICARP, says, * If there should be a controversy about any mean question,
ought we not to run unto the most ancient Churches, in the which the
Apostles had conuersed, and from them take that which is clear and perspicuous
to define the present question! For what if the Apostles had not written any
thing at all, must we not have followed the order of Traditions, which they
delivered to them to whom they delivered the Churches?

ORIGIN teaches, that the Church received from the Apostles by Tradition, to
baptize Infants. Romans 6


ATHANASIVS says: Lib. de decret. N^caeni con^
We have proved this sentence to have been delivered from hand to hand by
Fathers to Fathers: but ye, O new Jews, and sons of Caiphas, what Ancestors
can ye show of your opinion.

S. BASIL has these words: De Sp^ Sanct. c. 2
We have the doctrine that is kept and preached in the Church; partly written,
and part we have received by Tradition of the Apostles in mystery both which
be of the same force to godliness, and no man opposes against these, who has
at the least, but mean experience of the Laws of the Church. See GREGORY
NAZIANZ. Orat. 1. in Julian.

Because I have cited already some of the Latin Ancient Doctors: Insteede of
the rest, I will record out of them in a word or two, how old rotten
Heretics used always to reject unwritten Traditions, and fly wholly unto the
written word. See the whole book of TERTVLLIANS prescriptions against
Heretics, which principally handles this very point. The same does IRENEVS
witness of the Valentinians and Marcionis. Lib. 3. c. 2
The Arrians common song unto the Catholics was, I will not admit to be read
any words that are not written (in the Scriptures) as witnesses S. HILARY, in
his book against CONSTANTIVS the Emperor, against whom he alleges the
preaching of the Apostles, and the authority of the ancient Bishops,
expressed in his lively colors.

S. AUGUSTINE, some thousand two hundredth years ago, records the very form
of arguing, which the Protestants use now-a-daies, in the person of Maximinus
an Arrian in his first book against him in the beginning. If thou shall (says
this Heretic) bring any thing out of the Scriptures which is common to all,
we must needs here thee, but these words which are without the Scriptures
are in no sort to be received of us: when as the Lord himself has
admonished us, and said: in vain do they worship me, teaching commandments
and precepts of men. How S. AUGUSTINE opposed against them unwritten
Traditions, has been before declared. The like does S. BERNARD affirm of
certain Heretics of his time, called Hom. 62 Cantica.
Apostolici.

So that most truly it may be concluded, that even as we Catholics have
learned of the Apostles and ancient Fathers, our noble progenitors, to stand
fast and hold the Traditions which we have received by word of mouth, as well
as that which is written: Even so the Protestants have received as it were from
hand to hand, of their ignoble predecessors, old condemned Heretics, to reject
all Traditions, and to fly unto the only Scriptures.

FIRST, OF VOWS.
M. PERK. page 151. Is very intricate and tedious in delivering his opinion
concerning Vows: I will in as good order as I can, briefly correct his errors
herein.
OUR CONSENTS.
IN This passage (which he intitleth of our consents) he rangeth many things,
wherein we differ much; as first, in the definition of a Vow, which he
defines thus: A Vow is a promise made to God, touching some duty to be
performed to him. This definition comes too short of a Vow, and agrees unto
all other covenants made between God and man, and so ADAMS acceptance not to
eat of the forbidden fruit should be a Vow: and NOES buylding of the Arc:
and briefly, every acceptance and promise to fulfill any of Gods
commandments; and consequenly, every breach of them must needs be two
several sins; the one of disobedience in such a precept, the other of
infidelity, by breaking our Vow. All which absurdities, necessarily follow
of M. P. his definition, and be things unheard of either in holy Scriptures, or
among the ancient Holy Fathers, proceeding only out of the dross of their
own devises: and therefore, with as great facility to be denied of us, as
they do with audacitie avouch them. To make up then the definition, we must
add, that the promise to God be of some better good proceeding from our own
free choice and liberty: so that no Vow is made without a man's free choice to
bind himself, over and besides all other necessary bonds: which to be of,
the nature of a Vow we gather first out of holy Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 23
If thou make a Vow be not slow to perform it: but if thou will not
promise, thou shall be without sin.

What can be more clear, then that a man may choose whether he will Vow or
no? 1. Cor. 7
which is confirmed in S. PAVL: He that decrees in his heart, not having
necessity, but having power over his own will, etc. So that this liberty to
promise, or not to promise, is of the substance of a Vow, and that if he list
not to Vow, he does not sin: which were very false, if the acceptance of
necessary duties were Vows. For he that refuses to accept them, does
sin: as if a man should refuse to perform any of Gods commandementes. Hence
it follows most manifestly, that the promise which we make to God in
Baptism, of keeping Gods commandments, is no Vow, if a Vow be taken
properly: because it lies not in us to refuse it, without we will withal,
refuse the grace of Baptism, and remain in the state of damnation. And M. P.
affirming it to be a Vow; and often repeating it, does not once confirm it
with any shadow of proof, but takes that for granted, which he knows we do
deny flatly.

The second point of our supposed consent is, that Vows were some part of Gods
worship in MOSES Law, but are not so in the Gospel, which we also deny, M. P.
proves his assertion thus. Vows belonged to the ceremonies of MOSES Law, but
all those Ceremonies are abolished, by Christ's Passion.

ANSWER.
That Vows in themselves were no part of the Ceremonies of MOSES Law, but true
parts of the worship of God in all estates; as well in the state of Nature and
the Gospel, as in MOSES Law: but this point M. P. handles again in the first
point of our difference, where it shall be discussed. Thirdly he says, that
special Vows may be made in the New law, to perform some bodily exercise for
some good end, as to fast, to task our selves to prayer, or study of holy
Scripture, and such like: but many rules must then be observed: that we Vow an
honest thing agreeable to Gods word: this we allow. Secondly, that it be so
made, that it may stand with Christian liberty: that is, that it make not such
things necessary in conscience, which Christian religion leaves at liberty:
This rule of his is flat repugnant to the nature of a Vow, and contrary to
himself. For he says a little before; that a Christian may Vow Fasting,
Prayer, almes-deedes. I then demand, having Vowed these things; is he not
bound to perform them? Yes, or else he breaks his Vow, with which God is
highly displeased. Deuteronomy. 23
An unfaithful promise displeases God. Then is it manifest, Eccles. 50
that all Vows do abridge us of our liberty, and make that unlawful for us,
which before our Vow was lavvful: which is so evident of it self, that I
marvel where the man's wit and memory was, when he wrote the contrary.

His other rules, that a Vow be made with good deliberation, and with consent
of our Superiors; and not only of things possible, but also of the better
sort, we allow, for they are taken out of our Doctors: See S. Thom. Quest.
88


Now to the points indifference.
FIrst, the Church of Rome (says M. P.) teaches, that in the New Testament,
we are as much bound to make Vows, as was the Church of the Jews, we say no;
Considering that the Ceremonial Law is now abolished, and we have only two
Ceremonies by commandment to be observed for parts of Gods worship: Baptism,
and the Supper of the Lord.

ANSWER.
What, is not your Holie-day service (which you call divine service) any part
of Gods worship in your own opinions? Can a public assembly instituted to
honor God by prayer and thanksgiving? with external ceremony of time, place,
apparel, kneeling, standing and sitting, be no part of Gods worship? In your
irreligious Congregations, assembled together against CHRIST and his Catholic
Church, be it so. But admitting as you do, your service to be good; it could
not truly be denied to be long unto the worship of God. But to the matter of
difference, you grow very careless in your reports of our doctrine: for we
hold that neither in the Old nor New law, any man is bound to Vow, but that
it is and ever was a council, and no commandment, nevertheless, a thing of
great devotion and perfection in both states, intrinsecallie belonging and much
furthering the true worship of almighty God, which we prove in this sort.
In a Vow are two things; the one is the good which is Vowed, called the
natural part: as for example, Fasting, etc. The other, the promise it self
made to God, which is the form; the material parts do belong unto their
several virtues: but this promise and performance of it be substantial parts
of Gods worship. For by promising of any good thing unto God, we acknowledge
and profess that God is the sovereign goodness it self, and takes great
pleasure in all good purposes and determinations: therefore, to honor and
worship him, we make that good promise again, In performing that good service
of God, we testify, that he is most majesticall, reverend, and dreadful. And
consequently, that all promises made to him, are to be accomplished most
diligently, and without delay, wherein we honor and worship him, as
contrariewise they do much dishonor him who break with him, as if he were of
no better account then to be so deluded. This thing in it self is so certain
and clear, that he who denies it, must needs either be ignorant in the nature
of a Vow, or not know wherein the true worship of God consists: for
according unto the holy Scriptures it self, all good deeds done to the glory
of God, be acts of the true worship of God. And S. ANNE Luke 1
did worship God, by fasting and prayer: And Phil. 4.
alms bestowed on Gods prisoners, is called a sacrifice pleasing and
acceptable to God: And it is said, Iac. 5.
to be a pure religion before God, to visit Orphans and widows: If then all
other virtuous duties done to the glory of God, be parts of his true worship;
much more Vows, which by special promise dedicate a good deed to Gods honor:
they then being of their own nature, special parts of his true worship of God:
it follows necessary, that at all times they were and may be used to the
true worship of God: that they were in practice before MOSES Law is evident, by
that Vow which JACOB made Genesis 28.
, of setting up a stone, which should be called the house of God, and of paying
the tenthes of all his goods. Out of which Vow, we also gather, that God
holds for agreeable, any kind of good service offered unto him out of our
own devotion: albeit he has not commanded it, for no such thing as JACOB
there Vowed was commanded him, but he being well assured that it would be
well taken by God, which was offered of good will, to his greater honor, he
Vowed it, and is in holy Scripture commended for it.

Again, that when S. PAVL Colos. 2.
seems to disalowe voluntary worship, he must be understood to speak either
of irronious, or of frivolous and foolish things, promised to God, which do not
properly serve to the setting forth of his honor.

Now that Vows should be frequented in the state of the Gospel, besides the
evidence of S. PAVLS Vow Act. 18.
, and diverse other such like the Prophet ESAIAS did foretell, in these words:
Esa. 19.18
They shall worship him with sacrifice and gifts, and they shall Vow Vows unto
our Lord and perform them. To which M. P. answers, first, that by such
ceremonial worship as then was in use, the Prophet does express the spiritual
worship of the New Testament. This exposition is voluntary and nothing
proper: For what is more vilde and absurd, than (to declare that Christians
shall make no Vows) to say that they shall make Vows, as though one contrary
were sit or would serve to express the other. This exposition being very
unmeet, M. P. adjoyneth a second, that in the New Testament, we have Vows of
Moral and Evangelical duties, but such are not any part of Gods worship:
so that first you shall have no Vows at all: Secondly, the wind being
changed, you shall have them, but as no parts of Gods worship, as though
Morrall and Evangelical duties undertaken and performed to Gods greater glory
be not the very synewes and substance of his service and worship.

Again says M. P. they allege for Evangelical Vows: Psalm. 75
Vow unto God and pay it: M. P. his answer is, that this binds the Jews,
he would have you understand not the Christians. We say; that it is no
commandment to either of them, but an exhortation, as well to the one as to
the other. First, because good Vows do tend to the greater glory of God in
all states: (as has been proved before) Secondly, for that the Prophet in
the next verse, yielding the reason why we must pay our Vows, says, That
he unto whom we have Vowed is terrible unto the Kings of the earth; And
therefore most likely that such Vows he spoke of there, may be made of any
sort of men inhabiting the earth.

Thirdly, because the ancient Fathers take it to extend unto us Christians,
as well as unto the Jews; let one Saint AUGUSTINE serve in his Comentarie
upon this Psalm 75. Because we have handled those things (says he)
peradventure thou who wast willing before, but now wilt not Vow: but mark
what the Psalm said unto thee: It says not, Do not Vow, but Vow and pay
it: will thou not Vow? Therefore would have Vowed, but not have fulfilled
it, nay rather do both: Let the one be of thine own promise, the other
shall be performed by the help of God: He then took these words to belong
unto his Auditors who were no Jews.

In the same place, he does highly commend Christians for Vowing, some
Chastity, some Hospitality, some Poverty: But because contraries being set
together, each do more lively appear in his kind: Let us with this
Exposition, compare M. Perk. his Comentarie upon this place: who says, that
the Prophet speaks of Vows, of Prayer and thanksgiving: For so (says M.
Perk.) does he expound himself, Psalm. 56.12.
My Vows are upon me, I will offer praises unto GOD: Well aimed I warrant
you; The Psalm fifty six, written first, is the Exposition of the Psalm
seauentie five, which was conceited and uttered after: Again, in the Psalm
seauentie five, DAVID speaks to others: in the other he speaks of
himself: Thirdly, the Prophets words in Psalm fifty six, confirm rather
that which he taught before, that all considerate Vows are praises and parts
of Gods worship, or as the words do more literallie sound, because his
Vows, that is, his prayers and desires were by God accomplished, therefore he
would praise and thank him.

Let us now come unto the second point, wherein we dissent: They (says M. P.)
hold Vows made of things not commanded, as of Fasting, Prayer, etc. to be
parts of Gods worship; and that they tend unto a state of perfection. We say
flatly no; holding that lawful Vows be stays and props of Gods worship, but
not the worship it self: this is long since confuted. But here M. P. sets
up a rotten prop or two, to vp-hold his ruinous buylding, saying, S. PAVL says
plainly, 1. Tim. 4
Bodily exercise profits little, but godliness profits much. Where are you
good Sir? We treat here of Vows, which are formallie actions of the mind:
what do you now about bodily exercises? Vows ars principal parts of that
godliness, which is so profitable. And if by bodily exercise, Fasting, and other
corporal pain or labor be understood, then we say, that such things of
themselves would profit little; but our being directed to the chastising of the
rebellious flesh, to the end we may less offend, and better serve God, then
they may much profit us. But let us here M. P. his second reason against such
Vows. Gods kingdom stands not in outward things, and therefore his worship
stands not in outward things.

ANSWER.
Gods kingdom in it self stands not in outward things, and as it is in us
also, it does consist chiefly in inward worship, by faith, hope, charity,
and religion, in whose kingdom Vows hold a honorable rank: but a great part
of this worship among us, dependes of outward things; for be not the two only
parts of Gods worship among Protestants (as M. P. says in this question)
Baptism and our Lords Supper, both which partly consist in outwardly, both
speaking and doing. And is not faith (which is the root of all Christian
Religion) gotten by outward preaching and hearing? But it would weary a
willing man to trayle after all M. P. his impertinent errors: Let us then at
length come unto the principal point in controversy. Catholics (says he)
maintain such Vows to be made as are not agreeable to the rules aforementioned.
The first is, that of Continency, whereby a man promises to God to keep
chastity in a single life, that is, out of the state of Wedlock. This kind of
Vow, is flat against the word of God, as he says, which he proves first
out of S. PAVL, If they can not contain, then let them Marry: True, if they
have not Vowed Chastity before, 1. Cor. 7.
as the common Christians of Corinth, (to whom S. PAVL there speaks) had not.
For such, if they can not live otherwise chastelie, it is better they marry
then be burned, that is, defiled with incontinencie. But to them who had Vowed
chastity before, S. PAVL, writes in an other style, That if they but desire
to marry, they incur damnation, 1. Tim. 5
because they have made frustrate and broken their former says and promise
made unto God of their chastetie: So that this first text is a Furlong wide at
the least from the mark.

The second is much like: 1. Tim. 4.
It is a doctrine of devils, to forbid to marry: truth, if one should hold
marriage in it self to be wicked, and therefore condemn it in all sorts of
persons, as Mountanus, and the Manichees did. But we have a more reverend
opinion of marriage, than the Protestants themselves. For we with the Apostle
Ephesians. 5.
hold it to be a great Sacrament: they, that it is a moral contract only.
Notwithstanding, we maintain, that such persons, who being of ripe years,
have advisedly Vowed chastity, may not marry; not because marriage is not
honorable, but for that they have solemnlie promised to God the contrary:
which we also hold to be better, than if he had married. And so to use S.
AUGUSTINES words, He forbids to marry, who says it to be evil, but not
he who before this good thing, prefers a better. And a little after, you see
(says he) that there is great difference between persuasion to Virginity, by
preferring the greater good before the lesser, and forbidding to marry, by
accusing lying together for issue. The first is, the doctrine of the Apostles,
which we teach, the latter only of devils Lib 3. cont Faust. Manich. cap. 6.
.

M. P. His third and last text is, Heb. 13.4
Marriage is honorable among all, and the bed undefiled. The strength of this
place lies a double corruption of the text: For this verb (is) is not in the
text, nor cannot be the course of the Apostles speech, requiring a verb of the
Imperative Mood, as both the sentences besore and after do convince.

Again, if you will have the Apostle say, that Marriage is honorable among
all men; we must also needs take him to say, that the bed is also undefiled
among all, which was not true. Also, that their conversation was without
covetousness, etc. For there is no reason why this word (is) should be joined
with the one more than with the other. And nothing but passion does cause them
to make the middle sentence an affirmative, when they turn both the other into
exhortations.

The second corruption is in these words (among all) when they should translate
(in all) and the adjectiue: being put without a substantive, (...)
must in true construction have this word (things) joined with it, and not
(men,) wherefore the text being sincerely put into English, it would carry no
color of their error: For the Apostles saying is: Let Marriage be honorable in
all things, and the bed undefiled: Here is no willing of any man to marry,
but only a commandment to them that be married to live honestly in marriage,
to keep (as he else where says) their vessels in sanctifycation, and not in
dishonor, and then shall their marriage be honorable in all things, that is,
in all points appertaining to Matrimony: So that now you see that M. P. is not
able to bring any one place out of Scripture to disprooue the Vow of
chastity; the Scripture being so barren for him, he shall belike recompense it
with the abundant testimony of antiquity, in favor of his cause: but oh
unhappy chance, he has clean forgotten in this question the record of the
ancient Church: What was there not one Father? who with some one broken
fragment of a sentence or other, would relieve you in this your combat against
the Vow of Chastity? I will help you to one, but I fear me, you will scarce
thank me for my pains: It is such a one, as is neither holy nor father, but
the ancient Christian Epicure IOVINIAN, who as S. AUGUSTINE has recorded:
Here Is. 82 ad Quod vult.
and S. IEROM Lib. 1. cont. Ioui.
did hold that Virginity of professed persons, men and women was no better
then the continency of the married. So that many professed Virgins believing
him did marry, yet himself did not marry, as Friar Luther did; not because
he thought chastity should be rewarded in the life to come, with a greater
crown of glory; but because it was fit for the present necessity, to avoid
the troubles of marriage; see just the very opinion of M. P. and our
Protestants. But this heresy says S. AUGUSTINE in the same place, was quickly
suppressed and extinguished; it was not able to deceive any one of the
Priests: And in an other place Lib. 2. re^roct 22.
thus he speaks of IOVINIAN: Holy Church most faithfully and valiantly
resisted this monster: So that no marvel, if that M. P. could find small
relief in antiquity for this his assertion, which the best of them esteemed
no better than a monstrous sacrilegious heresy. But M. P. has an argument
that shall nevertheless demonstrate the Vow of perpetual chastity to be
intolerable. For (says he) this Vow is not in the power of him that Voweth:
for, continency is the gift of God, who gives it not unto all, but unto whom
he will, when he will, and as long as he will: And if we object that by prayer
and fasting, the gift of continency may be obtained of God: he answers that
it cannot, because it is not necessary to salvation: We reply, that it is
necessary for all them that have Vowed chastity: And be it so, that God
gives it not unto all, yet does he certainly give it to some, for otherwise
they cannot keep their Vows, but to the dishonor of God, and to their own
damnation should break them.

And we only teach, that some such who have Vowed chastity, could keep it,
so that the argument is very childish and too too weak to lead any wise man
away from the holy and ancient Doctrine of the Church. But to the further
confirmation of this point, let us hear what the holy Fathers teach touching
the possibility of this Vow.

TERTVLLIAN near the end, expounding these words Lib. de monog.
: He that can take, let him take. Mat: 19.
Choose (says he) that which is good if thou say thou can not, it is
because thou will not, for that thou might if thou would, he does declare
who has left both to thy choice.

ORIGIN upon the same place, Mat: 19.
He that will take this word that is set down of chastity, let him pray
for it, believing him that said, ask and it shall be given you, and he
shall receive it; which does plainly confute May. Perk. Who says, that
although we ask never so much, we can not obtain this gift: with ORIGIN
agrees Saint IEROM upon the same place, who says, It is given unto them
who have requested it? who have desired it, and trauayled that they might
receive it?

The same Song chanteth GREGORY NAZIANZ. which is of three kinds of Eunuchs.
Orat. 3 1.


Saint CHRYSOSTOM says, it is possible to all them who make choice of it:
and further adds, that our Savior CHRIST himself does prove it there
after this sort: Think with thy self if thou had been by nature an
Eunuch, or by the malice of men made one, what would thou then have done,
when thou should both have been deprived of that pleasure, and yet not have
had any recompense for thy pain. Therefore thank GOD, because thou shall have
a great reward, and a glyttering Crown, if thou live so as they must do
without any reward: yet (says he) thou may do it more easelie,
safely, and pleasantly, both, because thou art fortifyed with hope of
recompense, and also comforted with a virtuous conscience.

We will wrappe up this point with Saint AUGUSTINE, who directly confuteth
M. Perk. by many reasons and examples: Lib. 2. De adulterinis coniug. cap. 12.
Et de bono viduit. cap. 20.

And upon the Psalm, an hundredth thirty seven, he yields an other reason,
why God will more reallie assist them, saying: He that exhorts thee to Vow,
will help thee to fulfill it. All which heavenly Doctrine, because it is
spirituallie judged, (as the Apostle speaks) the Carnal man cannot
understand: And therefore M. P. being persuaded that few can live chastely
except they marry, avoucheth that this Vow, does bring forth innumerable
abominations in the World: Not the hundredth part, so many as the fleshly
Heretics imagine, and out of flying and lying tales report and brute
abroad: Naie, I dare affirm, that let the authentical Records of our Realm
be well perused, and you shall find more lewd filthy Lechery, to have been
practiced by Ministers and their Wives this last age, than was in a thousand
year before, by all the Catholic Priests and Religious persons of the Land.

This may serve for a reproof of all that M. P. objecteth against the Vow of
chastity: afterward, the man would somewhat reason the matter by showing how
he condemns not chastity: yet says, that Marriage is better than it, in
two respects, If IOVINIAN was reputed by the learned an holiest Fathers (a
Christian Epicure and a Monster) because he durst make marriage equal with
Virginity: What shall this man be who says it is better? His reasons are so
childish, that by the like you may prove, dirt to be better then gold:
wherefore I will not stand upon them.

He nevertheless afterward concludes, that one may purpose constantly with
himself to lead a single life, but so as he may change upon occasion, and
this to be a council of expedience, but not of perfection.

Lastly, that if any having the gift of continency, do Vow, and afterward
Marry (the gift remaining) they have sinned, which is flat against his own
second rule, which prohibites us to leese our liberty, and to make any thing
unlawful in conscience, which Christian religion leaves at liberty.

Now liberty supposes M. P. his default, who was accustomed to rehearse,
although many times untowardly, yet lightly always some reasons for the
Catholic party; which in this question he has wholly omitted. I will
briefly prove by an argument or two, that it is both lawful and very
commendable for men and women of ripe years; and consideration having well
tried their own aptness, to Vow virginity; if by good inspirations, they be
thereunto inwardly called. My first reason is this, that which is more pleasant
and grateful unto God, may very well be Vowed to him. but Virginity is more
acceptable to God than Marriage. The first proposition is manifest, and has no
other exception against it, but that which before is confuted, to wit, if we be
able to perform it. The second is denied by them, which we prove in express
terms out of S. PAVL 1. Cor. 7.
He that joins his Virgin does well, but he that joins her not, does
better: and again of Widows: Esa. 56.
They shall be more happy by S. PAVLS judgment, if they remain unmarried:
This may be confirmed out of ESAIAS, Where God promises the Eunuch that holds
greatly of the thing that pleases him, that he will give him in his household,
and within his walls a better heritage and name, than if they had been called
sons and daughters. I will (says God) give them an everlasting name. And
also, out of the book of Wisdom, Cap. 3.
Blessed is the Eunuch which has wrought no vnrighteosnesse. etc. For unto him
shall be given the special gift of faith, and the most acceptable portion in
our Lords Temple, for glorious is the fruit of God: Which is also plainly
taught in the Revelations, Reuelat. 14.
Where it is said, that no man could sing that song but 14400, and the cause is
set down, These be they which have not been defiled with women, for they are
Virgins. To these latter places, M. P. answers page 241. that to the Eunuch
is promised a greater reward; but, not because of his chastity, but because
he keeps the Lords Saboth and covenant. But this is said unadvisedly; for
to all others that keep Gods commandments, shall be given a heavenly reward:
but why shall they have a better heritage, and more acceptable portion than
others, but because of their special prerogative of chastity.

M. P. then answers otherwise here; that the single life is better and more
happy, because it is freer from common cares of this life, and yields us
more bodelie ease and liberty to serve God. But 1200. years ago S. AUGUSTINE
of set purpose confuted this error in sundry places of his learned works,
specially in his Treatise, De virginity, in these chapters, 13. 23. 24. 25.
Where he accounts him no Christian that does contradict, CHRIST promising
the kingdom of heaven to Eunuchs. Mat 19
And in the 25. Chapter more vehemently exclayming: O impious blindness, why
do thou cavil and seek shifts? why do thou promise temporal commodity
only to the chaste and contynent: when God says Esai 16.
, I will give them an everlasting name: And if thou would perhaps take this
everlasting, for a thing of long continuance: I add, inculcate, and often
repeal, that it shall never have end. What would thou more? This eternal
name, whatsoever it be, signifies a certain peculiar and excellent glory,
which shall not be common to many, albeit they be placed in the same kingdom,
etc. Which in the 29. Chapter he confirms out of that place of the Apocalips,
cited above in these words: The rest of the faithful shall see you, and not
envy your estate, but joy in it, and so be partaker of that in you which they
have not in themselves: For the new song which is proper unto you they cannot
sing, but shall hear it, and be delighted with your so excellent a
blessedness: but you, because you shall both sing and hear it, shall more
happily rejoice and reign more pleasantly. Which may be also confirmed out of
the Apostles in the same place: where he assures that the single life is
better for the service of God, saying; that a woman unmarried and a Virgin,
think of the things which belong unto our Lord; how she may please God, and be
holy both in body and spirit. And our blessed Savior teaches, Mat. 19
That some become Eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven: which, to be taken
there properly for the reward in heaven. Saint AUGUSTINE, (with the rest of
the Fathers) teaches: De virginit. cap. 23.
What could be spoken more truly or more perspicuouslie? CHRIST says, The
truth says the Wisdom of God affirms them to geld themselves for the
kingdom of heaven, who do of a godly determination refrain from marriage:
And contrarily, humane vanity does contend by impious temerity that they who
do so, do it to avoid the necessary troubles of Matrimony, and that in the
kingdom of heaven, they shall have no more than other men. Secondly, all the
Protestants doctrine for marriage, and against Vows, is notably confuted by S.
PAVL, Tim. 5
where he says: That there were then certain Widows, who when they waxed
wanton against CHRIST, would marry, having damnation (says he) because they
made void and cast away their first faith: which was as Saint AUGUSTINE De
sanct. virg. ca. 23.
and the rest of the Fathers expound it, they had Vowed continency, but
would not perform it.

Now these young Widows (if the Protestants doctrine were true) not having
the gift of continency, did very well to marry, and were in no sort bound
to keep their Vows, which was not in their power: But the Apostle does not
acquit them of their Vow, but teaches that they were bound to keep it; in
that he pronounces damnation to them if they marry.

Thirdly, the example of our heavenly Savior, who would never marry: and of
the blessed Virgin S. MARY, who Aug cap. 44. de uirg. Bed. 1. Luc
Vowed perpetual virginity. And of the glorious Apostles, as who S. IEROM
witnesses, Cle. Alex lib. 3. stom Lib. 1. cont Iouin. In apol. 2. ad Aut.
Tertul. ap. 2. cap. 9
were in part Virgins; and all after their following of Christ, abstayned from
the company of their Wives. And of the best Christians in the purest
antiquity, who as IVSTINIVS, one of the auncientest Greek authors among
Christians: And TERTVLLIAN his peer among the Latins, do testify, * did live
perpetual Virgins.

Out of these examples, we frame this Argument.

Our Captains and ringleaders, who knew well which was the best way; and
whose examples we are to follow as near as we can, Vowing Virginity: we
must needs esteem that state for more perfect, specially, when as the single
man cares only how to please God, that to be holy in body and mind (as the
Apostle writes) when as the married are choked with cares of this world. And
unless a man had made a league with hell, or were as blind as a Beetle, how
can he ever persuade himself, that to wallow in fleshly pleasure and
satisfying of the beastly appetites, is as grateful to God, as to conquer and
subdue them by Fasting and Prayer.

Finally, if S. PAVL give counsel to the married, to conteyne during the time
of Prayer 1. Cor. 7
Priests and religious (that must always be in a readiness to minister the
Sacraments, and to think upon such things as belong unto our Lord) are
therefore upon a great consideration bound to perpetual chastity.

We will close up this point with some sentences taken out of the ancient
Fathers, in praise of Virginity, which M. P. in all this question vouchsafes
scarce once to name, as though Virgins and Virginity were no English words,
or not as plain as continency.

S. CIPRIAN, De habitu Virginum: Intitleth Virgins to be the most noble and
glorious parson of Christ's flock: and adds, that they shall receive of God
the highest reward and greatest recompense.

S. CHRYSOSTOM Lib. 3. cont. vitup. vit. necess.
syteth, Virginity to be the top of perfection, and the highest typ of virtue.

And ATHANASIVS, De virginitate; in the end bursteth out into these words: O
virginity, a treasure that wastes not, a garland that wythereth not; the
Temple of God, the Palace of the Holy Ghost, a precious stone, whose price is
unknown to the vulgar, the joye of the Prophets, the glory of the Apostles,
the life of Angels, the Crown of Saints.

S. AMBROSE Lib. 1. de Virginibus paulo post init. Virginity is a principal
virtue, and not therefore commendable that it is found in Marters, but because
it makes Marters: Who can with human wit comprehend it which nature does
not hold within her Laws, it has fetched out of Heaven that it might imitate
on Earth: neither unfitly has it sought a manner of life in heaven, which has
found a spouse for her in heaven.

This surmounting the clouds, the stars and Angels has found the word of God
in the bosom of his Father; etc. See who list to read more to this purpose the
rest of the Fathers in their works of Virginity; of which most of them have
written. And S. IEROM, who is behind none of the rest in his books against
Iouinian and Heluidius, all which do most diligently exhort to Vow
Virginity; do teach how to keep it, and most vehemently inveigh against all
them that do break it. And if any be so mad as to credit rather our
fleshly ministers, than all that honorable and holy senate of the ancient
Fathers, he deserves to live and dye in perpetual darkness.

In this matter I have stayed somewhat longer, because our carnal teachers,
with the lewd example of their dissolute Disciples, have corrupted our age
with fleshly and beastly liberty: In the other points, I will recompense it
with brevity.

Concerning the Vow of poverty and monastical life, in which, as M. Perk.
acknowledges, men bestow all they have upon the poor, and give themselves
to Prayer and Fasting: yet he is not ashamed to avouch that this Vow is
against the will of GOD, and assures to prove it: Acts cap. 20. verse. 35. It
is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive.

ANSWER.
As the very proposition (that it is displeasing to God to cut off all cares
of the world, and to be-take our selves wholly to his holy service and
contemplation of heavenly matters) is in it self profaine and ungodly, so
the proof thereof is devoyde of natural wit and sense. Mark the Argument:
It is against Gods will to give away all, because it is more blessed to give,
than to receive: Why, if it be a more blessed thing to give; than they please
God better that give. So that this his proof, improoues flatly his own
assertion: But the dreamer means perhaps, that if you give all at once, you
shall not be able to give afterward, but rather stand in need to receive.

REPLY.
But no such human prudence can be drawn out of that sentence, which
encourages rather to give for the present, then to provide for hereafter.

The true meaning of the place, is to exhort Christians to labor and
travail, at vacant times to get their own living, and to provide something
also to bestow upon them who stand in need rather then to be idle, and to
stand in need of alms, as S. PAVL himself did: which they did best
perform, who had sold all they had and distributed it to the poor, as the
example of PAVL himself, and the first Christians does sufficiently declare,
who sold all, and laid the price at the Apostles feet. Act. 4.


The next place is, Pro. 2.
Give me neither riches nor poverty.

ANSWER.
The Prayer is good, and fitteth the persons of honest men, who live in the
world, and was of some perfection too, in the state of Moses Law, in which it
was made, as dissuading from covetousness of great riches, but it comes too
short of the perfection of the Gospel, wherein we are counseled to esteem
as doing all worldly riches.

M. P. His third reason is taken out of Deuteronomy. 28.22. where poverty is numbered
among the curses of the Law, none of which are to be Vowed.

ANSWER.
It is one thing to be punished with poverty, for transgressing of Gods Law,
and an other (I trow) for the love of God to give away all we have to the
poor: The former was a curse in the Law of MOSES, the latter is a blessing,
and the first blessing in the Gospel: Luc. 6.
Blessed are the poor, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: Which sentence,
albeit it may be applied verie-well unto humility, yet more literallie
signifies voluntary poverty, as by the sentence opposed against it is
manifest: Verse 24
Woe be to you rich men, etc.

Thus M. P. his textes of Scripture against poverty failing him, he fetches
about an other way, saying, that it is a rule of the Holy Ghost: He that will
not labor (namely, in some special and warrantable calling) must not eat
These. 2
.

ANSWER.
I allow both the text and the gloss, and find nothing there against
Religious persons, whose calling is special perfect, and therefore best
warrantable; not so (says he) because they give themselves to prayer and
fasting: What a profaine stupiditie is this? Is not a life given to prayer and
fasting agreeable to the will of God, and Laws of his Church? albeit many
religious men do over and besides very great services to Gods Church, in
Preaching, teaching, and writing of most learned books. But suppose they did
nothing else but fast and pray, did they not very well deserve their sustenance?
yes much better than they which travail all the year about the providing of
it: For in vain do men labor, if God bless not their work, with seasonable
weather, which he does rather at the Prayer and instance of such good
innocent souls, that are to be fed with it, than for the Plough-mans own
labors sake. And if by their Fasting, Watching, and such like afflictions of
their bodies, they do partly satisfy for our superfluous pampering of the
flesh, and teaches us by their good example to bridle and correct it: do they
not deserve at our hands bodelie sustenance? And who better performs all
duties of the second Table than they, being most obedient to all their
Superiors, and not hurting their neighbor in life, persons, or any manner of
their goods? And so in their several callings offend no honest men, and do
much good both unto the Church and common wealth.

After all this waste-winde, M. P. confesses, that a man may upon a special
calling, sell all his goods, as the Apostles did. What then (good Sir) shall
become of your former arguments? May one then Vow a curse of the Law, and
leave of prayer, neither poverty nor riches, and say that it is not a
blesseder thing to give, then to receive.

All these arguments which were whilom of great force, must now be nothing
worth: because it pleases M. P. the wind now sits in an other corner, such
weather-cockes surely are to be much respected.

He says further; in time of persecution, a man may also leave all: he should
rather have said, he must leave all, or else loose all; for the persecutor will
not spare him. Lastly, he does not condemn old ancient Monks, who lived by
the sweat of their brows, and were married, many of them, as he says, but
his authors cited, says not so, neither shall he be able to cite one
ancient allowed and approved writer, who says that the ancient Monks
lived with their wives, if perhaps they had been married before. But no
marvel if fleshly ministers think it no life without their fleshly mates.
As for laboring at vacant times, it was always, and is to this day in
practice among many religions. If other do in good studies, writing or
teaching, employ that time of labor, no doubt but they do far better.

In defense of the Catholic party, M. P. has not a word, wherefore I will
briefly supply his want and prove it to be very grateful to God to sell
all, and give it to the poor.

I omit the example of our B. Savior, (who would not have any poor cottage of
his own, so much as to rest his head in, but would wholly live of alms) and
come unto his heavenly doctrine. Mat 19
He teaches a young man whom he loved, in flat words, That if he would be
perfect, he should go and sell al he had, and give it to the poor, and come
and follow him, and then should have a treasure in heaven. These words are so
express and evident, that there can be but one way to shift from them, which
M. P. flies unto Page 244. to wit, that these words were only meant unto
that young man, and not to be applied unto any others, no more than those words
to ABRAHAM of sacrificing his son ISAAC. But this seely shift of our poor
Protestants is confuted, manifestly in the same chapter of Saint MATTHEW,
where a little after S. PETER says. Lord, behold we have left all things, and
have followed thee, what reward shall we therefore have: We have done (as S.
HIEROM expounds it, and the very sequel of the text does plainly require)
that which thou commaundest in the words before, to that young man, What
answer made our Savior? That his commandment was only meant unto that young
man, and that they had done foolishlie in so doing, nothing less, but
promises that they shall therefore sit with him in twelve seats, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel. And that who-so-euer would forsake Father, Mother,
Lands, goods, etc. for his sake, should receive an hundredth fold, and
possess life everlasting. Can any thing be more plain out of the word of God
it self, than that, not this or that man, but whosoever shall forsake all for
Christ, does very blessedlie. And if need were, I could cite most of the
ancient Fathers, teaching those words of Christ, Go and sell all, to be an
heavenly counsel given generally unto all. S. ANTONY took them spoken to
him, In vita eius apud Athanas. S. AUGUSTINE to him. ad Hilarium Epist. 89.
: to omit latter Religious men, I will only cite S. HIEROM who does briefly
both declare our Catholic doctrine, and shows also who was the Author of the
Protestants opinion, Lib. cont. vigilant.
saying thus: To that which thou affirmest, that they do better, who use their
goods, and do by little and little distribute to the poor, the profits of
their possessions, then others who selling them, give all at once, not I, but
our Lord shall answer: If thou will be perfect, go and sell all thou have
and give it to the poor. CHRIST speaks to him that will be perfect (not to
the young man only) who with the Apostles, forsook both father ship and
nets: That which thou VIGILANTIVS commendest, obtayneth the second and third
degree: so that the first (which is to sell all at once) be preferred before
the second and third: Which is, to give by little and little, the fruit of
our revenues to the poor.

I might confirm this former argument, with the example of the foresaid best
Christians, Act 4.
who having possessions and lands, sold all and brought the price of them,
and laid it at the Apostles feet: and more yet enforce it by the fact of
ANANIAS and SAPHIRA, his wife, who having sold all theirs, presented but part
of the money unto the Apostles, and reserved the rest unto them selves. Be-like
they were of M. P. his mind, that it is better to give then to receive, and
therefore kept part to that purpose; but they therefore were both punished with
present death: Which proves invincibly, both how laudable it is to sell all,
and how dangerous to halte in such holy works.

But to avoid prolixitie, I do but point at the places: And that ANANIAS; as
the rest had promised this to God (which is a Vow) it appears in the text,
where it is said, that he lied not unto men, but unto God, in not performing
his promise.

And here we deduce very cleerelie, that such a Vow is much pleasing unto God
thus: That which is commended by our Saviors own both example and doctrine,
and was practiced by the Apostles and most holy Christians, that may be Vowed
very laudablie: but to sell all and give it to the poor is such.

Now one word of obedience before we end this question. This Vow says M.
P. is against Christian liberty, whereby we have granted us a free use of all
things indifferent, and therefore to be bound to certain meats and
apparel is intolerable: but this reason has been reproved already: Gal.
5.10
he adds, stand fast in the liberty wherein Christ has made you free: Does
your breath or heart fail you Sir, that you stop thus in the midst of a
sentence, the rest belike discovers the fraud of it: And wrap not your selves
again in the yoke of bondage, to wit, bind not yor selves to the observation
of MOSES Law, as ye shall do if ye be Circumcised. All this is good; but
does it follow hereof, that in the Law of grace, we should not obey our
superiors, nor observe such good orders as Holy Church has approved nothing
less: but happy is that necessity as S. AUGUSTINE witnesses, which holds
us close to those things which be better to do, than to leave undone,
otherwise our weakness would quickly shrink back. And again, if Christ's
sufferings, without his obedience (as M. P. himself testifyeth, Page 61.) had
not been avayleable for our justifycation: No doubt, but those works which are
garnished with the virtue of obedience, are more acceptable in Gods sight.

Finally M. P. says, that we magnify these three Vows of Chastity,
poverty, and obedience: And good reason have we so to do, as has been
showed: but says he, for the Vow of Baptism, we has made no such account
of it, as they do; which is not so: We hold indeed that the covenant which we
make in Baptism, is no Vow, but a full and assured promise to believe in God,
to renounce the devil and all his works, and to keep all Gods commandments,
which we keep or do our best endeavor to keep; at least we teach not as the
Protestants do, that they are impossible to be kept, for that is enough to
discourage any man from endeavoring to keep them. And as touching the Vow
which he says we made in our Creation, we remember nothing of it, nor never
heard speak of it by any good author, not that we make, or mean we any Vows
when we receive the B. Sacrament. These be but novelties of words, and the
ravening of some decayed wits.

FIRST, OF IMAGES. M. PERK. page 170.
OUR CONSENTS.
WE Acknowledge the civil use of Images, as freely and truly as the Church
of Rome does. By civil use, I understand that which is made of them in the
common society of men, out of the appointed places of the solemn worship of
GOD: And this to be lawful appears, because the arts of paynting and
grauing are the Ordinances of GOD, and to be skillful in them is the gift of
GOD, as the example of BEZALEEL and AHOLIAB declare. Exodus 35.
This use of Images may be in sundry things. First in adoring and setting
forth of buyldings; so the Lord commanded his Temple to be adorned with
Images of Palme-trees and Pomegranates; of Bulls, Cherubs, and such like.
Secondly, they serve for distinction of coins. Thirdly, Images serve to keep
in memory friends departed whom we reverence, and therefore in the days
after the Apostles, Christians used privately to keep the Pictures of their
friends departed; which afterward (says he) by abuse came to be set in
Churches and worshipped, of which hereafter.

Second conclusion: We hold the Historical use of Images to be good and
lawful: that is, to represent to the eye the acts of Histories, whether they
be human or divine; and thus we think that the histories of the Bible may
be painted in private places.

Third conclusion: In one case it is lawful to make an Image, to testify the
presence or effects of the majesty of God; namely, when God himself commandes
it: so was the brazen Serpent made to represent Christ crucified Ioh. 3.
and the Cherubs over the Mercy seat, to represent the Majesty of God, when
the Angels adore: And therefore it is said: Thou shall not make to thy self
(that is upon thine own head) any graven Image: This by the way is a very
wilful perverting of those words (to thy self) which cannot signify, but,
to thine own use, that is, to adore them, as is plainly declared in the text
following.

The fourth conclusion: The right Images of the New Testament are the doctrine
and Preaching of the Gospel, wherein Christ and his benefits are lively
represented unto us: but these be metaphorical Pictures, not belonging to this
purpose: for it is one thing to describe in words, an other to express in
lively colors, and liueaments

These conclusions conteyne, as M, P. affirms, the doctrine of the Church of
England; which I would believe, if I did not see the Magistrates publikelie to
take away Pictures from Catholics, to tear and burn them, which were kept
but in private places: yea, their more fervent disciples, cannot abide a Cross
standing by the High-waie-side, or in any, never so profaine a place, but
either they beat and hale them down, or most despitefullie deface them:
bewraying indeed unto all moderate men, their cankered stomaks against him that
dyed on the Cross: who will one day (when he pleases) confound them. But to
cover this their malice, they cast over it the mantle of zeal, saying that
the Papists make them their Gods, and that therefore they are to be abolished.

O men blinded with spite against true devotion. We Catholics are a thousand
times more zealous of the true honor of the living God, than any Protestants
ever were or will be: And that small reverence which we yield unto Images, is
more different from the honor and obedience due unto Almighty God, than the
cope of heaven is distant from the center of the earth.

And that these hotter brethren may see what reason M. P. had to allow of the
civil and historical use of Images: I think it expediente to note here, how
in the purest antiquity, Images were made and respected.

That famous Image of our blessed Savior, which the woman cured of the bloody
flxe, Mat. 9.
set up in Brass at Caesarea Philippi, upon a Pillar of stone, is not unknown
unto any that have read the Ecclesiastical History of EVSEBIVS, Lib. 7. cap.
14. And how God did approve it by giving virtue unto an herb when it did
grow, to touch the hemme of that Picture, to cure all manner of diseases. Which
Image, EVSEBIVS himself did see standing until his days, which was 1300.
years ago, as he there testfyeth: as also, that he saw diverse others,
namely, of Saint PETER and PAVL.

This goodly stature being most memorable both for antiquity of it, being made
our Savior yet living, and for the miracles wrought by that herb, growing at
the foot of it, IVLIAN the Apostata for malice against our Savior, caused to
be broken down, and set up his own Image in the place of it: but his was
presently with lightning and thunder from heaven consumed into ashes, and our
Souiours, by the Christians carried into their Church, as witnesses
ZOZOMENIVS. Lib. 5. hist. c. 20.


An other Picture of our Saviors visage, he himself is reported to have
sent unto ABGARVS Prince of Edessa, as witnesses METAPHASTES In vita
Constantini, DAMASEN Lib. 10. de imagi.
, and EVAGRIVS, Lib. 4. hist cap. 28.
who does in the same chapter rehearse a notable miracle, wrought by the same
Image, to deliver the Town from the sacking of the Persians. And in his fifth
book and eighteenth chapter, records an other miracle done by the image of
the blessed Virgin MARY in a Prison at Antioch.

The third Image representing our blessed Savior, is said to have been made
by NICODEMVS his secreet Disciple, which afterward was taken by the Jews, and
in despite of Christ, was crucified, and to their confusion, much blood issued
out of it.

This history is in the work of S. ATHANASIVS that sound pillar of the
Church, entitled, De passione imaginis, and is either his, or some other very
ancient and grave writer: For it is related in the seventh general counsel.
act. 4.

That Saint LVKE the Euangell drew the Picture of our blessed Lady, is
registered by Theodorus Lector 100. years ago, Lib. 1. collectam.
and Metaphrastes, In vita Lucae, and Nicephorus Li. 14. hist. 1. 2
.

TERTVLLIAN, an author of the second hundredth year after Christ, has left
written, Lib. 2. de pudicitia.
that the Image of Christ in shape of a shephearde carrying a sheep on his
shoulders, was engraven upon the holy Chalices used in the Church. In the time
of S. CHRYSOSTOM, they were so common, that they were carried in rings, drawn
on cups, painted in Chambers. See THEODORET. In histor. relig. in vita
Simeonis Stelitae. Aug. lib. 2. de cons. Euang. c. 10. And the 7. Synod Act. 4.

This briefly of Images in general: now a word or two of the sign of the
Cross, which our Protestants have banished from all their followers:
Nevertheless, it can not be denied to have been in most frequent use among the
best Chiistians of the Primitive Church.

TERTVLLIAN has these words, De corono militis.
At every going forward and return, when we dress us and pull on our shoes,
when we wash and sit down at the lighting of Candels, and entering into our
Chambers, finally, when we set our selves to any thing, we make the sign of
the Cross one our foreheads.

S. AMBROSE Sermon. 84
exhorts us to begin all our works with the sign of the Cross.

S. AUGUSTINE. 118. in Joan.
What is that ensign of Christ, which all men know, but the Cross of CHRIST,
the which sign, unless it be made on the foreheads of the faithful, yea,
on the water by which they are regenerate, and on the Oil and Chrisme,
wherewith they are anointed, and on the sacrifice wherewith they are
nourished, not one of them are orderly and duly administered. Our Protestants
then that have neither holy Oil, nor sacrifice to make the Cross upon, are
in pitiful taking.

But hear also what some of the best Greek Doctors do say of this same
sign of the Cross.

S. CIRILL Catech. 4.
agrees fully with TERTVLLIAN, saying: Make this sign of the Cross both
eating and drinking, both sitting and and standing, and walking and speaking,
in sum, at all times.

S. BASIL De Spu. san. cap. 27
accounts this making the sign of the Cross among some of the principal
Traditions of the Apostles.

ORIGIN Hom. 6. in cap. 15. Ex.
yields one reason why we make this sign, affirming that fear and trembling
does fall upon the evil spirits, when they see the sign of the Cross made
with faith.

S. GREGORY NAZ. Orat. 1. in Julian.
reports, that the wicked Apostata Julian, being frighted with spirits, made
the sign of the Cross, which he had renounced, and yet it delivered him from
them.

S. CHRYSOSTOM most largely discourses of the glorious use of the Cross Orat
quod Christus sit Deus. See the place, among an hundred other commendations of
it, he has these words: That the heads of Kings are not so decked with their
Diademes, as with the sign of the Cross, and concludes, that all men strive
to pass other in taking to them this admirable Cross, and that no man was
ashamed of it, but esteemed them selves more beautified with that, than with
many Jewels, borders and chains, garnished with Pearl and precious stones.

Heu quantum mutamur ab ipsis: Alas, what a pitiful change is this, that
that which was of the best Christians reputed dear and holy, should now be
accounted a point of superstition and plain witchcraft.

By all which we learn, that the best Christians both used always and
highly esteemed of holy Images, even from our Saviors own days, and God
himself has by divine testimony of miracles recommended them unto us, not
only for the civil and historical uses of them, but more to honor them whose
pictures they were: for no man in his right wits can deny but that it is and
has always been reputed, as a great honor done to the deceased, to erect him
an Image, to eternise the memory of his noble acts: as also that it is a great
encouragement to all beholders of such Pourtraits, to endeavor to imitate their
glorious examples: The very sight of the Image of POLEMON, a most chaste and
holy personage, moved an unchaste woman to change her life, as out of S.
GREGORY NAZ. is related. Synod. 7 act. 4.


Having so great testimony for the ancient use of Images, and such manifold
commodities, by the discreet and holy practice of them, he must needs be
furiously transported with blind zeal, that makes war against Crosses, and
burns holy pictures; as of late the Superintendent of Hereford did in the
market place openly.

THE DIFFERENCE.
NOw to the points in controversy, which are three, as M. P. delivers: The
first is, in that the Church of Rome holds it lawful to make Images to
resemble God; though not in respect of his divine nature, yet in respect of
some properties and actions: We contrarily says M. P. hold t unlawful to make
Images any way to represe^t the true God. For the second commandment says
plainly, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, nor the likeness of any
thing in heaven, etc. The Papists say that the commandment is meant of the
Images of false Gods; but it must needs be understood by the Image of the true
Jehovah, and it forbids to resemble God, either in his nature, or in his
properties and works; for so says the Roman Catechism upon the second
Commandment.

ANSWER.
This passes all kind of impudency to quote the Roman Catechism in defense
of that opinion, which it does of set purpose disprooue. It teaches indeed,
that the very nature and substance of God, which is, wholly spiritual, cannot
be expressed and figured by corporal lineaments and colors, and alleges
the places produced by M. P. to prove that unlawful; yet by and by annexeth
these words: Let no man therefore think it to be against religion, and the Law
of God, when any person of the most holy Trinity is purtraited in such sort as
they have appeared, either in the Old or New Testament, etc. But let the Pastor
teach, that not the nature of God, but certain properties and actions
appertaining to God, are represented in such Pictures. If the man be not past
grace, he will suerly blush at such a foul error. His textes of Scripture are
taken out of the same place of the Catechism, and do prove only, that Gods
proper nature cannot nor may not be resembled in any corporal shape or
likeness.

Then M. P. returns to confute the answer made him; that Idols are there
only prohibited, and says that we then confound the first and second
commandment. For in the first was forbidden, all false Gods which man frames
unto himself, by giving his heart and the principal affections thereof unto
them. (Good) and in the second, (admitting it to be the second) is forbidden to
draw into any material likeness, that Idol which the heart had before
framed unto it self, and to give it any bodelie worship: which is
distinction good enough to make two several commandments. Now the Roman
Catechism, following CLEMENT of Alexandria: Lib. 6. stromat. And S. AUGUSTINE
Quest. 71. super exodus, and ep. 119. cap. 11. and the Schoole-doctors in 3.
sent. distinct. 37. does make two commandments of the Protestants last
distinguishing, desiring thy neighbors wife, from coveting thy neighbors
goods, as they do: Thou shall not commit adultery, from, thou shall not
steal; and make but one of the first two, because the former does forbid
inward, and the second outward Idolatry: and the outward and inward
actions: about the said object are not so distinct, as the desiring of so
diverse things, as a man's wife for leacherie, and his goods of covetousness:
And yet besides, add an other reason very probable, that the reward and
punishment belonging alike to all the Commandments, cannot in good order be
thrust into the middle of them, but must be placed either with the first or
last, now comprehending the two former in one, the reward is annexed
conveniently to the first; whereas, if you make them two, it is out of order,
and without any good reason put after the second. This I say, not to condemn
the other division, which many of the ancient writers follow: but to show how
little reason M. P. had to trust to that answer of his, that we should
confound the first and second, which he saw the very Catechism cited by
himself, do make but one of both. But M. P. goes on and says, that our
distinction between Image and Idol (that an Image represents a thing that
is, but Idol, a thing supposed to be, but is not) is false and against the
ancient writers, who make it all one: We prove the contrary, First, by the
authority of the ancient Doctors, ORIGIN Hom. 8. in exodus Q. 38 in ex
and THEODORET, * who in express words deliver the same difference of Image
and Idol: which is taken out of S. PAVL, 1 Cor. 8.
saying that an Idol is nothing in the world: that is, such Idols as the
Heathen take for their Gods, are nothing formallie, that is, though they be
great pieces of wood or stone materiallie; yet they represent a thing that is
not, that is, such a thing to be a God, which is nothing less. Let M. P. but
quote one place in the whole Bible, where they are used both for one.

I will cite some-where, if you use the one for the other, you must offend all
good Christian ears; As where man is said to be made after the Image of God,
may you say after the Idol of God? CHRIST is said to be the Image of his
Father; will you call him the Idol of his Father? Surely he cannot deny, but
the seventh general Counsel holden about nine hundredth years past and gone,
is so far off from making Image and Idol all one, that it does accurse all
them, who call the Image of CHRIST and his Saints, Idols.

But TERTVLLIAN De Idololat.
(says M. P.) affirms them to be all one; not so neither: For he makes
Idolum a divinity of eibos, which signifies a form or similitude: So that
Idolon, is but a small similitude or slender Image, not so much for the
quantity, as for that it represents but darkely.

EVSTATHIVS an excellent Greek interpreter, upon the elleuenth book of
HOMERS ODISSEA, descrybeth Idolum to signifye a vain and vanishing Image, as
the shaddowe of a man, a ghost, or fantastical Imagination. And so it cannot
be, that all profaine Authors use these two words indifferently, seeing both
in proper signifycation, and by the declaration of the learned, there is great
difference between them.

But Saint STEPHEN calls the golden calfe an Idol, so it was indeed: What is
that to the purpose?

And S. HIEROM says, That Idols are the Images of dead-men (add) that are
taken for Gods: True, many Idols be Images: all such as truly represente any
person that was once living here, but no Images be Idols, unless it be
taken for a GOD: And so Idolles requires besides the Image, that it be made a
God, or the Image of a false God.

Now to those few authorities which M. Perk. cyteth in his favor: To them of
the counsel of ELIBERIS and EPIPHANIVS, which seem to speak against setting
up of Images in Churches: I will answer in their place, to that out of
LACTANTIVS Lib. 2. instit cap. 19. Where Images are for Religion sake, there is
no Religion, the force lies in false translation of Images for Idols: Put,
where Idols are for Religion, there is no Religion: But what, suppose he spoke
against worshipping of Images in gemeral, it were not proper to this purpose,
where we speak only of making Images, and not of all sorts of Images
neither, but of an Image only to represent some properties or actions of God.

That out of ORIGNE Cont. cell. lib. 7.
is yet far wyder; We suffer not any to worship JESUS at Altars, Images or
Temples, because it is written: Thou shall have none other Gods. Here is
nothing concerning the making of Gods Image; only Christians are forbidden to
go unto the heathen Temples, and there at their Altars or Idols to worship
JESUS, who has no affinity nor can endure any fellowshippe with Idolaters.

Having confuted the Protestants arguments against the making Images, to
represent some property or action of God; I now come unto Catholic proof of
them. The first reason set down by M. P. I reserve to the next point: the
second is; God appeared in the form of a man to ABRAHAM Genes. 18
and to DANIEL, Who saw the ancient of days sitting on a throne. Dan: 9.
Now as God has appeared, so may he be purtraited and drawn: M. P. his
answer is, not so, unless it be expresselie commanded by God.

REPLY.
This first is flat against his own second conclusion, where he holds it
lawful to present to the eye in Pictures, any histories of the Bible in
private places, both the foresaid apparitions be in the Old testament, and
therefore may be painted in private places, which cannot be truly done without
you do represent God in the same likeness, as there he appeared. And what
reason leads in words to represent those actions of GOD, the same serves to
express them in lively colors: Not so says M. P. because when God appeared
in the form of man, it was a sign of Gods presence, for that time only, and
for no longer: be it so, it might notwithstanding be recorded in writing, that
the memory of such majesty joined with loving kindness might endure longer.
And if it pleased God, that this short presence of his should be written to be
perpetually remembered, even so the same might be engraven in brass, to
recommende it to us so much the more effectually: For as the famous Poet does
by the light of nature sing:

Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures,
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus.
Such worthy acts as by the ears are to the mind conueyde,
Do move us less then that which is by faithful eye descryde.
This argument may be confirmed by the pictures of Angels, of Virtues, and
other such like of spiritual or accidental nature: for if such things as have
no bodelie proportion or shape, may notwithstanding be counterfeit and
resembled in some qualities, why may not some property or action of God be in
like manner represented? That thou may (Reader) understand the better what
we mean, observe that pictures represent after three sorts. Some express to
the quick, the very shape, proportion and color of the pattern; as the lively
picture of man, or of any such corporal thing: others represent things as they
did appear and were acted, as if the Paynter should express the meeting of
God with ABRAHAM and his entertainment, he must then resemble God in the same
likeness of a man in which he showed himself to ABRAHAM.

Thirdly, an Image of a spiritual thing, may be drawn not to resemble the
nature of it, but to lead our understanding by such a similitude, into some
better knowledge of that thing: so are Angels painted like goodly young men
with wings; to teach us that they be of an excellent pure nature, ever
flourishing and most ready to dispatch with all expedition any employment to
which God sends them; and so may God the Father be pourtraited, as a goodly old
grave man, sitting in his throne of majesty, attended upon by millions of
Angels, (as he is described in Daniel 9.) to instruct us how he is eternal,
infinite, wise, and of most redoubtable majesty: In either of these two latter
sorts, we hold that God may be represented, and so in the seventh general
Council, the drawing of the Holy Ghost, in form of a Dove, as he appeared,
Mat. 3. is approved.

The first point then being obtained, that such Images of God may be made; I
come to the second: That all holy Pictures may be placed in Churches; which
I prove by the argument that M. P. made for our first objection. In SALOMONS
Temple were erected Cherubins, which were Images of Angels, on the Mercy
seat, where God was worshipped, and upon the walls and very doors of the
same pictured. To this M. P. answers, that they were erected by special
commandment from God, who prescribes the very form of them, and the place
where they should be set, and thereby MOSES had a warrant to make them, let
them show the like warrant for their Images, if they can.

Secondly, (says he) the Cherubs were placed in the most inward place of the
Temple, and so were removed from the sight of the people, and the Cherubs
without the veil, though they were seen, yet were they not. worshipped.

REPLY.
This man's wits were gone a wool-gathering, when proposing to himself the
Cherubs erected in SALOMONS Temple: he answers of the Cherubs made by MOSES
350. years before; a most gross ouer-sight and a shameful shift: but such as
men desperately defending untruths, must needs use: For if he had answered
directly, he had not had a word to say; for neither did God prescribe the
form of them, nor give any special commandment to SOLOMON, to make and erect
any such Cherubs, as he that pleases to read the Chapter may see, and there
they were placed not only in the inward, but also in the outward parts of the
Temple, upon the walls and very doors, that they might be seen of all the
people: which M. P. finding, flitted from thence, and did fly unto an other,
which because it spoke of Cherubs, he thought would serve to blind his simple
followers.

MOSES indeed had an express precept for the making of them, as he had for the
Curteines and Curteine-rods, and every particular belonging to the Tabernacle.
But SOLOMON without any special commandment out of his high and holy
wisdom, understood that he might most lawfully and lawdably imitate that
heavenly pattern of MOSES: And as the building was far more sumptuous and
stately: so in the number and quantie of pictures exceeded, which is a
sufficient instruction and warrant for all men after his days to make and set
Images in the Church. And this finally M. P. seems to grant, when he says,
that these Cherubs without the veyle, were there to be seen, but not to be
worshipped: so that we have gotten one step further; that Images may not only
be made, but also be set up in the Churches: which is fortifyed by the
testimony of TERTVLLIAN, in the place cited before: where he says, that our
Savior was pictured upon holy Chalices, which were used at the Altars: and of
SOZOMENVS, who witnesses that our Saviors Picture was taken into the Church.

S. GREGORY NAZ. Epist. 49.
makes mention of Images in the Church of Diocesaraea, trimmed up by himself.

Saint BASIL, Orat. in Barlaam.
poynteth to that holy man's Picture, standing in the Church.

DAMASVS In vita Siluest.
shows how CONSTANTINE in the Church of S. JOHN LATERAN, erected a silver
Image unto our Savior.

S. CHRYSOSTOM In demonst. quod Christ. sit Deus: And S. AVG. Sermon. 19 de sanc.
do teach, that the Cross was on the holy Tables, and used at all holy
functions. And the reason why Images should principally be set in Churches, is
very pregnant. For where should holy pictures of holy men be more properly
bestowed, than in holy places: And the Church being a resemblance of heaven
(as S. PAVL teaches, Heb. 9
) is most conveniently decked up with Images: the representations of heavenly
creatures: that men entering into that holy place, may by the view and
consideration of such a heavenly show, retire their minds from worldly
business, and lift them up unto the sovereign monarch of both heaven and
earth.

Now let us come to those two objections of M. P. which seems to be against
the erection of Images in Churches. The first is out of the Council of
ELIBERIS cap. 36. which commands, that nothing should be painted on the
walls of the Church, that was adored of the people.

ANSWER.
That if the Council speak of the Image of God (in which sense. M. P. cyteth
it, and the word (adored) does insinuate) then it may be said, that the
Council inhibiteth that sort of Gods Images, which are made to express the
divine nature: If it be extended unto all sorts of Images: I answer, that they
were then forbidden to be drawn upon the Church walls, but not to be set in
Tables upon the Altar, or in any other place. The reason is, because that
Council was holden in time of persecution, as appears by the twenty five
Canon of it: and then, if the persecutors had found out the place of their
assembly, as they often did: those pictures must needs either have been
defaced by themselves, or left unto the derision and despite of the Heathens;
And pictures also painted upon such poor walls as they had then to their
Churches, would either by the moisture of the walls, or other incommoditie,
have been quick y disfigured: wherefore, to the greater honor of such sacred
things, those grave Fathers thought it not meet to have them drawn upon the
Church walls, there being many more meet places for them in the Churches.

The second objection is out of a postscript of EPIPHANIVS letter, unto JOHN
PATRIARCH of Jerusalem, in which is written, as M. P. falsely reports: that
it is against the authority of Scripture, to see the Pictures of Christ, or of
any Saint to hang in the Church.

ANSWER.
It is there only, to see the picture of a man. Now that he should mean of
Christ or of some Saint is only gathered, yet M. P. makes no bones to thrust
them both into the Text: even so do we think that some old enemy of
Images added that postscript unto EPIPHANIVS letter. Our reasons are, because
it has no coherence with the former letter or style. Again, in the seventh
Council, when all that could be found out of antiquity, was cited against
Images: no tidings there of this place, which if it had been true, might have
been one of the principal. Thirdly, in the same Council, Act. 6.
other two places brought, as it were out of EPIPHANIVS works, were found to
be none of his: And for Images was alleged, that EPIPHANIVS own disciples,
erected an Image to their master, and set it in the Church; which they would
never have done, if he had taught them to be against the Scripture so to do.

M. P. observes a special reason in EPIPHANIVS other counterfeit testimony:
That Images must not be suffered in the common house, because we must carry
God in our minds. To which we answer, that Images must be suffered in all
places, that we may the better carry God in our hearts, being by the sight of
them, both often put in mind of him, and much moved to honor and love him.

Now I come unto a third point, which M. P. makes the second of our
difference: That Images may be not only made and set in Churches, but also
worshipped.

M. P. holds the contrary: and his principal ground is the second
commandment; which contains, says he, two parts. The first, forbids the
making of Images to resemble God; the second, the worshipping of them or God in
them, in these words: Thou shall not bow down to them.

ANSWER.
If it be only forbidden to make the Image of God, and to adore it: then the
making and worshipping of the Image of Christ, or of any other creature, is not
there prohibited: And so this second commandment more than thrice alleged,
will not serve the turn against any other Image but God only. And in plain
reason, according also to M. P. his own confession, the Commandments of the
first Table, touch only our duty toward God, that we give him all his due
honor, and do not give any part thereof unto any thing else whatsoever:
Wherefore divine and godly worship is only there spoken of, and not such
worship as we give unto any creature, or to the picture of it: And
consequently, there is nothing there against the worshipping of our holy Images.

Observe that there is a sovereign worship due to God, as to the Creator and
governor of all the world, and to give this to any creature, is Idolatry. An
other honor by infinite degrees inferior, yet absolute in it self, is
ascribed unto Angels, and men as creatures endued with reason, and made after
the likeness of God; and to exhibit this to whom it is due, is ciuilite and
not Idolatry. This honor may be divided into two parts, because these
creatures are like to God, as well in their natural powers and qualities, as in
their supernatural: And that honor which is given to man or angel (in respect
of any natural quality, may be called moral or civil; But that which is
attributed unto the^, in regard of their supernatural gifts may well be called
religious and spiritual, because it is due unto them only for their spiritual
and religious qualities.

There is a third kind of worship, yet meaner then the other; which is a kind
of dependant and respective worship; as when a servant is honored or
cheerished, not for his own, but for his masters sake. And this is that
worship which we allow unto Images, which, for the Saints sake whom it does
represent, we do either reverently regard, or take off our hat, or bow our
knee unto it. This third kind of worship, being all we allow unto
Pictures, were he not that understands it, more than half frantic, that
should think it a great desparagement unto the incomprehensible worship of
God, that to one of his servants pictures, I should yield some such petty
reverence; or that God should forbid this in the forefront of his ten
Commandments? nothing less.

But let us go on with M. P. his argument: His second is; the brazen Serpent
was an Image of Christ crucified, appointed by God: yet when the children of
Israel burned incence unto it, EZECHIAS brake it in pieces 4. Reg. 18
.

ANSWER.
So when Christians generally give godly honor to Images, as those Israelites
did to the Serpent, let them also be broken by their lawful superior, if no
better remedy may be found: But as that very brazen Serpent duly worshipped
many hundredth years by the same people before they sell to Idolatry (as
witnesses S. AUGUSTINE Lib. 3. de trinit. c. 10.
, where he reckons the brazen Serpents, among those signs which are worthy
of religious worship) so good Christians, may worship all sorts of holy
Pictures, so they think no God to dwell in them, nor put any trust in the
Pictures, but use them only to stir up devotion, to keep their minds from
wandering after their domestical affairs, and to conserve the memory of Gods
happy servants.

Now to the third argument, which is iollie and worthy the wilde-witte of a
madde-minister. CHRIST would not so much as bow his knee unto the devil,
although he would have given him the whole world for doing of it. Therefore we
must not odore Images, true, if the Image were M. Bezas ensign, or of their
master the devil, or of any of his hel-houndes.

M. P. His fourth reason: A man (says he) may be worshipped with civil
honor; not with religions, which is wholly prescribed in the first Table, and
yet the meanest man is a more excellent Image of God, than any painted one.

ANSWER.
A man may be worshipped with religious honor, in respect of his supernatural
gifts, as well as with civil honor of his natural properties, as has been
before declared: and no other religious honor is either precribed or proscribed
in the first Table, then such only as is proper to God.

But (says he) THOMAS of Watering 3 Part. qu. 25. act. 3
holds, that the Crucifixe is to be adored with the same honor that Christ is.
Leaving THOMAS of Watering and of Wapping to them that deserve it: I answer to
the place of Saint THOMAS of Aquine, that he speaks (like a most learned
Philosopher and divine) very profoundly; that the Image may be considered in it
self, and so he says, it is not to be worshipped at all: or as it does convey
our mind unto that which it does represent: and so because there is but one and
the same motion of our understanding and will toward Christ and the crucifixe:
we do adore them both at once with the same act of adoration, but in a far
different degree: for Christ we adore properly as the true God, but the
crucifixe accidentally as a thing joined with Christ. Even as (says he
expounding himself) art. 4. when one does his homage unto the king, he
worshippeth with all his purple garment, not that any worship is due to the
robe, but the whole is given unto the person, which cannot be seated from that
which is so closely joined to the person: Even so the divine person of Christ
is properly adored, but improperly al things conceived together with it; are
said also by that deep doctor to be adored, he that has ear of hearing, let
him hear: for our purpose it suffices to know, that he assigns very small
worship to themselves.

Lastly M P. says, without quoting any place that Augustine and Gregory in
plain terms deny Images to be odored, and so do we too, taking adoring as
they do for the worship that is proper to God.

Having now answered to all that M. P. objecteth against the worshipping of
Images: let us now examine the reasons, which he makes in defense of it.

The first by him proposed is this Psalm 98. Cast down your selves before his
footestoole, which was the Arc: now if the Arc were to be worshipped, because
it represented Gods foote-stoole, much more may the Image be worshipped. M. P.
answers, that the words must be englished thus, Bow at or before the arc,
not to the arc, but to God before the Arc.

REPLY.
If it were so, yet must they admit that we must kneel, at or before Images,
so we kneel to honor or pray to God: against which, some of their Preachers
do cry like madmen: but the Hebrew phraise carries, that we must kneel to
the arc, as they who be skilful in the language do know, and that the arc was
worshipped of the Israelites is otherwise very evident: for first none, but the
high Priest might come into the place where it was: and it was carried before
the camp with great solemnity 1. Reg: 4 Cap. 6.
to search out a reasting-place for the whole host. And when they were to
fight against the Philistines, * they had great confidence in the presence of
the arc: and cap. 6. 50000. of the Bethsamites were slain for seeing the
arc; and 2. Reg. 2
Oza was by God smitten to death for touching the arc. Does not all this
coruince in what reverence the arc was had, even by Gods own testimony?

To this may be added the authority of S. IEROM, Ep 17. Cap. 3.
who does teach that it was the more worshipped for the Cherubins and pictures
of angels that were erected at the ends of it: whereby he declares that he
thought Images worthy of religious worship.

To this we may join that of S. PAVL, Heb. 11.
that JACOB by faith adored the top of his son JOSEPH'S rod: so does the
Greek text of S. PVAL say, as ERASMUS also translateth it: The Protestants
mangle the text pitifully, to avoid the place: see the Annot. of Rhemes
Testament.

The second reason is taken out of Exodus 3. where God said to MOSES, Put off
thy shoes for the place where thou stand is holy. Now if places he hollie
and to be reverenced by reason of the presence of Angels: why not, as well the
Image that represents an angel or some Saints, which is equal to Angels: M.
P. his answer rather confirms than solueth this argument: for he says,
that the Ceremony of putting off his shoes, was commanded to strike MOSES with
a religious reverence; not of the place, but of the person there present, which
was not God but an Angel, as the text there expresses. Exodus 3.
The place then being holy, required the reverend respect of putting off his
shoes, and that reverence done to the place; stroke MOSES with a religious
reverence of the Angel speaking in the person of God: even so holy pictures
being first duly reverenced, do strike men with a religious regard of the
Saint represented. To this, let us annexe that days be truly called holy and
worshipped, as the first and last days be truly called holy and worshipful,
as the first and last days of the feast of Easter be. Exodus 12.16.
And the vestments of Priests Exodus 28.5.2.
, because they are dedicated and employed to holy uses: even so Images which
are made in honor of God and his Saints, and erected to move and teach us to
embrace heavenly courses.

The third reason proposed by M. P. in favor of the Catholics is: It is
lawful to kneel down to a chair of estate, in the absence of the king:
Therefore much more to the Images of God and his Saints in heaven glorified,
being absent from us.

To this he answers, that it is but a civil worship to kneel to the
chair of estate, and that very commendable to show our loyalty unto our
Prince: But kneeling unto the Images of Saints, is religious, and therefore not
alike.

REPLY.
He proposes our argument to the halfes, or else this answer had been
prevented. For thus runs our reason: As the chair of estate is to be
worshipped with civil reverence, in respect of the temporal Prince, whom it
represents: even so the Images of holy personages that reign now in heaven,
are to be worshipped with a holy and religious kind of courtesy: for as
Temporal honor is due unto a Temporal Prince, so religious and spiritual
honor, is due unto spiritual and most holy personages: And as a good subject
testifyeth his loyalty and good affection toward his Prince, by honoring his
regal throne: So does a good Christian give testimony of his dutiful, both
estimation and devotion toward those heavenly creatures, by giving honor unto
their Images. At leastwise, why do not the Protestants exhibit civil reverence
as well unto the representations of Gods Saints, as to the shadows of the
secular majesty? unless it be because they are fallen out with the Saints of
God, and are become adorers of sinful men.

M. P. makes a third point of difference, that we may not worship God in any
such Image, in which he has appeared unto men. In this we do not differ,
unless he takes it otherwise then he delivers it. Those Images we hold more
reverend than any others, as representations nearer approaching unto the
divinity, yet because they do not express the deity, God is not directly
apprehended nor worshipped in them, but only by collection, as for example.
The form of a grave old man, in DANIEL, does not represent Gods person, but we
gather by that ancient form Gods eternity, whereby we arise to a mere perfect
conceit of God, whom we adore: now other Images of Christ and his Saints, do
carry our minds directly upon their proper persons, whom in their Images we
adore and worship unto their degrees. But we worship Images with far
meaner reverence than any of the Saints, in regard only, that they do
represent such personages, and do induce us more to love and honor them, and
do stur up our dullness more often and ardently to honor God in the Saints,
and the Saints in their degrees: as also to imitate their holy example as has
bin said more than once, that all may understand how far off we are from giving
Gods honor unto either Saint or Image. But this point of difference is made to
bring in a common argument of theirs, to wit, that the worshipping of the
golden Calfe is condemned as flat Idolatry: Exodus 32
and yet the Israelits worshipped not the Calfe but God: The Calfe, to which we
say, they did not worship the true God; the Calfe, but the god of the
Egiptians, which was taken by them to have the shape of a black Calfe, with
white spots. Lib. 18. de ciuit. c. 5
See S. AVGST. 1. De not deor.
And therefore making the golden calfe to represent this false god, and
attributing their deliverance, unto that supposed god, and not unto the God of
Israel, committed idolatry, which the text proves most manifest, these be
thy gods that brought thee out of Egypt. M. P. answers, Verse 4.
that the meaning is nothing else, but that the golden Calfe was a sign of the
presence of the true God: such glosses without any authority of the ancient
fathers is ridiculous, being against the plain text: but says he, we must
not think them so mad, as to take a Calfe made with their eare-rings to be
their God, no: but we may well think them so ungrateful unto the true God
their deliverer, that they did ascribe their deliverance not to him, but unto
that God, which the Aegiptians served, whose purtraiture was that Calfe.

But now before we end this question, I must let you understand what worthy men
they were that first began to wage battle against images: they were the Jews
in their Talmud. Ord. 2. tract. 1. did. 2. See Synod. 7. act. 5. A barbarous
Persian Xenias, as witnesses NICIPHORVS Lib. 16. c. 27. Then Mahomet the great
god of the Turks. Alcoran ca. 15. and 17. with such like infidels sorcerers,
and the skumme of the earth.

See Card. BELLARMINE de Imag. lib. 2. c. 6.

I will with one or two testimonies of the auncientest Fathers, finish this
controversy. LACTANT In car. de pass. Christ. Kneel down and adore the
venerable wood of the Cross.

HIEROM, in vita paula: She adored prostrate before the Cross, as if she had
seen CHRIST hanging on it.

BASIL against Julian cited. ast. 2. Synod. 7. I honor the h story of the
Images, and do properly worship them.

Finally, in the 7. general Council holden ^00 years past, they are
condemned of heresy, that deny the use and worshipping of holy Images.

FINIS.

