THE HOLY TABLE, NAME and THING, MORE ANCIENTLY, properly, and literally used
under the New Testament, then that of an ALTAR: Written long ago by a Minister
in Lincolnshire, in answer to D. COAL, a judicious Divine of Q. MARY'S days.

Illa Sacramenti donatrix Mensa. -- Aurel, Prudent, in Peristeph, Hymno 11.
Printed for the Diocese of Lincoln. 1637.

I Have read and thoroughly perused a Book, called The Holy Table, Name, and
Thing, etc. written by some Minister of this Diocese. And do conceive it to
be most Orthodox in Doctrine, and consonant in Discipline, to the Church of
England: And to set forth the Kings Power and Rights, in matters
Ecclesiastical, truly and judiciously; and very fit to be Printed: And do
allow and approve of the same Treatise to be Printed and published in any place
or places whereas Ordinary I am enabled and Licenced so to do. And in
witness hereof, I have subscribed my Name the last day of November, 1636.

IO. LINCOLN. Deane of Westminster.

CHAP. I.
Of the state of the Question, and the first-occasion of the writing of the
Letter: with a true Copy of the same.

IT was a new but witty Etymology, which the Lord Chancellor At Star-cha, in
the Cause of the Nottingham Libell.
St. Albans gave of a Libel; that it was derived of a Lie forged at home, and a
Bell to ring it up and down the Country. Both these parts are fully expressed
in this Pamphlet. First, Title lease.
Coal makes the Lie, and presents it for a Token to his private friend; then
his private friend makes the Bell, by commending it to the Press, and ringing
it abroad over all the Country. And it gave an Omen, of what color the whole
Book would prove, by the mistake in the first page, where his friend calls him
a Divine of Judgment, which is the second part, whereas indeed he is but a
Divine of Invention, which is the first part of Logic. And this Invention he
puts in practice, not only in displaying his matters of Right, as all your
(...). Vlpian Enarr. in Demosth. orat. de classibus.
(...) and artificial handlers of Controversies are permitted to do; but even
in stating the matter of fact: which when it is in writing before our eyes, is
no more by a disputant indeed to be wriggled and wrested, but to be taken as
it is set down, and (for the time at the least) (...). Arist. Rhet. l. 5. c. 17.
swallowed and believed. Whereas this poor fellow makes himself an Adversary,
not out of the Letter, but out of his own fantasy; and driving him before him
(as he in Aristot. Meteor. lib. 3. c. 4.
Aristotle did his shadow) from one end of the Book to the other, shoots all
his arrows at this man of clowts of his own rearing, and yet with all this
advantage never stirs him. I will give you a short taste of his faining, and his
failing. Title lea^e, and P. 26.
He fains the Letter written not long since. He fails, because it was written,
when all flesh in England had corrupted their ways, and that there was a
general deviation in this weighty business. Title lea^e, and Letter, p. 69.
He fains, that the Question was of placing the Communion-table^. He fails, for
it was about the erecting of a Stone-altar. P. 5. and Let. p. 68. 69.
He fains, that the Writer conceived the Bowing at the name of JESUS was a vain
thing. He fails, for the Writer does commend, allow, and practice it. Page 8.
and Let. p. 69.
He fains the Writer had no reason to suspect any other sacrifice aimed at by
the Vican, but spiritual only. He fails, and never conferred with the Writer
about it, who charge the Vicar with meaning a Sacrifice contrary to his
Subscription. P. 27. and Let. p. 69.
He fains, that the Writer would cunningly draw the Chapels and Cathedrals to
a kind of ^remurire about their Communion-tables. He fails, for the Writer
confesses he does allow, and practice it. P. 25. and Let p. 71 p. 41. and 40.
He fains the Writer does slight; But fails, for he does cite and approve the
appellation of Second service. He fains, that the Writer does report the
peoples pulling down of Altars, as a doctrine. He fails, for he mentions it
only as a matter of fact. Page 42. and Let p. 74.
He fains the Writer should make the Counsel Act, for the taking down of
Altars, A kind of Law which no man was obliged unto. He fails, for the Writer
says it was obeyed over all England. Lastly, P. 51. and Let. p 69 76. 77
he fains, that the Vicar did not think of Fixing his Table to the Wall,
because he himself has no cause to think so, nor reason to conceive, and may
reasonably presume the contrary. He fails, for the Letter does every where
charge upon the Vicar the contradictory assertion. So that this man has not
only made himself the Judge, to open the Law, but the Jury also, to find the
fact in the whole controversy. But this is not to be endured. For beside that
it is uncertain, whether he be of the Voisinage, and but an inhabitant of a
remote and another Province, and so ignorant of the Circumstances of the fact,
he shows himself (every where) such a pugnacissimum animal (as Petron. Arbit.
Satyr. Coepique pugnacissimum animal armata elidere manu.
he said of the Gander) so partially addicted to brabbling and contention, that
he may be well excepted against for a common Barreter. Page 11.
He charge it home upon the Writer, for saying that the Curate and the
Churchwardens were appointed to pull down, when they were appointed only to
take down the Altars: For saying, that the name of an Altar page 34.
Crepe, when he should have said, Came into the Church: For P. 12.
saying that they were taken down in all or most; whereas he should have said,
in sundry and many places of this Kingdom: Lastly, for P. 8.
saying, The Communion, whereas he should have said, The Lords Supper. When the
Rubricke The Order for the Administration.
has it, The Lords Supper, or holy Communion, And would any man trust such a
Aristot. Ethic. l. 4. c. 1.
(...), and Tither of Cummin, as this wrangler is, to be of his Jury? Besides
that (as Plautus describes him to a hair in a Comedy of his own Asinaria.
denomination) Siquidem hercle Aeacidinis minis expletus animisque incedit, he
comes into the Session-house with such a haughty and prejudicare opinion of
himself and his Cause, that no man can expect the least right at his hands. For
besides that his friend Clove does stick him in the door of his Book (before
his going forth into the open Air) with this pretty perfume of a Judicious and
Learned Divine, he does so swell and improve by degrees, that he makes his work
above all the Humane, and equal to the Laws Divine. For speaking of the
Preface of the Communion-book, (a Canon confirmed by Act of Parliament) that
does not (without all question) direct the Bishop to send his resolutions to
the Priest, he says upon that Law, P. 11.
It is as true, or at least wise more fit, that the Bishop should do as he
would have him. Which is so high a Language against the Laws of the Land, and
the practice of all Ordinaries (who execute their own Mandates by their own
Officers) as was never uttered, and printed with License by any Subject of
England before this time. T. C. indeed from his Press at Coventry, was wont to
send abroad much of this stuff in Martin Marprelates days.

And for the other, what meaning should he have to bind up the Letter, not (as
in reason he should) before, but after his whole Book; and to call it He turned
to a Printer.
Apocrypha; but that he would have us to take all his dreams for Canonical
Scripture? So that a man cannot imagine what evidence to provide, to give
satisfaction to so haughty a Companion, who Jura negat sibi nata, nihil non
arrogat armis.

Considering therefore the partiality of this Writer, who makes his own Case,
makes his own Evidence, makes his own Law, makes his own Authorities, and all
out of his own Conceit; and endeavors what he can, a fear la Causa, (as the
Spanish Advocates use to say) to give a fair Cause a foul face: I shall be bold
(as a neighboring Minister to the Scene of this business, and employed
amongst other of my profession, in some of the main passages) to set down
seriously and faithfully the whole carriage of the Business, the true Copy of
the Letter, the agitation this Cause has had with us below, not able to
penetrate into those Motions it received above in the Ordinaries breast, and
(for it has been a kind of walking Spirit) in the Lower house of Parliament.

The Vicar, a Chorister in the College, and bred up in Music, brought along
with him from his faculty, some odd Crochets into the Ministry. And having
too much favor from his Diocesan (who had never seen a tolerable Incumbent of
that Church before) began to fly upon his own Coat, and turned out of the Town
two grave and painful Preachers salaried by the Parish; whereof the one was
his own Cozen, and brought in by himself a little before. His next quarrel was
with the Alderman and his Brethren, about some matters of Malting and Tithing:
which (by the continued favor of the Ordinary) was ended to his advantage.
Then he fell upon this removing of the Communion Table from the upper part of
the Quire (where it was Aldermans Letter.
comely placed and had stood time out of mind) to the Altar-place, as he called
it. Mr. Wheately the Alderman questioning him thereupon, what Authority he had
from the Bishop, Chancellor, or any of his Surrogates, to do this alteration,
received this Answer, Aldermans Letter.
that his Authority was this, He had done it, and he would justify it. Upon
the which return Mr. Wheately commanded his Officers to remove the Table to the
place again; which they did accordingly, but not without striking, much heat,
and indiscretion, both of the one side and the other: The Vicar saying, he
cared not what they did with their old Tresle, for he would build him an Altar
of stone at his own charge, and fix it in the old Altar-place, and would never
Officiate upon any other: the rude people replying, he should set up no
dressers of stone in their Church, and they would find more hands to throw his
stones out, then he should do to bring them in; and would all in a body make a
journey to the Bishop, before they would endure it. Whereupon Mr. Wheateley the
Alderman presently wrote unto his Lordship of these passages; as also of his
light gestures in bowing at the name of JESUS, so as sometimes his Book fell
down, and once himself, to the derision of those that were not so well affected
to that religious Ceremony. And this was about June or July 1627. To this the
Bishop returned no answer in writing at that time, but sent a quick and sharp
Message by word of mouth; both to the Alderman and the Vicar; that they should
not presume, either the one or the other of them, to move or remove the holy
Table any more, otherwise then by special direction from him or his
Chancellor; and that it should remain where it did (if it stood within the
Quire) until his next passage to Lincoln by that Town; at what time he would
himself by view taken upon the place, accommodate the same according to the
Rubric and Canons. And that the Vicar should not presume to set up any thing
in Church or Chancell, in the interim. Which return did not altogether pacify
the People of the Town in their jelousies against their Vicar. But Mr.
Wheateley, a prudent and discreet man, afraid to offend the Bishop, (as one who
had been a singular friend and patron to that Town, when he was in place)
resolved to ride unto his Lordship. Which was no ^ooner known, but all they of
the Town that were able, would needs hire horses and ride along with him. The
Bishop when he saw such a company, enquired of them what the matter was? They
opened unto him all this difference, assured his Lordship they were every one
of them quiet and peaceable men, conformable in all things to the Kings Laws
Ecclesiastical, and willing to submit themselves to any Order, concerning the
situation of the holy Table, which his Lordship should appoint. Only they
represented unto his Lordship, that they were much scandalized with the putting
down of their Sermons, and this new intended erection of a stone-Altar upon the
neck thereof. And that, if his Lordship should appoint the Table to stand in
the upper end of the Quire, it was impossible that the 24th part of the Parish
should see or hear the Vicar officiating thereupon. Desiring his Lordship to
take it to his consideration, that the Vicar (whom his Lordship much favored)
was not always right in the Headpiece; and that they lived in the midst of
Recusants, their chief Governor being one of that profession himself; and
that those kind of men began already to jeere and deride this new Alteration.
The Bishop entering into a discourse of the indifferency of this circumstance in
its own nature, the Vicar came suddenly into the Hall, pale and staring in his
looks, and either with his journey, or some other affrights much disordered.
Which the Bishop observing, used him with all sweetness and lenity, bade him
not be troubled with any thing that had happened, for he would end this
difference to his contentment. The Vicar brake out into passion and tears, and
said they threatened to set his house on fire. The Bishop answered, that if they
did so, he would procure him another; and he hoped his Majesty would provide
for them such houses, as in that case they well deserved. The Alderman and his
Assistants utterly denied the knowledge of any such base intents, or menaces:
but submitted themselves wholly (as the Vicar likewise did) to the Bishops
decision. Then the Lord Bishop taking the Vicar aside, talked with him in
private a pretty while. What they discoursed of is not particularly known. His
Lordship was overheard somewhat earnest with the said Vicar, to tell him who
they were that set him on upon these alterations. And it is conceived
generally, that the Vicar told his Lordship all the truth, from point to point.
At the close, the Bishop said unto him, Well, Mr. () you shall sup with your
Neighbors in my Hall to night, upon such cold provision as my people can make
you: But I have sup't already upon that you tell me. And if all the Books I
have of that nature be able to do it, I will find some satisfaction for my self
and you in all these particulars, before I go this night to bed. And I will
provide a Letter, as written to you, Mr. Alderman, to show to your Brethren,
and some Notes to be delivered to the Divines of the Lecture at Gr. And both
these (if the fault be not in my servant) shall be ready by seven a clock in
the morning.

The Bishop sat up most of the night, and his Secretary with him in his Study.
What they there did is not distinctly known: But it was observed that the
Secretary came down for the Book of Martyrs which stood in the Hall, and
borrowed from the Parish Church Bishop Jewels works. In the Morning between
7. and 8. of the clock, was delivered to the Alderman this Letter sealed up.

Mr. Alderman, I do conceive, that your Communion Table, when it is not used,
should stand in the upper end of the Chancell, not Altar-wise, but Table-wise.
But when it is used, either in the time of the Communion, or when your Vicar
shall be pleased to read the later part of the Divine service thereupon, the
Churchwardens are to cause the Clerk or Sexton to remove it, either to the
place where it stood before, or any other place in Church or Chancel, where
your Minister may be most audibly heard of the whole Congregation. If both your
Churchwardens agree with the Vicar upon such a place, let it be disposed of
accordingly; and your Ministers are not to of ficiate upon it in any other
place. If your Churchwardens disagree with the Vicar, let them take the opinion
of that Surrogate of my Chancellor, who dwells next unto your Town of Grantham,
and he and any one of the Churchwardens shall upon view assign the place where
the Table shall stand in most convenience, when it is to be of ficiated on by
either of your Ministers. And so I desire you ^o intimate this unto the
Churchwardens, and do recommend me very heartily to you and all your
neighbors, and you and them in my prayers to Gods protection. And am

At the same time this Letter was delivered, there was delivered also by the
Secretary, a sheet of paper closed up, to be conveyed to the Divines of the
Lecture at Gr. upon their next meeting-day, with a Note of direction from the
said Secretary, that if they conceived these passages contained in that Paper
to be well and truly collected, and had not found in their readings and
observations the contrary, they should impart them to the Vicar of Gr. being
one of their Company, and improve them what they could to give him
satisfaction, not denying (if he so required) to let him take out a Copy of
the same for his own use, but not to divulge these papers any farther. But if
they found any mistakings in these Quotations, or had met with any other Canons
or Constitutions differing from these, or that they themselves varied in
opinion from the premises, they should forbear to impart them, but write
freely back again their said variance from these directions, together with
their reasons for the same, which should be very kindly and thankfully
accepted. Or to this effect. We met accordingly, perused these Papers, found
them digested in the former part into the fashion of a Letter, (yet directed to
no body) but not so figuredly and distinctly in the later. They were not
written with the Bishops own hand, with which we were all acquainted, nor
subscribed by any body, and they varied in some places in matter from this
printed Copy, but little in form. After perusal we did confer with the said
Vicar at two several days, especially about the Contents of this Paper. Who
undoubtedly, at that time, received full satisfaction thereby, and conceived
that he had lost nothing by this decision, having gained all the points,
excepting the Form of placing the Table; against the which he conceived the
Rubric of the Liturgy to be apparent, but his Lordships opinion to be very
indifferent, because he observed (as he said) the Table in his Lordships
private Chapel to be so placed, and furnished with Plate and Ornaments above
any he ever had seen in this Kingdom, the Chapel Royal only excepted. And so
this difference was at that time thus ended and composed, and the Vicar well
satisfied, and never out of his Lordships favor (whereof he reaped after this
much fruit and profit) to his very dying day. Now the true Copy of this Letter
or Notes (for without all question they were neither superscribed nor
subscribed) here ensues

Sir, with my very hearty commendations unto you, etc. When I spoke with you
last, I told you that the standing of your Communion Table, was unto me a thing
so indifferent, the unless offense and umbrages were taken by the Town against
it, I should never move it, or remove it. That which I did not then suspect, is
come to pass. Your Alderman, whom I have known these 17 or 18 years to be a
discreet and modest man, and far from any humor of Innovation, together with
the better sort of the Town, have complained against it. And I have without
taking any notice of your act, or touching in one syllable upon your
reputation, appointed the Churchwardens, whom in my opinion it principally does
concern, under the Diocesan and by his directions, to settle it for the time:
as you may see by this Copy enclosed. Now for your own satisfaction, and my
poor advice for the future, I have written unto you somewhat more at large
then I use to express my self in this kind. I do therefore (to deal plainly)
like many things well, and disallow of some things in your carriage of this
business. It is well done that you affect decency and comelines in the
officiating of Gods divine service, that you president your self with the
Forms in his Majesty's Chapels and the Quires of Cathedral Churches, (if your
Quire, as those others, could contain your whole congregation) that you do the
reverence appointed by the Canons to that blessed name of JESUS, so it be done
humbly and not affectedly, to procure the devotion and not move the derision of
your Parishioners, who are not it seems all of a piece) and that you do not
maintain it Rationibus non cogentibus, and so spoil a good cause with bad
arguments. These things I do my self allow and practice. But that you should
say you will upon your own cost build an Altar of Stone at the upper end of
your Quire; That your Table ought to stand Altar-wise; That the fixing thereof
in the Quire is so Canonical, that it ought not to be removed (upon any
occasion) to the body of the Church, I conceive to be in you so many mistakings.

For the first; If you should erect any such Altar, (which I know you will not)
your discretion (I fear me) would prove the only Holocaust to be sacrificed on
the same. For you have subscribed when you came to your place, that that other
Oblation, which the Papists were wont to offer upon these Altars, is a
Blasphemous figment and pernicious Imposture. In the 31th Artic. And also, that
we in the Church of England must take heed lest our Communion of a Memory be
made a Sacrifice. In the 1. Homily upon the Sacrament. And it is not the Vicar,
but the Churchwardens that are to provide Vtensils for the Communion, and that
not an Altar, but a fair joined Table. Canons of the Convocation 1571. page
18. And that the Altars were removed by Law, and Tables placed in their stead
in all, or the most Churches of England, appears by the Queens Injunctions
1559 related unto and so confirmed in that point by our Canons still in force.
Canon 82. And therefore I know you will not build any such Altar, which Vicars
were never enabled to set up, but were once allowed (with others) to pull down.
Injunct. 1 mo Elis. For Tables in the Church.

For the second point; That your Communion Table is to stand Altar-wise; if you
mean, in that upper place of the Chancell, where the Altar stood, I think
somewhat may be said for that, because the Injunctions 1559 did so place it.
And I conceive it to be the most decent situation when it is not used, and for
use too, where the Quire is mounted up by steps, and open, so as he that
officiates, may be seen and heard of all the Congregation. Such an one, I am
informed, your Chancell is not. But if you mean by Altar-wise, that the Table
should stand along close by the wall, so as you beforced to officiate at the
one end thereof (as you may have observed in great men's Chappells) I do not
believe that ever the Communion-tables were (otherwise then by casualty) so
placed in countrey-churches. For besides that the Countrey-people, without some
directions beforehand from their superiors, would (as they told you to your
face) suppose them Dressers rather then Tables. And that Queen Elisabeths
Commissioners for causes ecclesiastical directed, that the Tables should
stand, not where the Altar, but where the steps to the Altar formerly stood.
Orders 1561. The Minister appointed to read the Communion, which you (out of
the Books of Fast in 1mo of the King) are pleased to call Second service, is
directed to read the Commandments, not at the End, but at the North-side of the
Table, which implies the End to be placed toward the East great window.
Rubric before the Communion. Nor was this a new direction in the Queens time
only; but practiced in K. Edwards reign. For in the plot of our Liturgy sent
by Mr Knox and whittingham to Mr Calvin, in the reign of Q. Mary, it is said,
that the Minister must stand at the North-side of the Table. Troubles at
Frankford, p. 30. And so in K. Edwards Liturgies, the Ministers standing in the
Midst of the Altar, 1549. is turned to his standing at the North-side of the
Table, 1552. And this last Liturgy was revived by Parliament 1o Elis. c. 2.
And I believe it is so used at this day in most places of England. What you saw
in Chappells or Cathedral Churches, is not the point now in Question, but how
the Tables are appointed to be placed in Parish-churches. In some of these
Chapels and Cathedralls, the Altars may be still standing, for ought I know;
or, to make use of their Covers, Fronts and other Ornaments, Tables may be
placed in their room, of the same length and fashion the Altars were of. We
know the Altars stand still in the Lutherane Churches. And the Apology for the
Augustane Confession, Artic. 11. does allow it. The Altars stood a year or two
in the reign of King Edward, as appears by the Liturgy printed 1549. And it
seems the Queen and her Counsel were content they should stand, as we may
guess by the Injunctions, 1559. But how is this to be understood? The
Sacrifice of the Mass abolished (for which Sacrifice only Altars were
erected) these (call them what you please) are no more Altars, but Tables of
Stone or Timber. And so was it alleged 24. Novem. 4o Edv. 6. 1550. Sublato
enim relativo formal, manet absolutum et materiale tantum. And so may be well
used in Kings and Bishops houses, where there are no people so void of
Instruction as to be scandalized. For upon the Orders of breaking down Altars,
1550. all Dioceses, as well as that of London, did agree upon receiving Tables,
but not so soon upon the form and fashion of their Tables. Act. and Monum. page
1212. Beside that, in the old Testament one and the same Thing, is termed an
Altar and a Table. An Altar, in respect of what is there offered unto God; and
a Table, in respect of what is thence participated by men, as for example, by
the Priests. So have you Gods Altar the very same with Gods Table, in Mal. 1.
7. The place is worth the marking: For it answers that merry Objection out of
Heb. 13. 10. which you made to some of your fellow Ministers, and one Dr.
Morgan before you, to Peter Martyr, in a disputation at Oxford. We have no
Altar in regard of an Oblation; but we have an Altar, that is, a Table, in
regard of a participation and Communion there granted unto us. The proper use
of an Altar is to sacrifice upon, the proper use of a Table is to eat upon,
Reasons, etc. 1550. vide Act. and Monum. page 1211. And because a Communion is
an Action most proper for a Table, as an Oblation is for an Altar; therefore
the Church in her Liturgy and Canons calling the same a Table only, do not
you now, under the Reformation, call it an Altar. In King Edwards Liturgy of
1549 it is almost every where; but in that of 1552, it is no where called an
Altar, but The Lords Board. Why? Because the people being scandalized herewith
(in Countrey-churches) first it seems beat them down de facto; then the supreme
Magistrate (as here the King) by the advice of Archbishop Cranmer and the rest
of his Counsel, did Anno 1550 by a kind of Law put them down de jure. 4o Edv.
6. November. 24. And setting these Tables in their rooms, took away from us, the
Children of this Church and Commonwealth, both the Name and the Nature of
those former Altars. As you may see Injunct. 1559. referring to that Order of
King Edw. and his Counsel, mentioned Act. and Monum. page 1211. And I hope you
have more learning, then to conceive The Lords Table to be a new Name, and so
to be ashamed of the Word. For, besides that Christ himself instituted this
Sacrament upon a Table, and not an Altar; (as Archbishop Cranmer and others
observe, Act. and Monum. page 1211.) it is in the Christian Church, at the
least 200 years more ancient, then the name of an Altar in that sense; as you
may see most learnedly proved (beside what we learn out of S. Paul) out of
Origin, and Arnobius, if you do but read a Book that is in your Church, Jewel
against Harding, of private Mass, Artic. 3. page 145. And whether this name of
Altar crept into the Church, in a kind of complying in phrase with the people
of the Jews, as I have read in Chemnitius, Gerardus and other sound
Protestants; (yet such as suffer Altars to stand;) or that it proceeded from
those Oblations made upon the Communion-tables for the use of the Priest and
the poor, whereof we read in Justine Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian and other
ancient writers; or because of our Sacrifice of praise and Thanksgiving, as
Archbishop Cranmer and others thought, Act. and Monum. page 1211. the name
being now so many years abolished in this Church, it is fitter in my
judgment, that your Altar (if you will needs so call it) should according to
the Canons stand Table-wise, then your Table, to trouble the poor Town of Gr.
should be erected Altar-wise.

Lastly, that your Table should stand in the higher part of the Chancell, you
have my assent in opinion already: And so was it appointed to stand, out of the
Communion. Orders by the Commiss. for causes ecclesiastical, 1561. But that it
should be there fixed, is so far from being the only Canonical way, that it
is directly against the Canon. For what is the Rubric of the Church, but a
Canon? And the Rubric says, It shall stand in the Body of the Church, or in
the Chancell, where Morning prayer and Evening prayer be appointed to be said.
If therefore Morning prayer and Evening prayer be appointed to be said in the
Body of the Church, (as in most Countrey-churches we see it is) where shall the
Table stand in that Church most Canonically? And so is the Table made
removeable, when the Communion is to be celebrated, to such a place, as the
Minister may be most conveniently heard by the Communicants; by Qu. Elis.
Injunct. 1559. And so says the Canon in force, that in the time of the
Communion, the Table shall be placed in so good sort within the Church or
Chancell, as thereby the Minister may be most conveniently heard, etc. Canon
82. Now judge you, whether this Table (which like Daedalus his Engines moves
and removes from place to place, and that by the inward wheels of the Church
Canons) be fitly resembled by you to an Altar that stirs not an ynch, and
supposed to be so resembled most Canonically. And if you desire to know out of
Eusebius, St Augustine, Durandus, and the fifth Council of Constantinople, how
long Communion-tables have stood in the midst of Churches, read a Book which
you are bound to read, and you shall be satisfied, Jewel against Harding: Of
private Mass, Artic. 3. page 145. The sum of all is this.

1. You may not erect an Altar, where the Canons admit only a Communion Table.

2. This Table (without some new Canon) is not to stand Altar-wise, and you at
the North-end thereof, but Table-wise, and you must officiate on the North-side
of the same, by the Liturgy.

3. This Table ought to be laid up (decently covered) in the Chancell only, as
I suppose; but ought not to be officiated upon, either in your first or second
service (as you distinguish it) but in that place of Church or Chancell, where
you may be most conveniently seen and heard of all.

4. Though peradventure you be (with him in Tacitus) Master of your own, yet
are you not of other men's Ears, and therefore your Parishioners must be Judges
of your Audiblenes in this case, and upon complaint to the Ordinary, must be
relieved.

5. Lastly, whether side soever ( you or your Parish) shall first yield unto
the other in these needless controversies, shall remain in my poor judgment,
the more discreet, grave, and learned of the two. And by that time you have
gained some more experience in the Cure of Souls, you shall find no such
Ceremony to Christian charity. Which I recommend unto you, and am ever, etc.

Now if you desire to know why I have been so tedious in stating thus the
Cause, with all the Circumstances thereof, I answer with the Poet, that it is
to ease you, if you please, of further Tediousness:

Mart. Epigr. lib. 14. 4 poph. 2.
Vi, si malueris, lemmata sola legas; That if you be so disposed, you may end
the Book with this first Chapter. For the true stating is the concluding of the
Question we have in hand. I dare here appeal without any further defense to
any indifferent Reader, what notorious want of Learning, what disaffection to
the Church, what malice to Cathedrals, what inclination to Puritanisme, what
approving of sedition, what popular affectation, this Ion. 4. 10.
filia unius noctis, this paper huddled up (upon this occasion) in one night,
can argue either in the Writer (whosoever he be) or in us that were the
approvers of the same. And particularly I appeal to you, that have read the
Libell written against it, whether it has any way answered your expectation,
or whether

( Phaedr. Aug. Libertus. Fab. Aesop. lib. 4.
Carbonem, ut ajunt, pro the sauro invenistis) this Ecclesiastic 8. 10.
Coal of a sinner does not rather appear to have been fetched from a Smiths
forge, then a sacred Altar.

CHAP. II.
Of the Regal power in ordayning, publishing, and changing Ceremonies, as also
in all Causes Ecclesiastical. And whether that power was ever used in settling
the Communion Table in form of an Altar.

IF Alexander was afraid to commit the proportion of his body to every ordinary
statuary, requiring that none but a (...). Plutarch. de fortuna Alexand* Orat.
2.
Lysippus should effigiate the same, and that Apelles himself could never set
forth the outward beauty of his face, but (...). Plutarch. in Alexandro.
slubbered and far short of the native vivacity; how careful ought
Sovereign Princes to be, not to permit their Regal power and prerogative (the
very visage of their persons, and majesty of their visage) to be profaned by
every Bungler, and to be slubbered up (as here it is) with a base Coal, upon
the walls of this ugly From page 58. to the end of the Book.
Pamphlet. Thus it is, when Coblars will be stretching up their Pia-maters
above their own Shop-lasts, and Chaplains (to show how ready they are, at the
very first call, to be dealing in matters of State) will be puddling in studies
they do not understand. Dr Coal has here by his exquisite knowledge in the
Can-none and Common (or trivial) law, committed a kind of merry treason, in
presuming to give a man a call to be a Page 61. Judge Ployden.
Judge, who died but an Reports de Edmund Plowden un Apprentise de le Common
Ley.
Apprentice at the Law* (Which was more then the L. Keeper of the great Seal,
without his Majesty's license, durst have done.) And mends it by and by with a
kind of sacrilege, by taking away from a noble Gentleman, his name given him
at the Font in Page 62. Sir Robert Cook.
Baptism. Whereas had this doughty Doctor left his Littleton, and kept him to
his Accidence, he could not have forgotten that Edvardus was his proper name.

Yea, but though he fails in names, he hits in matter, and shows you deep
Mysteries of State; how this question of Ceremonies does relate unto the King;
and that the Statute of 1o Elis. cap. 2. (which by long search and study he
found in the very first leaf of his Common prayer Book) was not a power
personal to the Queen only, but to be continued unto her Successors; and
that the Kings most excellent Majesty may safely and without any danger at all,
command the Table to stand (as the Doctor would have it) and to be rayl'd
about. These are high matters indeed, if they be well proved.

That they shall be to a hair. For this old Lawyer, and new-created Judge, does
tell us, that if a Fee-simple be vested in me, and I pass it unto the King,
the Fee-simple does pass without these words, SUCCESSORS, and HEIRS; as it
does to a Major, a Bishop, or any other meaner Corporation, as you have it Cook
on Littleton. fol 9. page 2. at the end
there at large. Well said Doctor; His Majesty is much beholding unto you, and
those about him, to take special care of your speedy preferment. You have not
in most of your scribble given a Bishop any more prerogative then to the Vicar,
nor the King in this Allegation, then to the Alderman of Grantham. Peradventure
not so much. For by perusal of your Author, I find the Alderman ranged in
the third place, but the King and the Bishop jumbled up together (as in a bag
after Chesseplay) and so thrown into the fourth place. But I pray you good
Doctor, where upon earth was this power of ordering matters ecclesiastical
vested, before it passed away, as a piece of land held in Fee-simple, unto his
Majesty by the Statute of Imo Elis. cap. 2?

Quis est tam potens cum tanto munere hoc? Was it in the Pope? in the people?
in the Clergy? in the Convocation? in the Parliament? or (peradventure) was it
in Abeyance? Away Animal; I tell thee, The Power in matters ecclesiastical is
such a Fee-simple, as was vested in none but God himself, before it came (by
his and his only donation) to be vested in the King. And being vested in the
King, it cannot by any power whatsoever (no not by his Translat. of the Orat.
de ver. Obed. 1555. shows this to have been the opinion of Steph. Gardener.
own) be divested from him. The donour in this Feoffment is God, and God only;
the Deed, a Prescription time out of mind in the Law of nature, declared more
especially and at large by that Statute Law, which we call the Word of GOD. So
that, Doctor, you deserve but a very simple Fee, for your impertinent example
of this Fee-simple. But what do you merit for your next prank? where you say
(most ignorantly and most derogatorily to his Majesty's right and just
prerogative) that that Statute of 1o Elis. c. 2. was a Confirmative of the old
Law? What? and was it not good, until it had passed the upper and lower house
of Parliament? was not God able enough; the King, his bright Image upon earth,
capable enough; the Deed of Nature and Scripture strong enough; but that (like
a Bishops Concurrent Lease) it must receive a Confirmation in that great
Chapter? Your De jure Regis ecclesiastico, page 8. Non novam introduxit, sed
antiquam declaravit.
Author (a deep learned man in his faculty) has it otherwise, and rightly. It
was resolved by the Judges, that the said Act of the first year of the late
Queen, concerning Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, was not a statute introductory
of a New Law, but declaratory of the Old. Parliaments are not called to
confirm, but to affirm and declare the Laws of God. Weak and doubtful Titles
are to be confirmed: such clear and indubitate Rights as his Majesty has to
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, are only averred and declared by Acts of
Parliament. And all declarations of this kind, are (as the stuff whereof they
are made) to last forever, and no Jonas Gourds to serve a turn or two and so
expire, as those p. 61. 1. Elis. c. 16. 14. El. c. 1. 14. El. c. 2. 23. El. c.
2.
Probationers did, which (peradventure) some Justice his Clerk might tell you
of. Yea, but your meaning is, that this Jurisdiction was intruth, or of right
ought to be by the ancient Laws of the Realm, parcel of the Kings
Jurisdiction, and united to the Crown Imperial. Still you are short, and
write nothing like a Divine. I tell you man, It is the Kings right by the
ancient Law of God, and a main parcel of the Kings jurisdiction, although the
Laws of the Realm had never touched upon it.

Translate. 1553. Latin, 1535. Qua in re nihil novi latum est; tantum
significantiore vocabulo apposito competentem (...) jure divino ^otestatem
exprimi clarius volu^runt.
Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, in his Oration of true Obedience,
says, that by the Parliaments calling of King Henry the Eighth, Head of the
Church, there is no new invented matter wrought; only their will was, to have
the power pertaining to a Prince by Gods Law, to be the more clearly expressed
with this sounding and Emphaticall Compellation. So likewise in that Book set
forth by the King and Convocation, called The Institution of a Christian man,
in the Chapter of the Sacrament of Orders, it is thus written: The Institution
of a Christian man, printed 1537.
Unto Christian Kings and Princes of right and by Gods Commandment belongs
specially and principally to conserve and maintain the true doctrine of Christ,
and all such as be true Preachers and setters forth thereof, and to abolish all
abuses, heresies, and Idolatries, etc. And De absoluto Regis imperio. p. 19. Ad
eas licet Episcopi populum ^ortar^et possint et debeant, l^gis tan^n vim habere
sine supremi reipublicae Magistratus authoritate, plane non dixerim.
John Beckinsan, speaking of these particulars in hand, to wit, Ceremonies and
Traditions not commanded by God, but recommended by Clergymen to stir up the
people to piety and devotion, says, That however they mayor ought to be
maintained by the Bishops, yet can they not be established as a Law, otherwise
then by the Authority of the supreme Magistrate. And these are all Papists, not
Protestants, who may be suspected to collogue with their Princes.

Nor is this Right united to the Crown of England only, as this Scribbler
seems to conceive, but to all other Christian Crowns, and challenged by all
Christian Princes accordingly. For the Roman Empire, one of the former Qui^
unquam im^robavir Iustiniani sactum, qui leges edidit de summa Trivtate, and de
fide Catholica, and de Ep scopis? Steph. Winton, Orat. p. 19. ^od, lust^ni
(...) Tom. 2. lib. 1. i^rul. 1.
Authors does instance in Justinian, that with the approbation of all the
world, he set forth those Laws of the most blessed Trinity, the Catholic
Faith, of Bishops, Clergymen, here^icks, and the like. For the most ancient
Kingdoms of Castile, Leon, Toledo, and others of Spain, famous is that great
work of the seven Partidas or Sections of Laws, advanced by Ferdinando the
third, otherwise called the Saint, (in whose long reign of 35 years, there was
no touch of Regnavit annis 35; in quibus nec ^am^s, nec p^stis fuit in regno
suo. Lopez. Gloss. in Prolog. part. 1.
hunger or contagion) but finished and completed by his Son Alfonso the
tenth; ^n la prima Partida del fablamos de to^as las cosas, que pertenescen a
la se Catholica, que face al ome conocer a Dios por cre^ncia. Prol. d^l Rey
Alonso, fol. 4. Col. 2. Partid. 1. In quibus Partitis sacratissimae leges, non
solum ad causas hominum decidendas, sed ad divinum cultum dirigendum
augendumque continentur. H^sp^^. Illustrat. Tom. 1. Roderici Santij Histor.
Hipan. part. 4. cap. 2. Et fue acabado d^ste que fue commencado a siete annos
complidos. Prolog. del Alonso. p. 4.
in the first Partida or Section whereof, he speaks wholly of matters pertaining
to the Catholic faith, which directs a man to know God, by way of credence or
belief. Nor were those Volumes so composed and collected in those seven years
employed in that service, to be afterward disputed of in Schools and
Universities only, but for the Part decision de las causas, y buena
Governacion de la Iusticia destos Reynos. K. Philips Proclam. (...) the
Partidas, Sect. 7. 1555.
decision of Causes, and the doing of justice, in all those Kingdoms and
Dominions. And how many Kings before this had made Laws to the same effect in
those Countries, God knows. For these Partidas were for the most part, but a
Leges Hispaniarum quas vocant Partitas in volumen redegit. Francise. Taraph. de
Regib. Hisp. in Alf. 10. Hisp. illustr. Tom. ^. Colligendarum cura injuncta
earum quas Partitas vulgo vocant. Io. Marian. de Reb^s Hisp. lib. 13. cap. 8.
Collection of the ancient Laws. And no otherwise have these matters been
carried in the Kingdom of France. For they ever held their Kings, if not for
the Sinon pour (...) de leur (...) pour le (...) comme (...) l'une de
meilleures et plus saines parties d'ice^^^. Qui est la cause, que l' ou^ertu^e,
etc. Pasq. Rech. l. 3. c. 30.
Head of their Church, yet surely for the principal and most sound member
thereof. Which is the reason, that the opening or Overture of their most
ancient Councels under the first and second (that is the Merovingian and
Caroline) line, was ever by the power and authority, and sometimes the
presidencie of their Kings and Princes. And my Author quarrels very much the
Gratian. Decre part. 2. Cause. 23. q 1. 5. D^st. ^rincipes.
Monk Gratian, for attributing to Isidore of Spain, rather then to a National
Council. Pa^is. 6. l. 2. c 2 sub Lu^ovico Pip. Anno Dom. 829. Council. Antiq.
Sirmondi. Tom. 2. p. 526.
Council of France, held in the year 829, that brave and excellent saying,
Principes seculi nonnunquam intra Ecclesiam potestatis adeptae culmina tenent,
ut per eandem potestatem disciplinam ecclesiasticam muniant. God sometimes
imparts secular power to Princes that live in the bosom of the Church, that
they might employ this power in preserving ecclesiastical discipline. Saepe
per regnum terrenum coeleste regnum proficit. The Kingdom of Heaven does many
times take growth and increase from these Kingdoms upon Earth. Cognoscant
principes seculi se Deo debere rationem propter Ecclesiam quam a Deo tuendam
accipiunt. And therefore the Great ones of the world must know, that God will
one day call them to an account for his Church, so tenderly recommended unto
them. It is true indeed, that these words are found in the sixth Council of
Paris, lib. 2. c. 2. But it is as true, that in my Book Isidore is set down in
the Margent as ready to own them. And both these will stand well enough;
considering that Isidore lived Anno 610. Helvicus. 626. Palmerius.
Isidore, Scholar to Gregory the Great, did flourish very near 200 years
before the Era of that Council; and that that Council, by incorporating of
these words unto the substance of their Canons, does put a greater luster and
authority upon them, as the French Et de plus grande authorite, en la
recognoissant d' une Synod. Pasq. ibid.
Antiquary well observes. And according to this doctrine, are all those
Capitulars or mixed Laws, for matters of Church and Commonwealth, of Charles
the Great, Ludovicus Pius, Lewis the Gross, Pipine, and others, gathered by In
Codice Leg. Antiquar. p. 827.
Lindenbrogius: And a world of other Capitula^s of the same nature,
intermingled with the Canons of the French Edita a Sirmondo 3 volum.
Counsels, in the late edition of them by Sirmond the Jesuit. In a word, the
very pure Acts and Constitutions of the Synods themselves, were in those former
times no further Les Constitutions Consiliaires n' avoient lieu, si non de tant
et en tant qu'elles estoient confirmees par nos Roys et prises aux Archifs de
leur Palais. Pasq. Rech. l. 3. c. 30. p. 273.
valid and binding, then as they were confirmed by the Kings of France, and
entered duly upon the Records of their Palais or Westminster Hall. And yet
under favor, all Crowns Imperial must give place in regard of this one flower
of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, to the Crown of Great Britannie. For as our
Prince is recorded to be the This Island has the glory to be graced with the
first Christian King that ever reigned in the wo^ld, which was Lucius. Speed in
his 6. Book, cap. 9. This first Christian King of the world. Eccles. History of
Great Britain, Age 2. cap. 6. Sub Lucio Britannia omnium provinciarum prima
publicitus Christi nomen recepit. Anton. Sabel. lib. 5. Ennead. 7.
first Christian King, so is he intimated to be the first that ever exercised
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, being directed by Eleutherius the Pope to fetch
his Laws by the advice of his Counsel, from the Habetis penes vos vtramque
paginam: ex illis (Dei gratia) per consilium regni vestri sum legem* Divisos
d^bes in unum ad concordiam et p^cem, et ad fidem et legem Christi, et ad
sanctam ecclesiam congregare. Epist. Eleutherijm. s. in Biblioth. Cotton. In
Archivis Land. apud Stow, Anno 189 In K. Edwards Laws. Archa^onom-Lambardi,
sol. 131. Antiquit Brita^^. p. 5. Jewel against Harding, fol 119. Act. and
Mon. 1. part. page 107, etc.
Book of God, the old and new Testament, wherewith to reclaim his subjects to
the Faith and Law of Christ, and to the holy Church. And if Father 3 Convers.
part 1. c. 4.
Parsons shall damn this Letter, as foisted, and another obscure Eccles. Hist.
of great Brit. Age 2. c. 20.
Papist suspect it to be corrupted, let the Reader content himself with these
proofs in the Margent of a far more authentical averment and authority. Sure
I am, that (according to this advice of Ele^therius) the British, Saxon,
Danish, and first Norman Kings have governed their Churches and Churchmen by
Capitulars and mixed Digests, composed (as it were) of Common and Canon Law,
and promulged with the advice of the Counsel of the Kingdom; as we may see in
those particulars set forth by In his excellent book called Archaionomia per
totum.
Mr. Lambard, In his Analect. Anglo-brit. l. 2. c. 3. and lib. 2. c. 6. 7. etc.
Mr Seldom, History of Cambria, p. 59. in Howell Dha.
D. Powell, and others. And I do not believe there can be showed any
Ecclesiastical Canons for the Government of the Church of England, until long
after the Conquest, which were not either originally promulged, or afterward
approved and allowed by either the Monarch, or some King of the Heptarchy,
sitting and directing in the National or Provincial Synod. For all the
Collections that Lindwood comments upon, are (as Theophrast. (...).
Theophrastus speaks) (...) but rough and rugged money of a more fresh and
later coinage. And yet in those usurping times, I have seen a Transcript of a
In M. s. Chronic. Abbatiae de Bello.
Record Anno 1157. 3o Henr. 2. wherein, when the B. of Chichester opposed some
late Canons against the Kings Exemption of the Abbey of Battles from the
Episcopal Jurisdiction, it is said, that the King being angry and much moved
therewith, should reply, Tu pro Papae authoritate ab hominibus concessa, contra
dignitatum Regalium authoritates mihi a Deo concessas, calliditate arguta niti
praecogitas? Do you, Sr, go about by subtilties of wit to oppose the Popes
authority, which is but the favor or connivence of men, against the authority
of my Regal dignities, being the Charters and donations of God himself? And
thereupon requires reason and justice against the Bishop for this foul
insolency. And it has been always as the practice, so the doctrine of this
Kingdom, that both in every part, and in the whole, Post-nati, page 106.
Laws do not make Kings, but Kings, Laws; which they alter and change from time
to time, as they see occasion, for the good of themselves and their Subjects.
And to maintain that Kings have any part of their Authority by any positive Law
of Nations (as this Page 62.
Scribbler speaks of a Jurisdiction, which either is or ought to be in the
Crown by the ancient Laws of the Realm, and is confirmed by 1o Elis. c. 1.) is
accounted by that It was never taught, but either by Traitors, (is in Spencers
Bill in Edward the 2ds time) or by treasonable Papists, (as Harding in the
Confutation of the Apology) that Kings have their authority by the positive
Law. Post. nati, page 99.
great personage an assertion of a treasonable nature. But when Sr Edward Coke,
or any other of our reverend Sages of the Law, do speak of the ancient Laws of
the Realm, by which this Right in ecclesiastical causes becomes a parcel of
the Kings jurisdiction, and united to his Imperial Crown, they do not mean any
positive or Statute Law, which creates him such a Right, as if a man should
bestow a new Fee-simple upon the Crown (as this Scribbler instanceth) or any
Law which declares any such Right created by any former Law; but the continual
practice, Judgments, Sentences, or (as this very Iurisdictio intra hoc regnum
exercita, Cawdreys Case, p. 8.
Report calls it) Exercise of the ancient Laws of the Realm: which declares
and demonstrateth by the effect, that the Kings of England have had these
several flowers of ecclesiastical Jurisdiction stuck in their Imperial
Garlands by the finger of Almighty God, from the very beginning of the
Christian Monarchy within this Island. For so our Post-nati, page 54.
Sententiae Iudicum, and Responsa prudentum, have been termed, time out of
mind, a main and principal part of the Common Law of England. And therefore
having cleared this point at large, I shall easily yield to Dr Coal, that the
Kings Majesty may command a greater matter of this nature, then that the holy
Table should be placed where the Altar stood, and be railed about for the
greater decency; and that, although the Statute of 1o Elis. c. 1. had never
been in rerum natura. But how does the Dr make it appear, that his most
excellent Majesty has commanded any such matter? or that there is (as he
avows) any public Order for the same? And this he must do by Proof, Reason,
Authority, nay Demonstrations; as one that can endure no modesty of assertion,
P. 28. and 18. A (...). Thucyd. lib. 1. And Aristotle gives us many presidents
of these modest expressions. (...), etc. (...). Eth. 1. c. 1. See there the
difference in Eustratius between (...).
I think, I conceive, I have heard, I believe, but jeeres at them all. I
warrant you, he shall make it cock-sure with three Apodicticall Demonstrations.

I Page 1. p. 27 and page 51. 52.
It is so in his Majesty's Chapel, where the ancient Orders of the Church of
England have been best preserved, and without the which (perhaps) we had before
this been at a loss amongst our selves for the whole form and fashion of
Divine service. The Chapel of the King being the best interpreter of the Law
which himself enacted; wherein the Communion Table has so stood, as now it
does, sithence the beginning of Queen Elisabeth, what time that Rubric in the
Common prayer book was confirmed and ratified. For thus he uses to double and
treble his files throughout all his Pamphlet, that he may make himself a Body
and Gross (of words at least) to skarre crows withal.

I do confess, that that most sacred Chapel, but especially the Saint of
that Chapel, may for his pletie and true devotion be a moving precedent and
breathing example, not only for the Laity and meaner sort of the Clergy, but
even for the gravest of all the Prelacie, to follow and imitate. And long may
this Relation continue between that Type and Prototype of Majesty. Long may he
serve God, and God preserve him, and this Church and State through and by him.
But yet every Page 28.
Parish Church is not bound to imitate, in all outward Circumstances, the
pattern and form and outward embellishment and adorning of the Royal Chapel.
And that for these Reasons.

1. Summa Sylvestri, verbo Obed. p. 208* La razon es, por que lo que tiene el
superior praecisamente en la mente yen la voluntad, nose ordena al subdito y
inferior, a manera de praecepto, ni es declaracion de sua voluntad. Luego, en
tal caso no ay obligacion de obedecer. Pedro de Ledesma 2. part de la Suma.
tractad. 15. c. 1.
An Inferior is bound to yield obedience to the outward only, and not to the
inward Motion of the mind in his Superior. For what the Prince keeps inwardly
unto himself in his Will and Understanding, has no reference to the Subject by
way of Precept, until it break forth ad motum exteriorem, as the Schoolmen
call it, to some outward overture and declaration relating to the Subject. How
the King shall adorn and set out his Chapel Royal, is a matter imminent and
left to his own Princely wisdom and understanding. It is a sin against many
precepts to whisper or doubt, but that he does it wisely and religiously. But
how his Laws and Canons require us to adorn our Churches, that is the outward
and exterior moving of his Princely mind, which the Schoolmen make the only
Cynosure of our Obedience. It is not therefore his Majesty's Chapel, but his
Laws, Rubricks, Canons and Proclamations, that we are to follow in these
Outward Ceremonies. And this I shall clear by an instance, which we should
have heard before from the Doctor, but that (peradventure) he knew it not. At.
Q. Elisabeths first coming to the Crown, a Speed. p. 858. Stow, 634.
Proclamation indeed was set forth, forbidding any man to alter any Ceremonies,
but according to the Rites of her own Chapel, Then I confess unto you, for
that (...), and instant of time, the Chapel, and the Chapel only was the
Rubric, and the Pole-starre we were to sail by in our obedience. But this
direction was not intended to be long-lived; it was but a Bush that brave Lady
got under to pass over a sudden shower, Cambd. Elis. page 23.
donec de Religionis cultu ex authoritate Barliamentaria statueretur, until the
Parliament might bring to the World that Statute of Primo, whereof we spoke so
much before. As therefore that wise Princess made shift for a time with her
Sisters Post-nati, p. 73.
Seal, so did she with her For they were the entire Ceremonies of the Mass:
but that the Lords prayer, Creed and Letany was in English, as was usual in
her Fathers time. Cambd. Elis. p. 23. Stow. p. 614. Letany with Suffrage
printed 16. of June. 1544.
Ceremonies; but forsook them both, as soon as she could be otherwise provided.
So as now we are no longer to president our selves in this kind by the
Chapel, but by the Liturgy of Queen Elisabeth.

2. I hope I shall ever live and die in an awful and reverent opinion of that
sacred Oratory, the vivest resemblance I know upon the Earth of that Harmony of
the Cherubims we look for in Heaven. Yet do I trust it will be no offense to
any that bears equal devotion to that sacred place, if I pluck out this
Cumane creature (who like a fawning Sy^ophant thinks to take Sanctuary in that
holy ground) from the shadow and shelter of the Royal Chapel. Where did the
man ever hear of any Chapel in the Christian world that gave form and
fashion of Divine Service to whole Provinces? To what use serve our grave and
worthy Metropolitanes, our Bishops, our Convocation-house, our Parliaments, our
Liturgies hedged in and compassed with so many Laws, Rubricks, Proclamations
and Conferences, if we had been long before this at a loss in England for the
whole form and fashion of Divine Service, but for one Dean and so many
Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel? Here is a riddle indeed!

Sphinx Philosoph.
Matter me genuit, qu^e eadem mox gignitur ex me. I have heard often of a
Mother Church, but now behold a Mother-chappell! Ad Basilicae principis
Apostolorum publicari and affigi -- Piu^ Quintus, prooem. ante Missal.
When Pius Quintus set forth his new Missall, he caused it to be proclaimed
claimed at S. Peter's Church, and not at the sacred Chapel. Council. Gerun^. in
Spanish en Girona, Anno 517. can. 1. Que enquanto a la celebration de los
officios ecclesiasticos, etc. Francisco de Padilla. Histor. Eccles. de Esp.
^art. 2. Centur. 6. c. 9. It is cited by Gratian 3. part. d. ^. de Consecr.
Burch. l. 3. c. 66. Ivo part. 3. c. 68. Beat. Rhenanus Praesat. in Miss.
Chrysostom. And is a current direction in all Authors.
In the name of God let the same Offices be said in all the Provinces, as are
said in the Metropoliticall Church: as well for the order of the Service, the
Psalmodie, the Canon, as the use and custom of the Ministration, was the old
rule of the ancient Fathers. I have read of great diversity heretofore in
saying and singing in Churches within this Realm; of the Uses of Preface before
the Common prayer book.
Salisbury, of Hereford, of Bangor, of York, of Lincoln; but never until now
of the Use of the Chapel. I have read also of far more ancient Offices then
any of all these, the In a very old and ancient Mis. at Sr. R. Cottons.
Gallicane Course, the Scottish Course, the Roman Course, the Eastern Course,
the Course of S. Ambrose, and the Course of S. Benedict, all at once used in
several parts of this Island: but never read I of any ordering or directing
Course from his Majesty's Chapel until now.

I pray you, good Sir, how were the divine Services held up in Christendom for
the first 500 years, in all which time (if we may believe one of our best Sr
H. Spilm. verbo Capella.
Antiquaries,) we shall hardly meet with the name of a Chapel? I Will put you a
merry Case. Most of our Strabo, de rebus Ecclesiast. c. 31. A Capa B. Martini,
quam Reges Francorum, ob adjutoriu^ victoriae, in praeiijs solebant secum
habere. Gemma Anim de antiq. ritu Miss. l. 1 c. 128. Durand. Rational. divin.
l. 2. c. 10. Beat. Rhe^. Praefat. in Miss. Chrysostom. Joseph. Vicecomes
Observat, Ecclesiast. vol. 3. l. 2. c. 28. Ludovici pri^^ Amul^tum.
Liturgicall Writers (the Favorites of the time) are of opinion, that this
word Capella is derived from Capa, which signifies a Hood or a Mantle, and
borrowed from the first Christian Kings in France of the Merovingian line, who
carried about them in their Armies, the Hood of S. Martin as a Relick of much
esteem: and using to say their Mattins and Vespers in that homely Booth where
this Jewel was lodged, the place from this Capa was called Capella, and the
beginning of Chappells in these parts of the world. My Case then is this: That
if all the Churches in France had been to take the pattern of their Ceremonies
from King Clouys his Chapel, they must have had every one of them a Hood of
S. Martins to officiate over: which would necessarily imply, that this one
Saint had a fairer Wardrobe, then all the Saints in the Martyrologie put
together. And many years after King Clouys, Chappells in France, and the
bordering Countries, were allowed but Gratian* Decret. part. 3. d. 1. De
Consecr. Ex Concilio Triburt. Non extat hoc Conciliu^ citatur tamen a Burchardo
etiam l. 3. c. 56. qui proculdubio vidit; eitat enim haec verba, ex Con. 4.
Vide Joseph. Vicecom. ubi suprae and Bin. Concilior. vol. 3. p. 1094 ex
Hermanno Canisii.
Portative, when all the Churches had fixed Altars; so as the former could not
in our particular give Law to the later.

I will now lead you from France into Spain, to see if any Country can yield
you satisfaction; and let you understand, that in the Kingdom of Toledo, and
the famous Universitie of Salamanca, Services in happells are quite differing
from those in Parish-churches, the Mozarabe por que usavn del lo^ Christianos,
que qucdaron mezel^dos enter los Moros Arabes y se usa del en particulares
Capillas de Toledo y de Salamanca. Fr. de Padilla, Hist. Eccles. de Espan.
part. 2. centur. 7. c. 20.
Mozarabique penned by Isidore and Leander, being to this very day in use in the
one, but the Roman Office commanded in the other. Teach not the Daughter
therefore against all Antiquity to jet it our before the Mother: But rather
give us leave to steer our selves by the Kings Laws, and we shall honor as
much as you, the comelines and devotion of the Kings Chapel.

3. Lastly, I would you had not named at all the beginning of Queen Elisabeth.
For when the Rubric and Common prayer was confirmed, and ratified, there was
an Altar in that Chapel, and the very Romano autem ritu in caeteris omnibus
uterentur. Cambd, El. p. 2. 3. Vsque ad vicesimum quartum Iunit. Idem. p. 39.
old Mass officiated thereupon. When the Act of Parliament was passed,
assented unto, and printed or proclaimed, the Altar was removed, and the Table
placed, and (as both parties conjecture, for they were neither of them, the
Inigo's, or Masters of the work at that time) in the very room that was filled
up with the former Altar. And this may be, for ought the one knows, to make
use of the rich Covers and ornaments, which fitted that room. But the other, as
resolute as Called Doctor resolutissimus. Praefat in 1. Sentent.
Bacon the Carmelite, enduring no Guessing or May-bees in this subject, holds
it for a thriftie dream, and a poor conjecture. Better a great deal the
Chappells and Churches were left to their own ability, to provide themselves of
convenient ornaments, without being any way beholding to their former Altars.
And if so learned a man had not delivered it, I should have held this opinion
to be but (...), (as Pinder of another in that kind) the very dream of a
shadow, or the shadow of a dream, that the State should throw away more rich
furniture for trying of conclusions, then the revenues of many Churches in the
Kingdom are worth. But there might be other reasons of this posture of that
Table, then either party has hitherto touched. Hist. of the Counc. of Tr. l.
5. f. 4 11. Not making any open declaration, what doctrine she would follow,
designing as soon as she was settled, to establish it. Et par my cette
innovation laissa plusieurs chooses qu'elle jugea indifferentes, comme les
Orgues, les Ornements d'Eglise, quoy que plus pour policeque pour religion. Du
Chesne Histoire d'Anglet. l. 21. d. 10. Excepta Christi cruci affixi effigy,
quam in domestico sacrario servavit Regina, publiceque ostentari passa est.
Thuan. Hist. l. 23. page 670. La Royne, qui vouloit flatter les Catholics and
les Princes estrangers, laignant n'estre pas tant e^^oginee, qu'on pensoit, de
la Religion Catholic, ny al'egal de ses Predecesseurs, fit dresser en sa
Chapelle une table en formed' Autel, sur laquelle elle fit m^ttre une croixd'
argent, aux d'eux cotes de laquelle il y avoit deux cierges, etc. Publiant,
mais avec trop de faintise, que ce qu'elle faisoit, n'estoit que comme
constra^nte a suivre l'inclination de ses subjects. Lesquels toutesfois
aucontraire elle force and contrainct d'aller aux Eglises Protestants. Flor.
Du Remond. de la Naiss. l. 6. c. 11. 73.
What if it was to hold besides fair Candlesticks, embossed Plate and Books of
Silver, which must have a back or wall to rest upon? What if there stood in the
midst thereof a massy Crucifix? What if all her Chapel was thus set forth,
to comply with foreign Princes, and to make them believe she was not so far
esloigned from the Catholic Religion, as was bruited abroad? Were all the
Churches in England to take pattern by this, who might not possess a picture
in this kind, no not any of the Subjects in their Articles of Imo. Elis.
Artic. 45. Whether you know any that keep in their houses, any undefaced
Images, Tables, Pictures, etc. Sermon against peril. of Idol. part. 3. p. 42.
Images of Christ be not only defects, but also lies. Not that this is Gospel,
but that it is QElis. her Homily.
private houses? Let Dr Coal kindle as red as he pleases: I dare not be too
peremptory in these Assertions, no more then Aristotle durst be in his moral
Philosophy; But I leave him to peruse my Margin a little, where he shall find
two or three Frenchmen, who out of the Freedom of the Nation, will be sure
Parler tout, and to conceal nothing that ever they heard of. And this is my
Answer to the first Argument.

2. p. 18. 19.
The Queens Injunctions were se^ our for the reiglement and direction of all
the Churches in this Kingdom, and it is said in them, that the holy Table in
every Church shall be decently made, and set in the place where the Altar stood,
and there commonly covered, as thereto belongs, (there is added which he
leaves out, and as shall be appointed by the Visitours) and if so, then certainly
(without any ifs and ands,) it must stand along close by the wall; because the
Altars always stood so, that is, p. 56.
generally and for the most part. p. 19.
And himself affirms, that placing of the Table where the Altar stood (which he
no where affirms terminis terminantibus, but as before, p. 17.
in the place of the Chancell where the Altar stood) is the most decent
situation, when it is not used, and for use too, where the Quire is mounted up
by steps, etc. which might have easily been done. Howbeit afterward, like a
cursed Cow, p. 18.
Quo teneam nodo?) he throws down all the milk he has given: for when he had
(desperately) written before, p. 17.
that he thought somewhat might be said why the Table should stand in that
place of the Chancell where the Altar stood, he says now, that p. 18.
if by Altar-wise is meant, that it should stand along close by the wall; then
he believes not, that ever it was so placed (unless by Casualty) in
Countrey-churches. So that confessing all this, p 13.
and that ( as he guesseth) the Queens Commissioners were content, that the
Altars themselves should stand, in the Injunctions 1559. we have that great p.
13.
advantage which Tully speaks of, Confitentem reum; were we but sure to tie a
knot upon him: For he is a slippery youth.

Plautus in Pseud.
Ps. Quid, cum manifesto tenetur? Chapter Anguilla'st, elabitur.

So that, as the former Argument was taken from the Queens Chapel, so is this
from the Queens Injunctions; and (I confess) the more pertinent of the twayn,
if it had a Cube, or any solidity to rest upon.

I answer first: That though I may grant the Queens Injunctions to have been an
Ecclesiastical Law, yet shall I ever hold them to have been Laws of England,
and not of the Medes and Persians. And Post-nati, p. 106.
the Kings of England have a power from God himself, not only to make Laws,
but to alter and change Laws from time to time, for the good of themselves and
their Subjects, as I showed before. Especially those parts of the Injunction,
which (like trees) breed the Worms in the Body of them, which in a short time
must needs destroy them, cannot but be subject to alteration. And this
Injunction for Tables in the Church, is clearly of that nature; That the holy
Table should be set in the place where the Altar stood, and there commonly
covered as thereto belongs, and as shall be appointed by the Visitours. Which
last words this false-fingerd gentlemen left out in his Quotation, as I noted
before. So that this Injunction is but, as he said of 1 Samuel 13 1.
Saul, the son of one year, and being set forth in the end of Primo,
referres the placing and adorning of the Table to the Commissioners, which
concluded both these particulars in their Orders of Tertio; Orders the 10th of
October. 1561. the first Item.
That the Table should stand where the steps within the Quires and Chancells
stood, and should be covered with Silk or Buckram. And there if you be a good
huntsman, you may wind your Horn, and blow the full of that Injunction. O, but
there is more life in the Game then so! P. 22.
For then the Orders published 1561, must run quite cross to the Injunctions
published 1559, but two years before; which were ridiculous to imagine. Well
Coal, thou art an Antmal rationale risibile, that is, a most ridiculous
creature, for thy reasoning. How many Acts of Parliament has England seen,
that were made Probationers for a shorter time then two years, as you compute
it? What was that last Proviso in the Statute of Primo P. 58, 59, 50.
you so much stood upon even now, but to imply, that the Queen by her
Commissioners (when she saw cause) would appoint alterations of Ceremonies,
without making your Mastership so merry disposed? However, this Injunction had
her plenitudinem dierum, having lived to the last minute it was ever intended
for, that is, the settling of some other Order in the premises by the Queens
Comm^ssioners in Causes Ecclesiastical. They settled the Table from the Wall,
and P. 26.
so it continued for many years in most places of England, (perhaps when this
Letter was written) though much deviated (as you think) from the ancient
practice, of those few Months, scil. under the foresaid Injunction. But the
Coal is not yet quenched; for he flames in the faces of the Commissioners, P.
22.
for offering to place the Table where the Steps stood, and yet fixing upon the
wall (which the Advertisements of 1565 do call the East-wall) the Tables of
Gods Precepts imprinted for the said purpose; which could not be, if the
Communion Table were not to stand abo^^^ the Steps, and under the Commandments,
and therefore all along the wall, (and why not as well in the place of the
steps, and end-wise to the wall?) on which the ten Commandments were appointed
to be placed. Here is the longest conclusion, that ever I heard made of such
short and petty premises. I hope he does not think that the Tables of the Law
did hang Geometrically, by a perpendicular line cutting right angles with the
Communion Table. For if they did, they would not serve his turn even in that
pendancy. So that to be fixed on the Wall, or the East-wall, over the
Communion-boord, can signify nothing else, but that they should be fixed
higher then the Communion Table, upon some part of the East-wall, so as the
people seeing the Communion Table, might over that see and read the ten
Commandments. And this may be the better done, though the Table stand in the
Midst of the Quire, which is more then the Letter required. And this is the
true meaning of those Orders, as appears by Interpretatio practice^ is to be
considered in all things. ^ost-nat. P. 66.
the general practice, and the Canons in force. That the ten Commandments be
set upon the East End of every Church, where the people may best see and read
the same. Not just over the middle of the Tabl^ Canon 82.
running along the East-window Altar-wise; (for then they must, in most
Churches, be fixed in the very Glass it self) but in any part of the East End,
where Canon 82.
they may be seen and read of the People. And so in B. Sand's visitation 13o of
the Queen, the Article runs no more then thus, Whether have you in your Church
or Chapel the Table of the ten Commandments? So that the very Church-Painters
cannot but have Tanto di naso, a nose as long as the Rhinoceros, in making
themselves merry with the conceit of this Argument. The Commandments are over
the Table; Ergo over the side of the Table. Nonsequitur. They may be over the
End of the Table. And that shall be the end of my first answer.

Secondly, how does it follow, that P. 8, and 9.
if the Injunction require that the Table should be set in the place where the
Altar stood, it must stand along close by the wall? have you no better proof
for it, P. 19.
then that Altars always stood so? Although this be a most bold and ignorant
assertion (as shall be showed in due time) yet being admitted, it does not
prove your sequel. For it might stand above the steps, with the end Eastward,
and the side Northward, P. 26.
as it was in most places of England, when this Letter was written, and yet
obey the words of the Injunction, and be in the place where the Altar stood. If
the Injunction had said, It was to be in the very place of the Altar, it had
not done your feat. For, as Aristotle tells us, there is a double place; there
is Nature. Auscult. lib. 4. c. 4.
(...) there is a place of the Altar, which might hold more then the Altar did;
and there is a place, that holds (...). Ibid.
just no more in any dimension, then the thing placed. And the Injunction
directed to her Majesty's Subjects, and not to her Mathematicians, is likelier
to use the term of a common and ordinary, then of a proper and Mathematical
place. This very Injunction says in the next words, that in the time of the
Communion it shall be in the Chancell. Before the Communion.
The Rubric says, in the body of the Church or Chancell. The Canon 82.
Canon in force, in the Church or Chancell. All which are common and
Mechanical, and not Mathematical places. And so the place of the Altar in
this Injunction, is not all, and in all dimensions, but some part only of the
Room which that Altar filled, But here it is not so difficult neither. The
words are, In the place, UBI, where the Altar stood; as in the Also that the
Steps, etc.
Orders of Tertio, where the Steps stood. So that the Injunction does not
describe the Mathematical place, but the Vbi only, and artificial place of
the Altar. And De subtilit. Exercit. 359. 5.
Scaliger will tell you, that many things else may be in an Vbi, without
levelling their length, breadth and thickness to the equal dimensions of a
corporeall-place. And therefore for the great pains you take with your line
and level, in finding that the Page 19.
Altar takes up much room to the North and South, which the Table placed
endlong does not take up, and the Table much room to the East and West, which
the Altar did not; you might have spared it all against the building of a new
Pigeon-house. Your Chalk and Oker are quite washed away with these distinctions.
For I that am but a poor Countrey-joyner, can set you up (if you please) a
Table end-wise above the Steps, that shall be said as properly to be in the
place where the Altar stood, as to be in the Church, in the Chancell, or that
paved ground where the Steps were a little before demolished. And thus the
Writer of the Letter does not play Page 18.
Fast and loose, but loose with you for altogether, dissolving this Vtopian
contradiction that rumbled in your brain, without the help of Antonius Zimarra.
If you mean by Altar-wise, the place; somewhat may be said for it; if the Form
of an Altar, nothing at all in the Injunctions of 1559. Nor does the writer of
the Letter any where say, that Page 13.
the Queens Commissioners were content the Altars should stand; for my Copy
has it, The Queens most royal Majesty by the advice of her most honorable
Counsel. Preface to the Injunct.
the Queen and her Counsel, her Commissioners having no hand at al in these
Injunctions. So that your self is the P. 13.
Reus in this Confession: either wilfully corrupting the text, or swallowing a
Gudgeon presented by the transcriber. I am not salaried to defend the Writer of
the Letter in all words and syllables; who (had he any ground given him by his
Majesty's Laws to turn him about) seems unto me fully as forward, and far
more able to defend old Ceremonies, then you are. But I must say this (though
both of you should be offended) that the The words be these, In the other (
that is, either) whereof, saving for uniformity, there seems no matter of
great moment, so that the Sacrament be duly and reverently administered.
Queen and the Counsel do not, unto me, seem to approve, but rather to
disprove the standing of Altars, in this Injunction. They say indeed, that
absolutely, and abstractedly from circumstances and considerations, it seems
no matter of great moment, unto them, whether the Sacrament be administered upon
the Altars, or the holy Tables, so as it be duly and reverently performed.
Duly, without turning it to a Sacrifice, as the Pontificians did: And
reverently, without pulling it down to a bare sign and Figure, as the
Zuinglians did. But taking the case not abstracted and naked, but clothed and
adorned with all its circumstances unto their consideration, they clearly
resolve to put down the Altars, and set up the holy Tables, for two main
reasons. In these words, Yet for observation of one uniformity through the
whole Realm, and for the better imitation of the Law in that behalf, it is
ordered, etc.
The first, for uniformitie of divine Service through the whole Realm. And
secondly, for a conformity with the Statute of 1^ Elis. c. 2. to the which the
Queen had but newly passed her Royal assent, when by the advice of her
Counsel she published these Injunctions.

My third therefore and last Answer is this, That it had been P. 22.
ridiculous indeed to imagine, that the Queen and her Counsel (the very flower
and glory of both the Upper and Lower house of Parliament) should in these
Injunctions vary from the Rites, which they had but few days before prescribed
to be used in the Rubric of the Book of Common prayers: Letter. p. 71
Where the Minister appointed to read the Communion, is directed to read the
Commandments, not at the end, but at the North-side of the Table, Rubric
before the Communion.
which implies the end to be placed toward the East great Window, as is was
likewise practiced in King P. 26. That only was put in to show that he had the
Book entitled The Trobles of Francofurt.
Edwards time; which the writer of the Letter (what shift soever the poor man
made to get the Book) has endeavored to prove out of Page 30.
The Troubles at Francofurt. It being very like, that Cox, Grindall, and
Whitehead (who made half the Cambd. Elis. p. 23.
number of the perusers of the Liturgy, which was to be confirmed in the
Parliament of Primo) would observe that Ceremony in placing the Communiontable,
which themselves (at home and Troubles of Francof. p. 23. 24.
abroad) had formerly practiced. And that this was the last situation of that
Table in King Edwards time, we may know from a servant in Ordinary of Queen
Mary's, from whom as I would be loath to receive matters of doctrine, so shall
I never refuse to be informed in matters of Fact, consonant and agreeing to the
Rubric of our Liturgy. Considering, as the Poet says, -- Fas est and ab
host doceri.

Miles Huggard, in his book called The displaying of I rotestants, Anno 1556.
Page 81. So the Bishop of Lincoln to Bishop Ridley, And yet when your Table was
constituted, you could never be content in p^acing the same, now East, now
North, etc. Act. and Monum. vol. 3. p. 497.
How long were they learning to set their Table to minister the said Communion
upon? First they placed it aloft, where the high Altar stood. Then must it be
set from the Wall, that one might go between: The Ministers being in contention
on whether part to turn their faces, either toward the West, the North, or
South. Some would stand Southward, some Northward, and some Westward. And this
contention was determined (by the Rubric still in force) for the North-side of
the Table. Which in my opinion, confirms very much the conceit of the Letter,
seem it to Doctor Coal never so shallow. That the Table should stand above the
steps, if there were any; That it should not stand along close by the wall;
That having (unless it were a Monster) but two long sides, Letter page 71. 70.
one of them should be placed toward the North, to obey the direction of the
Liturgy. And for elbow-room, let him take his square and plummet again, we will
find him enough. Actor. Eccles. Medio. sub Car. Borrom. part. 4. Instructionum
fabricae and supellectilis Ecclesiastica, l. 1. c. 11.
When you build an high Altar, there must be from the foot or lowest degree
thereof, to the Rails that enclose the same, eight cubits, and more, if the
Church will bear it, that there may be room for the Clergi to assist (as
sometimes is required) at solemn Masses. When the Altars therefore, with their
appurtenances, were taken down (for I will not offend those tender ears of his
with the word Page 11.
Pulling any more, though they deserve to be pulled once again for this
childish Criticisme) there was roomth enough to set a Communion Table end-wise,
in that very place where the Altar stood. Yet does Doctor Coal hope (if his
fire be of any activity at all) he has burnt this doctrine to very dust,
erudito pulvere, with the learned dust of his Geometry.

page 23.
For there is no difference at all in this case, between the North-end and the
North-side, which come both to one. For in all quadrilaterall and quadrangular
figures, whether they be a perfect square, which Geometricians Geometr. lib.
12. Can. 2.
that is, Peter Ramus, and those that follow him; for the Greeks do call it
(...), and the Latinists, aequilaterum; which would not handsomely fit in this
place, where the discourse is of a long-square) call Quadratum; or along-square
(as commonly our Communion-Tables are) which they call Oblongum, it is plain,
that if we speak according to the Rules of Art (as I hope we do not use to
speak to poor Subjects, that are penally to obey Laws and Canons) everypart
of it is a side, howsoever Custom Horat. in Art Poetica.
( Quem penes arbitrium est and jus and norma loquendi) has prevailed to call
the narrower sides by the name of Ends. When therefore he that ministers at
the Altar, stands at the North-end of the same, as we ( that are not
Mathematicians) use to call it, he stands no question ( the right style of a
Geometrae, qui se profitentur non persuadere, sed cogere. Cic. Acad. Quaest. l.
4.
Geometrician) at the North-side thereof, as in property of speech we ought to
call it. And this Interpretation of the Rubric I rather stand to, because it
is translated in the Latin Liturgy of 2do Elisabethae; ad cujus mensae
Septentrionalem partem Minister stans. And I presume no man of reason can deny,
that the Northern end or side (call it which you will) is pars
Septentrionalis. And thereupon he throws down his Gauntlet, and (contrary to
the Proclamation) challenges in plain terms the trim Epistoler, to let him
(if he can) hear in some reasonable time the contrary from him.

It is a Chartell of defiance, I confess, and being sufficiently divulged, I
must leave it to the party called upon, to take up, if he please, or otherwise
to digest, as his stomach and discretion shall best serve him. Let him meet
the Doctor, if he dare; but yet happy he, if he do not meet him. For mine
own part, I am nothing so much troubled with this language, as I am with a
speculation that suddenly comes into my head, of the elevation and raptures of
the Soul, when it is thoroughly plunged in the studies of the Mathematics. For
as these learned men converse in abstracted notions (as the (...). Arist. de
Anima, lib. 1. cap. 1.
Philosopher tells us) without any mixture with the mud of this world; so is
their pleasure and contentment so pure and liquid, that it is a kind of (...).
Plut. Non suaviter posse vivere juxta Epicurum. page 1094.
Hony-combe without any wax, and a bowl of Nectar powered down their throat
without a crum of any diverting or distasting thought to interrupt them.
Incomparable was the delight of Euclide, when he had found how to make but
(...). Plut. ibid.
a Jacobs staff, which notwithstanding, I can buy for twelve pence. Archimedes
washed in a brazen Lavatory, cries out in an ecstasy, I have found it. His men
thought he had found a Coronet of gold, and it was nothing but the (...), Idem.
ibid.
Coronet or Circumference of the Vessel. But that sad youth Pythagoras went
beyond them all, who having ever been in all his Sacrifices, (...), far from
any lavishing humor, when he had found in a Diagramme an equality of some
lines, or (as the Doctor calls them) of some sides, in a rightangled Triangle,
(...) (says mine Porphyrius de vita Pythag. ab Holstenio editus. p. 24.
Author) down went a whole Ox to the Gods for the Inspiration. It is not
therefore without a great deal of reason, that Dr Coal does thus triumph in
this page, to have found, by his rare Invention and study in Geometry, four
sides in a long Table; nor without some hope of having one day an Altar and a
Sacrifice, for joy of the Diagramme. And surely well may he deserve it, if at a
Table that has no end, he can Officiate at the end of the Table. Otherwise, to
enform us that in every Square there are four sides (that is, (...), Squares
are figures compassed with four right lines. Euclid. Element. ex Theon
comment. translated by Dosypodius. (...), Right figures are those that are
compassed with right lines. Ibid.
four lines; as all Mathematicians define a side.) I assure you, is no more,
then a Child in his long coats was able to demonstrate to the Divine Socrates.
(...), etc. Plato in Menon. page 418. Pusionem quendam Socrates interrogat
quaedam Geometrica de dimensione Quadrati. Cic. Tufc. qu. l. 1.
Socr. From what line, my Child? Chapter From this line. Socr. What, from this of
four foot long running from angle to angle? Chapter Just so, Sir. So as the Gods
deserve nothing at all, no not that holocaust mentioned in the beginning of the
Book, of the Doctors discretion (which is a grain or two less then nothing)
for this poor and meagre invention.

And that I deal clearly in this point to the Greeks in the Margin, I will
add some definitions of an M. Blundevils Exercit. 1 Book of the Sphere, p. 274.
English Gentleman of good esteem amongst the Learned. Triangles are those
which are bounded with three right lines. Foure-square figures are those which
are bounded with four right lines. Many square figures are those which are
bounded with more right lines then four, etc. If you speak therefore according
to the Rules of Art, a side in Geometry, is a line or length; and four sides
are but four lengths. But a side in the English-tongue, is a long length (as
the side of a man, from whence the word is derived, is the longest length of a
man) and the two sides of a long Square, the two long lengths of that Square;
which to the worlds end will never be proved to be that Squares End. Your self
confess that Custom has prevailed to call the narrower sides (say you, I say,
Lines or Lengths) by the name of Ends. And will you dispute out of Geometry
against Custom? And that with people which are no Geometricians? (...). Arist.
Analyt. post. l. 1. c. 12.
Then Aristotle shall tell you what you are. You must not dispute in terms of
Geometry, with those that verse not in Geometry: Otherwise, you will show your
self but a foul and sophistical disputant. Now Points and Lines are (...),
Arist. Anal post 1. c. 10.
proper to Geometry: Iul. Polluc. li. 4. c. 21. p. 212.
and so are Triangles, Quadrangles and Quadrates. And therefore these are not
words for binding and penal Laws. Loquendum cum Vulgo. When you speak to the
People of a Side, you must take a Side as they take it. Opera danda est ut
verbis utamur quam usitatissimis. Cio. 4. de Finib. Vsitata sunt ea, quae
versantur in sermon and consuetudine quotidiana. Cic. ad Heren. lib. 4.
We must take the words that are most usual, that is, those of daily speech
and communication. If Custom have prevailed, it is too late to stop the
current. Custom will carry it quite away from your Geometry. And as you may see
in the Margin out of Tully (one that understood prettily well the property of
speech) there is no property of speech, but in the speech of use and Custom.
For other wise every Art has her words of Art; as Dialecticorum quoque verba
nulla sunt publica; suis utuntur, Et id quoque commune omnium fere artium. Cic.
Acad. quaest. l 1.
Logic, and what not? Nay the (...). Analyt. post. l. 1. c. 11.
great Philosopher tells us, that if a Musician propound his Problem to a
Geometrician in his own terms, he will go near to gravel him. If you please,
we will try it a little. You are an excellent Geometrician, I perceive, and yet I
shall present you with an Epitaph of a French Musician, Noelle sueur, written
in terms of Music, which, for all your Mathematics, you will never understand
without the help of that chanting Science. Now if you may perchance have a
Crochet in your pate more then I know of, be not descanting too fast upon this
Epitaph. Upon my word it was not made of a Vicar, but of a Les Bigarreures du
Seigneur des Accords. De Rebus par lettres chapter 3. p. 25 and 26.
Chanter of Langres, and is here faithfully translated from the original, who
ever the Rhymer was.

An Epitaph of an excellent Musician, faithfully translated out of a French
Author.
Well couth he climb the scale of Gamuth Are,
Till leaving Quire, and of a Mood to marry,
In this imperfect Time, and uneven Notchets;
His house with Minum's swarmed, his head with (Crochets.
Then prowles a Long the Country for relief,
Looked for a Large, but lighted on a Brief.
And from the White Long, and the sacred Altar,
Deserving Duplas, reaped but Sesquialtar.
Base was his best part; yet his Neighbors say,
He sung the trouble till his dying day.
For Counterpoints and Discords much enquest
He made, till here he found his pause and Rest.
Time perfect had he had and more prolation,
He quite had changed the plain song of the Nation.
Now all this is canting, not chanting, to an unmusicall man.

You are too much in your Mathematical humor; as Euclide was before you: who
passing through many countries, and coming at the last to the banks of Nile,
and finding there some Diagrammes in the sand, drawn by the Egyptians Coelius
Rhodigin. Antiq. lection. lib. 18. cap. 34^ Nunquam non Collimitiis pereuntibus
Nili exuperantia. Hieron. Card. Encom. Geometr.
(whom the often overflowing of that River had forced to the study of Geometry)
is said to kneel down, and give the Gods thanks, that he was entering into a
country inhabited by men. As if they could be no men, that were not withal
Cardan. ibid.
Geometricians. I pray you therefore remember, that the Rubric was written for
the use of the English, not of the Gypsies or Egyptians. And for your
directions hereafter, I will give you two Rules from two Englishmen, prettily
well versed in Laws and Canons, because I perceive you suspect and jeere the
The ablest Canonist no doubt in the Church of England. p. 50.
writer of the Letter, as unskil'd in that kind. Post-nat. p. 62.
Words should be taken sensu currenti. For use and custom is the best
Expositour both of Laws and words. If of all Laws and Words, then most of all
of the Words of the Laws. That Is the first. The second is to the same effect.
Whitgift in his defense of the admonition, tit. 9. page 134.
The other is the common name customably used of the common people, who will
not be taught to speak by you or any man, but keep their accustomed names and
terms. Though you will go near to tell him for his good advice, Page 47.
that this was but his Helena to please the people. Well, if one should invite
the good Gentlewoman your wife to dinner, and bid her sit down at the side,
meaning in your property of speech, at the End of the Table, he might upon the
very naming of this word side, find his Gossip (peradventure) in the Top of the
house. But to dally with you no longer; learned men in these very particular
Ceremonies we have in hand, have appropriated the word sides, to the long, and
the word End, to the short length of an Oblong square: So as they cannot now be
otherwise (but improperly) used. What say you to Gregory the 13th who renewed
the Calendar? I hope he had about him all the best Bullarii Tom. 2. p. 456.
Mathematicians of Europe, that could inform him what was properly to be called
a side. And yet in his Pontific. Greg 13. Venet. 1582. p. 144. Et thurificat
Altar undique ad dextrum and sinistru^ latus. Et p. 142. In part posteriori,
and part anteriori Altaris. And it is so likewise in the Pontifical of Pius
Quartus printed at Venice, 1561. p. 133. Above all this, see Act. and Monum.
vol. 2. page 700. Of B. Ridley. And in the Church of ^oul brake down the wall,
standing then by the high Altars side. And when the Altar Sanctum in S. Denis
in France was opened by the Abbat Sugar, there was found S. James arm, en la
party anteritur, in the anteriour part; S. Stephens at the right, and S.
Vincents at the left side of the Altar. Du Brenl. Theater des Antiquitez de
Paris lib. 4. page 1102.
Pontifical, he makes no more sides of an Altar, then of a man, to wit, a
right side and a left side; calling the lesser squares, the anteriour and
posteriour part thereof. What think you of Archbishop Bancroft, and the
Composers of our Canons now in being? Did they use in those Canons a property
of speech? Surely they were much too blame, if they did not. And they require
(as we heard before) Canon 82.
That the ten Commandments should be set upon the East End (not the East Side
of every Church and Chapel. And for the words of the Latin Liturgy of 2^ of
the Queen, that translates it, ad mensae Septentrionalem partem (which Politia
Eccles. p. 221.
Mocket likewise follows in his Book) it helps the Doctor nothing at all, but
to show his want of Logic and learning. For beside that that Book is
recommended only Quoniam intelligimus Collegia utriusque Academiae, Collegium
item novum prope Wintoniam, and Aetonense. Q. Letters patents, 6. April. El. 2.
to a few Colleges, and not unto the Church of England, and was never confirmed
by Act of Parliament, or King James his Proclamation; Walter Haddon, or
whosoever else was the translatour thereof, in his Rhetorical vein, uses in
his rendering of these words, the Genus for the Species, which in an Argument
will by no means endure a (...). Top. 4. c. 1.
Reciprocation, as freshmen know in the Universities. I do presume, gentle
Doctor, that no man of reason can deny but that every End is a Part: but I
hope a man may stoutly deny that every Part is an End, and yet with the help of
a warm Nightcap keep his Reason safe enough. Every side of a man is a part:
but he that will say that every part of a man is a side, has neither head nor
brains of his own, nor has he ever studied Vesalius his Anatomy. So that your
Argument is troubled with a Pleurisy and some stitches in the side, which must
be cured; otherwise you have reason, Sr, to expect ye^ long to hear some news
from the trim Gentleman. Your Eve, Sr,

Martial. epigr. lib. 6.
( -- Illa tuum, Castrice, dulce latus) was taken from your side: (And
thereupon, by the Martinius in Lexic. verbo Latus.
Phrisians and Sicambrians, a Wife is to this day called a side.) But she was
not taken from Si ex posteriori part eduxisset, nimio plus mulier vilis
extitisset; si ex anteriori, quasi viro adversariam effinxisset. Gennad. (...)
aten. Lippo^^ in Genesis c. 7. fol. 74. Ne aut Domina, si de Capite; aut Ancilla,
si de Pedibus. Hugo de S. Victore.
everypart of a man. Tell her, that she was taken from your Heels, and you
shall quickly find her (if she be metall'd) about your Ears. So in this
particular; when you officiate at the end of the Table, you may officiate at a
part (and well enough, for ought the writer of the Letter says to the
contrary) but you cannot officiate at that part of the Table, to the which by
the Rubric, confirmed by Act of Parliament, you are literally directed and
appointed. Besides that, there is in this Latin translation more to be
considered, then you are aware of. The Calendar there is full of Saints, and
some of them got into red scarlet; there is an innovation in the Obits and
Exequies, which is fain to be warranted with the Queens Peculiari ^ quaedam in
funebribus and exequiis de^antinda, quae Statu^o non obstante, etc. Q. Letter
patent.
especial Non obstante. And what needed this to young Scholars, that meant not
to die so fast, but desired no more then leave to pray in Latin, to be better
acquainted with books in that Language? Lastly, there were so few Copies of
this Latin Liturgy printed at the first, that Dr Whitaker, when he was but yet
a very young man, was employed by his Uncle the Dean of Paul's, to translate it
again into Latinitate donasse fertur ( The Book is extent in 8^. omnem rationem
publicarum precum and totius Liturgiae formam praescriptam. Ashtonus in vita
Whitak^ri. Oper. tom. 1. page 699.
Latin. Which had never been, unless the other version was at that time either
exhausted or misliked. Set all these together, and compare the year of 3^ and
4^ of the Queen (for so long it may be yer the Book was printed) with the
doings at the Council of Trent, with the Popes endeavors to excommunicate,
and the Emperors to protect this young Princess, and you shall find a
probable reason that this Liturgy should be translated, rather to complie with
the Sea the History of the Counc. of Trent. lib. 8. page 727. Item Cambd. Elis.
page 41.
foreign, then to reigle and direct the English Churches. And so much by way
of Answer to the second Argument.

3. The third and main Argument of Dr Coal is this: p. 63.
That his sacred Majesty (whom God long preserve) has hereupon already
declared his pleasure, in the Case of S. Gregory's, and thereby given
encouragement to the Metropolitanes, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, to require
the like in all the Churches committed to them.

If this were true, it might very well serve for a Wall of brass to keep off
the tongues and pens of all the Clergy and Laity of England, from intermedling
in this Theme or Question any more. For who could have so steely a brow, as to
outface such a sacred Sentence; especially in a matter of a nature indifferent,
and acknowledged by all Laws divine and humane, to depend immediately upon the
Royal decision? But it is most untrue, that his Majesty has declared in that
Act one word of his pleasure Hereupon, that is, against the Contents of this
Letter; although it was (if I be rightly informed) either punctually read, or
opened very fully, unto his most excellent Majesty at that Hearing But this
Pamphleter, whose whole book is but a Libel against a Bishop, and every page
thereof a malicious falsification of some Author or other, had this height of
impudency only left to ascend unto in the Conclusion of his work, ponere os in
coelum, to outface heaven it self, and misreport the justice of so divine a
Majesty. For if you abstract from this Declaration, which this bold man has
printed for an Act of Counsel, the Allegations (which he calls the Relations)
of both parties, and his Majest^es just pleasure for the dissolving of the
Appeal; the remainder will prove a full confirmation of this Letter he so much
frets against, and a most condign reprehension of that Squirrelheaded young
man, that without consent of his Fellow minister, and in contempt of his
Diocesan, and all that populous Parish, would throw the Communion Table out of
doors, and build him a close Altar, out of faction and singularity. His
Majesty's Rescript, Mentis aureae verba bracteata, fit to be written in plates
of gold, is this, and this only, concerning the point in controversy.

And likewise, for so much as concerns the liberty given p. 65.
by the said Communion-book, or Canon, for placing the Communion Table in any
Church or Chapel with most convenience: That liberty is not to be understood,
as if it were ever left to the discretion of the Parish, much less to the
particular fancy of any humorous person, but to the judgment of the Ordinary,
to whose place and function it does properly belong to give direction in that
point, both for the thing it self, and for the time, when and how long, as he
may find cause.

With this Sentence I will conclude the Chapter: And will not presume with any
Ne quid, post illud divinum and immortale factum, mortale faceret. Plin. in
Panegyr.
mortal discourse of mine, to profane such heavenly expressions. Here is more
then I could say; here is as much as I could think. Here is no Altar, no
Altarwise, no fixing in the East, no stepping, no mounting; but all left to the
Law, to the Communion-book, to the Canon, and to the Dio^esan. And therefore if
this do not defend the Writer of the Letter (if he prove a page 3.
Diocesan writing to his own private Parish Priest) par my and par tout, (as
our Common Lawyers use to say) from the first word to the very last therein
contained, let him get him another Champion, and remain undefended for me.

-- Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
Si Troija dextra
Defendi potis est, etiam hac defensa futura est.
CHAP. III.
Of the Episcopal, and Presbyterall or private Ministers power, in matters of
Ceremony. What influence the Piety of the times, or the (secret) good work now
in hand, can have on this subject.

AS the A ceromate nos Aphe exce pit. Senec. Epist. 57. Haphe, pulvis quo
inspergebantur luctaturi. Muretus in locum. Sic Ovid. Ille cavis hausto spargat
me pulvere palmis.
ancient wrastler in the Olympic Games finding his adversaries members so
slick and slippery with oil and sweat, as it was impossible to lay any fixed
hold upon them, used to powder them over with a kind of dust, whereby to
procure himself a surer gripe and fastening: So this Pamphleter having slipped and
glided (as it were) those poor Reasons he has into all the several parts of
this Libell, so as it is impossible to refute them without committing as many
Tautologies as he uses himself; I have thrown this Method like a kind of
Pin-dust upon those naked limbs, that I might get some hold of him, and try
whether he be as strong and manly, as he is fidging and slippery in his
Refutation. As therefore I have in the last Chapter reduced into a body all the
Regal, so I intend to do in this, all the Ecclesiastical power, that the
poor fellow conceives to be any way opposite to the Letter confuted. I must
therefore fall a picking of them up, like so many Daisies in a bare Common,
here and there one where I can find them.

First, the setting of your Table Altar-wise being now exacted from you by your
Ordinary: This Case (says page 2.
he) requires more of your Obedience then Curiosity. And should we all be so
affected as to demurre on the Commands of our Superiors, in matters of
exterior order, and public government, till we are satisfied in the grounds
and reasons of their Commands, or fly off from our duty, we should soon find a
speedy dissolution both of Church and State. You know who said it well enough;
Si ubi jubeantur, quaerere singulis liceat, pereunte obsequio imperium etiam
intercidit. page 59.
Now the Ordinary of his own Authority can (if he please) so appoint and direct
it. Beside that, his page 63.
Majesty has given encouragement to the Bishops and other Ordinaries (whereof
I have showed the contrary in the precedent Chapter) to require the like in all
the Churches committed unto them.

Secondly, The Vicar of Gr. himself page 9.
might desire to have an Altar, i. e. to have the Communiontable placed
Altar-wise at the upper end of the Quire, or use the name of Altar for the holy
Table. page 10.
Because, for any thing the Canon tells us, the Vicar (who is never named or
dreamed of in the Canon, or articled unto concerning this particular in either
the Diocesan or Metropolitan Visitation) was to have a greater hand in ordering
of the said Table then the Bishops immediate Officers, the Churchwardens, were
or ought to have; as one that better understood, what was convenient in and for
Gods Service, then they did or could. Nor did the Vicar any thing against the
Canon (as he did not by taking his Mornings draught before he went about it) in
causing the Table to be disposed of to a more convenient place then before it
stood in. Only this Epistoler is pleased to countenance the Vestry-doctrine of
these days, in which the Churchwardens and other Elders (that grow in the
Doctors barren wit, never dreamed of in the Letter) would do all, leaving
their Minister (God bless good holy Churchmen from such a misadventure) to
his studies and Meditations. A thing more fitting for S. Basil or S. Bernard,
then for a Vicar, who was never intended for a looker on, or a dull spectatour
of their active undertakings in removing (when they are commanded by the
Ordinary) a joined Table. page 11.
For the Curate being once appointed as a principal man to take Altars down,
who but he should set them up? It is true indeed that the Bishop of the Diocese
is the man, to whom by right (and by the Liturgy) the ordering of these things
does belong; but then it is as true (or if it be not true, as it is most false
and foolish) yet (says the Title page
Judicious and learned Divine, Dr Coal, alias Firebrand) it is more fit, that
he should send his resolutions to the Priest, then to the (I know not what)
people, a kind of Myrmidons swarmed out of the Doctors fancy, and never
mentioned in the Letter confuted. And to say that they are the Diocesans
subordinate officers in this kind, is another smack of the Vestry-doctrine; And
placed there on front; to delight the people, encouraged thereby to contemn
their Parsons, who are left to mere contemplative Meditations, and not
employed (as they should be) in removing and providing of Frames and Tables.
And therefore, O bloody Prelate, to gore thy Clergy in this kind, as not to
suffer them to execute all these Mandates of Commissaries and Officialls,
concerning Bells, Frames, Bell-ropes, Beeres, Shove ls, and square Tables; but
leave those active spirits to moulder away (against all conscience) in divine
Meditations! Parce precor stimulis. Oh be not so hard-hearted and merciless
page 48.
to advance on this sort the Authority of the Churchwardens so high above
their Ministers. Especially page 51.
seeing the Vicar in correspondence unto former practice (some 80 years
before) thought the place where formerly the Altar stood, to be fittest for it.
Which he knew better then this extravagant Epistoler, page 3.
though the Epistoler seem to be a Diocesan, and the other a private
Parish Priest in his Jurisdiction.

Thirdly and lastly, If both the Ordinary and Vicar (which is not to be
conceived) should want a power to set the holy Table Altar-wise, page 4. and 28.
what can be said to that uniformity of public order, to which the piety of
the times is so well inclined? What say you to the good work which is now in
hand? Shall such page 3.
a poor trifling piece of work as this, discountenance these sublime
intentions? Non sinam, non patiar, non feram. And thus our Coal sparkles and
lays about him.

But surely these demonstrations were born in Thebes, and not in Athens, and
being of the true Cadmean brood, do kill and destroy one another; -- Ovid.
Metamorph. lib. 3.
suoque
Mart cadunt subiti per mutua vulnera fratres.
For if the Vicar had power to transpose Tables and set up Altars without and
contrary to the will of his Ordinary, why should he not (in the name of God)
demurre upon the Commands of his Superior in matters of exterior order, and
bid a Fico to your first Argument. But if upon his first demurre in this kind,
imperium intercidit, the Empire Ecclesiastical is at an end, what shall become
of the lusty blade that understood himself better then this extravagant
Ordinary, and of your second kind of Argument? Mary then, if the Piety of the
times, the devotion of some judicious particulars, and a good work, as yet in
Abeyance and pendant in the air, but ready yer long to fall upon our heads,
shall become the Square and Canon of our exterior order in the Church; Barbara
celarent, talk no more of Mood and Figure, for I would not give a button for
all your Syllogismes. So that these Thebane Arguments, that drew their first
breath

Iuven. Satyr.
Vervecum in patria crassoque sub aere, -- are but a kind of Sheeps head
sodden in the wool, and will do the Writer of the Letter no harm at all; being
made of the Pallas adest motae que jubet supponere terrae Vipereos dentes.
Ovid. Metam. l. 3.
tusks, though of a Serpent indeed, yet of a dead toothlesse Serpent. First, as
touching the Reverend Ordinaries of this Land, if there be any that dislike of
their Callings, or conceive of the same as not grounded upon Apostolical, and
(for all the essential parts thereof) upon divine Right; I would he were with
Master Cotton in the New, as unworthy of that most happy government, which (by
the favor of God and the King) all the Laity and Clergy do here enjoy in
the old England. But yet they never had, or challenged unto themselves any such
exorbitant power over their Clergy, and over the Laws and Canons established
(especially over Acts of Parliaments) as this Judicious and learned Divine (as
he writes) but indeed most injudicious and trifling Novice (as he proves
himself) does attribute unto them. Did ever any Bishop covet to command his
Clergy, as a General does his Army in a drunken mutiny, by Martial Law?
And yet this is the very Vino graves They would know whither Varius Crispinus
did drive those Cartloads of Armor. Tacit. Histor. l. 1. c. 83. according to
Gruterus.
President he cites out of Tacitus. No, no, Bishops have ever governed their
Clergy by Canon Law, and not by Cannon shot. God has appointed them to
govern both the Priests and the People subjected unto them according to
certain divine and humane Laws, and that with a power of Moderation, and not
Domination, says a great Bills. de perpetua Guber^^. 1^ p. 352.
Prelate of this Church. Sitting in Synods they might heretofore judge of
Canons, but in their Chaires they are not to judge of Canons, but according to
Canons, says the Gratian. part. 1. did. 4.
Father of all the Canonists. Otherwise why are the Council. Nice^. c. 5. (...)
And therefore they may conqueri de judiciis suorum Episcoporum. Council. Afric.
sub Aug. Can. 28.
Appeals by Canon Law as ancient in the Church of God, as the Canons
themselves? But because it is possible a Prelate may propose unto himself,
some peevish, wrangling, and waspish humor of his own, in stead of a Canon?
No ecclesiastical Judge whatsoever is to guide himself by his Exir. de
Constitut. c. 1.
own sense, but by the authority of the Canons. It is true indeed, that our
reverend Archbishops and Bishops shops here in England had a power (in Synod)
to make Declaratories and Revocatories of their Common Law (as they term it)
to set penalties where they were wanting, and aggravate them where they were
deficient, and to make Additaments to the constitutions of the Pope himself;
but still with this Lindwood in c. Presbyt. verbo Iuramento, de Majotit. and
Obedient.
proviso, that they do not overthrow the jus commune, and cross the general
Laws of Gods Church. But this power they had heretofore, it being now quite
taken away by 25. H. 8. c. 19.
King Henry the Eighth. And that not for the reason some have given thereof,
Considerations of the Government of Bishops.
because the state of the Clergy was then thought a suspected part to the
Kingdom, in their late homage to the Bishop of Rome: (for there were as great
Cum esset Ra^isponae, nec adhuc Episcopus aut Cancellarius, dicebat fuisse in
arbitrio Regis statuta abrogare and ritus novos instituere Calvin. in Amos. c.
7. v. 13.
Royalists in those days as in any age sithence whatsoever) but for the
reasons I gave in the Chapter before; that these Ecclesiastical Jurisdictio^s
were the native Roses, and Lilies of the Crown, not first pricked in by Gardener
the Bishop, but grafted and deeply rooted in the same by the first Genes. 2.
Gardener we read of from the very beginning. So that the power of making and
executing such Canons being ceased, if the Ordinaries now command, where there
is no Law or former Canon in force, it lays a burden and grievance upon the
subject, from which he may appeal, as being a thing unjust, and Lindwood in c.
Quia inconveniens.
consequently of a nature whereunto obedience is no way due. Nor do our
reverend Bishops otherwise conceive it. Bills. de perpet. Eccles Gubern. ^. 14.
p. 341.
Whatsoever by the Laws of God, the Prince, or the Church, is once constituted,
is no longer to be mooted upon, but absolutely obeyed by all inferiors. And
what God, the King, and Church have directed, is not to be put to deliberation,
but to execution. And D. Field of the Church. l. 5. c. 27.
another learned man says truly, that we make not the power of the Bishops to
be Princely, but Fatherly, and dirigible by the Laws. And Master Preface to
his Works.
Hooker gives the reason hereof: When public consent of the whole has
established any thing, every man's judgment being thereunto compared is
private, howsoever his calling be to some kind of public charge. Now it is
true as P. 15.
Dr. Coal notes, that in all doubts that may arise how to understand, do and
execute the things contained in our Liturgy, a deciding power is left to the
Bishop of the Diocese, to take order by his discretion for the quieting of the
same. But it is as true, that Coal dasheth out with an etc. the main Proviso of
this power; Preface before the Book of Com. Prayer.
So that the same Order be not contrary to any thing contained in this Book.
And therefore it is untrue what he says in the end of his Pamphlet, That the
Ordinary has an Authority of his own (as he is Ordinary) to place the holy
Table in one or other situation, more than what is given him (is case of doubt
and diversity only) by the foresaid Preface. All which I have opened the more
at large, to show the raw and indigested Crudities, that this judicious Divine
imposes upon us; not that I would advise any Clergyman, of what degree
soever, to oppose his Ordinary, either in this or any other particular of so
low a nature. Far be it from me to do so. That is a Doctrine -- nigro carbone
notanda, to be defended only by Dr Coal. I say, that all Commands of the King
(for this Fellow jumbles again P. 2. Should we ^ly off from our duty at sight
of every new device, we should soon find a speedy dissolution both of Church
and State.
the King and the Bishop, tanquam Regem cum regulo, like a Wren mounted upon
the feathers of an Eagle) that are not upon the first inference and illation
(without any Prosyllogismes) contrary to a clear passage in the Word of God,
or to an evident Sunbeam of the Law of Nature; are precisely to be obeyed. Nor
is it enough, to find a remote and possible inconvenience, that may ensue
therefrom; (which is the ordinary objection against the book of Recreations)
For every good subject is bound in We would not hive our Subjects so much to
mistake our Judgment, so much to mistrust our Zeal, as though We either could
not discern what were to be done, or would not do all things in due time. K.
Edw. Proclam. before the Co^mun. 1548.
Conscience to believe and rest assured, that his Prince (environed with such a
Counsel) will be more able to discover, and as ready to prevent any ill sequel
that may come of it, as himself possibly can be. And therefore I must not by
disobeying my Prince, commit a certain Sin, in preventing a probable but
contingent inconveniency. And then in the next place, for the Bishop or
Ordinary: If he command according to the Laws and Canons confirmed, (for
otherwise he is in his Eccentricks, and moves not as he should do) why then,
insuch a case as we had even now, that is, a Case Quid si dubite^ subditus,
utrum quod praecipitur sit contra Deum vel non? Respondeo; Debet obedire. Sum.
Rosell. Sum. Angel. Sum. Sylvest. in verbo Obedientia. Quoties subditus
convenienti inquisitione certificari non potest, obedire debet, and obediend^
excusatur, etiamsi dubites an agat contra praeceptum Dei vel non. Sylv. ex
Raimundo. Vide Pedro de Ledesma. ^um. part. 2. trat. 15. c. 1. So in the
Partidas. Part. 1. tit. 23. Ley 11. En esto es tenud^ el menor de fazer la
voluntad de su mayor ( that is) The lesser in this case is to follow the will
of the Greater. See then for the Canon Law. Hostiens. Sum. lib. 1. de majorit.
and obed. Gl. in c. ad Aures. De tempore Ordin. in Gl. 2. et Gl. 1. in c. Qui
contra morem. 1. did. et text. cum Gl. in c. Admonendi. Did. 2. q. 7.
of diversity, Doubt and Ambiguity, he is punctually to be obeyed by those of
his Jurisdiction, be they of the Clergy, or of the Laity. I say in matters of
doubting and ambiguitie, where the inferior shall be approved of God for his
duty and obedience, and never charged as guilty of Error, for any future
inconvenience. The exceptions from this Rule are very few; in cases only, when
the Command of the Ordinary does expressly oppose Su^ma Rosell verbo Obed.
an Article of Belief, one of the ten Commandments, or the general state and
subsistence of Gods Catholic Church. In all other Cases whatsoever that are
dubious, the inferior is bound to believe his superior, says the most wise
and learned of all the Tolet. Instruct. Sac. de 7 pecc. c. 15. See Gloss. in 1
Decret. tit. 11. c. 5. Si dubium sit praeceptum, propter bonum obedientia
excusatur a peccato, licet in veritate sit malum.
Jesuits. This point well poised and considered, would clear a world of Errors
both in Church and Commonwealth. And therefore I will set down in the Margent
some of my best Authors that confirm it. I have not heard (I protest
sincerely) of any Lord Bishop, that has exacted of his Diocese the placing of
the Holy Table, as this man would have it, and do believe this passage of his
to be rather a Prophecy, what he means to do when he comes to his Rochet, then
a true History of any Diocesan that has acted it already. But howsoever, as
long as the Liturgy continues as it is (without offense to any man in place
be it spoken) I had far leiver be he should obey, then he that should
peremptorily command, in this kind of Alteration. And my reason for this,
shall be the reason and expression of a wise and learned man. Hookers Eccles.
Pol. book 4. d. 14. p. 16^.
If it be a Law which the custom and continual practice of many years has
continued in the minds of men, to alter it must needs be troublesome and
scandalous. It amazeth them, it causes them to stand in doubt, whether any
thing be in it self by nature good or evil, and not all things rather such as
men at this or that time agree to account of them; when they behold those
things disproved, disannulled, and rejected, which use had made in a manner
natural. And so in all respect and humility to their high places and
callings, I leave those reverend persons herein to their own wisdom and
discretion.

But that Mounsieur the halfe-Vicar should have a power to remove (of his own
head) the Communion Table from that place of the Quire it had hitherto stood in
from the very first Reformation, and to call that an Altar, which his Rubric
never calls otherwise then a Table, and to be enabled to this by the Canons,
and to be a Judge of the conveniencie of the standing thereof, yea a more
competent Judge, then the Ordinary and his Surrogates, and no way to permit the
Church Officers to do what they are enjoyed by their immediate Superiors, is
such a piece of Ecclesiastical polity, as (were it but countenanced by many
of these judicious Divines) would quickly make an end of all Discipline in the
Church of England. Here is not only Page 3.
I. C. but T. C. up and down, and New England planted in the midst of the Old.
O foolish Vicar of Page 3.
Boston, that would needs take Sanctuary as far as America, to shelter himself
from Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction! Whereas had he but made a permutation with
his next Neighbor, the Vicar of Gr. and gotten but the acquaintance of these
judicious Divines (as they passed by that Road) he might have done what he
would in his own Church, Mart. l. 6. Ep. 70.
Ostendens digitum, sed impudicum,
Alconti, Dasioque Symmachoque,
in despite of the Ordinary and all his Officers. I am afraid that these
judicious Divines that tamper so much in Doctrine with Sancta Clara, and in
Discipline with Notis in Epist. Molin. ad Bals.
Sancta Petra, His Book against Dr. Kellison.
Flood and Le Maistre Instaurat. Episcop. antiqui status. c. 1. ad Epist.
Lomclii.
Lomeley, will prove in the end but prejudicious Divines to the estates of
Bishops. I am sure this Tenet is in the highest degree Jesuitical, and that
the solid Divines, both of ancient and later times, were of another opinion.
(...) Clem. Romans Ep. ad Corinth. p. 57.
To impair the power of Bishops is no little sin. (...) Ignat. Ep ad Smyrn.
(...). Idem in Ep. ad Trall ^s. (...). Idem Ep. ad Ephesians.
Let no man presume, to dispose of any thing belonging to the Church, without
the Bishop, says Ignatius. For he that does otherwise, does tear ( (...)
Ignat. Ep ad Smy^^.
as you would do a bough from a tree) the unity, sodder, and comely order
that should be amongst Gods people. Suffer nothing to be done in that kind
without thine own approbation, says the same Father writing to a Epist. ad
Polycarp. (...).
Bishop. And this advice was so well approved of in the Primitive Church, that
word for word it was inserted into the body of that famous Counsel of Council.
Laod. Can. 57. (...). Codex Canon. Eccles. Univers. Can. 161.
Laodicea, Anno 364. The word used both by Ignatius and the general Council
is (...), to be active and stirring in these businesses. And therefore the
Priest must needs (in despite of our Doctor and Page 10.
his Doctrine) keep him still to his meditations, and be a looker on, until
his Ordinary shall otherwise direct and appoint him. Especially in the matter
controverted, which is Erecting of Altars. For the Case must be taken as it is
in the For the first; If you should erect any such Altar, (which I know you
will not.)
Letter (and was in truth and verity) not as this poor Mooter does page 52.
reasonably (that is, against all the Laws of reasoning) presume it. For to
presume a thing against the words of his adversary, is not to take a case, but
to make a case; which will be laughed at in the Inns of Court. There were some
Priests in France and Germany, that encouraged thereunto by the Chorepiscopi or
Countrey-Suffragans, did presume, in the absence of their Bishops, Leo Epist.
88.
erigere altaria, to erect Altars. And this about the time of Theodosius the
younger. But Leo the great tells them plainly, they had no more power to erect,
then they had to consecrate an Altar; and that the Novells and Canons
Ecclesiastical did utterly Siquidemnec erigere ils altaria, nec Eccle. sias
vel altaria consecrare licet. Vide Bin. Council. general. Tom. 1. P. 990.
in hibite single Priests to do either the one or the other. Whereupon not many
years after, about the time of Justinian the Emperor, Hormisda^ made an
absolute decree to inhibite Priests to erect any Altars in this kind, under
pain of deprivation, as we read in 3 part. did. 1. Absque Episcopi permissu in
Ecclesia consecrata non erigatur altar. Vide Bin. Conc. genesis Tom. 2. p. 368.
Gratian, and elsewhere Which places I do not (for all that) press
dogmatically, as conceiving the Vicar would be so absurd to dogmatize any such
matter, as you perceiv^ the writer of the Letter seems to excuse him; no^ was
that the Error of the Germane Priests: bu^ I press it only historically, to
let you see, that if such a Rumor had been raised in the Church (as we all
know the Vicars behavior did raise in the Neighborhood) 1100 years ago, what
severitie they would have used to chastise the insolency. And no marvel, if
you consider well what I shall now represent unto you: That the very Video enim
esse legem veterem Tribunitiam, quae vet uit in jussu plebis aedes, terram,
aram consecrate. Cic. Orat. pro domo sua ad Pontifices, quae est. Or. 29.
Romans themselves, in the time of their Republic, would never assent that a
private man should presume to erect an Altar. But that which I press for
doctrine is this. Illa potestas quae est ligandi and solvendi in soro
judiciali, datur in consecratione Episcopi; alia, in consecratione Sacerdo.
tum, quando dicitur, Quaecunque, remiscritis, etc. Hugo de Sancto Victore apud
Halens.
That a single Priest, qua talis, in that formality and capacity only as he
is a Priest, has no Key given him by God or man, to open the doors of any
Sacerdotes non habent potestatem ligandi vel solvendi in foro Causae, and tamen
absolvunt in foro Poenitentiae. Hol. part. 4. q. 21. membro 4.
external jurisdiction. He has a Consistory within, in foro Poenitentiae, in
the Conscience of his Parishioners, and a key given him upon his Institution,
to enter into it. But he has no Consistory without, in foro Causae, in meddling
with ecclesiastical Causes, unless he borrow a key from his Ordinary. For
although they be Licet sit una potestas ligandi and solvendi hinc and inde, non
tamen qui habet potestatem ejusmodi ad hunc actum, habet came ad illum actum.
Alex. Hal. ibid. Non est alia in essentia, sed in alium usum se extendit. ibid.
the same keys, yet one of them will not open all these wards: the Consistory
of outward jurisdiction being not to be opened by a Quando consecratus
Episcopus, non confertur alia clavis, sed extenditur usus illius primae clavis:
unde dicitur accipere baculum, i. e. amplio^em potestatem. ibid. Sic Estius in
4. Sentent. d. 18.. 2.
Key alone, but (as you may observe in some great men's Gates) by a Key and a
staff, which they usually call a Crosier. This I have ever conceived to be the
ancient Doctrine in this kind, opposed by none but professed Puritanes. They
tell us indeed, that the Bishops power Altar Damast. c. 4. p. 114.
was the poisonous Egg out of which Antichrist was hatched, that it is mere
tyranny, because it takes all Ibid. p. 113.
to the Bishop and his Officers, and turns the Vicars to Soliloquies and
Meditations; whereas the Mr. Hooker in his Preface.
Minister holds all his authority unto the spiritual charge of the house of
God, even immediately from God himself, without dependence from King or
Bishop. But all learned men of the Church of England, that are truly judicious
Divines, do adhere to that former doctrine. They Dr. Field of the Church, l. 5.
c. 27. p. 498.
allow the Schoolmens double power, that of order, and that of jurisdiction;
and the subdivision of this jurisdiction, to the internal and external,
appropriating this last to the Bishops only. They say clearly, that all Mr.
Hooker in his Preface.
consecrated persons have not the power of jurisdiction; They ask you roundly,
Answer to the Admonition, Tract. 2. p. 87.
Who shall judge what is most comely? Shall every private man? Or rather such
as have chief care and Government in the Church? And for the Minister, whom
you would have wholly employed, they conceive, that generally he is a man, Mr.
Hooker in his Preface.
though better able to speak, yet little, or no whit apter to judge then the
rest; and that to give him a domineering power in matters of this nature, were
to bring in as many petty Popes, as there are Parishes and Congregations. But
the written Law and speaking Law of this Kingdom, are above all testimonies
that can be produced, the one appointing the Page 11.
Bishop of the Diocese only in the Affirmative, and the other excluding the
particular Page 66.
fancy of any humourous persons in the Negative, from assigning out these
matters of Conveniencie in Gods service. And the reason why this private Vicar
should not (without farther directions) call the holy Table an Altar, is set
down in the Letter, but not touched by you, and is a stronger one then your
Headpiece is capable of. Page 74.
Because the Church in her Liturgy and Canons, does call it a Table only. It
seems by you, we are bound only to pray, but not to speak the words of the
Canons. I have been otherwise taught by learned men. Vbicu^que habemus legem
vel cano^ nem, non debemus allega^e rationem, nisi lege vel canone desiciente.
Barbatus in Clement. de Elect. c. 1. n. 11.
That where we have a Law and Canon to direct us how to call a thing, we ought
not to hunt after reasons and conceits, to give it another Appellation. Verba
aliquid operaridebent. c. Si Papa de Privileg. in 6. Et nota in margin, quod
argumentum a verbis valet.
And that every word has that operation in construction of Law, that we may
draw our Argument from the words, as from so many Topic places. Which the
Writer of the Letter seems to do in this passage. The Rubric and the Canons
call it nothing but a Table; and therefore do not you, a poor Vicar in the
Country, call it an Altar. The writer does not deny but that the name has
been Letter P. 75.
long in the Church, in a Metaphorical usurpation, nor would he have blamed
the Vicar, if he had in a Quotation from the Fathers, or a discourse in the
Pulpit, named it an Altar in this borrowed sense: but to give the usual call
of an Altar, unto that Church-utensill, which the Law ( Regula communis est,
Quod statutorum verba proprie intelliguntur. Decius in lege, Non vult haeres,
de regulis juris.
(that always speaks properly) never calls otherwise then by the name of a
Table, is justly by him disliked, and by this Gallant lamentably defended. For
I appeal to all indifferent men, that pretend to any knowledge in Divinity;
If the Reading-pew, the Pulpit, and any other place in the Church, be not as
properly an Altar for prayer, praise, thanksgiving, Page 8.
memory of the Passion, dedicating of our selves to Gods very service, and the
Churches Box or Basin, for that Oblation for the poor which was used in the
primitive times, as is our holy Table howsoever situated or disposed. Or if it
be the Priest only that can offer a Sacrifice (which in these spiritual
Sacrifices we When the old Fathers called the Mass or Supper of the Lord a
Sacrifice, they meant that it was a Sacrifice of Iaud and thanksgiving. And to
as well the people as the Priest do Sacrifice. Archb. Cramner, Defense of the
Sacram. 1550. c. 16. sol. 115. And again, Christ made no such difference
between the Priest and the Layman, that the Priest should make oblation and
sacrific^ of Christ for the Layman, Ide^ ibid. c. 11. f. 111.
utterly deny) what one sacrifice does he infer out of the Collects read by
the Priest at the Communion Table, which are not as easily deduced out of the
Te Deum, or Benedictus, said in the Quire or Reading-pew^ Is there no praying,
praising, acknowledging or thanksgiving, commemorating of the Passion, and
consecrating of our selves to Gods service in these two hymns? And therefore
if that be enough to make an Altar, and that these judicious Rabbis mean not
somewhat else then for fear of our gracious King they dare speak out, this man
must change the Motto of his book, and say, Habenius Altaria, we have 10000
Altars. Whereas no place in all the Church, does offer unto us the body and
blood of Christ, in the outward forms of bread and wine, beside the holy Table
only. And consequently if a Name be invented to (...) Etymolog. ^^ag. p. 626.
divide and sever one particular thing from another, or to (...) rei, a
juvando, quasi (...), cujus usu rem agnosceres. Jul. Scaliger de Cause. Ling.
La^. c. 76. Est enim instrumentum quasi quoddam cognitionis, Imago quaedam qua
quid ^oscitur. Ibid.
help us to the knowledge of a particular thing, or that a name be tha^ which
the (...).
Law gives the thing, or that a thing cannot have two distinct and proper
(however it may have twenty Metaphorical) names; then surely a Table ought to
be the distinct and proper (and so the usual) an Altar but the translatitious
and borrowed (and so the more unusual) appellation of that holy utensill. So
that the Writer of the Letter says no more then this: If you have occasion (as
the Fathers had) to amplisie and enlarge the excellency of those Christian
duties, prayer, praise, thanksgiving, (at the time of the Eucharist especially)
abnegation of our selves, almsdeeds, and Charity, and to show unto your
people, that these are the only incense, now under the Gospel, which God
accepts in stead of those thousands of Rams and Odours of Arabia, vanished with
the Law: then in Gods name, -- Fas usum tibi nominis hujus; you may use the
name of Altar as the ancient Fathers do. But when there is no such occasion
offered, and that you speak only with your Neighbors and Churchwardens about
preparing or adorning the Church-Vtensils, what need you then tumble in your
tropes, and roll in your Rhetoric, when the words of the Canon do far better
express the duties enjoined them by the Canon? As therefore you do not in
common discourse call the Church (as the Puritanes in France do) the Temple;
the Bells, the holy Trumpets; the Quire, the Sanctuary; the Font, Jordan; your
Surplice, the holy garment; and your Hood, the Ephod: (although the ancient
writers ordinarily do so) So when the Rubric and Canons do call this sacred
Vtensill a Table, and but a Table, do not you, to be noted only as a Divine of
great Judgment, that is, of whyms and singularity, correcting Magnificat, in
the Articles of your Visit. of the Bishop of Linc^ln, Anno 1622. touching the
Church Art. 5.
Bishops and most Reverend Visit. of the Archbishops grace, Ann. 1 (^^. Artic.
1. verb^ Imprimi^.
Archbishops Page 65.
Visitation, and in the very expression of the King himself, call it an Altar.
And surely that Vicar that will not be taught to word it, neither by the Law,
nor the Rubric, nor the Canon, nor his Bishop, nor his Archbishop, nor the
King himself, Phavorinus apud Gellium.
qui tot imperat Legionibus, is (as they were wont to call a stout Priest) a
very Thomas a Becket, and fitter a great deal to officiate at Bethlem near
Bishopsgate, then at Jerusalem.

Nor had the Ordinary been the wisest man in the world, if having proper
Officers of his own to execute all his Mandates concerning the outward
Vtensills of the Church, he should have directed his Commandments to the Vicar,
or permitted him to command without him. It is not the Ordinary, but the
Apostles themselves, that have turned the Parsons and Vicars from being Active
in this kind, to their diviner Meditations. Act. 6. 2.
It is not reason we should leave the word of God, to serve Tables. The Greek
word is a term of Law, (...), which Erasmus translates a Plea, the French keep
to this day an Arrest or Judgment in Law, as Annot. in Pandect. ex lege ultima
de Senatoribus, fol. 73. p. ^.
Budaeus was taught to enterpret the word by Paulus Aemilius the French
Historiographer. The meaning therefore of the Text is this, Let Dr Coal find as
much fault as he will, that Priests are made dull Spectatours in these affairs;
yet shall he never find any Order, Arrest, or Judgment in the Church of God,
that Priests should meddle with Tables: Because from the time of this Arrest
and sentence pronounced by the Apostles, the Deacons have ever dealt therein; as
Annot. in Act 6. v. 2. Sic tamen, ut Presbyterio sub^ssent.
Beza himself confesses; though he hopes (for otherwise it would burst his
heart) that they were guided therein by the Minister and the Elders. But these
Elders are no elder then Calvin and Beza. And who guided the Deacons we must
learn of the Elders indeed. They were the Eye, says Clemens Romans in 1. Epist.
ad Jacob. fratrem Domini Est enim Diaconus ipsius ^ipiscopi oculus.
one; The Ear, says E (...). Clen. in Constit. Apostol. l. 1. c. 44.
another; The Ministerial servants of the Bishop, says the Council Nicen. Can.
18. (...).
third Authority. Clear it is, that from this time that the Apostles here
Arator lib. 1. in Act. Apostol.
Jura ministerii sacris altaribus apti
In septem statuere viris, --
from these first Deacons, to our present They have in charge omnia ornamenta
and utensilia Ecclesiarum. Canon Steph. de Langt. Lindw. lib. 1. de Off.
Archidia^.
Archdeacons (in whose office the ancient power of the Deacons is united and
concentred) Incumbents have been excluded from meddling with the utensills of
the Church, or ornaments of the Altar. So that the very Altar it self (with the
Rail about it) has been termed in the ancient Counsels, (...). Council. Laod.
Can. 21. Council. Agath. Can. 66.
The Diaconie, as a place belonging (next after the Bishop) to the care and
custody of the Deacon only. Nay, so far were the Ancients from making a
Parish Priest a stickler in Vestry-affairs, that a Sinc Diaconis Sacerdos nomen
habet, officium non habet. Conc. Aqu^sgr. sub Ludov. Pio, c. 7.
Council says clearly, That the Priest can boast of nothing he has in
general, but his bare name; not able to execute his very Office, without the
Authority and Ministry of the Deacon. And to conclude this point with a
president in this very particular: Lib. Quaes^* ex* utroque mixtion. qu. 101.
Nam utique and Altar portarent and vasa ejus.
It was the Deacons Office Portare (mark well the word against anon) to move
and remove the Altar and all the implements belonging thereunto, says S.
Augustine. And if you object, that some question has been made, whether that
Book be S. Augustines; I answer, That he that made that question, concludes
withal, That if it was not written by S. Augustine, it was by an Ex qu* 44.
colligitur cum vixisse ante Augustinum, and I^s^e. on. Cens. in Append ^om. 4.
Oper. Augustine. p. 416.
ancienter Author then S. Augustine, and is evidence good enough for matter of
fact, though peradventure not every where for points of doctrine. And as the
Archdeacon is the Eye, so the Churchwarden (as slight an Opinion as you
conceive of him) is the Hand of the Bishop and the Archdeacon too, to put all
Occononius, cui res Ecclesiastica gubernanda mandatur ab ^pi^copo. Lindw.
Constable. l. 3. de Cleric. non resid. And therforo Churchwardens were called
(...), men employed by him, Council. Gangr. c. 7. and (...), men ordered by the
Bishop. ibid. c. 8.
Mandates in execution, that may concern the Vtensills of the Church. I observe
our Latin Canors in force, by calling him Oecon^mus, do put him beside the
scorn this companion would throw upon him, by making him relate to that ancient
Ecclesiastical Office, famous in the Greek and Latin Counsels. It is true,
he moves now in a lesser Orb, yet with the same influence he did before. At the
first they were, as they are now, Laymen, some (...). Zonar. in Council.
Chalced. Can. 26.
Domestics or kinsmen of the Bishops, who (...). Zonar. ibid. (...). Photius,
tit. 9. c. 1. and ^^, 10. c. 1.
managed all things belonging to the Church (being then matters of good moment
and consequence) according to the direction of the Bishop. But because all the
state of the Church, consisting in those times most-what in goods and chattels
arising from the devotion of the people, was thus transacted in (...). Zonar.
in Council. Chalced.
hugger mugger, inter parts propinquas, by parties so near allied in
references one to another, that it grew very suspicious there might be foul
play in the business, that famous Council of Chalcedon Canon. 26. (...).
ordered peremptorily, That these Churchwardens from that time forward should
be Clergymen, and more esloigned from the Bishops family. Yet did Balsam, in
Synod. 7. Can. 11.
some continue of opinion, (this Canon notwithstanding) that Laymen were
capable of the Office: so that in a Zonar. in Council. Chalced. Canon. 26.
very short revolution of time it reverted to the Laity for altogether. Now
here in England it has been ever held an ancient Office, and much countenanced
as well by the Common as the Canon Law: The Churchwardens being admitted in
all ages, to bring their 11. Henr. 4. fol. 12. and 19. Henr. 6. fol. 66. etc.
Actions at Common Law, for trespasses committed upon the Church-goods,
wherewith they were entrusted. Now that Bishop were a wise piece indeed, who
being complained unto against a Vicar, for removing the holy Table to a place
every way inconvenient, would refer the examination of the Complaint to the
Vicar himself, rather then to his own most ancient Officers; to the Archdeacon,
his Official, or next Surrogate, for the designing; and to the Churchwardens,
for the actual placing of the Table in the most convenient situation. And the
Elders of the Vestry will be little edified with this doctrine, to be made but
Arist. Poli^. lib. 1. c. 1.
(...), (as Aristotle speaks) dead and passive Instruments, to execute the
Commands of the Ordinary and his Surrogates. But all this while the Vicar is
but a dull spectator, and has no Sphere of Activity to move in, but is wholly
left to his private Meditations. And Nos autem otiosos nos putamus, si verbo
tantummodo studere videamur. Amb. in Psalm. 118. Oct. 11.
S. Ambrose indeed does complain of the like complainers in his time, who held,
that the study of the holy Scriptures was but a dull and idle kind of
employment. But then Balt^^s. Castil. Cor^isano, l. 3.
Matto Sancto Petro (as the Charletan said when he saw the Pope in his
Pontificalibus) O simple S. Peter in the sixth of the Acts, that thought it a
far more laborious work, then all this moving and removing of Tables. Regul.
fusior. Reg. 20. (...), page 454.
O foolish S. Basil, that bids his Clergy take especial heed, that their
Martha be not troubled with many things. O dull Synesius, that held it fitter
for an Syves. ep. 57.
Egyptian then a Christian Priest to be over-troubled with matters of
wrangling. Well Doctor, God help the poor people committed to thy Cure; they
are like to find but a sorry Shepherd: one that will be in the Vestry when he
should be in the Pulpit; and by his much nimblenesse in the one, is likely to
show a proportionable heaviness in the other.

But now ventum est ad Triarios, we are drawing on to the maine of his Battle,
and the very pith of his Arguments: That the Writer of the Letter Page 3.
does not show one footstep of Learning or sincere affections to the Orders of
the Church, because he did not (in a private Monition written nine years
before) foresee and make way Page 4.
for a great good work, and the Piety of the times, that were to follow nine
years after. Alas! Ne saevi, magne Sacerdos: Do not lay all this load upon
him, most judicious Divine. For, as you find by your self, that can further
see into things to come, that all Prophets are not Ordinaries; so consider, I
beseech you, in cool blood, that all Ordinaries are not Prophets. L. Henry How.
^^d in his defens^^ive, about the ^6. leaf.
We may discern of things that are, by Sight; that were, by Memory: (...).
Sophocl. in Antig.
but before the proof make show, no man is such a Prophet of the future, that
he knows which way to direct his instructions, says a learned and noble
Writer, out of Sophocles. I am one, I thank God, that have buenas entranas (as
the Spaniards speak) some good and tender bowels within me, and do much pity
the poor man's case, even by mine own. How could he possibly foresee this
great Good work or Piety of these Times, so many years before, which I,
opening my eyes as wide as I can, cannot discover at this very instant? What is
this great Work now in hand? What new Proclamations, Rubricks, Canons,
Injunctions, Articles are come (at the least into these parts) as any special
invitations to the piety of these Times, more then were exhibited to the piety
of all other Times, from the first beginning of the Reformation? Page 66.
His Majesty heard the Cause in the year 1633; and in his Royal decision, he
calls it not Altar, but Communion Table, and leaves the moving and removing
thereof to the discretion of the Ordinary. His Grace, the Metropolitan,
visited these parts in the year 1634; and in all his Articles, does not so
much as mention the word Altar, but calls it (as the Rubric does) a
Communion Table; and puts his Article upon the Churchwarden, and not upon the
Vicar, concerning the decent site and convenient standing of the h^ly Board.
Articles to be enqui^ed of in the Metropoliticall Visitation, for the Diocese
of Lincoln, 1634. Art. 1.
Whether have you in your Church, a convenient and decent Communion Table? etc.
And whether is the same Table placed in such convenient sort within the
Chancell or Church, at that the Minister may be best heard in his Ministry and
the Administration, and that the greatest number may communicate? And whether
is it so used (out of time of Divine Service) as is not agreeable to the holy
use of it? etc. And his Lordship or Diocesan visiting the very next year,
1635. (as a burnt child, and dreading the fire) puts the Articles to be
enquired of in the Diocese of Lincoln, 1635. Artic. 1.
same Article in haec verba, in the very front of his own Book. Sithence that
time we have heard no Ring but of the lesser Bells, in this Tune. And Articles
for the Visitation of the Archdeac. of Redford, 1636.
one of these I hear chyming at this very instant: Whether have you in your
Church a decent Table for the Communion, conveniently placed? And all these
concurring with the conceit of the Letter, in every particular; in the name of
a Communion Table, and not an Altar; in the place of the Church or Chancell,
not of the East End only; in the distinct (not confused time) of receiving and
not-receiving* in the Account of the convenience of the situation to be rendered
by the Churchwarden, not the Vicar; how shall I that live at this day (much
less the Writer of the Letter, dead, peradventure, nine years ago) reasonably
discover (to use your own phrase) that Good work now in hand, and the special
inclination of these times to a peculiar kind of piety, differing from the
piety of former times, which under the peaceable Reigns of Queen Elisabeth,
King James, and King Charles, the Church of God, in these parts, has most
h^ppily enjoyed? Surely, I do reasonably presume, that (these dreams of Dr.
Coal notwithstanding) Eccles. 4. 9.
The thing that has been, it is that which shall be; and that which is done,
is that which shall be done; and that (in matters of this nature) there is no
new thing under the Sun. Because wise men tell us, that Mr. Hooker Ecel. pol.
l. 4. did. 14. p. 67.
change of Laws, especially in matters of Religion, must be warily proceeded
in: And because Archb. Whitgift, Defense of the Answer to the Admonition,
Tract. 2. fell. 86.
there is no manner of Reason, that the orders of the Church should so depend
upon one or two men's liking or disliking, that she should be compelled to alter
the same so often as any should be therewith offended. For what Church is void of
some contentious persons and quarrellers, whom no order, no reason, no
reformation can please? I should therefore reasonably presume, that this Good
work in hand, is but the second part of Sancta Clara, and a froathy speculation
of some fe^, who by tossing the ball of Commendations, the one to the other, do
style themselves (by a kind of Canting) judicious Divines: Whereas they be
(generally) as you may observe by this poor Pamphleter, doctiss^^orum hominum
indoctissimum genus (as In Colloqu.
E^asmus spoke of another the like) men learned only in unlearned Liturgies;
beyond that, of no judgment and less Divinity. For who but one whose Ruff
(as Sir Edward Coke was wont to say) is yellow, and his head shallow, would
propound these wild conceits of an imaginary Piety of the times, and a
Platonicall Idea of a good work in hand, for a Model to reform such a
well-composed Church as the Church of England? And if any Reformation of the
name, the situation, or use of the Communion Table, were seriously in hand,
what man of the least discretion, but would take the Magistrate along with him?
Proclamation before the Communion, 1548.
The bounden duty of Subjects is to be content to follow Authority, and not
enterprising to run before it. Archbishop Whitgift, Answer to the Adm. p. 86,
and 87.
For if you let every Minister do what he list, speak what he list, alter what
he list, and as often as him list, upon a general pretense of a Good work in
hand, or the Piety of the times, you shall have as many kinds of Religion, as
there be Parishes, as many Sects, as Ministers, and a Church miserably torn in
pieces with mutability and diversity of opinions.

But there is Page 13, and 14.
much (you say) to be said in defense thereof, out of the Acts and Monuments,
and some Acts of Parliame^ts. Much good do it you, with that Much, so as you
eat cleanly, and do not slubber and slabber your Quotations of those Books, in
which all sorts of men are thoroughly versed. First, Jo. Frith calls it The
Sacrament of the Altar. Does he so? Then surely it was long before the
Reformation, and when every man called it so. For he was Act. and Mon. page 2.
fol. 309, and 310.
burned 4o Julii, 1533. But where does he so call it? Yes, he says in his
Letter, They examined me touching the Sacrament of the Altar. Why man, they
called it so, not he. Those words are the words of the Article objected against
him. They are their words, not his. He does not once call it so in all his long
discourse. Turn but the Ibid. fol. 308.
leaf, and you shall hear him interpret himself. I added moreover, that their
Church (as they call it) Their Church, as they call it; Their Sacrament of the
Altar, as they call it. If you will know how he calls it, in that dawning of the
Reformation, look upon the Books penned by himself, not the Interrogatories
ministed by Sr Tho. More, or some others. He calls it every where, Answer to M.
Mores third book, fol. 102.
The Sacrament of Christ's body. Nay he is not there content; but desires, that
all the Church had called it otherwise. Answer to M. Mores fourth book, fol.
111.
I would it had been called (as it is indeed, and as it was commanded to be)
Christ's Memorial. And to call it a Sacrifice, is (says he) just as if I
should set a Ibid.
Copon before you to breakfast, when you are new come home, and say, This is
your Welcome-home: whereas it is indeed a Capon, and not a Welcome-home. And if
you will believe his Adversary, Answer to Frith's Letter, Oper. fol. 835.
Sr Thomas More, None spoke so homely of this Sacrament, as Jo. Frith, no not
Friar Barnes himself. Making this Bridegrooms ring of gold but even a proper
ring of a rush. So that vouz avez Jo. Frith. Let him, in Gods name, come up to
the Bar. The next man is Jo. Lambert. And he says, Page 15.
I make you the same Answer to the other six Sacraments, as I have done unto
the Sacrament of the Altar. But tell me (in my ear) I pray you, How does he
begin that Answer to the Sacrament of the Altar? It is but 14 lines before in
your Act. and M^^ part 2. p^^
own Book. Whereas in your sixth Demand you do enquire, Whether the Sacrament
of the Altar, etc. All these words of enqui^y are theirs, man, not his. What is
his Answer? I neither can, nor will answer one word. And so Jo. Lambe^t answers
there not one word for you. Yea, but he does in another place. That (...)
Christ is said to be offered up, no (...) every year at Easter, but also
everyday, in the celebra^^ on of the Sacrament, because his oblation once (...)
made is thereby represented. This likewise is (...) to be spoken long before any
Reformat^^^ (...) hand: For Lambert was also martyred (...) But are you sure
these words are his? I am sure you know the contrary, if you have read the next
words following. Even so says S. Augustine. The words are the words of an
honest man, but your dealing in this kind is scarce honest. John Lambert does
qualify them afterward; that S. Augustines meaning was, That Christ was all
this, in a certain manner or wise. He was an Oblation, as he was a Lion, a
Lamb and a door: that is, (as we said before) a Metaphorical and improper
Oblation, which never relates unto an Altar. Vouz avez an honest man, John
Lambert: But stand you by for a Mountebank, John Coal. The next, is the most
Reverend and learned Archbishop, who notwithstanding his opposition to the
Statute of the 6 Articles, yet uses the phrase or Page 15.
term of Sacrament of the Altar, as formerly, without taking thereat any
offense. Page 443. And are you sure he does so in that page? Are you sure of
any thing? I am now sure he names not that Sacrament at all, either in that
page, or in any other near unto it. The Treatise there set down, is of J^hn Fox
his composition, and set forth in his own name. It mentions indeed, in the
Confutation of the first Article, the Sacrament of the Altar, but with such a
peal after it, as none but a mad man would cite him for this purpose. Act. and
Mon. 2. part. p. 443.
This monstrous Article of theirs, in that form of words as it stands, etc.
And so the Lord Archbishop says as much as John Lambert, that is, not one word
for him. The next in order is John Philpot: whose speech this cruel man has
sore pinch't upon the rack, to get him to give some evidence on his side. He
wriggles and wrests all his words and syllables, that the Quotation is (very
near) as true a Martyr as the man himself. I am sure he has lop't off the
Head, that had a shrewd tale to tell, and the feet of his Discourse, which walk
a quite contrary way to Dr Coals purpose, leaving the Relation, like Plutarch.
in Philopoem.
Philopoemenes his Army, all Belly, The Head is this: I must needs ask a
Question of Dr Chedsey concerning a word or twain of your supposition (yours,
not his own) that is, of the Sacrament of the Altar; What he means thereby;
and, Whether he takes it, as some of the Ancient Writers do, terming the Lords
Supper the Sacrament of the Altar (for the Reasons there set down and mentioned
by Dr Coal) or Whether you take it otherwise, for the Sacrament of the Altar
which is made of Lime and Stone, over the which the Sacrament ^hangeth. And
hearing they meant it this later way, he declares himself, Then I will speak
plain English, That the Sacrament of the Altar is no Sacrament at all. How like
you John Philpot? You shall have more of him. Act. and Mon. part. 3. p. 571.
St Austinwith other ancient Writers do call the holy Communion, or the Supper
of the Lord, The Sacrament of the Altar, in respect it is the Sacrament of the
Sacrifice, which Christ offered upon the Altar of the Cross: The which
Sacrifice all the Altars and Sacrifices upon the Altars in the old Law did
prefigure and shadow. The which pertains nothing to your Sacrament, hanging
upon your Altars of Lime and stone. Christoph. No does? I pray you, what
signifies Altar? Philip. Not, as you falsely take it, materially, but for the
Sacrifice of the Altar of the Cross. Christoph. Where find you it ever so
taken? Philip. Yes: Habemus Altar. Christoph. Well, God bless me out of your
company. And I believe, so says Dr Coal (if his hue would permit him to
blush) by this time. For this man has done all your business. He tells, how he
came to use the term of Sacrament of the Altar, to wit, out of S. Austin, and
some other of the Fathers; he tells us, it was not by way of Approbation, but by
way of supposition; and lastly, what he conceives of the conveniencie of the
particular in Question, a Material Altar. And in another place he expresses
himself yet further; Act. and Mon. part. 3. p. 553.
And as touching their Sacrament which they term of the Altar -- They term it
so, not he. Jury Philpot. The next is Reverend Latimer; who grants (says P.
16.
he) very plainly, that the Doctors call it so in many places, though there be
no propitiatory Sacrifice, but only Christ. Still this is not to prove (no not
by one Witness) what you undertake; That the Martyrs did call this Sacrament
of themselves and their own expressions, The Sacrament of the Altar. This
Reverend man says, that the Doctors call it so, and especially S. Austin, as
he speaks a little before: he does not call it so himself. And what does he
add, concerning those Doctors that call it so, in the very next words to
these which are quoted by you? speak truth, man, and shame the Devil; for he
is the old Clipper of speeches. Well, I must do it for you. The Doctors might
be deceived in some points: I believe them, when they say well: or, as it is in
the Margent, Doctores legendi sunt cum venia, The Doctors must be pardoned, if
they sometimes slip in their expressions. And this is all that you have gained
by Reverend Latimer. The last you produce in this kind, is Bishop Ridley. And
he is for you not only, but also. First he says, that in the Sacrament of the
Altar is the natural body and blood of Christ. But why do you leave out still
those few words that go before? You know they are these; Act. and Mon. part 3.
fol. 492.
To the Question thus I answer. What is the Question then? Turn the leaf, and
look. Article 1. We do object to thee, Nicolas Ridley, etc. That thou have
openly defended, that the true and natural body of Christ is not really
present in the Sacrament of the Altar. What says he? To the Question I answer,
That in the Sacrament of the Altar, etc. So that the word is the word
articulated upon him, not his. And he could not possibly avoid the repeating of
it, unless he should mutare terminos, and so confound all method of
Disputation. But in all his own voluntary expressions in all that Conference,
he never calls it, The Sacrament of the Altar, but the Sacrament of the
Communion only. The which Communion he there affirms to be only a memory of
Christ's Passion. Which is the Doctrine I have all this while endeavored to
prove, to have no relation at all to a material Altar. In answering that place
in Cyrill, objected by the Bishop of Lincoln, (whereby that Bishop would fain
prove, that as erecting of Altars in Britanny did imply that Christ was come
and believed on in those parts; so the plucking of them down, as B. Ridley had
done, was sufficient to imply, that Christ as yet was not come in the flesh) he
says, as you say, That the word Altar in Scripture, signifies as well the
Altar of the Jews, as the Table of the Lords Supper: alluding, without all
question, to Hebr. the 13. as Philpot but even now expounded that place. But
that the Bishop of Lincoln should apply that Altar whereof S. Cyrill spoke, to
those material Altars pulled down in the Reformation under Edw. the sixth, B.
Ridley (in the midst of his great Afflictions) could not hear without a little
smiling. D. Ridley smiling answered. And then taking up his countenance again,
he tells him freely; That the removing of Altars was done upon just
considerations; and, That the Supper of the Lord was not at any time better,
ministered, nor more duly received, then when these Altars were taken down. And
would you know how he placed his Table, when these Altars were gone? Act and
Mon. part. 2. p. 700.
When some used the Table Altar-wise, he determined, that to use it as a Table,
was most agreeable to Scripture. And as B. Ridley smiled dat the B. of Lincoln,
so would the B. of Lincoln (were he alive) smile heartily at you, that would
bring such a passage as this to defend your Altars.

Having thus impannell'd his Jury, he begins to open his Evidence, for the
Sacrament of the Altar, out of the Laws of the Land, 1o Edv. 6. c. 1. revived
1o Elis. c. 1. but with the same felicity he produced those worthy Martyrs,
that is, to witness point blank against himself. For in this Quotation, he
does but peep over the Wicket, and touch upon the Title of the Statute: he
dares not for his ears open the door, and enter in to the Body thereof. It is
enough for him, that in the Title, The Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ is (at that time before the Statute of the six Articles was actually
repealed) said to be commonly called, The Sacrament of the Altar. Therefore
says he, That Name of the Sacrament of the Altar does occur in that Statute
still in force. First, I deny it to be the Name in that place, but the Addition
only of the blessed Sacrament, of the body and blood of Christ. The Sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ is the Name, and true Name; the other is only
an Addition Exposition of the Terms of the Law, p. 12.
given unto this Sacrament, over and beside the proper name thereof, whereby it
might be certainly known in this dawning of the Reformation: the darkness of
Popery, and the terror of the six Articles being not as yet dispelled from
the belief or language of the fearful multitude. So one Hume is said to be at
this time* convicted before Archbishop Cranmer, for denying somewhat Act. and
Mon. part 2. p. 655.
in the Sacrament (as it was then called) of the Altar. Then; Then was a time,
which the Frenchmen call Pour denoter les rets de la nuict nous disons enter
chien and loup. Pasq. des Recher. che^ de la Fr. l. 8. c. 15.
Enter Chien and Loup, so early in the Morning of our Religion, as a man could
not (without some special Character) discern a Dog from a Wolf; a name given
by God himself, from a name given by the invention of man, unto that blessed
Sacrament. Secondly, I utterly deny, that the Act of Parliament takes it for
the Name: It takes it clearly for the Nickname of that Sacrament. Come in with
shame enough into the Body of the Act, and see what imposture you print for the
people. 1o Edv. 6. 1.
The most comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ, commonly called, The Sacrament of the Altar, and in Scripture, The
Supper and Table of the Lord, The Communion and partaking of the body and blood
of Christ. Here is (I confess) some strife and contention about the naming of
the Child. The Commonaltie and Corruptions of the time (and, as I shall show
anon, the Course of the Common Law) name it one way, the holy Scripture another
way. And Cic. de Oratore, lib. 1.
if it were a matter de stillicidiis (as Tully speaks) a matter of Custom or
Prescription, that two or three Goodfellows might eeke it out with an Oath
before a Jury of the same feather, I think it would go hard with both Church
and Scripture. But in a matter of the most venerable Sacrament of the Christian
Religion, and before a Learned and Judicious Divine, (as his best friend, his
Alter ego, styles him) me thinks there should be no question, but that the holy
Scripture should carry it quite away; and that The Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ, The Supper, or The Communion, should be the right name, and
The Sacrament of the Altar the Nickname or vulgar Appellation only of this
blessed Sacrament. But a penal Law, as this is, was to take notice, not only
of the proper name, but of every Appellation, whatsoever this blessed Sacrament
enjoined to be had in reverence by that Law, was at that time known by and
discerned. Brook^ Abridgement, verbo Misnon^e^, ex 1o Edv. 4. fol. 82.
A man may be known by twenty Names, and yet have but one Name, say the learned
in our Laws: The Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, as by the right
name; of the Altar, as a thing known by, says the Statute. It is so called
indeed, but not by the Law of God, nor by the Law of Man, but commonly, that
is, by the common Error, and Popery of those times. Learn Doctor, learn to
language this Sacrament from a Prelate of this Church, from whom you may well
learn as long as you live. Answer to the Gagger, p. 251.
The Sacrament (as you call it) of the Altar. Gaggers of Protestants call it
so, Protestants themselves do not. For there has been much alteration in this
Church and State, (God be praised for it) and all in melius, and all confirmed
by Acts of Parliament sithence that Time. Rubric before the Comm. in K. Edw.
Liturgy of 1549. f. 121.
This very Sacrament was then commonly called the Mass, and allowed to be so
called by 2o and 3o Ed. 6. c. 1. and Injunct. of K. Edw. Injunct. 21.
Act of Parliament, and in that Appellation appointed to be so sung or said,
all England over. I hope it is not so Now. 23* Elis. c 1.
For every person that shall now say or sing Mass, shall forfeit the sum of
200 Marks, etc. And if Dr Coal shall report of me, that I have said Mass, when
I have only administered the Communion, I shall have against him my remedy in
Law, as in a cause of foul Slander. And presently after this Act was revived by
Q. Elisabeth, there was at the same Session an The later part of the Catechism
added in Q. Elis. her Liturgy.
Addition made to the Catechism, (and that likewise confirmed by 1o Elis. c. 2.
Act of Parliament) whereby all the Children of this Church are punctually
taught to Name our two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper. So that this
Judicious Divine was very ill catechized, that dares write it now, The
Sacrament of the Altar.

For the Writ directed in that Act of Parliament, it does not call it (as D.
Coal does expressly falsify the passage) Sacramentum Altaris, but it says
only, that it is grounded upon that Statute, which was made Contra sormam
Statuti concernent. Sacros. Sacram. Altaris.
concerning the Sacrament of the Altar. Having therefore cleared the Statute it
self from naming it so, the Writ will never be found guilty of such a Misnomee.
But how many presidents of that Writ can this great Lawyer show in the Book of
Entries? However, it was high time for the wisdom of the Parliament to take
some quick Order in this kind, when they were resolved to revoke all 2o H. 5.
c. 7. and 25o H. 8. c. 14.
former Laws that commanded honor to the Sacrament, and yet found the
unsufferable indiscretion of the Zelotes mounted to that height, as to dare to
term the Institution of Christ (however disguised in this superstitious habit)
with those base compellations of Altar Damasc. p. 316.
Jack of the Box, and Sacrament of the Halter, on the one side, and then
Defense of three Ceremonies, p. 270. Jewel, Art. 4. p. 282.
Bakers bread, Ale-cakes, and Tavern-tokens, on the other side. Purposing
therefore to keep in force one Branch of those two Laws which were by and by to
be repealed, (I mean, 2o H. 5. c. 7. and 25o H. 8. c. 14.) which required due
reverence to be performed to this Sacrament, they reserved the ancient words
and Additions, not of the people only, but of the Common Law it self, in the
Indictments for Lolardy, as we may see in the Book of Et docuerunt opiniones
haereticas contra fidem Catholicam Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae: viz. Quod in
Sacramento Altaris non est nisi panis Sanctus, and non caro and sanguis
Christi, etc. Rastall, Coll. of Entries, Endictment, c 11.
Entries. And because this Sacrament was so commonly called, not only in the
Mouth of the Church, but in the Mouth of the Law it self, the Statute in the
head of the Act, and foot of the Writ, gives it this Addition of Sacramentum
Altaris. But this Lollard Writ, these threescore years, has had (God be
thanked for it) no more operation in Law, then the Clause against Lollards in
the Nostro aevo accipiunt alii Lollardos, pro institutae religioni
adversantibus, eoque vetus jutamentum Vicecomitum ad prosequendos Lollardos
juratorum hodie attrahunt. H. Spilm. in verbo Lollard.
Sheriffs Commission. And if there were any occasion to put it in force, me
thinks (the subsequent Laws considered) it ought to be issued contra formam
Statuti concernentis sacrosanctum Sacrament^m Corporis and Sanguinis Dominici;
admitting the Brooks Abridgement, ex 2o H. 6. 9. And Cowell, in verbo Variance.
variance by this matter ex post facto, as men and Corporations may do in some
Cases. But being led by this fellow quite out of my way, I wholly submit my
Opinion herein to the Reverend of that Profession.

I make haste therefore to return to the Doctor again, before he finish his
Triumph over this Section, attended with Princes, Prelates, Priests, and
Parliaments, to confirm his Altar and his Sacrifice. Whereas in very truth all
his Witnesses are under Age, and are not able to speak of themselves one word
to his purpose. John Frith (as you have heard) speaks by Sr Thomas More; John
Lambert, by S. Austin; Archbishop Cranmer, by John Fox; John Philpot, by the
ancient Writers; B. Latimer, by the Doctors, who might be deceived; B. Ridley,
by the public Notary that drew the Articles; the Writ, by the Act of
Parliament; and the Act of Parliament, by Vox populi, and common Report. Not
one of all these, that speaks of his own knowledge, as a witness ought to do.
But this is some Susenbrotus Figure, by which this judicious Divine uses to
write in a different manner from all honest Authors; to make one man still to
speak what was uttered by another. Thus he handles the Writer of the Letter,
in that similitude Page 21.
of Dressers, unmannerly applied to the Altar-wise-situation of the holy Table.
For although the Writer says clearly, Letter 68, 69.
he likes that fashion, he allows it, and so uses it himself; yet if one
Prinne has printed it I know not where, or some Countrey-people said I know
not what, he must (in most Oyster-whore language) pin it and Prinne it upon
the Writer of the Letter. And if one Bishop of Lincoln, the Act. and Mon. part.
3. p. 486.
Popes Delegate, and one Dean of Westminister, Queen Mary's Act. and Mon. part.
3. p. 44.
Commissioner, shall speak irreverently of the Protestants Table; by this new
Figure, all Bishops and Deans of those two places, must, until the end of the
world, be supposed to do it. And so must the Bishops of Norwich be ever sending
forth Letters of Persecution, because In his Index reser^ing to Act. and Mon.
part. 1. page 870.
John Fox observes that one of them did so. It remains only, he should with
the Italian Hen. (...) Apol. d' Her^d.
Friar, fasten upon David, (whom he has reasonably abused already) that he
should also say, There was no God; because in one of the Psalm. 14. 1.
Psalms, the Doctors own Cofin, the foolish body, has heretofore said it.

CHAP. IV.
Of Bowing to the Name of Jesus. Of Sacrifice. Of the Name of Altar. Whether an
Altar is necessary for all kind of Sacrifices, etc.

HE cannot ascend not so much as to this Discourse of the Altar, without
Bowing; which makes him fall upon this P. 4.
Preamble so impertinently. But let him bow as often as he pleases, so he do
it to this blessed Name; or to P. 42.
honor him (and him only) in his holy Sacrament. This later, although the
Canon does not enjoin, yet reason, piety, and constant practice of Antiquity
does. The Churchmen do it in S. Vet. Pa^rtom. 2. p. 61. (...).
Chrysost^ms Liturgy, and the Laymen are commanded to do it in S.
Chrysostoms. Homil. 24. ad Corinth. Hom. 61. ad pop. Antioch. vide Claud. de
Saints de Ritibus Missae.
Homilies. And if there be any proud Dames, quae defer nesciant mentium
Religioni, quod deferunt voluptati, as S. De Virginib. l. 3.
Ambrose speaks, that practice all manner of Courtesies for Masks and Dances,
but none (by any means) for Christ, at their approach to the holy Table; take
them Donatus for me: I shall never write them in my Calendar for the Children
of this Church. But what is this to Dionysius? Yes, it comes in as pat as can
be. He was serving his first Page 5. That herb (according as the saying is)
has spoiled all the Pottage.
Mess of Pottage, and the Bishop (as the saying is) got into it, and has
quite spoiled it, by warning a young man (that was complained upon for being a
little fantastical in that kind) to make his reverence humbly and devoutly,
that he might win his people also to sympathize with himself in that pious
Ceremony. But this is to censure the heart. No, the Writer goes no further
then the outward action: ut audio, sic judico. In that he had heard somewhat to
be amiss, and desired (in a friendly manner) it might be reformed: But still
according to the Canon: Which requires it Can. 18.
should be done, as it has been accustomed, says our Canon, referring to a
former: As it has been accustomed heretofore, says the Q. Elis. Injunct
Injunct. 52.
Injunction, referring to a time out of mind. It is not therefore enough to
obey a Canon in the matter, if we obey it not likewise in the manner. Not to
make a Courtesy, if it be not a Injunct. 52.
lowly Courtesy. Nor so neither, unless it be as heretofore has been
accustomed. If we would preserve old Ceremonies, we must not taint them with
new Fashions; especially with apish ones. That reverence which the Priests and
Deacons were wont to perform in this kind, is called in the Greek Liturgies,
Chrysostom. Liturg. (...). Vet. Pat. Tom. 2. p. 84. Reverentia, ut vulgo
loquuntur. Meurs. in ^loss.
(...), a modest and humble Bowing of the body: such as in the primitive
Church, the Christians used in performing their Public penance. And if we may
believe their modern Divines, it was twofold, a greater, and a lesser
Reverence. The greater, when they bowed all their Martin. Crustus in Histor.
Eccl. Turcograec. ex Ge^lach. p. 205. (...). Herol^g.
Body, yet without bending of the knee, very lowly and almost to the earth. The
lesser, with the inclination and bending of the Head and shoulders only. Which
or whether any of these were used in the Western Churches, and delivered over
unto us, is not so certain. An accustomed lowly reverence to this blessed Name,
we received from all Antiquity, as appears by the Canons and Injunctions. And
good reason we should entail it on our Posterity. If this young man faulted
therein, he was much the better; If he faulted not, but was unjustly informed
against, he was not much the worse, for being gently admonished. But behold
this judicious Page 5.
Censurer of the Censurer of the heart, is now become himself a Censurer of the
spirit. Comparing (an angry man would say, Blasphemously) the young man Bowing,
with David's dancing before the Ark. Do you know with the Si corripiatur eodem
spiritu, quo David. Martyr in 2. Sam. 6. 14.
rapture of what spirit David did this? Surely S. Comment. in Matthew lib. 2. in
c. 11.
Hierome seems to imply, that it was done with no other spirit, then the very
same, wherewith Christ and his Apostles piped unto the Jews, when they had not
danced. Besides that, Etiam quia populus non scandalizabatur in illo, sed
putabant eum magis dignum honor. Test. in 2. Reg. c. 6. q. 19.
the people were not scandalized in him (which is supposed to be our case) but
Michel only. And so much of your Preamble, that is, your Pottage. Now to your
more solid Meat, if your Book have any of that kind.

The Writer of the Letter had said, that if the Vicar should erect any such
Altar, that is, a close Altar at the upper end of the Quire, where the old
Altar in Q. Mary's time stood, that then, his discretion would prove the sole
Holocaust should be sacrificed thereupon. Not only because his discretion,
being of a very airy and thin substance, would quickly (as a Holocaust should
do) vanish into nothing; but by reason that thereby by he should put himself
into the very Case, that Isaac conceived his father to be in: Genesis 21. 7.
Behold the Fire and wood, but where is the Lamb for the burnt-offering?
Because the 31 Article having taken away the Popish Lamb (for the which that
old Altar had been erected) as a B. of Articles, Artic. 31.
Blasphemous figment and pernicious imposture; the Homily had commanded us to
take heed, we should look to find it in the blessed Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: For there it was not: There was indeed in the Sacrament a Memory of a
Sacrifice, but Sacrifice there was none. And we must take heed of quillets and
distinctions, that may bring us back again to the old Error reformed in the
Church. Whereof this was a principal part: That we should not consecrate upon
profane Tables (as the In 1. Cor. 11.
Rhemists most profanely termed them) which relate to a Supper, but upon sacred
Altars only, which refer to a Sacrifice. For so Du. S. Sacram. l. 2. Aut^^r.
10. c. 1.
Cardinal Peron observes, that it is ever called a Table, when it points to
the Communion or Supper; and an Altar, when it points to the Sacrifice. Now the
Homily stating in one sentence most of the Controversies in this matter between
us and the Church of Rome, by an enumeration of opposite and distinct species
(the one whereof, as in (...). Arist. de Partib. animal. l. 1. c. 3.
Logic the nature of such is described to be, if we make the Doctrine of our
Church, we cannot without implication make the other) observes these four
contradistinguished Tenets or Positions: 1. We must make the Lords Supper
fruitful to us that be alive, not to the dead: both we of this Church cannot
do. 2. We must receive it in two parts, not in one only: both we of this Church
cannot do. 3. We must make it a Communion, or Public, not a private eating:
both we of this Church cannot do. 4. Lastly, we must make it a Memory, and not
a Sacrifice: both we of this Church cannot do. And this is the passage cited by
the Writer. We must take heed, lest of a Memory it be made a Sacrifice. What
says the Doctor to this? He says, that by these words the Church admits of a
Commemorative Sacrifice. Which is as much as Lib. 4. S^n^. d. 11. c. ^.
Peter Lombard and all his ragged regiment admit of. I am (as K. James of
famous memory was wont to say) a Slave to reason, and must yield when ever I am
thus summoned by it. I do confess the man has found a true and real
Sacrifice; but it is a Bull:

Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
Taurum Nept^no, Taurum tibi, pulcher Apollo. A very strange and hideous Bull,
which this Calf makes the Church to speak unto her people in her public
Homilies. As we must take heed, good People, we apply not the Sacrament of the
Supper to the dead, but to the living; receive it not under one, but under both
kinds; Let not the Priest swallow up all, but take our part with him: So must
we take especial heed, lest of a Commemorative Sacrifice, it be made a
Sacrifice. Which though it be not so fierce as Pius Quintus his, yet is a kind
of Pious Bull. But the Church in her Book of Hom. p. 197.
Homily, or any other public writing, never speaks a word of any Commemorative
Sacrifice, but of the Memory only of a Sacrifice, that is (as she clearly
interprets her self in the page before) of the Memory of Christ's death, which
she there affirms to be sufficiently celebrated upon a Table. And I shall be
able to show unto you, that it is called by S. De Civit. Dei, l. 17. c. 20.
Austin, a Sacrament of Memory; by (...). Eusebius. de Dom. Evang. l. 1. c. 10. ad
finem.
Eusebius, a Sacrifice of Memory: which is the word in the Homily. You will not
be able to show unto me out of S. Austin, or any of the Fathers (although
Replique a la Resp. p. 793. Bellarm. lib. 1. de Missa. c. 2.
Cardinal Peron affirms it to be sometimes used by them; which Bellarmine
utterly denies) no, nor out of Peter Lombard himself (upon whose old rubbish
they have built the distinction) and least of all (says Chemuit. Ex Conc.
Trident. part. ^. Bellarm. l. 1, de Missa. c. 2.
Chemnitius, which Bellarmine also approves) out of Scripture; that it is
called punctually a Commemorative Sacrifice. All that Sent. l. 4. did. 12.
Peter Lombard says in a manner is this, that it is called in the Fathers an
Oblation and a Sacrifice, Quia memoria est and repraesentatio very Sacrificii;
Archb. Cranmer Def. l. 5. contra Gardener. does thus interpret it.
not because it is a true Sacrifice (for you see those two terms are
contradistinguish'd) but because it is a Memory and representation of a true
Sacrifice. A true Sacrifice it is not (The Christian Church has but one in
that kind:) but a Memory only of a true Sacrifice. So likewise S. Chrysostom
Hem. 17. in 9. ad Hebraeos.
Chrysostom, when he had called it (...), a Sacrifice, eats up his word by and
by, and adds (by way of explication, yea, and correction too, as Sive
explicationis, sive etiam correctionis loco. Cas^ub. ad Per. Ep. p. 52.
one observes; Romans Sacris. l. 6. c. 5. p. 443.
correction of that excess of speech, says a Reverend Prelate of this Church;
That no man might take offense at the speech, says Archbishop Defense against
Gardener, lib. 5.
Cranmer) (...), I should rather have said, a Memory of a Sacrifice. You know
best, says Casaubon to Cardinal Peron, what weight and efficacy those little
particles, (...), do carry with them. I am sure, says Mounsieur Ces mots sont
fort exprez and grenvent advers^ires. Resp au Cardin. du Per. Controvers. 10.
c. 2.
Moulin, they vex the Pontifician not a little. Surely, if you put them in an
even and unpartiall balance, the name of Sacrifice will prove too light, and
the Memory of a Sacrifice only will pass for the current and lawful money. I
know some few learned men of the reformed Church do use the name of
Commemorative Sacrifices: but it is not with an intent to disturb the Doctrine
of Gods Church, as it is taught now; but to give a candid and fair
interpretation to those words of Art, by which this selfsame Doctrine has been
heretofore illustrated by the ancient Fathers. Besides that, our truly learned
men do set down precisely, that a Archb. Cranm^r Def. against Guard. 5. Book.
Episc. Dunelm. Romans Sacrifice, l. 6. c. 5. p. 440. Because the Eucharist being
only a Commemorati^e, cannot be a proper Sacrifice.
Commemorative Sacrifice, is not properly a Sacrifice, but (as K. Rex -- hoc
Sacrificium nihil esse aliud contendit, nisi Commemorationem ejus quod semel in
cruce, etc. Casaub. Ep. ad ^eron. p. 52.
James took it rightly) Commemoratio Sacrificii, a Commemoration only of a
Sacrifice, which differs in predicament (then the which nothing can be more)
from a true Sacrifice. And yet the most learned in this Theme of our late
Divines, Def. of the 5. Book against Gardener.
Archbishop Cranmer, does refuse to tie himself to Peter Lombard in the
Consequences, however he does sometimes use the terms of this Distinction. And
therefore if a Memory of a true Sacrifice be all that he has gained, which can
be celebrated upon a Table, as well or better then upon an Altar, the Vicars
discretion, and his Campions to boot, are not quite out of danger, to become
the Holocaust of this new Altar. And herein because you appeal unto the
Homily, to it you shall go; little to your comfort, I hope. The immmediate
words before these we spoke of, are those of S. Ambrose. Indignus est Domino,
qui al^ter mysterium celebrat, qua^ ab eo traditum est. Non enim potest devotus
esse, qui aliter p^aesumit, quam datum est ab Autore. Ambr. in 1. Cor. 11.
That he is unworthy of the Lord, that otherwise does celebrate that Mystery,
then it was delivered by him. Neither can he be devout, that does otherwise
presume then it was given by the Author. We must therefore take heed, lest of
a Memory, etc. Now there is no one word in Christ's Institution, that can
probably infer a proper Sacrifice: As our reverend Instit. Sacram. l. 6. c.
1. p. 398.
Bishop proves at large. Nor was there extant any one word of all these
Collects of our own (or of any other Liturgy whatsoever) from whence you
muster up your unproper Sacrifices, in the Apostles times. In which Age, they
consecrated the Sacrament of the Supper with the short Canon of the Mos
Apostolorum fuit, ut ad ipsam solu^ modo orationem Dominicam Oblationis hostiam
consecrarent. Greg. l. 8. Ep. 7. Sit Durand. Ration. l. 4. Pl^in. in vita
Sixti. Idem cita^ ex Gregor. Joan. 9. Papa. In vita Gregor. l. 2. and ^ea^.
Rh^^an. Praef. in Liturg. Chrysostom. and Ambros. Pelargus in Pro^^. in Liturg.
Chrysostom.
Lords Prayer only; out of the which, you must bestirre you well with your
Logic, before you can infer all your unproper and spiritual Sacrifices. And
if you should wring them all out of these six Petitions, yet will it not serve
your turn, unless you prove that the Lords Prayer cannot be said in Pew or
Pulpit, but at an Altar only. But to deal clearly with you, and to come to the
point. I do grant freely, that in the Scripture and the ancient Fathers, we do
meet with, not only those few which you reckon up, but a great many more
duties and virtues of Christian men, that are usually termed by the Names of
Sacrifices; howbeit (for the most part) they have (as In divinis literis opera
virtutum non vocantur absolute Sacrificia, sed cum addito, ut, Sacrificium
laudis, etc. Bellar. de Miss. l. 1. c. 2.
Bellarmine observes) their Sirnames also and Additions put unto them. The
learned Prelate of our own Nation reckons up some six out of Scripture, and a
great many more out of the ancient Fathers. And it is no marvel; For I could
fill a page or two, if I list, with the like Sacrifices, out of the very
heathen Writers. (...). Isocr. ad Nico^l.
Hold this the most glorious of all thy Oblations, if thou can exhibit thy
self unto the Gods a most just and excellent man, says Isocrates. It were a
pitiful case indeed (says (...), etc. Plato de voti^.
Socrates in Plato) if the Gods should regard the Perfumes only, and not the
Souls and Virtues of mortal men. Lastly, I will add that most admirable
passage of the Poet, applauded and commented upon by Lactant. divin. instit. l.
6. c. 11. Sentiebat non carne opus esse ad placandam coelestem majestatem, sed
mente sancta.
Lactantius himself. Let us sacrifice unto the gods A. Pers. Sat. 2.
Compositum jus, fasque animi, sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
I will likewise allow you, (which your indigested Meditations forgot to call
for) that all these spiritual Odours, improperly called Sacrifices, are not
only stirred up and made more fragrant with the Meditation, but many times
sown of seeds, and engendered at first by the secret operation of this blessed
Sacrament. Nay yet further; In contemplation of all these rare and special
Graces of the Spirit, wrought in our souls by means of the Eucharist, you
shall not reasonably expect any outward expression of reverence and submission
to the Founder of the Feast, any trimming and adorning of the Room and Vtensils
prepared for this great solemnity, which I will not approve of, and bring the
ancient Fathers along with me to do as much. I will allow Erat solicitus
Nepotianus, si niteret Altar, Hieron. ad Heliodor. ep. 3. c. 10.
Nepotian to take especial care that things be neat and handsome in that
blessed Sanctuary. I will encourage (...). Pallad. Lausiac. hist. c. 119.
Melania to beautify that place, with the forbearance (if need be) of her
chiefest Ornaments. I could say in a manner with that Iddio scrive in quella
polvere ^ vostri peccati, O curatori d' anime, quando per lungo spatio rimano,
Freder. Borrom. Cardin. Ragionam. Syno dal. 31. p. 305.
Italian Prelate, that God in that holy Table, which he finds full of dust,
does write down the sins of the careless Churchman. But this I can by no
means approve, which Protestants and Papists do jointly deny, that ever
material Altar was erected in the Church for the use of spiritual and
improper Sacrifices. Defense of his fifth book against Gardener.
The Sacrifice which Malachy speaks of, being the Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, all people offer unto God, as well as the Priest; be they at the
blessed Sacrament, at Prayers, or at some charitable work, at any time, and in
any place whatsoever; says Archbishop Cranmer. If question be asked, It there
then no Sacrifices now left to be done of Christian people? yea truly, but none
other then such as ought to be done without Altars. And these be of three
sorts, etc. For he instanceth in three of those which the Doctor does
instance upon in this Book; Praise and Thanksgiving, our Souls and Bodies, and
Oblations for the poor: And then concludes; Seeing Christian men have no other
Sacrifices then these, which may and ought to be done without Altars, there
should amongst Christians be no Altars; says Bishop In his third Sermon upon
lonas, preached before the King, 1550.
Hooper. Priest, Altar, and Sacrifice are Relatives, and have mutual and
unseparable dependence one of each other. So he, and truly. But you ought to
take with you a necessary Caution, observed by the same Cardinal, That an
unproper Sacrifice cannot infer a proper Altar, says the Lo. Institut. lib.
6. c. 5.. 15. p. ^61.
Bishop of Duresme; when he had said a little before (most truly and learnedly)
that a Because the Eucharist being only commemorative, cannot be a proper
Sacrifice, p. 440.
Commemorative Sacrifice cannot be a proper Sacrifice: and therefore cannot
infer a proper Altar. Then for the Pontificians, they are all of this
opinion; I will single out a few of the Prime. An Altar of Stone is never
erected to praise God or say our prayers at, says In Epist. ad Hebr. c. 13. ad
octav.
Salmeron. If not of Stone, neither of Timber; for that makes not the
difference. There is none so blind, but he may see that these Christian duties
and Ceremonies may be performed to God without an Altar, says Quis enim non
videt etc. de Missa, l. 1. c. 2.
Bellarmine. And he quotes to confirm this point, the testimony of Institut.
lib. 4. c. 18.. 13.
Calvin; They that extend the name of Sacrifice to all Ceremonies and religious
Actions, I do not see what reason they can produce for it. To Sacrifices taken
improperly and metaphorically, the circumstances of Altars (which relate still
to true Sacrifices) are no way requisite, says Les circ^nstances des autels,
qui ont relation aux vrais sacrifices, n'estoit point requise. Replique, p. 790.
Cardinal Peron. would the Jews (who no doubt had Prayers and Oblations) take
them for Sacrifices, or build an Altar for them? says Dr Survey, lib 4. c. 2.
Kellison. Which puts me in mind of one Argument, wherewith I will conclude
this Passage. God would not suffer the first Age of the world, for 1650 years,
to pass away without Prayers, Praises, and Thanksgivings unto him; but he
suffered it to pass without any Altars: That of Noah's being the Genesis 8. primum
Altar erectum, Bellar. l 1. de Missa, c. 2. Le premler autel dress. P.
Cotton. Genev. Plagiar. p. 282. Primus omnium Noah Genesis 8. fecit Altar,
Hospin. l. de Orig. Altar. c. 6.
first that ever was built, as learned men are of opinion. Therefore these
duties may be still performed without Altars. And consequently, if after all
this search in the Collects of the Liturgy, you can find the Vicar nothing,
but Prayers, Praises, Thanksgivings, and Commemorations; the holy Table, in the
place where it stood, will serve for all these, without erecting or directing
this new Altar. But what if I find you several Altars for all these
spiritual Sacrifices, in the ancient Fathers, will you promise not to disturb
the peace of the Church any more? Or if this be too much for you to perform,
will you have a better opinion of the Writer of the Letter, and suffer the
poor man to procure, if he can, so poor a Vicaridge as your friends was, to
be quiet in? Is it not a very little one? It is but a piece of a piece of a
piece of a Benefice: And therefore I will presume upon your kindness therein,
and set you up all the Altars that God ever required for these kind of
Sacrifices. The first, is the (...). Ignatiu^ Epist. ad Ephesians. vide Nic. Vedel.
Exercit. 6. c. 1. p. 237.
Council of the Saints and the Church of the first begotten; a most fitting
place for the pouring forth of these Christian duties: And this is Ignatius
his. Altar. The second, is (...), etc. Orig. contra Cells. lib. 8. p. 404.
(...), not the mind (as it is usually translated) but the commanding and
directing part of the reasonable soul, from whence is sent forth those Odours
of sweet Incense, to wit, Vows and Prayers out of a good Conscience: And this
is Origens Altar. The third, is the (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
Righteous Soul; the Incense whereof, is holy invocation: And this is Clemens
Alexandrinus his Altar. The fourth, is every place wherein we offer unto God
the sweet smelling fruits of our studies in Divinity: And this is (...).
Eusebius. de Them. Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
Eusebius his Altar. The fifth, is E^seb. hist. Eccl. l. 10. c. 4. it is said
to be (...), by Nic^ph. l. 7. c. 40. Domi co^posita, as Longus translates it,
at the dedication of a Church.
(...), the clearness and sincerity of the mind, smo^king up the unbloudy
and immateriall Sacrifices of Prayers: And this is the Panegyrists Altar,
quoted in your Pamphlet under another name, p. 53. The sixth, is the heart of a
man, Cor nostr^m Altar Dei, the true, proper, and literal Altar of all
spiritual Sacrifices: And this is S. Nos templum Dei sumus omnes, cor nostru^
Altar Dei, Au^. l 10. de Civ. Dei, c. 5.
Augustines Altar. The seventh, is our Memory, and remembrance of Gods
blessings; a very fit and pertinent expression: And this is Philo Iud. lib.
Quis rerum divinaru^ haeres, and l. 3 de vita Mosis.
Philo Iudaeus his Altar. The eighth, is the Son of God, become the son of
man; Altar sanctificans donum, The Altar which sanctifies all these
spiritual Sacrifices, that but touch that Altar: And this is S. Altar
Redemptoris, humilis Incarnatio, Berr. in Sent.
Bernards Altar. The ninth, is the Son of God now in Heaven; that Habemus
Altar, Hebr. 13. that Golden Altar, Apoc. 8. upon which we offer to God the
Father all spiritual Sacrifices: And this is Aquin in. 13. c. ep. ad Heb and
Antididagma Colon. de Miss. Sac^if.
Aquinas his Altar. The tenth and last, (for we must make an end, and remember
we are not now at Paphos or Cyprus, -- Virg. Aeneid 1.
ubi templum illi centumque Sabeo

Thure calent arae) is our Faith, the Prothesis or preparing-Altar to that
Altar going before. Altar id est Fides, the immediate Altar of all these
spiritual Sacrifices, is the Faith of a Christian, which elevates all these
virtues up to Heaven, (that otherwise would lie flagging about the Earth.) And
this is S. Vnusquisque sanctus Altar Domini in se habet, quod est Fides,
Hieron. in Psalm. 25.
Hieromes Altar. Now consider with your self, whether it were fitter for you to
make use of these Altars for your unproper and metaphorical Sacrifices, and
have all these Greek and Latin Fathers to applaud you for the same, rather then
to rely upon some Miracle of a good Work in hand, or some poor Dream of the
piety of the Times; especially when we are clearly inhibited by the Canons of
Conc. Carthag. 5. An. 438. c. 14. Number quae per somnia consti^uuntur altaria
omnimodo reprobantur. Sen^nens. Synod. An. 1528. Can. 38. Ne pr^tex^^ no^i
miraculi erigatur altar novum.
two National Counsels, to erect any Altars upon Dreams or Miracles.

CHAP. V.
Of the second Section. The Contents thereof. 1 Of Sacrifice of the Altar. 2
Tables resembling the old Altars 3 Alteration not in Bishop Ridley's Diocese
only, and how there. 4 Altar and Table how applied. 5 Altar of participation.
6 Of Oblation. 7 No Altars in the Primitive Church. 8 None scandalized with
name of the Lords Table. 9 Altars of old, how proved. 10 Not taken away by
Calvin.


THis Section is a true Section indeed, divisibilis in semper divisibilia,
chop't into a very Hotchpotch, or minced pie, and so crumbled into small snaps
and pieces, that an Adversary does not know, Martial Epigr. lib. 1. ep 61.
Quod ruat in tergum, vol quos procumbat in armos. All the first part thereof
that relates unto any Laws, Canons, or Constitutions, made or confirmed by the
Kings and Queens of this Realm, concerning this young Controversy, I have
already examined in the first Chapter: It being a ridiculous thing for us to
have waded thus far into the book, if we had received but the least check from
any Law of God or the King. In the remainder of this Section, there are some
things that concern the Question in hand, which we may call his Sixth (as it
were;) and some other that are but (...), certain skips and spurts, or Boutades
of the man (when he thought what Dignities he might expect for this piece of
service) which we will call his Extravagancies, and see that they shall be
forthcoming (as Waives in a Pinfold) to be surveyed at our better leisure in
the next Chapter. And in the former part now to be perused, you shall find
little that concerns the Writer of the Letter, or any of us that approved of
the same. For this New-castle-Coal is mounted up from the Kitchen to the Great
Chamber, and confutes no longer a private Monition sent to a Vicar, but
Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Jewel, John Calvin (a greater stickler, then ever I
heard before, in our Upper and Lower house of Parliament) the Acts of Counsel
made for the Reformation, the Lords spiritual and temporal, with the
Commonaltie, that confirmed our present Liturgy: not forbearing to P. 40.
jeere and deride both them and King Edward( The son of whom, was Edward the
Saint; of whom we may say, as of Enoch, Though he departed the world soon,
yet fulfilled he much time, Hooker Eccles. ^ol. l. 4. p. 168.
whom the Judicious Divine indeed does call Saint Edward) in a most profane
and abominable fashion.

First therefore he falls upon a solemn Act and Men. part 2 f 700.
Act of the King and Counsel, mentioned by John Fox, upon this occasion:
Letter, p. 73.
The writer of the Letter observes that in Saxony and other parts of Germany,
the Popish Altars upon the Reformation, being permitted to stand, were never
esteemed (call them by what name you will) any otherwise then as so man Tables
of Stone or Timber; the Sacrifice of those Popish Altars being now abolished.
Which words, I perceive, the Writer had translated in a manner from a learned
Quia cessante sacrificio, altaria illa nihil aliud sunt quam mensae lapid^ae:
Sublato enim relativo formali, manet absolutum and materiale tantum, Gerard.
lib. 2. tom. 5. p. 5^6.
Lutheran. And that these sacrifices were abolished, D. Page 7.
Coal has already confessed, pronouncing him for no son of the Church of
England, that presumes to offer them. Yet the Writer alleging the fourth Reason
given by the King and Counsel, for their taking away in England; That the form
of an Altar being ordained for the Sacrifices of the Law, and both the Law and
the Sacrifices thereof new ceasing (in Christ) the Form of the Altar ought to
cease also; D. Coal makes nothing of this Reason; but pities the simplicity of
the Times, as not being able to distinguish between the Sacrifices of the Law,
and the Sacrifices of the Altar. I pray you good Doctor, where may we read of
this Term of yours, Sacrifices of the Altar, if we do not read of it in the
Sacrifices of the Law? Omnia omnino quae in Scriptura dicuntur Sacrificia,
necessario destruenda erant, Bellarm, de Missa, l. ^ c. 2.
For surely all Sacrifices that we read of in Scripture, none excepted, were
necessarily to be destroyed. And beside the Sacrifices of the Law, woe read of
no Sacrifice that was destroyed, but that one you wot of, offered up upon the
Cross, and not upon an Altar. Beside that, the Apostles and Writers of the New
Testament, Lib. 1. de Missa, c. 17.
by the special instinct of the holy Ghost, did purposely forbear to insert
into their Writings the name of an Altar, if we may believe Bellarmine. And in
the ancient Fathers you shall not read your Sacrifice of the Altar, terminis
terminantibus, how ever you may have found it foisted into their As the Divines
of Lovain to the Index of S. Augustine.
Indexes by some Priests and Jesuits. And De Missa, l. 3. c. 4.
Mornay does show with a great deal of probability, that the ancient Fathers
could not possibly take any notice of this Sacrifice of the Altar. What then?
are you Christians to perform no manner of Sacrifices at all? No, not any at
all, says Quid ergo? Sacrificia censetis nulla facienda? Nulla. Arnobius
adversus Gen^es, l. 7.
Arnobius. Not any corporeal Sacrifice; but only praise and hymns, says
Lib. 6. c. 23.
Lactantius. And if some of the Fathers bad used those terms (as they have done
others of as high expressions) yet are there diverse reasons given by our
gravest Divines, why we should forbear in this kind the term of Sacrifice.
Bilson of Christ subject. part 4. p. 524.
1 Christ and his Apostles did forbear it, and therefore our Faith may stand
without it. 2 The speeches of the Fathers in this kind are dark and obscure,
and consequently unusefull for the edifying of the people. 3 Lastly, we find
by experience, that this very expression has been a great fomenter of
Superstition and Popery. And all these inconveniences have sprung from the
words, not from the meaning, of any of the Fathers.

But the Doctor has found it in the Bible for all this, Hebr. 13. 10. We have
an Altar. And although this be but one, and that (God he knows) a very lame
soldier; yet like an Irish Captain, he brings him in in three several
disguises, to fill up his Company; in Title Page.
front, in the Page 30.
middle, and in the Page 87.
end of his Book. But in good faith, if S. Paul should mean a material Altar
for the Sacrament in that place, (with all reverence to such a chosen Vessel
of the Holy Ghost be it spoken) it would prove the weakest Argument that ever
was made by so strong an Artist. We have an Altar, and a Sacrifice of the
Altar, that you of the Circumcision may not partake of. Have you so? And that is
no great wonder (may the Jew reply) when abundance of you Christians, may not
your selves partake thereof. For in the old time, as Albaspin. Observe. l. 2.
obs. 2. Antiquitus fieri, non nasci Christianos.
one observes, they were not born, but made Christians. Made by long and
wearisome steps and degrees, and forced. Council. Constantinop. 1. Can. 7.
(...), to creep on with time and leisure to the bosom of the Church, says
the General Council. Ex Albasp. l. 2. Observe. 2. Quid est quod datum est
completivum? Corpus quod nostis, quod non omnes nostis, Aug. in Ps. 39. Tom. 8.
p. 143. Ainsi pa^le t^il a cause de non initiez devant les quelz iln'cstoit pas
permis de parler ouvertement du mystere de l'Eucharistie, Cardin. du Peron.
Repliq. p. 806.
1. They were taught in some private house, the vanity of their Paganism,
without so much as daring to peep into the Church Porch. 2. They were admitted
to be Hearers only, and that at a very far and remote distance. 3. They were
licenced to bend the Knee, and to join in some Prayers with the Congregation.
4. They had leave granted them to become Competentes, suitors and petitioners
for the Sacrament of Baptism. 5. And then, after many months, nay years
expectation, being baptized, they were enrolled in the number of the Faithful,
and never before admitted to the least interest in the Sacrament of the Supper.
And therefore for S. Paul to frighten the Jews with the loss of that, which
so many millions of Christians were themselves bereaved of, had been a very
weak and feeble dehortation. I am sure this fellow is a mighty weak piece, to
take up this leaden Dagger, which the Non urgeo hunc locum, quia non desunt ex
Catholicis, qui interpretantur de Cruce, vel de Christo ipso, Bellarm. de
Missa, l. 1. c. 14.
Papists themselves have thrown away, as of no use in the day of Battle. And
that you should not build upon mine opinion alone, you shall hear what others
have printed in that kind. This place is brutishly abused, to prove that the
Christians have a material Altar, says D. Rhemish Test. p. 779.
Fulk. Who is of so shallow a brain, as not to discern the notarious
unconscionablenesse of your Diputers, who allege the word Altar in the Tent to
the Hebrews, for proof of a proper Altar? says a Reverend Institut. of the
Sacrament, l. 6. c. 3. p. 416.
Bishop. And (for vanieties sake) take you one of another Sect: M. Cartwr. in
(...), f. 648.
Let the Reader observe, how not childishly only, but absurdly also the
Jesuite^ apply this place to prove a real Altar. But to put your mouth into
r^lish again, I will conclude with S. Nihil hic visibile, neque Sacardos, neque
Sacrificium, neque Altar, in 10. ^^p. ^p. ad Hebr.
Ambrose: That we have nothing visible in all this disputation of S. Paul,
neither Priest, nor Sacrifice, nor yet Altar. And if these people be ^rutes,
br^inlesse, childish and absurd, who (grant them but their suppositions; that
here is an He^^ules in a Lions skin, seen of all, but discerned of none, as Par
l' example d'un homme, gui^ntiereme^t cou^ert d'une p^a^dolion, ne pour^a est^e
discern d'aucun, mais bien touch de tout le monde, Le^ princip^ux points de
la Fey, c. 6. Sect. 2. p. 131.
Cardinal Richelieu; that here is a David representing his former combat with
Goliath, as Institut. of the Sacra^. l. 6. c. 5. p. 446.
Cardinal Peron; that here is a King ^cting a battle he achieved before, as
Si rex aliquis gravissimo bello confecto, idem ipsum bellu^r ad oblectand^m
populo in s^ena repraesentare vellet, and ipse idem quirere pu^naverat, i^
s^ena seipsum repraesentaret: Esset enim ipse vere Antitypon suiipsins, De
Sacra. Eucharist. l. 2. c. 15.
Cardinal Bellarmine; or representing ^^ 's hirmish ^^hat was ^o come after,
as Induit, Christus in Coena modum and conditionem quam habult, ut sangul^^em
fu^dens in sacrificio Crucis, De Euchar^st^ Sacrif. l. 2. c. 13.
Cardinal ^lan does conceive it) have ^ll the reason that can be to erect a
stage for such representations: If these (I say) be to be so termed, what a
Brute is this wrangler then, who would have an Altar he knows not for what! For
he would have an Page 9.
Altar, i. e. a C^mmunion-Table; and a Sacrifice, i. e. a Page 8.
Memory; and a Page 11. Send his resolutions to the Priest.
Priest, i. e. not derived from The name of Priest need not be so odious unto
you, as you would seem to make it. I suppose it comes of the word Presbyter,
and not Sacerdos; and then the matter is not great. Whitg. Answer to the Adm.
part. 2. page 183.
Sacerdos for all that. So that I do not know how to resemble this Doctrine
fitter, then to that which a Country. Becan. Sum. Theolog. part. 1. c. 16.
M^untebank in France was wont to give in writing to his Patients for the
curing of all diseases what soever: Si vis curari de morbe nescio quali,
Accipias herbam, sed qualem nescio, nec quam;
Ponas, nescio quo; curabere, nescie quando.


Id est, Your Sore, I know not what, do not fore-slow
To cure with Herbs; which, whence I do not know:
Place them (well pounre't) I know not where; and then
You shall be perfect whole, I know not when.
And yet for all that, if we talk of a Page 47.
Helena indeed, this one place of the Epistle to the Hebrews, is the Helena of
all this sort of people. This they hug and clip and kiss: And above all
indeed, S. Paul in his HABEMVS ALTAR. Lord, how the man melts upon it! And
presently after follow those patheticall words, Haec est illa Helena. And yet,
God knows, they have of theirs, but as Paris had of his Helena (or rather of
her (...), says the Scholiast of Lycophron out of Stesichorus.
Statue only, her person being seized upon by Pr^teus in Egypt) Lycophron in
Cassandra.
(...), a most cold and uncomfortable embracement, and as Cited by Garassus
Doctrine Curieus. l. 4.. 4. in fi^t.
Gulielmus Parisiensit speaks of a like fancy, Chimaram Chimaerissimam, the
very Chimera of all Chimeras. For I will be bold (not without some
premeditation) to make all these several observations upon this passage.

First, that this is the first son of the reformed Church of England, that
has presumed openly to expound this place, of a material Altar: Yet not
constantly neither: For he confesses, for all his love to this Text, that the
Apostle Page 47.
may mean there the Lords Table, or the Sacrifice it self, which the Lord once
offered. And so a great Scholar indeed of this Church has expounded it. For
the Altar in the old Testament is by Malachy called MENSA DOMINI. Bish.
Andrew's notes upon Peron, p. 7.
And of the Table in the new Testament, by the Apostle it is said, HABEMVS
ALTAR. The Altar in the old, the Table in the new Testament (if we will speak
with that great personage, properly and Theologically.) And this is the
exposition of Peter Martyr, mentioned in the Letter, which this squeamish
gentleman could by no means understand: That as sometimes a Table is put for
an Altar, as in the first of Malachy; so sometimes an Altar may be put for a
Table, as in this Epistle to the Hebrews. Then the which solution there may be
peradventure a more full, (for the Cross of Christ is more appositely aimed at
in that Text, then the holy Table) but there cannot be a more plain and
conceivable Answer. And whereas it is inferred, that then at the least S. Paul
conceived the name of an Altar neither to be improper, nor impertinent in the
Christian Church; there is no man ever made doubt thereof; so as it be taken,
as S. Paul takes it, Metaphorically, and by way of Allusion, but not
materially, for this Church-Vtensill; which is the thing that lies before us
upon the Carpet at this time.

Secondly, I do observe, that ( Expos^t. in l^^.
Sedulius only excepted) no writer before the beginning of the Reformation,
did literally, and in the first place, but Allegorically only, and in the
second place of their exposition, by way of use (as it were) and accommodation,
bend this Text to the Material Altar. So (...). Theophyl. in locum.
Theophylact expounds it, first, of the Tenets and Observations of the
Christians; Remigius, Haymo, Anselmus, Contarenus, in 13. cap. ad Hebr.
Remigius and Haymo (who seem to be but two Friars under one hood) of the blood
of the Passion; Anselme, of Christ himself; Cardinal Contaren, of the Passion:
and in the second place only, of the Eucharist: making the debauchery of a
Christian man, to be the Service of the Tabernacle, which hinders him from the
worthy participation of this spiritual Sacrifice. Which clearly implies a
continued Allegory.

Thirdly, setting by the Jesuits on the one side, as Salmeron, Rhemens. A
Lapide, Haraeus, Tirimus, Gordonius, Menochius, and Cajet. in 13. cap. ad
Hebraeos.
Salmeron, the Rhemists, A Lapide, Haraeus, Tirinus, Gordon, and Menochius (and
Cajetan, a kind of Controversie-man) who expound it pointblank for a material
Altar; and all the Reformed Expositours, on the other side, as well Illyricus,
Hemingius, S^rigelius, Nulla est grata Deo, nisi Christus Filius, ara, Qui luit
officio crimina nostra suo, in locum.
Lutherans (who minister the Communion upon Stone-Altars) as Calvinists, who
utterly disallow of that exposition; I do observe, that the most learned of all
the Roman Writers, even sithence the stirring of these Controversies, do
expound it either of Christ himself, his cross, or his profession; as
Bellarmine, the Antididagma of Coleine, Catharinus, and Estius: As you may see
more at large in the learned Inst^^ut. of the Sacram. l. 6. c. 3. p. 406.
Bishop.

Fourthly and lastly, I do observe, that all Antiquity, besides these, do not
in the exposition of this Text, reflect in any kind upon the material Altar.
Chrysostomus, Oecumenius, Aquinas, Gorra^^s, Lyra, in 13. ^. ad Hebreos.
Chrysostom expounds it of (...), of the things professed here amongst us;
Oecumenitus, (...). the Tenets, as it were, of Christian men; Peter Lombard, of
Christ's body; Aquinas, of the Cross; Gorran, of the Incarnation; and Lyra, of
the Passion of our Savior. Not any one ancient Writer (beside Sedulius) that
next his heart, as it were, and in his first exposition, did ever touch upon
this material Altar. Fulks Def. of the Translas. against Gregory M^rtin, c.
17.
I do not except Oecumenius or Haymo, mistaken herein by a learned Doctor. And
therefore, good Doctor (unless you mean to turn Jesuit) leave off your
cracking to your Novices of this place, until you be able to back it with
better Authority then your poor conceptions. For above all indeed S. Paul in
his HABEMVS ALTAR is least of all for your material Altars.

And behold, he has not done yet with the Act of State, but will needs have
another bout with it. For Page 30.
although the Law and the Sacrifices thereof be both abolished, and
consequently the form of these Altars should be abolished; yet that does not
reach at their Altar, which lies along the wall, but at our Communion-Tables,
that are in the Body of the Church or Chancell, as the Jewish Altars stood in
the old time. Vah! quantum est sapere! It is an excellent thing to be a
judicious Divine! But the King and the Lords do not say that the Jewish Altars
are abolished, for us to put other Altars in the body of the Church or
Chancell, or for you to fasten them all along the wall; but that the form of
such Altars should cease to be erected in any place whatsoever in the English
Church.

And having a reasonable guess how those old Altars under the Law came to be
placed in the midst of the Priests Court and outward Temple, to wit, that it
was so done by Gods appointment; I pray you, forget not to tell me in your next
Book, Your needless and superstitious walls, which you have erected without
commission, Jewel, Des. of the Apol. part. 3. page 315.
where God, or his blessed Son, or the Apostles, or the Fathers after them or
any Council, or any Canon Law, or so much as a Popes Bull, has commanded any
Christian Church to set their Altars all along the wall? But I shall have
occasion to tell you many things more then you know, about that particular, in
the last Section.

For a full Answer to this Quillet, I do read in Antiquity, that the form and
situation of the holy Table in the Christian Church, was not exemplified from
the Exodus 27. 1. And thou shall make an Altar of Shittim wood, five cubits
long, and sive cubits broad.
Square Altars, but from the Exodus 25. 23. Thou shall make a Table of Shirtim
wood; two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof.
long Table of the Shewbread, which stood in the Temple. And if we can make
good our fashion and situation according to this pattern we saw in the Mount,
we care not how Altars stood either in the Jewish or Popish Church; our holy
Tables being quite of another race, and no descendants from any of them. One
Benjamin a Jew fell upon Isidorus Pelusiota, (a reverend Prelate, as ancient
very near as S. Chrysost^m) and charged him with the boldness of this new
Oblation and Sacrifice of Bread (as he termed it) invented by the Christian
Church, without any pattern or precedent from her Mother the Synagogue. To whom
the ancient Father returns this Answer; That there were two Oblations in the
Synagogue: The one upon an Altar, (...), in the outward Court, performed in
blood and steaming vapors, and visible to all: The other was upon a (...).
Isidor. Pelusiota, lib. 1. Epist. 401.
Table, performed in Bread, (...), within the Temple, hid from the
Understanding of the old, and reserved for the Faith of the new people. And of
those former (says he) thou art one thy self, that could not see the truth
of this Mystery, hid so long in the Law, and revealed so clearly to us in the
Gospel. It will be long yer you will bring us so clear and ancient an
extraction for the form and fashion of the Altars in Christianity. P. 35.
Yea but (say you) this Table was not made to eat upon. The Figure indeed was
not, but the (...). Isidor. Pelus. l. 1. ep. 401.
verity was, that is, the verity then hid, but now revealed. And yet David,
t^ough no Priest, did eat of that which was upon it* to let us know, that omnes
justi Sacerdotalem habent ordinem. All we that are justified in Christ, have a
Priestly interest in this holy Bread, says Irenans^ l. 4. c. 20.
Irenaeus. David's eating was a figure that the meat of the Priest should one
day be improved to be the meat of the people: Because all the children of the
Church are perfect Priests; By reason that we are anointed unto a holy
Priesthood, offering up our selves as spiritual Sacrifices to. Almighty God.
This Type teaching us thus much, that one day in the Body of Christ, food
should be provided for true Believers, says S. Ambros. in 6. c. Luc.
Sacerdotalem cibum ad usum transiturum populorum demonstrante typo, quod
Christi corpore cibus ^idelium pararetur.
Ambrose most excellently. So that there is just that difference between the
Shewbread and the Body of Christ in the Sacrament, as there is between the
shadow and the body, the representation and the verity, the patterns of future
things, and the things themselves prefigured by these patterns, says S. Hieron
in Ep. ad Tit. c. 1. and in Ezekiel. c. 44.
Hierome. And so said Origin. super Levit. Hom. 43. fol. 82.
Origin long before; The Commemoration and Remembrance of the 12 Tribes by
those 12 Loaves, does relate to those words of our Savior, Do this in
remembrance of me. And therefore if you mark well these mysteries of the
Church, you shall be enabled to observe the truth of the Gospel in the dark
mysts and Riddles of the Law. I will add to these and other Testimonies of the
most ancient Fathers (which you shall by and by find in the Margin) the
conceits of two Jewish Rabbis, somewhat tending to our purpose. Ezekiel. 4. 22.
it is thus written, And he said unto me, This is the Table before the LORD:
Meaning (without doubt) the Altar of Incense. The Question then grows, why the
Altar is here called a Table, I have heard this given as a Reason of it, says
Vitalpand. in Ezekiel l. 4. c. 51.
R. Shelomo, That at this day the Table performs what the Altar was wont to do.
R. Iohanan and R. Eliezer give the like reason, That while the Temple stood,
the Altar of God; but sithence the destruction thereof, the Table of a man, is
become the place of Sacrifice and propitiation. But I leave these Rabbis to
Rabbi Coal's consideration, whether he shall reject them, for their conceit of
the Table, or let them pass on, for maintaining the Sacrifice. However, to
conclude this point, I find the Cornel. A Lapide in 9. ad Hebr. Vilalpand. ubi
supra. Ribera in Ezekiel. 41. 22. Barrad. Harman. Tom. 2. l. 3. c. 20. So likewise
Dam. de Fid. Orth^d. l. 4. c. 14. Hieron. in 1. Malach. Rupertu^ in Mal. 1.
Cyrill. Catech. Mist. Cat. 4. agreeing with the other Fathers.
Jesuits themselves of Opinion, that the Table of the Temple, was the true Type
and prefiguration of the Communion Table. And no great wonder they are of that
conceit, considering that Hymn inserted in the Body of the Mass: In Cano^^
Missae.
Sacerdotes sancti incensum
et panem offerunt Domino.


That is, The holy Priests from thence
Offer bread and incense.
And therefore we have borrowed nothing at all from the square Altars of the
Law; but leave that form to the Papists, required of them in their Suarez in
tertiam part.
Canons: but the only Vtensill we relate unto, is the Long-square Table of the
Incense.

Yet will not this man be got off by any means from the King and the Counsel.
Page 31.
He says, that a small measure of understanding is sufficient to avoid offense
at an Altar (howbeit he prays heartily to God, there may be but such a
measure found in Kings and Bishops houses; of which he either is over-carefull,
or has a very base conceit) and that they have had now 80 years to become
better edified toward Altars. Lastly, if that they still continue scandalized
thereat, they are rather Headstrong, then strong enough, as was said of the
Puritanes in the Conference at Hampton Court. The Puritanes moved then for an
Abrogation; those that are scandalized with your new Altars, move only for a
Confirmation of the ecclesiastical Laws, and the practice of them, as they
have been these last fourscore years generally executed. So that your
quotation of that Conference, is a fine new Nothing. The Act of Counsel made
for this Reformation, does say peremptorily In the first and third Reason, Act.
and Mon. part. 2. p. 700.
in two several places, That the form of a Table shall more move the simple
from the Superstitious Opinions of the Popish Mass, and that this
superstitious Opinion is more holden in the minds of the simple and ignorant,
by the form of an Altar, then of a Table. And therefore they did not intend to
make a provision to prevent this inconvenience in the Church of England for
foure-score years only, but for ever. And accordingly they went to work,
caused their Liturgy to be mended in this particular, the word Altar to be
left out, the word Table to be put in, in their Rubricks for that purpose. Nor
rested they there, but confirmed this 50 and 60* Ed. 6. c. 1.
corrected Liturgy by Act of Parliament, 10 Elis. c. 2.
revived again by another Act of Parliament, confirmed by the Before our
ordinary books of Common Prayer.
Proclamation of the late King of famous Memory, which was revived (with his
other Proclamations) by his most excellent Majesty, in the very beginning of
his happy Reign. And what is the son of your father, to dare to offer
limitation of time to a Law so absolute and Authentical?

But Page 32.
this Counsell-order does not appear to have been transmitted to any other
Diocese beside Bishop Ridley's. This Quiblet is grounded upon a mere Error of
the Printer, by not putting a Period where he should, and putting it where he
should not. The words, rightly pointed, run thus, Anno 1550. other Letters (not
a Letter) likewise were sent for the taking down of Altars in Churches, and
setting up the Tables in stead of the same. And here the full point should be.
Unto Nicolas Ridley made Bishop of London in Boners place, (Here is a Period in
the new, but a Comma only in the old Book) the Copy and contents of the Kings
Letters, are these, as follows. So that Letters were written to all; but John
Fox (having access to the Bishop of Londons Registry) prints only the Copy
of those which were sent to Bishop Ridley. So that this is a subtilitie indeed,
a subtilitie in Print, as they use to say. But the next is more gross and
downright: That he says, that both parties that strove about the placing of
their Tables, in Bishop Ridley's Visitation, were left to follow their own
affections, and the thing left at large, and not determined.

There fell out about the year 1605, a great Controversy between M. Broughton
and M. Aynsworth, that troubled all the Diers in Amsterdam, Whether the lining
of Aarons Ephod was blue, or sea-water-green. And A Book called Certain
Questions, printed 1605.
M. Aynsworth, poor man, was put to print a large Apology in that business.
But had the Question been of the color of this Tale told here by D. Coal, it
might have been resolved in one word; It is a blue and perfect blue Tale. For
Bishop Ridley there resolves these Questionists, That the Situation most
conformable to Scripture, to the usage of the Apostles, to the Primitive
Church, to the Kings proceedings, was, not to lay the holy Table all along the
wall, (and therefore in Paul's Church he brake down the wall standing then by
the high Altars side) nor to lay it only in the right form of a Table (as this
Quis tam comesor mu^ Ponticus, qu^ qui Evangelia corrosit? Tertullian, adversus
Marcionem, l. 1. c. 1.
mus Ponticus, as he said of Marcion, this nibbler at all Quotations, does
mis-recite the Text) but to lay it in the form of a right Table, that is a long
Table; or, as your own See the Index in the word Ridley.
Index does interpret the word, not Altar-wise, but as a Table. So that by this
impudency of yours, which put us to this narrow search, we have met with two
particulars very pertinent to the present dispute. First, that upon the taking
down of the Altar, the Table is not directed to be set up in the place where
the Altar stood, In the Letter of the K. and Counsel to Bishop Ridley, Act.
and Mon. part. 2. p. 699.
but in some convenient part of the Chancell: That Is the first. And secondly,
that the meaning of the Kings proceedings (better known to this Bishop, then to
you) was, that the Ibid. p. 700. col. 2.
Table should not be placed and disposed Altar-wise, which is the Question now
before us.

Soon after, D. Coal begins to relent, and could find in his heart to bestow
half a Vicaridge upon the Writer of the Letter, for saying, That in the old
Testament one and the same thing may be called an Altar in respect of Page 33.
what is there offered unto God, and a Table in respect of what is there (as he
has it) participated by men. See what it is to put a man into a peevish
humor! Martial. Epig. l. 5. ep. 84.
Velle tuum nolo, Dindyme, nolle volo.

Now I would not give the Writer a Peas-cod for that distinction, nor do I
believe he ever dreamed of it. He said, that an Altar might be called a Table,
in what was Thence (not there) participated by men. For it is a thing
notoriously known (says In Theophrast. (...).
Cas^^bon) that Feasts heretofore were wont to accompany all solomn Sacrifices.
And that they did eat their good Cheer, not upon, but from the Altars. And so
says Theophrast. (...).
Theophra^^s, that they did first (...), offer up their Sacrifices, and then
(...), lay it on in entertainments. But if they did the one, then necessarily
the other. For if I did Sacrifice, then surely I did eat, says (...),
Philostrat. de vita Apoll l. 8. p 402.
Apollonius Tyaneus in his Apology to Domitian. The first they did at the
Altar, the second at their houses. Plautus in Militie, Act. 3. Sc. 1.
Sacrificant? Me ad se ad prandium ^o^ant. They never offer a Sacrifice, says
the Parasite, but they invite me to dinner to their houses. And this custom
was no stranger to the people of God. For so we 1 Samuel 9. v. 15. 22, 23.
read, that Samuel did bless the peoples Sacrifice in the high place, but
Feasted his strangers with his portion of that Sacrifice in his own Parlour. 1.
Cor. 9. 13.
So they that wait upon the Altar, are partakers with the Altar.

And because their provision came from the Lords Altar, as from a rich and
plenteous Table, this Altar was sometimes figuratively and improperly called a
Table. For otherwise (if we speak properly) Institut. of the Sacram. l. 6. c.
5. p. 465.
tell us where it was ever know, that any Altar was ordained for eating and
drinking, says a reverend Prelate. And for this Altar you aim at, This is the
way to correct the Son of God, who said not, Take this and offer it, as upon
an Altar, but, Take this and eat it, as from a Table, says another of our
Bilson's true differ. part. 4. p. 490.
Prelates. Bish. Andrews of his Sermons, p. 453.
Christ was given for us in the Sacrifice, to us in the Sacrament. There, per
modum Victimae, by way of Offering; Here, per modum Epuli, by way of
Banqueting: says a third. And to Banqueting, a Table relates more literally
and properly then an Altar. The Fathers Altar of Oblations which you find in
the Page 34.
Letter, is but an Altar of Allusion, as the Levits likewise are, which in the
ancient Fathers, are made to attend the foresaid Altar. That Altar of Praise
and Thanksgiving, which the Act of Council approves of, is a Metaphorical
Altar, all made of Notions, as the Sacrifices also are, that fume on that
Altar. All these are but airy Altars, built up of the Metaphors and Figurative
speeches of the ancient Fathers; resembling in composition that Altar of Claud.
Sa^^nas. ad aras Dosiadae. Lutet. Paris. 1619, p. 127.
Dosiades, all made of words or poetical feet, or that of Liceti Encyclopaed.
ad aram Nonar. Terrigen^, Patav. 1630.
Aeneas Terrigena, (...),
(...),
made neither of Gold nor Silver, nor any other solid matter, but of the
sublime Conceptions of those (...), those Grandchildren of the heaven, the
nine Muses. Lastly, such another Altar, for the Materialities thereof, as that
of Liceti Encyclop, ad aram Pythiam, 1630.
Publicius Optatianus, which thus describes it self, Non caute dura me polivit
artifex;
Excisa non sum rupe montis albidi;
Me metra pangunt de Camoenarum modis.


That is, No Mason hewed me out of Rocky vein;
Nor put I Carpenter to sweat or pain:
But made I stand of Muses gentle strain.


And therefore, gentle Doctor, you have (for all your boasting) found no Altar
of Stone, no Altar of Timber, no Altar that can lie along the Wall, and
consequently, no proof in the Letter for the situation of your Altar.

I but another and a worse Page 55.
Conclusion would soon follow upon this doctrine, [That Communion is an Action
most proper for a Table] which is, That men would think it necessary to sit at
the Communion. It is (I perceive) the Act of Counsel, that still you are
offended at. For so it speaks indeed; If we come to feed upon him spiritually
and to eat his body, and spiritually to drink his blood, which is the use of
the Lords Supper; then no man can deny, but the form of a Table is more meet
for the Lords Board, then the form of an Altar. If you were a Scholar, you
would have been ashamed to write this Divinity. There can be no question made,
but that for a certain time, the (...), and the Lords Supper were eaten at the
same Table, and (for ought appears in any Antiquity) in the same Vtraque
coena jungebatur, Baron. Annal. tom. 1. page 536. Which he clearly proves out
of Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. Hom. 27. in the beginning thereof.
posture: And yet was it a pious and religious Celebration. Our Church and
State are more cautious in their expressions, then this poor Doctor: Pref. of
Cerem. in the Book of Comm. Prayers.
And in our doings we condemn no other Nation, nor prescribe any thing but to
our own people only. For we think it convenient, that every Country should
use such Ceremonies, as they shall think best. For Suarez, in tertiam part.
to sit, stand, kneel, or walk, be not of the substance of the Sacrament.

Nor does the Church of Rome absolutely condemn this Ceremony of Sitting: Or
else it would recall that Called Mandatum, of the Antheme appointed to be sung
at this Ceremony of washing one another feel; Mandatum novum do vobis. Andreas
Quercetames, Notis ad vitam S. Odonis. Vide Lib. Statutorum Ordinis Casal.
Benedicti; Titulo, De Mandato, sive Ablutione pedum. And so Synod. Aquisgran.
Can. 20. In coena Domini pedes fratrum post lavacrum Abbas lavet and osculetur.
And so the word is used in Chronico Casin. l. 2. c. 85. And how it is used*
now, you may learn from a late Cardinal, Par une Collation, que l'on fait,
dans le Chapitre des Moynes a l'imitation des anciennes Agapes de l'Eglise
Chrestienne pour la celebration de l'Eucharistie, Card. du Peron. du S. Sacram.
l. 3. c. 11. p. 871.
Mandate or Maundie of the Benedictines, which testifies, that they (at the
least one day in the year) do receive the Sacrament sitting. And this custom
mounts higher then S. Benedict; even to Ep. 118. ad Januar.
S. Austins time: Who affirms, nonnullos probabilem quandam rationem
delect^ssse, that not Monks only, but some other kind of men, were pleased
with a specious reason, upon that peculiar day of the year, wherein our
Savior administered the Supper, to receive the body and blood of Christ
presently upon their ordinary repast, as a more notable commemoration of that
first Supper. Which must be in their private houses, and mensa communi, upon
their ordinary Table, as De Sacram. l. 4. c. 7.
Mornay observes: Although it be true what the Vbi supra, p. 8^2.
Cardinal Peron coldly replies, that S. Austin, in those words, does not deny
but this might be done in the Church, and upon an Altar, and inclines, as to
the better opinion, to have this Sacrament received by all men Fasting. But the
Cardinal there does clearly affirm, that the Apostles omitted no due
reverence, or (as he calls it) adoration of Christ, although they sat with him
at the Table: and brings a passage out of De Oratione, c. 12.
Tertullian, to prove that some of the ancient Christians did adore Sitting;
and maintained their Ceremony, with a place out of the book of Hermes, called
the Pastor. Which position of theirs although (as the Cardinal notes)
Tertullian does not blame, for being an imitation of the Pagans; yet surely he
does not there commend those Ancients, no more then I do this Ceremony in our
modern and Neighbor Christians; but spare to censure them, as I hope they will
do us, in matters of this nature. And sure it is, that (as the Cardinal there
observes) all the old Romans, by an express Law of Plutarch. in Numa, and in
Romans Quaestion.
Numa Pompilius, were required to worship their gods sitting. He proves the
same to be the custom of the Greeks also, by an old Quatrain of the Sieur de
Quatrain. 4. Adore assis, comme le G^ec ordonne, etc. Tertullian makes it a
common posture for all Pagans. Porro cum perinde faciant Nationes adoratis
sigillaribus suis residendo, L. de Oratione, c. 12.
Pibrac. Which I will not set down in French, as the Cardinal has it; but as
I find it translated into Greek by Florence Christian, 1584. Vide Fabri
Pibraci Tetrasticha, p. ^.
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).


That is, Worship God sitting, as the Greeks have used;
Running Devotion he cannot endure;
But will be served with a Heart firm and sure;
Which Heart is only by himself infused.
Now although (as In his Replique, c. 19.
Mounsieur Moulin returns it well upon the Cardinal) the Apostles of Christ
were not to learn Ceremonies out of the Laws of Numa, or the Quatrains of
Pibrac; yet may we herein learn some modesty out of Papists themselves, Not to
conclude the Ceremonies of so many Neighboring Protestants, as altogether
unchristian; which this Doctor for want of learning, or charity, or both,
endeavors to do in this place.

But for own Archb. Whitgifts Answer to the Admonition, p. 100.
Kneeling in the Church of England, at our receiving of this blessed Sacrament;
it is appointed, either for a signification of the humble and grateful
acknowledgement of the Benefits of Christ, given to the worthy receiver; or
rather because it is administered in our Church with a most effectual Prayer
and Thanksgiving. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is given for thee,
preserve thy body and soul, etc. The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.
preserve thy body and soul to everlasting life. Drink this in remembrance that
Christ's blood was shed for thee, and be thankful. Now he must have a knee of a
Camel, and heart of Oak, that will not bow himself, and after the manner of
adoration and worship, say, Amen, (as S. (...). Cyrill* Hierosol. Catech.
Mystag. Cat. 5.
Cyrill speaks) to so patheticall a Prayer and Thanksgiving, made by the
Minister unto God in his behalf. And this is a powerful Argument indeed for
conformity in this point; with the which I have seen some Leichestershire-
people of good sort, that had been refractory for a long time, satisfied in an
instant by the Bishop of the Diocese, being very sorry they had not observed so
much before, That in the Church of England, our whole act of Receiving is
accompanied in every part with the act of Praying and Thanksgiving. Archb.
Whitgifts Answer to the Admonition, p. 99.
However it behooveth humble and meek spirits in such indifferent matters to
submit themselves to the Order of the Church, appointed by lawful Authority.
And as long as our Liturgy has the honor and repute given thereunto, which
it so well deferves, there is little fear, that the people will clap them down
upon their Breech about our holy Table: It being no posture used in this Church
to say, Amen, to such divine raptures and ejaculations. Beside that, throughout
all the Diocese I live in (being no small part of the Kingdom) there is
(whether the Epistoler likes it or no) Rails and Barricadoes to keep the people
from all irreverences in that kind. But the general Rule in this case, is
that which is set down in the Articles of the Dutch Church in London (allowed
by Beza himself and diverse others) Archb. Whitgifts Desence of the Answer to
the Admonition, p. 87.
That every private man's judgment in these circumstances is not to be
respected. But what is profitable to edify, what is not, is not to be
determined by the judgment of the common people, nor of some one man, but (as
I have said at large heretofore) of those that have the chief care and
government in the Church. And so was it well done by the Reformed Church in
Poland, first by Monitions, in the year 1573. and then by Sanctions, in the
year 1583. Ne in usu sit, that the usual receiving of the Communion in those
parts, should not be by sitting round about the Table. (A Ceremony which some
of the Brethren, as they call them, had brought into those parts, either from
John Alasco, their countryman, or from other Reformed Churches, as might be
(the commerce of these three Nations considered) from the Low Countries, or the
Church of Lib. Disciplina Eccl. Scot. edit. 1560.
Scotland, where this posture of sitting was Synodically established from the
very beginning of the Reformation.) It was well done of them, I say, to reform
it; but very ill done of you to steal this Coal from the Altar of Damasco, and
never say so much as, I thank you, good Gaffer, or deliver it us cleanly as you
found it. And yet it is not* considering you confess the Thefts in the Title
of your Book, calling it ingeniously, A COAL FROM THE ALTAR.

Yet I would you had spared to abuse that grave Synod, to make them say
peremptorily, Haec ceremonia Ecclesiis Christianis non est usitata, especially
as you turn it to English, that Page 36.
this Ceremony is a thing not used in the Christian Church: And so put the
reformed Churches to fall together by the ears one with another, and many of
them to become odious in the Christian Church. Which (God he knows) is far
from either the words or meaning of that Synod. For their words are these, Haec
ceremonia, licet cum caeteris libera, etc. This Ceremony, however in its own
nature free and indifferent, as the rest of the Ceremonies, etc. Which sweetens
the Case very much. And then for their meaning; They do not say, it is a thing
not used in the Christian Church. This is your fingering and corruption. But
they say; it is me ^sed in those Christian and Evangelicall Churches, nostri
consen^us, which agreed with them in Articles of confession. They condemn no
other Nations, no more then the Church of England does. And is this the part of
a judicious Divine, to corrupt a passage in a Sectary or Puritan, who will be
sure (without any mercy) to send Hue and Cry after you over all the Country?
Surely the man has been instructed by Chrysalus in In Bacchide.
Plautus. Improbis-cum improbus sit, harpaget, furibus furetur quod queat. He
is resolved to put some knavery upon the knave himself, and to steal from the
Stealer what he can. For indeed (to come to the second point) both the Coal and
the Altar are quite mistaken, to think that the Synod did ever say, that this
Ceremony was brought in, or used by the modern Arians. It is very well known,
that John Alasco, who maintained this Ceremony of sitting, in a Called, Forma
S^ratio totius Eccles. Ministerii, etc.
little Book published here in England in K. Edwards days, was settled in
Poland, and (by the means of his Noble blood and kindred) in great favor with
his Prince, in Nolui committere, quin te nunc certiorem facerem do successu
rerum magnifici Domini Ioannis a Lasco in Polonia, Cracoviae, 19. Feb. 1557.
V^enh^vious Calvino, Calv. Ep. p. 194.
the year 1557. which is long before either of these two Synods. And all that
either of the Synods say in dislike of the Ceremony, is this; That it is
Arianis cum Domino pari solio se collocantibus propria: A thing fitter for the
Arians, who by their Doctrine and T^ne^s, placed themselves cheek by joul with
the Son of God, then for devout and humble Christians, compassed about with
Neighbors so fundamentally heretical. I could say that here in England, this
worse conclusion of the Doctors, To desire to sit at the Communion, is more to
be feared from the Opposers of our Liturgy, who brag of their It suiteth not
with a Coheir with Christ, to kneel at the Table, Abridgement of Lincolnshire,
p. 61.
Cosin-ship and Coheir-ship with Christ, then from us who are ready to live and
die in defense of the same. And the Altar Damasc. p. 752.
Altar at the last espied this to be the meaning of the Synod, that this
Sitting was proper to the Arians, not by usage, but secundum principia
doctrinae suae, as an Inference easily drawn from the Principles of their
Doctrine. Howbeit the Coal was resolved to wink at it in his Author, and to
speak big words, (though beside the Cushion, and against all truth of History)
that it was brought in at the first by the Modern Arians: His Author telling
him in the same Page, that it was published in the Book of Scottish discipline,
Anno 1560. and my self having showed by a Testimony beyond all exception, that
it was preached in Poland three year before that, by John Alasco.

And then your Principles were they true (as the Altar and Sacrificium
Relativa sunt, Bell. de Missa, l. 1. c. 2. So he, and truly, ^ish. of Dur. l.
6. c. 5.
one of them is false; For there was never any Altar erected in the Temple, but
to sacrifice upon, nor ever any man read in divine or humane learning, that
denied It is called Mincha in the Hebr. and translated Sacrificium by Hierom.
Numb. 16. 15. Nadab and Abihu are said to offer (...), by Joseph. Antiq. l. 3.
c. 10. and Ruffinus translates is Victimas. And some were of opinion, that all
Sacrifices were perfeated upon the Altar of Incense, according to Heb. 9. 6.
Vilalp. in. 41. Ezekiel.
Incense to be a Mincha, and kind of Sacrifice) the conclusion could not come
within a league of us. For we, who extract our selves (as I told you before)
from that Table in the Temple, do desire to eat in no other manner, then as the
Priests, and as David, our Types, did eat before us. We do not desire to eat
upon, which is but your foolish Inference, but to eat from the holy Table. And
that all the faithful may do in verity, what David and the Priests did before
in a representation, I have showed already out of the ancient Fathers. Nor are
we so unreasonably tied to one Table, but if the Defense of 3 Cerem. p. 256.
woman were driven to the desert, we could be content with the green Grass.
But in that case, the Grass should be unto us in stead of a Table; it should
not be in stead of an Altar* I do not love (...), (as Orat. contra Julian.
Gregory Nazianzen calls it) to break jests in these high Mysteries. Otherwise,
I could tell you that unhappy Inferences may be made out of your Tenets, as
well as out of those of the Arians. That no place will serve your turn to eat
upon, but Altars, appropriated by all Learning humane and divine to Altar soli
Deo vero rite potest erigi, Bell. de Missa, ^l. c. 2. ex August. l. 20. contra
Faust. c. 21.
God alone. Well, if you will needs be snapping at the Meats of the Gods,
(...), Lucian. in Ic^ro. Menippo.
Menippus will tell you that you must be content to fare as they do, upon
Blood, Vapors and Frankincense. This Menippus says. For mine own part, I
shall only desire to know of you, a judicious Divine, what may be the meaning
of an odd word used by Aristotle in his Ethics, to wit, Ethic. l. 4. c. 14.
(...). Because I was told it signifies two things, a scurrilous Railer at men
in place, and a Snatcher of Meats from the holy Altars.

Yea, but he does set down at large out of the Act of Page 38.
Counsel, with what indifferency these names of Table, Board, and Altar have
been used before, and may be used for the present. He does indeed and with a
great deal of ingenuitie, if you mark it. For the Question being made by some
of his humor that would have the Altars stand, because the Book of Common
Prayer (meaning the Book before it was reformed) did mention an Altar; the
Lords (amongst whom Archbishop Cranmer was a chief) were put to this Apology;
That the Book intended no Table, or Altar, formally, but a certain Thing (as
they there call it) whereupon the Lords Supper was administered. This Thing had
no figuration at all prescribed unto it in that Book: But so far forth, as the
Lords Supper is there ministered, though it be upon an Altar, it calls the
said Altar, a Table, and The Lords Board; but so far as the holy Communion is
distributed with the Sacrifice of Lands and Thanksgiving, though it be a Table,
it calls the said Table, an Altar. And therefore in so much as the
distribution of the Lords Supper in both kinds, is a real and sensible
Action, it is a real and sensible Table: But because the Lauds and
Thanksgivings are by all Divines acknowledged to be a Metaphorical and
improper Sacrifice, it is but a Metaphorical and improper Altar. And to call
it an Altar in that sense, you know the Letter does every where allow. But
hark you, Sir; it makes no matter for the Letter. I pray you, tell me in my
ear, What Book is it that calls it an Altar? and for what Book do the Lords
apologize in this place? If it be for the Book of 1549, Ratio quidem her^^e
apparet: Argentum (...), Plant. in Trin. Act. 2. Se^. 4.
(...), that is vanished, and we have nothing to do with it. And you are a very
Coal, that is, a thing that cannot blush, to say that that Book, or any thing
spoken of that Book, allows you to call the holy Table an Altar for the
present. Your tongue for the present ought to speak, as the present Book and
Law speaks it unto you; and that is, as you your self confess, Page 37.
The Lords board only. And when men in their nominations of things do vary
from the Law, which is the Quintessence of Reason, they do it in a humor,
which is the Quintessence of Fansy. Nor is there any way possible of peace and
quietness, unless the probable voice of every entire Society or Body
politic, overruled all private of like nature in that Body, says M. In his
Preface.
Hooker.

But we have been all this while mistaken in the Cause of this Change of
Liturgies, which the Letter so much stands upon. For the Letter supposes, as
the Act of Counsel and K. Ed^ards Mandate do, that the Altars themselves were
put out of our Churches, and their names out of our Liturgy, to comply with
the godly considerations of some that had taken them down already, and to root
out superstitious Opinions, more holden in the minds of the simple and
ignorant by the form of an Altar. And men did the rather believe it so, because
a Divine, very near as judicious as D. Coal, seems to be of that Opinion,
when he says, that Hooker, Eccles. Polit, l. 4. did. 14. p. 165.
our Churches were purged of things, which indeed ^ere burdensome to the
people, or to the simple offensive and scandalous. But the matter is Kim Kam to
all that we have conceipted. For it was indeed an offense against our Liturgy
Page 39.
conceived by John Calvin (a poor Minister at the foot of the Alps, who died
in Books and all worth very near See his last Will, in his Life, set forth by
Beza, p 12.
40 ^' sterling) that caused the King of England, the Convocation, the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and all the Commonaltie, to make that Change in the
Book of Common Prayer. And is it even so? Why then, gentle Readers, Assem para
and accipe auream fabulam: fabulas imo, Plin. Calvisi^, Ep. lib. 2. ep. 20.
Assem parate, et accipietis auream fabulam; make ready your Bread and Cheese,
for my life on it, you shall hear a Winter-Tale. Page 39.
It seems that Bucer had informed Calvin of the Condition of this Church, and
the public Liturgy thereof; and thereupon he wrote to the Duke of Somerset,
who was then Protector, Epistola ad Bucerum. And is this to look unto the
Story of those Times? It seems unto me that this Epistle to Bucer has no Date
at all, and if we give it a Date from the Printers placing of the Letter,
(which is your childish and erroneous Criticisme) you shall find it between
November 19, 1548, and January 16, 1549, and consequently before the publishing
of the first Liturgy, which was March 7, 1549. And so it must needs be. For
Calvin Rumor est vobis esse a Gallis inducias: utinam and firmae pacis ratio
iniri posse^! Calv. ep. p. 81.
says in that Letter, that there was Cessation of Arms between France and
England, and wished that some course might be taken for a solid Peace. Tillet
le Greff. Recueil de Traitez, page 410. and Tillet l' Evesq. Chroniq. p. 197.
Now the Commissioners were met to conclude that Peace, 24 of March, 1549. And
therefore the Letter was written before that. And to strike this seeming of
yours dead in the nest; Veni igitur quam cit^ssime poteris vir omnium
desideratissime, Petr. Alex. Dat. Lamb. 24. Martis, 1549. int^r* M. Buceri
opera Anglic. p. 191.
Peter Alexander writes his Letter to Bucer (as yet at Strasburgh) to invite
him to England, of the very same Date with the Commission of the French Treaty,
24 of March 1549, and tells him for news, that in the Parliament then sitting,
Missae Papisticae missae sunt ad novos Monachos Germaniae, the Popish Missal
was dismissed to the new Monks in Germany, by the first approbation of our
first Liturgy in that Parliament. See then how well you looked into the
stories of the time. You make Bucer, before ever he came hither, to enform
Calvin of the condition of this Church, and the public Liturgy thereof,
before the Liturgy was penned and approved in Parliament. But I will endeavor
to give this undated Letter a truer Date. Inter M Buceri script. Anglic. p. 190.
Archbishop Cranmer writes for Bucer to come over, 2o October. 1549. He desired
Calvin (who was no doubt a Polypragmon, and made his Letters to fly to all the
Princes in the world, that did but look toward a Reformation) to write by him
to the Protector, and to persuade him to a serious Reformation in general.
Calvin in this Letter, tell's him he had written to the Protector a Letter
(not the Letter Printed, bearing October. 22. 1546. Epist. Calvini, p. 72.
Date two years before.) and bids him if he could procure Audience (a sign he
had not been here as yet) deal with him roundly himself, and take heed of his
old fault (as he terms that most admired prudence and wisdom of that learned
man) to be ever inclining, mediis Consiliis, to peaceable and moderate Advices.
And this Letter must be written unto him about the Spring, 1549, when he was
ready to come for England. Where we find he was safely arrived, and reposed
himself at From his Epistle to Pet. Martyr, inter Opera Anglic. p. 550.
Canterbury in June following. Now although he had considered of the Book of
Common Prayers before, as well as he could, Censura, p. 456
per interpretem, by the help of an Interpreter, and approved it, as in nothing
(heartily construed) repugnant to the word of God; yet did he never make Notes
and Censures thereupon, until he was required thereunto by Archibishop
Cranmer, two years after this; to wit, Anno 1551: Nor could he tell Tales to
Calvin thereof, being then bedrid, and dying within Censura, p. 503. Nonis
Ianuar. Anno Domini 1551. Cantabrigiae, die 25o post defunctus.
25 days after (some two months before the Alteration of the Liturgy)
especially not any Tale against the Altar, having suffered Auricular
Confession, Oblations and Altars (though termed Boords or Tables) to stand in
the Reformation at For that Book called, A Religious consultation, by Herman
Archb. of Cullen, and printed here in English, 1548. was penned in Latin by
Bucer. See fol. 114. Of the Lords Supper.
Cullen, and not taking the least exception against the word in his Censure of
our Liturgy. I am therefore strengthened in my former Opinion, That it was the
King, the Lords, and the State rather then any incitement of Martin Bucer, that
made this Alteration in our Liturgy, in the point of Altars.

Then for Calvin; no man can conceive him to be more pragmatically zealous in
point of Reformation (even in those Countries which cared least for him) then I
do. Yet do I hold him a most innocent man, and our famous Liturgy sorely
wounded through his side, by this audacious Companion, in this particular
concerning Altars. The Letter to the Protector, that D. Coal relies upon,
bears Date, October. 22, 1546. which according to foreign Accounts, is a year
before K. K. Edward began his Reign the last of January, 1546. Stilo Angl.
1547. Stilo com. muni. Stow.
Edward came to the Crown. But compute it as you please; it must be three full
years before the month of March, 1549. At what time I find that this former
Liturgy was first printed. And if you rely upon his Character, the Letters
placed before and behind this to the Protector, are of the same Date, 1546.
And yet would this Companion have his courteous Readers to swallow this
Gudgeon, without so much as champing or chewing on it. And in this Letter,
Calvin touches only upon 4 particulars (which Censura, p. 468. Optarem ego
commendationem defunctorum and precem pro aeterna eorum pace praetermitti.
Bucer himself does likewise censure) Chrisoms, oil in Baptism, Commemoration
of the dead, and the abuse of Impropriations, but not one word of the Altars.
And good reason for it. For Sed non repugno quin Coena Domini in Altari
celebrari possit. Nam and a Lausanna Altar marmoreum, etc. Beza in Colleq.
Mempelg. p. 350.
Beza confesses, that at Lausanna, where Calvin taught before he came to
Geneva, there was a Marble-Altar used for a Communion Table, which from thence
was removed to Bearn (where Calvin also sometimes taught) and is so there used
as a Communion Table (abstracted from all former relations to a Sacrifice) unto
this day. Which I therefore note, to let you see that Calvin was not so
strait-lac't in this particular. Yea, but he finds great fault with the
Commemoration of the dead. And does he so? And I pray you, what does K. James
declare the general Opinion of our Church to be, for these Commemorations in
the time of the Communion, in that most exact Answer of his to Cardinal Peron?
Ad Epist. Card. Peron. Resp. p. 55.
This is a rite (says he) which the Church of England, though it does not
condemn in the first ages of the Church, yet holds unfit to be retained at
this day, for many and weighty causes and reasons, which you may read most
excellently pressed in that Book. Besides that, Calvin acknowledges (as he
wanted to wit to understand how the world went with him abroad) that he had no
such credit with the Conformable party here in England, as within two or three
years after this, he confesses openly in one of his Sed ego frustra ad eos
sermonem converto, qui forte non tantum mihi tribuunt, ut consilium a tali
autore profectum admittere dignentur, Calvinus Anglis Francofurt. Epist. p. 158.
Letters. Lastly, (which is the main Answer of all) the Protector was of no
power in the State, when this Liturgy was reformed; which was not altogether
unknown to Calvin, having an hint from Archbishop Cantuarichsis nihil me
utilius facturum admonuit, quam si ad Regem saepius scriberem, Calv. ad Farell.
15. lun. 1551. Epist. p. 384.
Cranmer to address his Letters to the King himself. But for the Lord
Protector, he had his crush a year and a half before (never restored again to
his Power or Office, admitted only by a John Stow.
New oath, to serve but as a Counselor at large) and in the first Abstract of
the Acts of that Parliament, at St R. C.
sitting of this Parliament which altered the Liturgy, he was attainted, and
condemned, and presently executed, having been in no case or place of a long
time, to make Alterations to gratify Calvin. And for Archbishop Cranmer; it is
true, the foresaid Active man writes unto him from Geneva a couple of Letters,
and offers his service in person, to make up our Articles of Religion, and to
state the Controversies in Divinity (another project, it seems, the learned
Archbishop had then in hand) when he gives him a general touch of the residui
surculi, the remaining stumps and roots of Popery, together with the cause
thereof (as he conceived) the Laymens swallowing of the Impropriations: But
has not in all the two Letters, so much as one syllable of Altars or amendment
of Liturgies. And what Date these Letters were of, God knows; for they have
none a all in the Book. But the Date seems to be much before Ann. 1551. which
is D. Coal's conjecture. For in the first Letter he presents his Grace with the
news of Osianders troubles, which he Melchion Adamus in vita Osiandri.
stirred up in the year 1549. And in the second he tells him of a Non multo
levius mihi videtur aliud vitium, quod ex publico Ecclesiae proventu aluntur
otiosi ventres, qui lingua incognita Vesperas cantillent, Calvinus Cranmero,
Epist. p. 101.
chanting of Vespers in an unknown tongue here in England; which was inhibited
in this Kingdom by Act of Parliament, full two years before the Altering of the
Liturgy. Nor does it seem that Calvin had any great acquaintance with the
Archbishop (who neither accepted of his Offer in the Agreeing of the Articles,
nor, for ought appears, ever wrote unto him back again; but sent him a
Message by one Nicolas, wishing him to write to the King himself about the
Restoring of the Impropriations) I say, it does not seem they were much
acquainted, by that first Letter that Calvin writes unto him. For in that he
rails most bitterly upon young Osiander, a Divine very near Vxorejue Neptis fuit
uxoris Osiandri, Godwin. in Catal. p. 198. Moram Norimbergae fecit, hospitio
que Andreae Osiandri usus est. Cum quo, secunda conjuge ducta, contraxit
affinitatem, Antiq. Britann. p. 331.
allied unto the Archbishop.

But if Calvin's Letter to the Protector himself be misdated (as like enough it
is, being but a Copy from the French, wherein the Date was not regarded) then
came it to the Dukes hands (as some Letter from Calvin was then delivered to
the Duke by one Nicolas, a Tel-tale of M. Calvin's, that studied in Cambridge in
those days) but in the year 1551, Bucer being dead before, (which Calvin
Calvin Farello; P. 384.
there takes notice of) and the Liturgy newly altered.

Let us not therefore, as we tender the credit of the Church of England, suffer
such a famous piece, as our Common Prayer Book is, to be disparaged in this
kind, upon such weak Flams and ridiculous suppositions. But if any desire to
know the reason of the Alteration, let him repair to the Act it self, where he
may be fully satisfied. He shall find, it was partly the 5o and 6o Ed. 6. c. 1.
Curiosity of the Ministers, and mistakes in the use and exercise of the
former Book met withal in the second Book by a clear explanation. Of the which
curiosity and mistaking, whether this removing and placing of the Altar, which
they found usually so termed in the former Liturgy, might not be a special
branch, I leave to the Readers collection, out of what has been already
delivered in the examination of the Counsell-Act in that behalf. And partly
also he shall find the Book was altered, for the more In the same Act.
perfection thereof, or (as it follows in the body of the Act) to be made
fully perfect: Not to gratify Calvin, who was Lecturing in his Chair at
Geneva, nor to comply with the Duke of Somerset, who was a condemned prisoner,
looking every day for the stroke of the Ax, when this Book was passing the
several Committees in the Upper and Lower house of Parliament. And that it
seems by any one syllable of the Letter to Farell, that Calvin wrote unto the
King about the change of the Liturgy, is another blue one. Read the Letter,
and you will be of my opinion.

Yea, but the Page 40.
King in his Answer to the Devonshiremen had formerly affirmed, that the Lords
Supper, as it was then administered, was brought even to the very use, as Christ
left it, as the Apostles used it, and as the holy Fathers delivered it. I
answer, that these Devonshire-men (whom the Doctor clothes in this fair
Livery) were a sort of notorious Rebels. And if a King (to avoid shedding of
blood) should answer such people clad in steel, edictis melioribus, in a more
passable language, then will endure Logical examination; is it fit he should
be so many years after jeered thus, by such a Mushrom here on earth, reigning
himself (without all doubt) a most glorious Saint above in Heaven? Besides
that, the Form that Christ left, the Apostles used, and the Fathers delivered
the Lords Supper in, is never taken by judicious Divines in a mere
Mathematical and indivisible point of exactness: but in a Moral conformity,
which will admit of a Latitude, and receive from time to time degrees of And so
the King clearly conceived it. That we may be encouraged from time to time
further to travel for the Reformation, Proclam. before the Book of Communion,
1548.
perfection. But I will not lead you to any woods, to borrow shadows for this
place: the Answer is set down in such capital Letters, that he that runs by
may read it. The Rebels in their third Article (set on by the Popish Priests)
do petition for their Mass (that is, that which we call the Canon of the We
will have Mass celebrated, as it has been in times past, without any man
communicating with the Priest, Acts and Mon. part. 2. p. 666.
Mass) and words of Consecration, as they had it before, and that the Priests
might celebrate it alone, without the communicating of the people. To this the
King answers, That for the Canon of the Mass and words of Consecration (which
is in nothing altered in the second Liturgy) they are such as were used by
Christ, the Apostles, and the ancient Fathers: that is, They are the very words
of the Institution. But for the second part of their Demand, which was for the
Sacrifice of the Mass, or the Priests eating alone, they must excuse him: For
this the Popes of Rome for their lucre added unto it. So there is a clear
Answer to both parts of the Article. They should have a Table, and a Communion,
and the words of Consecration, as they were used body Christ, the Apostles, and
the ancient Fathers: But they should have no Altar, nor Sacrifice; for these
the Popes of Rome for their lucre, had added to the Institution; being, as Def.
part. 3. p. 315.
B. Jewel truly calls them, the Shops and gainful Booths of the Papists.

And this Answer did nothing like our noble Doctor. And therefore from making
himself merry with the King, by a kind of Conversion (borrowed from father 3
Convers. part. 2. c. 12. p. 615. But yet for the present, this was the pure
Word of God, and the work of the H. Ghost, and no man might mislike or reprove
it.
Parsons three Conversions) he wheels about, and breaks a Lance upon the
Parliament: That would take upon them to mend a Book, which they could not but
acknowledge to be both agreeable to Gods Word and the Primitive Church. And
then he quotes 5o and 6o Edv. 6. cap. 1. as if he should say, There Is my Cloak,
and here is my Sword, and I stand in Cuerpo ready to maintain it. I say still,
that this Agreeableness to Gods Word and the Primitive Church, is not to be
taken in a mathematical, but in a moral point. The first Book was in some,
the second is in more degrees, agreeable to those excellent Paterns. But what
need I say this, when the Act of Parliament says no such matter as is
pretended? In that part of the Act, where these words are mentioned, some
coertion and penalties were provided for sensual persons, and refractory
Papists, who forbore to repair to the Parish-Churches upon the establishment of
the English Service, desiring still to feed upon husks, when God had rained
down his Manna upon them. The Parliament (according to their deep wisdom in
that kind) desirous to include some reason in the Preamble, of the smart that
comes after in the body of the Act, tells the Offenders against this new Law,
that Prayers in the Mother Tongue, is no Invention of theirs, as the Priests
would make them believe, but the direction of the Word of God, and the practice
of the primitive Church. Meddling no further with the Liturgy in this part of
the Act, then as it was a Service in the Mother Tongue. And so begins the Act,
That 5o and 6o Ed. 6. c. 1.
whereas order had been set forth for Common Prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments to be used in the Mother Tongue, agreeable to the Word of God and
the Primitive Church, etc. The thing excepted against, was Prayer in the
Mother Tongue, and this the Parliament avows to be agreeable to Gods Word and
the Primitive Church. And I hope, you are not mounted as yet to that height, as
to dare to deny it. If any Reader can doubt of so clear an explication, let him
look once more upon the Kings Answer to the Devonshire-Rebells, immediately
before this Parliament, and he shall find Sunbeams to display all darkness
that can possibly fall upon this point. Act. and Mon. part 2. p. 666.
To the 3. Ask, for the Service in the English tongue, it has manifest reasons
for it. Act. and Mon. part 2. p. 667.
If the Service in the Church was good in Latin, it remains good in English.
An alteration to the better, except Knowledge be worse then Ignorance. So that
whosoever has moved you to dislike this Order, can give you no reason for it.
Order, says the King; a godly Order, says the 5o and 6o Ed. 6. c. 1.
Parliament: both mean the same thing, as they use the same words: An Order for
Common prayers in the Mother Tongue. So that Father Parsons and you must
unlaugh again this foolish Laughter, which you made without cause upon this Act
of Parliament.

Well, let the King, the Counsel, and the Parliament order what they please;
two things he will make good: first, that if Origin, or Arnobius do Page 45.
say they had no Altars in the Primitive Church, they meant, not any for bloody
or external Sacrifices, as the Gentiles had. Where you see, he is almost come
to that we have been wrangling for all this while, That they had no Altars for
external Sacrifices. And show me, that ever one Father or Schoolman did teach
a necessity of an external Altar to an internal Sacrifice, and I will yield
him the better of the Controversy. But I see his Loop-hole already; he will
help himself with those words, As the Gentiles had: Although it be, God wot,
but a poor shift. And secondly, he will make it good, that the Church had
Altars, both the Name (which the Letter denies not, but only the name applied
to the material Instrument called the Lords Table) and Thing too, a long time
together, before the birth of Origin and Arnobius. This later part would prove
too heavy a Buckler for any man to take up, that were to fight it out with a
Scholar indeed. For the Writer of the Letter does utterly decline the Combat,
retiring himself to his 200 years, (which will not serve his Turn, for all his
Caution, if Rohwhick Fascicul. tempor. p. 48. Item que le Mess ne sut
celebree, si non sur l' Autel, Les sleures and manieres de temps, translated by
Surget, 1483. and augmented by Peter D'csrey, 1513.
Sixtus Primus did first appoint that Mass should be said no where, but upon
an Altar) as to an advantage of ground, and turning B. Jewel against this
Goliath, without averring any thing of his own, beside the testimony of S. Paul:
at which this Doctor, like that drunken Gossip, says, Amen; when he should
have said, All this I steadfastly believe. But having to do but with this man of
rags, I dare undertake him in both the points; and if I could fully satisfy
that place of Tertullian in his Book De Oratione, will adventure my credit, to
wipe his nose of the rest of those Testimonies produced by him. And all this
while I am no Champion for the Writer of the Letter (who has withdrawn his
Neck out of the Collar) but of the great Champion of our Church, B. Jewel.

For the first therefore, because B. Jewel says, Page 45.
that then the faithful, for fear of Tyrants, were fain to meet together in
private houses, etc. therefore it was, they were not so richly furnished, or at
least wise they had not such Altars, as the Gentiles had, says D. Coal. But B.
Jewel, when he spoke those words of their wanting of Churches in the Primitive
Church, adds presently a word or two (which this Doctor did not unwillingly
forget) Art. 3. p. 145.
And may we think that Altars were built before Churches? Which though it be
not altogether an unanswerable Question (for Because Abraham, Isaac, and other
Patriarchs built Altars unto the Lord, before the Tabernacle or Temple were
erected, Suar. in 3. tom. 3, 4. 83. disp. 81. Sect. 5. So says Walasr. Strabo
de rebus Ecclesiast. c. 1.
men are of opinion that Altars were built before the Churches;) yet is it
sufficient to declare the impudency of this man, that would undertake to
answer Origin, and Arnobius, out of B. Jewel. B. Jewels conclusion there is,
that M. Harding was ill advised to say confidently, that Altars have ever been
sithence the Apostles times. And he answers fully out of S. August. in Q. V.
and N. Testam. qu. 101.
Austin, the Doctors Objection, that Altars being then portativo, and carried
by the Deacons from place to place (which the learned Papists do not deny) they
might have had Altars, although they had no standing Temples. That is,
portative Altars, not of Stone, fixed to the walls of the Church (as our late
Popish Altars be) of the which B. Jewel might very well make his former
Question.

Now for that other Flam, That Origin and Arnobius should deny their having
only of Heathenish, but not of Christian Altars; although it were enough to
stop the mouth of this Ignoto, to set down the Testimonies of those great
Worthies of the reformed Church, who (with B. Jewel) expound these two
Fathers, of the having no Altars at all; as the Institut. lib. 6. c. 1.
B. of Duresme, lib. 2. de Miss. c. 1. p. 171.
Mornay, Digress. lib. 2. digr. 4.
Desiderius Heraldus, Monsieur In his Answer to the Replique, Controvers. 10.
Moulin, De Orig. Altar. p. 6. c. 34.
Hospinian, and others; yet because he thinks he has gotten the Cowards
advantage, to put us to the proof of the Negative, presuming only upon the
justice of the cause, I will undertake him upon these hard conditions.

For Origin; it is cleared in a word, that he was not interrogated, and
consequently that he never answered, concerning the Heathen or Pagan Altars.
For (...), etc. Orig. contra Cells. l. 1.
Celsius his adversary (what Countreyman soever he was) disguiseth himself as a
Jew disputing against the Christians in all that discourse. And it were an
Argument fitting as wise a Rabbin as our D. Coal, to prove the Christians to be
Atheists, because they had not (which they themselves abhorred to the death)
Pagan Altars. But Celsus his objection is to the purpose and general, that the
Christians had amongst themselves a (...), or secret Token, (...), of some
invisible combination, that they erected no kind of Altars, as all other Sects
and Professions (not being (...), Orig. contra Cells. l. 7. p. 384.
Atheists) amongst the Jews and Gentiles did. And to this general Objection
the Answer was likewise general (or very impertinent) that they had no Altars
at all, but those immateriall Altars we spoke of before, in the Souls and
Consciences of holy men.

And Arnobius well weighed, comes to the same effect. For howbeit he had not to
do with Jews, but with Gentiles, yet the Objection is in general terms, not,
that they erected no Altar for their Gods and Sacrifices, but that they built
them no Altar, venerationis ad officia, to officiate upon in any kind of
divine worship. And so Desiderius Heraldus, the best Critic extant upon that
Book, delivers himself, That this may be understood Potest hoc intelligi
simpliciter, quod nulla haberent simpliciter, Desid. Herald. ad Ain. l. 6. p.
342.
simply and absolutely, without any relation to the Pagan Altars. Holding an
opinion elsewhere, that simply and absolutely there were no Altars erected in
the Church of God, before Tertullians time. But this will appear yet more
clearly by a place of S. Cyrill, which the L. Institut. l. 6. c. 5. p. 464.
B. of Duresme does thoroughly examine to this purpose. For Julian the Apostata
had been a Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 3. advers. Julianum.
Reader of our Church, and knew the general practice thereof, and that it had
been in him a ridiculous thing to imagine, that the Christians should have any
Pagan Altars. Nay the witty Prince takes notice of it, that the very Jews do
sacrifice, and have an agreement in that particular with the Pagans, and yet
concludes bitterly against us (as he conceives) Offerre Sacra in Altari and
sacrificare cavetis, You Christians are most scrupulous in offering of any
Sacrifice upon your Altar. And to this (as the Learned Bishop well observes) S.
Cyrill answers not one word: which had been prevarication before God and man,
if the Christians had acknowledged in those days, any Christian-Sacrifice upon
a material Altar. And in Minutius Felix, (if it be well observed, and rightly
read) there is as pregnant a testimony as this of S. Cyrill. Some one had Et
qui hominem summo supplicio pro facinore punitum, and Crucis ligna feralia,
eorum Ceremonias fabulantur, ( a^ Wowerius; fabulatur, as Des Heraldus reads
it) congruentia perditis sceleratisque tribuunt Altaria, ut id colant quod
merentur, Minutius Fell. p. 20. juxta Wowerii edit.
written of the Christians (for you must read it fabulatur, not fabulantur)
that a Felon punished for his offense, and that woeful wood of the Cross, was
all the Ceremonies of the Christians. Whereupon Caecilius the Pagan, running
descant, says that the Author had suited them to a hair, and built them
Altars fit for such wretches, ut id colant quod merentur, making them to adore
that Infelici arbore suspendito, In 12 Tabul.
unluckie tree, which they had so well deserved. So far he goes with his
Author. But coming in the next Page, to charge the Christians himself, he
moves this Question; Why do they keep such ado to conceal, quicquid illud
c^lunt (not, colimus) that, what ever it be, they (the Christians, not we the
Pagans) do really worship? Cur nullas Aras habent? What is the matter they have
no Altars? Then ^urther in the Book, when Octavius comes to make his Repartee
to all this, he says, Putatis autem nos occultare quod colimus, si delubra and
aras non habemus? Vt rejiciam ei suum munus, ingratu^^ est. Cum sit litabilis
hostia bonus animus and pura men's and sincera conscientia, p. 73.
It is not with any desire to conceal the object of their worship, that they
have no Altars: But that with them, the bottom of their heart supplies the
Altar, and a good intention the hallowed Sacrifice. Where I observe two
remarkable circumstances; First, Gods truth acknowledged by the Father of Lies,
the Devil himself, by the mouth of a Pagan, That the Tree of the Cross was
the Altar of the Christians: And then a joint agreement of Caecilius and
Octavius, the Pagan, and the Christian, That for the setting forth of that
(what ever it be) that they, the Christians, then worshipped, they had no
visible erected Altar. And I hope I have set before you more solid stuff then
the Quelque-choses of the poor Doctor, to nourish your consent to B. Jewel
in this point, That in Origin and Arnobiu^ his time, there were in the Church
of God no material Altars. I will conclude with an observation, that has much
inclined me toward this Opinion; howbeit I do not find it stood upon by any
other, because peradventure it is but an Argument drawn from the Rack, and more
passable in the Civil Law, then in Schools of Divinity. Plinius Secund. l. 10
ep. 97. Compare with this Epistle, that of Tertullian; Plinius Secundus cum
provinciam regeret, damnatis quibusdam Christianis, quibusdam gradu pulsis,
etc. Allegans praeter obstinationem non sacrificandi nihil aliud se de sacris
eorum comperisse, Apologet. advers. Gentes. And Baronius is of opinion, that
Pliny himself does take notice in that Epistle, of the Christians receiving
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, Tom. 2. ad annum 104. did. 4.
Plinius Secundus, a very witty and learned man, making strict inquiry against
the Christians, and desirous to know exactly, what they did in his Province of
Bithynia at their private meetings and congregations, learned what he could
from Apostata's revolted from the Faith twenty years before, who before his
face, sacrificed to the gods, and adored the image of the Emperor. And having
collected from them the substance of all the Christian Profession in those
days, put two young Christian Maids upon the Rack, who in their Confessions
agreed word for word with the former Apostata's. I find in those Extracts,
continual meeting at their Love Feasts, (together with the which the Communion
was usually administered in those days) until all These were Sodalitates,
Companies, or Colleges of Artisans, such as they have in London. Amongst whom
there was a Fellowship, (as the Greek word signifies) and now and then
Good-fellowship. Upon a motion made by Pliny for a Company of Ironmongers or
Armo^ers in Nicomedia, Trajan, a wary Emperor, put down all these meetings;
because he called to mind, istas civitates ab ejusmodi factionibus esse
vexatas. See his Epistle, Plin. l. 10. ep. 43.
Wakes were put down by the Emperor Trajan; but I do not find one syllable to
fall either from the poor Maids, or the Apostata's themselves (who knew but
too well that those things were) of the Christian material Altar.

And so much for Bishop Jewels Negation; now for Bishop Wouldbee's Affirmation
of Altars in the Primitive Church.

It is (says Page 46.
he) most certain (as you found every thing to be which he said before) that
the Church had Altars, both the name and the thing; and used both name and
thing a long time together, before the birth of Arnobius. This is the ground he
means to fight it out on. And in the leading up of his men, to make it good, he
places, as Captain of the squadron, a stout Mauritanian, to wit, Tertullian.
And he has reason for it. For if Tertullian make not the Charge upon B.
Jewel, I am sure of it, none of the rest (of this Band) will hurt him. And if
this Leader should chance to be overcome, -- Pet. Arbit. in Satyr. de Catone.
in uno victa potestas
Romanumque decus; --
we shall make wash work with the rest of his followers. The more probable
authority that can be produced (as the Lord Tertullianum probabilius citare
videantur, De Miss. l. 2. c. 1. p. 175.
Plessie does acknowledge) is this of Tertullian in his Book of Prayer. Will
not thy Stationes, i. e. Iejunia, l. 4 Cerda. Publici Ecclesiae generalesque
conventus, quibus pii omnes jubebantur stare in Ecclesia di^tills, and
comparere coram Domino ad actiones sacras, ^r. Ju^n. in hunc locum. A militia
Romana tractu^ and usurpatum vocabulum. Nunc ad Basilicas, nunc ad Martyria
stantes and attenti precabantur, praeclpue die Dominico, Beat. Rhenan. in
Tertullian. l. 2. ad uxor.
Fast or Public meeting prove the more solemn, if withal thou celebrate the
same at the Altar of God? That noble Annon aperte de sacra Mensa loquitur?
Mornaeus, ubi supra.
Lord (because of the mention made of the Eucharist in the words before)
conceives it a clear case, that, by this Ara Dei, in his African and affected
style, he means plainly, the Lords Table. I will add some reason for this
opinion. Quilibet editior locus. Qui in publico aliquid dicere volebant, semper
ex edito loco, quasi suggessu vel tribunali, pronunciabant. Vt cespititia
tribunalia in castris. So (...) in Lucian, in Alexan. Abunotichite, for any
high place: For such a companion would not have been suffered to clamber up an
Altar. So that high stone, that Apollonius stood upon when he cried, (...), of
him that slab'd Domitian, Philostratus in vita Ap^ell^n. Salmasius in lib. de
Pallip, p. 396. Locus planus editusque. Varre de re Rustica, l. 1, c. 54. As
Rocks that seem higher then the Sea; Saxa vocant Itali mediis quae in fluctibus
Aras, Aexeid. 1. Fr. Iun.
Ara in Tertullian does not signify an Altar, but any hillock or advantage of
ground, or Stall or Table to stand upon; as appears plainly by that in his
Book De Pallio; Soleo de qualibet margin vel ara medicinas moribus dicere; I
am wont (says the Mantle, alluding to the fashion of the Stoics) to prescribe
Medicine to the manners of men, upon every brink, hillock, or stall that is
presented unto me. Because therefore the Lords Table, upon which the Sacrament
was administered, was in a kind of height, rising and elevation from the
Pavement of the Church, he calls it, Ara Dei; not that Altar, but that Rising,
or Table of Almighty God. And when these two places are well understood and
compared together, and notice also taken that the word is not otherwise used by
Tertullian in any place but this one, I shall not be afraid to submit the
interpretation to any learned Readers. Secondly, Tertullian, of all the
Fathers, does most allude in expressions to the fashion of the Gentiles. Their
fashion (as we touched heretofore) was of every Sacrifice they made, to give a
portion or share to their especial favorites. Plautus in Amphitr. Act. 3.
Sc^n. 3.
Vt re divina facta, mecum prandeat, says Plautus, That Sacrifice being done,
he might come and dine with me. And so says the Theocr. in Bucol.
Poet, -- (...)
(...).
When you next sacrifice to the Nymphs, forget not to send a good piece of
flesh to your friend Morson. Because therefore in Tertullians time, they did
not (as we now do) eat the consecrated bread upon the place, but (as it here
follows in the nextword) accipere and reservare, reserve it and carry it home
with them, as the Heathens did their (...), or portion (as (...).
Theophrastus calls it) from the Altars into their houses; Tertullian alluding
to these Reservations from the heathen Altars, does call the Communion Table,
ARA DEI, Gods Altar. Lastly, Tertullian, by naming his Sacrifice immediately
before, Sacrificium Orationis, to be but the Sacrifice of Prayer, does clearly
interpret what he means by his Altar, to wit, a Metaphorical and improper
Altar; as we showed abundantly heretofore. I will add hereunto for a
parting-blow, that Defiderius Heraldus, as strict an examiner of Tertullian, as
any we have this day in Print, was so little moved with this Authority, that
howbeit he grants Altars to have been in the Church in Naziazen's time, yet
does he clearly affirm they were brought in after Digress. l. 2. Digr. 4. For
when he had showed the other place, Aris Dei was to be read, Charis Dei; yet he
says, Afterward, that is, after Tertullians time, Altars came to the Church.
Where he is to be read, Postea autem (not as it is falsely printed, Postea
ante) cum Altaria in Ecclesiis constitui coeperunt, Aris etiam atque Altaribus
supplices accidebant, p. 277.
Tertullians time. I could add a fourth exposition of these words, made by a
most Learned and Judicious Divine, one D. Coal, That P. 47. And (...), Gods
Altar, as Tertullian and S Cyprian did after call it, ad Tarsens.
Tertullian by an Altar in this place means as Ignatius does in his Epistle ad
Trallenses, that is, an old woman; But that I am afraid you would take it to
be, not a Tale of an old Wife, but an old Wife's Tale.

Being therefore rid of this Captain-authority, the rest will quickly vanish of
themselves. And that Geniculatio ad Aras, which the Doctor quotes out of
Tertullian, De Poenitentia, is a Testimony that never was in the Book at all.
Adgeniculari Aris Dei, to kneel to the Altars of God, was there once, I
confess, and much made of by Bailius item ex Bellarmino. Rivet. Cath. Orthod.
tom. 1. p. 516.
Bellarmine and Depravations, p. 282.
Pere Cotton: But is now like a Coward got out of the Book, and run away: The
true reading being Adgeniculari CHARIS Dei, To kneel to Gods Favorites, the
Saints and Priests, to intercede for them. A likelier matter, a great deal, in
men that did penance, then to be kneeling at the Altars of God, which in those
days they durst not approach by a great distance, until they had undergone
all that was enjoined them. And this Criticisme is none of ours originally, but
Pamelius his, corresponding with the M. S. in the Vaticane Library; but
approved by In locum.
La Cerda, In locum.
Iunius, L. 2 de Miss. c. 1.
Du Plessy, Digress. l. 2 digr. 4.
Heraldus, Ad aram Dosiadae.
Salmasius, Observe. l. 2. observe. 22.
Albaspinaeus, and all men else, beside this poor Doctor.

As I was writing of this, I was showed a Latin Determination, that goes from
hand to hand, well-languaged, but of poor stuff and substance (God he
knows) aiming to prove, that look what Ceremonies were used about the Altar
before the Reformation, vi and virtute Catholicae consuetudinis, by power and
force of any general Custom, though passed over in deep silence by our
Liturgy, are notwithstanding commanded, as by a kind of implicit precept,
even unto us that live under the discipline of the English Liturgy. Which is a
doctrine so contrary, not only to that Chapter in our Liturgy, Book of Com.
Prayer, of Ceremonies.
Of Ceremonies, why some be abolished and some retained, but even to the 1
Elis. c. 2.
Act of Parliament, that appropriates the addition of any more Ceremonies of
that nature, then be prescribed in our Book, unto the person of the King
himself, that I cannot believe, that any Divine should publish the same,
otherwise then in a Merriment. The same Writing does except against this new
reading of this place in Tertullian, Charis Dei adgeniculari, (embraced, as I
said before, by all learned men of both Religions) because it is not said,
Charis Deo, as he thinks all the Africans, Cyprian, S. Austin, and the like,
would say; and because doers of penance, though they might not at the first (as
Pamelius objects) yet might well at the last, when they came for their
Absolutions, approach the Altars. Wherein this pocket-Authour is very wide in
both his Criticismes. For why should not Tertullian say as well Charis Dei, as
Aris Dei adgeniculari, which he himself would make him speak? But that he
knows not what Chari signifies in this place. The word is here a
substantive, and signifies As Chara cognatio, Tertullian. de Idol. c. 10.
Chari dicuntur liberi* Turneb. Adversar. l. 18. c. 14. Chari (...) liberi, lun.
in Tertull. de Idol. p. 105.
Children: as Peniculus in Menoechm. Act. 1. Sc. 1. Charis meis, i. e. liberis
meis, qui sunt nobis charissimi, Lambin. p. 419. Chari dicuntur liberi, Taubm.
p. 598.
Plautus,

Domi domitus fui usque cum charis meis. I have been hampered all this while at
home with my poor Children. And so Divin. Institut. l. 6. c. 12. Biblioth.
Patr. 10. 9. p. 226.
Lactantius calls the Widow and the Orphans, Charos Dei, Gods peculiar
Children. And this in imitation of the Appellatione Charorum interdum Liberi
intelliguntur, more Graecorum, qui Liberos (...) appellant, Lambin. in
Menoechm. Act. 1. ^c. 1.
Greeks, who call their Children (...). Yea, we have both these expressions in
the Africane writers, speaking of Jobs Nec amissionibus Charissimorum, Tertull.
lib. de Patientia, c. 14. Which S. Cyprian, his Scholar, calls, Amissionem
Charorum, lib de Patientia, c. 9.
loss of his children. And that the Africane Fathers also use it in the
second, not in the third Case (as the Determinatour would have it) appears by
Volo ut Impatientia sit in secundo Casu, vividiore and acriore sententia, La
Cerda in lo^um. Sic Affines cupiditatis deprehendemur, Tertull. lib. de
Patient. c. 7.
La Cerda upon that of Tertullian, Lib. de Patient. c. 9. Quis Omnino
impatientiae natus, etc. And so the doers of Penance in this place are said,
Adgeniculari charis Dei, t^ kneel before Gods peculiar Children. And as much
more is the man deceived in his other conjecture, That this Adgeniculation was
before the Altar, when they came for Absolution. God knows, few lived in
Tertullians time to come for absolution, the Penances for slender faults were
of so long Continuance. But whereas there were four several degrees of
public Penance in those severer times, called in Latin Fletus, Auditio,
Substratio, Consistentia, Weeping before the Porch, Hearing in the Porch, Lying
all along on the Church-Pavement, not far from the Porch, in expectation of the
Bishops prayers and blessing, and Standing with the people within the Church to
partake of their Orisons, but not of the holy Sacrament: this Adgeniculation
was in the first and not in the last degree; and to procure the Priests to
enjoyne, and not to dissolve their penance, as See it handled of purpose by
Albaspin. Obs. l. 2. Observat 22. and in sequentib. by Pamelius on this place:
by Desid. Heraldus at large, Digress. l. 2. Digr. 4.
learned men observe. And the words that follow in Tertullian, do prove clearly
that this was not the last act, and done to the Priest alone, ad absolutionem
obtinendam, to obtain absolution: Omnibus fratribus legationes deprecationis
injungere, to enjoin all the Brethren, an embassy of prayers and intercession
in their behalfs: That is, to God, not to the Priests; and that in the (...),
or first degree of penance, as S. (...). And so Eustatb. ad 9. Iliad. defines a
prayer to be (...).
Basil teaches us clearly in his Commentary upon the 32. Psalm. And this is
enough, if not too much, to wash away this weak conjecture, opposed by all
learned men, that have lived sithence Pamelius his time. And so much for
Tertullian.

Irenaeus, l. 4. c. 20. is a peaceable man, and fights against none of our
side: Making (by a continued Allegory taken from Deuter. 33. 9.) all to be
Priests serving at the Altar, who are willing to forsake all and follow Christ.
So does Nicolaus Galasius epitomize this Chapter, Omnes justos Sacerdotalem
habere ordinem, Iren. ab illo editus, p. 245.
Omnis justus, Every sanctified man (as we quoted before) that makes himself a
lively, (...), and well-pleasing Sacrifice, offering Alms and the Calves of
his lips to Almighty God, is a Priest serving at Irenaeus his Altar. Sacerdos
scitus fuit David, (says he) David in this kind was a proper Priest. And so
is this man, scitus scriptor, a very proper Writer, to bring in this place of
Irenaeus for a proper Altar. S. Cyprian, l. 1. c. 7. ad Epictetum, expounds
himself clearly what he means by an Altar, to wit, Stipes, Oblationes, Lucra;
the Contributions, Offerings, and all Advantages belonging to the man's
Bishopric, whom they had suspended. Interlarding all this passage with
allusions to Texts in Exodus, Deuteronomy, and Leviticus (quoting one which
Reperire autem non potui quem Scriptu^ae locum citet, Pamelius and Goulart.
Pamelius knows not where to find) de Sacerdotum altari Jehovae
inservientium officio, touching the duties of Priests attending the Lords
Altar, says Page 191.
Goulartius. For that famous place out of the eighth Epistle, [ There is one
God, and one Church, and one Chair, founded upon Peter by the words of Christ.
Other Altar, or other Priesthood, beside that one Altar, and that one
Priesthood, cannot be erected.] you know how all the As Pamelius himself, in
his Notes, in librum De unitate Ecclesiae, referres it.
Pontificians interpret. And I hope you would not have the Popedom it self
settled and erected in every Parish Church of England. But if you will expound
it with the learned Protestants, then you must know, that by the Altar and
Priesthood in this place, he means Summam Evangelii, the substance of the
Gospel delivered by Christ and his Apostles, inviting all Christians to the
participation of Christ's death and the efficacy thereof, that they may be
collected together and united in him, says learned Annot. in librum Cypr. de
unitate Ecclesiae, p. 305.
Goulartius. Lastly, for that place in his ninth Epistle; it is a clear case,
that by Altar he means there, ministerial functions and offices, and that with
a plain and literal allusion to the Tribe of Levi under the Nec sacrae
institutionis and functionis, in Levitica praefiguratae, debitam habuisse
rationem, Goulort.
Law. S. Cyprian was angry with one Geminius Victor, for making (against the An
old Canon renewed, Council. Chalced. Can. 3. Exceptis tutelis miserabilium
personarum, and legitimis, ad quas per leges compelli possent, Goulart. Habetur
in Codice Ecclesiae universae, Can. 180. (...), Leo Imp. Novell. Constitut. 68.
Canon) one Faustinus a Priest, Overseer of his Will, and by that means
withdrawing of him from his Calling and Ministry. And enlarging of himself in
that Discourse, how careful God had been in providing Tithes and Oblations for
the Priest under the Law, giving him no Lands and Husbandries amongst the other
Tribes, ut in nulla re avocaretur, that he might have no occasion to be
withdrawn from the Altar: he aggravates the offense of those Testatours, that
by making Churchmen, Executours and Overseers of their last Wills, ab altari
Sacerdotes and Ministros volunt avocare, will needs withdraw Ministers from
their Ecclesiastical functions, with no less offense, then if, under the Law,
they had withdrawn the Priests from the holy Altar. So that this place takes my
Doctor a little by the Nose, that Page 10.
cannot endure to be a looker on, and a dull Spectatour, confined only to his
Ministerial meditations: but has not one syllable that crosses the assertion
of B. ^ewell, That as yet there was not erected in the Church any material
Altars. S. Cyprian does allude in every one of these three passages, and the
Doctor illude and abuse his Readers, figure-casting them in this sort, as if
he had been to deal with some ill Spirits, and not daring to cite his Authors
at large, Ne deberet risum, lest children should hoot at him with Jeeres and
Laughters.

Page 46.
But to go higher yet (ut lapsu graviore ruat) he tells us, that Ignatius uses
it in no less then three of his Epistles. What it man? If you mean the name,
Ignatius uses it in five or six of his Epistles at the least; if the thing,
that is, a proper and material Altar; he uses it not in any of these three
insisted on by you. The place in the Epistle to the Magnesians (besides that
Locum hunc supposititium esse, luce clarius meridiana est, Exercit. in Epist.
ad Magn. Then in the Margent, he notes them to be excerpted out of the
Constitutions of Clemens, l. 2. c. 59, 60, 62. Although this later part does
not so clearly appear unto me.
Vedelius conceives it to be a supposititious fragment, taken out of the
Constitutions of Clemens) the man brings in undoubtedly to make sport. Run
all of you like one man, to the Temple of God, as to one Altar, (...), to one
Jesus Christ; Or, to translate it in plain English, to one Jesus Christ, as to
one Altar. And this one Altar we all acknowledge to be in the Church. In his
next place to the Philadelphians, he does express himself to mean by Altar,
(...), the Council of the Saints and Church in general (as we said before)
and not any material Altar; as Exercit. in Epist. ad Ephesians. p. 237.
Vedelius proves at large. For should Ignatius mean by the like speeches, a
material Altar, when he says, that if any man be not Ep. ad Trallens.
(...), within the Altar, he is deprived of the Bread of God, what should
become of women and the Laity, that by an express Canon of a general (...),
Conc. Laod. Can. 44. (...), Council. 6. in Trall. Can. 69.
Council, are prohibited from coming within the material Altar? By Altar
therefore in these passages, he must understand the bosom of the Church. For
that place in the Epistle to them of Tarsus; I pity the poor man, if he be
indeed (as they say he is) married to a Widow. Sure I am, he never read the
passage, but some knavish Scholar exscrib'd it for him, to make sport withal.
The words are these, Honor Et de continentia viduarum, locum intelligit
Baronius, Annal. Tom. 2. ad annum 109. did. 30.
Widows, (...), that uphold their Chastity (as Vedelius translates it) and
Reputation, as the Altars of God. But Clement. Constit. l. 3. c. 6. Genebrardus
in eundem.
Genebrard himself confesses, that this is a patch taken out of Clemens his
Constitutions. And were these any vendible commodities amongst good Scholars,
that Passage would make more for the Doctor a thousand times, then all he has
produced. Let her know (says he) (...), that she is Gods Altar, and set her
down in her house, (...), for the Altar of God never uses to run or gad about.
and well said, most Metaphorical Clemens! Here Is an Altar indeed! An Altar
becomes much better the upper end of his Table, then the upper end of his
Church: though not out of love with the upper end in that place also. And yet
men sometimes make use of these Altars, if they be richly set out. -- Iuvenal.
Satyr.
Optima summi
Jam via processus vetulae fortuna Beatae.


A young Scholar that was reading Callimachus his Hymn of Apollo, concerning the
famous horn-Altar built at Delos, hearing me and a neighbour-Minister of mine
somewhat pleasant about this Widow-Altar, and other fond passages in those
foisted Constitutions of Clemens, brought me the next morning this allusion
between the passage in his Author, and that in mine; Callimach. Hymn^ in Apoll.
(...)
(...).


That is, Carbo alleging Fathers for his ground,
No Altar there, but a chaste Widow found:
Which yet not unbecame his new device
Of Widow-Altar without Sacrifice.
From this chaste Widow may his find such aid,
As Ph^bus Altar did from that chaste Maid;
Who with her Bow that crooked matter brought,
Which he at Delos to an Altar wrought.
That Virgins horns lay (...), Plutarch. de solertia. Anis mal. p. 983.
jointlesse, smooth, and shee^;
Such those our Widows plant have sometimes been*
Yet was that (...), Ibid.
wonder of the World I w^^;
We make no wonder in the World of this.


For the 3 Canons of the Apostles (to say nothing how all good Scholars esteem
these Canons but as so many See the Magdeburgenses, that make many exceptions
against them, Centur. 1. p. 544.
Pot-guns) he that shall read what was and what is presented on these Altars
for the maintenance of the Bishop and all his Clergy (the Tenths being then
due, but not then established) as Honey, Milk, strong Drink, (...), Consecta
quaedam, Dionysius E^ig. and Hervetus.
Sweetmeats, Fo^l, Flesh, Roots, Grapes, Ears of Corn, Oil, Frankincense, and
Fruits of the Season, will conceive them to be rather so many Panteries,
Larders, or Storehouses, then consecrated Altars. And indeed they were such,
as are called in the Greek Liturgies, (...), or Oblation-Tables: which no
learned man but knows to be Vtensils quite differing from the holy Altar;
however called Altars by these Canons, by a manifest allusion to the Altars of
Oblation among the Jews. And as Imo cum adhuc superstes Dominus munus
praedicationis obiret, ex his quae dabantur, una cum suis victum capere
consueve r^^. Judas enim habens loculos, etc. Ad Apostolorum poste^ pedes
Credentes oblationem faciebant, Baron. A^n. tom. 1. p. 513. Et hunc ^^cum citat
Binius, ad hos C^n^nes.
Baronius himself implies, Judas his Bag, and the Apostles feet (from whence
these Oblations had their raise and beginning) may with as good reason, as
these Tables, be termed Altars. Of his place, above all indeed, of Hebr. 13.
10. we have spoken indeed but too much already. Lastly, I have perused
reverend B. Jewel, Artic. 13. Divis. 6. and do find, that there he cites many
Fathers that mention but one Altar in one Church, and that placed in the midst
of the Congregation; (which this Doctor does not observe) and that (he thinks)
this unity of Altar was kept in the Church of God, until the Council of
Anti^i^d^rum: But I cannot find, with all my perusal, one word in him, why it
should not be properly called a Table, and not an Altar. But perusing withal
the third Article, and 26. Division, I find he declares himself in those
words, with which I will conclude this Chapter, and withal (if it please the
Doctor) the whole Controversi^. And notwithstanding it were a Table, yet was
it also called an Altar: not for that it was so indeed, but only by allusion
to the Altars of the old Law. And so Irenaeus calls Christ, and Origin our
Heart, our Altar: Not that either Christ or our Hearts be Altars indeed, but
only by a metaphor or a manner of speech. Such were the Altars which were used
by the old Fathers immediately after the Apostles time. And this is all that
the Letter desires the Vicar to know and observe.

CHAP. VI.
Of Extravagancies. Misquotation, Book of Fast. Chappells and Cathedrals. The
Fact of taking down Altars. Altars in the old Liturgy. Children of this Church
and Commonweal. The name of the Lords Table. Ovall Table. Pleasing the people.

THe last Chapter contained the Sixth (as the Canonists term it) this, the
Extravagants, or Wild-goos-chase of this second Section. Wherein the Doctor
diverts his fury, from the King, the Counsel, the Parliament, and B. Jewel,
upon the Writer of the Letter again; but all upon Querelles d'Allement.
high-Germane or picked Quarells, not worth two rushes apiece.

First, he charge the Writer with lending lame Giles a pair of Crutches to
walk upon, and some Page 21.
Arrows to shoot at the Altars, and the Bowing to the blessed Name of JESUS.
Who this Claudius Gellius, or Lame Giles should be, I cannot guess; nor is
this Cripple known by any in our Neighborhood. He may be much older them the
Page 4.
Letter but now sought after. And this Doctor may halt before his Cripple,
when he talks of Canons 1471; and again* outrunne a Constable, when he denies
the Canons of 1571, page 18. to require joined. Tables for the Communion. Page
15. you say; because you saw it in Latin: Page 18. they say; because they saw
it in English. And you may see it, when you please, the easier, because printed
by John Day. In the mean time, the world may see your wisdom, to trouble the
Press with such impertinent Follies.

Secondly, Page 24.
he taxes the Writer with seeming to cast a scorn on them, by those direction
the Book of the Fast in 1o of the King was drawn up and published; as if it
were a Novelty or singular device of theirs, to call the Later part of divine
Service by the name of Second Service: Which the Discourser slighteth. Surely
this is a fierce hunting-Dog!

-- Petron, A^bit. in Satyric.
In somnis leporis vestigia latrat. He has dreamed of some Hare, and now barks
after her^ Unless (peradventure) all this noise be but to get a bit from his
Masters, Seneca, lib. 2. de ^ra.
ex consuetudine magis quam ex ferocitate; of a Custom he has got to be
rewarded in this kind, not that he is any way provoked by the Writer of the
Letter. For the Writer speaks not one word against this Partition of the
Service in the Book of Fast. But the Vicar applying the same in his discourse
(as it seems) to the Book of Common Prayer, and some of his Neighbors boggling
thereat, the Writer excuses it, as done in imitation of that grave and pious
Book, (which never intended to give Rubricks to the public Liturgy) and not
(as might be conceived) of the two Masses used of old, that of the Catechumeni,
and that of the Faithful, a Partition Mutatis rebus, necesse fuit mutare
Ceremonias. Quia jam Catechumeni deesse incipiebant, and hodie nulli sunt. Quod
si sint (ut existere possint) Iudaeis ad nos transeuntibus and Turcis, quid
attinet propter paucos veterem repetere morem? B. Rhenan^t of S. Gregory's
changing of Gelasius his Liturgi^, ^raf. ad Liturg. Chrysostom.
deserted long ago by the Church of Rome it self, as of no further use in these
parts of the world, wholly converted to Christianity. But D. Coal being
conjured into the Circle of this Parenthesis, knows not how to get out again;
but about he goes, and about he goes, from one absurdity to another.

For first, the Order of Morning Prayer is not (as this man supposes) nor ever
was, the whole Morning Prayer, but a little fragment thereof, called the order
of Mattins, in the Primar of A Primar of Salisbury Use, printed 1544.
Sarum, as also in K. A Primar set forth by the King, 1545.
Henry the Eighths Primar, (which was in use under K. K Edwards Injunct.
Injunst. 34.
Edward for a long time) as also in the first Liturgy set forth by K. Fol.
121. And so in his Injunst. Injunct. 23.
Edward himself. Besides these Mattius or Order of Morning Prayer, there were
of old, See the two Primars.
Lauds, Primes, Hours, Collects, Letanies, Suffrages, and sometimes Dirges and
Commendations. Some whereof are still retained in our Morning Service. So that
if we should make one Service of the Mattins, we must make another of the
Collects, a third of the Letary, and our Communion shall be, at the soonest, our
fourth, and by no means our Second Service.

Besides that, according to this new Reckoning, we shall have (that which I
will be hold to say no Liturgy, Greek or Latin, can show this day) an entire
Service without a Prayer for the King or Bishop, which in our own Liturgy come
in after, Thus ends the Order of Morning Prayer.

Thirdly, The 1o Elis. c. 2.
Act of Parliament calls it Service, not Services; and the Contents of the Book
of Common Prayer.
Contents of our Liturgy (which is our Rubric confirmed) follows the old
distinction in K. Henry's Prime. 9 Order for Morning Prayer; 10 the Letanie; 11
the Collects, Epistles and Gospells; and 12 the holy Communion. And therefore
it was a bold part in a Country- Vicar, to make thereof any other Partition.
And the Writer of the Letter showed (in my Opinion) more good will, then good
skill, in excusing his Ne^fanglednesse.

Lastly, the true and legal division of our Service into the Common Prayer,
and the Communion, or Administration of the Sacrament; the one to be officiated
in the Reading-pew, and the other at the holy Table conveniently disposed for
that purpose; as it is the more justifiable, so is it indeed the ancient
Appellation. I will not undertake to make good the Antiquity of S. Peter's
Liturgy: but I do find that this part of Divine Service is there called
(...), i. e. Deinde legit Communione^, Orationem quae ad sacram Eucharistiae
participationem populum praeparat. A Sancto Andrea. Bibl. V. Patrum, Tom. 2. p.
123.
(...), and translated by S. Andreas, Communion. And in S. Ambrose his
Liturgy, which all the world knows to be very ancient, it is called, Sic and
in Ambrosiano, ubi additur, and Co^municatio. A Sancto Andrea. ibid.
^ommunicatio, the Administering of the Communion; and by other names in other
As, (...), The thanksgiving-part, S. Marc. Liturg. Et^lioth. V. Patrum, tem. 2
p. 32. (...), The Office done upon the Table, by Dionysius.
Liturgies; but nowhere by that of Second Service. And for our own Divines;
Archbishop Whitgift, being put unto it by a fierce and a learned adversary,
reckons ^p all the parts and parcells of our Liturgy, and call's this Answer
to the Admonition, page 151.
last of all, the Administration of the Sacrament. And M. Hooker speaking of
that Case, which this man triflingly touches by and by after, to wit, when
there is no Communion, and yet some Prayers to be said at the holy^Table, does
not say (as this poor soul would imply) that these Prayers make a Second
Service, but that they were M. Hookers Eccles. Polit. l 5. did. 30. p. 248.
devised at first for the Communion, and that that is the true cause, why they
are at the Table of the Lord (not always neither, but) commonly read. So that
those Directours of the Book of Fast, had (no doubt) their particular reason
for the particular. Division of those pious Devotions (which none but a slight
man would offer to slight;) but never dreamed (I dare swear for them) to impose
upon the public Liturgy of the Church, any other then the ancient and Legal
Partitions and Appellations.

And again, before he comes out of his Circle, he is resolved to conjure up
such a Doctrine, as might (if any were so simple as to believe him) turn not a
few Parsons and Vicars out of their Benefices in a short time: By encouraging
of them (in a Book printed with License) to set up a Consistory in the midst
of Divine Service, to examine the worthiness of all Communicants. And upon
what ground think you? Because the Communicants (that due provision may be made
of Bread and Wine, and other Necessaries for that holy mystery) are required
to signify Page 25.
their names unto the Curate over night, or before the beginning of Morning
Prayer, or at the least immediately after. After what? Clearly; says he, after
all the Morning Prayer, and before the Communion, that the Curate may hold a
privy Session in the midst of divine Service, and impannell a Jury of the
Congregation, to know whether they be offended against the party. Clearly say
all Vel immediate post principium matutinarum precum, Latin Liturgy. So to a
word, Doctrima and Politia Ecclesiae Anglic. p. 221.
other men (and his own Latin translation to boot) post principium matutmarum
precum, immediately after the beginning of morning prayer, that there may be
allotted some space of time to make provision according to the number of the
Communicants. And this is the true meaning of that first Rubric, that has no
reference at all to the three subsequent. The second requires the Curate to
admonish all They must be notorious and known. Answer to the Adm. p. 102.
open and notorious evil livers of those, that is, those intenders to receive
the Sacrament, so to amend their lives, that the Congregation may thereby be
satisfied. Which were a thing ridiculously prescribed, to be done in such a
place, or in so short a time; but is intended to be performed by the Curate
(private Confession being not in use) upon Let him communicate with him privily
at convenient leisure. The Order of the Communion 1548. p. 6.
private conference with the parties. The third directs the Curate how to deal
with those that he perceives (by intimation given and direction returned from
his Ordinary, as the Canon 27. compared* with Can. 26.
Canon interprets it) to continue in unrepented hatred and malice. These
(having the direction of his Ordinary) he may abstain or keep back from
receiving the Sacrament, and that (as we know by experience) in an Instant,
without chopping or dividing the divine Service. Otherwise, it is a thing
unreasonable, and altogether illegal, that a Christian man, laying open claim
to his right in the Sacrament, should by the mere discretion of a Curate be
debarred from it. I would be loath to put my Lands, nay my goods and Chattels,
and shall I put my interest in the body and blood of Christ to a private
discretion? So might it be in the power of a malicious Priest (as our learned
Cum enim quilibet Christianus ex hoc ipso quod est baptizatus, sit admis^us ad
Dominicam mensam, non potest jus suum ei tolli, nisi pro aliqua causa
manifesta. Aquin. Sum. p. 3. q. 60. art. 6. Imo quilibet Christianus habet jus
in perceptione Eucharistae, nisi illud per peccatum mortale amittat. Vnde cum
in facie Ecclesiae non constet talem amisisse jus suum, non debet ei in facie
Ecclesiae denegaii -- alias daretur facultas malis sace dotibus, pro suo
libito, punire hac poena quos vellent. Iandwood l. 3. de Celebrat. Missar. fol.
128.
Glosser does prudently observe) to mulct whom he pleased with this most
horrible and execrable punishment. And therefore may not the Steward by any
means keep back these Nimrods or fat ones of the Earth, from his Masters Table,
but warn them fairly of the danger ensuing, as Gratianus part. 3. de Consecrat.
d. 2. fol. 437.
Gratian tells us out of S. Augustine. And indeed it is against the practice of
all Antiquity, that the Priest should offer of his own head, to keep off any
Christened and believing man from the sacred Mysteries.

It was the Deacon (whose power, as I touched before, our Archdeacons now, by
Collation of the Bishop, and prescription of Time, have incorporated in their
Jurisdictions) that always executed this severitie: It is the Deacon, that
cries out, (...), Look to the doors, the doors there; in S. Biblioth. V.
Patr. Tom. 2. page 46.
Basils Liturgy: It is he that show^s out three several times, Ibid. p. 72.
(...), On, on there, get you out there, all you that are to be catechized; in
S. Chrysostoms Liturgy. It is the Deacon that cries, Go out all that are not
to receive, go out Catechumeni; in the Biblioth. V. P. Tom. 6. page 75.
Ethiopick Liturgy. It is unto the Deacons, that S. Chrysostom elsewhere
speaks, Chrysostom. in Matthew. Ho^. 82. edit. Savil. Tom. 2, p. 515.
(...), You deserve no little punishment, if conscious of notorious crimes in
any of the Communicants, (...), you connive at them to partake of that holy
Table. This is (...) the true dignity which God has given unto you, to look
to the worthy and unworthy Communicants; and not to strout it up and down the
Church in white or shining Copes and Vestments. And I verily believe, that from
these ancient times until this present, the debarring of unworthy persons from
the holy mysteries, has ever been esteemed a part not of the spiritual, but
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. The Curate is but to present to the Ordinary,
and to admonish the offender, and that in private only (as I should conceive
the Law) lest he prove Peccato occulto poenam publicam inferens, est revelator
confessionis, aut proditor criminis. Lindw. ubi supra Sed quia Christus nobis
debuit esse exemplum Iustitiae, non conveniebat ejus mag^sterio, ut Iudam,
occultum peccatorem, sine accusatore and evidenti probatione, ab aliorum
communione separaret; ne pe^ hoc daretur exemplum Praelatis. (To the Prelates,
not to the simple Priests) Aquin, 3. part. q. 81. art. 2 in corp. So
Tertullian; Parum hoc, si non etiam proditorem suum secum habuit, nec
constanter denotavit. De patientia, c. 3.
proditor criminis, a revealer rather, then a healer of his Brothers
infirmities. And S. Tom. 9. lib. De Medicina poenitent. c. 3. Citatur in Gloss.
ad 1. Cor. 5. and in Sum. Aquin. part. 3. qu 80. art. 6.
Austin is clear of this opinion: Nos a Communione quenquam prohibere non
possumus, nisi aut sponte confessum, aut in aliquo Iudicio Ecclesiastico vel
seculari nominatum atque convictum, We may not prohibit any man from the
Communion, until he either willingly confess, or be openly pronounced and
convicted (of some notorious crime) in some Ecclesiastical or secular Court.
In 4m Sent. did. 12. art. 6.
Dominicus de Soto is of opinion, that if a sinner do but privately demand the
Sacrament of the Parish Priest, the Priest may not deny it him, until it be
pronounced deniable unto him juridice, that is, by some one exercising
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Howbeit In 3m disp. 67. Sect. 3.
Suarez and others differ from him in that opinion, affirming the Parish Priest
to be restrained in this case, not upon private, but upon open and public
demands only. But in the case of a public demand the In 3m, disp. 67. 4.
Jesuit sets down, in my opinion, an excellent Rule. It is requisite for the
Common good, and the convenient order of both Church and Commonwealth, that
all common favors, which are publicly to be disposed and distributed
according to the merit and dignity of private persons, should be dispensed by
some public Minister, designed thereunto by the chief person in that Church or
Commonwealth; not according to the private knowledge neither of that Minister,
but according to a public and notorious cognizance, agreed upon in that Church
or Commonwealth. And however a sinner does by his offense against God, loose
(as the Schoolmen think) his right and interest in this blessed Sacrament,
until by a new Repentance, he makes, as it were, a new Purchase of the same;
yet, says In 4m, d. 12. q. 1. art. 5.
Aquinas, must he loose it in the face of the Church, before it can be denied
him in the face of the Church: Being to be judged (as in all other Cases) not
by any man, nor any Ministers private knowledge, but according to Proofs and
Allegations, before such men and in such places only, as have power to admit
of Proofs and Allegations. The Common good requiring necessarily, that all such
public actions of this nature should be reigled by a kind of public, and not
private knowledge; which once admitted into Judicature, would soon fill up the
Church and State with a world of Scandals, Injuries and Inconveniences. And
although public demanders of this Sacrament are by the Doctrine of these
Jesuits to be publicly rejected, when their offenses are known to the Priest,
either by an Evidence of Law, or by an Evidence of fact; yet because this later
Evidence of fact does arise from a scrupulous and curious examination of the
number of the persons which know the same (and how many of the present
Communicants be of that number) as also of the quality of the place, the nature
of the Crime, the Condition of the Witnesses, and a thousand other
Circumstances; I had leiver entrust the Ordinary for altogether, then trouble a
simple Curate to charge his headpiece with so many Quillets, and be liable
afterward to answer over in higher Courts, for the least misprision, and
misapprehension in any of these curious pieces or Circumstances.

My practice therefore has ever been, not to keep back, but to admonish only,
public offenders, upon the like evidence of fact; and that not publicly
neither, nor by Name. And I continue the stiffer in this Opinion, because I
find sithence the Reformation, our Church had once a Canon for the One (which
still may be in some force) but never any footstep of the other, being the
height of the Genevan and Presbytery Doctrine. But for the former, there was
(as I said) a Rubric of this nature, immediately before the Collect, You that
do truly and earnestly repent, etc. Order of the Commun. 1548. page 6.
Here the Priest shall pause a while, to see if any man will withdraw himself.
And if he perceive any one so to do, let him commune with him privily at
convenient leisure. Privily, not in the Church: At leisure, not by chopping and
enterloping with the divine Service. But this (though I think I am very near
the right) I submit for all that (for the declaration of the practice) to the
learned Canonists of our Church.

His third Extravagancy is, That page 27.
he so fain would learn of this doughty Disputant why he should make such
difference between the Chappells and Cathedral Churches on the one side, and
the Parochialls on the other: The Laws and Canons now in force looking alike in
all. And if there be not some cunning, to make Chappells and Cathedralls guilty
of some foul Transgression. The Reason that the poor man gives, is because
the placing of Letter p. 72.
Tables in Chappells and Cathedralls is not the point in Question. The Reason
that you give is void of all reason (though not of all malice) that he should
do it to their prejudice: when he tells you at the first, he does both approve
in the Vicar, and imitate in his own practice their forms and Ceremonies. I
should conceive, that he could not but know that the Altars in Chappells and
Oratories are not amongst the Papists themselves (the Mint-masters of
Ceremonies) agreeable in situation to the Altars in Churches. And this In 3m
part. Tom. 3. q. 83. art. 3. disp. 81. 5.
Suarez the Jesuit could tell him. He might also mark some special differences
which our Canons themselves do make between Cathedrals and Parochial Churches:
As in the Q. Elis. Injunct. 18.
place of Reading the Letanies; in the allowance of Injunct of K. Edw. Injunct
21.
Local Statutes; in Certain Canons 1571. p. 8.
monthly Communions; in Advertisem. Articles for Adm. the Sacrament, ibid.
revived. c. 24.
Copes, not only for him that officiates, but for the Epistolers and the
Gospellers; in the Excepting of Cathedralls from delivering up to the Queens
Commissioners, the Ornaments and Jewels of their Churches; (the Article naming
expressly the Q. Elis. Injunct 47. For Vestments, etc.
Churchwardens of every Parish only) And particularly in an observation
concerning the point in hand, That whereas in Parish-churches, the ten
Commandments were only appointed to be printed in little Tables, and to be
fixed upon the wall over the said Communion-Boord; there is a special Proviso,
that in Cathedral Churches, the Tables of the said Precepts be more costly and
largely painted out. Whereof this may be a reason, That in some Cathedral
Churches where the Steps were not transposed in tertio of the Queen, and
consequently Orders, October 1561.
thought fit to continue, and the Wall on the Backside of the Altar untaken
down, the Table might stand, as the Altar did before, all along, and the
Commandments be more largely painted out, to fill up the length and extension
of the same. But he that will peruse all these Canons well, that concern the
placing and displacing of Tables, shall find, that not one of them names
Cathedral Churches; And will easily condemn this man's supposition, as
childish and ridiculous, That every Injunction given the Visitours, for the
Parochial, is extendible to the Mother and Cathedral Church, left in many
things to her Local Statutes. Unless there were some other special
directions, as to B. Ridley in the case of Paul's; which are not extant in
Print, nor (as I am informed) in the paper-office. But I do not find in the
Writer of the Letter, any supposable End of this Exception, beside Caution and
wariness, not to give any the least offense, or stir up needless and
unnecessary Controversies.

His fourth Extravagancy, Page 40. 41.
is a great desire he has to bring both this Writer (and all other writers of
Histories) within the compass of the Statute of Sedition, for daring to relate
the Peoples beating down of Altars de facto, before any Order of Law issued
forth for their demolishment. Because the People (of England) are led by
Precedents, more then by Laws, and think all things lawful to be done, (for
example, the Rebellion of Jack Straw, and Wat Tiler) which were done before
them. And therefore to write such a fine History, is fine Doctrine. As to raise
Doctrines out of Narrations in Histories, is a fine and a very fine Bull.
Thrice happy then Sr Thomas More and the Lord of S. Albanes, that are already
dead; and woe be to that learned Nobleman, who having much to loose, is
notwithstanding commanded to relate the Acts and Mon. part. 2. fol. 377.
Rebellion of Captain Cobbler in Lincolnshire, and the holy Pilgrims in
Yorkshire, that would appoint Counselors and Bishops to King Henry the
eighth. This is fine Doctrine indeed, when Doctor Coal (if he should look that
way) can neither be Counselor nor Bishop, without the special recommendations
of brave Captain Cobbler. Nay the Father of the T. Livius Prooem.
Latin History is not out of the danger of this Gunshot: Who delivers this
fine Doctrine to all Historians, That they ought to set down Foedum incoeptu,
the foul attempts of ill men, not to be imitated, but to be eschewed by all
Readers. Yea, but with the Relating of it, he should have written a Sermon or
Homily against it. There are already public Against disobedience and wilful
rebellion* The worse should give place to the better.
Homilies in the Church, written of purpose against all Seditions and
Rebellions. And to do this in every Narrative of a fact, is the fault that
Hist. l. 2. (...).
Polybius finds with Philarchus; for presenting his Readers with a passionate
Tragedy, in stead of plain and naked History.

Yea but (says the page 41.
Doctor) the History is false in matter of fact. For the Altars were not stird
by the people, until they had some Order and authority from those who had a
power to do it. If this be made good, let the Writer defend himself for me; I
wash my hands of him. Yes, there is nothing can be more clearly proved. For in
the Letter to Bishop Ridley it is said, that it was come to the Kings knowledge
already (that is, before any Order given by the King or the Counsel, for ought
appears in any Book or upon any Record) that the Altars upon good and godly
Considerations were taken down. Were they taken down already, before the King
and Counsel heard thereof? and upon Considerations only? Then surely, not
upon any Command of the King, direction of the Counsel, Canon of the
Convocation, Mandate of the Ordinary; (For where does your Doctourship find any
Commands of this nature called Considerations?) but upon the private
apprehension of the People, instructed by their Ministers, that the form of a
Table would more move the simple to the right use of the Lords Supper. For so
the King and Lords, in their first reason, do clearly express what is meant
by the good and godly Consideration set down by that King in his Letter.
Because the Doctor therefore is disposed to be merry, and to make his Readers
sport, looking (like a Water-man in a Wherry) one way, and pulling on his
Proofs another way; I will tell you, what I conceive the Writer of the Letter
might mean by these two Lines objected against; although it be little material
to the present Controversy.

1. I perceive he relates (in the first place) to the Reformation of Altars
beyond the Seas (because he speaks of supreme Magistrates) which the people
began by way of fact, before the Magistrates established the same by way of
Law. And this Luther complains of against Tu vero irruis and turbas cies,
altaria demoliendo and ^acra tollendo, -- cum e suggesto docendum fuisset, etc.
Lut^erus, Sermon, De iis quae non necessaro exiguntur. 1522. Oper. Tom. 7. p.
276.
Carolostadius: that he chose rather to hew down, then to dispute down Altars.
Although some Melchior Adamus in vita Carolostandii, ex Sleidan. lib. 3.
others write, that Carolostadius had herein the assent at least wise of the
Magistrates then residing in the Castle of Wittemberg. However Luther was
enflamed against him, that he durst in the time of his absence in Pathmos
presume upon so punctual a Reformation. Tom. 5. De Sacra Caena, did. 261.
Gerardus likewise finds no fault with the thing* but with the manner of the
Reformation, which the Calvinists made in this particular of the Altar: That
they did it Securibus et bipennibus, with Axes and Hammers, and not with the
power of the Magistrate, instructed thereunto by the ecclesiastical Synod. So
Iacobus Colloq. Mo^pelg.
Andreas gives Beza thanks, that however he maintained the matter, he did so
clearly express his dislike of the manner of this Reformation, done (as
Andreas says) argumentis a Fustibus, rather with Arguments from Clubs and
Staves, then with Syllogismes fetched from the Word of God. And thus this
Reforming of Altars began in the Churches beyond the Seas: Of the which we may
say, as the Romans did of Plutarch. in Vita Pompeii.
Pompey the great, (...), that it was a fair and a happy daughter, though
brought forth by an ugly and odious Mother.

2. And in the second place, I do conceive, that the Writer holds it a very
easy matter to prove the same by way of Fact, to have been observed in all the
taking down and setting up of Altars, practiced here in England in these last
Reformations. K. Edward himself complains of this kind of people, that did
enterprise to run before Proclam. before the Communion.
authority; and declares how 5o and 6o Ed. 6. c. 1.
he with his uncle the Protector, and Counsel, diverse times in the first and
second year of his reign, did assay to stay innovations or new Rites in this
kind, though not with that success he wished. Howbeit (as it is there said)
he did not punish them, but granted them a Parliament-pardon for these
disorderly attempts; because his Highness took it, that they did it of a good
zeal. Where you have a clear exposition of those words we spoke of even now,
good and godly Consideration. And Q. Mary her self, as forward as she was to
set them up again, yet could she not make such have of her deformation in this
kind, but she was prevented by the superstition of her Cooper in his Chronicle.
Zelotes, who no doubt had likewise their Considerations. The same may be said
of Q. Elizabeth: That before her Injunctions could get forth, Q. Elis. in her
last Injunct.
In many and sundry places of the Realm, the Altars of the Churches were
removed: And much strife and contention did arise amongst her subjects about
the removing of the Steps of the foresaid Altar. And all out of private
Considerations. This irregular forwardness^ of the people the Writer of the
Letter does touch indeed, (though but in a word) but does no more approve of,
then I do of your stickling in this sort for Table-Altars in the Church, upon
pretense of the Piety of the Times (another Consideration up and down) and
running before the Declaration of your Prince and the Chief Governors of the
Church in this your fancy and imagination. This answers another Hubbub the
Doctor makes, page 28.
that the Altars stood longer, then for two years, in K. Edwards time. They
stood three or four years before the Kings Declaration, but not one complete
year, before this godly Consideration had taken them to task. And this
Declaration is therefore in the Letter called a kind of Law, because it was
neither Act of Parliament, nor a mere Act of Counsel, but an Act of the King
sitting in Counsel; which (if not in all things else) without all question, in
all matters ecclesiastical, is a kind of Law. And if it be more then a kind of
Law, the more it is for the advantage of the Writer, and the more impudent is
this Companion, that in all this Section, from the beginning to the end
thereof, has set himself to thwart and oppose it.

His fifth Extravagancie, is to impose upon the page 37.
Writer of the Letter, that he should aver the name of Altar to be only used
in the Liturgy of 1549. Whereas the Letter says no more, but that it is
passim, everywhere there used without scrupulosity. And whereas he taxes the
Writer for want of leisure to find the word Board once, and the word Table
once, in that Liturgy* I perceive plainly, that he is more busy a great deal,
then the Writer, who peradventure came not so late from his Horn-book as this
Doctor did, to mind the joining together of Letters and Syllables. For though
upon perusal in cold blood, he can find the word Board but once, and the word
Table but once, in all that Liturgy; (And he must cry, (...), in Print, to all
England, to come out and see this sublime curiosity) yet will I undertake to
show unto him the word Board twice, and the word Table six times used in that
Liturgy, if he will but promise to show unto me, how he, or I, or the Writer
of the Letter, or the Reader of this scribble, may be six pinnes the better for
this doughtie observation.

His sixth Extravagancy goes a little beyond his companions, and lacks but a
grain of a Capricheo; That the Writer of the Letter deserves first to be burnt
as an Heretic to the Church, and then (at the same instant) to be drowned as a
Tra^or to the State, for using in a Kingdom these desperate expressions of
Children of this Church and Commonwealth. Here is fine Doctrine indeed, That
all Children of this Church, must be ^^tra partem Donati, downright Puritans:
And all that mention here any Commonwealth, (even Sir Thomas Smith, that writ
of Englands Commonwealth) must be an Enemy to the Kingdom. I never heard of a
Church without Children, unless it be one of a Sebaptist in Amsterdam, who
having baptized himself to a faith of his own making, could never be seconded
in that Religion. And I never heard of a Kingdom without a Commonwealth,
unless it be likewise on little Robert Gaguin. Histor l. 2* in Clotario. And
Belleforest after him* ^he S^ory doubted of by President Fauchet, (who thinks
there was no such Roitelet, as he called him) and disputed against by Pasquier
des Re^her. l. 3. c. 7.
Yvitot in Normandy, which, they say, is but the Countrey-house of an ancient
Gentleman. I had heard heretofore, that the Church was the best Mother, as
bearing Children unto God; and the Kingdom the best of Commonweals, to
nourish and preserve this Church and her Children. But now, all the Children of
this Church must be printed the Brethren of dispersion: And the well-wishers of
the Commonwealth must be Enemies to Monarchy and Friends to confusion. And
this blinking Doctor can see this with half an eye. I would fain have him open
the other half, and tell me what he sees in Epist. 40. Jerusalem which is above
is free, which is the Mother of us all. Gal. 4. De qua praedicatur, quod in
toto mundo fructificet and cre^cat. Aug. tom. 7. contra Crescon. Grammat. l. 4.
p. 212.
S. Cyprian; when he lessons him about this fine Doctrine; Nemo filios
Ecclesiae de Ecclesia tollat, Let no* man presume to take the Children of the
Church, and thrust them into the part of Donatus: As also what he can see in
Haec est Eva matter omnium Viventium. l. 2. In Luc. c. 3. Tom. 5. p. 32.
S. Ambrose, Matter nostra Ecclesia est. Hieron. tom. 4. in Ezekiel. l. 5. in c.
16. p. 821.
S. Hierom, Quales debent ess^ Ecclesiae filii? quales? pacifici. Aug. tom. 8.
in Psalm. 127.
S. Augustine, and Ecclesiae pueri vocantur, qui coelestibus mandatis
inserviunt. Tom. 1. in Job. 29. p. 466.
S. Gregory, who call all Christians, the Children of the Church: What in so
many 5o Elis c. 2. etc. 4. 39o Elis. c. 12. 1o Iac. c. 22. 3o Iac. c. 12. 21o
Jacob. c. 9, 10, 17, 18.
Acts of Parliaments, in so many See K. James his works p. 485* 528, 544, 545,
546. And most of these Expressions to his people in Parliament.
Speeches of K. James in Parliament, that mention without scruple the
Commonwealth of this Kingdom. Shall the Fathers learn Criticismes to speak of
the Church; and K. James, expressions to speak of Kingdoms, from this railing
Philistine? For the Writer of the Letter one half is too much; a quarter of an
eye will serve the turn, to see what he means, and to see what he means not, by
the one and the other. The Children of this Church, be those (in his style)
that will give ear to the voice and Canons of this Church: The Children of
this Commonwealth, are such as obey the wholesome Laws and Reiglement of this
State and Kingdom. But base Sycophants, that slight the Canons of their
Bishops, and undertake to refute the Reiglement of their Princes, (though they
hope by flattery to prey upon either) are (as the Writer thinks) no true
Children of the one or the other. As this man by his allusion to Donatus the
African, shows clearly what he would be, if he were to choose: Donatus potius
quam Natus, No obedient Child, but a domineering Father in Gods Church. Howbeit
the man (give him his due) is not infinite in his Ambition, nor so malicious,
as he seems, against the Puritanes. For whereas S. Paul in his first to
Timothy, reckons up a long Catalogue of Graces, to be blameless, vigilant,
sober, modest, learned, hospital, and I know not what; the man is content, the
Puritanes take all these for themselves, and the glorious Titles of Children of
the Church and Servants of the Commonwealth, so as they leave him but the
first in that Chapter, a desire to be a Bishop. Which great pity it were so
Judicious a Divine should not enjoy as long as he lives.

His seventh Extravagancy is this, To conceive that none was ever scandalized
at the name of the Lords Table: p. 43.
And to charge the Writer for making this Supposition to persuade the people,
that questionless such men there are. Surely there are of that kind but too
many in the world: Some, that (because it stands not Altar-wise) call it a
Rhemists, 1. Cor. 11.
profane Table; some, an p. 21.
Oister-boord; some, an Oister-table; and this Vicar himself (if the Neighbors
charged him rightly) a Chapt. 1.
Treste. Nay, this Judicious Divine implies very strongly, that the name and
fashion of an Altar is more agreeable to the Piety of the times, and the Good
work in hand: Which could I believe to be true, I would my self be ashamed to
be such an Enemy to Piety and good works, as to give it any other Appellation,
then that of an Altar. Beside that, there goes from hand to hand, a pocket-
Determination, as said or read in one of our Universities, to prove the
lawfulness of bowing before the Altar. The Altar, I say, not the Table, by any
means. For in this short Discourse (which held me but one half-houre to read
over) this word Altar is thundered out one hundred and five several times, and
the holy Table scarce once named (in the man's own expression) in the whole
Treatise. And whether the Author may not be suspected to be ashamed of the
name of a Table, I will leave you to guess by this which follows.

He says, the Rubricks of all the Greek Liturgies, and more especially of
those of S. Basil, and S. Chrysostom, (the rest in truth, having in a manner no
Rubricks at all, do require (...) fieri (...), vel (...), that Courtesies or
Adorations be made before the Altar or the holy Table. At which Quotation, you
would swear the word Altar were to be found in these Rubricks up and down, but
the word Table scarce at all used, but brought in by this Protestant Doctor,
to comply with our own Liturgy. Whereas, the clean contrary way, these (...)
are there required to be made (and decently, as I think) before the holy Table;
but no mention at all in any of those Rubricks, of (...), or the Altar, in any
good or Authentical Neither in those in Biblioth Vet. Patr. tom. 2. Parsiis,
1624. Nor in those set out at Paris by Morelius, 1560.
Copy. There is indeed a lame and imperfect Liturgy of S. Chrysostom, set out
by Parisiis, 1537.
Erasmus, one Rubric whereof does say, that the Priest, and the Deacon, do
make (...), three Reverences toward the holy Altar. But, beside that the
complete Copies have no such Rubric in them, Erasmus translates Missa
Chrysostom. Graecolat. page, (...) per Wechelium, 1537.
(...) in that place, sanctum sacrarium, the holy Chancell, not the holy Altar.
True it is, that the Papists (whom the Doctor does not a little imitate) do in
all these Liturgies familiarly translate (...)* The holy Altar, in stead of The
holy Table. Whereas (...) does ever signify a Table; but (...) does not ever
signify an Altar. For in that place of Socrates, lib. 1. c. 25. (in the Latin;
but c. 37. in the Set forth at Paris by Robert Stephen* 1544.
Greek) cited in the same Determination, it is not well translated by Musculus
(whom the Doctor follows) Alexander going into the Altar, did fall down on
his face before the holy Table. For it ought to be, Alexander going into the
Quire or Chancell, did fall down, etc. For (...). Eustath. in 1. Iliad. p. 39.
(...) does signify a motion to such a place, as the mover may be at the last
(...), within that place. But Alexander could not be within the Altar, but very
properly within the Quire or Chancell, (...), Altarium, Sacrarium. It signifies
a Chancell as well as an Altar, says the old Found annexed to some manuscripts
of Cyrill, and set forth by Henry Stephen, 1583.
Glossary. And so Erasmus does often translate the Word, as I noted before. But
this Humiliation before the holy Table, had never prevailed against Arius, as
this Determinatour thinks, unless by hook or by crook, it had been eak'd out
to an Adoration before the Altar.

However, that this private Letter, written to be perused, and to die in the
hands of Divines only (and not so much as once read to the Alderman of
Grantham) should be endicted to humor or persuade the People, is a Calf
already, and may in time prove a more bellowing creature, if venom and malice
do not metamorphize the same to that deformed reptile that walks upon the
Belly. But the true Adversary this passage in the Letter reaches at, is the
Church of Rome; which, upon the Reformation of her Mass by Pius Quintus,
directed by the Council of Trent, has quite left out of her Canon, this very
name of the holy Table, against the practice of all Antiquity, and the
precedent of the Liturgies of all Ages and Nations that ever I could set eye
upon. And I shall crave the patience of the Reader, if I enlarge my self a
little in this particular; because it may conduce (peradventure) to enlighten
all the Corners of this little Controversy.

S. Luke is styled by S. Paul (as you know) the 2 Cor. 8. 18.
man whose praise is in the Gospel. And (as some of the Greek Fathers are of
opinion) the Gospel of S. Luke dictated by S. Paul, is called in one place,
Romans 2. 16.
S. Paul's own Gospel. There being such a harmony of expressions between the
one and the other. Now look what S. Luke calls that Vtensill upon the which the
Rich man did eat his meat, in the Luke 16. 21.
16th, he calls the same, which our Savior did celebrate the Supper upon, in
the Luke 22. 21.
22th Chapter of his Gospel: and that is, (...), which the Grammarians derive
of Etym. M^g.
(...) a foure-footed Table. S. Paul likewise speaking of set purpose and in a
continued discourse, (Neither of both, as I desire you to observe well, S. Paul
does in the Epistle to the Hebrews) does call that Utensill, upon the which
they in the Primitive Church did celebrate the Lords Supper, (...). a
foure-footed Table likewise. And in all the new Testament, there is no one
place, which treating purposely and literally of the Sacrament, does give the
Vtensill it was celebrated upon, any other name or Appellation. The Syriack
Translation calls it (...) in the 22th of Luke. Which is the Arias Montan. in
Lexico Syriaco.
same with (...) a Table, the word in S. Mathews Hebrew Gospel set forth by
See Munsters Hebrew Gos^ell. of S. Matthew. p. 244.
Munster, derived of the Verb (...) to Mess or set on, from the Messes
standing thereon, say Pag^in.
some, or from the Mission and extension of the same, as being more extended in
length then in breadth, as Mercer.
others conceive. And in the Syriack and Latin Testament printed in Rome with
curious pictures, Christ and his Disciples are painted sitting upon such a long
and foure-footed Table: As Mounsieur In his Answer a la Replique.
Moulin observes to have seen them set forth in the Gallery of a French
Cardinal. Libro 2. de Missa, c. 17.
And Bellarmine is of Opinion, that the Apostles all their time called this
Vtensill by no other name, especially not by the name of an Altar: The learned
Bishop of Instit. l. 6. c. 5.
Duresme agreeing with the Cardinal in this Opinion, though not in the reason
he gives of the same. Some while after the Apostles age (but how long that
while may be, we have already handled) this Vtensill came to be called both a
Table and an Altar: But with this difference: that (as Gregory In Fulks d^^ence
c. 17. page 174
Martin tells us) the Greek Fathers call it more often Table; the Latin, more
often Altar. But, as our learned Instit. l. 6. c 5.
Bishop conceives, it was more rarely called Altar, of Greeks and Latins, then
Table. However, in S. Basil, and S. Chrysostoms Liturgies, it is in the Prayer
before the Consecration, and in all the Rubricks, called a Table.

It is so in the Set forth in Syriack and Latin by Gui^o Fabricius, 1672.
Syriack Liturgy of the Patriarch Severus, who uses the same word (...) which
we spoke of before. It is so in the Ethiopian Liturgy, called Bibliotheca
Patr. Tom. 6. p. 79.
Miraculosa Mensa, a miraculous Table. The word is used by l. 5. de Sacram. c.
3.
S. Ambrose, in his Books de Sacramentis. Nay it is used in the Roman
Pontifical, in the very Pontif Greg. 13. 1582. page 145. Pontif. ^ii 4t^*
1561. p. 136. Adesto, Domine, dedicationi hujus mensae tuae.
Prayer of consecrating the Altar. But upon the Reformation, the words began to
be examined and more narrowly looked unto by both parties. The Protestants,
because they make it a Communion or a Supper, and no Sacrifice, therefore they
call it Table only, and abhor from the word Altar, as Papisticall, says In
Fulk's Defense, c. 17. page 174.
Gregory Martin; And very truly, for those times he wrote in. For D. Fulk, when
he comes to answer that passage, does no way flinch, but clearly confess that
it was so here in England. Ibidem.
With us indeed it is, as it is called in Scripture, only a Table. And this
Book was dedicated to Q. Elisabeth. And what did the Papists on the other side?
Although in their writings they give us smooth words, as this our Doctor does,
That they do with the Fathers approve equally of the one and the other
appellation; yet when they come to reform their Canon of the Mass, they never
use in Rubric or Prayer, neither literally, nor so much as by Allusion, this
word Table. Let any indifferent Reader therefore judge, if the Writer of the
Letter had not then some cause, and my self now much more, to wish that the
Lords Table may not be conceived to be a new name, and that the Good work in
hand may not make the unlearned sort of men ashamed of it.

His eighth Extravagancy is this; That having conferred with the Joyner, which
wrought the Table upon the which our Savior Christ celebrated the Supper, he
has found it to be of a more curious composition, then we took it for, to wit,
of an Page 44.
Ovall form. Which surely is some addle Egg, hatched by the wind of his own
imagination. Nor does he offer to cite any Author for it. Nonnus in 13. Joan.
and a little before, (...).
Nonnus does seem to call it indeed a Circle; (...).

But that is in regard of the Apostles filling of the Table, and sitting (as
those Olive-branches in the Psalm) Psalm. 127. 3.
round about the Table. And so is the Verse to be understood, which In summa de
Eccles.
Turrecremata calls the Verse of the ancient Divines, and Vnde and quidam
metrice dixerunt. 3. part, q. 81. art. 2. ad 1m
Thomas Aquinas, the Meetre-verse. Rex sedet in coena turba cinctus duodena,
Se tenet in manibus, se cibat ipse cibus.
That is, The twelve Apostles in a Ring
Sat at the Table with their King:
Who in his hands himself did bring,
The Food and Feeder being one thing.
And there was amongst the ancient Jews a round and circular kind of sitting
at meat, called in Salomons Cantic. 1. 12.
Canticum Canticorum (...) having Oecos rotundos, Sphericall Rooms, with
banquetting-beds suitable to the place, as that great Casaub. Exercit. 16. p.
494.
Critic does describe them. But this Ovall form is the Doctors own Invention,
and he might challenge, if not a Triumph, yet an Ovation for the same, could it
be handsomely accommodated to those Benches, Stools, Chairs, and other
Furniture he has bespoken for his Table. For he says, it was compassed round
about with Beds; which how it could be about an Page 44.
Ovall Table that held thirteen (or more, as See Suarez in 3m, q. 81.
some are of opinion) but that those of either end must make long arms to reach
at their meat, and especially to take the bread from our Saviors hand, can
never be cleared without another bout in Geometry, and as long a wrangling
about Sphericall, as we have had already about A^gular figures. For let these
Feasting-couches be three, as Joseph Scaliger de emendatione temporum, l. 6. p.
271.
Scaliger, or four, as Exercit. 16. p. 494.
Casaubon will have it, yet will it pose 24 of the nearest Gentlemen Ushers
about the Court, to fit them so about an Ovall Table of this Diameter, but that
some of the Ghests must suffer a kind of strappado in their arms, when they
reach at their Victuals.

The last Extravagancy (of more Page 10. 42. 48. 58.
vagancy then any of the rest, as wandering like a Gypsy up and down his
Pamphlet from one end thereof unto the other) is this, That he charge all
this Letter (written to Clergymen, and them only) to be composed populo ut
placeret, to please the people. And I must confess, it is a heavy case, as
you lay it. A fantastical Vicar may not call his Communion Table, an Altar,
as the Papists do, nor change it to an Altar of Stone, without the leave of his
Superior, but his Ordinary, or this fellow that looks like a Ordinary, must
check him for his devotion, and all to curry favor with the multitude or
people. Nay the Vicar, though (after that fashion of the ancient Kings of
Xenoph^n in Cyrop^d.
Persia) he has ears planted in every corner of his Church, may not by this
domineering fellow be suffered to determine, who can hear him, and who not,
rather then the deaf Adder of the Parish, the common People. Lastly, this
Vicar, being no dull Spectatour or contemplative piece, but e meliore luto, a
right blade, and of the Active Mold, cannot thwack these Russet-coats as they
well deserve, but he must be most basely used, and exhorted to Peace and
Charity by this supposed Ordinary, out of a trick to please the people. O
Literam illiteratissimam! O Letter fit to make litter of, for offering in this
sort to pull down the Steeple, and wind up the People! There is a kind of
Venom that makes a man laugh; and of this operation is this part of the
Libell. Diogenes would fain triumph upon the ambition of Plato, but does it
with a far more swelling ambition. The ambition of this Text had never been
blown up with the blast of the People, had it not been for the pride and
ambition of the Commentator. It is a certain judicious Divine had an itching
desire to be in print, and to build a new house upon old ruins, carrying this
poor Letter but like a Pageant of conquered Countries, to set forth and adorn
his Triumphall Chariot: but for whose (no small) indiscretion, I might have
said of this Letter (destinied to the perusal of a few Churchmen of the
Neighborhood only) as Aristotle once said, either of his Physics as Aulus
Gellius noct. Attic. l. 20. c. 5.
A. Gellius) or Metaphysics (as Plutarch. in vita Alexandri.
Plutarch conceives it) that it was (...), that it was published and
unpublished, before the Edition of this railing Pamphlet. However the man (we
conceive to be aimed at in this malicious passage) has better reason, then D.
Coal, to know, Tacit. Annal. lib. 2.
quam breves and infausti populi Romani amores, how brickle and unlucky a
repose it has been in all Ages of the world, for a man to stay himself upon
the unconstant multitude. And yet if he were a Diocesan (as you seem to make
him) he were as very a mad one as ever escaped Bethlem, if he should give way to
such a slight and undiscreet Churchman, by odd humors and conceits of his
own to scandalize the people committed unto him.

At non ille, satum quote mentiris, Achilles
Talis erat populo. --
The first Protestants of the Reformation (whom you falsely pretend to imitate)
had a better opinion of the Common people. We have proved already, and that at
large, that the first inducement of K. Edward and his most able Counsel, to
remove your Altars, and place holy Tables, was to root up superstition in the
minds of these (by you so much despised) Common people. And if you be (I will
not say a Judicious, but) any Divine at all, how dare your Mothers Son in
such a State as this, in such a Church as this, and under such a Prince so
beloved as this, speak so contemptibly of these so many provisionary Saints of
God, so many Nerves and Sinews of the State, so many Arms of the King to defend
his Friends and offend his Enemies, as are these, whom (for want of wit) you
jeeringly call the poor people? This is a kind of Lion, which (the more is
the pity) often offends, but is not, for all that, to be lash't by every man's
whip, but by the rod of the Prince his accustomed Governor. If you have
obtained a Cure of Souls over any people, you are a poor Soul your self, if
you conceive them therefore to be your own. I tell you, they are none of yours;
they are the Kings, they are Gods people. If you feed them, they feed you, by
those settled means which God and the King have provided for you. And being of
so proud and ignorant a spirit, as all your Pamphlet speaks you, for fear you
should despise any admonition of mine, I will lesson you in this point, in the
words of a National Council. Council. Sirmondi, tom. 2. Council. Paris. 6. c.
23. sub Ludovico ^io Imperatore, Anno 829. Nec sibi dominatum superbus usurpare
contendat. Fulgent. de veritat. Praed. and Gratiae. l. 2. Debet Pontifex habere
Paternam severitatem, and Maternam pietatem, Lombard. in Tit. 1. ex Ambros.
Because there are but too too many that carry no Fatherly affection, but a
domineering spirit, toward the Flock committed to their Charge, and like
bladders blown up with the wind of Arrogance, conceive their people to be
owned by them, and not by Christ; we would have them listen to their Savior in
the 21 of John, IF YOU LOVE ME, FEED MY FLOCK, MEAS, inquit, non SUAS; Mine,
good Sir, not your Flock. And therefore it is more then a presumptuous vanity
to slight your Neighbors, as if they were your own; when they are none of
yours, but Gods people.

I will conclude this point with the observation of a Heathen man; Valor. Max.
An vos consulere scitis, Consulem f^cere nescitis? Caius Figulus. Dictum
graviter and merito, sed tamen aliquanto melius non dictum: Nam quis Populo
Romano irasci sapienter potest? l. 9. c. 3.
Irasci populo Romano nemo sapienter potest. You may (when Fortune is disposed
to make some Christmas-sports) prove a great, but you shall never prove a wise
or judicious man, by these Ieeres and Invectives against the People.

CHAP. VII.
Canonical standing of the Table. (...), In medio, what they signify. Table
in the midst of the Quire, in the Eastern, so in the Western Churches. The
Rites of the Church of Antiochia. The Diptychs.

IN all this Section of the Page 48.
Fixing of the Altar, or Communion Table at the upper end of the Quire, (where
you see the Altar is perkt up already before the Communion Table in this new
Heraldry) there is nothing offered more then what has been already handled,
worth the Readers perusal, were it not that Reverend B. Jewel may not be left
undefended from the irreverent usage and slights of this whiffler. To the
writer of the Letter he has nothing to say, unless he can make him say what
he never imagined; Page 49.
that the Table should stand most Canonically in the body of the Church. No
such matter in all the Letter. It is there only affirmed, that the Canons allow
it not to be fixed to the End of the Quire (where the Writer, be he Canonist or
none at all, would have Letter 51.
it situated, when it is not used, and used too, when the Minister may be heard
of all the Congregation,) but to be made of a moveable nature, to meet with
those Cases in the Law, in the which, without this transposing thereof upon
occasions, the Minister (were he that Stentor with the sides of brass, Homer.
11. 5.
(...), That is, Who equaled with his voice
Full fifty men in noise)
could never be heard of his Congregation. And happy was reverend Jewel in
this point of Controversy: for he had to do with a learned and Ingenuous
Adversary, Dr Harding in B. Jewel, 3. Artic. 1. p. 45.
who confessed he never mean^t the people should understand any more of what was
said at the Altar, then what they could guess at by dumb shows and outward
Ceremonies. This is fair dealing yet; and gives us opportunity to ask him
again, Why then do S. S. Jacobi Liturg. (...), etc. Bibl. vet. Patr. tom. 2. p.
21.
James, and S. S. Marci Liturg. (...), etc. Ibid. p. 40.
Mark, in their several Liturgies, give the people so large a part in all the
Prayers and Letanies poured out at the very Altar? But these new Reformers,
though they prepare and lay grounds for the same, dare not (for fear of so many
Laws and Canons) apparently profess this Eleusinian Doctrine. They are as yet
busied in taking in the outworks, and that being done, they may in time have a
bout with the Fort it self.

But he tells us, p. 10.
that the 82 Canon, that says the Table shall be placed in the Church or
Chancell, so as the Minister may more conveniently be heard by the
Communicants, is a matter of Permission, rather then Command. He says so
indeed, but without any authority or reason. I hope the reverend house of
Convocation is not convened, or licensed by the King, to make Permissions, that
men may do what they list; but to make (when they are confirmed by the 25o H.
8. c. 19.
King) strong and binding Canons, to be obeyed by the Subjects, and to be
pursued by all the Ordinaries of the Kingdom. And so is this Canon a
Conditional Law, of the same nature with a Conditional Proposition, growing
to be of an absolute and Categoricall force, when the Condition begins to
exist, though before suspended, and in deliberation. As if the Table be so far
esloigned and removed from the people, that they cannot possibly hear their
Minister, when he officiates thereupon; the Ordinaries in this case, are not
permitted, as this man conceives, but absolutely required to transpose the
Table. And his Majesty's most prudent Determination, in the case of S.
Gregory's, makes the Ordinaries indeed Judges of the Fact, and the existence of
the Condition, as was most fitting: but that once agreed upon, it makes them by
no means Arbitratours of the Law; which if they do not literally follow and
pursue, the parties are left to their ordinary Appeals, as in other cases of
grievances and abuses. For in all other sentences Ecclesiastical, the Judges
are not to pursue their own sense, but the sense and meaning of the Canons.

Page 51.
Yea, but the Altars may soon be mounted up by steps, that the Minister may be
seen and heard of the Congregation. I cannot tell you that neither, without new
directions. For the Sea Ord. 10. October. 1561. page 2.
Orders made 1561 require plainly, that if in any Chancell the steps be
transposed, they be not erected again. And these were high Commissioners
grounded upon the 1o Elis. c. 1.
Act of Parliament, who set forth these Orders. Which how far they bind, I
dare not determine, being (as you say) none of the ablest Canonists in the
Church of England.

But Page 49.
he must first show us where it was determined by the Ordinary of the place,
that Morning and Evening prayer shall be said only in the body of the Church,
before he venture on such new and strange Conclusions. And for the Rubric, it
says only, that it shall be so placed in Communion-time. And just so says
the Page 76.
Letter, and no otherwise; In the body of the Church or of the Chancell, where
Morning and Evening prayer be appointed to be read, when the Communion is to be
celebrated. So that you see our Coal begins to be quite extinct, and to yield
nothing but vapor and smoke for a parting farewell. For considering that both
Provinces (God be praised) have been so lately visited, what needs the Writer
saddle up his Horse, and visit them over again, to know where the several
Ordinaries have appointed the Reading-pews in every Parish Church to be
erected? Erected they must be in some convenient place, or else the Canon. 82.
not without an ancient precedent. Nehem. 8. And Ezra the Scribe stood upon a
Pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose. And the Deacon reads the
(...), in S. Chrysostom. Liturgy.
Canon is not pursued. Wheresoever that Convenient place is in Church or
Chancell, thither, in this case of the Peoples not-hearing their Minister, the
Communion Table is to be transposed: (...). But he tells us Page 20.
our Countrey-churches for the most part are so little, that this provision is
superfluous. What pity is this! that as Ore enim blasphemo dicebat palam, si a
principio creationis humanae Dei consilio interfuisset, nonnulla melius,
ordinatiusque condita fuisse. Roderic. Santii Hist. Hisp. p. 4. c. 5.
exantiquis Annalib.
Alfonso the wise (in other matters, in this no wiser then our Doctor)
bemoaned himself very much, that he was not at Gods elbow to put him in mind of
some things, when he was at work in the Creation of the World; so that this
Judicious Divine had not been at the elbow of that unexperienced Prelate
Archbishop Bancroft (whose very dreams were wiser then his Morning-thoughts)
and the rest of his Brethren, when they were in hand with that superfluous work
of the 141 Canons! Why man, -- P. Heylin, 461.
Ecclesia, Foemina, Lana. What Country of Europe can yield you fair, if
England affords but small Churches?

And having shot his childish shaft, -- Aeneid. 2.
telumque imbelle sine ictu, at the Writer of the Letter, he falls once more
(as Kestrels love to feed on dead things) to rake into the ashes of Reverend
Jewel. The Vicar (supposed to have but a small Study of Books) was desired for
his satisfaction, That Communion-tables have heretofore stood in the midst of
Chancells and Churches, to Let. p. 77.
read some places out of Eusebius, S. Augustine, Durandus, and the fifth
Council of Constantinople, in a Book chayn'd in his Church, to wit, B. Jewel
against Harding. To the which, the Doctor sitting in his Chair (that may prove
Episcopal one day) and making trial how the style and language would now
become him, he speaks, or rather pronounces in this manner, Page 53.
And read him though we have, yet we are not satisfied. And this is somewhat a
strange Case. Three great Princes successively, the one after the other, and
four Archbishops of very eminent parts, have been so satisfied with the truth
and learning of this Book, that they have imposed it to be chained up, and read
in all Parish-Churches throughout England and Wales; and yet cares Act 18. 17.
Gallio for none of these things: For we Don Nosotros are not satisfied. And
why, good Gravity, are not you satisfied? Because Eusebius speaking of the
Church at Tire, has it in the Greek, (...), which is not (as 3. Article, p 145.
Bishop Jewel interprets) in the midst of the Church among the people, but
Page 53.
in the middle of the Chancell, in reference to North and South. And well said
Doctor; I had thought Eusebius (or rather the Paneg^rist in Eusebius) had been
describing in that place a brave Chancell set all about with Seats and other
Ornaments, and that he had placed the Altar in the very midst of that Chancell.
But I see I am mistaken, and so is Artic. 3. p. 145.
B. Jewel, Instit. l. 6. c. 5. p. 462.
B. Morton, In 1 Cor. 11. p. 528.
D. Fulk, De Orig. Altar c. 6. p. 35.
Hospinian, De Miss. l. 2. c. 1. p. 177.
Mornay, and Resp. a la Repliq. Controv. 12.
Monsieur Moulin, as well as I. For the Panegyrist it seems is there painting a
Sea-card of the Winds, or the four points of Heaven; and having set down the
North, and the South, he places in the middle of these two the aforesaid
Altar. But the Doctor in this Conceit, is (as Sr Philip Sidney calls it)
Heavenly wide, as wide from the true sense, as the North of the Heaven is from
the South. For if this Altar stood along the Eastern Wall, and because fixed in
the Middle of that Wall, is said to be in the midst of the Chancell, a Grecian
would not call such a posture, (...), or understand what you meant when you
said so; but, (...), as Elem. l. 1. propos. 32.
Euclide himself terms it, over-aneanst the middle of the wall; as the
Septuagint describe the situation of the Altar of Incense (which is your own
instance in the next line) to be Exodus 30. 5.
(...), over-aneanst the veil of the Temple. Nor is it conceivable how this
Altar should be in the middle between North and South, rather then in the
middle between East and West; All substantial bodies here on Earth being
equally measureable by those four postures of the Heavens, as the Aristot. de
coelo, and mundo, l. 1.
Philosopher tells us.

But (like a child in a sandy bank) look what fine structure the Doctor had
here built up with one hand, he straightway in the very next words of all,
pulls down with the other. Page 54.
For now the Altar might possibly be placed in the Middle of the Church, in
imitation of the Jews, with whom this people were mingled. Well, this Doctor
is full of Miracles in his writings. I had read of an Piccol. De Stellis fi^is,
Cum victoriam ob^^nuissent Di^, Aram inter sidera colloc^runt, p. 50.
Altar heretofore, suddenly got up from Earth to Heaven; but of an Altar so
soon toppled down from Heaven to Earth, I never read before this time. But he
had as good let the Altar alone, where he had placed it: For it shall not serve
his turn. For Tire though it was in Syria; Adrichom in Aser, ^n descript.
Tyri. page 10. c. 2.
yet were the people thereof never mingled with the Jews, nor the Jews with
them, until their embracing of the Christian Faith, after the utter ruin and
subversion of that Nation, says Adrichomius. Nor was the Altar of Incense in
the midst of the Temple, as Page 54.
he likewise unlearnedly relates. Josephus de bello Iudaico, l. 6. c. 6.
For Herod's Temple was sixty cubits long; twenty within, and forty without the
Veil: And this Altar was close unto the Veil; as In Exodus 30. 5.
Tostatus and De Templo, l. 2. c. 8.
Ribera do fasten it; and therefore far from the midst of the Temple. But it
stood indeed in another midst; in the midst between the Table on the North, and
the Candlestick on the South thereof, says Lib. 3. De v^ta Mosis.
Philo Iudaeus. Nor lastly is any thing observed truly (though the refuting
thereof be altogether impertinent) which this man sets down in all this
Section; unless it be, that the word Altar is named in Eusebius. It is not
true, that the Gate or Entrance of this Church is said to be open to the East:
nor is there any such thing in Eusebius. It is not (...), but (...) not a Gate,
but a Portico, or a shady walk; nor is it of the Church, but (...), of the
Cloister about the Church. To be short, there is (as I said even now) in this
passage nothing related sincerely, but, that the word (...) is there indeed.
But then it is as sincerely to be replied, that this Altar is by and by after
interpreted to be a Metaphorical Altar; (...), the Sanctification of a
Christian Soul; as we heard Cap. 4.
before. And so much for Eusebius. The next he takes in hand, is the fifth
Council of Constantinople, Page 54.
as it is there called (by poor B. Jewel that never saw it) being indeed the
Council sub Agapeto and Menna. And how should we have done, had we not known
under whom this Council was held? and any man would swear, that correcting B.
Jewel so punctually, he should be now in the right. But the poor man is
abused by some wag that fits him with these Exscriptions. Agapetus was dead
before this Council was held. And if he had but read any one Action, he could
not but have found it out, Agapetus of blessed memory, etc. It was held by
Menna the Patriarch, in the vacancy of the Sea of Rome, between Agapetus and
Sylverius, as Binius, tom. 2. Council. p. 4^2.
Binius, Praesidente Menna Patriarch^, p. 164.
Caranza, and Breviar. Chronol p. 166. tempore in terregni. and sum. Council.
p. 454.
Coriolanus do state it. Well, in this Council he finds, that (...), cannot
be properly interpreted (as B. Jewel would have it) round about the Altar, but
before the Altar: as the Noblemen standing before the King, may be said to be
about the King; and the Angels in the Revelation, round about the Throne. I had
thought the Throne in Heaven had been safe enough, and had needed no wall to
rest upon; and that the Angels might be as conveniently conceived to compass
it about (as all Interpreters expound the place) as to cast themselves into a
Half Moon in this sort, before the presence of Almighty God. But what Authors
has he for this new conceit, to weigh down these great Names that expound it
otherwise, as Artic. 3. p. 143.
Bishop Jewel, De Missa, l. 2. c. 1.
Mornay, Lib. De Orig. Altar. c. 6.
Hospinian, and others? None, but the learned judicious Divine his own self.
Then I must tell him, that S. Bibl. ve^. Patr. tom. 2. p. 45. See likewise
Dionysius, Athanas. and Chrysostom. cited by the B. of Duresme, to the phrase of
(...)and (...). Instit. l. 6. c. 5.
Basil in his Liturg^e does otherwise interpret those postures in Heaven;
(...), The Seraphims stand round about thee, in orbem, in a ring, or perfect
Circle, as Gentian Hervet does there expound it.

And for the passage in the Council, (...), I will be bold to say, that it
cannot possibly be thus interpreted in Greek or Latin, if we examine but the
phrase it self. For the Greek; See Budaeus Comm. p. 1494. and 1495.
Budaeus handles of purpose all the (...) and compassings in this kind, that
are to be found in any good Author, and has not one acception of the word for
an imperfect compassing about. The Greek Eustath. in ultim. Iliad. page 1462.
Scholiast upon Homer will have that only to be termed Circular (...), which
has in it no Corner at all, as your eye will let you see all your half-Moons
have. And In Verbo (...).
Hesychius, an excellent Grammarian, does tell us, that in Geometry, a Circle
is a kind of Circumference carried about with one line: which cannot be said of
men standing in a half-Circle before the front of a Throne, or the face of a
King, according to this English Phraser. And then if we come to the Latin,
Tully himself does end the Controversy, putting both the words with their
differences before our eyes. Cicero l. 1. De sinibus.
Circulos aut semicirculos consectari. Intimating by the former, says Comment.
L. Gr. p. 1494.
Budaeus, a Company of men in orbem collectorum, gathered into a perfect round;
by the later, a concourse of people before one man, as it might be before a
public Reader in Philosophy. Where you find a clear distinction between a
Circle and half-Circle. I will conclude this Grammatical Question, with
Eustathius his note upon Pandarus his Bow; where Il^ad. 4. Which Nazianzen
imitates in his description of the devil. (...). Naz Carm. 54.
Homer says, -(...), That he drew his Bow into a perfect Circle. Whereupon
Eustathius observes, that the Bow of it self cannot be said to be (...), a
Circle, but (...) or (...), a bowed or crooked thing, until the Arms of the
Archer draw it with such a strength, that both the ends meeting in one, do
fashion the Bow to a perfect Circle. And so the people flocking about the Altar
in this Council, did not resemble a bended only (which Homer would have
expressed by (...)or (...)) but a full-drawn Bow, (which Homer will have to be
(...)) and therefore are said to stand about the Altar (...), in a perfect
Circle.

But to leave the Grammar, and come unto the Business. There is nothing more
clear in Antiquity, then, that not only this Altar in Constantinople, but all
the Altars and Communion-tables in all the Eastern Churches were so situated
and disposed, as they might be compassed round about by the Priests and
Deacons. In the (...), or Chancell, there be two Altars, whereof the greater
stands in the midst of that Room, and the l^sser close by, at the left side of
the greater, Ad lectorem, in the (...) of the Greek Liturg. 1560. p. 115.
says Gentian Hervet. There be in those Churches two Altars: the greater is in
the midst, and called the holy Table; the lesser is called the Prothesis or
Table of Proposition, says the Biblioth. vet. Patrum tom. 2. in Annot.
Setter forth of the Greek and Latin Liturgies. In the Greek Temples there is
but one high Altar, and that placed in the middle of the Quire, says In his
Edition of the Greek Liturg. at Paris, 1560.
Claudius Saints. (...). I will compass about thine Altar, says the Priest,
in S. Page 12. as it is set forth in G. L. by S. Andr.
Peter's Liturgy. Be not ashamed, O Lord, of any of us that compass thy holy
Altar, says S. Basil in his Liturgy. The Deacon takes the Censer and fumes the
holy Table (...), i. e. circumcirca, says Hervetus, round about, in S.
Chrysostomes Liturgy. Biblioth. Vet. Patr. tom. 2 p. 64.
And in another place of the same Liturgy, the Deacon perfumes the holy Table
Ibid. p 40.
(...), in all the circuit and compass thereof. Lastly, Constit altera habita
ad Thatalaeum.
Synesius says, that he will (...), compass about the Altar of God, in one of
his Epistles. Where you may observe, that these three last, together with the
Priest in S. Peter's Liturgy, are but single men, and cannot possibly be
expounded to go about the Altar, in the Doctors absurd Interpretation. For
standing in the face of the holy Table, as Noblemen do before a King, is not
for one man to compass about, or for one man to incense about the holy Table.

Having made sport in the Greek with the Council of Constantinople, he does as
much in the Latin with S. Augustine. The like mistake there is, if it be
lawful so to say (as no doubt it is lawful for such as you are to say any
thing; Virgil. Aeneid. 1.
Haec ara tuebitur omnes: having, if any man should call you in Question, an
Altar, as the Poet says, to fly unto) A mistake there is, says ^ag 55.
he, in the words of S. Austin. For that which has been alleged from him,
being the 46 Sermon, not the 42, (Another correction of Magnificat; the Theolog
Lovan. in Oper. S. Augustine. Tom. 10.
Sermon being the 46 in the late, but the 42 in Bedes Numeration, which Bishop
Jewel followed) Mensa ipsius est illa in medio constituta, clearly, and
without ambiguities, is not to be interpreted, as it is translated (by B.
Artic. 3. p. 145.
Jewel, and B. Instit. l. 6. c. 5
Morton, and applied in the same sense by De Missa, l. 2 c. 1.
Mornay, De Orig. Altar. ubi su^ra.
Hospinian, Cathol. Orthod. tom. 1. q. 29. p. 514.
Rivet, and all our Divines,) the Table set here in the midst, but, the Table
which is here before you. Now because he says it appears so clearly; I will
appeal, not to those great Worthies I named even now, but to every Schoolboy,
Whether l^terally and Grammatically, Medium does not signify the middle part
or space; (being in truth a Geom^tricall word of proportion, as Aristotle notes
in his Lib. 5. c. 7.
Ethics and whether, when it signifies a thing set before us, it be not every
where taken for a Metaphor, and a figurative Phrase; when a Reason or any other
thing, Haec non sunt quaesita ex occulto aliquo genere literarum, sed sumpta de
medio. Cic. Orat pro domo sua. In medio posita, Things obvious to every o^e.
Idem, lib. 1. de Oratore.
not so obvious before, is newly produced, and so presented unto us; as if a
massy substance should be so laid in the midst between us, that (unless we
close our eyes) we cannot but behold it. The Greek (from whence the Latin
word, as De Causis Linguae Latinae.
Scaliger observes, is derived) is therefore called (...), because it does
Etym. magn. or, (...). Phavorin.
(...), take out an even share or proportion from either extreme; which every
thing does not do that is only set before us. And (because these conceits are
fitter a great deal to be refuted by School-boyes then Divines) observe I pray
you, that the Latin word for a Table was not always Mensa, but at the first
Mesa, from the Greek word (...), says Mesa quod a nobis media, a Graecis
(...), mensa dicit potest. De Lingua Latina, l. 4.
Varro; because this Vtensill, says he, is ever placed in the very middle
space between us. So that according to this great and ancient Critic, (with
whom the Martin. in Lexico. Brocensis, In Covarruvias Spanish Dictionary.
modern do concur) it cannot properly be called a Table, unles it be placed,
as S. Austin reports it, in Medio, in the Middle. But however Etymologies may
seem more pretty then weighty Arguments, it is impossible it should be used by
S. Austin in this place in that Metaphorical sense, which is here before you.
For the man will not be so senseless, I presume, as to say, that Medium does
properly signify before; as that the Virtue in Ethics is to stand before the
two Vices, or the Argument in Logic to stand always before the two Extremes:
but that he explaines his meaning by that other Phrase, Page 56.
afferre in Medium, to bring it to us, or before us; so as we may use it as
freely, if we please, as we do the meat and drink upon the table, for that very
purpose laid before us. Such and such a thing was then to seek, but now afferam
in Medium, I will lay it before you. Now will I make a Schoolboy (whom with
his book of Phrases the Doctor has given us for a Companion in this place)
easily conceive, that S. Austin could not possibly mean it so in these words:
(though the Doct^ur, when he scrubbed up this leaf, did little dream of what
could be objected.) For the Table of the Lord, or the Sacrament of that Table,
was not to be brought unto, nor to be set before these, to whom S. Austin
addresseth his speech in this place. For he speaks unto the Vnum genus
Catechumenorum, qui audiebant verbum Dei, sed nondum petierunt Baptismum,
dicebatur Audientes, sive Auditores. Iustell. in Cod. Can. Eccles. vet. page
150. And they stood (...), without the Church, until the reading of the
Gospel. The Schol. on Harmenop. Tom. 1. page 53.
Audientes, a sort of Catechumeni, and not unto the Fideles, or Faithful, in
this Passage. He tells them, that they are as yet to be fed by Preachers, not
by Sacraments; and bids them ply it hard, that from Hearers becoming
Understanders, they may in time become Receivers; and so be fed by this
Sacrament at the Lords Table. And because that very word might amaze those
Novices, who were never so timely to be instructed in these mysteries, and did
not know what Table that should be, which S. Austin called the Lords Table,
When those words were thundered by the Deacon, (...), Zonar. in Council.
Neocaes. p. 305.
(being ever driven out by the Deacon, when the Priest began to approach the
holy Table) S. Austin tells them, that the Lords Table is that Table in medio
constituta. How is that? Brought unto them, or ready for them? Soft and fair;
nothing so. They are yet but Audientes, and have a great while For we use to
make them (...), to come by little and little unto the Church, that we may keep
them the longer. Council. C^nstantinop. 1. Canon. 7. Lest any root of
bitterness lurked in them. Rupert. de divin. ^ssi^. l. 4. c. 18. And thereup
^n seven Scrutinies passed upon them, to see, an essent in Fide stabi it^.
Vasq. de Bapt. q 71. art. 4.
(...), to Time it, (as you heard before) many degrees to get through yer it
come to that. They must be Ncocaes. Con 5.
genuflectentes, knee-benders, as the Council calls them: they must be Pasch^
appropinquante, dedit nomen inter alios competentes. Lib. de cura pro mortuis,
c. 12. Tanquam qui jam Baptismu^ peterent. Beat. Rhen Praef. in Lit. Chrysostom.
Competentes, suitors, says S. Austin: they must be Lib. de Poenitentia.
Intincti, dipped in the Font, as Tertullian terms it, before this Table be
either brought unto them, or ready for them. It is not ready for them, before
they be ready for it. But that is the Lords Table there, says S. Austin, which
you see placed in the midst of the Church. For were it in the Chancell, you
could not be admitted to draw so near, as to see and view it: and could you
but by chance get a Albasp. Observat. l. 2. Obs^r^at. 2. ex antiquo Canone.
glimpse of the same, you were instantly (all discipline notwithstanding) to be
baptized. Ply then your Catechismes and Sermons apace, that you may not only
see it, but partake of it. This none are admitted to do but the Faithful; nor
is it to be expected of you, Being as yet Gods Bisognos, as it were, Tyrones
Dei, Aug. l 2. De Orthod fide, ad Catechum. c. 1. Novitioh, Tertul de Poenit.
c. 6. And their Pew was extra Ecclesiam. La Cerda vol. ^ l. 5. p 275. (...).
Throrianus in Legate. Armen.
until after two or three further degrees of Ecclesiastical discipline, you
do your selves likewise grow to be of the number of the Faithful. And whether
we shall believe this Schoolboys device, or S. Augustine expounded by himself
and all Antiquity, I leave to the consideration of the learned Reader.

But what needs this wresting and writhing of Histories, Fathers, and general
Councels? Is it such a new thing in Israel, that the Tables heretofore, and the
high Altars afterward, did stand in the midst of the Church or Chancell? or at
leastwise, so far from the wall, as the Priests and Deacons might stand round
about them? Did ever any learned Bapist make a question of it? Let this fellow
but travel into any part of the World where Altars stand, and he cannot but
blush to impose such Dreams upon the people. For the practice of the Eastern
Church, I have already set down rather too many, then too few Examples. I will
do the like now for the Western Church; First quoting the Authorities of some
learned Pontifician Writers, ancient and modern: And then the Precedents
answering these Authorities in all Ages and in all Countries whatsoever.
Howbeit I found some difficulty herein: for being laughed at by all Strangers
for making unto them such a foolish Question, as they deemed it; when I came
home to my Study and mine own Books, I found it such a silly thing, that very
easiness made it hard to be related in serious manner: as Eccles. Pol. lib. 4.
did. 14.
M. Hooker speaks of not an unlike subject.

For my Authors; I will begin with Lib derebus Ecclesiastici^, c. 4.
Walafridus Strabo: who though he was but a blinker, and saw (as this Doctor
does) but with half an eye; yet could he see, that the Christians in the
beginning did place their Altars indifferently, in diversas plagas, East, West,
North, and South; and gives a reason for it not to be easily refuted; Quia non
est locus, ubi non est Deus. God is as well the God of the West, North, and
South, as he is of the East: and it is Paganish (as Deo cuncta ^lena lum.
Vbique non tan^um nobitproximus, sed infusus est. p. 75. Ista non prima and
maxima contu^elia est, habitationibus Dens habere districtos? Arnob. l. 6.
Minutius Felix well observes) to make him more propitious in any one Corner of
the world, then he is in another. And this Strabo died about the Gulielm.
Eising. citatus a Melchiore Hittorpio, prooem. in Walafridum.
year 846. One Sacrorum Electorum, l. 2. c. 3.
Aloysius N^varinus writes as much, upon those words, Cir^undabo Altar tuum;
That their situation was such in former times, that the Priests might
encompasse round about the holy Altar. But the most learned in our Age, of all
that have dealt with Rites and Ceremonies, is Josephus Vicecomes; who both out
of the Tombs and Sepulchers of the Martyrs (the first place elected in the
Church for fixing of Altars) and especially out of that passage in Eusebius we
spoke of before, takes it for a very clear and indubitable Assertion, Lib. 2.
de Antiquis Missae ritibus, c 28.
Altaria medio in Templo allocata fuisse, that Altars were placed heretofore in
the midst of the Church. And De cultu Sanctorum, l. 3. c. 3.
Bellarmire himself together with In 3 partem, tom. 3. disput. 81. sect. 6.
Suarez, do willingly allow they may be fixed in any posture propter loci
commoditatem, if the convenience of the place shall so require it. But the main
Authority I rely upon, is the Romans Pontific. Greg. 13. Circuit ter Altar, p.
144. sem l, 145. semel, 146. and the Chaplain must perfume it continue
circumcundo, p. 144.
Roman Pontifical. Which in the Ceremonies of the Consecration of the Altar,
enjoins the Bishop (in three several places at least) to compass the Altar,
circumcirca, round about: Which were it fastened to the East End, were
impossible for a Mouse to perform, without a good mind prepared beforehand
for the fitter accomplishment of that service. And these Authors may suffice
for a Question that admits of no more difficulty.

In the Precedents, I will begin with Rome it self; And first, with the famous
place called Baron. Martyrolog. Rom, Jan. 20.
Catacombe (a word of a mongrell composition, half Greek, half Latin, and
signifying as much as near the Tombs) a kind of vaulted Church under the earth
in a manner, of a semicircular form, seated not unhandsomly round about;
wherein the ancient Bishops of Rome were wont to repose themselves in time of
persecution. Roma Soterran l. 3. c. 13. In medio de questo aedificio, e^un
antiquissimo Altar, etc.
In the very midst whereof there stands a most ancient Altar of Marble, under
the which lay for a time the Bodies of S. Peter and S. Paul, and upon the which
it was not lawful heretofore for any to officiate beside the Pope himself,
until Paulus Quintus, in our^ memory, licensed by a special Bull, all other
approved Priests to do the like. That Is for the time past. For the present, S.
Peter's Body being removed by Constantine unto S. Peter's Church in the Vatican,
and the great Altar, called Altar Maggiore, consecrated by Pope Sylvester over
the same (which is recorded in a Book kept in that Church, called Codex S.
Petri, preserved to this day) the posture of this high Altar was in the midst
of the Quire, and such from the beginning, that Roma Soterran, lib. ^. c. 4.
page 31.
Clemens Octavus had room enough to erect a new Altar sopra di esso, above this
former Altar: which he consecrated, assisted with 38 Cardinals, 26. of June,
1594. And this very Pope, Vrbane the eighth, reedifying and enhansing the old
Altar, did not offer to change the position or situation of the same. So that
the Pope himself is more tractable in this point, then this heady Author. From
Rome I must lead you, as my Books lead me, to Millain, and let you see, that
until Cardinal Borromaeus (made a Saint it seems for this service) did
demolish them, the Altars had an indifferent situation in any part of the
Church; as, under the Actor. Eccles. Mediolan. part. 4. l. 1. de fabr. Eccles.
p. 569.
Pulpit, where Gods Word was preached; under the Organ-loft, whence God was
praised; and under the Reading-desk, where the Gospel was delivered. And this
continued thus, until within these threescore years. And yet in this severe
Reformation, which that Cardinal made in all the Churches of the State of
Millain, he does Actor. Eccles. Mediolan. part. 4. l. 1. de fabr. Eccles. p.
567.
require, that there be left a space of eight Cubits at the least between the
high Altar and the Wall, to admit the assistance of more Priests and Deacons,
at Feasts of Dedications, and other Appointments of solemn Masses. And this is
more liberty yet, then our Doctor will afford. Howbeit, this Cardinal was so
severe a Prelate, that he was once shot at with a Pistol by some of his By
Farina one of the Order of the Humiliati, set on by 3 Priors of the same Order
Rip^mentius Hist. Eccles. Mediolan. part 3. l. 3. p. 155.
Clergy: whereas God forbid that any man should discharge ought at D. Coal,
unless it be a Shot of Jests, or a Peal of Laughter.

From Italy, my Books transport me to Germany, where I hear Crantz. in Metrop.
l. 1. c. 24.
Witikind the ancient Saxon telling Charles the Great (who much endeavored,
and at last effected his Conversion to Christianity) that be observed a great
deal of cheerfulness and alacrity in the Emperors face (cast down before)
when he began to approach that Table which was in the midst of the Church. And
Libr. de Origin Altar. c. 6. page 35.
Hospinian tells us, that in the Reformation which the Helvetians made at
Tigure, 1527, they found that of old time the Font had been situated in that
very place, where the Popish high Altar was then demolished. And looking for
more, I find that Exam. Council. Trid part 4. p. 84.
Chemnitius notes that Altar in the Vatican we spoke of before, to be placed,
ante Chorum, before the very Quire; which my former Author had not observed:
And that Praefat ante Liturg. Chrysostom.
Beatus Rhenanus makes a general observation, that these Wall-altars in
Europe, are nothing so ancient as the Churches, but of a much fresher and later
Erection. Which D. An Answer of a true Christian, p. 56.
Fulk proves both of our Altars and Chancells here in England, by many pregnant
conjectures and probabilities.

In France, they do not fasten (as I am informed) the high Altars to the Wall,
but the lesser or Requiem-Altars only. In my Le Theater des Antiquitez. de
Paris, l. 4. p. 1098. out of Sugerius a m. s. of that Abbey.
Books I find a most rich Table in the Abbey-church of S. Denis, all of beaten
gold, encha'st round about with rich and curious precious stones: to the
beautifying whereof (as the Children of Israel, to the enriching of the
Sanctuary) the Kings, Princes, Prelates, and Nobles of that Kingdom, parted
with the Stones of their chiefest Rings; as Sugerius an ancient Abbar, who has
recorded all the Curiosities of that religious house, does report at large.
This Table is not laid along the Wall, but stands Table-wise; and by the
Inscription, must needs have been used heretofore for a Communion Table: It
being this, Da pro praesenti, Coeli mensa satiari:
Significata magis significante placent.
That is, Let this food us for Heavenly food enable,
The signifying for signified Table.
I do Le Theater des Antiquit. l. 4. p. 1102.
read likewise, that the holy Altar in the same Church placed before the Tomb
of Charles the Bald, stands in a manner in the midst of that Room. But these
postures are no strangers in that Country.

Now having led you a long round to visit the sites of the Altars in Rome,
Italy, France, and Germany, I will bring you home again unto your own Country,
and desire you to mark well, how Austin the Apostle of the Saxons, placed his
first Altar in the Cathedral Church at Dover, dedicated to S. Peter and S.
Paul. This Church has Beda Eccles. Histor. Gentis Anglor. l. 2. c. 3.
in medio sui pene, almost in the very midst thereof, an Altar, dedicated to
the honor of S. Gregory the Pope. Upon the which the Priest of the place does
every Sabbath Day perform the Agends of this Austin and S. Gregory. And shall
we believe, that no Church of all the English Nation, did imitate herein her
first Metropolis? It is impossible it should be so. But we may the more
reasonably presume, the Conjecture (for I dare not otherwise propound it) of D.
An Answer of a true Christian to a counterf. Catholic, Artic. 14.
Fulk to be worthy of further consideration. That if you mark the most part of
the old Churches in England, you shall plainly see, that the Chancells are but
additions builded since the Churches. Also that some Churches are builded
round, as one in Cambridge, and the Temple in London; to which may be added the
old Pantheon in Rome, called by the Moderns, Santa Maria Rotunda. And many
Churches (if you mark it) which are of the Gothic building, have their
steeples at the East End. Lastly, a number of our old Churches have their Isles
of such a perfect Cross, that they cannot possibly see either high Altar, or
so much as the Chancell. A shrewd Argument that the holy Tables in England were
not fixed as the Piety of the Times would now have them, when these Churches
were first erected. I will conclude all this discourse with a couple of rich
and curious Tables, presented unto the two great Mother-Churches of the World,
Rome and Constantinople, and leave it to your considerations, whether they were
so richly enchas't and adorned to lie along against the stone-wall. The first
was Sozom Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 1. Niceph. Callist. lib. 14. c. 2.
Pulchclia's (...), a miraculous thing for wealth, all of Gold and precious
stones, and wrought thus of purpose by that incomparable Lady, (...), for a
holy Table, as both the Greek Historians affirm. The second was sent from
France, by K. Council. Sirm. Tom. 2. page 51. a^ Ann. 761.
Pipin to Pope Stephen, and by him to be dedicated to S. Peter, and falling
short of that Pope, came into the hands of Paul his Successor: Who in his
Letter back again to the King, does not say he turned it to an Altar; but that
upon that very Table, which he received with Hymns, and Letanies, and
consecrated with Oil, he offered Sa^rifice of Praise to Almighty God for the
prosperity of his Kingdom. This Table is still in Rome, and was never laid
along any Wall. And because I will be better then my promise, I will propound
unto you a third Table, far exceeding the other two, as having in it all the
riches of the Land, and Sea (as mine Author describes it.) And this was
really, (...), a holy Table, offered up by Justinian in the Temple of Sophia in
Constantinople. This had a long and admirable Georgius Cedrenus Compend.
Histor. ad Annum. 32. Justiniani, p. 3 17. (...).
Inscription engraven, (...), round about it, (...), etc. We offer here Thine
of Thine unto Thee, etc. Half which Inscription could not have been seen, had
this Table layn along the Wall. And so much in defense of B. Jewels exposition
of that Passage in S. Augustine.

The last Author quoted by B. Jewel, is Durandus, whom this man turns over
with another Flamme; That, In medio Ecclesiae aperui os meum, is as much in
good English, as, I opened my mouth in the midst of the Altar. So that these
two words, In Medio, Illud i. Cornucopiae, Plautus in Pseudolo.
Corrupiae est, ubi inest quicquid velit: It is his Cogging-box, to strike what
Casts of the Dice he lists to call for. If he have to do with Eusebius, In
medio signifies, between North and South: If with S. Austin, In medio is to be
construed, to us, or, before us: But if with Durandus; why then, In Medio
against him, is in the midst of the Altar. But Durus Durandus jacet hic in
Marmore duro. That is, You do but knock, whilst you against Durand warble,
Your head of glass against his head of Marble.
For he does with a witness aperire os suum, open his mouth so wide in this
point, that he devours all your Book at one Gobbet. Durand Rat. divin. l. 1. c.
de. Altars.
Per Altar Cor nostrum intelligitur, quod est in medio corporis, sicut Altar
in medio Ecclesiae. By the Altar is to be understood our heart, which is in the
midst of the Body, as the Altar is in the midst of the Church. If you be a good
Ramist, analyze these words a little. No sensible Sacrifice is offered upon the
Heart: which makes an end of your first Section. A material Altar cannot
become a Predicate to the Heart: which makes an end of your second Section. The
Heart is situated in the middle, and not in the Heels of a man; which gives a
wipe to your third Section. So that you had been as good let Durand alone, to
sleep and take his nappe in Moralizations and Allegories, as awake him thus
between Hawk and Buzzard, to blast the fair hopes of your expected Conquest.

But hang Durand; he is but a Child to those gray hairs and hundreds of
years, that the Wallaltar is able to show. And this shall be made to appear
in one Page 56.
word, and all this Combat ended at one Blow. For as the Greek Proverb says,
that the Fox has many tricks, but the Hedgehog, (...), though but one, yet a
great one; to wind up himself toward a Combat, so that his Adversary shall
have nothing but Plin. Histor. natural, l. 9. c. 12.
Prickles to fight against: So says the Doctor here; that although B. Jewel
was put to many shifts in this kind, and to call for the helps of many
Fathers, Counsels, and Canonists to protect his cause; Yet my Don Nos^tros
will not lay hold on any such poor advantage. We will allege one Testimony,
and no more but one: Pero, But such a one as shall do the business, as shall
give very good assurance of that general usage, (that the holy Table lay
Altarwise all along the East End of the Church) and that is this: Socrates in
his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 5. cap. 21. speaking of the different
Customs in the Christian Church, says of the Church of Antioch, the chief
City of Syria, that it was built in different manner from all other Churches.
How so? Because the Altar was not placed to the Eastward, but to the Westward.
Nicephorus, lib. 12. cap. 24. observes it generally of all the Altars in that
City, and note's withal, that they were situate in a different manner from all
other Altars. I have set down these words entirely and at large, because I
intend to let the Reader see the silliness of this Braggard, in understanding
never a word aright of all this passage, which he so much insists upon. And
first, this must needs be a Halt he has learned from Page 20.
Lame Giles, to borrow Quotations, Mistakes and all. For this place of
Nicephorus is not to be found, lib. 12. cap. 24. but lib. 12. cap. 34. And I
beshrew him for this trick, making me to read Nicephorus all over in a manner
to find it out, and to run through so many strange Miracles, that I am now
much disposed to believe any man that speaks of his own, though not this
Doctor yet, because he speaks (as you see) out of another man's knowledge. And
for Socrates likewise, though in Latin he cites him right (according to
Musculus his Translation) yet in the Sea Socrat. ex officina Rob. Steph Lutet.
Paris, 1544. p. 249.
Greek (which he takes upon him to have read) it is not the 21, but (...), the
22. Chapter. So that this may be truly called, Lame Giles his Haltings.
Secondly, both his Authors, Socra^es and Nicephorus, when they enter into the
discourse of this Variety of Rites in the Christian Churches, set down this
Rule for a Proeme, That it no way infringeth the Unity of the Faith; so as it
is not material to the true piety of the times, how our Tables are placed
Thirdly, these Historians do not note these Rites of the Altars of the City of
Antioch, as different from all other Altars, (this is an addition of D. Coal)
or from the general practice of the Church. No such matter. Sed ab Ecclesia
Romana Ceremoniis discrepasse, that they varied in these Rites from the Church
of Rome only, as De Missae ritibus, lib. 2. ^. 5.
Josephus Vicecomes proves at large. Fourthly, this man pitifully forgets
himself, unless it be true what some report; that the Pamphlet was penned by
more then one. Does not he say that Antioch is the chief City in Syria? And did
not he say, but two Page 54.
leaves before, that all the people in Syria might possibly place the Altar in
the middle of the Church, to comply with, and allude unto the Jewish Altars?
See this proved by Dr. Willet, 6. general Controvers. q. 6.
And was not both the Temple at Jerusalem, and the Altar there, builded toward
the West? This Doctor may have a good wit, because he has a very bad memory.
Fifthly, the man surely has not seen the Greek, nor observed well Musculus his
Translation. For neither Socrates nor Nicephorus do say, that the Altars were
placed to the Westward, or did stand Westward. All these are mistakings.
Socrates does not speak at all of any (...) or position of these Altars, but of
the Churches only. Nicephorus who copied him out, adds (besides his Author)
the posture of the Altars; but presently corrects himself in Socrat^s his word,
that his meaning was the same with Socrates, that the Altars there did (...)
not stand, but look and carry an aspect Westward, where ever they were sited
and fixed. And this is the true point in Question; not where the Altars stood,
but to what part of the heavens he that officia^ed upon the Altar, did bend his
looks, as Walafridus Strabo, though As he is plaised to call himself: H^^e pus
exiguum Valafridus pauper h^besque though he was indeed in omni doctrin^rum
genere celeberrimus. Gulie^m. ^isinger cited by Hittor ius.
pauper hebesque, a poor and heavy Author, did better De rebus Eccles. 6. 4.
state it then this Doctor. It is true indeed, that (as these Historians
write) the Churches and Altars must be built (...), so as the Priest may turn a
contrary way to that they do that pray only to the East. And this B. Jewel
observes to be used at this day, Articl. 3. page 146.
in all the great Churches of Millain, Naples, Lions, Mentz, and Rome, and in
the Church of S. Laurence in Florence, the Priest in his service standing
toward the West, with his face still upon the People, howsoever their Altars
be standing or placed. Sixthly, This is utterly against what the man labors
for all this while. He desires to page 23.
stand at the North-end of a Table laid Altar-wise all along the Wall, looking
(as that posture requires) toward the South; and to bring this project to
pass, he makes (or would fain make) these two Historians to say, that the
general practice of the Church (besides a few places in Antioch) was to make
their Altars (...), always to look toward the East. Howbeit properly the
Altars cannot be said to look at all; but those only that officiate, or pray
upon these Altars. Lastly, the Coal being now quite spent, that he might be
sure to go out with a stench, especially in the sense of those Readers that
have any Noses, does fain a Tenet to be maintained, which is opposed in all the
Letter, That Communion tables should not stand or be placed toward the East.
Who ever said so man? The Writer of the Letter is but too much for it, not
allowing the ordinary exceptions of De cultu Sanctor. l. 3. c. 3.
Bellarmine, Suarez in 3am partem Thom. ubi supra.
Suarez, or De reb. Eccles. c. 4.
Walafridus Strabo before them, that it might be otherwise, when the
Convenience of the building does require it. It may stand to the East, in the
body of the Church, much more in the body of the Chancell, unless the man
would have it planted in Eden (where God planted his Orchard) to be sure it
stood far enough in the East.

I will conclude this Brangle with a better reason then any this doughty
scribbler could think of, why all the Churches in those parts had their Altars
and postures, in the same manner that the Temple and Synogogues of the Jews
were formerly contrived. Because upon every occasion of their Conversion to
Christianity, the entire Synag^gues of the Jews undemolished and unaltered,
were turned in a trice to Christian Churches, as you may read at large in two
several Greek Ex M. S. Palatinis vetustissimis Athanas. Oper. G. I. tom. 2.
page 6 31. and 632. Peter Bishop of Nicomedia attests this book. Council. Nicen.
2. Act. 4.
Copies lately printed, of a Book written by S. Athanasius under this title, De
passione Imaginis Domini nostri, etc. But how indifferent they were in the
midst of Rome it self in those primitive times how their Churches should stand,
the very Titles of the Cardinals preserved to this day do clearly witness,
being all of them (in a manner) converted to sacred use from the habitations of
private men. Especially that of our Countrey-woman (if we may believe our
Popish Broughto^s Eccles. History of Brit. Age 1. c. 1. Parsons 3 Convers. part
1. c. 1. p. 17. Baron. in Martyrolog. Roman ad 19 Maij.
Heralds) the Lady Claudia, who suffering this part of her patrimony (the first
lodging of S. Peter in that City) to descend upon her daughter by Pudens, gave
an opportunity to have it converted to a Title and a Church, called at this day
Sancta Pudentiana: A blushing Saint, to whom this Doctor (when his Altar is
up, and conveniently beautified) should do very well to address more special
and peculiar devotions.

And here I could make an end, if the Doctors ignorance would give me leave:
Which I cannot endure should abuse so mild and patient a Reader, as has held
out so long a Discourse of no more use or consequence unto him in the
reiglement of his Soul, or advantage of his Civil conversation. And that is,
in his foolish definition of the Diptychs in the primitive Church, which is
this; The page 55.
Diptychs, i.e. The Commemoration of those famous Prelates and other persons of
chief note, which had departed in the Faith. A description, that no man, who
could with the help of a Lexicon have but known the meaning of the Greek word,
would ever have offered (in this learned age) to have imposed upon his Readers.
I have seen a naughty boy, that having but two leaves of his ABC left, being
graveld in the one, would tear it out, and go very pertly to be posed of his
Master in the other. No otherwise does our Judicious Divine. ( -- Virg. Aegl. 1.
Sic parvis componere magna solemus.) behave himself in this place. The
Diptychs in the primitive Church, were two Leaves, Tables or Boards, bound like
an oblong Book: in the one Column whereof were written the Names of such worthy
Popes, Princes, Prelates, and other men of noted Piety, that remained yet
alive; and in the other, a like Catalogue of such famous men, as were already
departed in their sleep, as the Greek, or in their pause, as the Mozarabick
Liturgy terms it. This man having heard by some body, that there was heretofore
out of these Tables a Commemoration of the dead at the time of high Mass or
Communion, was willing to let the world understand so much, and therefore made
have to put it in print. But being unskilled in the other leaf, he tore it
quite out of his ABC; as not bound by any law of God or man, to write any more
then he knew himself.

Now the Greek word in general, signifies any thing that is twofold, in the
form of a pair of Tables: And in this particular, was (without all Question)
borrowed for this sacred use, from the first Book of Homers Iliads; where (...)
-- Iliod. l.
(...) --. does signify their laying of a (...), Didymus.
fold or lining of tallow on the one side, and another fold of fat or tallow on
the other side of the flesh which was to be offered in the Heathen Sacrifice,
to make it burn the clearer and sooner in the Holocaust. From this proper and
real, it was taken by the Greek Fathers to signify that Metaphorical and
improper Sacrifice of Comm^moration, as well of the living, as of the dead,
used in the Church in those ancient times. And these Tables were always
double, as I have told you the word generally does require and import. Annot.
in Liturg. S. Petri. p. 39.
Lindan saw one of them at Biscay in Spain at the Church of S. George. They
were like two little doors, a foot and a half high, to be opened in time of
high Mass, and closed again as soon as it was finished. They contained the
names of general Councels, Popes, Emperors, Princes, Prelates; the living in
the one page, and the dead in the other; says Observat. Eccles de Missae
apparatu. l. 7. c. 17. Tom. 4.
Josephus Vicecomes. They were two Tables; the one containing the names of
those that were alive, the other of those that were departed, says learned In
verbo, Diptycha.
St Henry Spilman. And it must be a true description. For besides that we read
the Priest commemorating the living and the dead in S. Bibl. vet. Patr. tom 2.
page 16. et 17.
James and S. In the Edition of S. Andreas, p. 21. and p. 29.
Peter's, and the Deacons perfuming the Diptychs of the living and the dead in
S. Tom. 2. vet. ^atr. p. 53.
Basils and S. Ibid page 80.
Chrysostoms Liturgy; Niceph. Histor. Eccles. lib. 16 c. 19.
Euphemius is said with his own hands to have put out Mongus, that was dead,
and inserted Felix, that was alive: And Council. juxta Bin. tom. 2. page 508.
Timotheus is charged in a general Council by the Bishops of Egypt, for
scraping out Proterius, and inscribing himself and Dioscorus into the sacred
Diptychs. Nor have I ever read any learned man that gave this wooden book any
fewer then these two Columns. I have read of Ambros. Pelarg. Annot. in
Chrysostom. liturg. Wormatiae, Anno 1541. Annot. 63. in hoc verbum, Duplicata.
one that gave it four, two in either leaf. The first contained a Memorial of
Saints already blessed: The Second, a remembrance of good people at rest; but
not yet consummated: The third made a rehearsal of pious and exemplary men,
that they might be hereby more encouraged: The last was an enumeration of some
notorious and debauched people, that they might by this means become ashamed of
themselves, and in time amended. And into this Column, I could be willing, if
the Church approve thereof, this railing Doctor might be inserted: Promising,
that if ever I hear those Diptychs read in the time of the Communion at the
holy Table (though laid Altar-wise, and all along at the East-end-wall) yet
shall it not deter me in my devotions from saying thereunto a hearty AMEN.

FINIS.

