THE HAVEN OF HOPE: Containing godly Prayers and meditations for diverse
purposes. Gathered by R. A.

Mark. 13, 35. Watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is. Imprinted at
London, for Yarath James. 1585

To the Worshipful, and my very good Master, M. JOHN DARCIE, Esquier, grace,
mercy, and peace from God the father through our Lord Jesus Christ be
multiplied.
CAlling unto my remembrance (worshipful Sir) the straight account that our
Savior Christ shall take of his servants, on whom he has bestowed his talents,
and seeing the reward that the good and profitable servant shall have for well
bestowing and imploieng the same. And also setting before mine eyes, the
punishment prepared for the wicked and unprofitable servant, I (waieng the
reward of the one, and the punishment of the other) thought it to be very
necessary and my bounden duty, (according to the talent, which almighty GOD
in mercy has bestowed upon me) to write this little book, two especial
causes moving me thereunto: the first and principal cause is, to discharge my
duty toward almighty GOD (of whom I have received and do receive every good
gift whatsoever it be) as near as he will give me grace: for as the Scripture
says; Every good gift, and every perfect gift comes from above, (the Lord
make us thankful for them) for when we have done whatsoever we can of our
selves (which is nothing) yea, when we think that we have done the best
service that can be done, yet must we understand and know that we are but
unprofitable servants, and have not done so much as is our duty to do. This is
the first and principal cause that moved me to the writing of this little
Treatise. Then when I had finished this small piece of work, being
undetermined whom I might make my patron, at length it came into my mind to
present the same unto your worships view, as to one, of whom (among men) I
have received the greatest benefits. Therefore the second cause that moved me to
the writing of this little volume, was, somewhat to gratify your worships
goodwil, which has at all times been so great toward me. But peradventure
your worship may think it a great presumption in me, to present such a rude
piece of work to you, but I crave pardon for my boldness, and I trust that your
Worship will accept it according to my good meaning, and I hope in the
almighty Lord, (that although it be not furnished with Ciceronical eloquence)
you shall find in it such matter, as shall tend both to the glory of GOD, and
the health of your soul, and that is my greatest desire. Thus being loath to
use superfluity of words, I end, desiring almighty God to prosper your
Worship in all your affairs, that you may so walk before him in this vale of
misery, that when this our sinful course is ended; you and we may all reign
together with him in that place, which he (in mercy) has prepared for all his
elect children: to the which place, bring us the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, Amen.

Your Worships most humble to command: Raphe ALLIN.

To the godly and Christian Reader, R. A. wishes the direction of Gods holy
spirit.
THOU have here (good Christian Reader) the first fruits of a barren field,
which, although it be not replenished with pleasant herbs delightful to the
fleshly fancy of thy mind, yet if thou put away from thee the delights of this
world, and put on Christ Jesus, I do not doubt, but by the assistance of Gods
holy spirit, they shall be pleasant to thy spiritual appetite. And heerin I
desire thee not to be rash in condemning without consideration, but rather if
thou see a fault by any means to be escaped, I earnestly desire thee to correct
it, that if hereafter occasion do serve me to set forth the like again
(seeing thy good will toward me) I may be emboldened the more to persevere in
the like enterprise. And because that prayer (if it come from a heart and mind
that is stirred unto godliness) is a thing most precious in the sight of
almighty God, I thought it good therefore to write this small Manuell of
prayers, entitled, The HAVEN of HOPE, which although the volume be but small,
yet if thou well peruse and mark the same, I trust in the Lord Jesus Christ,
that thou shall find such matter in it, as (if thou pray by faith) shall (no
doubt) bring consolation both to thy soul and body. And if I do find, or can
any way learn, that this little Treatise does bring any comfort unto thy
soul, I do mean (as God shall make me able) in time to augment the same. Thus
being very loath to trouble thee with many words and little matter, I leave
thee to the defense of almighty God, unto whom I pray, that it will please him
to guide thee with his holy spirit, that thereby thou may do whatsoever
shall be pleasant in his sight, to his honor, and the health of thine own
soul, through our only Savior Jesus Christ: to whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, praise, glory, dominion and thanks giving, now and
evermore: So be it.

Thine in the Lord, R. A.

An introduction to prayer.
BEFORE thou beginnest to pray (good christian Reader) there are three things
of thee principally to be noted; which are these that follow.

1 The first is to bewail thy sins, and to be heartily sorry for them,
promising never to commit the like again. For at what time soever a sinner
does repent him of his sin from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his
wickedness out of my remembrance, says the Lord.

2 The second is this, that thou must be persuaded in thy faith and conscience,
that the Lord does hear and regard whatsoever thou do pray for: or else thy
prayers are made altogether in vain; For whatsoever proceeds not of faith,
is sin.

3 And the third and last is this, that thou must go with an upright and a
clear conscience before the Lord thy God, not bearing malice or envy to any
thy brethren or sisters in the Lord: for as Saint John says; How can thou
love the Lord thy God, whom thou have not seen, when thou hate thy brother
whom thou see daily.

Thus good Reader, if thou do diligently mark and consider these three
points, and follow them; there is no doubt but that the Lord thy GOD will
hear what soever thou praiest, and also grant thee thy request. For how can
thou pray to the Lord, to direct thee with his holy spirit, when thou do not
bewail and lament for thy offenses which be past? And how do thou think to
obtain thy request at the Lords hand, when thou do not pray by faith, and
with a clear conscience? And how can thou pray with a clear conscience,
when thou bear malice and envy to thy brethren or sisters, which are all
members of one mystical body with thee, Jesus Christ being the head? Thus
breefly have I set down the order how thou ought to behave thy self when
thou go to prayer. And now in the name of God we will begin with prayer.

A prayer to be said in the Morning.
ALMIGHTY, most merciful, and everliving God, who art the co^forter and
defender of all those which assuredly do put their whole trust and confidence
in thy mercy, as thou have showed unto me a manifest token of good will, in
defending me this night from the snares of Satan that ancient enemy of all
mankind, who rages now most cruelly, knowing that his time is but very short,
and therefore is he the more eger in seeking of his pray, devising how he might
get a multitude of the souls of thy children to be intrapped in his net of
perdition, therefore I beseech thee (good father) even for thy Son our Savior
Jesus Christ's sake, that like as thou have this night preserved me from the
snare of this wicked hunter, and from his noisome pestilence: even so good
Father, I heartily beseech thee, so to inlighten the eyes of my mind this day,
that I may see how to avoid the wicked engines, which he lays to snare us
withal: for as he is a spiritual enemy: even so, O Lord, had we need of thy
spiritual help to avoid him: grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake our
Savior, Amen.

Another prayer to be said in the morning.
Almighty and most loving Father, like as thou have this night mercifully, and
of thine infinite goodness and mercy graciously preserved me from the subtilitie
and tyranny of satan, and have given me sweet sleep and quiet rest? Even so,
good Lord, I beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake to keep and defend me this
day from all evil that may happen unto me, and that I may bestow it wholly in
thy service, and that I may do nothing, but that which may be pleasing unto
thee, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer to be said at night.
O Good Lord, I beseech thee to bless, preserve, and keep me this night from
the wily ways and subtle suggestions of the devil, who being the ancient
enemy of all mankind, goes about like a roaring lion continually seking whom
he may devour, but keep me, O good Lord, by thy merciful providence, that I
may rest quietly, and sleep sweetly, that waking I may give thee thanks for
thy merciful protection and defense, thorough Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer to be said when the day is light.
Almighty GOD, which have ordained the light of the sun to lighten the day,
and the moon to lighten the night; I beseech thee for thy great mercy sake,
so to inlighten my mind with thy holy spirit, that I may truly perceive and
understand the heavenly mysteries of thy holy word, that thereby I may be
guided to the land of everlasting blessedness, there to reign with thee world
without end, Amen.

A prayer to be delivered from the Pope and his detestable heresies.
O Good Lord, I beseech thee strengthen me with thy holy spirit, and give me
grace faithfully to remain in that obedience toward thee, which I am taught in
thy holy word, so that I be not led away from thee by the vain ceremonies and
deuilish doctrine of Antichrist the Pope, which calls himself the vicar of
Christ, and is nothing less; for he makes merchandise of men's souls, making
them to worship stocks and stones, in stead of the true worshipping of thee, O
God. Deliver me, O good Lord, and all thy faithful servants from the tyranny
of this Romish wolf, which seeks continually to devour the poor lambs of
thy sheepfold, and Lord, I beseech thee, if it be thy pleasure, either to turn
his heart, or else confound him suddenly. From whose deuilish doctrine, deliver
us the father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three in person, one in
substance: to whom be honor and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

A prayer against worldly tribulation.
GRant, Lord, I beseech thee, that I may remain thy faithful servant, and
serve thee in true obedience, that neither the cares of this world, nor any
worldly tribulation may withdraw my mind from the obedience of thee, and
grant also good Lord, that my mind be not choked with the cares of this world,
but that I may cast all my care upon thee, which live, and reignest for ever.

A prayer for faith.
MOst merciful and loving father, I beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake, to
increase and strengthen my faith, that I may go forward in all godliness. And
grant, O Lord, that my faith may be builded upon the rock Christ Jesus, that I
be not carried away with every blast of vain doctrine, but through faith in
thee, I may be as an invincible fortress to my enemy the devil: so that he
may never prevail against me. And also Lord, I pray thee let not my faith be
an idle faith, but a working faith, a faith that daily proceeds from one good
work to another, and in the end unto everlasting life. There to reign with
thee world without end, Amen.

A prayer to be said when one enters into the Church.
I Enter into this thy temple, O merciful father, to hear thy word preached,
give me grace, O Lord, that I may hear it with such an humble and fervent
zeal, that it may not be unto me, as seed that is sown among thorns, least
the thornie cares of this world choke it: so that it cannot bring forth fruit.
Neither as seed that is sown upon stony ground, where it can take no root:
nor yet as sown by the way side, where the fowls of the air do gather it and
eat it up, but let the seed of thy word, good Lord, be sown in me, as seed
that is sown upon good ground, bringing forth fruit unto life everlasting,
some thirty, some sixty, some an hundred fold: grant this, O Father, for
Jesus Christ's sake our only mediator and advocate, Amen.

A prayer against the lusts of the flesh.
I Thy humble servant (O most merciful father) do feel in my self a great
and marvelous battle between the flesh and the spirit; but (gracious Lord) I
beseech thee give me thy grace from above, that I do not let the flesh have
victory, but that I may tame and subdue it, and make it obedient unto the
spirit, least that I by giving victory unto the flesh do heap sin upon sin,
and in the end bring upon my self swift damnation, because the flesh indeed is
apt and ready unto al vice and wickedness: therefore O Lord I pray thee to
strengthen me with thy holy spirit, that thereby I may subdue the flesh with
the wicked imaginations thereof, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for the diligent reading of the scriptures.
Eternal God and most loving father, which have of thy unspeakable goodness
revealed thy self most openly and plainly to the world by the gift of thy
holy word, I beseech thee (O good Lord) give me a willing mind to the reading
thereof, and make my soul and heart to take delight therein, as in a most
precious jewel. For even as wine, O Lord, is pleasant unto the taste and
senses of men: even so (good Lord) let thy word be delectable unto my mind and
soul. For if I take pleasure in a worldly thing that is delightful and
pleasant unto the body, being here this day, and gone the next: how much more
ought I to take pleasure in that unspeakable treasure, the delight and food of
the soul, which for ever shall endure. And although the world be so full of
wickedness, that whosoever is a true professor of thy holy word, is accounted
of the worldlings, as one that is unworthy of their company: yet
nevertheless, O Lord, I beseech thee give me grace, that I may suffer the
rebukes of the world, so that I may be accounted in the number of thy faithful
children: thorough our Lord and Savior Jesus Chrst, Amen.

A prayer for repentance, for the amendment of our former wicked lives, with a
thanks giving to God for all his gracious benefits bestowed upon us.
MOst merciful and everliving father, I a most wicked and damnable sinner,
which have many ways and most grievously transgressed thy laws, and offended
thy divine majesty, in leaving the use and study of thy divine and heavenly
word, the ready pathway to my salvation, and following the wicked desires and
filthy lusts of the flesh, whereby I have been driven to be altogether
careless of thee, the everliving God, and also of all godly living, the cause
whereof has been mine own negligence, which the frowardnes of the flesh,
whereby I am fallen into such a grievous sin (that were not thy great mercy,
oh Lord) I should be accounted among the number of them which go down into
destruction. But (oh most merciful and loving father) in the name of thy decre
son our only Savior, advocate, and mediator, I appeal to the high throne of
thy mercy, beseeching thee for his sake, and for thine own mercy sake to
blot out of thy remembrance, all my former sins and offenses, whereby I have
most grievously offended thy majesty. And furthermore, O Lord, I pray thee to
blot al my secret sins out of thy remembrance: so that they may never be seen,
nor stand in judgment against me. And also, Lord, I beseech thee give me the
grace of thy holy spirit, and so inlighten me with the same, that henceforth I
may live according to the precise rule of thy holy word, and do those things,
which may be pleasing unto thy divine majesty. And Lord, I beseech thee, give
unto me the light of thy holy spirit, that I may praise thy name for all the
benefits, which thou of thine abundant goodness have so mercifully bestowed upon
me: especially, O Lord, for the great graces and benefits of my creation,
redemption, and sanctification. For my creation, in that it has pleased thee
to create and make me a living soul, and also in similitude like unto thine
own person, whereas if it had pleased thy majesty, thou might have made me
a beast, a foul, a tode, a serpent, etc. For my redemption, (in that it
pleased thy majesty) after that through the transgressio^ of my first parents
(Adam and Eve) I was become like as one that was sold unto sin, and indeed was
in bondage unto the devil, then when all hope of recovery was past, thou (oh
most merciful and loving father) did send thine only begotten son to
take our nature upon him, and to make satisfaction for our sins, and to suffer
a most shameful death (even the death of the cross) that we by his great
patience might be redeemed, justified, saved, and delivered from sin, death,
and hell, and that so many as do by faith lay hold upon the sweet promises of
thy deerly beloved son our savior, should surely have everlasting life, and
reign with him in that place of rest, which thou have appointed for all thy
faithful children, etc. For my sanctification, for that after I was by thy
heavenly wisdom and divine power created, and made a living creature: and
after that being fallen from thee by the concupiscence of the flesh, and then
redeemed by the precious death and bloodshedding of thy deer son (our savior
and redeemer) Christ Jesus. Then after my creation and redemption, thou again
of thine exceeding love and favor, did send thy holy spirit upon me, to
give me understanding and knowledge of thy holy word, that thereby through
faith in thy promises I might have everlasting life: thus (oh Lord) is thy
gracious goodness showed unto me, Lord of thy great mercy make me thankful for
it, for thy dear son Christ Jesus sake, our only mediator and advocate, to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor, praise, and glory, both now
and for ever, Amen.

A prayer in the affliction of conscience.
Eternal and most loving father, I thy humble servant most entirely beseeching
thee, of thy woonted goodness and mercy, to give unto my conscience (being fore
afflicted and ouerloden with sin, the cares of this world, and tyranny of
satan) the sweet comfort of thy holy spirit, which is the comforter of all
them that put their trust in thee, I beseech thee, O heavenly father, so to
inlighten and comfort me with the grace of the same thy spirit, that I may give
over all worldly cares, and betake my self wholly to the fulfilling of thy
heavenly will, oh Lord, that know the secrets of all hearts, that see me a
most vile and wicked sinner, being borne in sin, nouzeled up in sin, and still
day by day continue in sin; yea, and that which is woorst of all, I do even
commit the same with greedines, whereby I am fallen into such an oblivion of
thy goodness, that I have (as it were) forgotten all the benefits and graces,
which thou of thine abundant goodness have so many ways bestowed upon me.

This mine oblivion of thy graces, oh Lord, together with the suggestions and
entisements of satan has been, and is such a terror unto my conscience, that
were not thy sweet promises (oh most merciful father) promised by thine only
son our Savior Jesus Christ, I might utterly despair of my salvation. But
as thou, oh father, art in promising most bounteous, so art thou in performance
most true. Although (good father) my sins and ingratitudes have deserved
eternal damnation, and are a continual grudge unto my conscience, yet, Lord, I
beseech thee of thy great mercy, to comfort my conscience, being sore
afflicted and laden with the burden of my sins. Thou (O most sweet Savior
Christ) have commanded all those which labor, and are laden with the but then
of their sins, to come unto thee, saying; Come unto me all ye that labor, and
are laden, and I will refresh you. (Oh what comfortable words were these of a
most sweet Savior.) Therefore (oh Lord and heavenly father) I give thee most
hearty thanks for these thy sweet promises in our Savior Christ Jesus. To
whom with thee and the holy Ghost be ascribed all honor, power, praise,
dominion, and thanks giving, both now and for ever, Amen.

A prayer for the obtaining of true love both to God, and to our neighbor.
O Most sweet Savior, which art the life of al them that believe in thee, the
hope of all them that trust in thee, the comforter of all them that come to
thee for succor, the helper and assister of all them which love thy
commandments, put into my heart (oh most merciful Savior) the true love,
which thou have commanded. Oh Lord, I confess that I have been a lover of my
self, more than thee, exalting and lifting up my self with pride, ambition,
and self-love: contrary to thy commandment I have (good Lord) loved my self
more than my neighbor; I have soght for my self worldly promotion by all means
possible, and have sought by all means to thrust down into the mire my poor
neighbor; all which was clean contrary to the love which thou have appointed,
whereby I have deserved thy curse unto everlasting condemnation. But (most
merciful Savior) I appeal to thy high throne of mercy, beseeching thee from
the bottom of my heart, to forgive me all the sins of my youth, and all that
hitherto I have committed both ignorantly and wilfully. And furthermore, oh
Lord, I pray thee to give thy grace from above, that I may abandon all
self-love, as a thing which thou most despisest. And also let me not do as the
worldly rich young man did, which would know the means whereby he might be
saved, who as soon as he understood that he must sell all that he had, and
distribute it to the relief of his poor neighbors, which stood in great
necessity, he went away very heavy, because he was marvelous rich. But give
me grace, good Lord, so to love my neighbor, that I may do as Zacheus did, who
said; Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give unto the poor, if I have
done any man wrong, I will restore it four fold again. Here was thy grace, O
Lord, here was not self love; but here was brotherly love, the love which
thou have appointed to be in every Christian, that seeks for salvation in
thee; put this love into my heart, oh Lord, that I may love thee with all my
heart, and my neighbor as my self; put from me, good Lord, all rancor and
malice, all debate and strife. O Lord, thou have in thy holy Gospel commanded
all men, not only to love their friends, by whom they reap profit; but also
to love even their enemies by whom they have received loss and damage: how far
this love is from me, thou, oh Lord, can tell. Thou command me to love,
and I hate; thou command me to be favorable, and I am envious: in fine, thou
command me to be charitable unto all men, and I am filled with rancor,
malice, strife, debate, and contention, with innumerable other vices, which
thou, oh Lord, have commanded the contrary.

What is the cause that I should behave my self so contrary to thy
commandments? Truly mine own blockish negligence, which has so sore blinded
my mortal eyes, that I am not able to look into the mysteries of thy holy
word, which should be my guide and leader unto the knowledge of thy heavenly
will. What is the reward of all this wickedness, which I have and do daily commit?
Thy holy Apostle Paul does make mention in these words, saying; The reward of
sin is death: but what death, the death of the body? yea truly: and that which
is woorst, even the death and condemnation of the soul. Sithen, oh Lord, that
thou of thy great mercy have given me the grace to see and know what is sin,
and what is the reward thereof, I beseech thee (oh most merciful Savior) give
me also the grace to fly from sin, and cleave unto godliness, least that I
knowing, and will not know, be accounted among those, which sin against
knowledge, which is a sin against the holy Ghost, and therefore as some
think irremissible. Oh Lord, I beseech thee forgive me all that is past, and
guide me to turn unto thee: renew also, good Lord, a right spirit in me, that
I may live in thy law, which thou have appointed me: grant this (oh sweet
Savior) for thy death and passion sake, Amen.

A prayer to be said in any kind of tribulation, desiring God to give patience
unto the afflicted, that they may endure whatsoever his fatherly wisdom will
lay upon them.
IT is an impossible thing for any mortal eye (O most merciful father) to see
into the depth of thy wisdom, and how thou go about to call home thy
children, being gone astray. Thou first do touch them with thy fatherly
correction, as being loath to make them despair, and as the prophet David
says; Like as a father pitieth his own children, even so is the Lord
merciful unto all that fear him. Thy correction, good father, is only
favorably to chastise thy children, being erred from the truth, to call them hom
by a little and a little unto the knowledge of thee again: and then they being
once reclaimed, thou do withdraw thy rod from them. I beseech thee, oh
heavenly father, give me patience patiently to suffer whatsoever thy fatherly
goodness will lay upon me, and diligently to wait the time when it shall please
thee to ease me of my trouble, that with the prophet David, I may say; Oh give
thanks unto the LORD, for he is gracious, and his mercy endures for ever.
Let them give thanks whom the LORD has redeemed, and delivered out of the
hand of their enemy: and gathered them out of the lands, from the east, from
the west, from the north, and from the south. They went astray in the
wilderness, and found no city to dwell in: so they cried unto to the Lord in
their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distress. He led them forth
by the right way, that they might go to the city where they dwelt. O that men
would therefore fear the Lord, and declare the woonders that he does for the
children of men. For he satisfies the empty soul, and fills the hungry
with goodness: such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, being fast
bound in misery and iron. Here (O most merciful father) do thou show thy
gracious goodness unto me; thou releeuest every soul that calls to thee
faithfully in distress. O good Lord, I beseech thee give me grace to call upon
thee by faith: for as the scripture says; Whatsoever is not of faith is sin:
and he that asks not faithfully can not obtain. Grant this, O most merciful
father, and whatsoever else thou know to be needful for me, for thy dear
sons sake Jesus Christ, our only mediator and advocate, to whom with thee and
the holy Ghost, be all honor, power, praise and glory, both now and evermore,
Amen.

A prayer to be used when the lust of the flesh does rage, wherein the gift of
continency is begged.
Almighty and most merciful father, I beseech thee for Jesus Christ's sake to
strengthen me in this great and terrible battle of conscience, which I feel
between my flesh and my spirit, concerning lechery and continency. For my
spirit says; I will delight my self with the study of that which may bring
salvation unto me; that is, the reading of thy holy word, with the me ditation
and hearing of the same, and altogether to give my self to put far from me all
worldly pleasures and earthly delights, that thereby I may (through the merits
of my sweet Savior Jesus Christ) make an atonement with God the father for
the innumerable multitude of my transgressions, which had almost drawn me
headlong to hell; but whilst I am in these cogitations, behold, the flesh with
his detestable desires does come unto me, and by all wicked means possible does
seek to bring me (through his carnal concupiscence) into the lake of
perdition. For as the spirit does desire spiritual and heavenly things; even
so the flesh as it is carnal, does desire carnal and earthly things; for each
thing desires such as it self is. Well, seeing that I have within my
conscience such a great and terrible battle between the flesh and the spirit:
and that the flesh (for any strength or power that is in me) is like to have
the upper hand: and if the flesh have the upper hand, what shall my reward be
at the latter day, when I shall come before the tribunal seat of the
almighty and everliving God? Truly my reward shall be this; I shall be cast
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. Well
now, since it has pleased almighty God of his great mercy, to give me
knowledge what sin is, and that the desire and lust of the flesh is
altogether wickedness and abominable in the sight of the Lord, and that the
reward of sin is hell and everlasting condemnation. And now since he of mere
mercy has given me knowledge thereof; if I do not seek to redress it, then
I shall be accounted as one that knows the will of his father, and will not
do it: and truly such a son must be beaten with many stripes. Seeing now
that through the carnal concupiscence of the flesh, hell fire is come upon me,
what means may I use to have the same taken from me again? To have this great
work done for me, I must put on sobriety, embrace humility, mingled with
desire of a godly life; and then must I come and appeal before the high
throne of mercy, and ask forgiveness of my sins, in the precious death and
bloodshedding of my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who has of his great mercy
and goodness promised forgiveness of sins to all those that with a true and
lively faith, com unto him, humbly craving forgiveness of their sins. For by his
death we are made alive, and by his strokes we are healed. Here (oh most
merciful father) do I behold as it were in a glass, the great and fatherly
care which thou have for all thy children, which with hearty and vnseined
repentance come unto thee for mercy; for thou deniest none that call upon thee
for mercy in the blood of Christ Jesus our fauiour. I beseech thee, oh Lord,
to strengthen me with thy holy spirit, that thereby I may withstand all the
furious assaults of satan and the flesh. For the flesh being stirred up by the
subtle suggestions of satan, do give many fierce assaults unto my spirit:
insomuch that while it is in my body, it is in a dark prison, desiring (when
it shall please thy majesty) to be dissolved from this body of sin: and as
the prophet David says; Like as the heart desires the water brooks, even so
my soul longs after thee, oh Lord. And also in another place, he says; My
soul longs for thy salvation, and I have a good hope because of thy word. My
soul longs for thy word, saying; Oh when will thou comfort me. My soul
cleaneth unto the dust, oh quicken thou me according to thy word. Oh Lord, I
beseech thee to inlighten my heart with thy holy spirit, that I may fly from
and abhor the filthy and abominable lusts of the flesh, as a thing which is
most detestable in thy sight, considering that it is most odious before thee.
And also (Lord I beseech thee) for thy dear son our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ's sake (in this conflict and in all other such like) to give victory
unto the spirit, that thereby thy name may be glorified, and that it may live
as a conqueror over the wicked desires of the flesh; and that the flesh with
his concupiscences may be in such subjection unto the spirit, that it dare not
once to rebel against it. And that I may live, so that whatsoever I do may be
pleasing in thy sight: and that I through the strength of thy holy spirit, may
have victory over sin, death, and hell, and live according to the precise
rule of thy holy word, so that whatsoever I do, it may be pleasant in thy
sight: through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be
all honor, praise, and glory, both now and ever, Amen.

A conflict between gluttony and abstinence.
AS yet (oh my sweet Lord and God) I suffer a continual conflict in my
conscience, between the spirit and the flesh: for my spirit many times
speaks within me, and says; I will abstain from excess of meats and
drinks, that thereby I may bridle, and keep under the corrupt and filthy
desires of the flesh, that in so doing, I may be the more apt and ready to the
knowledge and understanding of thy holy will. No sooner, oh Lord, am I in this
contemplation, but presently the flesh with his devilish concupiscence offers
it self to persuade me to the contrary. For where the spirit does desire
spiritual and heavenly things, and to do such things as may be pleasing unto
thy divine majesty: my flesh clean contrary unto this, does desire all kind
of uncleanness, and to satisfy his own carnal lusts and appetites, by eating
and drinking excessiuely, and so (were not thy great mercy) it were like to
bring my soul to utter ruin and perdition. But, Lord, as thou know that
satan the ancient enemy of all mankind, is the intiser and stirrer up of all
these wicked imaginations of my sinful flesh, and that he is a sly and subtle
adversary, I beseech thee, good Lord, give me grace manfully to withstand him,
knowing this, that whosoever does valiantly fight under thy spiritual banner,
and continues a faithful soldier unto the end, shall not lose his reward, but
shall be made inheritour in joy everlasting, with thy celestial company of
angels and saints: then who would not suffer all the torments under heaven, to
have after all their troubles, such a inifull resting place? But such oh Lord,
is the wicked and corrupt nature of our sinful flesh, that it sets more by
the vain pleasures of this transitory world, which is here to day, and gone
to morrow, than it does by that everlasting rest, which never shall decay. Good
Lord, I beseech thee to give me the gift of abstinencie (which is a most
precious jewel in thy sight) that when my wicked flesh desires to glut it
self with superfluity of meat and drink, and so by gluttony and
surfeiting, offend thy divine majesty, that then, O Lord, I may by the gift of
the holy spirit, bridle this wicked desire of my flesh, and so make it to
become subject unto the spirit, that thereby I may be more apt and ready to
serve thee in true holiness and righteousness all the days of my life. How
excellent this gift of abstinencie is, oh Lord, is declared by thy holy apostle
Peter, in these words; Deerly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pilgrims
abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul Here, O Lord, may
we see how necessary it is for man to abstain from fleshly lusts: for as this
text witnesses, they fight against the soul to bring it to destruction. And
Saint Paul, writing to the Galathians, faith; Walk in the spirit, and ye
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. And writing to the Romans, he says;
Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill
the lusts of it. Seeing (oh most merciful father) that the holy scriptures,
even from one end to the other, do so earnestly speak against this filthy and
abominable vice of gluttony: and all holy fathers do likewise in their works
inueigh against the same; I beseech thee, good father, give me grace that I may
so bridle this my fleshly nature, that thorough the grace of thy holy spirit,
I may be made a meet member, readle prepared with oil in my lamp, and a
wedding garment on my back; against the coming of thy dear son Christ Jesus
mine only Lord and Savior: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost be all honor
and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.

A prayer against pride, and for humility.
Eternal and most loving Father, which hate the proud, and give grace to
the humble, I beseech thee for thy great mercy sake, let not my mind be puffed
up with vain pride and glory of this world, which is an instrument of satan,
a snare of the devil, and as it were a hook to catch men with, to lead them
into utter destruction. Oh Lord, give me grace (I pray thee) to eschew and
utterly to abhor this abominable and detestable vice of pride and vain
glory, and to embrace lowlines and humility, considering what is said by the
prophet Esaie; The holy Ghost said; Now cry, and the prophet answered; What
shall I cry? That all flesh is grass, and that all the goodlines thereof is as
the flower of the field: the grass is withered, the flower falls away: even
so is the people as grass when the breath of the Lord blows upon them;
nevertheless, whether the grass wither, or the flower fade away, yet the word
of the Lord endures for ever. Here I see, O my God, what man is, how he is
compared to grass: and all his glory, to the flower of the field, and is not
able for all his pride to abide one blast of thy breath, oh Lord. And also the
prophet David faith; Man shall not abide in honor, seeing he may be compared
unto the beasts that perish. Also it is written by the prophet Esaie in another
place; Shall the axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? Or does
the saw make any bragging against him that rules it? That were even like as
if the rod exalt it self against him that bears it? Or as though the staff
should exalt it self, as if it were no wood. Therefore shall the Lord of hosts
send among his fatlings leannes, and burn up his glory as it were with a
fire. Also Solomon says; The Lord does, all things for his own sake, yea, he
keeps the ungodly for the day of wrath. The Lord abhors all such as be of
a proud heart, his hand is against their hand, and they shall not escape as
innocents. And again David says; Thou shall bring down the high looks of
the proud. And the prophet Jeremy says; Behold, I speak unto thee, oh thou
proud, says the Lord God of hosts: for thy day shall come even the time of thy
visitation. And the proud shall stumble and fall, and no man shall help him
up. I will burn up his cities with fire, and it shall consume all that is
round about him. Likewise the prophet Abacuk says; Behold, the unrighteous
thinks himself in safeguard, as in a strong hold, but the just shall live by
his faith. Like as the wine deceives the drunkard, even so the proud shall
fail, and not endure. He opens his desire wide as the hell, and is as
insatiable as death. All heathen gathers he unto him, and heapeth unto him
all people. Here (oh most merciful father) I see what the reward of the proud
and vain glorious man is, I see that he is abhorred of thee, and kept for the
day of wrath: his high looks also shall be brought down. The proud also shall
stumble and fall, and no man shall help him up: he also shall fail, and not
endure. Oh Lord I beseech thee give grace to me, and to all thy faithful
servants, that we utterly detest and abandon from us al pride, presumption, and
vain glory, and only to stay our selves upon thee, in Christ Jesus, and to
fly from all such abominable vices, and come home unto thee our most
merciful father: for we have gone long astray, as it had been sheep without
a sheapheard (Lord I pray thee strengthen me with thy holy spirit.) As I see,
O Lord, the punishment of the proud and vain glorious, so do I see also as in
a glass, the reward which thou have prepared for the humble and lowly. For
it is written in the holy Gospel after S. Luke, that He that exalts himself
shall be brought low, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted. And Job
says; Who so humbles himself shall be set up, and who so looks meekly shall
be healed. And also David says in the psalms; The righteous cry, and the
Lord hears them, and delivers them out of all their troubles. The Lord is
nigh unto such as be of a contrite heart, and does save them that are of an
humble spirit. Yea, and the Lord says in the prophet Esaie; I dwell hie above,
and in the sanctuary, and with him also that is of a contrite spirit do I
dwell: that I may heal a troubled mind and a contrite heart. Also Solomon
says; Presumptuousnes goes before destruction, and after a proud stomach
there follows a fall. Better is it to be of an humble mind with the lowly,
than to divide the spoils with the proud. Now oh Lord, here is before my eyes
the punishment of the proud and presumptuous, and also the reward of the humble
and meek. Here also are the great and manifold promises set down, which thou
by thy prophets and apostles have promised to them that are of a contrite heart;
thou have promised to exalt the humble; to heal the meek; to be nigh unto such
as be of a contrite heart, to deliver them out of all their troubles, and to
dwell with them that be of a contrite spirit. Thou, O Lord, have made these
promises, and thou will most surely perform whatsoever thou have promised. Now
(oh my sweet Savior) I beseech thee give me grace to stick fast unto these
sweet promises, that I may through the grace of thy holy spirit, pull down
this proud flesh of mine, which is (were it not thy great mercy) ready to hale
my soul into destruction, I may well say unto my flesh; Why art thou so proud,
O thou earth and ashes, of that which will not endure, but is altogether wicked
and abominable in the sight of the Lord. Therefore (O my most merciful
Savior) I pray thee for thy precious death and passion sake, to strengthen me
with the grace of thy holy spirit, that it may have victory of this body of
sin, the lusts and desires of the same; that I may so live here on earth, that
when it shall please thee to call me from this vale of misery, I may dwell
with thee in thy habitation of rest, prepared for all thy faithful ones, Amen.

Another prayer for the morning.
O Eternal God, and most merciful father, I a most weak and feeble creature
in all goodness and godliness whatsoever, most heartily thank thy majesty, for
that it has pleased thee, of thy great mercy and goodness to preserve me this
night from the cruelty and tyranny of the devil and his angels, and to take
me unto thine own protection and defense. And also of thy mere mercy, not
suffering me to sleep in death, but did waken me in due time, to give
thanks and praise unto thy majesty for thy most merciful protection and
defense. I beseech thee (O most merciful father) give me grace that whatsoever
I take in hand this day may have good success; and whatsoever I do, it may all
be to the honor and praise of thy name, the profit of my neighbor, and the
health of mine own soul, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

Another prayer for the evening.
MOst merciful and everliving GOD, which art father of the fatherles, and
husband of the widow, which also this day past, have kept me safely under the
wings of thy mercy, and have not suffered me so to fall, but that with thy
hand thou have lifted me up again: and also have kept me this day from the
power of darkness, and defended me with thy armor of light; I beseech thee (O
most merciful father) that like as thou have this day kept me under the
covering of thy wings, from the subtle assaults and privy sleights of that
capital enemy of mine, satan: even so, I beseech thee, to keep and defend
me this night from his cruel tyranny, which in every place lays baits and
traps to catch men's souls, and so to bring them into utter darkness: there
shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth; from whose subtilitie,
deliver us, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, three in person, and
one in essence, Amen.

Another prayer when the light appears.
O My sweet Savior Jesus Christ, which art the light of the world, and the
light of all them that believe in thee, I beseech thee (oh my sweet Savior)
give me thy grace from above, that I may put away the works of darkness, and put
on the armor of light now in these perilous and dangerous days. And like as
thou have appointed the light of the day to lighten earthly men about their
earthly affairs: so also have thou appointed thy holy word to lighten their
minds, which labor and seek to attain to the knowledge of thy heavenly will.
In which lightsom exercise, I beseech thee for thy great mercies sake, give me
an earnest desire to attain unto the full knowledge thereof, and that
whatsoever I do, it may be pleasing unto thee, to whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be all honor, power, praise, dominion, and thanks giving both now
and for ever, Amen.

Another prayer to be delivered from Antichrist the Pope of Rome, and all his
detestable enormities.
O My sweet Savior, which leadest all those into the path of righteousness,
which by faithful and earnest prayer come unto thee for the same, I beseech
thee for thy death and passion sake, give me grace to trust in thy sweet
promises, and to exercise my self in the study of thy holy word, and to cast
away and utterly to eschew and abhor the dirtie traditions, the devilish
dreams, the vain reliks, and ceremonies of that man of sin, the Pope of Rome,
and al his Balaamiticall shauelings, which are utter enemies to thy cross,
killing thy innocent lambs, converting the simple ons from thee my sweet Savior
(as much as in them lies) unto their antichristian power, teaching them to
come from thy merciful promises unto that man of sin, for money to have their
sins forgiven them; whereas my sweet Savior, none is able to forgive sins, but
only thou: much less, oh Lord, he that is so great a sinner, robbing thee of
thy glory, by taking upon him so presumptuously without fear of thy name, to
forgive his brother his trespasses, when the holy scripture is clean
contrary: for David says in the psalms, that No man can deliver his brother
from death, neither make agreement unto God for him: for it cost more to
redeem their souls, so that that must be let alone for ever. Here he may see,
if he be not wilful blind, how wickedly he takes upon him to do that, which
only belongs unto thee my sweet Savior. But let him repent in time, least
he bring upon himself swift damnation. His doctrine, oh Lord, is clean
contrary to thy most pure and sincere word (which is the word of truth)
teaching those that will learn of him and his priests of Baal, to look for
their salvation by the works of the law only, and not by faith in thee my sweet
Savior, which art the only way of truth; the path of life; the giver of
everlasting life unto al those that come unto thee by says, and not to
challenge thy place of rest by any of our merits or deseruings, which are most
abominable in thy sight: for we are able to deserve nothing but death and
endless damnation, in the fire which never shall be quenched; oh what a terror
is this to the conscience of many, which know themselves to be great and
grievous offenders, and yet (as this detestable doctrine of antichrist teaches
them) must obtain salvation by their own merits or deseruings. Oh what a hell
have they in their conscience, and except they fly speedily from that devilish
doctrine, and look upon thy most merciful and sweet promises, and with a
steadfast faith assuredly believe the same, doubtless they must needs fall into
the pit of desperation, and from thence to the lake of condemnation, (for
nothing else is a man able to deserve of himself) except he have a steadfast
faith in thy promises, and believe that, which thou have spoken in thy holy
word, which is the entry that leads us unto salvation. I beseech thee (oh my
sweet Savior) for thy manifold and great mercies sake, to deliver me (and all
those that think to be saved by faith in thee) from the doctrine of that
antichrist, that man of sin, the Pope of Rome, that I may leave to study of
any thing saving that, which may be to thy glory and praise, the health of
mine own soul, and the profit of my brethren: to thee therefore with the
Father, and the holy Ghost, be all honor, power, praise, and dominion, both
now and ever, Amen.

A prayer to be made by those that be sick.
MOst merciful Father, which do chastise every child that thou receiuest, I
beseech thee for thy great mercy sake, give me grace patiently to bear this
thy fatherly correction, which thou do so favorably lay upon me: and Lord I
beseech thee, give me grace, that I do not (for this thy loving visitation,
through the imbecillitie and weakness of the flesh) fall away from thee, but
that I may constantly and patiently abide the same, until it shall please thy
fatherly goodness to send a remedy for the same, knowing this; that whosoever
does not patiently suffer with thee the cross of tribulation in this world,
shall never reign with thee in the world to come, in the place which thou have
prepared for thy elected children. And like as thou, O Lord, do know the
weakness of my wicked nature to be such and so great, that of my self I am not
able to endure this thy gentle and loving chastisement; therefore most fatherly
have thou promised that thou will never lay more correction upon thy children
than they are able to bear: therefore most loving father, I beseech thee give
me grace steadfastly to stick unto this thy sweet promise, so that my adversary
the devil with his subtilitie be never able to withdraw my mind from thee: but
as he knows me to be weak of my self, so is he busy with all his might to
tempt me, that I might fall away from thee my good God, and from thy sweet
promises in my savior Jesus Christ, and so to make my soul a pray for
himself. From whose devilish temptations, deliver me the father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, Amen.

A prayer to be said when one traueleth on his journey.
Eternal and most loving father, like as this world is nothing else but a
continual pilgrimage, and that a man while he is in this world does nothing
else, but still labor and travel to gather unto himself worldly riches and
promotion, and the more he has, the more he still desires, so that here he
does never think himself satisfied; yea, he is even as a bottomless bag, that
will never be filled, be there never so much put into it: even so good Lord, I
beseech thee give me grace to have such an earnest desire unto thee, that I may
continually all the days of my life, travel and labor to obtain thee, knowing
this, that whosoever obtains thee has all things, and whosoever has all the
world without thee, has nothing. For as the scripture says; What does it
prevail a man if he win the whole world, and in the end lose his own soul?
If a man, oh Lord, take such care and thought for these transitory riches,
vain pleasures, and delights, which are here this day, and gone the next: how
much more ought we to travel, study, and labor, for those riches and
pleasures, which never shall decay? But this is the dulnes and blockishnes of
our corrupt and wicked nature, which is daily ready to throw us into the lake
of destruction: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. From the which
place of torments, deliver us the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, Amen.

A prayer for a young man.
MOst merciful father, which keep and preseruest all those (of what estate,
degree, or calling soever they be) that unfeignedly and with a lively faith do
call upon thee: therefore good father, I beseech thee (according to thy woonted
mercy and goodness) preserve me, which am a miserable sinner, and have most
grievously offended thy majesty, both in thought, word, and deed, and am
altogether unable of my self to make any satisfaction for mine offenses, but
only to fly unto thee by prayer, and to call on thee in the name of thy
well-beloved son our Savior Jesus Christ, in whom only thou art well pleased,
as thine Evangelist Saint Matthew testifies in these words; And a voice came
from heaven, saying; This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased,
hear him. Heerby may I see (oh most merciful father) the great love that thou
bear unto this thy well-beloved son our only Savior and redeemer, therefore
in his name I am bold to come and present my self before thy mercy seat,
beseeching thee of thine infinite goodness to blot out of thy remembrance al my
offenses, and to renew a right spirit within me. And Lord I beseech thee, give
me grace, that I being a young man, may so spend the residue of my days here
upon earth, as it may both tend to the glory of thy holy name; and the health
of my soul. And furthermore I beseech thee good father, strengthen me with thy
holy spirit, that I may remain steadfast and vnmoouable, hoping for the reward
of the faithful martyrs, which endure and continue unto the end, as Moises
writes of thy servant Lot; And the angel said unto Lot; Escape for thy life:
look not behind thee, neither tarry thou in all the plain; escape into the
mountains, least thou be destroyed: willing him to fly from the judgments of
God, and not to be sorry to depart from that fruitful country. For such is
the quality of our corrupt nature, that when we are in this world, we are
very loath to depart from it, seeing the earthly pleasures so great, esteeming
them of more value than all the ioies of the life to come: oh good Lord what a
wretchedness is this, that men will no better seek for the salvation of their
souls, but altogether for the vain pleasures of this life: O Lord I beseech
thee thrust this worldly care out of my mind, and let the care of heavenly
things take such deep root in my heart, that it may evermore endure and
continue so long as this earthly life does last. Another notable example of
continuance do I find in thy faithful servant Job, in these words; And the
Lord said unto satan; Have thou not considered my servant Job, how none is
like him in the earth? An upright, a just man, and one that fears God, and
escheweth evil; for yet he continues in his vprightnes, although thou
moouedst me against him, to destroy him with out a cause. Here, O Lord, was
the grace of thy holy spirit; here was the gift of continuance unto the end;
who although he had lost all worldly pleasures, yet would he never start from
the obedience of thy holy will; yea, although satan that ancient enemy of
all mankind, sought all the means that he could devise to plague the carcass
of poor Job, yet did he remain constant unto the end, for all the trouble and
persecutions that he abode. If it be thy will, good father, I pray thee to
imprint this gracious gift of continuance in my heart, that whatsoever cross or
tribulation I suffer, I may patiently abide the same: for as our Savior Christ
says; He that takes not his cross and follows me, is not worthy of me.
And again; He that will save his life shall lose it: and he that loses his
life for my sake shall find it. Oh unhappy man that will seek to save his
life in this world, and lose it in the life to come: and thrice happy is he
that loses his life in this world for our Savior Christ his sake: for he
surely shall find it in the world to come in ioies everlasting, which neither
eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man: unto the which ioies, Lord for thy mercy sake bring us, and for thy dear
son our Savior Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the holy
Ghost, be all honor and glory for evermore, Amen.

A prayer for an old man.
Almighty GOD, which-art the helper of all those that call to thee for
succor, I beseech thee to come near unto me, and hear the voice of my crieng
which have lived long on earth, and that very wickedly, even from my youth unto
this my crooked age, I have still continued in blindness and ignorance, yea and
that wilfully, neither seeking to attain unto sight nor knowledge, whereby I
might see into thy holy word, and thereby perceive mine own wickedness and sin,
and to get knowledge, thereby to understand thy holy commandments, that I
might through faith in thee seek to observe the same. But now, O Lord, I come
unto thee, which never despisest the sighing of a contrite heart, nor the desire
of such as be sorrowful, which never stoppest thine ear at the cry of a
penitent sinner, nor withdrawest thy hand from helping of such as be in need;
which call sinners to repentance when it pleases thee, even at all times
and ages, some at the first hour, some at the third, some at the ninth, and
some at the eleventh, of the which late number (oh Lord, thorough thine
inestimable goodness and mercy) I am one who have spent the greatest part of
the time of my life in sloth and wantonness, and in all manner of uncleanness and
wickedness, even til now that I am ready to put one foot into the grave, that
is even till the eleventh hour, or the very latest time of my life. And had
it not been for the multitude of thy mercies, I might have proceeded forward
in all kind of wickedness and sin, even as I begun: but thou, oh merciful
father, which wilt not the death of a sinner, but rather that he should repent
and turn from his wickedness, and that his sin might be done away; Even to
thee, oh Lord God, belongs mercy and forgiveness. And thou it is, oh Lord,
that wilt bring mercy and forgiveness of sins, to as many as faithfully in thy
dear son Jesus Christ do call to thee for mercy in time, before it be too
late: yea, while it is said to day; To day if ye will hear my voice harden
not your hearts, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation in the
wilderness. And heerin I beseech thee good father, to forgive me all the sins of
my youth, which are as the sands of the sea in number: good Lord cast them into
the bottom of the sea, where they never may be seen with eyes, nor stand in
judgment against me. And also good Lord, I beseech thee to cleanse me from all
my secret sins, and cast them from the light of thy countenance: and Lord I
beseech thee direct me with thy holy spirit, that I may remain thy faithful
servant unto the end, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for a maiden.
Unto thee, oh Lord GOD, belongs mercy and forgiveness of sins, and the gift
of a godly and virtuous life: therefore, oh Lord, I do at this time present my
self before thy divine majesty, beseeching thee not to look upon me, neither
harken unto me according to mine own merits or worthiness, but in the merits of
thy deer son, our Savior Jesus Christ, requiring thee for his sake to be
merciful unto me, and forgive me all my sins that are past, and give me grace,
that hence forward I may no more so grievously offend thy majesty as I have
done, both in thought, word, and deed, but that I may henceforth lead a godly
and christian life, following the example of Marie Magdalen, out of whom our
Savior Christ cast seven devils, who in the beginning was a great and a
grievous sinner, but in the end, confessing her wickedness and sin, obtained
free remission at thy hands, and became a new woman, leading her life in
holiness and righteousness: and as the evangelist Luke witnesses, when our
Savior Christ entered into the house of one of the Pharisees to dine with him,
behold, a woman in the city which was a sinner, when she knew that Jesus sat
at the table in the pharisees house, she brought a box of ointment, and she
stood at his feet behind him weping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and
did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed
them with the ointment: showing the great humility and reverence which she
bare unto our Savior. Good father, I beseech thee give me such a contrite heart,
as had this Marie Magdalene, that I may so bewail my sins, while I remain
here on earth, that when I depart from this vale of misery, I may remain
with thee in ioies everlasting: to the which place bring us the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost, Amen.

A prayer to be said of all true and faithful subjects, desiring almighty God
to bless and keep the Queens most excellent Majesty.
GOD, which art the author and giver of all goodness, and sparest not to bestow
plentifully on al those that faithfully ask it of thee, I beseech thee
therefore, good father, give me thy grace, that I may keep my self under the
obedience of thy servant, my sovereign Queen, that I may love her, and obey
her laws, as thou, oh Lord, have commanded every subject: and the Apostle
Paul writing to the Romans, says; Let every soul be subject unto the higher
powers: for there is no power but of God: and the powers that be are ordained
of God. For he that resists the power, resists the ordinance of God: and
they that resist, shall receive unto themselves judgment. And writing to the
Hebrews, he says; Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your
selves: for they watch for your souls, as they that must give accounts, that
they may do it with joy, and not with grief: for that is unprofitable for you.
Here I see, oh Lord, how straight commandment we have to obey those that are
magistrates over us, of the which magistrates that are appointed to the
oversight of the people, under thy divine majesty, the prince is the chief:
good father, therefore I beseech thee give me grace, that I may not swerue from
this commandment, but that I may at all times and in all places, next under
thee my heavenly father, give due honor and obedience unto my prince, as unto
one whom thou have appointed ruler in thy steed, that there may be no sign of
disobedience seen in me. And Lord, I beseech thee to bless and preserve thy
servant, our most gracious Queen and gouernesse, that she may long live to the
setting forth of thy glory, the advancement of virtue, and abolishment of
vice, that thy name may be glorified, and thy people edified, to the glory of
thy name, and the health of their souls; Lord I pray thee prosper all her good
and godly proceedings, as thou did prosper thy faithful servant Joshua,
when he went in arms against Ierico. And Lord I beseech thee, defend her as
thou did thy servant Ezekiah from the cruel railings of Rabsecah the servant
of Senacherib, who railing both against him and thy holy name, was by thy
mighty hand utterly destroyed, and slain in one night, and Senacherib him
self slain of his own sons, as he worshipped his idol Nesroth, even so good
father, I beseech thee, let it happen to the enemies of thy servant Elizabeth:
let, O LORD, rise against her one way, and fly before her seven ways. Bless
good father I beseech thee, all that she takes in hand, that it may be seen in
all lands, that thy name is called upon by her, and that she does spend her
days in the setting forth of thy glory. And Lord I beseech thee, give unto
her the wisdom of Solomon, that as the Queen of Saba did come from the east
to hear the wisdom of Solomon; so all nations may come to hear the wisdom
of this thy servant, and to see her prudent government, and wonder at the same:
and let all her enemies confess with grief of heart, that thy hand is with her
hand, and against them that are against her, until they be consumed from off
the face of the earth. And furthermore, good father, I beseech thee, if it be
thy good will and pleasure, ad unto her years as thou did to the years of
Ezekiah, that when the end of her days are come, they may be lengthened as
were the dais of that good king Ezekiah, unto the glory of thy name, and the
health of her soul. And further good Lord, I pray, that all traitors that go
about to hurt thine anointed, may be consumed from of the face of the earth,
them and their seed for evermore. These things, good father I beseech thee
grant, and all other necessaries, which thou know to be needful for us; for
thy dear son our Savior Jesus Christ his sake: to whom with thee, and the
holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world without end, Amen.

A prayer for a householder.
Almighty GOD, which art the maker and governor of all things, and createst
rulers as it pleases thy majesty, which also have made me (thy servant) the
master and governor of a household or family, I beseech thee, good father,
give me grace, that I may show unto my family such example of life, as both
they may be edified, and thy holy name glorified both in them and me. And Lord
I pray thee, give me grace, that I may be gentle unto my servants, and not
bitter; remembering always (as the holy Apostle Saint Paul says) that I my
self have also a master in heaven. And good father, I pray thee let me have a
care to see that all necessary things belonging to my family, may be
provided, that nothing may be lacking, that is pertaining to a Christian
family: for as the scripture says; He that is without care of his household or
family, is worse than an infidel: oh what a reproach is this, for a Christian
man to be accounted an infidel, for not having care of his household. Good
father, I beseech thee for Jesus Christ his sake, that I may have such a care
as thou have commanded in thy holy word, that this great reproach and infamy
may not be laid unto my charge, nor imputed unto me. And furthermore, good
father, I pray thee, that I may be loving and friendly unto my neighbors, and
always willing to help and further them with their business and labors, and
never mindful to hinder them, but that in all my doings and proceedings, I may
show my self loving unto them, and dutiful and obedient unto thee: to the
honor and praise of thy name, and the profit of my brethren, through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Amen.

Another prayer for faith.
Almighty and most merciful Father, which grantest the request and petition
of as many as call upon thee faithfully, and without faith whosoever asks is
sure not to obtain: for as the Apostle witnesses; Without faith it is
impossible to please God. And in another place; Whatsoever is not of faith, is
sin. Therefore good father, I beseech thee, for thy dear son Jesus Christ his
sake, grant unto me this great and excellent gift of faith, which is the gift
that thou bestowest upon all thy servants. And seeing that without this, it is
impossible to plese thee, and without pleasing thee it is impossible to obtain
everlasting life, for these causes (most dear father) I come unto thee,
beseeching thee in the bowels of thy dear son our Savior his sake, to
ingraffe into me a true and lively faith in this my Savior, that whatsoever I
ask in his name faithfully, may be obtained effectually, to the relief of my
necessity, and to the setting forth and spreading abroad of thy glory and
praise, thorough Jesus Christ our only Savior and redeemer, Amen.

A prayer for a laboring man to be said, when he is about to begin his labor.
Eternal GOD, and most loving father, which hate nothing that thou have
made, neither despisest any thing that thou have created, which also command
al men to labor and take pains in this world, thereby to sustain our bodies
with necessary things thereto belonging: for this cause dear father, I
beseech thee to bless and prosper all my labors, that hence forward I take in
hand. And as thou, O Lord, have commanded unto man in the time that he had
transgressed, saying; In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy meat,
until the time that thou return to earth again: for dust thou art, and unto
dust shall thou return: even so, good father, I beseech thee to bless and
prosper whatsoever I take in hand, so that it may be to the glory of thy name,
and the profit of my brethren, through Jesus Christ our only Savior and
redeemer, Amen.

A prayer to be said in the time of persecution.
MOst dear and loving father, which of thy own goodness did so love the
world that it pleased thee of thy free mercy, to send thine only son into
the world to take our nature upon him, thereby to deliver the world from sin,
death, and hell: and promising, that whosoever did call upon him faithfully;
believe in him steadfastly; and persevere unto the end constantly; should
receive of him (after this life) a crown of everlasting glory: then who will
not endeavor to call upon him faithfully? Who is such an infidel, as (knowing
this) will not believe steadfastly? Or who so unconstant or wavering minded, as
will not suffer all the torments under heaven, to obtain this unspeakable
reward? But for so much, good father, as all these things are thy good gifts, and
without thy gracious favor it is impossible for me to do any of all these
things; therefore, good father, I beseech thee for thy dear son our Savior
Jesus Christ his sake, to put into my heart, grace to call upon him faithfully;
faith to believe in him steadfastly; and constancy to remain unto the end
vnmoouably, that I may obtain this reward: the greatness and goodness whereof,
no eye has seen, no ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of
man. And although the cruel and malicious tyrants of the world do go about by
all the means they can devise to draw me from thee, by their cruelty and
mischief: yet in this great extremity, O good father, I pray thee give me
thy comfortable aid, that as I have begun in thee to abide their cruel
rackings, and other persecutions, (wherewith they vex and torment thy
children) so I may continue unto the end, knowing as our Savior Christ says;
Whosoever does endure unto the end, shall be saved. And in another place he
says; he that does put his hand unto the plough, and looks back, is
unworthy of the kingdom of heaven. But for that the frailty of man's nature
is such, as of himself he is not able to endure the least touch of persecution
without thy fatherly aid and comfort, I beseech thee therefore, good Father,
strengthen me with thy holy spirit, that (for all the troubles and torments
of this wicked world) I may not once look back, but persevere unto the end in
that good work, which thou, O Lord, have begun in me. And for so much, good
father, as there are many things in this world that does hinder man very much
from following of Christ, as the love of worldly riches, of father and mother,
wife and children, of brethren and sisters, and such like: therefore our
Savior Christ says plainly; He that loves father or mother more than me, is
not worthy of me: and he that loves son or daughter more than me, is not
worthy of me. And he that takes not his cross and follows after me, is
not worthy of me. He that will save his life, shall lose it: and he that will
lose his life for my sake, shall find it. Thus may all men see, oh most
merciful father, what a great commodity there is to be had in the world to
come, by losing life in this world for Christ his sake. Therefore, good father,
I beseech thee give me grace patiently to suffer whatsoever persecution the
wicked tyrants of the world will lay upon me, and not to look back or shrink
from the same, knowing, that for every moment of sorrows that I suffer for
Christ's sake in this world; I shall have a million of ioies in the world to
come: unto the which place, God for his son Jesus Christ his sake bring us;
to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world
without end, Amen.

A prayer for a competent living.
Almighty GOD, which mercifully bestowest thy gifts and graces upon all thy
faithful servants, and give unto every man sufficient, according to thy
good will and pleasure, I beseech thee, good father, grant unto me a sufficient
and competent living, that I neither have too much riches, nor extreme need;
but even living wherewith I may sustain my self, and help my poor neighbor:
for as the wise man Solomon says; Two things have I required of thee, deny me
them not before I die: remove far from me vanity and lies; give me not
poverty nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me; least I be full, and
deny thee, and say; Who is the Lord? Or least I be poor and steal, and so
take the name of my God in vain. Therefore, good father, I beseech thee give
unto me sufficient to serve my need and no more; for here I see the
discommoditie of them both: grant this, good father, I beseech thee for Jesus
Christ his sake, my only Savior and redeemer, Amen.

A prayer for a magistrate.
Eternal GOD and most merciful father, which have framed all men out of the
clay of the earth, and hate nothing that thou have created; which also have
appointed every man in his vocation and calling, to do his duty faithfully,
and to walk in the way which thou have appointed for them: and have appointed
magistrates and rulers for the oversight of thy people, among whom it has
pleased thee to appoint me thy servant to be one, I beseech thee therefore,
good father, give me grace so to use my self in my vocation, as it may be both
to the glory of thy name, and the profit of thy people, which thou
hastappointed to the under me. And also, good father, I pray thee give me
grace, that I may be loving and gentle unto them, and not spiteful and
rigorous, so that I may win them unto thee rather by gentleness, than by
tyranny. And furthermore, good father, I beseech thee give me grace, that I may
so live my self, as my living may be an example unto them of good life, so
that vice may be punished, and virtue advanced, and that every man may live
according to his vocation, so that thy name may be glorified, and their souls
edified, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

A prayer for a conclusion of this little book.
O Lord, from whom all good things do come, and without whom nothing neither is
good, neither can any way be made good, I beseech thee to bless this labor,
and to prosper it, and grant that some fruit may arise by it. And for so much as
faithful prayer is an acceptable sacrifice in thy sight, grant therefore, good
father, that every one when they pray may pray by faith, that in so doing they
may obtain that, which they pray for. And Lord, I pray thee put away all
impediments that hinder godly prayer, as too much care of worldly goods,
pride, vain glory, and other like: all which things are lets and impediments
that hinder prayer; grant therefore, good father, that when I pray, I may put
away all thoughts and imaginations of vain worldly pleasure, that thy holy
word may take deep root in my heart to the glory of thy name, the comfort of my
soul, and the strengthening of my brethren, thorough Jesus Christ our Lord: to
whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be al honor, glory, power, praise,
dominion, and thanks giving, both now and evermore, Amen.

All glory to God alone.

FINIS.
A Table expressing the prayers comprised in this book.
AN introduction to prayer, page 1 A prayer to be said in the morning, 7
Another prayer to be said in the morning, 11 A prayer to be said at night, page
13 A prayer to be said when the day is light, 15 A prayer to be delivered
from the Pope, and his detestable heresies, 17 A prayer against worldly
tribulation, 20 A prayer for faith, 22 A prayer to be said when one enters
into the Church, page 24 A prayer against the lusts of the flesh, 26 A prayer
for the diligent reading of the scriptures, 29 A prayer for repentance, for the
amendment of our former wicked lives, with a thanks giving to God for all his
gracious benefits bestowed upon us, 33 A prayer in the affliction of
conscience, 43 A prayer for the obtaining of true love both to God, and to our
neighbor, 49 A prayer to be said in any kind of tribulation, desiring God to
give patience unto the afflicted, that they may endure whatsoever his fatherly
wisdom will lay upon them, 60 A prayer to be used when the lust of the flesh
does rage, wherein the gift of continency is begged, 67 A conflict between
gluttony and abstinence, 78 A prayer against pride, and for humility, 88
Another prayer for the morning, 103 Another prayer for the evening, 106 Another
prayer when the light appears, 109 Another prayer to be delivered from
Antichrist the Pope of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, 112 A prayer to
be made by those that be sick, 121 A prayer to be said when one traueleth on
his journey, page 126 A prayer for a young man, page 130 A prayer for an old
man, page 141 A prayer for a maiden, page 148 A prayer to be said of all true
and faithful subjects, desiring almighty God to bless and keep the Queens
most excellent majesty, 153 A prayer for a householder, page 164 Another prayer
for faith, page 169 A prayer for a laboring man, to be said when he is about
to begin his labor, 172 A prayer to be said in the time of persecution, 175 A
prayer for a competent living, 185 A prayer for a magistrate, page 188 A prayer
for a conclusion of this little book, page, 192.
FINIS.
1585 printer's device: McKerrow 239? "Framed device of Abraham and Isaac with
Deus providebit. Gene. Cha. 22." DEVS PROVIDEBIT Gene Cha 22.

Imprinted at London, by Arnold Hatfield and Ninian Newton, for Yarath James,
dwelling in Newgate market, over against Christ-church gate.


