The Joyful entry of the Dukedom of Brabant, and the Articles agreed upon,
and granted by their Lords, and confirmed by the Emperor Charles the Fifte,
and solemnly Sworn by Philippe his son King of Spain. Anno 1549.

Set forth to the view of al lovers of the truth, who openly may see
therein, how the same in no wise is performed, (the Lord in his mercy amend
it) but to the contrary, in place of getting and preserving of Privileges and
liberties, they are through the inspiration of the Pope and his allied, with
all cruelty and Tyranny, broken, taken away, and totally void.

Printed at Delft in Dutch, and Englished by R. V. S. 1581.

PRINTED AT LONDON BY RObert VValdegraue, dwelling without Temple Bar, near
unto Sommerset-House.

The establishing of the King of Spain, in government of the Low countries
upon those Articles following, to the which he is most solemply sworn.
CHarles by the grace of God, Emperor of Rome, always augmenting of ye
Empire, King of Germany, of Castille of Leon, of Grenade, of Arragon, of
Navarre, of Naples, of Sicille, of Maiorque, of Sardaine, the Isles of Indies,
and fast land of the Occean seas, Archduke of Austria, Duke of Borgundie, of
Letricke, of Brabant, of Limbourgh Luxenbourg, and of Shelre. Earl of
Flanders, of Artoys, of Borgoingne, Palatine and of Haynolde, of Holland and
Zealand, of Ferrette, of Haguenault, of Namur, and of Zutphen, Prince of Swaue,
Marquis of the holy Empire, Lord of Freesland, of Salins, and of Mechlen, of
the City, Cities, and Lands of Vtreht Oueryssel, and of Groening, Dominator
in Asia, and Affricke.
And we Philip by the same grace, prince of Spain, of both the Secillies of
Jerusalem, etc. Lord of Hubsburgh of Flanders, etc.
To al them yt shall see these presents, gretings.
Forasmuch and to show and declare the better our inheritant lands on this side
and ye good and true subjects thereof, the upright love, favor, and affection,
which we Emperors always have borne and yet are bearing. Not requiring, but
that which is and concerns their common welfaring, rest, peace, and
assurance. We have sent for, and caused to come over, our well-beloved prince of
Spain, to the intent that he him self should see, examine, visit, and
know the said our heritable lands of the Low countries, proceeded of
succession, and likewise show unto the subjects thereof, the good and special
true love and effection which he bears unto them. To the intent they should be
more inclined, affectioned, and to be bound to remain, and for the same
certain other special reasons, have we resolved, and concludteh him to be
received, held, and sworn, by the States and members of all our said
heritable lands, and among others by the Prelates, Nobles, and four chief
Cities of this our Dukedom and countries of Brabant, for their natural and
chiefest Prince and Lord, for him his heirs and successors, to be occupied
after our discease, the said our Dukedom and countries of Brabant, with his
appurtenances, as just and lawful Lord thereof: All which we have caused to
be proposed and declared to the aforesaid three States of Brabant in our
presence, and in the presence of our well-beloved sister, and Aunte of our
Prince, lady Marie Queen Dawgieresse of Hungary, of Boheme, etc. In our
absence Regent and governor of our said heritable lands. And that our will
and intention has been, and is yet, that our said son the Prince as our
only heir to come, likewise do grant, promise, and swear the joyful income,
after the old order and custom. But because that in the joyful income which
we and our forefathers have sworn, are in some points and matters already
done, and totally performed, others which are not to be performed, nor
reasonably for the common wealth and quietness of the same country. And
considering that our said son thinks and does require all that which he
shall grant, promise, and swear unto them pointly to observe and perform.
So have we caused to be made communicacion with the aforesaid three States of
Brabant, for to have our joyful incomming to be seen over and visited, because
that they them selves might consider all that which ought therein to be
moderated and variated. And for to refourme the articles which should be
found not to be obseruable, nor maintained. According to which there had been
kept, diverse communicacions and assemblings together, so that finally after
diverse delayings, aduisements, opinions, and reports respectively made one to
another, they have in that behalf consented and willed them selves, according
to ye act hereupon made, signed by them. And also we Prince having sure and
well understood the aforesaid joyful income of our Lord and Father, and
likewise the adjoined letters and additions thereof, with also the other
adjoined letters and graunts of the said our grandfather mentioned in the last
article of our aforesaid joyful income, being truly translated and set over
in the Spanish tongue, and likewise also the vocation and moderation thereof,
and that which thereunto is set by, according to the contention of the aforesaid
act, willing and requesting according to the good pleasure of our said Lord
and Father, the common country of Brabant, and the good people inhabitants
and subjects thereof, their rights, privileges, freedoms, customs, vsances,
and old proceedings, observe and perform, especially considered, the great
and manifold services, favors, and fidelity by them at diverse times done,
and showed to our forefathers, Dukes, and Ducesses of Brabant, of disceased
memory, and among others to our remembered Lord the Emperor our Lord and
father, as true subjects ought to do to their Lords. And as we trust that they
likewise will do to us hereafter. So we have the will, and knowledge of our
said Lord and Father, in this our receiving and holding within the City of
Louaine, and with our good knowledge and will also granted, given and
consented, grant, give, and consent, search, privileges, points, and
fastness of rights, as here do follow, promising and swearing unto them for
us, our heirs and successors, after the discease of our said Lord and
father, (whom God almighty grant a good long prosperous life,) fervent and
steadfastly to observe and maintain and cause to be observed and maintained,
without breaking, interruption, for ever and ever.

1 That we shall be the good and true Lords, and shall not do nor suffer to
be done to them, any force and will in any wise, and that we shall not meddle
our selves, nor suffer to be meddled with the foreign laws and judgments. But
that we shall use and cause to be used al our Prelates, almeshouses,
Banrotches, Noble, and good people, and subjects of our Cities and Towns of
the Country of Brabant and Ouermaze, use and cause to be used in all matters
with judgment, and with law according to the laws of the Cities and Benches,
whereas the same ought to be done and shall appertain. And yt the Judges of our
said Country shall be bound to keep their term times of law without any means
of prolongations by any their doings or procurement. Reserved that the
foresaid Judges may prolong their terms of Lordships once, and no more.

2 Item, that the preuiledges and charters belonging to the said countries and
good people, which they have at this present, and herafter shall or may get in
their countries behalf, shall remain in the Castle of V^uoorde, in the keeping
of an honest worshipful and well quallified man, borne and resident in
Brabant, thereunto by the prince committed, or to be committed. Reserved that
the same Commissionor shall besworn by the Prince in the presence of the States
or their Deputies: whereunto the Prealates and Nobility have appointed two
Prelates, and two Noble men, which the laid Prince, or his Deputy, shall
commodiously find at the time when as the said Commissioner shall do his
oath. And shall the third estate, to wit, the four chief cities (thereunto
being required by ye prince) apoint one out of every chief city which shall
be called thereunto for to be likewise by the swearing of the same oath, which
oath shall be and shall contain to be good and true to the said Prince, and
not to alienate nor variate change nor hide the same charters and privileges by
him self, nor any others in any wise. And that the said Commissioner shall
give over and deliver to the States a general Inuentary of the privileges and
charters belonging to the said country and good people of Brabant, which shall
be made by the said Commissioner and keeper, in the presence of the Chancellor
of Brabant, so extends that every one of the States may know thereby, that
which concerned and belonged unto them, for to be kept by the said States into
their coffer, and to deliver to no man in particular the copy, But the same
States, and every of them, and of the four chiefest cities, at their request
and by order of the said Chancellor shall have the sight thereof, Moreover
that the said keeper of the charters shall be bound (being thereunto
required) by the said States or any of them to give the sight and copy
auctentyke of such original letters, as the same States, City or Cities or
any of them shall require and have need of, and that by order of the said
Prince or his Counsel of Brabrant.

3 Item, that we shall never bind our self as Duke of Brabant, and county of
Limborch, and for the matters of the Lordshippes of the same countries, for to
make wars, nor lay to gage, nor cause for to be done upon any of them, except
it be by the counsel and will of our cities and Country of Brabant, and that
we shall not scale, nor promise other matters wherewithal our countries,
limittes, or cities, or any of them of the said countries, or the laws,
lyberties, and privileges shall be interrupted, or diminished, wherewithal our
countries and subjects thereof might be put to charges, or loss in any wise.

4 Item, that we shall take upon us the title and arms of Lotrycke, of
Brabant, of Limbourgh, and Marquis of the holy Empire as it appertains, and
that we shall cause to be made and gathered a seal according to the said
Title and arms, with a special mark, different of our other seal, which we
shall, nor may cause to be altered, or any others to make, or cause to be
counterfeited thereafter, neither will nor consent thereunto in any wise, except
it were for reasonble causes which we should then do, by the consent of their
States of the said country of Brabant, which seal shall always remain in
the said county of Brabrant, and not be carried thereout, and therewithal
shall be sealed all the matters belonging to our said county of Brabant and
Ouermaze, and the subjects thereof, and none others, and that the letters
thereof shall be made by one of our Secretaries that shall be ordained for the
matters of Brabant.

5 Item, that we shall entertayne seven worshipful persons, whereof the one
shall be Chancellor and sealer, bound within our said country of Brabant,
speaking three languages, scilicet, Latin, French, and Dutch, which shall
keep our said seal, and the fore borne resident and inherited in our said
country of Brabant and that do possess of themselves, or by marriage in our
said country of Brabant Barronnies, and the other two of our part of our
counsel, as we shall think best understanding dutch, with which seven and others
thereunto, now ordained them that shall please us hereafter to the said
counsel to ordeine, we or our gouernoure, or gouernaunt general shall cause
to meddle and do all the matters of the same Countries, and the inhabitants
thereof concerning Justice, and all that is thereunto depending, It be of
Provisions ordinaries of Justice of statutes, placeats edictes, ordinances,
commandments or others by counsel and aduisement of the same, and the
aforesaid counsel of Brabant, without that there shall be done any let or
impediment, nor that they shall stand to the order of any man, but of us, our
governor or gouernant general, and al them that shall be ours or our
successors, Counselors, or secretaries, before they shall meddle with office
of counsel or offices by such faith, fidelity, and oath as they shall have
done to our successoures, that they to our three states in our countries
behalf, shall promise and grant that they shall never stand over or come
by, make letters, sign seal wherewithal any of our countries, Cities,
Castles, people reuennues or Lordships by water or by Land, laying on this
side, or on the other side of the Maze, shall be encombred, charged, sold,
alienated, given away, or acquitted in any wise, except it be by consent, and
assent of the before said three States, And if it be found that any of our
Counselors, do seal or the secretaries subsigne in their Counsel, office,
and service, and do so misrule themselves: we shall then correct by counsel of
the nobility and good Cities of our said country of Brabant, or the most
part thereof.

6 Item, that we henceforth shall take nor maintain none to our sworn
counsel of Brabant: except they be good men borne of lawful birth in our
country of Braba^t, and resident within our country, inherited or possessing
barronnies in our said country proceeding of themselves, or having them
gottem by marriage, except the two of our counsel which have the said Dutche
tongue.

7 Item that we shall set good men of our counsel of Brabant, for to keep a
counsel chamber in our behalf, in the place whereas we shall keep our
residence in the said Country, and if it did happen us to be therewith, so
shall we ordain the same to be kept within the same country, in a fit place,
which shall have full power, all men to discharge in our name, and that
likewise our reckoning chamber shall be kept as it has been kept until this
time,

8 Item that all letters as well open as closed that shall be granted and and
sent forth from he^ceforth in our name out of our counsel of Brabant, either
if it be for us, or at the request of parties, shall be made dispatched, and
sent in such speech as is spoken in the places, whereas they shall be sent unto.

9 Item yt we shall set no Chanceller, nor sealer, into our Countries of
Brabant, except he be of lawful birth, born within our Country of Brabant, and
there dwelling, inheriting possessing Barronies and in our said country of his
own succession, or by marriage, speaking three languages as aforesaid, and
being apt and for the purpose, and profitable to the office and Land, which
Chancellor shall do the oath to the same office belonging in our presence, and
of the three states to the use of the common country, after the sort as here
before is in one point comprehended, concerning the promises which our
Counselors, Sealers, and Secretaryes, shall do to the said three States. And
that our Secretary of Brabant, and the Clearke of our freelandes shall be
borne in Brabant: reserved that we may ordein two secretaries, though they are
not borne in Brabant.

10 Item that our Chauncellor, and men of counsel, Secretaries, the men of
our chamber of reckoninges in Brabant, and Clearks, Shirifs, Masters of
Warrants, masters of Woods, and al others that have any great offices or
doings, And likewise also all offices upon the flat land, and also the Burugh
masters, and Schepens of our Cities, and al others that do, or administer
justice in our or in our Vasselles name, shall swear upon the holy
Evangelists that they shall observe these our joyful ent^rye in all points,
forasmuch as it does belong to every one of them, without any doings to the
contrary thereof with counsel or deed in any wise,

11 Item that they of our Counsel, and all other our officers, Justices,
Burughmasters, Schepens, men of Counsel, men o^ free lands, our farmers that
have power to ask judgment, and to give judgment and likewise that keep
offices and services in our said Country of Brabant, of what offic^ there be
none reserved, both in cities, town^ and villages, shall be sworn, Doing their
e^ that they shall not cause to be taken an^ gold, goods, gifts nor any kind
of things, not cause nor suffer to be promised or taken by themselves or by any
other, for to advance or to hinder, but that they shall do to all men as well
rich as poor, Equity and Justice without any dissembling, Moreover that they
do not have respect upon Burughmasters, Schepens, Counselles, goods, money,
gifts, nor any manner of services, good deeds, given or promised, nor
offered, or cause to be offered, give nor offer, nor caused to be offered in
their names nor required, or praying therefore in any wise, and whosoever does
to the contrary, that in no wise such never shall or may enter in our
counsel, service, nor in any law or government of our Cities, Towns, or
Villages.

12 Item that our Countries of Lymburgh and beyond the Maze shall remain for
ever with our country of Brabant.

And that they never shall be separated thereof, that we likewise shall release,
and discharge our other countries of over Maze, as we shall be able to do, and
bring them to our country of Brabant, for to remain with them, without being
separated. That moreover to the said our Countries of Brabant, shall remain
the Earl and Oyen with their appurtena^ces, and others which are thereof
alienated. And specially to procure so much, that through the aforesaid place
of Oyen, at this present is out of our hands, that notwithstanding the same
place be brought and set again into our hands, and remain together as it
has been before, if right may be done. And that we, our lands, and castles of
over Maze, with all their appurtenaunces, shall not encomber any more or
further, then there are encombred at this present time. And when they shall
come into our hands and power, that we shall then immediately cause them to be
ashamed, with our said country of Brabant without any delay, with good
sureties on this side of the Maze, and to deliver the houses thereof to our
Countries, and the said houses and towns to be inhabited by Brabanders, or
the same people of the same Country, and them that shall assure our Countries,
so well with good sureties resident on this side of the Maze, so that we and
our country shall be well assured thereof, that they shall not be separated of
the said our countries in no wise. And that we from thencefoorth never shall
enlarge, nor incomber any more the said countries, castles, and towns of over
Maze in any wise. And that the subieces of our said countries of over Maze,
shall keep their laws and Justices, whereas it shall appertain according to
the use of the Benches.

13 Item, that we shall keep al our subjects and people, of our Countries, and
Cities: and Towns of Braba^t, and over Maze, peaceably and quietly in the
countries of Hollande and Zelande, and all other Countries to travel by water
and land, free and frank upon their customs as they were wont to do. And that
we moreover, shall keep our said subjects and people of our Country, Cities,
and Towns, free and frank to travel, pass, and repasse, without any
molestation of any debts and promises which we or our predecessors, might owe
and be debuable or have promised, or yt we might owe and promise hereafter.
Moreover, we have confirmed and allowed to our citizens of our City of
Bolducke, and do confirm and allow by these presents, such letters as they
have of Duke John of Brabant, and Lady Jacob, Duchess in Beyre disceased,
concerning yt they should be free of custom in Hollande and Zealand for their
merchandise: and we shall command our letters to be made thereof sufficient,
according to the letters, and as the country of Gealre, that they shall be
likewise free of custom, pass, and repasse in the aforesaid country,
according to ye leters which they have likewise thereof. And if it were so,
that any of due subjects by reason of debts, or promises of our said
prodecessors, or of us should fall in talk that we shall keep them harmless
thereof according to the contention of letter thereof written in Wallon.

14 Item, that we shall keep open all our free streets as we ought to do
without fraud or guile, for every man to pass and repasse there through
paying their custom, except of debtes or promises which he did owe, or any
forfaytes or offenses which might have offended.

15 Item, that we shall compel or cause to be compelled all them that owe
our said Countries, any ways, bridges, or passages through their land and
goods, and cause them to amend well and sufficiently the same ways, bridges
and passages from time to time, and if that therein were any fault, that in
such case the chief city where under such ways, bridges, and passages do
lie, shall and may do upon the cost and charges of him that is bound
thereunto. And for that intent and for the observation of all neighbourly
rights shall no man be excused.

16 Item, that from henceforth they that shall hear or have part of our
customs in our said countries, during the term of their hyring. Also likewise
them that have part in our cities in the coining of money, shall or may not be
ordained, are also likewise received,

17 Item, that whatsoever man or person that is taken prisonner within our
said Countries of Brabant and over Maze, that we shall not carry nor cause to
be carried out of our said Countries.

18 Item that we shall cause no money to be coined with our said country of
Brabant, except it be by the will and consent of the common Countries
aforesaid, and that the same piece of money, never shall or may be made
lyghter, and if that it be made lighter, that we shall and may take the same
upon our coyners life and goods, without delay or exception, and that the said
piece of money shall be made in one of our free cities, and to warrant the same
according to the contention of the charter, or letter heretofore made in Wallon.

19 Item, yt no man yt is not of a lawful birth, shall or may be Counselor,
Sheriff, nor Iusticer in Brabant, nor have any office of us.

20 Item, if in case there did fall any difference or fightings in our said
Countries that then all that be not guilty of the differents or fyghtings,
shall have fast and sure quietness from the hour that the said differents or
fightings were done the space of 24 hours, and whosoever do some what in the
matter, shall be more quieter.

21 Item, that we shall grant no man freedom in the country, any that has
slain a man, except he be first reconciled with the friends of the disceased.

22 Item, that all them that hencfoorth shall give the office of Majors,
Bayliffes, and they that have them already at this present time, that they
shall serve the same, and that they shall or may not, transport, nor sell them,
nor let them out, and them that keep commons, or do other services, upon the
flat lands, and that have authority to administer Justice to the people,
shall without delay, put in certain sureties before they shall or may have their
offices, and that in the hands of the Justice, whereas they do serve in the
behalf of them that might suffer any hurt by them.

23 Item, that the officers of our country of Brabant, concerning Justice shall
not be let out, nor belent, but they shall be served as they have been used to
have kept and observed in old time to be served, and all letting out thereof,
shall be of no value nor effect.

24 Item, yt we shall not suffer yt any man of our Countries, shall or may
arrest, encomber, nor trouble out of our countries for any matters wheresoever
they be, except he flee away before, without fraud or guile. Likewise also
that whosoever of our subjects does call the other our of ye Country for to
fight, or cause to be called to fight, they shall forfaite two hundredth marks
of fine gold, or other ways to be corrected to the moderation and abiterment
of them, of the Counsel of Brabant.

25 Item, if any of our subjects did rob or steal, in our country of
Brabant Ouermaze or the inhabitants thereof, and furthermore if they did lodge
into their houses or succored, with their will and knowledge any enemies to us
as Duke of Brabant, Limburgh and Lords of the Countries of Ouermaze, that he
shall leese his life and goods, and we shall nor may never grant him again
the said our countries, and if that we did give pardon to such, that such
pardon shall be of none effect.

26 Item, that if in case that any women were forced, so that she did cry out,
or that it were found to be true, that it were done against her will, and that
she did remain and continued with the man, then shall we have all her
moveable goods, and her lands during her life, and after her death, shall the
lands return and succeed where as they ought to go. And if she did not
remain and continue by the man. In such case we shall have neither the
moveable goods neither lands, and shall the man that commits such things,
and all his helpers, and likewise they that with their knowledge do help
succor and lodge him, do forfaite their lives, and all their goods for ever,
if in case that they may forfaite it, And if in case that any man did by force
conueie away any child being under age, either man child or woman child, so
shall they and all their helpers have forfetted their life and goods without
exception, and against the same no man shall have excuse by S. Peter's manship,
freedom of Cities, or others, but there shall be used according to the laws
of the countries.

27 Item that women shall be accused, nor may be accused which should hinder
him concerning bludshed, neither of killing of any body, if in case that he
dare trust himself to stand to the truth thereof, and will come to his
notgyltinesse, until the time that he shall be vanquished. Reserved that the
officer of the place shall and may arrest him and keep him in prison, keeping
the goods of him in safety, proceeding against him to the diffinitiue, either
of condemnation or absolution.

28 Item that all our good people and subjects of our Cities and Countries of
Brabant and of Ouermaze, touching all public mishappes which may happen to
come to their bodies, or their Children, servants and family in whatsoever
sort or manner it were, Whereby they or any of them did come from life to
death, without any proceeding faults, the same shall stand and remain free and
frank of any forfets or confiscation of their goods. Of which mischance the
magestrates of the places shall visit and consider the matters (at the request
of the officer there) and that being done shall declare whether it ought to be
kept for mischance or not, And such as they shall declare concerning the
matter, shall be kept observed and performed, and if in case, that there be
found any fault before, then shall and may the Magistrates punish the
offender extraordinarily, according to the state of the matter.

29 Item whatsoever Cities, Towns Lordships or fortresses, which we shall win
with force of arms and common war out of our countries of Brabant, upon what
soever Princes or Lords, that they shall remain and apperteine, to our
Country of Brabant aforesaid, without turning back again, and that they
shall use and do as our common country ought to do without parting likewise,
as our said Country of Brabant.

30 Item whosoever requires adioining within our said Country of Brabant and
ouermaze, that we shall cause him to have against all men.

31 Item that Saint Peter's men and all they that are of Saint Peter's manshapes
company shall be used and kept as they ought to be kept by all equity and
Justice.

32 Item if in case that any parties two together being low persons do go to
law concerning any goods, having within our said countries and the said
parties having proceeded to the end and condemnation, so that the one do leese
the process or judgment, and if the same wherefore the process was there
Judged from him, and if he did show the same to any priest. Cleark or other
spiritual person, or likewise to any other for trouble, and molest the other
out of the Country which had the judgment upon him, if also any person
resident within our Country had the advancement of the matter, or that also
any person residente, within our said Country that did give over the matter to
any others for to trouble and molest the party out the Countries, that he yt
did any of these things shall forfet two hundred Marks of gold, or otherways
to be punished at the arbitrament and moderation of them of our counsel of
Brabant.

33 Item that every man shall and may keep his own lands or cause, is to be
watched and keep Dogs thereto, the claws vnshortened, without calenging and
if that it hapened that any wild, break his neck, or ware hurted by the dogs,
that the same shall so remain laying, and that their dogs shall suffer no hurt
or damage thereby, And that further every man shall and may hunt Hairs and
foxes through out all Brabant without calenging, and likewise Connies without
free warrands, and also fly with Hawks over all without chalenging.

34 Item that henceforth all knights, yeomen and al good people resident
within our country of Brabant, shall and may hunt through all Brabant in his
season, all manner of wild Dear. Without chalenging, except. In the
warrantes and Woods of Zonien, of Zauenterlo, of Greotheyste, of Weeredale and
Grootenhout, and to the intent that this point should be observed, so have we
promised and sworn, do promise and swear as is said that we shall never make
any disending, nor cause, nor suffer to ^e made any commandment to the
contrary in any manner of wise, wherewithal these points shall suffer any let,
hurt, or interrup^ion.

35 Item, that henceforth within our said country of Brabant, shall be any
warrants, nor kept any then the free warrants, then those that have bin free
warrants, since the year 1367. and have been received, so long time for free,
of the^ that owes them, except that the good people, suffer not thereby any
unreasonable damage.

36 Item, that the debt shall be brought or delivered by the laws or warrants,
and ^wards excepted, debts proceeding of wood and timber, of old woods of the
Prince, of the country, or of other warrantes of the Prince of the Country,
or of other woods and wards, which from old time have stood under the same law.

37 Item, that there shall be in our country of Wallon, a Bayliffe, an honest
man borne in our country of Brabant, and that his clearke and other officers
under borne, and likewise our other justices and officers of our other 6.
offices, shall be borne of our country of Brabant. And that the court of
Genepia, shall be kept as it was heretofore, so that no man that shall have
occasion there to do, shall not be used without order of law.

38 Item, that also henceforth our small Lords, Justices, and Officers,
Re^tmasters, particularly shall be borne within our country of Brabant, so that
they shall nor may have served their said offices by any outlandishbrone, of
what so ever quality they be, and also our Lieftenants of our castles, of our
said country of Brabant, shall be inborne Brabants, except it were that they did
possess by them selves, or by marriage any old possessions of the same
country.

39 Item, that we shall keep in state our reformed Benches of Santhouen and of
Vccle, as they now be, and as apperteineth, and that our Schepens of Vccle,
shall keep their residence in Brussell.

40 Item, that our city of Antwerppe with the appurtena^ces thereunto
belonging, shall remain assembled for ever to our good cities and country of
Brabant, after such sort and manor, as she was at the time when she was
separated from Brabant, and likewise our City of Niuelle, as she has been
until this day.

41 Item, yt our assembling days which we shall henceforth send to our
States, and country of Brabant, and of Ouermaze that we shall write always for
the^ 14. days before the day, that ye appointed assembling pay shall be kept
(except the matters, wherefore we would keep the same assemblings, did require
great haste, and that we shall appoint such commodious places, whereas our said
states may free and frankly without danger, come and go. And that every one of
our Prelates, Banrotches, Noble, cities, and Towns, of our said country of
Brabant and Ouermaze, before us or elswere, where as it apperteyneth jointly or
particularly shall and may say open and declare their charges, and satisfy
therewithal without any indignation or rebuke of us, or by others to have, or
by us to be disfauoured in any wise, and if in case that they therefore did get
any hurt, the same do we promise to revenge upon his or their lives and goods
without remedy.

42 Item, that we shall always set and ordain the countries of our free lands
in the places whereas we shall keep place of residence, so that the parties,
with their witnesses, and other things thereunto belonging may easily come
therein, and whenever it shall happen to us, to be out of our country of
Brabant, then shall we ordain an hones^ man, either our chief Sheriff of
Brabant or an other yt might be councellor in Brabant: which in our absence,
and as long as (...) shall please us, shall receive the free lande^^ touching
us, and in our absence keep the court days in the place whereas the
res^^dence shall be of our Counsel chambers, an^ he shall and may do all that
appertayne^ to the free lands, as we might do being o^ self present, without
giving, or forgiuin^ any thing.

43 Item, that we shall keep free, and cause (...) be kept free, al our fayres
being within (...) city of Antwerp, as well by water as by lan^ of body and
goods, within all our Countrey^ liberties powers, and commandments. A^^ if it
came to pass, yt the aforesaid fair we^ prolonged 14 days or under, by the
Mag^strates of our city of Antwerpe, we do p^^mise that we shall keep, or
cause to be ke^^ free ye said prolonged days, as free as we are bond for to
keep the principal days of the layre.

44 Item, that we shall not suffer our free faires of our cities of Brussel,
Antwerpe, and likewise the free fayres of the city of Barrowe, or Zoam, to be
troubled or interrupted by any executions, commandments, or dissentions,
either by letters of mark, countermarkes, arrestmentes, or their like, which
we might grant to the contrary, herein excepted our own proper debtes, and
also likewise ye ordinance made, or to be made by us, upon the matter of
coining, which ordinance we will have observed, as well in the aforesaid yearly
faires as without, for to have punished and corrected the transgressors.

45 Item, yt we he^ceforth shall grant no privileges, nor liberties to the
nations that keep staple in our country of Fla^ders, yt can or may prejudice
and hinder our said countries, and inhabitants of Brabant.

46 Item, that we shall let ye inhabitants of our country of Brabant, and their
goods which they have in other countries and lands, or shall have hereafter, and
the fruits thereof shall suffer quietly and peaceably to have and enjoy,
notwithstanding any commandments, or defendings, which might be made to the
contrary thereof. And likewise the merchants, and inahbitants of all our
countries, lordships, and jurisdictions, shall have and may one among another,
traffic with their goods and merchandise, and walk, travel, bargain, sell,
bring their goods to the market to sell, where their liking shall think best,
paying their ordinary custom and charges,

47 Item, that we shall cause to be kept, and remain unto our couurtrey of
Brabant, and in the hands of our said country indistinctly, the lands,
castles, and towns of Hensden, and S. Shertruydenbergh, with all their
appurtenances, if in case we may do it with right and reason, due both for the
costs and charges or shall keep or cause to be kept until ye money which is den
and suffered in ye assigning of S. Shertruydenbergh, and the taking in, and
providing of Hensden, be duly and totally paid and restituted.

48 Item, if it happen that the cities of Holland, and Zeland, did not
perform and observe such tractat or agreement made, and agreed between the
Pensionaries of Brabant, that we shall then do full justice like as if it were of
other lawful debt to the Pensionaries of Brabant, having life pentio^ upon the
said cities of Holland, and Zeland, in commanding them and the inhabitants
thereof.

49 Item, moreover we have promised, and by these presents do promise them of
ye States of our country of Brabant, and Ouermaze, that our lands of our city
of Grave, with the lands of Duke Ressell, and Oyen, if the law will suffer it,
shall always remain anexed and incorporated with our said countries of
Brabant, and that the inhabitants of the said land and city of Grave, with the
said land of Cuyc Res- and sell Oyen, and shall have their resort to our counsel
of Brabrant, and not be thereof in any wise seperates

50 Item, that all merchants of whatsoever country or nation they be, as well
outla^dish as inlandish shall and may go by water, to traffect, frequent: bie,
and sell peaceably, and quietly in our said country of Brabant, and Ouermaze,
both among us, and the small lords of the same our countries, in what cities,
towns, or places, whereas it shall please the^ best, paying their custom and
charges, without that the said merchants shall and may be compelled with any
restrict commandments, or defendings or other ways for to compel to sell the
more their marchandizes in one particular place then in another. And that the
said merchants shall and may choose themselves their dwelling places and keep
where it shall please them, without that for any staples sake, or other ways they
shall be let or hindered in their free will, in any wise reserved, that the same
which is aforesaid, shall or may not larger be extended then to the Staples
which are at this present, within our countries of Brabant.

51 Item, yt we will not nor may suffer to be done yt any of our subjects of
our countries of Brabant and of Ouermaze shall be, (for any civil matters) kept
and detayned prisoners in any castelles, but that they shall keep their
imprisonments within the countyes, except whereas there be no countyes, and
that notwithstanding the said prisoner putting in surety for civil matters,
for to stand to the law and to accomplish the judgment, as apperteyneth to ye
use of the place there, except he were arrested upon condemnations, or for our
proper debts.

52 Item, that every one of what state or condition he shall be, shall or may not
fish upon the river of the Zenne as has bin used, and was in the time of our
old grandfather, Duke Philip.

43 Item, whenever we or the officers of our Justices shall have, apprehende,
take prisoner any man, by water or by land, which has robbed or stolen, or taken
away another goods, money, or substance, and that he had yet the same goods,
or knew ye same goods where they were sold, so shall ye same goods not being
forfaited, but the officer under who^ this shall happen, shall be bound to
restitute, or cause to be restituted to the party from whom it was taken and
stolen, if in case the said party can prove it lawfully to be is own, and that
it appears lawfully to be his own, reserved that he shall be bound to pay to
the officer which did this arrest or apprehension, his reasonable sallary at
the discretion of the Magistrates of that same place where this was done.

44 Item that henceforth shall nor may apprehend or arrest any of the liberties
of cities or otherways being under us that are of a good name and fame, except
the officer of the place shall first and for most have taken full information
of the suspection, whervppon he would arrest and apprehende him, and that no
man shall or may be put to sharp examinatione, xcept the officer shall first
and formoste have showed his information to the Magistrates of the place, and
that he be thereto condemned by judgment of the magistrates, except it were a
privileged Crime, and whereof the magistrates of the flat land ought to have
no knowledge, and yt the knowledge-belongeth to us and to our said counsel.

55 Item yt from henceforth for ever, no Mayor Shirife-Bailife nor any other
officers of our countries of Brabant, by virtue of transport of letter of
Attornie, which they might have of any man, or yet accept, shall or may arrest
enco^ber attach and charge within their liberties by themselves or any others,
any inhabitants of the said our countries, or their goods, by virtue of any
debtes which the Cities, Towns and Villages, do owe of rentes of
Liffe-pensions or other debts, and if they do to the contrary, that the same
shall be of no vallure, and beside that, shall forfet to the Lord whereas this
shall be done ten Andrewe Children.

56 If that henceforth there shall be given no commens, almosses of Lands and
perpetual rents in no manner of wise, and that we shall do al our diligence, for
to get and to have reduction of the chair of Rome of the Annates, of all the
Cloisters, and all Almshouses which are or may be discomforted therein, more
then they have been therein discomforted heretofore, Reserved that the
aforesaid prelates almeshouses and cloisters, shall find and pay for the costs
and charges needful to the said reduction.

57 Item moreover we have confirmed and ratified, confirm and ratify by these
pattens al our prelates almsehouses Cloisters, Banrotches knights, Cities,
Towns, and all other our subjects and good people of our Countries of
Brabant, Ouermaze, and all their laws Liberties, Privileges, Charters,
Customs, Vsanses and old proceedings of lands which they have, and are given,
granted, and sealed them by our forefathers, Dukes and ducesses, and also them
which they have used, hanted, and where went to use and specially the odd
letter granted to the said three states by our said Duke Philip our old
grandfather diseased at his incomming of the date as the letters be of the said
incomming. Likewise two other letters granted by the said our grandfather
disceased the one of the date. 1451. the 20. day of April, and ye other in the
year. 1457. 28. days in November, and likewise the two additions of the joyful
income of the Lord, our father given at Ghaunte of the twenty day of April in
the year 1515 after Easter, and the other given at Bridges the 26. of April in
the same year and do give them generally and specially: if in case they do
stand to observation, and are able to be oberused, to hold them firm and
stabell for ever, for us our heirs and successors, without breaking or doing
or cause to be done to the contrary in any wise.

58 Item we do promise them moreover for us our heirs and successors, that
we shall never allege devise or propose, nor cause to be alleged, as that we
are not bound and deluable to keep and observe the aforesaid liberties, laws,
Privileges, Charters, Customs, vsances, and old uses which when we have
heretofore confirmed and ratified in general, because and for that we have not
granted and promised to them the said points and articles, particularly,
which we will that shall do no hurt, hinderance or prejudice to them, And
because that we will and desire that all the aforesaid points, articles
gifts, promises, confirmations, and assurances, shall be kept and remain sure
and constantly for ever. So is it therefore that we have them altogether
generally promised in good faith to all the prelates, cloisters, and almshouses,
Barons, knights, Cities, towns, and to all our good people and subjects of
the said Countries of Brabant and Ouermaze to their heirs and successors, and
do promise in good faith, and freendly sworn upon the holy Gospel for us,
our heirs and successers that after the dissease of our Lord and father, to
keep them fast and steadfastly, and there against never to do or cause to be
done, nor suffer to be done in any wise. And if in case that we, our heirs and
successoures did do, say, or vppose here against or caused to be done, by our
self or others in our name, in part or in all, in whatsoever manner it were.
So do we in that case consent and do will our prelates, barrons, knights Cities
and towns, and al others our said subjects that they shall do to us, our
heirs and successors no manner of service, nor be obedient in no manner of
Cases that we need, or that we might require and do request of them until the
time we shall have made fully amends, and left and forsaken immediately, all
the matters before mentioned, whereunto we will do, discern, and declare, that
immediately, al our offices doing to the contrary of this my incomming, shall be
left, forsaken, and that al henceforth shall or may be attempted, shall be of
none effect and shall not be observed in any wise hereafter. And all without
fruade or guile. In witness of which things and for perpetual assurance, have
we Emperor and prince aforesaid caused our seal hereunto to be hanged. Given
in our City of Louaine, the fifth day of July, Anno. 1549. of our empire of us
Charles the 30. and of our Realms of Castile, and others. 34. Thus subsigned,
Charles, Philippe, and underneath is written, By the Emperor, and the said
Prince, and signed by the audience, and first Secretary Verricken, and this
Letter was sealed with the seal of the emperor and prince in red wax with
gold and black-silke strings. And underneath was written, Collationated and
found agreed with the original, By me I. Facuwez.

FINIS.

