The second tome or volume of the Paraphrase of Erasmus upon the new
testament: conteynyng the Epistles of S. Paul, and other the Apostles. Whereunto
is added a Paraphrase upon the Reuelacion of S. John. Impriented at London in
Fletestrete at the sign of the Sun by Edward Whitchurche, the xvi. day of
August.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno do. 1549.

To the most Excellent Prince, our most dear Sovereign Lord, King Edward
the sixte, by the grace of God King of England, France and Irelande, defender
of the faith, and in earth under Christ, of the Church of England and
Irelande the supreme head.
SO mercyfully did almighty God pour his manifold benefits upon his people
of Israel in the time of their dear Sovereign Moses, that in consideracyon
of so gracyous a god, who so louynglye had chosen them to himself before all
other people, done so great things for them even in the mids among their
enemies, so wonderfully delivered them from the tyranny of Egipte, so
fatherlye noryshed them in the wilderness, yea and not only gave them the
dear light of knowledge by openyng unto them his holy law, but also sent them
such a governor, as above al other Princes of the earth in his time (scripture
witnessing the same) bare the name of faithfulness and loving kyndnesse. (For
as he was most Number. xii. Eccle. xlv. Hebr. iii.
feruente and erneste in the cause of God, so was he also most gracyous toward
his subjects.) They, I say considering such evident demonstracyons of gods
inestimable love and favor toward them, thought themselves most bound (as the
truth was) even of very love to serve him again: which thing they notably
declared, when at the commandment given them by their Sovereign, they showed
them selves so willing, so glad, so cherefull, and so fre hearted, to further
the work and setting up of the Tabernacle. To the which work who so brought
that he had, though it were but brass, fyrre tree, or such other things,
far under the estymacyon of gold, silver or precious stone, was yet welcome
and accepted for his unfeigned heart and good wills sake: As was also the poor
wedow with her two Mark. xii. Lu^. xxi. ^. Cor. viii.
mytes. For as the holy Apostle Paul witnesses, if the mind be willing, it
is accepted, according to that a man has, not according to that he has
not.

Which cherefull readynes of mind in those subjects, as it came only
through the mocion of the holy gooste: Even so did it greatly rejoice the
heart of noble Moses. In so much that (as the text says) when he saw how
uniformly they brought their gifts, and endeavored them selves to perform
every thing in the Tabernacle, according to the commandment of the Lord, he
blessed them, that is to say, commended and praised them for their labor: So
well lyked he their doings, and so well was he pleased withal. For such
godly princes are so wedded to almighty god, so fervent in settinge forth his
honor, so ready to take pains in redressing such things as are amysse, so
desirous to have the house of god repaired, his tabernacle set up, his true
service and worship restored, his people brought to the unity of faith and
love in him, and among them selves: that it is their only study, delight and
pleasure to have such a loving sort of subjects: who beholding and
consideringe so great godlynes and gracious di^posicion in their Sovereign,
must needs not only aknowlage such infinite kyndnesse of god in him, but
also at the remembrance thereof, labor and study in their vocacion to show
them selves again (and that gladly) as well thankful to so merciful a god,
as obedient to so loving a Prince, and consequently of very love to serve
them both, and to be charitably disposed to their neghbours: yea most willing
to bring that they have, to the furtheraunce of gods honor, to the
repayringe of his house, and to the edifiyng of his true congregacyon and
church. And though some labors of such true subjects be but rude, homely and
imperfect, yet proceade they of a mind that is both willing to give that it
has, and de^irous also to do more then it yet is able to do.

Your highness, as high and chief Admiral of the great navy of the lord of
hoostes amongst us, Principal Captain and governor of us all under him, the
most noble ruler of his ship, even our most comfortable Noah, whom the
eternal god has chose^ to be the bringer of us unto rest and quietness in
him: your most Royal Majesty (I say) going before in your Imperial office,
and having after you your most intierly beloved uncle the Lord Protectours
grace with the residue of your highness worthy counsailours, your nobility,
your clargie, your deputies and officers in all estates, with all other your
loving subjects: has set up your sail already, and is so well forward on
your most godly journey (the gracious wind of the holy ghost serving you) that
it makes many a faithful subject of youres, according as his calling
requires, to come after a good pase: yea and to be as well occupied as he can,
and to do as good service under you as to him is possible, within the fear of
god and your graces obedience. Your Royal Majesty: to whom the high
governance of your realms and dominions is committed, being most godly
occupied with the prudent and wholesome aduyce and ministry, of your noble
uncle and counsel, continues still in stopping up the gappes, that Antichriste
and his false doctrine has made into the byneyarde of the Lord: and to buyld
again the walls of his house, which through ydolatrie, superstycyon, euel
custom, and horrible abuses has been broken down. Truly your noble acts
and statutes, your proclamacions and iniunccions testify the same. The godly
Homelies and notable work of Erasmus Paraphrasis upon the holy Evangelists,
if they be distinctelye red, and practiced with such discrecion, as your
highness has commanded, they are worthy to be compared to the rich Jewels,
that Moses used to the pleasant garnishing of the Tabernacle. And as for the
sacred Bible and volume of gods holy book, set forth by your Majesty's
appointment, to be dewly practiced in all holy exercyses within your churches:
like as it is the fairest flower of the garden and most precious perle of gods
jewel house, eue^ so because your Majesty as gods high minister in y^ behalf,
has so graciously made us partakers thereof, through your most virtuous
proceadinges: we again, acknowledge our selfs no less bound to your Majesty
(as y^ truth is i deed) the^ y^ Israelites were first, to their sovereign
Moses for bri^ging the^ out of Egypt. etc. and for setting up of the
tabernacle: And afterward, to noble king Josias, not only for restoring the^
again the book of y^ law that was cast aside, but also for abolishing so great
ydolatrie and sin from among them. Who then would not be very loath, to bring
nothing to this most excellent work, wherein your Majesty so godly
proceadeth, like as your most noble father of most famous memory most
valeauntly begone?

Certes, when I look behind me, and call to remembrance but even the short
days of my time: how sore we have been blinded, seduced and hindered from the
true way of Christ's doctrine: how strongly the wicked delusion of Antichriste
(according to S. Paul's prophecy) has prevailed: what sects of perdicion,
what deuelishe doctrines, what strange inuencions of corrupt men, what
vain pylgremages, what offerynges and lyghtes to stocks and stones, what
costly deckyng, lyckinge, censinge and worshipping of images, what horrible
abusing of gods holy sacraments, and good creatures, with thousands more
inconveniences, that most wicked beast of Rome has brought specially in to
this your realm: how shamefully and presumtuously (even after the nature of
proud Lucifer) he has usurped the Imperial power thereof: how horryblye he
has abused the Majesty of the kings (your highness most noble
progenitors) in this your realm of England: how cruelly also and
irreverently he and his has dealte with their most Royal persons: yea and
how the^ishlye (under the color of gods service) he has robbed both them and
their good herted subjects of their substance and goods: Thus my most dear
sovereign, when I remember this most lamentable case, wherein your graces
realm has been, and considre now again on the other side, the most
pleasant shape and bewtifull face of the same (as conce^nynge the dear
knowledge of god in your Majesty's most gracious proceadinges) most like unto
the prosperous reign of the blessed king Josias, I find myself most debt
bound (and so do all other your graces true subjects esteem them selves
without doubt,) not only with all thankfulness most humbly to embrace
such inestymable kyndnesse of God, but also to sprede the same abroad: and
that in such a godly and quiet sort, as may serve most to the sainctifiyng
and halowing of his holy name, to the furtheraunce of his kingdom, and to the
encoraging of other men to increase in the knowlage of his good pleasure and
will, and gladly to obey the same.

Considering then that your Majesty is in the said most godly work of the
Lords Tabernacle all ready, your worthy counsaillours, officers, servants,
and other your heavenly endewed subjects both of the clargie and of the
laity, bringing to the same, some gold, some silver, some brass, sum other
presents. etc. according to the measure of such gifts as Almighty god has
richely reposed in them: your true and faithful subjects the Translatours
and Printer of this right fruteful volume, co^teining the Paraphrasis of the
famous Clarke Erasmus upon the Epistles of the holy Apostles, most humblye
offer unto your highness, their true and faithful diligence herein: and that
with such chereful hertes, glad and good wills, as they trust your Royal.
Majesty (after the ensample of noble Moses) will both bless and graciously
accept: According as your pryncely benignity can not but favor those that
desire none other wise to spend their time, save only as may be most to the
glory of god, and to the discharge of the duties of the unfeigned love and
obedience, that they within his fear, do owe to your grace.

The comfortable remembrance of the which most virtuous disposicion in your
Royal Majesty: has greatly encoraged me (as I was desired) most humblye to
write this little epistle unto the same: and not so much to be afraid thus to
do, at the respect of mine own great unworthiness, as I was moved thereto
through the most plentiful grace of almighty god and incomparable clemencye,
which is so notablye placed in your highness. For all we your graces true,
faithful and loving subjects that behold and se, how like ye are unto the
ancient Kings and Princes, (as Moses, Joshua, David, Iosaphat, Ezechias,
Josias, and such other,) in the most rightful and wholesome administracion of
your high Imperial office, can not, but as to our great comfort we find
it all ready, even so still to look for like prosperous success of wealth and
felicity with increase and contynuaunce. Which in deed must needs ensue and
follow amongst us, if through the wicked perswasyon of Satan, and corrupt
examples of the world, we our selves increase not in unthankfulness.

As for your most Royal Majesty: like as it is called of God to this supreme
office of gouernyng his people, and enclyned by the most blessed mocion of his
holy spirit still to excute the same in all gracious wise: Even so proceading
therein, your highness may be assured, to have the same most gracious defense
from god, with like prosperous increase of his most excellent gifts, that the
said noble kings were partakers of. The eternal and everliving god, possessor
of heaven and earth, strengthen and establish your highness in such sort as
may be most to the glory of his holy name, to the increase of his kingdom,
to the cherefull perfourmynge of his will, to the honor and quietness of your
Majesty: and fynallye to the comfort and welthe of all your loving
subjects.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful subject Miles Couerdall.

Amen.
A prologe upon the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Romans.
FOr as much as this epistle is the principal and most excellent part of
the new testament, and most pure Euangelion: that is to say, glad tydinges
and that we call Gospel: and also a light and a way in unto the whole
scripture: I think it mete, that every Christen man not only know it by rote
and without the book: but also exercise him self therein evermore continually,
as with the daily bread of the soul. No man verily can read it to often, or
study it to well: for the more it is studied the easier it is, the more it is
showed, the pleasanter it is, and the more groundely it is serched, the
precyouser things are found in it, so great treasure of spiritual things
lies hyd therein.

I will therefore bestow my labor and diligence through this little preface or
Prologue, to prepare a way in there unto, so farforth as God shall give me
grace, that it may be the better understand of every man. For it has been
hitherto evil darckened with gloses and wonderful dreams of Sophisters, that
no man could spy out the intent and meaning of it. Which nevertheless yet of
it self is a bright light, and sufficient to give light unto all the scripture.

First we must mark diligently the manner of speaking of the Apostle, and
above all thing know what Paul means by these words, the Law, Syn, Grace,
Faith, Righteousness, Flesh, sprite, and such like, or else read thou it never so
often, thou shall but lose thy labor. This word Law may not be understand here
after the common manner, and to use Paul's term, after the manner of men or
after man's ways: that thou would say the law here in this place were nothing
but learning which teaches what ought to be done and what ought not to be
done: as it goes with man's law where the law is fulfilled with outward works
only, though the heart be never so far of. But God judges the ground of the
heart, yea and the thoughts and the secret monynges of the mind, and therefore
his law requires the ground of the heart and love from the botome thereof,
and is not content with the outward work only: but rebukes those works
most of all which spring not of love, from the ground and low botome of the
heart: though they appear outward never so honest and good. As Christ in the
Gospel rebukes the Pharisees above al other that were open sinners, and calls
them ypocrites, that is to say simulars and painted sepulcres. Which Pharisees
yet lived no men so pure, as perteyning to the outewarde deeds and works of
the law: yea and Paul in the third Chapter of his epistle unto the Philippians
confesses of him self, that as touching the law he was such a one as no
man could complain on, and not withstanding was yet a murderer of the
Christen, persecuted them, and formented them so sore, that he compelled them
to blaspheme Christ, and was all together merciless, as many which now feign
outward good works, are.

For this cause the.cxv. Psalm calls all men liars, because that no in anne
keeps the law from the ground of the heart, nether can keep it, though he
appear outward full of good works.

For all men are naturally enclyned unto evil, and hate the law. We find in
our selves unlust and tediousnes to do good, but lust and delecracion to do
evil: Now where no fre lust is to do good, there the botome of the heart
fulfilleth not the law, and there no doubt is also sin, and wrath is
deferued before God, though there be never so great an outward show and
appearaunce of honest living.

For this cause concludes saint Paul in the second Chapter, that the Jews
are al sinners and transgressors of the law, though they make men believe,
through ypocrisy of outward works, how that they fulfill the law, and says
that he only which does the law, is righteous before God, meaning thereby
that no man with outward works fulfilleth the law.

Thou (^ayeth he to the Jew) teach, a man should not break wedlock, and
yet breakest wedlock thy self. Wherein thou iudgest an other man, therein
condemnest thou thy self, for thou thy self do even the very same things
which thou iudgest. As though he would say, thou live outwardly well in the
works of the law, and iudgest them that live not so. Thou teach other
men, and see a moote in an other man's eye, but art not ware of the beam
that is in thine own eye. For though thou keep the law outwardly with works,
for fear of rebuke, shame and punnyshment, either for love of reward,
vauntage and vain glory: yet do thou all without lust and love toward the
law, and had lever a great deal otherwise do, if thou did not fear
the law, yea inwardly in thine heart thou would that there were no law, no
nor yet God, the auctor and vengear of the law, if it were possible: so
paynefull it is unto the to have thine appetites refrayned, and to be kept
down.

Wherefore then it is a plain conclusion, that thou from the ground and bo^ome
of thine heart, art an enemy to the law: what preuayleth it now, that thou
teacheste an other man not to steal, when thou thine own self art a thief
in thine heart, and outwardly would feign steal if thou durst? though that
the outward deeds abide not always behind with such ipocrites and
dissimulars, but break forth among even as an evil scabbe or a pocke cannot
always be kept in with violence of medicine.

Thou teach an other man, but teach not thy self, yea thou woteste not
what thou teach, for thou understand not the law a right, how that it
cannot be fulfilled and satisfied, but with an unfeigned love and affeccion, so
greatly it cannot be fulfilled with outward deeds and works only. Moreover
the law increases sin, as he says in the fyfte Chapter, because that man
is an enemy to the law, for as much as it requires so many things clean
contrary to his nature, whereof he is not able to fulfill one point or title,
as the law requires it. And therefore are we more provoked, and have greater
lust to break it.

For which causes sake he says in the seventh Chapter, that the law is
spiritual: as though he would say, if the law were fleshlye and but man's
doctrine, it might be fulfilled, satysfyed and stylled with outward deeds. But
now is the law gostly, and no man fulfilleth it, except that all that he
does, spring of love from the botome of the heart. Such a new heart and
lusty courage unto the law ward, canste thou never come by of thine own
strength and enforcement, but by the operacion and workinge of the spirit.

For the spirit of God only makes a man spiritual and like unto the law,
so that now henceforth he does nothing of fear or for lucre or vantages
sake, or of vain glory, but of a fre heart, and of inward lust. The law is
spiritual and will be both loved and fulfilled of a spiritual heart, and
therefore of necessity requires it the spirit that makes a man's her fre,
and gives him lust and courage unto the law ward. Where such a spirit is
not, there remains sin, grudginge and hatred against the law, which law
nevertheless is good, righteous and holy.

Acquaynte thy self therefore with the manner of speaking of the Apostle, and
let this now stick fast in thine heart, that it is not both one, to do the
deeds and works of the law, and to fulfill the law. The work of the law
is, what so ever a man does or can do of his own free will, of his own
proper strength and enforsyng. Not withstandyng though there be never ^o
great workinge, yet as long as there remains in the heart, vnluste,
tediousnes, grudgynge, grife, pain, lothsumnes, and compulsion toward the law,
so long are all the works unprofitable, lost, yea and damnable in the sight of
God. This means Paul in the third Chapter where he says, by the deeds of
the law shall no flesh be iustyfyed in the sight of God. Hereby perceauest
thou that those sophisters are but deceauers, which teach that a man may,
and must prepare him self to grace and to the favor of God with good
works, before he have the spirit and true faith of Christ. How can they
prepare them selves unto the favor of God, and to that which is good, when
they them selves can do no good, nor cannot once think a good thought or
consent to do good, the devil possessing their hertes, minds and thoughts
captive at his pleasure? Can those works please God thynkest thou, which
are done with gryfe, pain and tediousnes, with an evil will, with a contrary
and grudgyng mind? O holy sayncte Prosperus, how myghtely with the scripture
of Paul, dyddest thou confound this heresy, about (I trow) a twelve hundred
years a goo, or there upon.

To fulfill the law, to do the works thereof, and what soever the law
commands, with love, lust, and inward affeccion and delectacion: and to
live godly and well, freely, wyllingly, and without compulsyon of the law, even
as though there were no law at all: Such lust and free liberty to the law,
comes only by the workynge of the spirit in the heart, as he says in the
first Chapter.

Now is the spirit none other wise given then by faith only, in that we
believe the promises of God, without wavering, how that God is true, and will
fulfill all his good promyses toward us for Christ's bloudes sake, as it is
plain in the.i. Chapter. I am not ashamed (says Paul) of Christ's glad
tidings, for it is the power of God unto salvation to as many as believe. For
attonce and together even as we believe the glad tidings preached to us, the
holy ghost enters into our hertes, and lowseth the bonds of the devil, which
before possessed o^^e hertes in captivity, and held them that we could have
no lust to the will of God in the law. And as the spirit comes by faith
only, even so faith comes by hearygne the word or glad tidings of God,
when Christ is preached how that he is Gods son and man also, dead and risen
again for our sakes: as he says in the.iii.iiii. and.x. Chapters. All our
justifying then comes of faith, and faith and the spirit come of God and not
of us.

When we say, faith brings the spirit, it is not to be understand, that
faith deserves the spirit, or that the spirit is not present in us before
faith. For the spirit is ever in us, and faith is the gift and workyng of
the spirit. But through preaching the spirit begins to work in us. And as
by preachinge the law, he works the fear of God, so by preaching the glad
tydinges, he works faith. And now when we believe and are come under the
covenant of God, the^ are we sure of the spirit, by the promise of God, and
then the spirit accompaineth faith inseperablie: and we begin to feel his
workinge. And so faith certifyeth us of the spirit, and also brings the
spirit with her, unto the workynge of all other gifts of grace, and to the
working our of the rest of our salvation, until we have all to gether
overcome sin, death, hell and Satan: and are come unto the everlasting life
of glory. And for this cause say we: faith brings the spirit.

Hereof comes it, that faith only justifies, makes righteous, and
fulfilleth the law: for it brings the spirit through Christ's deservings,
the spirit brings lust, looceth the heart, makes him free, sets him at
liberty, and gives him strength to work the deeds of the law with love,
even as the law requires. Then at the last out of the same faith so workynge
in the heart, spring all good works by their own accord. That means he in
the third Chapter: for after he has cast away the works of the law, so
that he sounds as though he would break and disanull the law through
faith: he answers to that might be laid against, saying: we destroy not
the law through faith: but mayntyene, further, or stablyshe the law through
faith. That is to say, we fulfill the law through faith.

Sin in the scripture is not called that outward work only committed by
the body, but all the whole busynes and what soever accompanies, moves or
stereth unto the outward deed, and that whence the works spring: as
unbelief, pronenes and redines unto the deed in the ground of the heart, with
all the powers, affeccions and appetytes, wherewith we can but sin. So that we
say, that a man then sumeth, when he is carried away hedlonge into sin, all
to gether as much as he is of that poison, inclynacion and corrupt nature,
wherein he was conceived and borne. For there is none outward sin committed,
except a man be carried away all together, with life, soul, heart, body,
lust and mind thereunto. The scripture looks singularly unto the heart and
unto the rote and original fountain of all sin, which is unbelief in the
botome of the heart. For as faith only justifies and brings the spirit
and lust unto the outward good works, even so unbelief only damneth and
keeps out the spirit, provoke the flesh, and stereth up lust unto the
evil outward works, as happened to Adam and Eua in Paradise. Genesis.iii.

For this cause Christ calls sin unbelief, and that notably in the.xvi.
Chapter of saint John. The spirit says he, shall rebuke the world of
sin, because they believe not in me. And John.viii. he says: I am the light
of the world. And therefore in the.xii. of John he byddeth them while they have
light, to believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light: for he
that walks in darkness woteth not whither he goes. Now as Christ is the
light, so is the ignorance of Christ that darkness whereof he speaks: in
which he that walks, woteth not whither he goes: that is, he knows not
how to work a good work in the sight of god, or what a good work is. And
therefore in the.ix. he says, as long as I am in the world, I am the light
of the world: but there comes night when no man can work: which night is
but the ignorance of Christ, in which no man can se to do any work that
pleases God. And Paul exhorts, Ephesi.iiii. that they walk not as other
hethen which are strangers from the life of god, through the ignorance that
is in them. And again in the same Chapter. Put of (says he) the old man
which is corrupt through the lusts of error, that is to say ignorance.
And Romansxiii. Let us cast away the deeds of darckenes: that is to say, of
ignorance and unbelieve. And i. Pet.i. Fassion not your selves unto your old
lusts of ignorance. And.i. John.ii. He y^ loves his brother dwells in
light: and he that hates his brother walks in darckenes, and woteth not
whither he goes, for darcknes has blinded his eyes. By light he means the
knowledge of Christ, and by darckenes, the ignorance of Christ. For it is
impossyble that he that knows Christ truly, should hate his brother.

Furthermore, to perceive this thing more clearly, thou shall understand, that
it is impossible to sin any sin at all, except a man break the first
commandment before. Now is the first commandment divided into two verses:
Thy Lord God is one God, and thou shall love thy Lord God with all thine
heart, with all thy soul, with all thy power, and with all thy might. And the
whole cause why I sin against any inferior precepte, is that this love is
not in mine heart: for were this love written in my heart, and were full and
perfect in my soul, it would keep mine heart from consentinge unto any sin.
And the whole and only cause why this love is not written in our hearts, is
that we believe not the first part, that our Lord God is one God. For wist I
what these words, one Lord and one God means: that is to say, if I
understood that he made all, and rules all, and that what soever is done to
me, whether it be good or bad, is yet his will, and that he only is the Lord
that rules and does it: and wist thereto what this word mine means: that
is to say, if mine heart believed and felt the infinite benefytes and kyndenes
of God to me ward, and understood and ernestly believed the manyfolde
couenauntes of mercy, wherewith God has bound him self to be mine, wholly and
all together, with all his power, love, mercy, and might, then should I love
him with all mine heart, soul, power, and might, and of that love ever keep
his commandments. So se ye now that as faith is the mother of al goodness
and of al good works, so is unbelief the ground and rote of all evil, and
all evil works.

Finally, if any man, that has forsaken sin and is converted to put his
trust in Christ, and to keep the law of god, does fall at a time: the cause
is, that the flesh through negligence has choked the spirit, and oppressed
her, and taken from her the food of her strength: which fode is her
meditacion in God and in his wonderful deeds, and in the manyfolde couenau^tes
of his mercy.

Wherefore then before all good works, as good fruits, there must needs be
faith in the heart whence they spring. And before al bad deeds, as bad
fruits, there must be unbelief in the heart, as in the ro^e, fountain, pith
and strength of all sin. Which unbelief and ignorance is called the head of
the serpent and of the old dragon, which the woman's seed Christ, must tread
under foot, as it was promised unto Adam.

Grace and gift have this difference. Grace properly is Gods favor,
benevolence or kind mind, which of his own self, without desecuyng of us, he
bears to us: whereby he was moved and inclined to give Christ unto us, with
all his other gifts of grace. Gift is the holy ghost and his working whom he
powers in to the hearts of them, on whom he has mercy, and whom he
favors. Though the gifts of the spirit increase in us daily, and have not
yet their full perfeccion: yea and though there remain in us yet euyil lusts
and sin which fight against the spirit, as he says here in the.vii.
Chapter, and in the.v. to the Galathians, and as it was spoken before in
the.iii. Chapter. of Gene. of the debate between the woman's seed, and the sede
of the serpent: yet nevertheless Gods favor is so great, and ^o strong over
us for Christ's sake, that we are counted for full whole and perfect before
God. For Gods favor toward us, deuydeth not her self, encreasinge a
little and a little, as do the gifts, but receaueth us whole and al together
in full love for Christ's sake, our intercessor and mediator, and because that
the gifts of the spirit and the battle between the spirit and evil lusts,
are begone in us al ready.

Of this now understand thou the.vii. Chapter. where Paul accuses him self
as a sinner, and yet in the.viii. Chapter says, there is no damnacio^ to them
that are in Christ, and that because of the spirit, and because the gifts of
the spirit are begone in us. Sinners we are because the flesh is not full
killed and mortified. Nevertheless in as much as we believe in Christ, and
have the earnest and beginning of the spirit, and would feign be perfect,
God is so louinge and favorable unto us, that he will not look on such sin,
nether will count it as sin, but will deal with us according to our belefe
in Christ, and according to his promyses, which he has sworn to us, until
the sin be full slain and mortified by death.

Faith is not man's opinion and dream, as some ymagin and feign, when they
hear the story of the gospel. Which when they se that there follow no good
works nor mendement of living, though they hear, and yet can babble many
things of faith, then they fall from the right way and say, faith only
iustifyeth not, a man must have good works also, if he will be righteous and
safe. The cause is, when they hear the Gospel or glad tydinges, they feign of
their own strength certain ymagynacyons and thoughts in their hertes,
saying: I have heard the Gospel, I remember the story, ^o I believe. And that
they count right faith, which nevertheless as it is but man's ymaginacion
and faininge, even so profits it not, nether follow there any good works or
mendement of living.

But right faith is a thing wroughte by the holy gooste in us, which
changes us, turns us in to a new nature, and begets us a new in God,
and makes us the sons of God, as thou redest in the first of John, and
kills the old Adam, and makes us altogether new in the heart, mind,
will, lust and in all our affeccions and powers of the soul, the holy ghost
ever accompanying her and rulinge the heart. Faith is a lively thing, mighty
in working, valiant and strong, ever doing, ever fruitful, so that it is
impossible that he which is endued therewith, should not work always good
works without ceasing. He axeth not whether good works are to be done or not,
but has done them all ready, ye^ mention be made of them, and is all way
doing, for such is his nature: now quick faith in his heart and lively
mouinge of the spirit drive him and stere him thereunto. Whosoever does not
good works, is an unbelieving person and faythlesse, and looks round about,
gropinge after faith and good works, and wotteh not what faith or good works
mean, though he babil never so many things of faith and good works.

Faith is then a lively and steadfast trust in the favor of God, wherewith
we commit our selves all together unto God: and that trust is so surely
grounded and stycketh so fast in our hearts, that a man would not once
doubt of it, though he should dye a thousand times therefore. And such trust
wrought by the holy ghost through faith, makes a man glad, lusty, cherefull
and true herted unto God and to all creatures. By the means whereof, willingly
and without compulcion he is glad and ready to do good to every man, to do
service to every man, to suffer all things, that God may be loved and praised,
which has given him such grace: so that it is impossible to separat good
works from faith, even as it is impossible to separate here and burninge
from fire.

Therefore take heed to thy self, and beware of thine own fantasies and
ymaginacions, which to judge of faith and good works will some wise, when in
deed they are stark blind and of al things most folysshe. Pray God that he
will witesafe to work faith in thine heart, for else shall thou remain
evermore faithless, feign thou, ymagin thou, enforce thou, wrestle with thy
self, and do what thou will or can.

Righteousness is even such faith, and is called Gods righteousness, or
righteousness that is of valor before God. For it is Gods gift, and it
alters a man and changes him to a new spiritual nature, and makes him
fre and liberal to pay every manne his duty. For through faith is a man
purged of his sins, and obteineth lust unto the law of God, whereby he
gives God his honor, and paieth him that he owes him, and unto men he does
service willingly wherewith soever he can, and pays every man his duty. Such
righteousness can nature, fre will and our own strength never bring to pass.
For as no man can give him self faith, so can he not take away unbelief: how
then can he take away any thing at all? Wherefore all is false ypocrisy and
syn, what soever is done without faith, or in unbelief, as it is evident in
the.xiii^. Chap. unto y^ Romans, though it appear never so glorious or
beautiful outwardes. Flesh and spirit may thou not here understand, as
though flesh were only that which pertains unto unchastity, and the spirit
that which inwardly pertains to the heart: but Paul calls flesh here, as
Christ does John.iii. Al yt is borne of flesh, ye is to were, the whole man
with life, soul, body, wit, will, reason, and whatsoever he is or does within
and without: because that these al, and all that is in man, study after the
world and the flesh. Call flesh therefore whatsoever (as long as we are
without the spirit of God) we think or speak, of God, of faith, of good
works, and of spiritual matters. Call flesh also all works which are done
without grace, and without the workynge of the spirit, howsoever good, holy
and spiritual they seem to be, as thou may prove by the.v. Chap. unto the
Galathians, where Paul numbreth worshipping of ydols, witchecrafte, envy and
hate, among the deeds of the flesh: and by the.viii. unto the Romans, where
he says that the law by the reason of the flesh is weak. Which is not
understand of unchastity only, but of all sins, and most specially, of
unbelief which is a vice most spiritual, and ground of all sins.

And as thou call him, which is not renewed with the spirit and borne
again in Christ, flesh, and all his deeds, even the very mocions of his heart
and mind, his learning, doctrine and contemplacion of hie things, his
preachinge, teaching and study in the scripture, bildinge of churches,
foundinge of abbeys, geuyng of alms, mass, mattence and whatsoever he does,
though it seem spiritual and after the laws of God: So contrary wise call him
spiritual which is renewed in Christ, and al his deeds which spring of faith,
seem they never so gross, as the washing of the disciples fete, done by
Christ, and Peter's fishing after the resurreccion, yea and all the deeds of
matrimony are pure, spiritual, if they proceade of faith, and whatsoever is
done with i^ the laws of God, though it be wrought by the body, as the very
wiping of shoes and such like, how soever gross they appear outward. Without
such understanding of these words, canste thou never understand this
epistell of Paul, nether any other place in the holy scripture. Take heed
therefore, for whosoever understands these words otherwise, the same
understands not Paul, whatsoever he be. Now will we prepare our selves
unto the epistle.

For as much as it becomes the preacher of Christ's glad tidings, first
through openinge of the law to rebuke all things, and to prove all things
sin, that proceed not of the spirit and of faith in Christ, and to prove all
men sinners and children of wrath by inheritance, and how that to sin is
their nature, and that by nature they cannot otherwise do then to sin, and
therewith to abate the pride of man and to bring him unto the knowledge of him
self, and of his miserye and wretchedness, that he might desire help: Even so
does saynct Paul, and begins in the first Chapter to rebuke unbelief and
gross sins which all men se, as ydolatrye, and as the gross sins of the
hethen were, and as the sins now are of all them which live in ignorance
without faith, and without the favor of God, and says: The wrath of God of
heaven appears through the Gospel upon all men for their ungodliness and
unholy living. For though it be known and daily understand by the
creatures, that there is but one God, yet is nature of her self, without the
spirit and grace, so corrupt and so poisoned, that men nether can thank him,
nether worship him, nether give him his due honor, but blind them selves
and fall without ceasing into worse case, even until they come unto
worshyppyng of images, and workyng of shameful sins which are abominable and
against nature, and moreover suffer the same unrebuked in other, having
delectacion and pleasure therein.

In the.ii. Chapter he proceadeth further, and rebukes all those holy people
also which without lust and love to the law, live well outwardly in the face
of the world, and condemn other gladly, as the nature of al ypocrites is, to
think them selves pure in respect of open sinners, and yet hate the law
inwardly, and are full of covetousness and envy, and of all uncleanness,
Mat.xxiij. These are they which despise the goodness of God, and according to
the hardenes of their hearts, heap together for them selves the wrath of
God. Furthermore saynct Paul as a true expounder of the law, suffers no man
to be without sin, but declares that al they are under sin which of fre
will and of nature will live well, and suffers them not ^o be better then the
open sinners, yea he calls them hard herted and such as cannot repent.

In the.iii. Chapter he mingleth both together, both the Jews and the
gentiles, and says that the one is as the other, both sinners: and no
difference between them, save in this only, that the Jews had the word of
God committed unto them. And though many of them believed not thereon, yet is
gods truth and promise thereby nether hurt nor minished: and he takes in
his way and allegeth the saying of the.L. Psalm. that God might abide true in
his words and overcome when he is judged. After that he returns to his
purpose again, and proves by the scripture that all men without difference or
excepcion are sinners, and that by the works of the law no man is justified:
but that the law was given to utter and to declare sin only. Then he
begins and shows the right way unto rightewesnes, by what means men
must be made righteous and safe, and says: They are all sinners and without
praise before God, and must without their own deseruinges be made righteous
through faith in Christ, which has deserved such ryghteousnes for us, and is
become unto us Gods mercy stole for the remission of sins that are paste,
thereby proving that Christ's righteousness which comes on us through faith,
helps us only. Which righteousness says he is now declared through the
gospel, and was testified of before by the law and the Prophets. Furthermore
(says he) the law is help and furdered through faith, though that the
works thereof with all their boste are brought to naught, and proved not to
iustifye.

In the.iiii. Chapter (after that now by the.iii. first Chapters, the sins
are opened, and the way of faith unto rigteousnes laid) he begins to
answer unto certain obieccions and cauillacions. And first he puts
forth those blind reasons, which commonly they that will be justified by
their own works, are wont to make when they hear that faith only without
works iustifyeth, saying: shall men do no good works: yea and if faith
only iustyfye, what needs a man to study for to do good works? He
puts forth therefore Abraham for an ensample, saying: What did Abraham with
his works? was al in vain? came his works to no profit? And so concludes
that Abraham without and before all works was justified and made ryghteous. In
so much that before the work of circumcysion he was praised of the scripture
and called ryghteous by his faith only, Genelis.xv. So that he did not the
work of circumcision for to be help thereby unto ryghteousnes, which yet God
commanded him to do, and was a good work of obedience: So in like wise no
doubt none other works help any thing at all unto a man's iustifyinge: but as
Abraham's circumcysion was an outewarde sign whereby he declared his
righteousness which he had by faith, and his obedience and redynes unto the will
of God, even so are all other good works outward signs and outewarde fruits
of faith and of the spirit, which iustifye not a man, but that a man is
justified already before God inwardly in the heart, through faith, and through
the spirit purchased by Chrstes blood.

Herewith now stablysheth Sayncte Paul his doctrine of faith before rehearsed
in the.iij. Chapters, and brings also testimony of David in the xiij. Psalm,
which calls a man blessed, not of works, but in that his sin is not
reckened, and in that faith is imputed for ryghteousnes, though he abide not
afterward without good works, when he is once justified.

For we are justified, and receive the spirit for to do good works, nether
were it otherwise possible to do good works, except we had first the spirit.

For how is it possible to do any thing well in the sight of God, while we are
yet in captivity and bondage under the devil, and the devil possesses us
all together and holds our hertes, so that we cannot ones consent unto the
will of God. No man therefore can prevent the spirit in doing good: but the
spirit must first come and wake him out of his sleep, and with the thunder of
the law fear him, and show him his miserable estate and wretchedness, and
make him abhor and hate him self, and to desire help: and then comfort him
again with the pleasant rain of the Gospel, that is to say, with the sweet
promyses of God in Christ, and stiere up faith in him to believe the promises.
Then when he believes the promises, as God was merciful to promise, so is he
true to fulfill them, and will give him the spirit and strength, both to love
the will of God, and to work thereafter. So se we that God only (which
according to the scripture works all in all things) works a man's
iustifyinge, salvation and health, yea and powers faith and belefe, lust to
love gods will, and strength to fulfill the same, into us, even as water is
powered into a vessel, and that of his good will and purpose, and not of our
deseruinges and merits. Gods mercy in promisinge, and truth in fulfilling
his promises saves us, and not we our selves. And therefore is al laud, praise
and glory, to be given unto God for his mercy and truth, and not unto us for
our merits and deseruinges. After that he stretches his ensample out
against all other good works of the law, and concludes that the Jews
cannot be Abraham's heirs because of blood and kynred only, and much less by
the works of the law, but must inheryt Abraham's faith, if they will be the right
heirs of Abraham: for as much as Abraham before the law, both of Moses and
also of circumcision, was through faith made righteous, and called the father of
all them that believe, and not of them that work. Moreover the law causes
wrath, in as much as no man can fulfill it with love and usie. And as long as
such grudgynge, hate and indignacyon against the law remains in the heart,
and is not taken away by the spirit that comes by faith, so long (no
doubt) the works of the law, declare evidently that the wrath of God is upon
us, and not favor. Wherefore faith only receives the grace promised unto
Abraham. And these ensamples were not written for Abraham's sake only (says
he) but for ou^es also, to whom if we believe, faith shall be rekened likewise
for righteousness, as he says in the end of the Chapter.

In the.v. Chapter he commends the fruits and works of faith, as are peace,
rejoicing in the conscience, inward love to God and man: moreover boldness,
trust, confydence and a strong and a lusty mind and steadfast hope in
tribulacion and sufferynge. For all such follow, where the right faith is,
for the aboundaunte graces sake and gifts of the spirit, which God has
given us in Jesus Christ, in that he gave him to dye for us yet his enemies.
Now have we then, that faith only before al works iustifyeth: and that it
follows not yet therefore that a man should do no good works: but that the
right shapen works abide not behind, but accompanye faith, even as
bryghtnes does the sun, and are called of Paul the fruits of the spirit:
where the spirit is, there it is always somer, and there are always good
fruits: that is to say, good works. This is Paul's order, that good works
spring of the spirit, the spirit comes by faith, and faith comes by
hearing the word of God, when the glad tydinges and promises which God has
made to us i^ Christ, are preached truly, and received in the ground of the
heart without wavering or doutynge, after that the law has passed upon us and
has damned our consciences, where the word of God is preached purely and
received in the heart, there is faith and the spirit of God, and there are also
good works of necessity when soever occasion is given: where gods word is
not purely preached, but men's dreams, tradicions, ymaginacions, inuencions,
ceremonies and supersticion, there is no faith, and consequentlye no spirit
that comes of God. And where Gods spirit is not, there can be no good
works, even as where an apple tree is not, there can grow no apples, but there
is unbelief, the deuels spirit and evil works. Of this Gods spirit and
his fruits have our holy ypocrites not once known, nether yet tasted how
sweet they are, though they feign many good works of their own ymaginacions,
to be iustyfied with all, in which is not one crum of true faith or
spiritual love, or of inward joy, peace and quyetnes of conscience, for as
much as they have not the word of God for them, that such works please God,
but they are even the rotten fruits of a rotten tree.

After that he breaks forth, and runs at large, and shows whence both
sin and righteousness, death and life come. And he compares Adam, and
Christ together, thus wise reasonynge and dysputynge, that Christ must
neades comme as a second Adam, to make us heirs of his ryghtewesnes, through
a new spyrytuall birth, without our deservings: even as the first Adam
made us heirs of sin, through the bodily generacyon, without our deserving.
Whereby is evidently known and proved to the uttermost, that no man can bring
him self out of sin unto righteousness, no more then he could have withstand
that he was borne bodily. And that is proved herewith, for as much as the very
law of God, which of right should have help, if any thing could have
helped, not only came and brought no help with her, but also increased sin,
because that the evil and poisoned nature is offended and utterly displeased
with the law, and the more she is forbid by the law, the more is she provoked
and set a fire to fulfill and satisfye her lusts. By the law then we se
clearly that we must needs have Christ to iustifye us with his grace, and to
help nature.

In the.vi. Chapter he sets forth the chief and principal work of faith,
the battaill of the spirit against the flesh, how the spirit laboreth and
enforseth to kill the remnaunt of syn and ^^^ which remain in the flesh,
after our iustifiyng. And this chapter teaches us, that we are not so free
from sin through faith, that we should hence forth go up and down idle,
careless, and sure of our selves, as though there were now no more sin in
us: yes there is sin remaining in us, but it is not rekened, because of faith,
and of the spirit which fight against it. Wherefore we have enough to do all
our life's long, to tame our bodies, and to compel the members to obey the
spirit, and not the appetites, that thereby we might be like unto Christ's
death and refurreccio^, and might fulfill our baptism, which signifies the
mortifyinge of sins, and the new life of grace. For this battle cease
not in us until the last birthe, and until that sin be utterly stain by
the death of the body.

This thing (I mean to tame the body and so forth) we are able to do (says
he) seeing we are under grace, and not under the law: what it is, not to be
under the law, he him self expounds. For not to be under the law is not so
to be understand, that every manne may do what him lusts. But not to be
under the law, is to have a free heart renewed with the spirit, so that thou
have lust inwardly of thine own accord to do that which the law commands,
without compulsion, yea though there were no law. For grace, that is to say
Gods favor, brings us the spirit, and makes us to love the law: so is
there now no more sin, neither is the law now any more against us, but at
one, and agreed with us, and we with it.

But to be under the law, is to deal with the works of the law, and to
work without the spirit and grace* for so long no doubt sin raygneth in
us through the law, that is to say, the law declares that we are under
sin, and that sin has power and dominion over us, seeing we cannot fulfill
the law, namely within the heart, for as much as no man of nature favors
the law, consents there unto, and delyteth therein. Which thing is exceading
great sin, that we cannot consent to the law, which law is nothing else save
the will of God.

This is the right fredome and liberty from sin, and from the law whereof he
writes unto the end of this Chapter, that is a fredome to do good only with
lust, and to live well without compulcyon of the law: wherefore this fredome
is a spiritual fredome, which destoyeth not the law, but ministers that
which the law requires, and where* with the law is fulfilled: that is to
understand, lust and love, wherewith the law is stylled and accuses us no
more, compels us no more, nether has ought to crave of us any more. Even
as though thou were in debt to an other man, and were not able to pay, two
manner ways myghtest thou be lowsed. One way, if he would require nothing of
the, and break thine obligacion. An other way, if some other good man would
pay for the, and give the as much as thou myghtest ^ar^s^ie thine obligacion
with all. Of this wise has Christ made us fre from the law, and therefore is
this no wild fleshely liberty, that should do naught, but that does all
things, and is fre from the crauyng and decre of the law.

In the.vij. Chapter he confyrmeth the same with a similytude of the state of
matrimony. As when the husband dies, the wife is at her liberty, and the one
looced and departed from the other, not that the woman should not have power to
mary unto an other man, but rather now first of all is she fre, and has power
to mary unto an other man, which she could not do before, till she was looced
from her first housband: Even so are our consciences bound and in danger to
the law under old Adam the flesh, as long as he lives in us. For the law
declares that our hertes are bound and that we cannot disconsent from him.
But when he is mortifyed and killed by the spirit, then is the conscience fre
and at lybertye* not so that the conscience shall now naught do, but now first
of al cleueth unto another, that is to were Christ, and brings forth the
fruits of life. So ^ow to be under the law, is not to be able to fulfill the
law, but to be detter to it, and not able to pay that which the law
requires. And to be looce from the law, is to fulfill it and to pay that
which the law demands, so that it can now hence forth are thee naught.

Consequently Paul declares more largely the nature of sin and of the law,
how that through the law sin reuiueth, moves her self, and gathers
strength. For the old man and corrupt nature, the more he is forboden and kept
under of the law, is the more offended and dyspleased therewith, for as much
as he cannot pay that which is required of the law. For sin is his nature,
and of him self he cannot but sin. Therefore is the law death to him,
torment and martyrdom. Not that the law is evil, but because that the evil
nature cannot suffer that which is good, cannot abide that the law should
require of him any good thing. Like as a sick man cannot suffer that a man
should desire of him to run, to lepe, and to do other deeds of an whole manne.

For which cause. S. Paul concludes, that where the law is understand and
perceived of the best wise, there it does no more but utter sin, and bring
us unto the knowledge of our selves, and thereby kill us and make us bond unto
eternal damnacion, and detters of the everlasting wrath of god, even as he
well fealeth and understands whose conscience is truly touched of the law.
In such danger were we yer the law came, that we knew not what sin meant,
nether yet knew we the wrath of God upon sinners, till the law had uttered
it. So see thou that a man must have some other thing, yea and a greater and
a more mighty thing then the law, to make him ryghteous and safe. They that
understand not the law on this wise, are blind, and go to work
presumptuously, supposyng to satisfy the law with works. For they know not
that the law requires a fre, a willinge, a lusty and a loving heart.
Therefore they see not Moses right in the face, the veil hangs between and
hydeth his face, so that they cannot behold the glory of his countenance,
how that the law is spiritual and requires the heart. I may of mine own
strength refrain that I do mine enemy no hurt, but to love hi^ with all mine
heart, and to put away wrath clean out of my mind, can I not of mine own
strength. I may refuse money of mine own strength, but to put away love unto
riches out of mine heart, can I not do of mine own strength. To abstain from
adultery as concerning the outward deed, can I do of mine own strength, but
not to desire in mine heart is as impossible unto me as is to chose whether I
will honger or thurst, and yet so the law requires. Wherefore of a man's own
strength is the law never fulfilled, we must have thereunto gods favor,
and his spyryte, purchased by Christ's blood.

Nevertheless when I say a man may do many things outwardly clean against
his heart, we must understand that man is but driven of diverse appetites,
and the greatest appetite overcomes the less and carries the man away
violently with her.

As when I desire vengeance, and fear also the inconvenience that is like to
follow: if fear be greater, I absteyne, if the appetite that desires
vengeance be greater, I cannot but prosecute the deed, as we se by experience
in many murderers and thieves: which though they be brought into never so
great peril of death, yet after they have escaped, do even the same again.
And commen women prosecute their lusts, because fear and shame are away, when
other which have the same appetites in their hearts, abstain at the
lestewaye outwardly, or work secretly being overcome of fear and of shame,
and so likewise is it of al other appetites.

Furthermore he declares, how the spirit and the flesh fight together in one
manne, and makes an ensample of him self, that we might learn to know that
work aright, I mean to kill sin in our selves. He calls both the spirit
and also the flesh a law, because that like as the nature of Gods law is to
drive, to compel, and to crave, even so the flesh dryueth compels,
craves, and rages against the spirit, and will have her lusts satisfied.
On the other side dryueth the spirit, cries, and fights against the
flesh, and will have his lust satisfied. And this strife du^eth in us, as
long as we live: in some more and in some less, as the spirit or the flesh
is stronger, and the very man his own self is both spirit and the flesh,
which fyghteth with his own self until sin be utterly slain and we all
together spiritual.

In the.viij. Chapter he comfort such fighters that they despair not
because of such flesh, either think y^ they are less in favor with God. And
he shows how that the sin remaining in us, hurts not, for there is no
danger to them that are in Christ which walk not after the flesh, but
fight against it. And he expounds more largely what the nature of the flesh
and of the spirit is, and how the spirit comes by Christ, which spirit
makes us spyrituall, tameth, subdueth, and mortifieth the flesh, and
certyfieth us that we are nevertheless the sons of God, and also beloved
though that sin rage never so much in us, so long as we follow the spirit
and fight against sin to kill and mortifye it. And because nothing is so
good to the mortifiynge of the flesh, as the cross and tribulacion, he
comfort us in our passions and affliccions, by the assistens of the spirit
which makes intercession to God for us myghtely, with gronynges that pass
man's vtteraunce, so that man's speech cannot comprehend them, and with the
mourning also of the creatures with us, of great desire that they have, that
we were looced from sin and corrupcion of the flesh. So se we that these
three chapters, the.vj.vii.viij. do none other thing so much as to drive us
unto the right work of faith, which is to kill the old man and mortify the
flesh.

In the.ix.x. and.xi. Chapter he treats of Gods predestinacion: whence it
springs all together, whether we shall believe or not believe, be looced from
sin or not be looced. By which predestinacion our justifying and salvation
are clean taken out of our hands, and put in the hands of God only, which
thing is most necessary of al. For we are so weak and so uncertain, that if
it stood in us, there would of a truth no man be saved: the devil no doubt
would deceive us. But now is God sure that his predestinacion cannot deceive
him, nether can any man withstand or let him, and therefore have we hope and
trust against sin.

But here must a mark be set unto those unquiet, busye, and hie clyming
spirits how far they shall go, which first of al bring hither their hye
reasons and pregnant wits, and begin first from an hye to search the
botomlesse secrets of Gods predestinacion, whether they be predestinate or
not. These must needs either cast them selves down headlong into desperacion,
or else commit them selves to fre chance careless. But follow thou the order
of this epistle, and noosell thy self with Christ, and learn to understand
what the law and the gospel mean, and the office of both two, that thou
may in the one know thy self, and how that thou have of thy self no
strength, but to sin: and in the other the grace of Christ. And then se thou
fight against sin, and the flesh, as the.vii. first Chapters teach the.
After that when thou art come to the.viij. Chapter, and art under the cross
and suffering of tribulacion, the necessity of predestinacion will wax sweet,
and thou shall well feel how preciouse a thing it is. For except thou have
borne the cross of adversity and temptacion, and haste felt thy self
brought unto the very brymme of desperacion, yea and unto hell gates, thou
can never meddle with the sentence of predestinacion without thine own harm,
and without secret wrath and grudging inwardly against God, for otherwise it
shall not be possible for the to think that God is righteous and just.
Therefore must Adam be well mortifyed and the fleshely wit brought utterly to
naught, yer that thou may away with this thing, and drink so strong
wine. Take heed therefore unto thy self, that thou drink not wine, while thou
art yet but a suklinge. For every learning has her time, measure and age, and
in Christ is there a certain chyldehod, in which a man must be content with
milk for a season, until he wax strong, and grow up unto a perfect manne
in Christ, and be able to eat of more strong meat.

In the.xii. Chap. he gives exhortacion. For this manner observes Paul in all
his epistles, first he teaches Christ and the faith, then exhorts he to
good works, and unto contynuall mortifyinge of the flesh. So here teaches he
good works in deed, and the true serving of God, and makes al me^ Priests,
to offer up, not money, and beasts, as the manner was in the time of the law,
but their own bodies, with killing and mortifyinge of the lusts of the
flesh. After that he describes the out ward conversation of Christen men, how
they ought to behave them selves in spiritual things, how to teach, preach
and rule in the congregation of Christ, to serve one another, to suffer all
things patiently, and to commyt the wr^ke and vengeance to God, in
conclusyo^ how a Christen man ought to behave him self unto al men, to friend,
to foo, or what soever he be. These are the right works of a Christen man
which spring out of faith. For faith keeps not holy day, nether suffers
any man to be yd^e, whersoeuer she dwells.

In the.xiii. he teaches to honor the worldly and temporal swearde. For
though that man's law and ordinance make nor a man good before God, nether
justify hi in the heart, yet are they ordained for the furtherau^ce of the
commune wealth, to mayntene peace, to punish the evil and to defend the good.
Therefore ought the good to honor the temporal sword, and to have it in
reverence, though as concerning them selves, they need it not, but would
absteyne from evil of their own accord: yea and do good with out ma^s law,
but by the law of the spirit which governs the heart, and gideth it unto all
that is the will of God. Finally he comprehends and knitteth up all in love.
Love of her own nature bestows all that she has, and even her own self on
that which is loved. Thou nedest not to bid a kind mother to be loving unto
her only son. Much less spiritual love which has eyes given her of God,
neadeth man's law to teach her to do her duty. And as in the beginning he
did put forth Christ as the cause and auctor of our ryghtewesnes and
salvation, even so here sets he him forth as an ensample to counterfayte,
that as he has done to us, even so should we do one to another.

In the.xiiii. chapter he teaches to deal soberly with the consciences of the
weak in the faith, which understand not yet the liberty of Christ perfectly
enough, and to fauer them of Christen love, and not to use the liberty of the
faith unto hynderaunce, but unto the furderaunce and edifyinge of the weak.
For where such consyderacion is not, there follows debate and despising of the
Go^pell. It is better therefore to forbear the weak a while, until they wax
strong, then that the learning of the Gospel should come al together
underfoot. And such work is the singular work of love, and where love is
perfect, there must needs be such a respect unto the weak, a thing that
Christ commanded and charged to be had above all things.

In the.xv. Chapter he sets forth Christ again to be followed, that we
also by his ensample, should suffer other that are yet weak, as them that are
frail, open sinners, unlearned, vnexperte, and of lothesome manners, and not to
cast them away forthwith: but to suffer them till they ware better: and
exhort them in the mean time. For so dealte Christ in the Gospel and now
deals with us daily, sufferyng our imperfectness, weakness, conversation and
manners, not yet fassioned after the doctrine of the Gospel, but smell of the
flesh, yea and sometime break forth into outward deeds.

After that to conclude withal, he wysheth them encreace of faith, peace, and
joy of conscience, prayseth them and commits them to God, and magnifyeth
his office and admynistracyon in the Gospel, and soberly and with great
discrecion desires succoure and aid of them for the poor saynctes of
Jerusalem, and it is al pure love that he speaks or deals with all. So find
we in this epistle plenteously, unto the uttermost, whatsoever a Christen man
or woman ought to know, that is to were, what the Law, the Gospel, Sin,
Grace, Faith, Righteousness, Christ, God, good works, Love, Hope, and the
cross are, and even wherein the pythe of all that pertayneth to the Christen
faith stands, and how a Christen manne ought to behave him self unto every
man, be he perfect or a sinner, good or bad, strong or weak, friend or foo,
and in conclusion how to behave our selves both toward God and toward our
selves also. And all things are profoundely grounded in the scriptures, and
declared with ensamples of hi^ self, of the fathers, and of the prophets, that
a man can here desire no more.

Wherefore it appears euydently, that Paul's mind was to comprehend brefely in
this Epistle all the whole learning of Christ's Gospel, and to prepare an
introduccion unto all the old testamente. For without doubt whosoever has
this pistle perfectly in his heart, the same has the light and the effect of
the old testamente with him: wherefore let every man without excepcion
exercise him self therein diligently, and record it night and day
continually, until he be full acquaynted therewith.

The last Chapter is a chapter of reco^mendacio^, wherein he yet mingleth a good
monicion, that we should beware of the tradicions and doctrine of men, which
begyle the simple with sophistry, and learning that is not after the Gospel,
and draw them from Christ, and noosell them in weak and feeble, and (as Paul
calls them in the pistle to the Galathyans) in beggarly ceremonies, for the
intent that they would live in fat pastures and be in authority, and be
taken as Christ, yea and above Christ, and sit in the temple of God, that is
to wit in the consciences of me^, where God only, his word, and his Christ
ought to sytte. Compare therefore all manner doctrine of men unto the scripture,
and se whether they agree or not. And commytte thy self whole and all together
unto Christ, and so shall he with his holy spirit and with all his fulness
dwell in thy soul.

The sum and whole cause of the writing of this epistle, is, to prove that a
man is justified by faith only: which proposicion who soever denies, to him
is not only this epistle and all that Paul writes, but also the whole
scripture so locked up, that he shall never understand it to his souls
health. And to bring a man to the understanding and feeling that faith only
iustifyeth: Paul proves that the whole nature of man is so poisoned and so
corrupt, yea and so dead, concerning godly living or godly thinkinge, that it
is impossible for her to keep the law in the sight of God: that it to say, to
love it, and of love and lust to do it as naturally as a man eats or
drincketh: until she be quickened again and healed through faith.

And by justifying, understand none other thing then to be reconciled to God,
and to be restored unto his favor, and to have thy sins forgeuen the. As
when I say God justifies us, understand thereby, that God for Christ's sake,
merits and deseruinges only, receaueth us unto his mercy, favor and grace,
and forgeueth us our sins. And when I say, Christ justifies us, understand
thereby that Christ only has redeemed us, bought and delivered us out of the
wrath of God and damnacio^, and has with his works only purchased us the
mercy, the favor and grace of God, and the forgeuenes of our sins. And when
I say that faith only justifies, understand thereby that faith and trust in
the truth of God and in the mercy promised us for Christ's sake, and for his
deserving and works only, does quiet the conscience and certify her that our
sins be forgeuen and we in the favor of God. Furthermore, set before thine
eyes Christ's works and thine own works. Christ's works only justify the,
and make satisfaccion for thy sin, and thine own works not: that is to say,
quieteth thy conscience, and make the sure that thy sins are forgeuen the,
and not thine own works. For the promise of mercy is made the for Christ's
works sake, and not for thine own works sake. Wherefore saying God has not
promised that thine own works shall save the, therefore faith in thine own
works can never quiet thy conscience nor certify the before God (when God
comes to judge and to take a reconing) y^ thy sins are forgeuen the. Beyond
all this, mine own works ca^ never satisfy the law or pay her that I owe
her. For I owe the law to love her with all mine heart, soul, power and might.
Which thing to pay I am never able while I am compassed with flesh. No, I
cannot once begin to love the law, except I be first sure by faith that
God loves me and forgeueth me.

Finallye that we say faith only justifies, ought to offend no man. For if
this be true, that Christ only redeemed us, Christ only bare our sins, made
satisfaccion for them and purchased us the favor of God, then must it needs be
true, that the trust only in Christ's deferning and in the promyses of God the
father made us for Christ's sake, does only quiet the conscience, and certify
her that the sins are forgeuen. And when they say, a man must repent, forsake
sin, and have a purpose to sin no more as nigh as he can, and love the law of
God: Ergo faith alone justifies not. I answer: that, and al like arguments
are naught, and like to this. I must repent and be forye, the Gospel must be
preached me, and I must believe it, or else I cannot be partaker of the mercy
which Christ has deserved for me: Ergo Christ only justifies me or not,
Christ only has not made satisfaccion for my sins. As this is a naughty
argument, so is the other. Now go to reader, and according to the order of
Paul's writing, eue^ so do thou. First behold thy self diligently in the law
of God, and se there thy just damnacion. Secondarely turn thine eyes to
Christ, and se there the exceading mercy of thy most kind and louinge father.
Thirdly remember that Christ made not this atonement that thou should
anger God again: nether dyed he for thy sins, that thou should live still
in them: nether cleansed he the, that thou should return (as a swyne) unto
thine old puddell again: but that thou should be a new creature, and live
a new life after the will of God, and not of the flesh. And be diligent least
through thine own negligence and unthankfulness, thou lose this favor and
mercy again.

Fare well.
The whole matier and argument of saint Paul's Epistle to the Romans by
Era^mus of Roterodame.
ALL the beginning to make the matier more plain, this shall be briefly to
declare the sum and contents of this present Epistle. And first to begin
with the authors name, albeit I know that saint Hierome in his commentaries
he wrote upon the Epistle to Philemon, is of the mind, that Paul was first
called Saul, and afterward called him self Paul, in remembrance of the
great and victorious act, whereby he won unto Christ Sergius Paul
lieuetenaunt of Paphos in Cipres, as it is written in the.xiii. chapter of the
Acts of thapostles: And though again I know that other some be of the mind,
that Paul for the time, wherein he lived under the Jews law was called Saul,
and that at the first beginning of his new religion he changed his name: yet
the one opinion seems unlikely, forsomuche as S. Luke in the chapter before
rehearsed, (then Saul, which is also called paul, being full of the holy
ghost) plainly by these words declares that he had two names before Sergius
Paul's conversion: the other opinion seems more unlikely, as it appears, as
well by that some else where, as especially in the same chapter even at that
time, when he preached Christ's gospel, he is called Saul, the holy gooste
speaking these words, divide me Barnabas and saul.

Me thinks therefore, that Origens opinion is in this point nigher y^ truth.
For as in the books of the old testament we find some, which had diverse
names, as for example, one in one place is called Idida, which in an other is
called Solomon, likewise an other is in some place called Ozias, whom scripture
elsewhere calls Azarias, and in the gospel of Luke he is called Leui, which
in his own gospel calls him self Mathewe: so is it to be supposed that
Paul had two names, though that in his Epistles he never uses to call him
self Saul, but in every place Paul, peradventure because y^ name of Paul
was more familiar among them that he wrote unto, I mean the Romans and
Grecians. Now is the Latin word Saulus after like sort derived out of this
Hebrew word Saul, as the Grecians form Josephus of Joseph. This name Paul
to them that understand the Heorue toungue signifies, marvelous, if we may
be suffered to search the interpretacion of a Latin or Greek word out of a
strange language, in which enterprise, albeit in other matiers saint Hierome
seems to be scrupulous, yet herein bears he with him self, I wene, because
the matter is not earneste, nor much weighty. For in deed with the Grecians
the name sounds, quiet, and with the Latin men little, but Saul with the
Hebrews, signifies required, or if we give ^redence to saint Ambrose,
unquietness, and so does it signify in deed as Ambrose says, but that is
with y^ Grecians only, by this word Saulos. And this much have I said of
Paul's name, more at large (I wene) tha^ the nature of an argument does well
bear. This epistle endited Paul, Tertius being his scribe, as Tertius him
self at the end of the Epistle says. And I tertius salute you also, which
vvrote this epistle in the lord. It appears that it was sent to Rome from
Corinthe by Phebe a woman of Cenchris. Now is Cenchris the Corinthians port,
and stands not far from y^ city. And if any man be desirous to know the
time, when it was written, to such as weigh the matier diligently, it may seem
written after both the epistles to the Corinthians (whereof some gather, that in
it above other epistles are comprised and taught the full and perfect rules of
Christian religion) and written about the same time that he had preached
throughout the whole country of Achaia, wherein the city of Corinthe stands,
and also through the country of Macedonia borderyng nigh thereunto, even until
the cost of Slauone, not only teaching every where Christ's gospel in such
places where none of ye other Apostles else had been, but gatheryng also (as
Peter warned him) money of his hearers for the relief of the poor people,
made him self ready to repair unto Jerusalem, and thence, after yt he had
bestowed that, which he had received, minded to go into Spain, and by the
way to go through Rome, and there to salute christian men, whose faith and
godlynes he had only heard of in deed, and yet had he not seen them. Their
state was somethyng unlike the Galathians. For the Galathians being at the
first well taught by saint Paul, were by fraud of false Apostles deceived
and brought backewarde to Iewishnes again. The Romans co^trariwyse being
first miss taught and by false preachers deceived, as soon as they according to
their wisdom perceived it, they amended their fault, fast and steadfastly
after continuyng in such a trade, as they well wist was good. In the infancy
and first chyldhod of Christ's church some there were which thought that the
grace promised by ye gospel should not foorthwt be preached unto ye cursed
Panymes given al to ye worshippyng of idols and devils, forsomuche as the same
seemed especially pinised to Abraham's posteritee and stock of the Jews. Of
this mind it appears that saint Peter was, as which would not have
received the captain Cornelius into Christ's religion, had he not been warned
by a vision so to do. For which deed he was troubled at Jerusalem, what time
they, that of Jews were converted to Christ, laid unto his charge, that he
had been in company among them, that were not circumcised. And likely it is,
that some of them, which so accused Peter, were of thapostles them self. For
in the xi. chapter of the Acts so is it written: And the Apostles and brethren
that were in Jury, heard that the heathen had also received the word of god.
And when Peter was come up to Jerusalem, they that were of the circumcision,
contended against him saying: why wentest thou in to such as were not
circumcised, and did eat with them? Again some there were of this mind,
which albeit thought not, that the Panyms should from the fellowship of the
gospel utterly be excluded, yet thought they therewith also, that such should
not be received, unless they were like Jews, circumcised: as though it so were
that Christ had need of Moses law, thereby as appears laboryng to transpose
and alter the glory of Christ's gospel in to the glory of their own nation.
Agreeable with this is that which is written in the.xi. chapter of thactes,
when it is said, that such, as for the persecucion ensewyng shortly upon
Stephens death were fled into Phaenicia, Cipres, and Antioche, preached
Christ to none, but to Jews only. Again in the.xv. chapter, certain Jews
came to Antioche, which openly preached against Paul and Barnabas, that men
were without hope of salvation, if they were not, (as Moses law teaches)
circumcised. By mean whereo^ there was luche a commocion stirred up that it
was by a commen counsel decreed and appointed, that Paul and Barnabas with
their adversaries should repair unto Jerusalem, to the intent that there this
contencion might by the Apostles and elders arbitrament be determined, where
again through the vehement and contencious labor of some, of such specially,
as were of Phariseis become christians, of which sect Paul himself was too,
there was called a counsel of Apostles and elders, wherein by the authority of
Peter and James it was decreed, that the Gentiles should not be burdained with
the obseruaunces of Moses law, but only abstain from eating of strangled
beasts, from blood, from flesh offered to idols, and from fornicacion, which
points were for a time only condescended upon, by reason of the great and
stubburne scrupulositie of the Jews, as by this it does well appear, that we
now see, that three of them are in these days utterly taken away and abolished.
Upon this occasion arose also y^ notable and famous co^tencion at Antioche
between Peter and Paul what time Paul the Gentiles Apostle seeing his flock
through Peter's dissemblyng to be in ieopardye reproved him openly, as himself
in the second chapter of his epistle to the Galathians writes. Again at
Jerusalem by the counsel of James to pourge the rumor than spread among the
Jews, for that he seemed to draw men back from Moses law, he with other of
his company shaued him self, and being purified as the Jews custom was, made
his oblacion in the temple, as Luke in the.xxi chapter of thactes reherseth.
By the which place it appears, that James, albeit he before had
enfraunchised the Gentiles, welnigh from the burdaine of Moses law, abode
still yet in this opinion, that the Jews should be bound to the obseruacion
of the whole law, if it were for nothing else, but to appeace such as had not
yet so far profited in the truth of the gospel, that they could be content to
despise their auncestres rites and vsages. For so speaks James: and all shall
know, that those things, which they have heard concerning the, are false:
but that thou thyselfe also walke^t and kepest the law.

And for the same cause (I wene) shaued he his head at Cenchris according unto
his vow, as appears in the.xviii. chapter. And for like consideracion
caused he Timothe to be circumcised, as we read in the xvi. chapter, which
yet had in deed a Jew to his mother, when that his father was a Gentile.
Such a difficulty was it to make of a Jew a christian.

This nation beyond all other had a special untowardness, nor was there ever
found any, that more stiffely abode in their religion, as Josephus writes in
his book of the defense of the Jews antiquity. Moreover as the Jews were
especially hated of al people of the world, to of their side abhorred they
again al other nations, as unclean, cursed, and deuilishe, so farrefoorth
that they disdained to talk with them, who thought also y^ their temple was
utterly suspended, if any uncircumcised had entered there into. Such proud
looks had they for a little skynnes paryng of.

Forasmuch as therefore there was no likelyhode, that the Grecians and
Romans would receive such an odious law, and that the Jews on their side
held on still, Paul fearyng lest by such deadly contencion and strife a great
part of the fruit of the gospel might perish and be lost, lest also the
glory of Christ might by minglyng of Moses name be darkened and defaced, in
every place specially laboreth utterly to abrogate and abolishe the ceremonies
of the law, and to persuade them that all assurance of attainyng salvation is
through Christ only. And as he sharply, but yet louyngly, rebukes the
Galathians, for that they fell back to Iewishnes again: so does he prepare
and fortify the Romans, lest they might elswyse unware through false
Apostles be snared, who^ he well wist, never ceased, eftsoon encouragyng the^
still to continue in that doctrine, which they had once begun heartely to
enbrace and favor.

There was at Rome a great noumbre of Jews, whether they were brought thither
by Pompeius Magnus who spoiled Jerusalem, and made them captives, orels
whether it were because the province of Jury appertained to the Romans, it is
uncertain, but sure it is that their supersticion is by Horace, Iuuenale, and
Senec oftymes reproved. With them also was Paul after his coming to Rome much
troubled, as in the last chapter of thactes of the Apostles it does plainly
appear. Paul therefore like a runnyng craftesman with a wonderful discrecion
tempereth his tale between these two people, the Jews (I say) and Gentiles,
labouryng by all means possible to allure them unto Christ, as much as in
them lay procuryng that noman at al should perish to that captain, whose
soldier he was.

One while therefore chydeth he one sort, another while, another, and anon
after again comfortably encourages them both. The Gentiles pride he abated,
declaryng, that neither the law of nature, nor their Philosophy, whereof they
were so proud, auayled them so, but that they fell nethelesse into all kinds
of mischief. Checkyng again and reprouyng the Jews arrogant minds, which
through their affiaunce in the law had lost the chief ground thereof, that is
to wete, faith in Jesus Christ, he teaches them, that the ceremonies of Moses
law are abolished through the bright beams of the gospel of Christ, whom the
shadows of the law rudely represented, with diverse other things, as the
rest of the sabbath day, the displeasure and pain of circumci^ion, the coming
about of the calendes, the holy days, which thrice yearly came again. their
choice of meats, making foul again the bathes every day, the boucherye of
hurtles beasts, the religion of their temple, polluted with continual
slaughter of beasts, and that all these dark shadows at the light of the
truth appearing vanished away, and that such only are Abraham's children as
express Abraham's faith, that such are the right and true Jews, as profess
Christ's name, and that they were verelye circumcised, whose minds were
cleansed from filthy desyers. That true justice also and perfect bliss is
equally given to al people through the gospel and only faith in Christ
without help of the law, and that notwythstandyng that salvation was
specially promised unto the Jews, yet was it so promised unto them, that their
own Prophets let not to prophecye, that the same salvation being refused
by the Jews, the preaching of Christ's gospel should be spread abroad among
the Gentiles, that no man through Moses law, whom the Jews carnally
observed, obtained ryghteousnes, but through faith, as he proves as well by
the example of Abraham, as also by diverse testimonies of the law. And after
that when he has by this means abated y^ pride of both parts, by taking away
this their vain confidences, in the profession of the gospel, he makes them
equalle in such sort joyous of the Gentiles salvation, that yet like a tender
father he bewayleth the blyndnes of his own countreye men, whom toward him,
always he found most spiteful, and so he does mitigate this matier, which
was of it self hard, that he says, that all were not blinded: promisyng
that the time should come, when they should be of a better mind, and amend,
being through the faith of y^ Gentiles provoked so to do. And here by the way
touches Paul many high and diverse points of doctrine, as of
predestinacion, of foreknowleage, of vocacio^, of grace and merits, of fre
will, of the unsearchable counsel of god, of the law of nature, of Moses
law, and of the law of sin. Likewise herein are sondrye allegories, as when
he makes two Adams, one in whom we are borne to dye, another in whom we be
regenerate and borne again to live euerlastyngly, When he makes also two men,
an inward and an outward man, the inward obedient to the spyryte and reason:
the outward, subject and thrall unto lusts and desyers, of which two the
first he calls sometime the body or members, sometime the fleashe, sumtyme
the law of sin, the other sometime calls he the spirit. When he also
makes two deaths, that is to wit the death of the soul and of the body,
and the thryde death, wherein we dye unto sin, and sinful desires. And when
he makes three kinds of life, a bodyly life, a spiritual life, and a life,
wherein we live, either justly or synfully. Again when he makes two kinds of
bondage or liberty, one, wherewith we being made free from sin, live a godly
life, or else forsakyng ryghteousnes we do service to sin. And when he makes
two sorts of Iewishenes, two kinds of circumcision, two degrees of Abraha^s
posterity, two parts of Moses law, one like unto the body, carnal,
another, which is spiritual, as it were the life of the law.

Two baptismes also, of which the first is, when we at the fontstone are
washed from our old sins, the second is when we renouncyng all worldly
pleasures dye with Christ. Two kinds of buryinges, a bodily sepuiture, wherein
Christ lay three days buried, and a spiritual, wherein we sequestring and as
it were withdrawyng our selves from worldly business do rest in him. Two manners
of resurreccion, the one paste already in Christ, and shall follow in us, the
other, wherein we being quickened again from our death by sin, walk furthe
from virtue to virtue, in this present life, beginning the life, which is
without end and death, as much as in us lies. Of righteousness also two
kinds, of god, yt is to say, and man, of the judgment of God and manne, of
a double praise, before God, and before manne. After al which points
disputed, he passes over to a commen place belongyng to good manners, by the
example of the parts in a man's body, especially exhortyng the Romans to
concord, and because peace and unity can not be whereas pride and malice
raygneth, he besecheth them with ready minds, each one to bear with other,
and so to nourishe and maintain mutual love and good will. And desires the
Romans for a season to bear with the Jews infirmity, which by reason of
long custom in the law, was rooted in them, and on the other side he
requires the Jews, not to envy at the Gentiles called to the grace of the
gospel, but rather with godly mind to follow their faith and christian
liberty, wyllyng them, since y^ there is but one God of al, one Christ, one
grace, and one reward to grow all into one body, and that none arrogantlye
presume and take upon him, but if he have any gift, wherein he surmounteth
other to apply the same to the help of his neighbor. This place handles
saint Paul diversely instructyng them, how they should use themself
toward supersticious christians, or as he calls them, weak and feeble, how
toward their superioures, and how to their inferioures and fellows, toward
heathen princes and magistrates, after a sort yet doing their duties, and to
be short, how they should behave themself in prosperity, and how in
adversity. After which sharp monicion, he apeaseth the matier with the
Romans praise, and auaunceth his authority, and does them to wit, how
much more he had promoted the gospel, than other, showing what a desyer he
had to see them, promising, that he would come thither, and what let he
had, and why he was compelled to differ it, praising the fre liberality of y^
Macedonians and Corinthians bestowed upon the poor and devout people,
couertlye, and as it were with a reverence prouokyng the Romans to do the
like. The last chapter almost spends he in commendacions and yet this does
he not with names vnsauerly and at adventure heaped together, but with every
man's praise maruaylously joined with him.

Finally, because he thoroughly knew, as well the malapert wylynes of the false
Apostles, as also the ready simplicity of the Romans, eftesones he bids
them to beware of their fair speech.

Albeit most part of matiers entreated of in this present epistle specially
apertayne to that time, wherein the church being but young, secretly increased,
myngled with Jews and Gentiles together, subject than to heathen rulers, yet
is there in every place of it, somewhat, whereof wholesome doctrine may be
learned, for this our present time necessary, as to beware of supersticion,
the root and original of dissencion, which having a colorable appearance of
godlynes, is to the same most repugnante and contrary: herein also sumwhat is
there of the vain assurau^ce, which men have in worldly wisdom and in their
own acts and deserts, and of the deserte of faith, of auoydyng hyghnes of
mind, of bearyng with sumtimes the weakness of such, as are not yet fully
learned, of nouryshyng mutual concord, through each ones diligent service
toward another, of suffering in some points evil rulers and ungodly
bishops, lest by resistance the common order might be disquieted and
troubled, of ouercomyng evil deeds with good and charitable means, to beware
in iudgyng such things, as belong not unto us: to take well in worth al such
things, as may be done of a good mind, and with a right conscience, to
beware of crafty flaterie, with such other like points, wherewith this our
co^me^ life is to full. But as profitable as this epistle is, yet has it
as much, or welnygh more difficulty, than profit, which principally
happens for three causes, either through the confoundyng of the right order of
speech, or else by reason of long sentences not well hangyng together, or
finallye, for that the same are oftetymes, as a man may say, entriked or
entangled, and not fully finished but imperfect, so that thereupon Origin
expoundyng this epistle many times complayneth, here and there laboryng and
wrastlyng with such difficulties. Whether this happened through Tercius, which
was saint Paul's scribe, or else through Paul himself, or through the
interpreter, let therein other men be judges, certainly Paul himself confesses
his rudenes of speech, albeit he deny, that he is ignorant, touching
knowledge. And beside this, so far was he from sekyng for such piked speech,
as in any part sauered worldly curiosity. y^ he thought the same diligently
to be forborne and avoided, lest any part of the glory of Christ's cross
might thereby be deminished. And for this cause Origin thinks it labor lost
for any man in his wrytinges to look for eloquence. Hierome in some place
grants, that he had the art and crafty setting of words and sentences
together, and in some place denies it again, saying and affirming plainly, y^
his language was greatly corrupted, by the rude people of Cilicia, where he was
brought up. But Austen out of Paul's epistles gathers flowers and ornaments
of Rhetoric. Yea and in the acts of the apostles he is called, chief
captain of the word, and in his first epistle to the Corinthians he says
of himself, that he spoke with languages above all other. And albeit (as
saint Hierome says) at the same time all the East part of the world used
the Greek toungue, lykely yet is it, that as the french men had not such
purity of the Latin speech, as was used in the city of Rome, so might there
well be a great difference between one of Cilicia and another of Athens,
speaking or writing Greek.

Beside all these difficulties there is another, arysyng through the Hebrew
speech, whose properties Paul almost in every place uses, so writing in
Greek, that yet a man may by his writing know, that he was a Jew. The second
cause of difficulty is through the darkness of such matiers, as cannot
clearly be expressed, because none other epistle is there more in tricate and
entermedled with deeper priueye mysteries, insomuche, that Paul himself
sometime leauyng his purposed matier, is compelled to make exclamacion, and
say: O the deapnes of treasures. Yea, and for the nonce sometime so touches
he some mysteries, that he only shows the^ a far of, temperyng his oracio^
according to the times, and as their capacities served, to whom he wrote. He
law and knew certain things, which might be told to noman, knowing well
how farfurth his disciples, had need of light meat, as milk is, or of strong
food, and therewith also knew he the degrees of ages in Christ, and what was
for every age meet. So did the apostle Peter also, when he should preach to
the rude people, Christ, whom without any mention making of his godhed, he
calls a man. The third cause of difficulty makes (I ween) the often and
soden change of persons, whiles he one while has regard of the Jews,
speaking in their persons, another while of the Gentiles, su^tyme of both
parties, now the right beleuers, and then the faythles, taking upon him
sumtyme the weak, sumtyme the strong persons part, sumtyme of the godly, and
sumtyme of the ungodly. By mean whereof it comes to pass, that the reader
wandering up and down, as it were in wrenches, or (as some call it) in a
mismase diversely tournyng and wyndyng, neither sees, where he came in, nor yet
well knows, which way to go out. Insomuche that Origin both truly, and
properly (me seameth) lykeneth Paul to a man, which brings his friend into a
very rich princes palace, by tournyng of ways and secret chambers very
doubtful and cumberouse, and shows him the great treasures and heaps of
goods sumwhat a far of, and some things sets before his iyen and would
have sum things not seen at all, oftetymes when he went in by one door, he
goes out at another, so that the stranger his friend maruayleth, whence he
came, where he is, and which way to get out. This knew also saint Peter in
his second epistle, saying: that there were in Paul's epistles certain points
hard to be understood, which the unlearned, and unstable perverted to their
own destruction. Herein have we, as much as in us lay, labored to exclude
such difficulties, saving that sumthynges so peculiarly belong to Paul's
tou^gue, that in some places they could not be changed, of which sort these
be, faith, grace, the body, the flesh, the members, the spirit, the mind,
the sense, to edify, with such other like, which as they should not utterly
be changed, so have we labored to molifie the hardness of them, as much as
might be. But now let us hear Paul himself speaking to the Romans, or
rather in them more grossly and plainly to us all.

The paraprase upon the Epistle of the Apostle saint Paul to the Romans, by
Des. Erasmus of Roterodame.
The first Chapter.
The text.
Paul the servant of Jesus Christ, called to the office of an Apostle, put
aparte for the gospel of God, which he had promised before by his prophets in
the holy scriptures of his son, which was borne unto him of the seed of
David after the fleashe: and has been declared to be the son of god with
power, after the spirit that sanctifies, since the time that Jesus Christ our
lord rose again from death, by whom we have received grace and Apostleship,
that obedience might be given unto the faith in his name among all heathen, of
whose number you be the elect of Jesus Christ. Paul, even I the very same, so
becomen of Saul, that is to say, of an unquiet person, a peacemaker of late
subject to Moses law, now made fre thereof, and becomen the servant of Jesus
Christ, not like a false soldier that falls from his capitain or one that
like a truant forgoeth his old profession, but called forth to do this
message, and much more to my co^tentacion divided now, than at that time wha^
I was a mainteiner of the divided Pharisaical sect, upon an ungodly zeal, and
light persuasion wanderyng out of the right way: now, and never before meet to
be called by the surname of unfeigned division, as one divided and chosen Put
aparte for y^ gospel.
out by Christ him self to labor and travail in a much more weyghtie mat^er,
to preach (I say) the joyful tidings of God, which is no new found
pha^tasie, but promised many years since in his own prophecies, which remain
still in books of no small credence, but in such as are of an holy and most
undoubted truth of his son, which was touching his frail manhed, borne in
time, of the seed of David, and was nevertheless declared to be the
everlasting son of God everlasting, by the holy gooste, as well appeared
both by diverse other profes, as moost^ specially, by that he overcame death,
and rose again from the dead, now becomen to al such, as in him are borne
again, the prince and chief author of resurreccion, I mean Jesus Christ our
Lord, by whom we have obtained not only such fauer, as the keeping of the law
could not help By who^ we have received grace and Apostleship. etc.
us to, but also in such sort to be his messagier, that as by other Apostles
Christ's gospel has been spread abroad among the Jews, so may it by me
likewise be set forth among all heathens, whatsoever they be: not to trouble
them with the burdaine of the law, but to make them yield and submit them
selfs obediently to the doctrine of Christ's faith, steadfastly cleauyng
thereto, not to the vain wisdom of Philosophers: of which noumbre of
heathens ye Romans are also touching your nation, but by adopcion and
fatheryng called all to the right title of inheritance and surname of Jesus
Christ, which point I incidently give you warnyng of, lest either sects or
names of countries put you now at square, which through a favorable and gentle
fatheryng, are now made one man's children.

The text.
To all you that be at Rome, beloved of God and called saints, grace be with
you, and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. To al you
therefore, as many as be at Rome, the dearly beloved children of God, and to
such, as from your former synful life are called to godlynes, grace and peace
wyshe I unto you, not such as the world commonly Grace be with you etc.
wysheth, but a substancial and a new grace, that is to wete, the fre gift of
faith taught by the gospel perfectly iustifiyng: and by it through the utter
abolishement of all the offenses of your former life, a quiet peace of
conscience, and a steadfast peace and friendship with God, which two are
neither gotten by any help of worldly wisdom, nor yet by keapyng of Moses
law, but are obtained of al men, by the free gift of God the father, and
his son Jesus Christ our Lord.

The text.
First verily I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your faith
is spoken of in all the world. For God is my wytnes, whom I serve with my
spirit in the gospel of his son, that without ceasyng I make mention of you,
praiyng always in my prayers, besechyng that by some mean, at last (one time
or other) a prosperouse journey (by the will of god) might fortune me to cum
unto you. For I long to see you, ^ I might bestow among you some spiritual
gift to strength you withal: that is, that I might have consolacion together
with you, through the common faith, which both ye and I have. And first of
all, verily in all your names I render thanks to God the father, which
through Christ his son has given you this, that ye, which heretofore were
faythles, are now through your faith in great renoume in all the world, and
much spoken of. Which report certainly for the love I bear toward you, can
not be unto me, but very pleasant. For God the father is my wytnes, whom I now
being delivered from Moses law, do service unto, not with the gross and
carnal ceremonies thereof, but spiritually, by preaching the gladsome tidings
of his son (for this service pleases him best) that always and without
ceasyng I remember you in my prayers: besechyng his goodness, if it may by any
mean be, that my long desire made unto him may at last ous take effect, which
is, that his pleasure may be, I may prosperously and with a merry For I love to
see you, that I might. etc.
journey cum to you. For surely a great longyng have I to see you, not for any
advantage of mine to be had for so doing, but to bestow some gift among you:
not the gross gift of Moses law, but the spiritual gift of Christ, to
establishe you more surely, in that ye have already begun: orels to speak it
better, that every one of us may be to other comfortable, whiles I shall be
joyful for you faith, and ye likewise again rejoice of mine, by mean whereof
this will ensue, that both our faythes shall through mutual co^fortyng be more
aided and strengthened. The cause why this has not hitherto been done, rose not
of me.

The text.
I would that ye should know brethren, how that I have often times purposed to
cum unto you: but have been leat hitherto, to have also sum fruit among you,
as among other of the gentiles. I am debtor both to the greeks and to the
vngrekes, to the learned, and to the unlearned: so that (as much as in me is) I
am ready to preach the gospel to you that are at Rome also. For I am not
ashamed of the gospel of Christ, because it is the power of God unto salvation
to every one that believes: to the Jew first, and also to the gentile. Much
rather assure your selfs (brethren) that ofte^tymes purposed I to see you, but
until this time some one let or other has chanced: that I could not, and
for this cause desired I so much to see you, that I might among you also do
sum good, as I have heretofore done among other nations. Nor am I bound to
bestow this my labor of preaching the gospel, wherewith I am by God put in
trust, peculiarly upon this nation or that, but as he is indifferently God of
all the world, so is Christ's gospel equally due to all people. I call y^
gospel a mean, whereby a man is made righteous through faith in Jesus Christ
the son of God, whom the law promised, and in figure represented.

Debtor therefore am I herein, not only to the Grecians, but also to I am
debtor both to the greeks, and vngrekes.
barbarous nations, not to the learned and eloquente only, but to the rude
also and unlearned, whosoever he be, that renounceth it not, nor disdayneth it.
So that, as much as in me is, I am in a joyful readynes to preach the gospel,
even unto you also that are at Rome. No neither the majesty of thempier of
Rome makes me afraid so to do, nor think I the preaching of Christ's gospel
any such thing, whereof I ought to For I am not ashamed of the gospel.
be ashamed. For as to the wicked and unfaithful the gospel seameth a matier
to be laughed at, and vain: so whosoever believes it, to him it is the mighty
power of God, effectual to salvation, and perfect quietyng of men's
consciences: which things neither Jews tradicions, nor your Philosophy, nor
yet your dominion are able to bring about. And albeit this mighty power of
the gospel be in like condition auailable to al men, yet as Gods pleasure
was, so for honors sake, first was it offered to the Jews, after that
straight by the preachers of the gospel, to be spread abroad among the
grecians, and al other nations of the world: to the end, al men should both
knowledge their own unrighteousness, and also seek to be made righteous by
God, whither they be Englishmen, or Frenchemen. For far is that man from
salvation, which neither knows his own disease, nor woteth where to seek
for remedy.

The text.
For by it is the righteousness of god opened from faith to faith. As it is
written, The just shall live by faith. And whereas before this time sondrie men
thought righteousness to stand in sondrie points, now by preaching of Christ's
gospel all men know righteousness, not of Moses, (I say) but of God him self,
which stands not in supersticious worshippyng of idolles, nor in Iewishe
ceremonies, but is won by faith, whiles men knowledge and consent, that God
now perfourmeth that, which he long since by the mouth of his prophets
promised to do. Even as Abacu^ also prophesied, saying: Abacu^, ^^.
my righteous shall live by faith.

The text.
For the wrath of God appears from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, which withhold the truth in unrighteousness: seeing that
it, which may be known of God, is manifest among them, for God has showed it
unto the^. Yea his invisible things, (that is to say, his eternal power and
godhead) are seen, for as much as they are understand by the works from y^
creacion of the world: so that they are without excuse, because that when they
knew God, they glorified him not as god, neither were thankful, but wa^ed
full of vanities in their imaginacions, and they: folishe heart was blinded.
When they coumpted them selves wise, they became fools, and turned the glory
of the immortal God, unto an image, made not only after the similitude of a
mortal man: but also of birds, and four footed beasts and crea^yng beasts.
Wherefore God gave them up to uncleanness through the lusts of their own
hearts to defile their own bodies among them selves: Which turned his truth
to a lie, and worshipped and served the things that be made, more then him
that made them, which is blessed for ever and ever. Amen. For whereas before
this time all people in manner without al punishment and correccion, and as
though God bare with and favored men's sins, fell to mischief, now declares
he openly by his son sent from heaven, that his wrath is for good cause set
on fire, and ready to take vengeance upon al men, after what sort soever they
be ungodly or unrighteous, yea, even upon them, that to Moses law are
strangers, because the truth in manner known unto them, they applied not to
godly Which withhold y^ truth ^n unrighteousness. etc.
and virtuous conversation, but held on nevertheless in their sinful life
still, and because also they knowing much more of God, than the rude and
ignorant people, were yet no less deuilishe than the other. God in deed wholly
and perfitely, as he is, can in no wise by man's wit be known, and yet
as much as by it might be understood, men have obtained, albeit not so much
neither, without his great goodness. For never had they gotten somuche, had not
God opened it unto them, as he in deed did, albeit not by the books of the
prophets, in who^ men thought he only spoke unto the Jews, at lestewyse yet
by the wonderful creacion of this whole world.

For notwithstanding God him self can not be seen, yet is he by man's wit
known through beholding this world wrought so wonderfully, and governed also
so meruailously. Whereof albeit a beginning there was, and hereafter an end
shall follow, yet by the workemanshippe of it is understood the power of the
maker, which neither has beginning nor endyng, yea, and moreover his godhead
also, wherein he always was in him self of most perfeccion, even before the
world was made, all which was by God done, because they should have none
excuse left them to cloak their wickedness withal. For where they knew well,
that a God Because that when they knew god. etc.
there was, yet neither honored they him as God, chief ruler and gouernoure
of all, nor yet gave him thanks, as to the geuer of al goodness, whom doubtless
they were yet of duty bounden to laud and praise for the same knowledge,
whereof they were so proud, but swellyng with the blast of vaynglory they became
vain, and were in their imaginacions deceived, their folishe understandings
also darkened with the mistie cloud of arrogancy, and in that became
unlearned fools, because they bosted them self to be wise men and eloquent.

Mark now, into what blindness and foolishenes they fell. They And as they
regarded not to know God. etc.
turned and counterfaited the majesty of God immortal, not only after the
image of a mortal man, but also after the image of birds, fourefooted beasts,
and crepyng beasts. And in punishment of such monstrous honoring of God, he
suffered them so to run on headlong, that they following their own desires
fell to such filthy uncleanness, that each one of them abused and dishonored
others bodies, doing shameful vilanie thereunto. And surely well worthy were they
to fall into such horrible sins, that through pride so vnordrely and out of
fashion honored God, whom they knew, as which in steed of very god self,
worshipped a false maumet made with man's hand, and frowardly stouped unto
creatures, worshippyng them even above him, that made all things, therein
wrongful to God, to whom only praise is to be given as only among men worthy
thereof for ever.

Amen.
The text.
Wherefore God gave them up unto shameful lusts. For even their women did
change the natural use, into that, which is against nature. And likewise
also the men left the natural use of the woman, and brent in their lusts
one with another, men with men wrought filthynes, An^ received to them selves
the reward of their error, as it was according. Through this means (I say)
God being displeased suffered them to run forth headlong into all filthye and
beastely lusts. In somuche that not only the men, but also their women
forgeatyng their kind, changed the natural use of woman's body into that,
which is against nature, therein doubtless following the men, which leauyng (as
I said) the natural use of women, brent in foul and abominable lusts, one of
them upon an other, so that the male upon his like committed detestable
uncleanness. And after they had by such vilanouse ways done iniurye and spyte
to God, reward was given unto them meet for such madness.

The text.
And as they regarded not to know God, even so God delivered them up unto a
leude mind, that they should do those things which were not comely, being
full of al unrighteousness, fornicacion, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousnes,
full of envy, murder, debate, deceyte, evil condicioned, whisperers,
backbiters, haters of God, doers of wrong, proud, bosters, bringers up of evil
things, disobedient to father and mother, without understanding, covenant
breakers, vnlouyng, truce breakers, unmerciful. Which men though they knew
the righteousness of God (considered not) how that they, which commit such
things, are worthy of death, not only they that do the same, but also they
which have pleasure in them, that do them. For as they could neither be
content to acknowledge and honor God, who^ they sufficiently knew, so again
God suffered them being blinded with their own darkness to walk forth in
leudenes of mind, and that so far, that they committed such detestable
acts, as beseamed no reasonable man to do, which were elswyseful of al
naughtynes, fornicacion covetousness, wickedness, envy, murder, debate,
deceipte, maliciousnes, evil co^dicioned, whisperers, back biters, haters of
God, doers of wrong, proud, bosters, bringers up of mischief, disobedient to
father and mother, without understanding, inordinate, covenant breakers,
vnlouyng trucebreakers, unmerciful. These people whereas they right well knew,
Which men though they knew the righteousness of God. etc.
that a God there is, and know also that he is exactly and in every point
just, so that it can not be avoided, but that such outrageous offenders are
worthy death: not only do such deeds the^ self, but also consentyng to
other like doers, are to the unlearned an occasion of stumblyng and ruin

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
Therefore art thou inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou be that iudgest. For in
that same wherein thou iudgest another thou condemnest thy self. For thou that
iudgest, do even the self same things. But we are sure, that the judgment
of God is according to the truth against the^ which commit such things.
Think thou this, O thou man that iudgest them which do such things, and
do even the very same thy self, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?
Either dispisest thou the riches of his goodness and patience and long
sufferaunce, not knowing that the kyndenes of God leads to repentance. NOr
makes it so greatly for their excuse to say, that wise men with words abhor
such enormities: nor yet to allege, that the magistrates by the laws inhibite
and punish them. For whatsoever a man in the trade of his life follows, the
same thing he approves. Nothing therefore have thou to excuse thy self
withal, whosoever thou he, which winkyng at thine own faults, condemnest an
other. But much rather assure the, that whiles thou geuest sentence upon an
other, in so doing thou condemnest thy self: forasmuch as thou taking upon
the the office of a judge, do even the same things, for which thou
condemnest another. And since thou art in the same thing faulty, that he is,
surely whiles thou geuest sentence against him, therein pronouncest thou
sentence against thy self. Men may thou deceive, and their judgments
escape parauenture, because they upon conjectures only and likelyhodes give
sentence, and are not able to see the secrets of man's heart. But God which
sees, and knows all things, shall against all such haynouse offenders, But
we are sure that the judgment of God. etc.
as we before spoke of, give sentence of just damnacion, not upon any slender
or apparent proof, but even as the very truth is.

What do thou so farfoorth man, stand in thine own fantasy (I speak to
every such, as herein knows him self guilty) to think, whiles thou iudgest
such offenders, that thou can escape Gods judgment thy self, doing as
they do? and look thou to escape gods hands, when the transgressor can
not escape thine? and to avoid gods sentence, when men can not avoid thine?
What, does gods sufferaunce Either dispisest thou, thryches of his goodness.
put the in hope to escape unpunished? And is he for his exceadyng and
bounteouse goodness, or his long bearyng with the in deferryng thy punishment,
of the despised, as though he were such one, as would either wynke at
offenses, or favored evil deeds? Nor understand thou, that this gods long
sufferaunce showed upon the, puts not offenders in hope of escapyng
punishment, but favorably leads the to penance and amendment, to the end
that upon remembrance of his great benefits toward the, thou should at
last begin for shame, with thy self to be displeased.

The text.
But thou after thy stubbernes, and heart, that can not repent, heapest unto
thy self wrath, against the day of vengeance, when shall be opened the
righteouse judgment of god, which will reward every manne according to his
deeds, that is to say, praise honor, and immortality, to them which
continewe in good doing, and seek immortality. But unto them that are
rebels, and that does not obey the truth, but follow unrighteousness, shall
come indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguyshe upon the soul of every
man, that does evil: of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile. ^o every man
that does good, shall come praise, and honor, and peace, to the Jew first,
and also to the Gentile. For there is no respect of persons with god, for
whosoever has sinned without the law, shall also peryshe without law. And as
many as have sinned in the law, shall be judged by the law. For in the sight
of god, they are not righteouse, which hear the law: but the doers of the
law shall be justified. For when the Gentiles, which have not the law, do of
nature the things contained in the law: then they having not the law, are a
law unto themselfes, which show the deeds of the law written in their
hearts: while their conscience bears wytnes unto them, and also their
thoughts, accusyng one another, or excusing at the day, when the Lord shall
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my gospel. But thou
thy self tournest the goodness of god toward the, to the encreace of thy
damnation. For whiles thou through such a stubberne mind, as can by no
means be mollified with repentance, refusest and forsakest god prouokyng to
y^ amendment, nothing else therein do thou but procure, and lay up the
treasure of gods wrath against the. And albeit the wrath and vengeance of
God be not now presentlye seen and perceived, yet shall it in time to come be
found, doubtless in Against the day of vengeance.
that fearful day, when without al favor, synful people shall so much more
earnestly be punished, by how much more stubbernlye, they refused gods
gentle calling of them to amendment, and when before all the world the exact
sentence of god shall be opened, which shall neither erroniously nor parcially
pronounce, as men are wont to do, but as a most vprighte judge, and one that
knows all thing, who shall, as men's deserts be, give reward, to some
life everlasting, to them (I say) which having a confidence in the promyses
of the ghospel, continewe still in godly life, without desire of transitorye
things, or the vain pleasures of this present life, but are desirouse of life
everlasting in heaven: for their short reproach here will he give glory
without end: for despite suffered, honor, and for not regardyng their
temporal life, immortality: to other again, which through froward
rebellyon had rather obey unrighteousness and falshed, than the truth, reward
shall be given meet for such deserts, without doubt the indignation and wrath
of god, and thereby tribulation and anguyshe of mind, which punishment shall
indifferently be laid upon all sinful offenders, but specially upon the Jew
and Gretian, to the end that such be first punyshed, to whom god first
offered his merciful fauer: on the other side, to every such, as through
faith has lived godly, shall praise, honor, peace, and glory equally be
given, but to y^ Jew first, the^ to y^ Gretian, and after that, to al other
wild and barbarouse nations. For with god there is of persons no such respect,
as there is among men syttyng in judgment, but he is one to all men, and
equally just. Wherefore, whosoever have without the law sinned, shall also
without the condemnacion For whosoever has sinned without law, shall also.
etc.
of the law peryshe: and such shall by the law be judged, as receiving the
law have against the same transgressed. For in the sight of god to be coumpted
for righteouse, it is not sufficient to have been only a hearer of the law,
which I say, because thou that art a Jew should not by so thynkyng
deceive thy self, but such, as in works and godly life express and put the
law in ure, such (I say) and none else shall by the judgment of God be
taken for righteouse. God is such one, as embraces and makes of good works,
albeit there be no law at al, and much more abhors such, as having a law
are not yet obedient thereto, howbeit in deed no man is there, that is
utterly without a law. For when the Gentyles being without Moses law even by
the course of nature do such works, as are by the law commanded,
notwithstanding they be not put in remembrance so to do by the rules of Moses
law, yet are they to them self instead of a law, as well appears, by that
in their life they express the very substance thereof, wryte^, not in tables,
as the other was, but in their hearts, insomuche that, whatsoever in the
court of judgment among the Jews is customablye wont to be done the same
is done in their hearts, whiles thy conscience bears wytnes either against
the, or with the, and thy alteryng thoughts either accuse, When the the lord
shall judge the secrets of me^. etc.
or excuse the. In time to come herafter by this law shall god judge, in
which day that shall be opened plainly in the syghte of all men, which is
now in men's hearts secretly wrought, where he shall give sentence* to whom
nothing is unknown. But yet this judgment, shall god execute by Christ his
son, for this present time our Lord and savior, which shall than be the
judge of all the world. And lest any should think, that this I now tell
you, is some fable or dream, assure your self, that it is a part of the
gospel, which I preach unto you.

The text.
Behold thou art called a Jew, and trustest in the law, and make thy
boaste of God, and know his will, and allowest the things that be
excellent, and art infourmed by the law: and beleuest, that thou thy self
art a guide of the blind, a light of them, which are in darkness, an
infourmer of them, which lack discrecion, a teacher of the unlearned, which
have the ensample of knowledge, and of the truth, by the law. Thou therefore
which teach an other, teach not thy self. Thou preachest, a man should
not steal, yet thou stealest. Thou that say, a man should not commit
aduoutrie, breakest wedlock. Thou abhorest images, and yet robbest god of his
honor. Thou that make thy boste of the law, through breakyng of the law
dishonourest god. For the name of god is evil spoken of among the gentiles
through you, as it is written. What cause then have thou, that art a Jew, to
glory of the law? Behold, thou which to be called a Jew thynkest it a
great matier, and upon the privilege of the law given unto the by god bearyng
thy self boldly, bostest that god is author of thy religion, whose mind and
pleasure thou know by the holy wrytynges, which came from him, which art
also infourmed by the law, so that not only thy self art learned to know
what is to be desired, what things are to be avoided, and what is best to be
done: but stand also in a confidence, that thou art able to be guide A light
of the^ which wander in darkness.
to such, as are in blyndnes, and to give them light, which wander in darkness:
that is, to be a teacher of the unlearned, and an infourmer of them, y^ lack
discrecio^. Because the law has in the brought to pass to know the form
and order of life, and the rule of truth, think thou for this in the grace
of the gospel to be preferred before the Gentile? I think not so, but rather
think that the knowledge of the law, whereof thou makeste such boste, shall
before the judgment seat of god make thy matier worse, unless thou frame thy
life thereafter. For the knowledge whereof thou make such boste, shall
sharply be laid to thy charge. Thou bragger upon the law, what crakest thou?
thou (I say) which teach an other, and teach not thy self? which
preachest, that a man should not steal, and thy self do commit robbery?
which tellest other, that aduoutrie must not be done, and thy self breakest
wedlock? which abhorrest ydolatry, and thy self take gods honor from
him? which among men crakest and gloriest of the law given unto the by god,
and by breaking the same, dishonourest and shamest god the author thereof?
tournyng y^, for which among other thou sekest for glory, to his reproach, to
who^ only al praise is dew. For this wise to do, what else is it, but as far
as in the lies, to dishonor god, I say, as far as in the lies, for in
deed upon him, no reproache at For the name of god is evil spoken of among the
Ge^tyles.
all falls. Of such, long since complained the holy prophets of god, and
namely Esai and Ezechiel saying, that through you the name of god is evil
spoken of, reviled, and through your fault cou^pted reprocheful, eue^ among
the Gentiles given to ydolatrie, whiles ye bostyng your selfs upon the title
of god and his law, lead an ungodly life.

The text.
For circumcision verelye avails, if thou keep the law. But if thou be a
breaker of the law, thy circumcision is turned to uncircumcision. Therefore if
the uncircumcised keep the right things contained in the law, shall not his
uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? And shall not uncircumcision,
which is by nature, (if it keep the law) judge the, which being under the
letter, and circumcised, do transgress the law? He is not a Jew, which is
a Jew outward: neither is it circumcision, which is outward in the flesh,
but he is a Jew which is hyd within, and the circumcision of the heart is
the true circumcision, which consists in the spirit and not in the letter,
whose praise is not of men, but of god. For neither is it sufficient to be
only a Jew borne, nor yet to be taken into their religion, but to that end
avails circumcision, if thou put that thing in ure and practice, for which
circumcision was given, and in trade of ly^e exercise that, which thou in
ceremonies takeste upon the. But if thou transgress the law, thy circumcision
will nothing avail, But if thou be a breaker of the law, the circumcision.
etc.
forasmuch as before god, it is as though thou were not circumcised at al. Now
then as thy circumcision is turned into uncircumcision, except thou therewith
keep other rules of the law, which make to good manners: so shall the Gentile
for lack of circumcision take no hurt, but before god be accoumpted for
circumcised, if he being ignoraunte nor regardyng the ceremonies of the law,
perform such things wherein the whole perfetcion and end of the law
stands, that is to say, pure and innocent life, and have therewith a sure
confidence in Christ, and be obedient unto him, which is the end of the
law. Yea I say, the Gentile shall not only in this behalf be in as good
state as thou art, but be also set before the, and therein in better case, than
thou art, because he knows not what circumcision is, so that therefore his
hurtles life shall declare thy life to be more damnable: forasmuch as he not
professyng the law, in the order of his life expresses yet the end and
meaning of the law, whereas thou lenyng exactly to the bare words and small
points thereof, professing also the same with the mark of circumcision, by
refusyng Christ breakest that, which in the law is chiefest. Before god, who
judges not men by bodily marks, but by their godly minds lost have thou
the name of a Jew, onles thou live after thy profession. For neither is he
Jew, which bears upon him a Iewyshe outward mark, Neither is it
circumcision, which is outward in the flesh. etc.
nor is he circumcised, that has a little skyn pared from his secret part: but
he, and none else is a very Jew, which inwardly and in his conscience is a
Jew, whom as god only regards: so therbye judges he every man. To be
brief, he is circumcised, whose heart is circumcised, rather tha^ he, whose
privy member has some part pared of, nor trusts somuche upon the law
graue^ in stone, as upon y^ spiritual meaning of it. For whose only flesh is
circumcised, among me^ he may in deed glory, that he is a Jew, but the very
Jew in deed is he, whose conscience is pourged from sin, and has wholly
given himself to Christ which man: albeit among men be defrauded of his praise,
yet does god acknowledge and approve him, whose approbacion is perfect bliss
and salvation.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text*
What preferment then has the Jew, or what auauntageth circumcision? Surely
very much. For because that unto them were committed the words of god. What
then, though sum of them did not believe. Shall their unbelief make the promise
of god with out effect God forbid. Let god be true, and every man a liar, as
it is written: that thou myghtest be justified in thy sayings, and ouercum
when thou art judged. But here some one will say, if the whole matier stand
in godly life, and hurtles manners joined with faith in Christ, what preferment
then has Wha^ preferm^nt then. etc.
the Jew more, than the Gentile, or what aduauntageth circumcision at al, if
faith and godly living make both the circumcised I say, and the uncircumcised
equal? yea if circumcision make the Jews matier worse, if he transgress the
law and offend? Truly, touching the free gift of gods grace offered by ye
gospel, no point better is the Jews state and condition, than is the
Gentiles. And yet in some consideracion surely a great preeminence is it to be
a Jew borne. For herin first may they lawfully glory, that among all other
nations unto them only were delivered the words of god, as it may appear,
either for that to them above other was committed the law and prophecies, or
for that to them god only vouchesaued to speak. Of which both, the first
could not be without the great bounteousnes of god, whom it pleased so to
magnify that nation: and the^ again much more seems he prepared to the
faith offered by the gospel, which knows the promyses of the law, and
nygher is he to the truth, which has sumwhat thereof, albeit it be but a
shadow. For the knowledge of Moses law, and of the dark sayings of the
Prophets are, as it were a step onwarde, and a furtheraunce to the doctrine
of Christ's ghospel. And albeit sum of the Jews being to much stubbernely
given to the What then though sum of them did not. etc.
carnal letter of the law would not give credence to the gospel, yet
hurts not their unbelief, such as unfeignedly credit it. Shall the unbelief
of such (think you) cause, that the faithful promise of god shall not take
effect, so that he being therewith displeased will, (as men are comenly wont to
do,) break his promise, and disapoynt all men of y^, which he has equally and
indifferently promised to every man? God forbid it should be so: but rather
look surely, that god will with all men keep his promise, saving: with such,
as refuse to take his offer: which he does, lest any manne might at any time
reprove the fidelity of the promise maker, and lest it appear not
sufficiently that god is true, and as he is true in deed, and cannot lie, so is
he ready to perform, whatsoever he promised, but falsehod and lying cum of
men, which through their own faults are of the promises of god disapoynted.
God, as he is faithful, so neither can he be deceived, nor deceive: but man,
in as much as he is but manne, may do both. That the promyses of god ben
most certain, witnesses also the mystical and heavenly psalm of David,
saying: To the intent thou in thy sayings myghteste appear righteouse and
true, and in deed ouercum, as often as men shall accuse the for such one,
as makes vain promises, falsely and leudly thynking with themself, that for
mine offenses sake thou will not perform thy promise made to the stock of
David. In deed I cannot deny, but that I well deserved to be disapoynted of
thy promise, but yet much matier makes it, that thy fidelity and truth
should through my sins be among men more commended and spoken of: as it
will, when they shall see the hold on still, not chaungyng thy sentence,
notwithstanding all mine unrighteousness.

The text.
But if our unrighteousness make the righteousness of god more excellent, what
shall we say? Is god unrighteous, which takes vengeance? I speak after the
manner of men: god forbid. For how then shall god judge the world? for if the
truth of god appear more excellent through my ly unto his praise, why am I
he^cefurth judged as a sinner? And not rather (as men speak evil of us, and
as sum affirm, that we say) let us do evil, that good may cum thereof: whose
damnacion is just. But here sum man with himself will peradventure think
this: if by men's unrighteousness, the righteousness of god, be more advanced
and set furthe, what shall we think? Shall we think god unrighteous, and
such as would have sin to continewe, that his justice may more clearly
appear and be more praised? But now speak I not in mine own name, but in the
name of ungodly people. For god forbid, that any such thought should at any
time enter into any good man's mind. If For if the truth of god appear more
excellent thorough my ly.
god be unrighteous, (as this reason seems) how can he be high judge of this
world? For if this be gods ordinance, that I should be a sinful liar, to
the intent that through my lying his fidelity and truth might the better be
known, and more set forth, and that my reprochefull life also should auau^ce
his glory, why is the^ my sinful life laid unto my charge? why thynk we not
rather, as foul tounged people falsely report, taking us, as though we this
said: let us do unhappily, that good may cum thereof, if that through out
unrighteousness the righteousness of God be more magnified and praised. But god
keep all good folk far from such frantyke imaginacions. Al such men for
their unbelief are for just and lawful causes by gods sentence condemned.
For as they can not lay to gods charge the sins, whereof themself be wylful
workers, so thanks should there none be given unto them, if god of his
goodness turn their offenses to his glory.

The text.
What then, Are we better than they? No, in no wise. For we have all ready
proved, how that both Jews and Gentiles are all under syn, as it is written.
There is none righteouse, no not one, there is none that understands, there
is none that seeks after god: they are all gone out of the way, they are al
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open
sepulcher, with their tongues they have deceived, the poison of aspes is under
their lyppes. Whose mouth is full of cursyng and bitterness. Their feet are
swyft to shed blood: Destruction and wretchedness are in their ways, and the
way of peace have they not known. There is no fear of god before their eyes.
But now again to our purpose what shall we say? Are we, that are Jews in
better case, tha^ are y^ paynyms? Not a whyt. I mean touching gods grace,
promised by the gospel, though that in the prerogative of the law given unto
us by God we seem to pass them. For now have we already plainly proved, that
both Jews and Gentiles are all subject and thral unto sin. As for the
gentiles, y^ matier is more plain, than can be denied. And y^ the Jews are in
like case, their own scriptures bear evident witness. For in the.xiii. psalm
of David this wise is it written: there is none righteous, none is there that
understands or seeks for God, all are wandered out of the way, and
therewith also becomen unprofitable, no man is there, that does well, (I say)
not somuche as one. Again in the.v. Psalm: their shrote is an open sepulcher,
with their tongues have they deceived: the poison of ye serpent Aspis is under
their lips. In the ix. Psalm likewise, whose mouth is full of bitterness and
cursyng. With which testimonies the prophet Esai agreyng, says: their fete
are swift to shed blood, destruction and wretchedness are in their ways, and
the way of peace have they not known, there is no fear of God before their
yies.

The text.
We know, that whatsoever thing the law says, it says it to them, which
are under the law, that all mouths may be stopped, and that all the world
may be subdued to God, because that by the deeds of the law, there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight For by the law cummeth the knowledge of
sin. Nor can we now cauel and say, that such sayings touch not, ne belong
to the Jews, since that whatsoever the law says, the same properly
appertains unto such, as the same was given unto, and are therefore to the
same more bounden. All which was of God for none other purpose done, but
generally to stop every man's mouth from proud That al mouths may be
stopped, and that all the world. etc.
auauncyng of them selves: and eftsoon to declare, that the whole world was
endaungered to God, since that, no not Moses law carnally kept, was able to
make any man righteous and innocent in the sight of God, without whose
commendacion among men to be accoumpted for righteous is but a vain trifle.
But here will some one say, if men by keeping of the law become not righteous,
what good does it? Certainly to this end auailed the law, that by it each man
knew his fault. And surely toward the recovery of health no small
furtheraunce is it, if a man know his own disease.

The text.
But now is the righteousness of God declared without the law, forasmuch as
it is allowed by the testimony of the law and of the prophets. The
righteousness of God comes by the faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon
all them, that believe. But as hitherto it specially apperteined to the law to
show men their offenses, which they before the law given knew not so well:
so is there now by preaching of the gospel, a righteousness declared, which
needs no help of Moses law, which righteousness yet the law and prophecies
spoke of before. A justice (I say) there is declared, not of the law, but the
justice of God, to be obtained, neither by circumcision, nor Iewishe
ceremonies, but through faith and a sure trust in Jesus Christ, who alone
gives true and perfect justice, not only to the Jews, or to any other
special nation, but without percialitie to all and every man, which has a
sure trust and confidence in him.

The text.
There is no difference: for all have sinned, and are destitute of the glory of
God: but are justified freely by his grace through the redemption, that is in
Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be the obteiner of mercy through
faith, by the means of his blood, to declare his righteousness, in that he
forgeueth the sins that are passed, which God did suffer, to show at this
time his righteousness, that he might be coumpted just and the iustifier of
him, which believes on Jesus. For as the disease is so general that all are
this far gone, that before God they can of their own justice nothing glory:
so must all of the same God, whom they have offended, seek to be made
righteous, which righteousness he gives, not as wages due for keeping of Moses
law, or of the law of nature either, but freely through the great mercy of God,
procured not by Moses, but by Jesus Christ, by whose blood we are redeemed from
the tyranny of sin. The Jews as it cannot be denied, had in times past their
mercy table, a shadow and figure of that, which should Who^ God has ^et
f^rth to be the obteiner of mercy. etc.
afterward follow, but no we has God declared Christ to be unto all people the
very propiciatory mercy table, and sacrifice, to the intent that upon
displeasure conceived first with our sins, we might now be made at one with
God, not by the blood of beasts, as the Jews were, but by the most blessed
blood of Christ him self, which washes away the sins of all men, thereby
declaryng his righteousness to al y^ world, whiles he through his son in such
sort forgeueth the sins of our former life, y^ he would yet have us no more
hensfoorth fall again unto the^. Nor yet does he this because men have deserved
so much, but because his pro^ise was so to do. Nor is it to be supposed, that
God has until this time suffered his people to run at ryote out of his laws
and to continue in sin, either because he wist not what they did, or favored
their doings, but rather in this time long before appoineted, to show his
righteousness, that so it might clearly appear, that he is both thoroughly and
in all points righteous of him self, and the only author of our justice,
which he indifferently gives to al such, as believe the gospel of Jesus
Christ.

The text.
Where is then thy reioysyng? It is excluded. By what law? Of works? Nay: but
by the law of faith. If this be so, (as it is) then answer thou me, which
art a Jew, where be thy crakes become? They are undoubtedly taken from the,
and dispatched art thou of them, since the time that it has pleased God, in
the gospel of Christ to make all nations equal. For even the very Gentiles have
now health and salvation offered unto them. But then by what law I pray you, are
they excluded? Are they excluded by the old ceremonial law of Moses? No not
so, but by a new law, such as nothing else requires, but a living faith in
the son of God.

The text.
Therefore we hold, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the
law: Is he the God of the Jews only? Is he not also the God of the Gentiles?
Yes, even of the Gentiles also. For it is God only which justifies the
circumcision that is of faith, and uncircumcision through faith. Do we then
destroy the law through faith? God forbid. But we rather maintain the law.
For we hold (as in deed the truth is) that every man may hensfoorth through
faith be made righteous, though he keep not the works and ceremonies of Moses
law. The law and righteousness thereof peculiarly heretofore Therefore we hold
that a man. etc.
appertained to the Jews: but the benefit of Gods mercy offered by ye gospel,
God now generally offers to al men. Is he (trow ye) only God of y^ Jews? Is
he not as well God also of the gentiles? Doubt there is none, but that he is God
of al nations, as well (I say) of the gentyles as of the Jews. Then further,
sithe there is but one God over all, good reason is it, that his gift be
likewise commen to all. Whereupon it follows again, that it is not one God,
which justifies the circumcised Jew, calling him from his affiaunce in the
law, which promises a savior, to the faith of the gospel, which
perfourmeth the same, and another God which justifies the uncircumcised
paynym, by calling him from his idolatry, to the same faith: but it is even
one god, which works righteousness in both. But here will some Jew say,
what say thou Paul? If through faith (as thou say) all things be given
us, then make you Do we then destroy the law through faith, etc.
Moses law but a vain thing, and for none use and profit given to ye Jews.
God forbid. Rather so far are we from thabolishement or thappayryng of the
authority of the law, that we much more maintain and establishe it, whiles
we preach and teach, that thing to be done in deed, which y^ law promised,
and tell you of him, to who^ as to a mark the law appointed and directed. Nor
is that abolished, which is changed for a better, no more the^ we say, that
the flowers are abolished, when in their stead falling from y^ trees there
grows fruit, or when in stead of y^ shadow, there is placed a very body.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
What say we then, that Abraham our father (as pertainyng to the fleashe) did
find? If Abraham were justified by deeds, then has he wherein to rejoice: but
not with God. For what says the scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was
coumpted unto him for righteousness. To him that works, is the reward not
rekened of favor, but of duty. To him that works not, but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, is his faith cou^pted for righteousness (according
to y^ purpose of the grace of god) Eue^ as David describes the blissedfulnes
of that man, unto who^ God imputes righteousness with out deeds. Blessed are
they whose unrighteousness are forgeuen, and whose sins are covered. Blessed
is that man, to whom the lord will not impute sin. ANd yet if now any man
stubbernly maintein and defend the present state of Moses law, gross and
carnal as it is, and not only defend it* but also upon a co^fide^ce therein,
put other in hope to be saved: Against him will I for example rehearse no mean
Jew, but eue^ Abraham him self the first and chief of all the circumcised, of
who^ as father and beginner of their stock, the whole nation of Jews are wont
specially to crake and glory. And yet is Abraham in very deed touching carnal
kynred in such sort father to the Jews, that yet he is nevertheless father
to all such as in faith rese^ble him, and are like unto him, in thimage of ye
soul, and not somuche in y^ image of the body. As for circumcision, (which as
I said) had his first beginning in Abraham, was but a pledge and mark of al
Moses law, and as a man may say, a special token whereby Jews are known to be
Jews. Let us now therefore consider what Abraham got, and that which he got,
by what means he obtained it. That Abraham first was praised for a righteous
man, y^ scriptures self bear evident record. But now if he either through
circumcision, or by keeping of such other ceremonies, as If Abraham we
justified by deeds, the^ has he wherein to rejoice: but not with God.
are in Moses law prescribed, wo^ne yt co^mendacion, than has he in deed
somewhat whereof to rejoice, and yet not before God, but before men. And why
before men? Undoubtedly, because he got it through such externe and bodily
means, as men use to judge of. And why not before God? Certainly because he
obtained it not for his faythes sake, whereby we are brought into y^ fauer of
God. But now so is it that Abraham even at Gods own hand obtained the praise
of righteousness. Whereupon it follows, that he got it, not by keeping of any
prescripte ceremony of the law, but by that faith, whereby all men both Jews
and Gentiles must now seek for like praise, I mean al such, as are the true
children of Abraham. Nor require I, that ye should herein believe my words,
unless the scriptures clearly and evidently testify the same. In the.xv.
chapter of Genesis, ^o, thus is it written: Abraham believed God, and the same
belief of his was unto him cou^pted for righteousness. To him had God promised
an offspring, as ple^tiful, as is the nu^bre of stars in the firmament, which
yet was in ye case that both his wife was past child bearyng, and him self had
yet none heir. And yet unlikely as it was without delay believed he the promise
maker, not co^sideryng the possibility of the thing, which was promised, but
rather who was the promise maker, and for yt his sure co^fidences sake was he
foorthwt cou^pted righteous, not for his circumcision, which he had not at y^
time received, but for his faythes sake, and was in deed so counted, not before
men, but before God, who was the only witness, when this mystery was wrought:
of who^ this his faith was counted for righteousness, long before that he had
done any good deeds (such I mean) as are by Moses law commanded. Now that
call we properly counted or taken for paid, which being not paid in very
deed, is by y^ special goodness of him, that so takes it, rekened for paid.
Now then, if even y^ Patriarche Abraham him self was not for his circu^cisions
sake cou^pted righteous, but was long before his circumcision, for his faythes
sake accepted of God, why should the Jew in y^ ceremonies of y^ law put any
affiau^ce, to who^ y^ same was given but for a season? And surely much less
should the gentiles therein have any trust, to who^ the same was not given at
all. For if unto y^ Jew subject To him that works, is the reward not
reakened of fauer, but of duty. etc.
unto the ceremonies of the law any reward be given for keeping of them, y^
seems paid unto him, as wages due by covenant, rather then given by any
fauer and mercy of y^ geuer, as of y^ otherside, if for tra^gression of y^ law
the same suffer punishment, well worthy is he thereof. For as y^ servant, when
he has thoroughly finished his task, he receives his wages: so if y^ same
forget to do his duetye, he is with si^ipes and punishment sharply corrected. But
to the gentiles, to who^ the ceremonies of the law are unknown, or to the
Jews either, which having forsaken the bondage of the law are become
christian men, and work no longer now, as it were by tasque, but unfeignedly and
purely put their trust in him, which freely gives perfect justice, even to the
wicked, al whose sins he has by his death taken away, to such (I say)
gives faith, as he did unto Abraham, which is, that they be accou^pted for
righteous, not for keeping of the law, but for their only faythes sake,
whereunto no man is compelled, but rather ge^tely provoked and allured, which
God does to the intent that our faith in Christ should be a thing of us freely
wrought, and of no co^pulsion, and that our deliuerau^ce through him, and
restoryng of us into the nu^bre of righteous people should be a thing of Gods
fre gift and mercy, and of no debte. To this purpose likewise makes David
both king and prophet, the chief glory of the Jews next after Abraham, and
in who^ Christ thonly fountain of our wealth and salvation was specially
promised unto us. For in his.xxxi. Psalm describes he also this blessedfull
state of man, declared now by the gospel, showing y^ it is not given and
received, as due unto us for the works of Moses law, but by the fre goodness of
God, whereby we are moved and drawn to believe. Blessed are they (says he)
whose unrighteousness is forgeuen, and whose Blessed are they whose
unrighteousness is forgeuen.
sins are covered. Blessed is that man to who^ the Lord will not impute
sin. By which testimony ye se how unrighteousness is forgeuen, done against
Moses law: And how also sins done against y^ law of nature are covered.
Briefly ye hear and perceive, that such as through Christ have attained this
blisseful state, have no kind of sin laid unto their charge, in all which
saying yet of y^ prophet there is of keeping the law no mention made. Cause is
there none therefore, though y^ Jews be never somuche descended of these men's
stock, that they should peculiarly challenge as their own, either the
blisseful state spoken of by David, or the praise of righteousness given unto
Abraham, excludyng the gentiles from it.

The text.
Came this blessedness then upon the uncircumcision, or upon the circumcision
also? For we say, that faith was rekened to Abraham for righteousness. How was
it than rekened? When he was in the circumcision? or when he was in the
uncircumcision? Not in the time of circumcision: but when he was yet
uncircumcised. And he received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the
righteousness of faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised: that he should be
the father of al them that believe, though they be not circumcised, that
righteousness might be imputed to them also: and that he might be the father of
circumcision, not unto them only which came of the circumcised, but unto them
also that walk in the steps of the faith, that was in our father Abraham,
before the time of circumcision. If it be reasonable, let them answer me to
this question, whether this blessedness promised by God, only appertain to
such as are circumcised, and are thereby bound to y^ law? or else to such, as
also are both ignorant what circumcision is, and what the ceremonies of the
law mean? Thus much must they at the lest grant, y^ Abraham for his faith
was coumpted righteous. But by Abraham's title as first father and beginner of
the Jews stock, must al his ofspryng be esteemed and cou^pted for righteous.
For an unmeet thing is it, and against reason, that the neuewes should by other
means challenge any right, tha^ by such whereby their first pare^t was put in
possession. A known matier is it y^ Abraham was called righteous, but let the^
then tell me for what cause was he so called? was it for paryng of a How was it
then rekened.
little skin from y^ fore part of his yard, or was it rather for his faythes
sake, without any co^sideracion had of circumcision? To say that he for his
Iewishe circumcision, obtained the praise of a righteous man, cannot be
defended, forasmuch as at y^ time when Abraham was so cou^pted, neither was he
circumcised, nor yet commanded so to be. But long before that be leued ^e that
of his sede Christ should be borne,, through whom all nations of the world
should obtain this blessedness and fatherly praise of righteousness: and for
this faith of his was he counted for righteous. After which time followed
circumcision, not as a mean whereby to make him righteous, And he received the
sign of circumcision, as a seal. etc.
but to be as a mark and token among men only, and not before God, whereby the
Jews should be known to be his children, which being not circumcised believed
God, and yet uncircumcised as he was, had through his only faith pleased God.
If Abraham had been first circumcised and tha^ believed, and so consequently
called righteous, then would it appear some what, that this holy name of
righteousness appertained only to the circumcised, but in him was it contrary,
as which for his faythes sake was by God pronounced righteous, before that he
was circumcised or commanded so to be. And afterward ensued circumcision, not
as a mean to make And he received the sign of circumcision
him righteous, for so was he already, but partly to be as a certain figure of
the true circumcision, y^ is to say, of the pure and godly life, which should
afterward be in such as would perfitely believe in Christ, which kind of
circumcision is not ministered with a sharp flynte stoone cuttyng of a little
skin from the fore part of the yard, but wrought by the spirit of God,
rootyng out of men's hearts all naughty desires, and partly also to be a
certain seal or bond whereby Abraham should of the promises be assured,
which should not yet foorthwt be accomplished in Isaac, which only figured
Christ, but in due season be performed in y^ son of God, that so finally
Abraham the first example of faith, might be known to be the father unto all
such, as would believe in Christ (as he did) though they were not carnally
circumcised: that as his faith was coumpted for righteousness, so should the
faith of al such as are the true and lawfully begotten children of Abraham, be
of God likewise accepted. And by this also in such sort known to be father
to the gentiles, that yet the Jews That he should be the father of all t^em
that believe.
are not excluded, if they for this only stand not to much in their own
fantasy, because they are lineally descended of the circumcised Abraham's
stock, and have nothing else to prove their kynred by, but only a bare bodily
mark, but have rather that faith whereby he being not yet circumcised, was of
God cou^pted for righteous. For nothing is there that to y^ fathers makes a
surer proof that their children are their own and lawfully begotten, than if
they follow their fathers virtues. And if it so be, that men use to disenherite
even their own children, deniyng that such as grow out of kind from the
good conditions and manners of their auncesters, are theyrs, surely much more
will God by like marks seauer bastardes from his lawful children.

The text.
For the promises (that he should be the heir of the world) happened not to
Abraham or his sede through the law, but through the righteousness of faith. For
if they which are of the law be heirs, then is faith but vain, and the
promise of none effect, because the law causes wrath. For where no law is,
there is no transgression. Therefore by faith is the inheritance given, that it
might come of favor, that the promise might be sure to all the sede: Not to
them only which are of the law, but to them also which are of the faith of
Abraham, which is the father of us all (as it is written. I have made the a
father of many nations) even before God, whom he believed, which restored the
dead unto life, and calls those things which be not, as though they were.
Now as Abraham deserved neither for keeping of Moses law, which was not at that
time given, nor for his circumcisions sake, which (as I before said) he had
not yet received, that God should make him such honorable promises, that is to
wete, that the dominion of the whole world should by inheritance fall unto him,
or to his posterity, but through faith whereby he deserved to be called
righteous: no more should the Jews look to enjoy the said right of Gods
promise, either by the only title and right of circumcision, or of the law
either. A title (as ye know) can by none other ways be conveyed to
posterity, than by such as the first author and beginner of the stock came
by it. For if the possession and enheritaunce of the whole world promised unto
Abraham's posterity generally belong unto the Jews by the title of the law,
so that they thereby only becu^ heirs, tha^ is y^ preaching of Christ's faith,
but a vain For if they which are of the law, be heirs, tha^ is faith but
vain. etc.
thing, than is gods promise of none effect, since it is certain, y^ through
the benefit of the law, noman receives y^ blessyng which god promised to
Abraham. Yea I say so unable is Moses law to bring men to this joyful and
welthy state, y^ it rather works wrath and gods displeasure, whiles thereby
occasion is ministered more grievously to offend him, whereas faith contrarywyse
of y^ wicked and ungodly makes men righteous. For where offenses are and
displeasures are borne, as it is with them, which are under the law, there is
there for children no inheritance dew. But now and if any man ask how the
law rather works gods displeasure and wrath than righteousness, behold,
this wise it is. Experience shows, that it is unlawful to condemn another
man as gyltye, unless by some law first made there be a penalty of
conde^nacion proclaimed and appointed. But so was it that in Moses law were
there diverse things commanded to be done or not done, as for example
circumcision, the Sabbath day keeping, feasts of the new Moon, the
differences of meats, touching of dead bodies, of strangled beasts, of
blood, of washynges, al which are of this sort that though we never so
diligently observe them, yet make they us not righteouse, and yet is such one
as does in these offend, endaungered and subject to punishment. But now
because by this law no man is bound, but such as are Jews, and forasmuch as
to Abraham was promised the enheritaunce of all nations, well follows it, that
by the right and keeping of the carnal law, the promise of god can not be
derived into all nations, and then follows it that by faith is this
inheritance obtained, and gods pleasure is it should so be, to thentent that
men should know, that it is a gift given by gods free mercy and favor, and
of no debte. And thus shall gods faithful promise, whereby Therefore by faith
is thinheritaunce given. etc.
all Abraham's posterity is put in hope of this glorious state, be certain and
effectual. I call Abraham's posterity, not only such, as by reason of one
common law given unto them are of one stock, but rather all such, as in
faith resemble their first parents. For more agreeable unto reason is it, y^
spiritual kynre^d knytte together through faith, whereby Abraham deseruyng the
promise became gods friend, should be a thing much more effectual, then is
any carnal kynred through the law, who provoke both gods displeasure and
also condemns us. A vain crake is it therefore to say as the Jews do, that
Abraham is only their father, when he is in very deed father to us all, of
what nation soever we be, so y^ we humbly receive and embrace Christ's gospel.
That this is true, god himself in the.xvii. Chapter of Genesis witnesses,
what time he increased his name, and instead of Abram calling him Abraham,
said: I have I have made the a father of many nations. etc.
made the father of many nations. Certain must that be, which god spoke. But
then if Abraham be father to the circumcised people and no mo, how stands it
with this, y^ he is father of many nations? Be in this persuaded rather, y^ as
there are no more gods but one of al such as trust upon him: so gods will and
pleasure was, y^ Abraham which was a figure of god, even as Isaac fygured
Christ, should be the father, not of this nation, or that only, but of all them
which were by like faith joined unto him.

Nor could Abraham in his belief be deceived, because he had a confidence in
his promyses, which was not only able to make the barayne to be fruytfull, but
also to restore the dead to life again: so farfurthe that when he was
afterward commanded to sacrifice his only son Isaac, And calls those
things, which be not, as though they were.
in whom alone all the hope of his posterity rested, yet nothing doubted he
of the fidelity of the promise maker, by whom Abraham well wist that his son
might be restored to life again, and knew also that god was able to call into
a part of this blessed inheritance, such things as in the common opinion of
men are vetterly nothing, as though they were somewhat. The Jews judge
themselves only to live and to be somewhat worth, abhorryng the Ge^tyles as
unmeet for any good thing, but to be abiectes: to whom yet more auayled the
merciful and favorable calling of god, then carnal kynred auayled the Jews.

The text.
Which Abraham, contrary to hope, believed in hope y^ he should be y^ father of
many nations, according to y^, which was spoken: Eue^ so shall thy seed be, as
the stars of heaven, and the sand of the sea And he faynted not in the
faith, nor yet considered his own body, which was now dead, even when he
was almost an hundred year old: neither yet that Sara was paste child bearyng
He staggared not at the promise of god through unbelief, but became strong in
faith, and gave god the praise, being full certified, that he which had
promised, the same was able also to make it good. And therefore was it reckened
to him for righteousness. And in deed well worthy was the strong and constante
faith of that good old man, to have gods favor, which upon a trust of gods
promise, in Which Abraham contrary to hope believed in hope.
such things conceived a sure hope wherein by course of nature there was no
hope to be conceived: in so doing as well knowleging the faythfulnes of god y^
promise maker, as also his great and almighty power. And though himself was
feeble, and his wife likewise passed temyng, yet nothing doubted he, but that he
should be father of many nations, and the beginner of such an infinite
posterity, as is the number of sterres in heaven, even as god said unto him,
when he had brought him into the fields and showed him the firmament ^et
thycke and replenished with sterres, saying: As thou art not able to number
these sterres, ^o shall thine ofspryng be innumerable. And albeit at that time
the same promise by reason of his feeble age seemed neither apparent nor like to
be true, yet weak and feeble as he was in bodily strength, he faynted not in y^
strength of faith, nor as mistrusting people do, sought for profes how these
things might be done or not done, nor co^sydered his dry and barayne body eue^
the^ worn out, and not able According to that, which was spoken, even so
shall thy seed be.
to have issue, as which was the^ well nighe an hundred years old: nor yet
consydred his wives age neither, whose flowers by reason of age were dried up,
i^ such sort y^ though himself had not ben past al strength to beget a child,
yet was she passed child bearyng and unable to co^ceyue. No such thing (I
say) remembered he, nothing mistrusted he, nothing staggered he, but surely and
with all his heart leaning and trustyng unto y^ promyses of god (as strong in
faith as he was in body weak, being in despair of his own power,) conceived a
most sure trust upon the power of him y^ made the promise: and in all this
matier chalengyng nothing to himself as his own, gave over the whole praise
and glory to god only, whom he by his sure and constant faith, both testified
to be true of promise, as which would deceive no man, and likewise to be
almightye, as who^ he thought able to perform his promise were the same
never somuche passing all worldly strength.

This is the glory wherewith god is chieflye delighted, which needs no
service of ours, and therefore, (as the scripture says) it was reckened unto
him, for ryghteousnes.

The text.
Nevertheless it is not written for him only, that it was reckened to him
for ryghteousnes: but also for us, to whom it shall be coumpted for ryghteousnes,
so that we believe in him, that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead: which
was delivered for our sins, and was raised agyue for our justification. Nor
is it to be supposed, that this was written only for Abraham's sake when it is
said, y^ his faith was reckened unto him for righteousness for y^ scripture
laboreth not so much for the auau^ceme^t of Abraha^s glory only but rather to
give us which are of Abraha^s posterity, an example, whereby Nevertheless it is
not written for him only.
all the world might understand, that as Abraham, for his faythes sake without
healpe or aid of the law obtained before god to be coumpted for righteouse:
so should none of us by keeping of the law only, think to have the same.
Abraham the^ was called righteouse, because he believed god. And surely entry
have we none to ryghteousnes, unless we likewise believe in the same god, which
to us has brought to pass in Jesus Christ our lord, whom he raised from
death to life, even that he promised to Abraham, in the figure of Isaac, thereby
declaryng that the faith of Abraham was no vain faith, which believed y^ god
was such one, as could give life even to the dead, and call again such
things, as are not, as though they were. Let us not therefore for our
righteousness and cleannes of life, thank Moses but Christ, which gave
himself to death to the intent he would freely through faith forgive our
sins, which also rose again from death, to the intent we should abstain
from deadly sin, nor displease him, by committyng again such things for
which his pleasure was to dye. He dyed (I say) to kill sin in us, and rose
again from death to thentent that by him first, dying to our old sins, and
so furthe with him, and by him, being brought and restored into a new kind of
life, we may hereafter live unto y^ ryghteousnes, which we have through his
goodness received.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
Because therefore y^ we are justified by faith, we are at peace with god,
through our lord Jesus Christ: by whom also it chanced unto us to be brought
in through faith, unto this grace wherein we stand: and rejoice in hope of the
glory of the children of god, Not that only, but also we rejoice in
tribulation knowing, y^ tribulation brings patience, patience brings
experience, experience brings hope, and hope makes not ashamed, for the love
of god is shed abroad in our hearts, by the holy ghost which is given unto
us. COnsyderyng that only syn causes variaunce betwixt god and man, now are we
certeynly at peace with god, because that of wicked and synful people we are
made ryghteous, and Because therefore that we are justified by faith* we are at
peace with god.
that neither by Moses law, which rather increased our offenses nor for our
works, but as our father Abraham was for our faythes sake reconciled unto god
y^ father, whose friend also through faith Abraham became, and that neither
through Moses, but through the only son of god our lord Jesus Christ, which
with his blood washed away our offenses, and by his death reconcilyng us unto
god, being before y^ time displeased with us, so opened for us an entrye, y^ we
through like faith without either the law, or circumcision might be brought
into this grace of god promised by the gospel.

In which faith we stand steadfast, and not only stand with good will and
couragiouslye, but also rejoice not only because we are at peace with god but
also for that we are pute in sure hope, that through our stedfastnes of faith,
we shall in time to come enjoy the glory of heaven. Nor envy we the Jews,
through the glory of their circumcision, and as we envy them not, so mislike
we not our faith, the brynger furthe of such plentiful fruicte, nor yet
repent we our glory, with hope whereof we for this present time are advanced
and vnderpyght. Which glory albeit it be such, as cannot yet be seen, and
though without sufferyng of adversities and troubles we attain not thereunto,
yet eue^ the same troubles in the mean season reckon we a thing to rejoice and
glory of, as which we suffer both to our high praise, and are also such, as
open unto us the gate to life everlasting. For this new example has Christ
both given us, and by him also taught are we this excellent doctrine, that by
sufferyng of tribulatio^s, the virtue of patience is strengthened: and as the
fire tries gold, so through patience become we better tried and proved both
of god and man. Again the more tribulatio^s we suffer, the surer hope of
reward stand And rejoice in hope of y^ glory of the children of god.
we in. Nor is it to be feared, lest this hope mysse and disapoynt us, and of
our belief make us ashamed, before y^ wicked people because we have eue^ now
thereof in hand a most sure pledge and earnest penye, which is the meruaylous
and unspeakable love of god toward us, not only externally showed unto us,
but most ple^tifully printed in our hearts in manier co^pellyng us to love him
again wrought by the holy ghost, and in stead of the watryshe letter of the
law given unto us as a gage, assuryng us of his promise herafter surely to be
performed.

The text.
For when we were yet weak, according to the time, Christ dyed for us, which
were ungodly. Yet scarce will any man dye for a ryghteouse man Peradventure for
a good man durst a man dye. But god sets but his love toward us, seeing
that while we were yet sinners, according to the time, Christ dyed for us Much
more then now we that are justified by his blood, shall be saved from wrath
through him. For had not god of his great mercy singulerly loved and pitied us.
Jesus Christ his only son had never by the will of his father descended For
when we were yet weak, according to the time, Christ died for us.
into earth, nor have taken our mortal flesh upon him, and so have dyed,
namely, what time we were weak, thrall, and subject to beastlye desires,
which were by the law more like to be provoked, than to be brydel^d and
suppressed. Bad yet as we then were, he loved us in hope of salvation, yea he
loved us being wicked people and deuilyshe ydolaters, and so loved us, that for
our sakes he wyllyngly suffered death, which was the greatest, evident, and
most singular point of love, that ever could be showed. Among men scarcely
shall any man find another so frendlye, as will for his good and well deseruyng
friends sake suffer death: But to grant that some such may some where be
found, as for his approved friend will paraduenture be contented to dye, yet
has god showed an example passing all examples of such earthly loves, whom it
pleased even for wicked and unworthy persons to deliver his only son to
death. Now if god have for us being wicked people and offenders done thus
much, how much rather will he do for us being now purged, chastised, and by
the blood of his son, reconciled unto him, that we through sin fall no more
into his displeasure, and thereby stand in ieopardy of more greuouse damnation
not only for our synful life, but also because we should then be unthankful.
Christ dyed for us but for a season, but he rose again for ever. And as he
dyed for us, so arose he again for our sakes.

The text.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to god by the death of his
son, much more, seeing we are reconciled, we shall be preserved by his life.
Not only this, but we also joy in god by the means of our lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have now obtained the atonement. Now and if by his death
he have this much done for us, that where as before that time god was with us
highly offended and displeased, we have him now gratiouse and merciful, much
rather shall we so through his life be preserved, that we no more fall into his
displeasure. By his death delivered are we from sin, his life shall preserve
us in innoce^cie, his death has delivered us from the power of the devil, his
life shall toward us continue the love of his father. These are such evident
signs Not only this, but we also joy in god. etc.
of gods love toward us, that they not only put us in a quiet assurance,
and in a sure hope to be saved from the vengeance of god to come, but also
give us a lustye courage, even to glory not of our deseartes. but with
thanks geuyng to god the father, through whose bountefull mercy we have
received this welthy state, promised by him to be given unto us, neither for
the laws, nor for circumcisions sake, but through Jesus Christ his son, by
whose means we are restored into his favor again, to thentent that for all
this benefit, thanks should be given to noman, but to god himself and to his
only son. Al which was done by the meruaylous and secret counsel of god, to
the end, y^ the way and means of our restoryng should agree with the way
of our damnation.

The text.
Wherefore* as by one man syn entered in the world, and death by the means of
syn: even so death also went over al men, insomuche as all men sinned. For even
unto the law was syn in the world, but sin is not imputed where there is no
law, nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over the^ also, that
had not sinned with like transgressio^ as did Adam, which bears the
similitude of him, that was to come. Wherefore as by Adam, which first
transgressed the commandment of god, sin entered into the world, and by
the means of sin, wherefore, as by one man* syn entered in to the world.
death, because syn is, as it were the poison of man's soul, by whose
occasion sin, which had his beginning in the first of our stock, issued
furthe into all his posterity, whiles each man followed the example of their
first parente: so through Christ alone, in whom by faith al are borne again,
we receive innocence, and therwyth life: which blessedness likewise having his
beginning in one first and new author of generacio^, Christ, is spread abroad
among all them, which are through faith knyt unto him, and in hurtlesse
life follow his steps. But when sin had once ouergone the world, and
poisoned all mankind, such was the strength thereof, that it could by no
means, neither by the law of nature, nor yet by Moses law be vanquyshed, so
that by the law nothing was done but that such as had offended, knew that
they were gylty and worthy of damnation. For as to children, in who^ the law
of nature has no place, by reason of their tender age not able as yet to
discern, what is good, and what is not, syn is not yet imputed, no more was
But sin is not imputed, where ther^ is no law.
it laid unto the Paynyms charge, if they ought did against Moses law.
Therefore before the law given, which showed men their sins, by reason of
the law of nature the world in deed was not utterly without sin, but yet bare
men at that time with themselfes: and as it were without correction fell to all
licenciousnes, as though they had been utterly lawles. Forasmuch as therefore he
was not yet comen, which should take away the sins of the world, and
vanquyshe the tyranny of death, death which enteryng through Adams offense
raygned without any resistance, even upon them also which had not maliciously
offended against the commandment of god, as Adam did, which even than bare
the image and figure of Christ, which should come long after, and yet mean I
not, that he is in every point unto Christ like, but that he in some points
bare the image of Christ. In this point like, that both were the begynners of a
generation, the one of an earthly, the other of an heavenly. In this like also,
that a certain thing is from both begynners derived into their posterities,
but the difference is, that from the earthly Adam was the beginning of
unrighteousness and sin, but by the heavenly Adam is given all grace and
goodness.

The text.
But the gift is not like as the sin. F^^ if through the sin of one, many
be dead, much more plenteous upon many was the grace of God and gift by grace
which was given by one man Jesus Christ. But now as these two are partly
like: so were they not equal. For besides that elswyse of it self it is a thing
more effectual to save then to destroy, But the gift is not like as the sin.
much more strong and mighty is Christ to save, then was Adam to condemn,
so that much more effectual is Christ's obedience to give life, then was the
tra^sgression of Adam to work death, so that in all points Christ's goodness
ouerwaigheth the offense of Adam, which thing I monishe you of and say, lest
any man might think the sin of our first parent to be so outrageous, that he
should despair of his restoryng again to salvation. For it one man's sin
was of such power, that it made so great a number of people thral unto death,
of much more power, plentyfulnes and more general shall the benefit of God be
and his mercyful gift which he has gyne^ us by one man likewise, I mean Jesus
Christ y^ author of godly and innocent life, by whom he has not only taken
away the tyranny of death and syn, but has also in stead of syn given
righteousness, and in the stead of the tyranny of death, the kingdom of life,
so that the offense of Adam through the great mercy of god, turned to our
weal and advantage.

The text.
And the gift is not over one sin: as death came through one sin of one,
that sinned. For damnation came of one sin unto condemnation: but the gift
came to justify from many sins. For if by the sin of one, death reigned by
the means of one, much more they (which receive abundance of grace and of
the gift of righteousness) shall reign in life by the means of one (that is to
say) Jesus Christ. Again though through Adams only offense damnation
entered, and through innocent Christ, salvation: yet is not one equal to
another. For in such sort had damnacion her beginning, that the sin of one
man issued into al his posterity, by mean whereof it might in continuau^ce of
time, at the last have made the whole world thrall to sin: but y^ benefit of
god co^trarywyse is in such sort given, y^ the sins of all the world then
gathered together, and grown strong are at once by Christ's death wyped away,
and not only so, but also righteousness is given. And therefore For if by the
sin of one death reigned by y^ means of one, much more. etc.
albeit the sin of only one man had such a power, that it brought all men
under the tyranny of death, so that all such as had offended, as Adam did,
could not be, but under the same yoke, that he was, yet much more receive we
through the bountiful and over flowyng mercy of god, which is, that all such
as following the example of Christ, live iustlye and innocently, shall not only
be free from the tyranny of sin and death, but also through him, which is
the only author of our felicity and welthe reign themselfes in life
everlasting.

The text.
Likewise then, as by the sin of one, there sprang up evil on all men to
cond^^nation: even so by the righteousness of one: spryngeth good upon all men
to the righteousness of life. For as by one man's disobedience many became
sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteouse. But the
law in the mean time entered in, that sin should increase. Neuerthelater
where abou^daunce of sin was, there was more plenteousnes of grace. That as
sin had raygned unto death, eue^ so might grace reign through righteousness,
unto eternal life by the help of Jesus Christ. Herein therefore are both
like, that as by the offense of one man, syn came into the world, by mean
whereof all became thrall unto death: so through y^ ryghteousnes of one, which
is derived into al such, as believe and submyt themself unto the kingdom of
life, are all men of god made righteouse and partakers of the kingdom of life.
For as by Ada^, through For as by one man's disobedience many became sinners:
so by the obedience. etc.
his disobedience to gods commandment, many became sinners, whiles they
followed their first fathers tra^sgression: so shall only Christ which even unto
the death of the cross obeyed god his father, make many righteouse, all such
(I say) as are folowers of his obedience. But to return again unto our
former purpose, if by such means as we before spoke of, it pleased god both
to take away sin, and also to give righteousness and life, to what purpose
was it to give a law, unable to do any good? Whereunto to answer, it is to be
understood, that in this the law did good, y^ thereby the great mercy of God
toward us became more evident and better known. For the more great and
outrageous the power of sin is, the more notable is his benefit which
delivers us from sin. Now is by the law the tyranny of sin set forth,
whiles the same, albeit in vain, resists it. Strong and mighty was this
tyranny, but much more mighty was the mercy of God, whereof we have by so
much more perfect experience, the greater danger of the said tyranny we have
hitherto been in. And That as syn reigned unto death, even so. etc.
certainly for this also are we bounden to thank the law, because thereby we
perceive the greatness of Gods benefit, by mean whereof as the devil through
sin winnyng the dominion, destroyed man's soul, which is very death in
deed, so should godly life through Gods gift obteinyng the kingdom and upper
hand, give life unto all men through the help of Jesus Christ, under whom as
our lord and captain we rejoice being now delivered from the bondage of
death, under whose baner we were not long ago souldiars.

The.vi. Chapter.
The text.
What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that there may be abundance
of grace? God forbid. How shall we, that are dead as touching sin live any
longer therein. Know ye not that all we, which are baptized into Jesus Christ,
are baptized to dye with him? We are buried then with him by baptism, for to
dye: that likewise as Christ was raised up from death by the glory of the
father, even so we also should walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death
like unto him: even so shall we be partakers of the resurreccion: knowing this
that our old man is crucified with him also, that the body of sin might
utterly be destroyed, that hensfoorth we should not be servants unto sin.
For he that is dead, is justified from sin. But because we before said, that
through the law sin increased, and that of sin this good came, that Shall
we continue in sine? God forbid.
the grace of God more increased, lest by so saying some take occasion to
continue in sin, and this wise think with him self: if sin auaunce and
increase Gods grace toward man, well done were it to sin more often, that
his fre gift may more and more increase. Hereunto I answer, that pity were it
that any man should so think. When I so said, I meant and spoke of the sins
of our former life, which God of his goodness turned to our weal and profit.
But now after that we are ons brought from the tyranny of sin, into the
kingdom of innocence, God forbid that we should again depart from our
redemer, and fall again headlong into our old tyrannous subjection. Life and
death are so quite contrary one to another, that each one destroys the
other, nor can they after like consideracion stand together. Therefore, if that
as soon as we begin to live to Christ ward, we be dead toward the devil,
with what reason stands it that we should still live to him ward, to whom we
are already dead? If we live to Christ, then live we not to y^ devil, And if we
through sin live unto the devil, then are we to Christwarde dead. But now
forasmuch as we live to Christ, it follows that we are dead to sin, which
he has by his death vanquished. For mete it is that ye should know, since ye
have received the baptism of Christ, what the said baptism in us does both
work and signify. What time we are in Christ's name baptized, we dye ^now ye
not that all we which are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized to dye with
him.
with him touching y^ sins of our former life, which sins are through his
death abolished, and not only so, but buried also are we with him, and that by
the same baptism: that as he, which never lived synfully, diyng yet for our
sins, was raised up again to life everlasting, not by any worldely power,
but by the mighty power of his father: so should we being through him raised
out of the death of sin, and becomen dead to our former life leadyng
hereafter a new life, walk in the trade of godly conversation, continually
encreasyng upward from better to better.

For seeing that we are through baptism planted into Christ's body, and in
manner altered into him, mete is it that whatsoever we see done in him, which
is our head, the same be of us, which are his members, either in life
expressed, or else looked for in time to come.

Risen is he again, ascended into heaven, and sets in glory at the Even so
shall we be partakers of his resurreccion.
right hand of his father. All which things already done in Christ, we may
our selves finally trust to enjoy, if for this present time, as much as in
us lies, we follow the same, and diligently put them in ure. Therefore if we
through baptism dye unto our former sins, and fleashely lusts, therein (as
we may) resemblyng Christ's death: even as mete and convenient is it, that we
hensfoorth forsakyng the filthynes of sin, and diligently exercisyng our
selves in godly works, express in our living his holy resurreccion.

To follow Christ's death, is neither to kyl our selfs, nor yet to hurt our
bodies, but then (as ye well know) dye we with him, if to our old froward
appetites, we have such a dull desire, y^ to them we seame as dead. For
according to our double generation we must in our selfs conceive two men:
the one old, gross, and like unto the yearthly Adam, the other new and desirous
of heavenly things, as which has by Christ sent from heaven, his beginning.
Our old man therefore is, as it were, destroyed, what time it was with Christ
fastened upon the cross, whereupon also were extinguished all our desires of
transitorye pleasures, whose whole rabble may well be called the body of sin.
This body of That hence forth we should not be servants un to sin, etc.
sin is then in us effectually and holsomely slain, when hurtefull desires
are in such sort destroyed in us, that we no more do service unto sin. He
that after this sort (as I have now expressed) follows Christ's death, is
even become a righteous man, and is no longer subject unto sin, from whose
tyranny he is already delivered.

The text.
Wherefore if we be dead with Christ, we believe, that we also shall live with
him, knowing that Christ being raised from death, dies no more. Death has
no more power over him. For as touching that he dyed, he dyed concerning sin
once. And as touching that he lives, he lives unto God. Likewise consider ye
also, that ye are dead, as touching sin, but are alive unto God, through
Jesus Christ our lord. Let not sin reign therefore in your mortal body,
that ye should thereunto obey by the lusts of it. Therefore if (as we have now
oftentimes said) we be to Christ dead, and so delivered from our former sins,
our trust is hereafter through innocent and holy life, to live with him: and so
to live with him, that we shall never dye more: in this also as far as
possible is resemblyng Christ, who submitted not him self in such sort to
death, that in him death should have any power after, but rose again to live
euerlastyngly. For as touching that he dyed unto sin, he dyed but once, but
touching that For as touching that he dyed, he dyed concerning sin once.
he now lives, he lives to God his father, by whose might he was from death
raised to life everlasting.

And as it was in Christ: so think your selfs once dead to sin, by that
your old v^cious desires are destroyed, and by that ye are now becomen new
men, as though ye were raised again from death, to live a heavenly and an
immortal life to Godwarde, by whose benefit we are now made innocent and
holy. For if ye this do not, ye live not to Godwarde, because that to God noman
lives but such as live godly, righteously, and in other virtues. For since
that we are planted into Christ's body, and becomen one with him, mete is it
that we as members be like unto our head which is Christ. And since yt he now
lives to Godwarde for evermore, reason it is that we likewise live unto him
through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. And as he being once raised from
death, Let not sin reign therefore in your mortalbodies
suffers no more ye tyranny of death, so must ye take heed lest sin being
now once banished out of your souls, recover in you again the tyranny which
it has lost, and so renew his old title of death. As it surely will, if ye
follow such beastly desires, with which the devil is wont to allure and bring
us into our old bondage.

The text.
Neither give ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness unto sin, but
give over your selves unto God, as they that of dead, are alive. And give over
your members as instruments of righteousness unto God. For sin shall not have
power over you: because ye are not under the law, but under grace. And see
that your members being now consecrate unto Christ, do henceforth no more
service at the devils mocion, whom Christ has subdued, and so to work
unrighteousness, but rather hereafter so use your selves, that by all your life
it may appear, that ye with Christ have forsaken all deadly sin and works
of death, and to be altered into a new life. And so shall ye in deed do, if
henceforth all your members, that is And ge^e over your me^bres as
instruments of righteousness unto God. etc.
to say, all the powers of your bodies and souls be applied, not to vice in
the devils service, but to righteousness in the service of God. For reason
requires that we wholly belong to him, to who^ we have once bound our selves,
and with him to have nothing to do, from whom we are now departed, and whose
yoke we have once shaken of. Nor is it to be feared lest sin, (will we or
nil we) bring us back again into our old bondage, because ye are now no
longer under the law, which rather provoked wylfull desires, then suppressed,
but under Gods grace, which as it was able to deliver us from the bondage of
sin, so is it able to keep and preserve us, that we no more fall thereunto.

The text.
What then? shall we sin, because we are not under the law, but under grace?
God forbid. And yet now God forbid, that in the mean season any manne should
this wise take my words, when I said, ye were free from the law, either to
think, that forasmuch as the law is abolished, ye may do as ye list, or
that Gods free goodness which has pardoned all our old offenses, has also
therewith freely given us liberty to do evil:

But rather so much the more ought we to abstain from sin, because we are
now no more like slaves compelled to do well, as by a law, but are as children
are wont to be, with deserts and love provoked thereto. So that your bondage is
changed, and not utterly taken away. In such sort have ye given over the
service of the law, that ye now are become Christ's servants, whose service
is all weal and bliss.

The text.
Know ye not how that, to whom soever ye commit your selves as servants to
obey, his servants ye are, to whom ye obey: whether it be of sin unto
death, or of obedience unto righteousness? Ye know both kinds of service. Now
is it partly in your powers to chose which ye will, for both together ye can
not. The time was when thou stodest in a fredome to keep thy self out of
bondage, but since thou have freely made thy self another man's, and have
begun to be obedient unto him, the same must thou only obey, whose servant
thou art become. They therefore which give them selves unto sin, and to sin
His servants ye are to whom ye obey. etc.
become bondeslaues, the fruit of that their bondage is death. On the
othersyde, such as to Christ have dedicated and given them selves, him must
they obey, which they shall do to their own great commodity. For by that
their obedience nothing shall Christ win, but thereby get they them slues
righteousness, that is to wete, the well agreyng and pleasant company of all
virtues knitte together.

The text.
God be thanked, that though ye were the servants of sin, ye have yet obeyed
with heart unto the rule of the doctrine that ye be brought unto. Ye are then
made free from sin, and are becomen the servants of righteousness, I speak
grossly, because of the infirmity of your flesh. Glad am I for your sakes, and
for this give thanks unto God, that whereas heretofore ye were in this most
miserable bondage, wholly given to idolatry and filthy lusts, ye are now
departed from the tyranny Ye have yet obeyed with heart unto y^ rule of y^
doctrine of that ye be brought unto.
of the devil, freely and gladly submittyng your selves to Christ's kingdom and
governance, purposyng henceforth to live, not as ye are, either by wylful
desires or by the law moved, but after the new rule of ye gospel, whereunto ye
are brought from your old errors, and so brought that ye are become under
another law, enfraunchised out of the dominion of sin, and thence conveyed
to serve righteousness and to do her behestes. Nor think it hard and
paynefull, because ye are commanded to serve righteousness. For as sin and
godly life far differ one from another, so are their fruits quite contrary,
and the fruits of godly life, infinitely more excellent, so that if we weighe
and consider, but even the thing self, much more cause is there, why men
should more diligently serve God, then the devil. For whosoever serves sin,
serves the devil, but he that serves innocence, serves God.

But yet will not I for a while so much require of you, as I might lawfully
do, but rather temper and measure my writing to y^ weakness of them, in whom
the spirit of God is not yet fully ripe, but are rather such, in who^ yet the
old naughty desires labor to grow up again. This only require I, that
righteousness be now with you in like condition, as sin before was.

The text.
As ye have given your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity (from
one iniquity to another) even so now give over your me^bres servants unto
righteousness, that ye may be sanctified. For when ye were servants of sin,
ye were void of righteousness. And that as before this time you gave your
members to serve uncleanness and iniquity, so that as blind desires led you, ye
fell from one iniquity to another, every day more filthy than other: even so
now see that ye likewise give your members to obey righteousness, whose
servants ye have freely made your selfs, therein still encreasyng from virtue
to virtue, every day more pure and holy then other. For it is to much against
For when ^^ were servants of sin ye were void of all righteousness.
al reason, but that Christ should at lestwyse have somuche service of you, as
the devil had before this, and as unreasonable is it, but that ye should now
begin to do as good service under your lady and maistres righteousness, as ye
before in another sort did unto the tyranny of sin. As touching your former
synful life for your excuse after a sort some thing may be said: which is,
that as long as ye were heathens, because ye were bond servants to sin, ye
might seem with righteousness to have no thing to do, nor to be any thing bound
unto her, as to whom ye had not yet bound and yielded your selves. But now have
ye nothing to lay for your defense. But yet and if the excellent nature of
righteousness self move you not, consider and weigh yet the diverse fruits and
profit of both services, you I speak unto, which have of both services had
experience.

The text.
What fruit had ye then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? For the
end of those things is death. But now are ye delivered from sin, and made
the servants of God, and have your fruit to be sanctified, and the end
everlasting life. For the reward of sin is death, but eternal life is the
gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Call to your remembrance, what
time ye were servants unto sin, and as vile bond slaves followed wanton
desires, what reward (I pray you) had ye at the last? Even the sins self
have their punishment joined unto them, because the same forthwith all to
defile and corrupt the whole man, so vilanously and reprochefully defacyng him,
that since the time ye are amended, and as men awaked out of the dronkenes of
syn, ye are ashamed of your selfs, so that your minds abhor to think upon
your old noughtie pleasures. And though this wages (as ye see) be not For the
end of those things is death.
to be desired, yet beside the last stipend and hyre, which the devil pays
to such as do him service, is death everlasting. Howbeit in very deed the life
which in the mean leason is after this sort led, is a most shameful death
in deed, and not a life.

Now consider what a happy change ye have made, which being delivered from
the tyranny of the devil, are now becomen the servants of God. By this ye see
(I am sure) how unlike the masters are.

But if this content you not, but that ye look for a reward also, first of
For the reward of syn is death, but eternal life is the gift of god. etc.
all whereas ye lived before fylthy and wicked, ye now live innocent, pure and
holy, which only is the very life: and beside this, after that this short
time of your service is finished, ye shall receive your last wages, I say
life everlasting. Compare me now god with ye devil, with uncleanness, holiness,
with everlasting death, life everlasting. Even as I now told you, so it is,
the reward of the devil is death, which he gives unto men for his fylthy
and miserable service. But contrary for such as according to their abilities
serve god, is laid up life immortal, not as hyre wages due for the same, but
as a free gift to be given of God the most merciful father, not for Moses,
but for Jesus Christ's sake our Lord, whom the father would have thanked for
all his gifts, given unto us, rather then any law or circumcision.

The.vii. Chapter.
The text.
Know ye not brethren, (I speak to them, that know the law) how that the
law has power over a man, as long as it endures? For the woman, which is in
subjection to a man, is bound by the law to the man, as long as he lives.
But if the manne be dead, she is losed from the law of the manne. So then, if
while the man lives, she couple her self with an other man, she shall be
coumpted a wedlock breaker. But if the man be dead, she is free from the law
of the husband, so that she is no wedlock breaker, though she couple her
self with an other man. ANd good reason is there, why we should so do, for
Christ has not only delivered us from the bondage of syn and death, but also
from the bondage of the law, which was given but for a season, and has
delivered not only the gentiles, which were Know ye not. etc. how that the
law has power over the man. etc.
not to this law subject, but even the Jews self to, which have hitherto
ben under Moses law. That this which I have said, is true, may be proved
even by the wytnes of the law it self. And first, what say, ye that are
Jews, which by reason of the knowledge ye have in the law, well perceive and
understand, that a man is bound to the observance and keeping of any law even
as ye for example not long since were bound to Moses law, as long as the
same law lives, that is to say, as long as it endures in his full power, and
strength: but if the same be either grown out of use, or else abrogate, a man
is than no longer bound thereunto. For the Jews bond toward the law ought
no For the woman which is in subjection to a man. etc.
further to be kept, then in the bond of the wife to her husband the same
law requires to be kept. Now is the married woman, which is under her
husbands dominion bound unto her husband, as long as he lives. But as soon as he is once dead, she is delivered from the bond of that matrimony, and
after the death of her former husband straightway at her own liberty.

Wherefore if she during the husbands life, to whom she belongs, go So then
if while the man lives she couple herself with an other. etc.
about to mary another she shall be cou^pted a wedlock breaker, as which has
forsaken that husband, from whom she might by no means, save only death be
departed.

But contrary wise, if she co^tinew in that ba^devntyl her husbands death, she
is no le^ger bound unto him, but is in such sort become her own woman, y^
she may lawfully mary any other who^ she will. For it is not to be supposed,
that as the masters title descends to his heir, in such sort that the
servant by the death of his master changes not his state, but his master:
that like wise the right of a husband upon his wife falls after his death
to an other, but the title of marriage reaches no further, than for a man's
own life. If it so were that the husband were immortal, the woman should
for ever continue bond. Now then because Moses law in figures and ceremonies
was as it were a shadow of Christ to come, it was given to be of force
effectual, but until the time, that to y^ bright light shadows should give
place: and until that to the truth, the shadows of truth should give over
and vanyshe away. And therefore since that Moses law was as a man might say,
a mortal thing, marvel it is none, though it be now dead in deed. And for
this cause as long as the time of the law continewed, the same stood in full
power and had full authority upon them, which had bound them self unto it.

The text.
Even so ye also (my brethren) are dead concerning the law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be coupled to another (I mean to him, that is risen
again from death) that we should bring forth fruit unto god. For when we
were in the flesh, the iustes of sin which were stered up by the law,
reigned in our members to bring forth fruit unto death. But now are we
delivered from the law and dead unto it, where unto we were in bondage, that
we should serve in a new conversation of the spirit, and not in the old
conversation of the letter. But now have ye with Moses law nothing to do,
since the same is become to you ward dead, or if she lived still, as she does
not, yet are Eue^ so ye also (my brethren) are dead concerning y^ law, etc.
ye at the least to her dead. For since that Christ, which is the truth, has
showed his glisteryng beams of the gospel, abrogate and abolished is all
Moses law, at the least touching the carnal meaning thereof. And forasmuch
as ye are now planted into Christ's body, coupled unto him, as y^ wife is to
her husband, and being made free from your former bond ye are belonging to
your new husband, such one (I say) as is immortal, as which once rose from
death to live hereafter for ever, insomuche that ye cannot in time to come
either look to be married again, or to be deuorced, (for a shameful vilanye
and reproach were it to such a new husband, as ye have gotten, in any point
to hang upon the old,) forasmuch as (I say) ye are in this case, diligently
labor you, that as by the law, which for the time was as it were your
husband, ye brought forth a certain sort of fruit, not unlike your
husband: so endeavor ye to bring forth now being much better married then ye
before were, fruit such as is conueniente for God your father in law, and
Christ your spouse and husband.

For as long as we were subject to the gross and carnal law as it were to a
husband, the same seamed, as husbands do, to bear rule over us, because
carnal lusts being by reason of the law more provoked, had such power in
our members, that even like slaves we were drawn to sin, and so of that
unhappy marriage, unhappy children had we, when that which was borne, was for
nothing good, but to be destroyed and to dye.

But now, since we are delivered out of y^ bondage of the law, under But now
are we delyu^^^^ from the (...) and de^^ (...) it.
whom we lived before, or rather because our life was sinful, we lived not
at all, but were dead, and yet under it were we until a certain time
appointed, against reason is it, that we should any longer obey that carnal
husband, that is to wete the letter of y^ law, but rather serve our new
spouse, which is both heavenly and spiritual: not seruyng him in the old
conversation of the letter, but in the new conversation of the spirit, which
spirit we have of him received, as a marriage token.

The text.
What shall we say then? Is the law sin? God forbid. Nevertheless I knew
not sin, but by the law. For I had not known what lust had meante, except
the law had said, thou shalt not lust. But sin took occasion by the
means of the commandment, and wrought in me all manner of concupiscence. For
verelye without the law, syn was dead: I once lived without the law. But when
the commandment came, syn revived, and I was dead. And the very same
commandment, which was ordained unto life, was found to be unto me an
occasion of death. For syn took occasion by the means of the commandment,
and so deceived me, and by the same slew me. Wherefore the law is holy, and
the commandment holy, and just and good. But now fear I, lest here any
captious person think, that I condemn the law as the author of sin,
because we said, that whiles we were under the law, we ran forward even to
sin and death. For such one will not let to reason the matier, and say,
that as righteousness works life: so to sin it properly appertains to
work death, so that then if the law in us works death, either seems it that
the same law is sin, or at the least joined with sin. But god forbid, that
any man should so think: For the law is not author of sin, but the
vtterer Nevertheless I knew not sin but by the law.
and apeacher thereof, whereof before the law given we were in manner ignorant,
because each man favored his own folly, thynking that he might lawfully do
what so him lusted, thinking it also well done and good, to desire that thing,
which to have seemed pleasant. This wise therefore favoring my self, I was in
manner ignorant, that to desire any other man's goods was sin, had not the
law said unto me: thou shall not lust. And in deed the law was given to
suppress sin, but through our folly it chanced otherwise. For whiles the
law showed a man his sins and gave no power to resist the same, upon that
occasion it followed, y^ man's desire to syn, was more provoked even as the
property of men is, more to be provoked to such things, as are forbidden.
Therefore forasmuch as before the law was given, certain sins I knew not,
and certain I knew, but yet in such sort, that I thought I might lawfully
use them, because they were not forbidden, my mind was, but houerly and
fayntlye moved to sin, even as we are wont sklenderlye to love such
things, whereof we may, when we lust, have our pleasure. But when that by the
law, so many ways and manners of sin were declared, the whole rabble of
naughty desires being provoked through that prohibition begone more
vehemently to allure to sin.

And by this occasion sin took strength and power, which before the For
sin look occasion by y^ means of the commandment etc.
law given was but dull and in manner dead, so that in the mean season I
lived without law, or rather I thought, that I lived, as one, that might
freely sin, and do as I lusted. But after that I was by the commandment of
the law forbidden to syn, my synful usage was not only not restrained, but
also seemed quyckened and to take strength: but as soon as sin was after this
sort quyckened, I, which before thought my self to live, was dead, by the
law knowing my sin, and yet nevertheless continewyng in it still. Whereupon it
followed, that the mean, which was provided and ordained for the healpe of
our life, turned to my death, not through any fault, which the law had,
but through mine own fault. For whereas I was of my self given to sin, my
sick and diseased mind, taking occasion of sin by reason of the prohibition
of the law, became more desirous to sin. And thus the devil abusyng a good
instrument by occasion ministered through the law enticed me to sin, and by
sin slew me, so that then I knew my self gyltie, wherefore the law is
holy and the commandment holy.
and thrall unto another. No cause is there therefore why we should reprove the
law, which as it was given by a good god, so lays it before us, good, lawful,
and holy commandments. For needs must that be good, which forbyddeth evil.

The text.
Was that then, which was good, made death unto me? God forbid. Nay it was
syn: that syn might appear (by it which was good) to work death in me: that
sin by the commandment might be out of measure sinful. For we know, that
the law is spiritual, but I am carnal sold under sin, because I allow
not, that which I do. For what I would, that do I not: but what I hate, that
do I. If I do now, y^ which I would not, I consent unto the law, that it is
good: so then now, it is not I, that do it, but syn that dwells in me. For
I know, that in me (that is to say in my flesh) dwells no good thing. But
some one will again encounter and say: since that like brings forth his
like, if the law be good, how has it wrought my death, which is evil, and
wont to be engendered of sin? Whereunto the answer is easy, that this reason
were strong, were it so, y^ the law wrought our death. But this is not so,
but as I now said, far otherwise. For it is not to be supposed, that the
law is author of death, but rather that Nay it was sin: y^ syn might
appear (by it which was good etc.
sin is cause of our destruction, which is a thing of such infeccion, and
so full of poison, that it turned that, which of it self is good, to our
undoing, by the which every man may evidently perceive, how pestilent a thing
syn is, through whose contagion such things, as are best, turn to worste.
Whereof as y^ law gave occasion, so was the same yet in no fault. For the law,
as all we do know, is spiritual and provoke us to goodness.

The cause why that comes not to pass wherabout the law labors, But I am
carnal sold under sin.
am I, I (I say) for example to speak of my self, which am carnal and given
to sin, and by reason of long custom and continuance in sin thral and
bond thereto, even as the bondslaue bought for money is bound to his master,
so farfurthe that by reason of blyndnes of sin which I am in, I wot not
what I ought to do. For I do not y^, which my mind and reason tells me to
be honest, though with my heart I desire it, but rather do that which is
contrary to honesty, and hate as dishonest, being undoubtedly ouercu^me^ with
naughty desires. And by this may even If I do now that which I would not I
consent. etc.
offenders and hurtefull persons understand, that the law is not to be
reproved. For if through fleshlye desires mouyng, I do such things as my
mind and reason condemns and abhors, without doubt I consent, that the
law is good: as which forbad such things to be done and used, as I by the
better part of my reason condemned and disalowed.

For needs must that be good, which does forbid such things, which though
I do following the flesh, yet know I well, are evil and naught. But some one
will say, why do thou not obey thine own reason then, being such as does
consent to honesty, and fear the from dishonestie and syn? But now
forasmuch as for playnes in teaching to be used, I have taken upon me y^
person of such one, as is yet subject to vice and noughtie desires, ye must
in only me by ymagination conceive two men, the one carnal and gross, the
other more pure and not so gross, of which two the one may be called an
outward manne, the other an inward.

The one being subject to unlawful desires, is wholly given to sin, For I
know that in me etc. dwells no good thing.
the other having yet some sparks of goodness remaynyng (as it may) labors
to honestiewarde, and in the mids of our sinful life, as much as it may,
relisteth and withstandeth. Now in estemyng, what we be, rather are we that,
which we be according unto the better part in us. As often therefore as our
mind agreyng unto the law endeavors toward honesty, and does yet in deed
the contrary, me thinks I do not that, which I do, for who does that, which
he would not? But in my grosser part there is a forwardnes to sin, and a
certain aptnes thereunto, by means whereof it cummeth to pass, that though we
would well and godly, yet do we the contrary. And if by this part (that is to
wit) my sensual part, men esteem and measure me, I grant, that in me there is
no goodness.

The text.
For to will is pre^ent with me: but I find no means to perform, that which
is good. For the good that I would, do I not: but the evil, which I would
not that do I. If I do that I would not, ^hen is it not ^, that do it, but
sin that dwells in me. I find then by the law, that when I would do good*
evil is present with me. For I delight in the law of god, after the inward
manne. ^ut I se an other law in my members, rebellyng against the law of my
mind, and subduyng me unto the law of syn, which is in my members. O wretch
d man, that I am: who shall deliver me from this bodies subdued unto death? I
thank god through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the mind I serve the
law of god, but with the flesh the law of sin. For albeit by the
inclination of reason, I desire that, which is honest, For to will is present
with me, but I fide no means to perform. etc
yet have I not power to bring to pass, this my good desyer. For, whiles
fleashly lust pluckyng to evil and fylthy life has a greater stroke and
preuayleth more, tha^ does reason prouokyng to goodness, it happens that I do
not the good, which I desire, but rather, that I disalowe and condemn, that
is to say, evil. Now and if a man be not thought to do that thing, which he
does against his will, since I do y^ thing, which after the better part of a
man I would not, then seem not I the author of that which I do, but rather the
readiness to sin which is in my grocer part. This towardnes or readynes to
sin is not taken from me by the law, but if at any time, I purpose to
follow and obey her motion, the law causes me to understand, that my gryef
is thoroughly rooted and fastened in my soul. In deed, delyghted am I For I
delyghte in the law of god. etc.
with honesty and goodness which I see and know by the law, but of the other
side I find in the members of mine outward man, another law, which is to the
law of reason quite contrary, and continuallye rebelleth against it. So that
though reason call me one way, and wylful desires another way, yet in me
that bears rule, which is worse, and that is ouercommen, which is better.
For so depelye rooted in my flesh, is this towardenes and inclination to
sin, and of such power is the custom thereof, being as it were now altered
into nature, y^ whyther I will or not, I am drawn to sin.

O wretched man that I am, which am under such a miserable and painful
bondage. Who shall deliver me from this fleashe endaungered to so many sins
and contencions, whereby I am continuallye drawn to O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me. etc.
death? May not a man, which is under such a violent and hard necessity
well and lawfully make such exclamation? Certaynely the greater this unlucky
bondage is, the more are we bound to the goodness of god, which has from
such miseries delivered us, neither by the law nor yet by circumcision, but
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And had not god thus much done for us, even I
which am one man, should continually have been likewise pluckte in sunder and
divided, that with mind I should have served the law of God, desirous of good
things, and with my flesh the law of sin, being over commen with wanton
desires, and with the temptacions thereof.

The.viii. Chapter.
The text.
There is then no damnacion to them, which are in Christ Jesus: which walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit. For the law of the spirit of
life through Jesus Christ, has made me free from the law of sin and death.
For what the law could not do (forasmuch as it was weak because of the
flesh) that performed God, and sent his son in the similitude of sinful
flesh, and by sin damned sin in the flesh: that the righteousness of the
law might be fulfilled in us, which walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. Wherefore though now yet some leauynges and dregs of the former
bondage still remain in some christian men, yet shall they through godly
endeavor well suppress them, nor against their wylles be drawn into any such
heinous offense, by reason whereof such might deserve to be dampened, as are
through faith and baptism once graffed into Christ's body For the law of y^
spirit of life through Jesus Christ has made me fre from the law of sin and
death.
and have now intended and purposed to live no longer, as wanton and carnal
desires moved and ruled them, sith that Christ's law, which is spiritual and
an author of life more effectual, and subduer of death, has delivered us from
sin and also death joined thereunto. All which when Moses law could not do,
inasmuche as it was carnal, and therefore not effectual, God meruailously
provided for our salvation. And therefore (as I before told you) that in one
man there were as it were two men, a carnal and a spiritual man, so are there
in Moses law, as it were two laws, the one gross and carnal, the other
heavenly and spiritual. Of the first part of the law was Moses maker, which as
it endured but for a season: so was it not of strength and power sufficient to
work out salvation. The other part of the law is spiritual, effectual,
mighty, and such as will never dye, whom Christ being as it were a second
Moses made in all points perfect. And truly very mete was it, that this wise
flesh should abolishe flesh, sin should through sin be ouercomen, and that
also death should subdue death. For which intent God mercyfully And sent his
son in the similitude of sinfall flesh.
being of man's salvation desirous, sent his son, though in deed far from
all corrupcion of sin, endued yet with such flesh, as other sinners have,
for he took the comen nature of men upon him, and as though he had been a
sinner, was among sinners conuersaunt, yea and was even fastened upon a cross
among heinous transgressors, as though him self had been such one also.
Insomuche that he in manner took upon him the person of sin, to this end, that
he in the likeness of sin, might first overcome sin, and forthwith abolishe
it, being made a sacrifice for our sins: and so diyng as touching the flesh
which he had taken, he subdued death, which through the desires of the
flesh, and the fleshely law, bare rule upon us, and caused that henceforth
by abolishyng of the carnal meaning of the law, the better part thereof,
which we call the spiritual sense or spirit of it, should in stead of the
other take place, and not work Gods displeasure as the first did, but give
perfect righteousness to them which led not their life after y^ law carnally
understood, as the Jews do, but after the spiritual and heavenly meaning
thereof, as men renewed and through Christ newborn. In the Jews was there
nothing drawn and painted but a shadow of righteousness, but the undoubted and
perfect righteousness is in us through Jesus Christ, thoroughly and perfitely
wrought.

The text.
For they that are carnal, are carnally minded. But they that are spiritual,
are gostly minded. To be carnally minded, is death. But to be spiritually
minded, is life and peace. Because that the fleshely mind is enemy against
God: for it is not obediente to the law of God, neither can be. So then they
that are in the flesh cannot please God. The love and good will borne to
things in us being so greatly changed, make plain proof of a new kind of
profession. We se, how y^ such as still hold on their Iewishe supersticion,
because they be yet carnal, are with y^ same carnal vsuages much delited.
Contrary, such as are graffed in Christ, and have now begun to lead a
spiritual life, renouncyng all fleshely desires, are ravished and enamoured
with like conversation, as is godly and spiritual, as we comenly see every man
favor such things, as him self is bent unto. Mortal we be as touching our
flesh, but yet has Christ, which is immortal, called us to life, who is him
self our life. Now is the carnal law of the Jews only literally observed,
even against To be carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is
life and peace.
Christ, and by reason thereof works death and kylleth, forasmuch as it is
against him, which is the only author of life, As in the Jews the^ selfs
well appeared, who for favor and zeal borne thereto, put to death y^ author of
life and righteousness. Of the other side, they which despisyng y^ carnal
lettre of the law folowen the spiritual mocions of God, find in Christ life,
nor strive for waterishe ceremonies of the law, but gladly following the
inclinacions of charity, are with all men at peace and concord. Supersticion
is full of ianglyng, but true and godly pytie is quiet and peaceable. And
marvel it is none, that such with men are at disse^cion, which are not at
peace with god. For nothing else is it for a man to cleave and stike fast to y^
carnal law (who^ God would through Christ should be abolished, y^ in stead
thereof a spiritual law might ensue and take place) but to rebel against God,
which froward mind of any man, since it squareth from Gods pleasure, cannot
be but against him, which calls us, to far unlike and contrary rules and
acts. Let noman therefore think it a small peril and ieopardy stubbernly to
hang upon the lettre of the law, and therein to continue. And let us assure our
selfs, that it is, but a vain thing to please men, unless we please God also.
But such as stubbernly maintain Moses law literally and carnally
understood, except they forsaking the carnalnes thereof, fall So then they that
are in y^ flesh can not please God.
from it to the spirit, neither do please God nor can. Let the Jews exact
and require their feasts of the new moon, and their sabbath days keeping
never somuche, they shall not attain to that they look for.

The text.
But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: if so be that the spirit of
God dwell in you. If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is none
of his. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit
is alive for righteousness sake. Wherefore, if the spirit of him that raised up
Jesus Christ from death, dwell in you: even he that raised up Christ from death,
shall quicken your mortal bodies, because of his spirit that dwells in you.
But to you which have with the carnal law nothing to do, these things nothing
belong, since y^ ye are becomen spiritual, if ye after such condition led
your life, that it please ye holy spirit of God to be a dweller in your
hearts. For whosoever is nothing else but baptized, still belongs to the carnal If
any man have not the spirit of christ the same is none of h^s. etc
kingdom of the flesh, except he taste also Christ, and be with his blessed
spirit inspired. Coupled are we unto Christ, not with ceremonies, but with
that spirit, who^ whosoever lacks, is to Christ but a stranger. But now then,
and if Christ be in you, sith he is nothing else, but chastity, but truth, but
te^perau^ce with other virtues, how can in you sin have any place? Whosoever has
received Christ, him must the same man needs in such virtuous points
express. He (as I before said) once dyed touching his flesh and ma^hed, and
yet lives he now a life everlasting. Then fruitfully express and rese^ble we
him, when ye body y^ is to say our gross part which with pleasant lusts
allureth us to all unhappiness, is dead: and is without al desire to sin: and
if therewith our spirit also, that is to say, y^ better part in us who always
moves to goodness, and with his mighty power draws us to such things as
are good and righteous, be quick and alive. Therefore if the spirit of God,
which raised Jesus Christ from death, unfeignedly Wherefore if ^ the spirit of
him that raised up Jesus Christ from death. etc.
dwell in you, the same will not be idle. A lively and an effectual thing is the
spirit of God, and will according unto your capacities in you likewise work as
it did in Christ. Him it raised from death, and suffers not to dye again.
And so will ye same raise you from sin, which is very death in deed, to life,
extynguishyng your froward desires and appetites: al which he will do by his
blissed spirit ye author of life which now dwells in you.

The text.
Therefore brethren, we are detters, not to the flesh, to live after the
flesh: For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall dye. But if ye (through the
spirit) do mortifye the deeds of the body, ye shall live: For as many as are
led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God, For ye have not received
the spirit of bondage to fear any more, but ye have received the spirit of
adopcion, whereby we cry: Abba father. The same spirit certifieth our spirit,
that we are the sons of God. If we be sons, then are we also the heirs I
mean of God, and heirs annexed with Christ, If so be that we suffer with him,
that we may be also glorified together with him. Under this spirit now therefore
live we, his subjects are we, it must we obey, and not the flesh, whereunto we
are now dead. For as soon as we once begun to be one with Christ, we cast of
the bondage, wherewith we were to the flesh endaungered. Sith this is so, God
forbid that we hereafter live, as the flesh rules, which flesh should
rather to the spirit be obedient. Remember that ye be called to life, but if
ye live carnally, then run ye headlong to deathwarde, but contrary if by the
power of the spirit ye For if ye live after the flesh ye shall dye. etc
suppress al fleshely desires, after such mortifiyng of them, ye shall live.
Nor is it to live after the governance of the spirit of God, a paynefull
profession. For albeit the same call you forth to great and weighty
enterprises, yet are ye glad and willing to undertake them, because by it in
you is enkienled a fervent charity, to whom nothing can be hard, nothing can
be but sweet and pleasant. As the body lives with his bodily spirit, so
d^eth the soul through a heavenly. If our bodily spirits and natural powers
be weak and faint, the wholle body is made dull and heavy, but if the same be
quick and lusty, the wholle body is full of courage. So likewise al such as
are with the spirit of God led and moved, are his children. Such as, are
toward children, resemble their fathers goodness, with a merry chere and freely
doing al such things as they shall suppose will please them. Bondslaues,
because there is between them and their masters no natural knotte, for fear
of punishment abstain from evil, and being violently compelled, do their
duties. Jews, which are with y^ bondage of the law delited, this wise do,
but ye which are once delivered But ye have received the spirit of adopcion*
etc.
from such bondage, will no more so fall to the same, that with fear it be
nedeful to compel you. Endued are ye with the spirit of God, through whom ye
are by adopcion received into the nu^bre not of servants, but of Gods own
children. This spirit puts us in such a sure trust and confidence, that in
all our distresses we may boldly speak unto God those words, which fathers
most gentilly and favorably are wont to give ear unto, calling upon him: O
father, father. Which word we durst not be so bold in our troubles lame^tably
to speak unto him, were we not in assurau^ce, both that we are his children,
and that he also is our merciful father, as long as we live after his
commandment, not by co^pulsion (I say) but of free This spirit certifieth
our spirit, that we are ye sons of God.
will and gladly. For were it so, that he accoumpted us not for his children,
never would he have given us this his holy spirit. This benefit of God
therefore, whether ye call it a pledge or token of fatherly love, well assures
our consciences, that we are his children, which gave us this pledge. Further
then, if we be his children and not his servants, than are we also his
heirs. The heirs (I say) of God from who^ as author and begynner, al things
come, and ioynte inheritors with Christ, into whose body being graffed, we now
have the same father, that he has, and through him enjoy one comen
enheritaunce. It shall we yet none otherwise possess, but by going the same
pathe way to it, by which it pleased Christ him self to walk. He by
sufferau^ce of miseries came to the possession of his glorious inheritance, he
by obedience came to his kingdom, he by reproach came to glory, and by death
attained to life everlasting. Suffer must we therefore with him, that we may of
his joys be partakers, obedient must we be with him, that we may with him reign
euerlastyngly, suffer must we also worldely shame and vilany, that with him we
in heaven may be glorified, and finally for a season dye also with him, that we
may in his kingdom live for ever.

The text.
For I suppose that the affliccions of this life, are not worthy of the glory,
which shall be showed upon us. For the fervent desire of the creature abides,
lokyng when the sons of God shall appear, because the creature is subdued to
vanity, against the will thereof, but for his will, which subdued the same in
hope. For the same creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corrupcion
into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. For we know, that every
creature groneth with us also, and trauaileth in pain, even unto this time.
These be the ways and conditions to win this inheritance by, whereof since
there shall never be an end, and the thing self so great, that it For I
suppose that the affliccions of this life are notworthy. etc.
passes al men's capacities and estimacion, surely if all the affliccions of
this life were put upon one man's body, all the same yet were of no weight
but even trifles, being weighed and compared with the reward of the glory to
come: which men get, and in manner bye, with such great displeasures and
calamities. And though we now already have an ernest penny of this welthy life
to come, so that thereof noma^ should despair, yet by reason of our bodies
subject to pains and death, the same is not in every point perfect and full.
In the mean time by the spirit of God have we thereof inwardly a secret taste
given us, but then shall we have it fully and wholly, when our bodies are
restored to life, and all the miseries of our mortal state are shaken of, at
what time we shall with everlasting For y^ ferne^^ desire of the creature
abides lookyng when y^ sons of God shall appear* etc.
Christ reign euerlastyngly. For which joyful time in the mean season the
whole engyne of this world ernestly looks, in his manner wishyng for the day,
wherein after that the number of Gods children is fulfilled and restored, their
glory shall plainly appear, which being yet burdened with their mortal bodies,
are with hunger, with thryst, with diseases, with diverse pains and miseries
punished: yea, even the world self after a sort seems to be of man's
careful estate partaker, because the earth, the water, the air, heavenly
bodies, and to be brief even the very Angels self were by God especially made
to help man's necessities. And therefore not so much as the very world
self shall from such miseries be free, until that Gods children be set in
perfect fredome, so yt in the mean season it is in bondage unwillingly. For
even in the very dead creatures, which have no life, a natural desire is there
to be made perfect: and yet abide they nethelesse this bondage, therein obeiyng
him at whose pleasure it became subject, enduryng it so much the more
patiently, because it knows it self not bond for ever, but under this
condition, that as soon as the children of God are fully delivered from al
infeccion of death, than shall ye world no longer be thral and under the
displeasures of corrupcion. For sith that we see al ye eleme^tes of this world
so diversely altered under so many corrupcions, and see that the Sun For we
know that every creature gr^neth with v^ also* etc.
and moon, beside that they almost seem in their continual renewyng of
corruptible creatures to labor in vain, have also their eclipses, and since
that the one stars power is also contrary to another, since there is no doubt
also, but that the whole company of Angels from heaven beholding our
wretchedness, are by reason of a pitiful love borne toward us, greatly moved,
and are as far as may stand with their blessed state, sorry for our miseries:
Appears it not by this, that al natural things mourn with us, and like a
woman trauailyng with child wyshe an end of labor and sorrows?

The text.
Not only it, but we also which have the first fruits of the spirit, mourn
in our selves also, and wait for the adopcion (of the children of God) even
the deliverance of our body. For we are saved by hope. But hope that is seen,
is no hope. For how can a man hope for that which he sees? But and if we
hope for that we see not, then do we with patience abide it. Now should it seem
much less marvel, if such sorrow befall unto other creatures, sith that
even we also, which after our saviors coming were first of al replenished
with the spirit of Christ, and that after no mean sort but fully, are yet
still under so many miseries, partly through diverse necessities of this life,
and partly through the obstinacy of ungodly people, that we ofte^tymes mourn
with our self, and are daily compelled to be sorye even for other men's
calamities also, desyryng continually in our prayers made to God for that day,
wherein the whole body of Christ full and perfect in all his members, shall be
delivered from all noysomnes, and of gross and carnal, become spiritual,
heavenly and immortal. In the mean season all the calamities that chance unto
us, we abide and suffer, in hope of that bliss, which is promised through
Christ. Of whom, albeit we have here received an earnest penye, assuryng us of
salvation to come, yet has he not presently given us full salvation, but would
have us to look for it, in the time to come.

Christian men's perfect weal is in things to come, whereof we have For we
are saved by hope, but hope that is seen, is no hope.
a sure hope. Now is there no hope in such things, as are already present and
seen with our iyen, but of such, as do not yet appear. If this be not so, I
pray you tell me, of whom was it ever said, that he hoped to see that, which he
saw with his iyen already? Nor were there in this our life any commendacion of
faith and hope, if we were even now presently put in possession of such
things, as Christ has promised unto us, but then is our faith well worthy
praise, if through the clearenes thereof we see such things, as with our
carnal iyes cannot be perceived, in the mean season continuyng still in
sufferyng pains, with full hope lookyng for that, which was once promised. And
though in the mean season such bodily affliccions be heavy and payneful, yet
is it perhapse expedient for us so to be punished.

The text.
Likewise also the spirit helps our infirmities. For we know not what to
desire as we ought: but the spirit makes intercession for us, with grouynges
which cannot be erpre^sed. And he that sercheth the hearts, knows what is
the meaning of the spirit: for he makes intercession for the saints,
according to the pleasure of God. These troubles our spiritual and inward man
in deed takes in good worth, and strives with bodily infirmities: but the
spirit of God stays with grace, aydyng the weakness of our flesh, with hope
encouragyng us to suffer al things, evermore at hand, showing us what we ought
to desire, and what we should refuse. For we of our own might and inclina^ion,
For we know not, what to desire as we ought.
wot not what is to be desired, nor how we ought to desire: by means whereof
it oftymes comes to pass, that in steed of wholesome things, we pray for
hurteful, even as it fortuned unto my self, which being not content with mine
affliccions bodily, desired importunely Gods help, thrice making my prayer
unto him, that satan, by whom at that time I was troubled, might no more te^pte
me: wherein because I desired of God that which was not for me expedient to
attain, my tequest took not effect. And therefore instead of pleasures,
received I wholesome gifts. In deed God hears the peticions of his children,
so yet that they make no carnal prayer, but pray unto him according unto the
mocion of his blessed But y^ spirit makes intetcession. etc.
spirit, secretly mouyug our hearts. The same spirit also, though we hold
our peace, is yet a peticioner and mean to God praiyng for us, not as men are
wont to do, but with sighs unspeakable.

The spirit of man sometime with great mournyng desires god to preserve him
from bodily trouble and affliccion, or else it desires worldly pleasures and
commoditeis, much esteming such things as are in very deed but trifles: but
the heavenly spirit graffed and planted in godly me^nes hearts, desires of
god such perticions, which y^ we lack, are to be desired of god with syghes
unspeakable, forasmuch as the same obtained and had bring with them the very
true perfect weal, and bliss. Of And he that search ^^ the hertes knows,
^^^at is the meaning of the spirit*
men must thou with words outwardely pronounced and spoken desire, that you
myndest to obtain, as which neither know, what we would have, except they
hear it, nor yet sufficiently understand, what is best for us to be asked,
but god, which searches even the most secret part o^ man's heart, and
thoroughly looks into it, knows, though we hold our peace, what our
spirit desires, and pitiyng man's miseries, as often as it makes
intercession for such, as are godly, prays not, as man would have it to do,
but as gods holy will and pleasure is. And desires nothing, but such as
apertayne to everlasting salvation* and such things as increase gods honor
and glory. Whosoever desires such things, albeit he per adventure err in
choice, and election, yet is his intent and purpose good. Wherefore god
grants not always y^, which is of him desired, but y^ rather, which is most
profitable to y^ end, whereunto you directedst al thy peticions.

The text.
We know, that al things work for the best unto them, that love god, which
also are called of purpose. For those which he knew before, he also ordained
before, that they should be like fashioned unto the shape of his son, that
he might be the first begotten son among many brethren. Moreover, who^ he
appointed before, the^ also he called. And who^ he has called, them also he
justified: and who^ he justified. the^ he also glorified. Nor ought me^ to
fear, lest they being ouerco^me^ through the weight^nes of outrageous
persecution, utterly fall from him, since we know this for most certain, y^
what affliccion soever chance unto devout and godly people, al ye same shall be
for ye best. Such is gods fauer toward the^, who^ he has of purpose chose^
out, and called to this welthy life. Endeavor must we, and do what in us lies*
but the end of al hangs of gods ordinance. God without cou^^el or unadvisedly
choseth none, but well knows al such, as are his, long before he call them. And
not only knows them, whom he For these w^^che he knew before he also
ord^y^ned before.
calls* but had also even at the same time surely purposed with himself to
graffe and plant them into the body of his son Jesus, yea and to
transfourme the^ likewise into the lykenes and shape of him, which ouerco^myng
the flesh and death, triumphantly went to immortality: both to teach, that
all the members of his body should themself look to have the same, which they
see already done in the head, that by this way and means through his only
son he might to himself geat many children, among whom Jesus Christ
should be head and captain, and as the first begotten, departing yet his
inheritance with other: and to put us in assurance likewise, that god will
fully perform y^ thing, which he once purposed, moreover whom before al time
he knew and had chose^ out, being such, of whom he had already in his
prophets dark sayings showed And whom he has called them also he
justified. etc.
his mind, them called he also by the gospel, and that not in vain, but of
his goodness and fauer made them, that were so called, of ungodly, godly, and of
hurtful hurtlesse.

So that now only there remains glorifying, whereof a great deal we have
already, except we think it no glorious preeminence, to be without syn, to
floryshe in the renoume of innocent life, to be without corrupt desyers, to be
so planted in Christ, that thou art become one with him, to have his holy
spirit, as an earnest penny thereof, to be the enheritour of god, and ioynte
enheritour with Christ, so that of the rest we can in no wise doubt, but that
it shall in dew time be fulfilled.

The text.
What shall we than say to these things? If god be on our side, who can be
against us? which spared not his own son: but gave him for us all: how can
it be, that with him he should not give us all things also? Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of gods chosen? It is god, that justifies: who is he y^
can condemn, it is Christ that dyed, yea rather which is risen again, which
is also on the right hand of god, and makes intercession for us. Now sith all
this is so, wherefore should any man mistrust it, namelye since god has by so
many and evident ways showed unto us his special If god be on out side, who
ca^ be against us?
love and great fauer. Who standing on our side, what is any adversary able
to do? What can men's malice prevail, if god be our defender? Or what may we
not boldly look for at his hands being now reconcyled unto him, which what
time we were out of his fauer, for our sakes spared not his only son, but
sent him down into this world for us all? Yea (I say) and brought him in
manner to naught and deposed him, and al to exalte us, making him well nyghe syn,
to deliver us from syn, and delivered him to death, to thentent we might live.
And therefore sith he has for us delivered his son, in whom al goodness is,
follows it not, that with the same gift, he has given us all rightes, that
belong to the son, us (I say) whom he has put in like state of
enheritaunce? Or what is it, that he will not give us, since that he has once
given him, which infinitely passes all creatures? And ieopardye there is none,
least god, thorough the crafty sleyghtes and temptacions of the devil, change
and withdraw this his especial fauer from us. For who durst commense any
action against them, whom god of purpose and sure determinacion of mind has
chosen out and takes for his own? Will he hear (think you) any accusers
capciouse complayntes against them, all whose sins he has freely forgeuen?
God himself, which is judge of all, has forgeuen us It is god y^ justifies,
who is he y^ can condemn. etc.
the offenses of our old life, and takes us now for ryghteous, and who is
he, that can condemn us, being by him quited? So that we take heed, y^ we
no more fall to our old life again. Christ is he which loved us so tenderly,
that for our welthe it pleased him to dye, yea he it is which likewise rose
again for our sakes, because he would healp and succoure us his people. This
great procter and judge syttyng also at the right hand of god his father, to
whom he is in all points egall, entreats our matier before his majesty.

The text.
Who shall separate us from the love of god? Shall tribulacion, or anguishe, or
persecucion, or hunger, either nakedness, either peril, either swearde? As it
is written: for thy sake are we killed all day long, and are coumpted as
sheep appointed to be slain. Nevertheless, in all these things we overcome
through him that loved us.

For I am sure, that neither death, neither life, neither angels, nor rule,
neither power, neither things present, neither things to come, neither
height, neither loweth, neither any other creature shall be able to depart us,
from the love of god, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Since therefore the father has thorough the death of his son forgiven us al
our gyltes and offenses, sithe his son so tenderly loves us, why should
men hencefurthe fear the devil, or any man the devils minister, either
accusyng us, or condemnyng? Considering also with how Who shall separate us
from the love of god?
many benefits and special gages of love we are bound both to god and
Christ, who is he, that shall pluck and withdraw us away from loving the^
again, which so tenderly love us? Shall any storm of worldly adversity do
it? Shall any affliccion or distress? Shall hunger or nakeones? Shall ieopardy
of drownyng, or any like peril chau^cyng after like sort? Shall persecucion of
the wicked, or the bloody swearde of death? For that such things should in
this world happen to innocents, the holy psalm writer David lightened with
the spirit of god, long before saw, what time he said, that for thy sake o
Lord are we killed al day long, and coumpted as sheep appointed to be
slain. Al these troubles, though they seem greuouse, cause yet is there none,
why they ought to make us a frayd. Chance may they to us in deed, but yet
oppress us they can not Nevertheless in all the^e things w^ ouercum through him
that loved us.
Yea (I say) the more vehemently they trouble us, the more shall they both
strengthen our burning charity to Christward, and Christ's also to us,
because we at al times depart having the upper hand, not through any strength
and power of our own, but through his defense, whom we are bound to thank
for altogether. Nor will he, which in such sort loves us, suffer us to be
overthrown, nor we upon remembrance of his goodness toward us through any
assaults of adversities shrink from loving him again. But yet have I
rehearsed unto you but light and common mattiers, but harken a bolder saying,
and such whereof my self am most certain, and am most certainly persuaded
in. More cause were there to fear such ieopardies as hang over our head by
reason of creatures, which can not be seen, as evil spirits, which yet
nevertheless assault men's souls and not only their bodies, whom if we but
once regard not and despise, the ieopardies of the other can not make us a
Neither heighte, nor loweth. etc.
fearde. Nor in this have we any cause to fear, seeing that neither mean power
of angels, of much more might yet than is any man, no neither the chief
angels, which order is called a rule and power neither any heyght or depnes,
that is to say, whether the same invade us from above, or from beneth, whither
it be with a color of honesty or not, yea though wonders were showed from
heaven, or else threatenings from hell put us in fear, neither things present,
neither yet to come, whether we be put in fear of present ieopardyes, or in
ieopardy of the life to come: briefly, what soever else befall any where here
in earthly things, whether it may be seen, or not, be it never so strong and
mighty, yet shall it not be able to divide us from that charity, wherbye we
are knyt to god through Jesus Christ his son.

The.ix. Chapter.
The text.
I say the truth in Christ, and lie not, (my conscience also bearyng me
witness by the holy ghost) that I have a great heaviness, and continual sorrow in
my heart. For ^ have wyshed my self to be cursed from Christ for my brethren
(my kynsmen as pertaynyng to the flesh) which are the Israelites. To whom
pertayneth the adoption of y^ children, and the glory, and the couenauntes,
and the law that was given, and the service of god, and the promises: whose
also are the fathers, and they of whom (as concerning the flesh) Christ came:
which is god in all things to be praised for ever. Amen. TO whom would to god
all the Jews were converted, forsakyng their Moses: the Jews (I say) which
yet still continewe in this mind, and think that to thattaynyng of salvation
it is sufficient to be Abraham's children, and in their hands to have the law
once given unto them by god, whom yet in deed no such thing shall avail and
profit, unless by faith they make themselfes worthy to be drawn and loved of
god. But of them is Christ promised in the law I say y^ truth ^n Christ and
l^e not, my conscience also bearing me witness, etc.
stubbernly refused, whom the Gentiles receive and knowledge. This yet speak I
not of any displeasure conceived or borne against my contreye men, not
withstandyng their spiteful minds toward me: but as Christ, to who^ nothing*
is unknown, is my witness, witnessyng with him also mine own conscience, whose
gouernoure and ouerseer is the holy ghost, I will say the truth, and lie not,
that it troubles my mind exceadynglye and above measure, and with continual
sorrow even wears me away to see For I have wish^dde my self ^^ be cursed
from Christ etc.
some of them through their own folly utterly perish. As for mine own part,
so ferte am I from hatyng the Jews, that if it might any way be, I would
even with mine own destruction procure their amendment and weal, nor would
refuse even my self of Christ to be forsaken so that all they to whom I am
both by country and aliaunce joined, were with me in the faith of Christ
likewise joined, that as by stock and blood they are Israelites, they likewise
were in knowledge of the truth perfect Israelites, whom of all other nations
most besemed it to receive him, whom the law promised, specially since it is
that nation, whom god out of all the other, many hundred years past, specially
chose for him self: and coumpting all other nations, as bastard children,
nouryshed these and brought the^ up, as his natural and true begotten sons:
and most of all because they above other for this honor and dignity may
specially glory, that they To whom pertayneth y^ adopcion of the children,
and the glory etc.
dispising all idolatrye worshipped the very true god. In their hands is the
possession and prerogatyue of the law, given unto them by god. With them made
god and they with god couenauntes and promises. In their hands is there the
right form and manner of dew honoring of god, even as he him self
commanded: in their hands are the prophecies, wherein was long before both
Christ's coming spoken of, and this welthy state, whereof I did a little before
glory, promised.

Which also are lineally descended of the most famous and chief lanternes
Whose also are ye fathers, and they of whom (as co^ce^nyng the flesh) Christ
came.
of light, and first begynners of our nation, (I mean) Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, with other, of who^ Christ himself touching his humanity vouchsaued to
be borne, so that in this behalf, will they or not, of aliaunce and kynred
must they needs be to Christ himself, who far far excels and passes
those fathers, of whose title and holiness they so greatly auau^t themself. Be
it so, that their fathers were never so good and holy, yet were they nothing else
but men. But now is Christ in such sort man, that he therewith is also god,
not of this nation or that only, but of al, one and equal with his father,
which rules al things, by whose unsearchable wisdom all this gear is
wrought, to whom only for such unspeakable love borne toward mankind, al
praise and thanks are dew for ever.

Amen.
The text.
I speak not these things, as though the words of god had take none effect.
For they are not al Israelites, which are of Israel: neither are they all
children straighte way that are the seed of Abraham. But in Isaac shall thy
seed be called: that is to say: they which are the children of the fleashe,
are not the children of god. But they which be the children of promise, are
coumpted the seed. For this is a word of promise, about this time will I
come, and Sara shall have a son. And surely for this the more detestable is
the wickedness of some Jews, which irreverently gaynsaying and blasphemyng
Christ, therein dishonor god the father, which would have his glorious name
set forth by his son. And yet all this their wyckednes, outragiouse as it was,
caused not, but that god nevertheless in all points performed, as much as he
in his prophets sayings promised to do. To the people of Israel, which are
Abraham's posterity, was this blysseful life promised, and yet not to all
neither, but to such only, as truly and unfeignedly are his ofspryng. For it is
not to be supposed, that al such are very Israelites, as They are not all
Israelites which are of Israel. etc.
are descended of the stock of Israel, but such rather as are so strong and
mighty in faith, that they will not with worldly tribulations be ouercomen,
nor yet with troubles* wherewith god tries our stedfastnes in religion: such
(I say) worthily and none else ought to be called Israelites, that is to say,
mighty and strong to godwarde. Nor are al they, that come of Abraham's blood,
therefore so fer Abraham's children, that by this bare title they may challenge
the promised inheritance, but rather such as rese^ble that faith of Abraham,
whereby he deserved, that this blessed inheritance should be derived and given
unto al his posterity. To make this more evident and plain, mark whyther y^
word of god, who made y^ promise, be not so, which says: in Isaac thy sede
shall be called. To the seed of Abraham promise was made, that in it and by it,
al nations of the world should famously But in Isaac shall thy seed b^ called.
etc.
be spoken of and blessed. But now is it not gods will, that al Abraha^s
posterity should be called Abraham's seed, unless they be, as Isaac was, who
was the child of faith, and in figure represented Christ. Now was not Isaac
borne, as children are comenly wont to be, but by a father, which was in deed
dry and barayne, full yet of trust in god, and of an old woman, unmeet
likewise to conceive any child.

Much rather therefore begotten was he through the mighty power of They which
are y^ children of the flesh, are not the children of god etc.
god, and his fathers faith, than by any power of man, or carnal act. What
else then meaned god, when he said, in Isaac thy seed shall have his name, but
plainly to declare, that not all they which are of Abraham carnally begotten,
are therefore the children of god, and therefore right inheritours of gods
promyses, but such only apertayne and belong to Abraham's seed, which have
like faith, as that was, whereby Abraham deserved to receive the promise of god.
But mary if god under this form of words, had made his promise, to as many
as shall be begotten of the shall my promise belong, then in deed might all
such as are of Abraham's carnal stock, lawfully claim this glorious
inheritance* But now when god this wise said, about this time will I come,
and Sara shall have a son, he meant his only child, and the same which
should be the child of faith, whom god had for the same inheritance chosen
furthe of many, not for his circumcisions sake, as which was not at that time
borne, but for his fathers faythes sake. Abraham after that time had by other
wives, children, yet was Abraham's blessyng promised unto him only in Isaacs
name.

The text.
Not only this, but also Rebecca was with child by one, even by our father
Isaac For yet the children were borne, when they had neither done good, neither
bad (y^ the purpose of god by election might stand) it was said unto her, not
by the reason of works but by the caller: the elder shall serve the younger. As
it is written: Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. What shall we say
then? Is there any unrighteousness with god? God forbid. For he says to Moses:
I will show mercy, to whomsoever I show mercy: and will have compassion, on
whomsoever I have compassion. So lies it not then in man's will or running:
but in the mercy of god. For the scripture says unto Pharao: even for this
same purpose have I stiered the up to show my power on the, and that my name
might be declared through out all the world. So has he mercy on whom he
will, and whom he will he makes hard hearted. And as it was in Isaac, and
other of the children of Abraham, after like sort and condition was it in
Jacob and Esau. If this glorious enheritaunce Rebecca was with child by one,
even by our father Isaac.
of gods blessyng only through carnal kynred befell unto any, then should
it much rather belong to Esau the elder son, than to Jacob the younger. Isaac
was father to them both, one mother at one time conceived both, both were at
one time borne in their mothers woumbe, and both were at one time delivered,
yet did god knowledge one, as his natural child, disinheriting the other, as a
bastard and unlawfully borne, saying: Jacob I have loved, but Esau have I
hated. What was it then y^ thus severed and made a difference betwixt these
twins? Surely neither carnal kynred, nor keeping of the law, nor yet
circumcision. For of both being not yet borne, before they had any thing at al
done, either with the law, or against it, it was said: the elder shall serve
the younger. And why pleased it god so, or what intended he in this deed of his
to declare unto us? Surely nothing else but that noman should either upon hope
That the purpose of God by election might stand.
of circumcision, or of the law challenge the right of this gods promise
unless by faith he make himself worthy to be taken among the chosen children
of god, and to be such, as Isaac and Jacob were.

For it is not carnal kynred, that makes Abraham's children, but the choice of
God. And if God refuse and reiecte the Jews, as he once rejected Esau,
certainly to be descended of Abraham's stock, nothing avails. But on the
other side, if God through the desert of faith receive the Gentiles to this
inheritance, hurt is it none, though they to Abraham be of no carnal
aliaunce, forsomuche as God by another way, by the title of adopcion (I say)
does acknowledge them for his own children. Nor let any deuilishe person
wreste, that I now have said, to this What shall we say then? Is there any
unrighteousness with god
purpose, as though in men there were now no fault, but y^ all the fault is in
God, who at his pleasure receives or refuses such as have either of pain or
pleasure nothing deserved: God forbid, that any man should conceive such a
phantasye, nor let any manne so take that, which in the book of Exodi is by
God spoken, I will show mercy, to whom soever I show mercy, and will have
compassion, on who^ soever I have compassion, forasmuch as it lies not in
man's will or runnyng, but in Gods mercy, to attain unto salvation, as which
both desire in vain and al in vain labor we, unless God of his goodness
draw us, as in deed he does such, as it pleases him, though they nothing
deserve it, and refuses such, as have nothing so deserved. And yet of all this
it follows not that God is to any man wrongful, but rather y^ he is merciful
to many. Noman condemns God, but for his own offense, no man is saved,
without Gods benefit, which benefit he vouchesaueth to give unto such as it
pleases him, and yet in such sort, that he leaves occasion, why men should
for his merciful drawyng thank him, and thou nethelesse without occasion to
complain, if thou be given over to thine own leudenes. For God does not so
harden men's hearts, that thereby men are caused to discredit the gospel of
Christ, but such as through malice and stubbernes refuse to believe, uses God
as instruments to the magnifiyng For y^ scripture says unto Pharao: even for
this purpose have I stered y^ up etc.
of his great benefit, and to the setting forth of his mighty and glorious
power. And so must that which in the both of Exodi is spoken to Pharoa be
understood: even for this purpose have I stered the up, to show my power on
the, and that my name might be declared throughout al y^ world.

The text.
Thou will say unto me: why then blames he us yet? For who has been able to
resist his will? But O man what art thou, which disputest with God? shall the
work say to the workman, why have thou made me on this fashion? Has not the
potter power over the clay, even of the same lump to make one vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor. Even so, God willing to show his wrath,
and to make his power known, suffered with long patience the vessels of wrath,
ordained to damnacion: and to declare the riches of his glory on the vessels
of mercy, which he had prepared unto glory: whom also he called, not of the
Jews only, but also of the Gentiles. (As he says also to Osee: I will call
them my people, which were not my people: and her beloved, which was not
beloved, and her to have obtained mercy, that had not obtained mercy.) And it
shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them: ye are not
my people: there shall they be called the children of the living God. Of such
sayings some deuilishe disposed person takes occasion, and says: if of who^
soever he will, he have mercy, and who^ he will he makes hard hearted, what has
he then, wherein to blame us? Sith his will and pleasure noman is able to resist,
let him lay it to him self, and not to us, if any sin be committed. But
hear now of the otherside, what may be said. Noman withsta^deth his will (I
grant) yet is not therefore Gods will cause of thy da^nacion. Nor did god in
such manner harde^ y^ heart of Pharao, that he wrought the vice of stubbernes
therein, but rather whereas he well knew, y^ the arroga^t tyran was well worthy
suddenly to be destryed, yet used God toward him by little and little such
increase of punishment, as he might therwt have been amended: had not his
malice been an impediment. But through Gods gentle favor used in punishyng of
him, his wicked mind became worse and worse. And therefore the man's frowardnes
God turned to his glory. In this matter for the defense of Gods righteousness
many things might be answered, but briefly to say God hates all hautnes But O
man, what art y^, which disputest with god shall the work say to the workm^n.
etc.
and arrogancy. And what a greatter point of arrogancy can there be, then
that a man most vile and abiecte should with God reason y^ matter, encou^tryng
with him, as though he were his fellow? For who (I pray you) could abide to
hear the yearthen vessel quarrel with his maker and say: why have thou made me
after this fashion? For as clay is in the hand of y^ potter: even so are we in
Gods hands, as by the prophet Esai y^ Lord him self says. The potter, as
his mind stands, works some vessels to serve for vile and uncleanly uses,
and some other also appoints he for honest service. In which act, what
reason soever the workman follow, therein does he lawfully, and why he so
does, unmeet it is that the clay should require any cause. The clay of it
self is nothing else, but clay, whereof if y^ potter work a comely and a
welfauored cup, for that his fair shape ought he to give thank to the crafts
man, and yet to the vile and filthy clay is there Has not the potter power over
the claye even of the same lu^pe. etc.
no wrong done at al, if of it be made a chamber pot, or some other vessel of
more vile use. Likewise is it of God, which leauyng man in his sin, because
so he was borne, does him no wrong, as calling man to rightwyse life he therein
shows his bounteous mercy and goodness. In the forsaken person it pleases God
to show his justice, to thentent he would be feared, in y^ approved, to
thentent he would be loved, shows he his fre mercy. Nor besemeth it any man,
of God for so doing to exact and require a reason, nor why he calls some one
lately, and some other more tymely, nor why he draws one which has not so
deserved, and forsakes another, which has deserved better. A much more base
creature is man, being compared with god, then is clay compared with the potter.

So that then if it be an unseen and a hiddeous presumpcion, that the clay
should with the potter pratle and reason his matter, how much greatter
arrogancy is it, for a man to talk of Gods counsels, which so far pass
our capacities, that we thereof have, but even as it were a shadow or a dream?
Begin to believe, and leave thy reasonyng, and so shall y^ much rather
understand. Besides this remember y^ the potter may be deceived, but in God
none error can be found. It is for y^ enough to believe this, y^ God by reason
of his almighty power, may at his pleasure do what him list, and again
forasmuch as he is without co^paryson best, do will he nothing, but that which
is best. Nor should he, because our ungodliness he turns to his honor:
therefore of us be blamed, but this rather should we take as a sure proof of his
exceadyng goodness, y^ he such mischief turns to good. It was not God, which
made the an unclean vessel. But thou thy self art he which have made thy
self filthy, through appliyng of thy self to ungodly exercises. Beside this
if God according to his wisdom both for the salvation of the good, and glory
of his name abuse thy frowardnes cause have thou none for y^ to complain.
Lawfully art thou for thy sin punished, and through thine example the good
people will y^ better take heed, and whiles through thy blindness and destruction
they the better perceive, how greatly they are bound to the goodness of God,
they are with more merry chere encouraged to give him thanks. Nothing had Pharao
to wit God withal, but of his own naughtynes only perished, and yet did that
his stubberne malice among the Hebrews highly auaunce the glory of God. And
what can there be, that they can reprove, if, as god Even so God willing to
show his wrath, and to make his power known suffered with long patience the
vessels of wrath. etc.
at that time deferred the destruction of Pharao: so likewise now for a season,
not without great favor he bear with and suffer y^ unbelieving and sturdy
Jews being vessels, which have right well deserved even out of hand to be
crushed in pieces, to thentent that all the world shall more clearly
perceive, that they are well worthy of damnacion, which being so many ways
provoked, amend not, to the end y^ both through their punishment other should
fear almighty God, whom we may not through continuance in sin provoke to
sure vengeance, and also more plentifully to show the greatness of his might
and glory toward good people, who^ he has purged being before unclean
vessels, and reserved them for holy uses: not for their circumcision or y^
laws sake, but through the deserte of faith, for whose only sake they are
called to this honor. Called (I say) not only of y^ Jews as we be, but also
of y^ gentiles, because herein it is not birth which makes inheritors, but
the choice of God. Nor ought the Jews to marvel, that the gentiles, which
were before this time heathen and strangers to God, are now by adopcion
received into the number of Gods children, sith they them self long since were
for their offenses done against God despised, rejected, and as disinherited,
when yet afterward being sorry for their sins and amendyng, they were through
the great bountyfulnes of God received into his favor. That this should so be,
witnesses their own prophet Osee, saying: I will call the^ my people which
were not my people. etc.
I will call them my people which were not my people, and her beloved, which
was not beloved, and her to have obtained mercy, which had not obtained
mercy: so that this shall come to pass, that in the place, where heretofore
it was said: ye are not my people, there shall some be called the children of
the living God. Why grudge and reprove they that thing in other, which they
them self have already assayed? Why stand they not rather in a watch and
take heed, lest through their own folly they become again, that they were once?
Why envy they at them, whom they might follow, were it not, they had more
pleasure to strive, then to obey?

The text.
But Esai cries concerning Israel: though the number of the children of Israel
be as the sand of the sea, yet the remnaunt shall be saved. For he finisheth
the word verily, and makes it short in righteousness. For a short word will
God make in earth. And as Esai says before, except the lord of Sabbath had
left us seed, we had been made as Sodoma, and had been likened to Gomorra. Now
if through men's own stubbernes the greatest part of y^ world perish, yet to
the few that will believe, will God perform, as much as was promised to the
whole number. And never shall the time be, but that this inheritance shall have
his successors. This did the prophet Esai speaking of the people of Israel,
without al coloring clearly testifye saying: If the number of the Israelites
were as many as the sand of the sea, and though through their own folly as many
also perished, yet shall there some always remain, which shall through faith be
saved. For be y^ number of them that falls from God never so great, yet shall
not their Though the number of y^ children of Israel be as the sand of the sea.
etc.
fall make the promise of God vain. Men in promises are wont to break their
credence, but God is he, which will fully perform all that he promised, and
that briefly and co^pendiously, not with deceit and falsely, but justly and
truly, for as the same prophet Esai said: the Lord in earth will make a
short word. Shadows seem not clear without suspicion of deceit, and the
law self is full of words, promisyng, grossly represe^tyng, co^maundyng,
threatnyng sometimes, and sometimes co^forting. But Christ being sent into the
world even at once gave al and performed y^ was promised, opened al y^ was
before hidden in figures, and brought the great multitude of rules contained in
y^ law, to y^ only commandment of charity of A short word will God make in
yerth
the gospel. And thus spread he abroad the seed of his heavenly doctrine and
gospel, which albeit in many of my countrymen be unfruitful, yet some are
there, in whom it brought forth fruit. Again the same prophet a little before
says, had not the Lord of sabbath left us sede, we had been made as Sodoma,
and likened unto Gomorra. Wherefore, though the most part of the Jews fall from
Christ, yet will not Christ suffer the true and natural sede of Abraham utterly
to perish.

The text.
What shall we say then? we say that the gentiles, which followed not
righteousness, have overtaken righteousness: even the righteousness which comes
of faith. Contrariwise Israel which felowed the law of righteousness, could
not attain to the law of righteousness. Wherefore? Even because they sought it
not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law. For they have stumbled
at the stu^blyng stone. As it is written* behold, I have put in Sion a
stumblyng stone, and a rock that men shall be offended at. And whosoever
believes on him, shall not be confounded. Since this is so, what shall we say?
Surely nothing, but as the truth is, that is to wete, that the gentiles, which
seemed far from righteousness, and without the ceremonies of the law, have yet
attained the true and perfect righteousness, and not a Iewishe (which standing
in bodily things was nothing but a shadow only of christian perfeccion), but
a wholesome and an effectual justice, which such have not, as for the works of
the law stand much in their own conceit, but such as through an unfeigned
faith submit and yield them selfs unto God.

We may likewise of the othersyde say that whiles the people of the Israel
which followed the law of rightousnes could not attain y^ law of righteousness.
etc.
Jews with all their power following the justice of the law carnally
understood, and stiffly cleave to it, with all their labor they came not unto
the very law of justice, forasmuch as the same fell from Christ, whereunto as to
a mark al y^ dark sayings of Moses law principally directed. Here some will
say, how fortuned all this, and how ended these purposes so diversely? Without
al doubt, because God abhors such as are high minded, and gives him self
and his righteousness, to such as are sobre and lowly. And therefore y^ gentiles
upon acknowledgyng of their own disease and an humble submission of them self
to God, God received: y^ proud Jews of thothersyde, which falsely usurped y^
title of righteousness, as their own, bearyng them self bold upon their
sabbath day keeping, washynges, circumcision, and such other small
obseruaunces, disdainyng to receive the yoke of faith, has God set at naught
and refused because they denied Christ, and delivered him which is the author
of life, For they have stumbled at y^ stumblyng stone. etc.
to death: which thing Esai long before knowing, prophesied should be, under
this form, that Christ, who^ the law promised should be a savior, by reason
of unbelief should be unto the Jews an occasion of stumlyng, and that the same
stone, which should be to the good a sure and a strong defense, should be their
utter undoing, whiles they had rather by resistyng stumble at him, then with
belief to rest upon him. For so by the prophet Esai speaks God the father of
Christ: behold I put in Sion a stumblyng stone, and a rock that men shall be
offended at, but whosoever believes in it, shall never be confounded and put to
shame, as one disapointed of that he looks for.

The.x. Chapter.
The text.
Brethren, my hertes desire and prayer to God for Israel is, that they might be
saved: For I bear them record, that they have a fervent mind to God ward,
but not according to knowledge. For they being ignorant of Gods righteousness,
and going about to stablishe their own righteousness, have not been obedient
unto the righteousness of God. For Christ is the fulfillyng of the law, to
justify all that believe. ALl which things (brethren) speak I with great
heauynes, because with all my heart I fauer and would them well, if I were in
any wise able to do them good, being in ieopardie of everlasting da^nacion. But
now that which is the only thing Brethren my hearts desire and prayer to God
for Israel is. etc
I can do, in my daily prayers made unto God, my desire and peticion is, that
they may once yet amend and not always continue in such blyndnes. I can not
utterly excuse their unbelief, but yet in the defense of their fault some
color may be made and pretended. As they are not in all points in such
sort strangers to God, as the gentiles be, so much the more wish I that
their rude beginnings may once be made perfect, that whose shadow they have
for a season borne about with them in their bodies, of the same they may now
come to the very truth. For They have a feruentminde to Godward but not
according to knoledge. etc.
albeit they with extreme deuilishnes fastened to the cross the Lord, who was
y^ fou^tayne of al glory, yet this say I of them, and deny not, that to
Godwarde a certain zeal and love have they, but yet not according to
knowledge and right judgment. Nor are they deceived for lack of a godly mind
and purpose, but in the choice and practice of life, they ru^ne far awry. Now
better is it to have some mind to religion, then to be al without, and of God
well worthy were that mind of theyrs in goodness to be increased, were it not
that they to the gross beginnings of godly life so stubbernly cleaued, that
they refused the true and perfect religion, and were it not also they so
vehemently required and auaunced even shadows and pictures of truth, that the
very fountain of truth they utterly despised. For whiles they busyly in
deed, but yet indiscreetly defend and keep Moses law, resistyng him for whom
the law was principally ordained, they utterly fall even from the whole law
self. Keeping of the sabbath day, circumcision, abstinence from certain kinds
of meats, the shonnyng of dead carcasses, fasting days, the keapyng of high
They going about to stablishe their own righteousness have not been obedient
to the righteousness of God. etc.
feasts, were for this purpose made and decreed for a time, that from such
rude beginnings men might by little and little grow upward to true and perfect
righteousness and from a certain worldly righteousness increase and grow up
to that, which is in all points godly and perfect. If an ordinance be
purposed and made for a better end, vnseamyng is it for love of such a mean,
to despise the end, for which the said mean was appointed. But now
frowardely so yet do the Jews, whom albeit after the publishyng of the
righteousness of God it besemed to forgo the carnal justice of the law, yet so
farrefoorth bolster they out and defend their old, and at this time hurteful,
and not only superfluous justice of the law, that they not only will not
knowledge the heavenly righteousness of God, but also having a confidence in
their ceremonies withstand and resist the gospel of Christ, whereunto they
ought by faith to submit them self, if they ever minded to be truly
righteous. For we must by imaginacion conceive as it were two kinds of
justice: the one whereof Moses was author, the other whereof Christ was beginner.
The one stands in ceremonies, the other in faith and obedience. And as the
rude piece of timbre is matter whereof an image is wrought, and as blood is the
beginning of living creatures to be brought forth by generacio^: so is the
justice of the law a rude and gross beginning of the other, which is more
perfect. And certainly extreme folishenes is it, after that a man is come to
perfeccion, curiously to stick still in rudimentes. But now of all Christ is
the fulfillyng of the law to justify all that believe. etc.
Moses law, which is of it self rude and imperfect, is Christ the fulfillyng
and perfeccion, by whom through faith, and not through circumcision, we attain
righteousness, which way to righteousness is not only open for Jews to enter
therinto, but also to all true and faithful beleuers.

The text.
For Moses writes of the righteousness, which comes of the law, how that
the man, which does the things of the law, shall live thereby. But the
righteousness which comes of faith, speaks on this wise: say not thou in
thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven (that is even to fetch Christ down
from above) either who shall descend into the depth? (that is even to fetch
up Christ again from death) but what says he? The word is nigh the, even in
thy mouth and in thy heart. Both kinds of justice did Moses clearly express.
For the temporal justice, which rested in ceremonies, to be kept but for a
season, plainly sets The monne which does the things of the law shall live
thereby. etc
he out in the book of y^ Levites, saying: keep my laws and decrees, this who
so does shall live thereby. But the true and everlasting justice, which we by
Christ through a lively faith obtain, in the book of Deuteronomi expresses
he, when he says: neither say thou in thine heart, who shall ascend into
heaven: for that is even to fetch Christ down from above. Nor yet say thou,
who shall descend and go down into the deapth of the earth, for that were
even to fetch up Christ again from death. Of which both sorts of
questioners, forasmuch as they require of faith to have an experiment, neither
of both seems to believe well.

But, whosoever unfeignedly believes, is in such points more surely Say not
y^ in thine heart who shall asce^d into heaven. etc.
and better persuaded, the^ is one, which needs such means to be taught
with, either of this (I say,) that Christ once descended from heaven, or else
of this, that he now sytteth at his fathers right hand, though he no more
show neither of both before men's iyen. And though it be of men seen no more,
yet believes he also, that Christ went down to hell, and the third day rose
again to life. Sufficient is it for us to believe, that this was once done. So
that this remains, that we give credence unto such, as saw the same. And to
believe this we need not to seek far. The Jews saw, and yet believed not.
Other heard, which saw not, and yet gave they credence. The scripture
records the same, which straight after says: the word is nyghe the, even
in thy mouth and in thy heart.

The text.
This same is the word of faith, which we preach. For if thou knowledge
with thy mouth, that Jesus is the lord, and believe in thy heart, that god
raised him up from death: thou shalt be saved For to believe with the heart,
justifies: and to knowledge with the mouth makes a man safe. For the
Scripture says: whosoever believes on him, shall not be confounded. And what
word is this, which Scripture speaks of? Without doubt the word of the
gospel, which we being publyshers of this righteousness do preach, works in
men's souls present salvation, so that men by faith only apply their
minds thereunto. But how is this If you knowledge with thy mouth that Jesus is
the lord. etc.
word of the gospel in thy mouth, and how is it in thy heart? If thou with
thy mouth confess and knowledge the Lord Jesus, and with thy heart
unfeignedly believe, that god from death raised him again to life, that we
through him being restored to life from the death of syn should hereafter live
in cleanness of life, then shall thou be saved. For with heart believe we,
which is to ryghteousenes the very entrey, but for as much as, when need
requires, all men are bound to glorify Christ, to everlasting salvation, it
is not sufficient with heart only to believe, except thou the same with thy
mouth confess. By this seeye, that this matter hangs not upon ceremonies,
but upon faith. Which thing Esai also speaking of Christ records, saying:
whosoever believes on him, shall not be confounded.

The text.
There is no difference between the Jew and the Gentile. For one is lord of
all which is rich unto all that call upon him. For whosoever does call on the
name of the Lord shall be safe. How then shall they call on him, on whom they
have not believed? How shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard?
How shall they hear without a preacher? And how shall they preach, except
they be sent? As it is written: how beautiful are the feet of them, which
bring tidings of peace, and bring tydinges of good things. But they have not
al obeyed the gospel. For Esai says: Lord who has believed our sayings? ^o
then faith comes by hearing, and hearing cummeth by the word of God. But I
ask, have they not heard? No doubt their sound went out into all lands, and
their words into the ends of the world. In y^ the prophet says (whosoever)
takes he not away al difference betwixt Jew and Ge^tile? And in y^ he says,
(believes) without mention making of circumcision or such other like, abolysheth
he not utterly the ceremonies of the law? Faith only is required, whom every
man may equallye For one is Lord of all, which is rich unto all that call
upon him,
enjoy and have. And god likewise is he, which is not only lord of the
Jews, but of all indifferently, whose bounteousnes is not so narrow, and
strait, that it can no ferther reach, but only to the Jews, so that among
the^ the same is utterly worn out, but without end is his goodness ple^tifully
flowyng forth not only upon this nation or y^, but upon all people of any
country, what soever they be, so that with a sure trust in god, they desire
his help. The Prophet Micheas also affirms the same, saying: Whosoever call
upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. In the prophets laying no kind of
men is there excepted. But every man, whatsoever he be, be he either Jew,
Grecian, or of any nation else, if the same with a sure confidence call upon the
name of god, he shall be saved. And on the other side, whosoever calls not upon his
name, shall utterly peryshe. Now upon him uses no man to call, or to desire
his help, in whom he has conceived no trust.

But who will in him put any trust, of whom he never erste heard speak? Again
how ca^ me^ hear speak of an other, unless there be some, to preach How shall
they believe of whom they have not heard.
the name of him, which is in such sort unknowen? And as for apostles, how
can they preach, unless they by him, to whom the gospel apertayneth, be sent
so to do? of whom the same prophet Esai making mention says: how beautiful
are the feet of them, which preach tidings of peace, and bring tidings of
good things. By which words ye hear and perceive, what Christ's messengers
are commanded to preach, neither circumcision, as ye see, nor yet keeping of
the Iewyshe Sabbath day, but peace, which after that our sins are through
faith forgyuen, by mutual charity joins us together in Christ, and to
preach such good things, as because they are of themself naturally good,
are in all times and in every place good.

And yet notwithstanding this wonderful benefit of god, which has so used
all means to call every nation to everlasting bliss, that none is there, but
the same has heard of the joyful tidings of the gospel: all yet believe not
the gospel. But that it should so be, the same Prophet Esai long before said,
speaking in the person of the apostles: Lord who has believed our sayings?
For even among the Gentiles but very few believe the gospel, if they be compared
to the multitude of such, as believe not. The briefnes of this our matier
shortly comprised is this then: if calling upon the name of the lord work
our salvation, if such as believe not, call not upon him, a plain proof is it,
that faith is specially required, and not circumcision. Now is not faith in
man's soul conceived by experience, but by the preaching of the apostles,
that is to say, not by the iyes, So tha^ faith cummeth by hearing, and hearing
cummeth by the word of god.
but by the ears, through whom as means the gospel of Christ is powered into
the obedient soul. Sith now then the bright beams of the gospel has
lyghtened all the world, so that Christ's name is throughlye known, what
means this, that so few of the Jews give credence thereto? Can they say
for their excuse, that they of Christ have heard nothing?

No, for now se we that fulfilled, which David prophesied of before, when he
said: Their sound went out into al lands and their words into the ends of
the world.

The text.
But I demand whether Israel did know or not? First Moses says: I will
provoke you to envy, by them that are no people: by a folyshe nation I will
anger you. Esai after that is bold and says: I am found of them that sought
me not: I am manifest unto them, y^ asked not after me. But against Israel he
says: Al day long have I stretched furthe my hands unto a people that believed
not, but speaks against me. Then sithe Christ so many hundred years gone
was in prophecies promised, and now throughout all the world by his apostles
mete and convenient witnesses preached, and their preaching with so many
miracles confirmed, can the Jews for themselfes colourably say, that they
know not Christ? No, for they saw the light, but malice blinded their iyes.
They heard the gospel, but rancour and envy stopped their ears. Rather had
they bear malice and displeasure against the Gentiles called to everlasting
salvation, than to follow their faith. Both which two I will provoke you to
envy, by the^ that are no people.
things, y^ is to wit, that the Jews should reject the joyful tidings of
gods word, and that the Gentiles should receive it, were long before prophesied
of by Moses and also Esai: of which two, the first in the book of Deuteronomi
in a song makes the lord being displeased with the unbelieving Jews, this
wise to speak: I will provoke you to envy by a very vile nation, which
heretofore in comparison of you, has been acoumpted for no nation, and for
somuche as ye think your selfs to be wise, I will anger you with a kind of
people, which in your judgment is folyshe and beastlye, thereby to make you
more envious. And Esai, which prophesied after Moses time, without all fear
plainly says, that god more accepted the Gentiles obedience, then the Jews
stubbernes. For on this wise speaks he in the person of Christ, I was found
of them, that sought me not, and plainly appeared unto them, that asked not
after me. Such a glorious I am found of them that sought me not, I am
manifest unto them, that asked not after me.
witness bears god unto the Gentiles faith. But against the people of Israel,
whom much rather it besemed to embrace the faith of the gospel, what says
straight after the same Esai? All the day long have I stretched forth my hands
unto a people, that believed not. I sent them prophets, them murdered they up,
my self with sundry miracles provoked them to goodness, instead of thanks,
they said, the devil is in him, and by the power of Beelzebub chief devil
works he these wunders. My humblenes they despised, and my myghtie power took
they in a wrong sense.

The.xi. Chapter.
The text.
I say then: has god cast away his people? God forbid. For even I also am
an Israelite, of the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. God has not
cast away his people, which he knew before. Wot ye not, what scripture
says of Helias, how he makes intercession to god against Israel, saying:
Lord they have killed thy prophets, and have dug down thine alters: and I
am left alone, and they seek my life. But what says the answer of god unto
him? I have reserved unto my self seven thousand men, which have not bowed
their knees to the image of Baal. Even so also at this time is there a remnaunt
left, according to the eleccion of grace. If it be of grace, then is it not
now of works. For then grace is no more grace. But if it be of works, then
is it now no grace. For then were deserving no deserving. What then? Israel
has not obtained it which he seeks, but the eleccion has obtained it. The
re^naunte are blinded, according as it is written. God has given them the
spirit of unquietness, iyes that they should not see, and eats that they
should not hear even unto this day. And David says: Let their table be made
a snare to take them with all, and an occasion to fall, and a reward unto
them, let their iyes be blinded, that they see not: and bow thou down their
back always. But to what end draw all these my words? Be they to teach,
that the Gentiles which were before this time to god strangers, are thoroughe
faith taken into gods family, and that the people of the Jews, which was
by god first chosen out, is through unbelief utterly refused? No not I say
then has god cast away his people: god forbid,
so: for unlikely is it, that god has now utterly refused that nation, which
he has hitherto gentely and gladly knowledged, as his chosen people. If god
had thoroughly refused the whole nation, then should not my self, by kindred an
Israelite, lineally descended of the stock of Abraham, and appertaynyng to the
tribe of Benjamin, at this time preach Christ. So far are we from this,
that god has refused us, that even when I for zeal of the law persued good
people, then god called me forth to preach his gospel. At lestwyse that ye
forget not, which is red in the third book of the Wot ye not what scripture
says of Helias, how he makes intercession.
kings, where the prophet Helias speaks unto god complaining upon and
blamyng the Jews wickedness, saying: Lord they have killed thy prophets, and
overthrown thine aulters, I am left alone, and they seek for my life. After
which unmerciful cruelty it might seem, that god would utterly have cast
of his people, as desperate and paste all amendmente. But what was by god
answered to Helias? I have reserved unto my self seven thousand men, which
have not bowed their knees unto y^ ydoll of Baal. As then at that time god
refused not al his people, but of so many evil left a certain noumber to
honor him: after the same sort happens it now. For the whole people of the
Jews has not god suffered to be estraunged from him, no more then he has
suffered the rest beside to peryshe in their sins, albeit of both people
very few are they, which do believe in comparison of them, that refuse so to
do.

But yet of his goodness has god saved some, neither because they were Jews
borne, nor yet because they kept Moses law, but because he of many has
chosen them furthe, upon whom his pleasure was to show If it be of grace than
is it not now of works?
his bountiful grace and mercy. Now if he so did of his own bountiful mercy,
and not for their deserts, let it not be imputed unto their works. For that,
which is given a man for his labor, is rather, as hyrewages, than a free
gift. But that, which is given to such as deserve not, that and none else is
a free gift. If the deserts of works be once accoumpted, then is a benefit,
no longer a benefit, but should much more be called Israel has not obtained
that which he seeks, but y^ eleccion has obtained it.
a reward. What happened then? Surely this happened, that the same, which
the people of Israel upon confidence of the law intended to obtain, for lack
of belief they went there without, so that such only obtained, as were of
gods eleccion, and not they, which belonged to the circumcised stock. To
such as were not chosen by god, neither circumcision, nor keeping of the law
auayled, but they were with malice so far forth blinded, that upon syghte of so
many miracles they gave no credence, leyng with their bodily iyes Christ, whom
they had so long looked for, yet with the iyes of their heart seeing him not at
al. And that we now see done and are for the same sorye, the prophet Esai long
before prophesied, should be. Because they refused the holy and humble spirit
of Christ, therefore has god given them the spirit of unquietness both roughe,
boysteouse, and unruly, so that the wonders they beheld with their iyes, they
deny still, as though they saw them not, and that they hear with their ears,
no more moves them, than if they heard them not. Such were they in time
paste to the prophets, such were they to Christ himself, such are they
until this day toward the preachers of the gospel.

This also David replenished with the spirit of prophecy saw long And David
said, let their table be made a snare, etc.
before, and for their great stubbernes in this behalf against the will of
god, prophecieth destruction mete for such froward people. Let their table
(says he) become a snare to take them withal, and an occasion to fall, and
into punishment dew for such deeds, let their iyes be so blinded, that they
see not, and always bow down their backs, because they would not
pleasauntly use that which was laid before them, and refused such things, as
they presently saw and heard, and were without al godly regard to look up to
heaven ward, and knowledge toward the^ their makers benefit, but gyuyng
themself wholly to the gross meaning of the law, disdain heavenly doctrine,
and in regard of things transitory, despisen that, which is everlasting. The
Jews carry about in their hands the books of Moses, and understand them not:
they read the prophecies, and deny, that in them is promised. But whereto
makes this some man will say? they are blyndfolded, they are snared, they be
bowed down, and become deaf.

The text.
I say then have they therefore stumbled, that they should utterly fall away
together? God forbid, but through their fall is salvation happened unto the
Gentiles, for to provoke them withal. Wherefore if the fall of them be the
riches of the world, and the minishyng of them the riches of the Gentiles:
how much more their perfitenes? I speak to you Gentiles, in as much as I am
the apostle of y^ Gentiles, I will magnify mine office, if by any means I may
provoke them, which are my flesh and might save some of them. For if the
casting away of them be the reco^cilyng of the world, what shall the receiuyng
of them be, but life again from death? For if one piece be holy, the hole
heap is holy. And if the root be holy, the branches shall be holy also. Are
they so fallen from god, that all hope of rysyng again is passed? I say then
have they therefore stu^bied y^ they should utterly fall away together
No not so. But rather this fall of theyrs chanced but for a time, and for
you, which are Gentiles it luckelye so chanced, because their fall was the
occasion, why you were called to life everlasting, that through your example
again the Jews at the end of the world might be moved to godly religion:
that as their falling from Christ opened y^ way for the Gentiles to come to
Christ: so should your faith if it were for nothing, but for envy, prycke
yet the Jews forward to believe as ye do. Now if their fall occasionally so
greatly profyted, that the Jews forsakyng and falling from Christ caused not
only no hurt, but rather that the doctrine of the gospel was preached among
many more, whiles that in steed of a few falling away, the gospel was spread
abroad among al, so y^ the loss of one nation got unto Christ so many nations,
how much more shall the world be enryched, when that nation also being
through your godlynes provoked, shall be joined to the other? You speak I unto,
I speak to you Gentiles in as much as I am the apostle of the Gentiles.
that are Gentiles, as mine own disciples, for somuche as I am sent to
preach unto you, though I my self be a Jew borne. And albeit I for your sakes
leave nothing undone, yet will I more endeavor to auaunce the office co^mited
unto me, and to allure as many of you as I can to Christ, and not only so, but
also make you worthy of Christ's service, if by such means I may provoke my
country men, (whom as touching carnal aliaunce I may so call, albeit in faith
unlike,) to follow your godlynes, though it be but even for envy and malice,
as the property of them is to be given to a ialowsye: that if I can not bring
all home to goodness, some yet may be saved. And as I am desyrouse of their
amendment: so know I, that ye also desire the same. For if by thoccasion of
the Jews castyng of, all the world else was brought into gods fauer, because
that whiles they fell from the fauer of god, the Gentiles were by gods
goodness received therinto, that is to say, if their great hurt and loss became
good to the world, how much more good were it, if they being now estraunged
from god, were through faith received unto him, like men restored from death to
life again: that finally, when the number of the faithful is thoroughly
fulfilled, there remain nothing, but the resurreccion of bodies? For though of
the Jews some are ungodly, we may not therefore despair of al. If the
Gentiles far from god might through gods calling be brought to perfect
religion, what let should there be, but y^ ^acio^, which had holy fathers, and
beginners, may likewise be called and brought to the faith again? Much more
with reason agreeable is it, y^ of the good, good should be borne, forsomuche as
al me^ for the most part For if one piece be holy y^ whole heap is holy.
resemble that beginning, from whence they are descended. If the leaven be
holy, needs must the whole bache, which is therewith seasoned, be holy and
clean. And if the root of the tree be holy, likely it is, that the branches
of the same, be likewise holy. The Jews have both of kynred and nation
Abraham their begynner, whose faith god allowed: and what let is there, but
that they may resemble their first parents faith? If they this do not, then
are they not his neuewes, no more tha^ the branch plucked from his stock is
any longer nourished with the sap of the root.

The text.
Though some of the branches be broken of, and thou being a wild Olive tree
was grafte in among them, and made partaker of the root and fatnes of the
Olive tree, boste not thy self against the branches. For if thou bost thy
self, thou bear not the root, but the root the. Thou wylt say then, the
branches are broken of, that I might be grafte in, thou say well: because of
unbelief they were broken of, and thou stodest steadfast in faith, Be not high
minded, but fear. For seeing that God spared not the natural branches, take heed, lest it come to pass, that he spare not the also. Now if we see
branches to be plucked from the stock, whereupon before they did naturally
grow, much less marvel is it, if such be plucked of, as are but graffed
upon another. Then if thou see y^ Jews, which Thou being a wyld Olive tree
wastgraft in among the^ and made partaker of y^ root and fatnes of the Olive
tree.
sprung out of the rote of the true Olive, for lack of belief broken down and
plucked from their stock, so that now to them the root does no good: and thy
self contrary wise, whereas thou sprongest out of the wild Olives root,
graffed into the right Olive, not by nature, but by the will and kunnyng
workmanship of God, so set and planted among his very branches, that you
being taken out of thine unfruitful stock art becomen fellow and partaker of a
strange root, and whereas diverse boughs, which in the same tree growed, are
now cut of and withered away, and thy self with a new juice lusty and
plentiful, take heed and beware that thou therefore folishly rise not in thine
own conceit, and disdain other branches, who^ thou see cut of. If thou
unorderly rise in thine own phantasy, if thou grow proud, and therewith be
puffed up, have this in mind, that the root bears the, and not thou the
root.

Beware that no such fond imaginacion come into thy head, to think this with
thy self, the natural branches were broken of, because I should be graffed
into their stock. Think not y^ they were for thy sake broken of, but thereupon
in deed followed it, y^ thou were graffed in. And yet herein say The
branches be broken of that I might be graffed in.
thou well, that they were broken of, whereas they growed out of the root, but
mark why they were after such sort broken of. Without doubt for lack of
faith lie they on the ground and are tredde underfoot, thou through faith
abidest fast upon the tree. Rejoice not at other men's misery, but by their
evil chance rather learn to be lowely and sobre, and by their punishment
learn, what is to be feared, if thou likewise offend. For if thou well see,
yt God spared not the natural branches, and that it nothing auauntaged them,
that they being descended from good and holy fathers, peculiarly belonged to
the people of God, great cause have thou to fear, lest he spare not the, if
thou with arrogance and unkindness displease him. Learn by their fall, what thou
must beware of. Let not thy state cast the in a pride, but rather put the in
remembrance of the goodness of God showed toward y^. Good cause have thou for
thy wealth to be glad, and good cause have thou also to render God thanks, but
without cause art thou to rejoice of their fall. They are for their deserte cut
out of their stock, and thou without thy deseruyng art graffed in it.

The text.
Behold therefore the kindness and rigorousnes of God: on them which fell,
rigorousnes: but toward the, kyndnes: If thou continue in his kindness. Or else
thou shall be hewn of, and they again, if they abide not still in unbelief,
shall be graffed in again. For God is of power to grafe them in again. For if
thou wast cut out of a natural wild Olive tree, and waste graffed contrary
to nature in a true Olive tree. How much more shall the natural branches be
graffed in their own Olive tree again. Considre in God both his mercy, and
his exact justice, and by the one learn to be thankful to God, and by the
other forget to be proud and disdaineful. Of Gods exact justice the Jews
felt example, which from their first state fell to such blyndnes, that Christ
for whom they so many years looked, they maliciously and cruelly persecuted. Of
Gods great goodness have thou which art a Gentile, a plain experience,
Toward y^ kyndnes, if y^ continue in his kyndnes.
in that he of his goodness made the of that blissful life partaker, who^
neither thy heathen stock, neither thy wicked life in any wise deserved. Once
has God freely forgeuen the offenses of thy former life, once art thou through
Gods favor received into the number of his children, but yet art thou so
received, that as thou without thy deserte were called unto it: so through
thine own folly thou may again fall from it. God will from the being
unthankful withdraw his gift, unless thou knowledge his goodness, and
unless thou mekely use his benefit. Thy unkindness will lose all that his
goodness gave. Thy pride will destroy, that thy obedience won.

In which points if thou be not ware, thou shall from the true Olive, Thou
shall be hewn of and they again, if they abide not still in un belief.
in whom thou art now planted be again cut our. Likewise the Jews if they
change and forsake that which deuideth them from God, (I say) their unbelief,
they shall into that tree be new planted, from whence they were cut. So that
faith shall to that place restore them again, from whence through unbelief
they were once deposed. For if thou which wast profane and cursed, being as it
were cut out of the wild Olive, contrary to nature be graffed into the true
Olive, how much rather will this be done, that the Jews, which came of good
pare^tes, come to their kind, and be planted into that good stock again,
from whence they were cut?

The text.
I would not that this secret should be hid from you my brethren, (lest ye
should be wise in your own conceiptes) that partly blindness is happened in
Israel, until the fulness of the gentiles be come in: and so al Israel shall be
saved. As it is written: there shall come out of Sion he that does deliver, and
shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob. And this is my covenant unto them, when
I shall take away their sins. As concerning the gospel they are enemies for
your sakes: but as touching the eleccion, they are loved for their fathers
sakes. I will brethren open unto you a hidden mystery, which should
parauenture not be spoken of at al, were it not that the same is for you very
expedient to be known, lest ye proudly take to much upon you, for so much as ye
think your selfs to be set before the Jews. The blyndnes I spoke of,
whereunto the Jews are fallen, neither fell upon the whole nation, nor shall
continue still. Of them many knowledge Christ, the rest shall so long continue in
their blyndnes, until that the number of gentiles be thoroughly filled up,
which through the Jews fall have had an entry Until the fulness of the gentiles
be come in.
into this condition. But when after long time they shall see all the whole
world to florishe in the faith of Christ, that they in vain look for their
Messiah, and that their city, their temple, their sacrifices, and all their
whole nation is dispersed and scatered abroad, through the light of
understanding, they will at the last begin to knowledge their error, and well
understand that Christ is the very true Messiah. So that albeit some of them
are now grown out of kind, yet shall then the whole number And so shall all
Israel be saved.
of the Israelites be saved. Then shall they for good skill be called right
Israelites, when with the light of faith they shall begin to se that Christ is
both God and the son of God, and through their strength in faith, more then
upon any confidence in works, wreste out with strong hand the benediccion of
God.

And because ye shall believe this the better, the same was also by y^ prophet
Esai long before said. Both were prophesied of, that is to wete, both that
they should fall, and also rise again and amend: the one see we already done,
so y^ and y^ thing self confirms and establishes y^ prophecy, the other with
like faith we look hereafter to ensue. The prophecy is this, there shall come
out of Sio^ he that shall deliver, and shall turn away ungodliness There shall
come out of Sion he that does deliver.
from Jacob, and this is my covenant with them, when I shall take away their
sins. With this nation made God once a covenant, which being surely made
and decreed, though some make them self unworthy of Gods promise, yet for
their unworthiness God will not suffer his promise to be utterly vain. Some
shall yet remain, that shall receive the whole stocks right. For
notwithstanding they are fallen from the grace of God, yet are they not so
fallen, that they can not be reconciled. As many of them as receive not the
gospel of Christ, but cleave still fast to the letter of the law, are eue^ y^
enemies of God, and that (but be not proud of it) turned you to good, for upon
their refusal and forsaking of the gospel, the same was to you by so much y^
rather offered. But yet in as much as they are descended of godly and holy
parents, and are that nation, whom among all other God chose out peculiarly
for him self: for their sakes God greatly regards them, so that if they
amend, they shall the rather be received into his favor, because that, which
we now preach, God long since promised to their fore fathers.

The text.
For verily the gifts and calling of God are such, that it cannot repent him
of them: for like as ye in time passed have not believed God, yet have now
obtained mercy through their unbelief: even so now have they not believed the
mercy, which is happened unto you, that they also may obtain mercy. For God
^^th wrapped al nations in unbelief, that he might have mercy on al. For God
does not in such sort promise to do any thing, nor in such sort fathereth
his children, y^ he after forthinkyng him self, will change his purpose, as men
are wont to do. God cannot be changed, but rather The gifts ^ calling of God
^re such that it cannot repent him of them.
as he cannot be deceived, so will he not be sorry for that he has done. As soon as the Jews no longer refuse him, then will he of his side remember his
promise. There is a change in all things. As at their fall therefore thou
should not rejoice, if thou thereby wo^ne: so should thou be glad of their
amendment. For y^ ye were once the same all the Jews welnigh are now, that is
to say, unfaithful to God: and yet did not God refuse you for ever, since we
now of his mercy see it done, y^ as upon their refusal made, ye were
received, so now suffers God them for a time to be out of his faithful
household and congregation, whiles ye be received into it, y^ they in time to
come through the calling of God amendyng their life, may as ye do, obtain Gods
mercy, which God does, because neither should revile other, but each be of
other glad, findyng like mercy at Gods hand. For so does God by his
unspeakable wisdom rule and order all things, that no kind of men should be
fre from sin: not that he is God has wrapped all nations in unbelief, that
he might have Mercy on all.
author of the same, but that for a season he suffers men through their own
faults to fall into sin, that when they know their own offenses they may well
perceive, how that they are saved, not for their own deserts, but through the
fre mercy of God, lest they otherwise might wax proud. And whiles he this
does, so far is he from puttyng evil into men's minds, that of his goodness in
a marvelous sort, other men's evil he turns to our good.

The text.
O the depnes of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God: how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways paste findyng out? For who has
known the mind of the lord? Or who has been his cou^sailour? either who
has given unto him first, and he shall be recom^pensed again? For of him and
through him, and for him, are all things. To him be glory for ever. Amen. But
into this secret point happily I enter more deapely, than is mete for any
manne to do among men. But am with consideracion of the unspeakable way and
counsel of God, as one astonned, that whereas I cannot express the same, this
exclamacion make I, O the depenes of the O the depenes of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God.
most aboundaunt and ouerflowyng wisdom of God, how unable are men's wits to
search out and conceive his judgments, how unmeet are men's wits to find
out his ways? For who ever knew the mind of the Lord, or who was at any time
his counsailour? What man is there, that first provoked him with any good
turn, in such sort, that the benefit of God given to him again, may seem a
reward and wages given for his well deseruyng? In such sort provides God
for our salvation, by such means in deed, as men's wits are not able to
find out, but yet so well, that it cannot be amended: in such condition his
pleasure is, we should of his benefit be partakers, that for the same we
should for no part thereof thank our selves. If any evil be, for that may we
thank Of him, and through him, and for him are al things.
our self. All the goodness that ever is, of him comes it, as from a
fountain, by him as author are all things given, in him be they, as keeper and
defender of his gifts, because no man should of this praise presumptuously
take upon him any part, sith the beginning, mydle, and end, belong to him, to
whom for the same, honor, praise, and glory is due for ever, of which glory
it is unlawful for any man to challenge any part.

The.xii. Chapter.
The text.
I beseech you therefore brethren, by the mercyfulnes of God, that ye make your
bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, which is your
reasonable seruyng of God, and fashion not your selves like unto this world:
but be ye changed in your shape, by the renuyng of your mind, that ye may
prove what thing that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God is. For I say
(through the grace that unto me given is) to every man among you, that no man
stand hye in his own conceit, more then it becomes him to esteem of him
self, but so judge of him self, that he be gentle and sobre, according as God
has dealte to every man the measure of faith. Sith now then by the goodness of
God ye are from your old supersticion brought to perfect religion, and sith ye
are delivered from the burdain of Moses law, I heartely beseech and pray you
brethren, for the great mercies sake, which God has diversely showed, and still
shows toward you, whose free goodness ye should thank for the welthy state
ye stand in, that ye henceforth unto him offer such sacrifices as become
your profession, not gootes, sheep, or oxen, which as the Jews and Paynyms
custom is, are chosen out, as clean beasts, and meet for divine sacrifice.
Ye have in such gross sacrifices until this time sufficiently had your will,
henceforth requires God of you Make your bodies a quick sacrifice, holy and
acceptable un to God.
far unlike customs, another kind of worshippyng, with other new
sacrifices, that is to say, that ye unto him offer even your own bodies, not
making them lame, but subduyng your naughty desires in them, not offering unto
him dead beasts, but a living sacrifice, in all poinctes pure and holy,
thankeful and acceptable unto God, a reasonable sacrifice, a sacrifice (I say)
of the soul, and of no brute beast.

As long as the carnal law continued, God was contented that corporal beasts
should be offered unto him. But after that the law once became spiritual, with
spiritual sacrifice worship him must we. Instead of a calfe, kyl thy proud
thoughts, instead of a ram, kyl thy fervent malice, instead of a goote,
burn up thy fylthy lust, instead of dooues and turtles, sacrifice unto God
thy frail and wanton thoughts. These and none else are mete sacrifices for
christian men, these are the sacrifices whom Christ gladly receives. God is a
spirit, and with spiritual oblacions is his favor won. Nor requires he so
much to be honored Be you changed in your shape by the renuyng of your mind.
with ceremonies, as to be enbraced with a pure heart and mind. Instead of
circumcision, cut out of thy mind superfluous and vnsemyng desires. Instead
of keeping thy sabbath, keep thy mind quiet from troublous desires. Christ for
our sakes once offered him self, mete is it that we again offer our selfs to
him.

And then will this follow, that as ye are taken out of this world, and have
betaken your selfs to an heavenly profession, so shall ye in life and minds
dissent all together from your old state, and as much as may be, altered into
new and heavenly men, though not with bodies immortal, yet at lestwyse with
new desires of minds, so that henceforth no such thing shall please you, as
cursed people, and such as are given to transitory pleasures, do greatly
esteem, but desire only such things as please God, nor be any longer under
the Iewishe rules of men, but in all your desires, and in all your doings,
hang at the will and governance of God, which regards no gross thing, nor
that which is imperfect, but that which is perfitely good, and acceptable,
and for Gods honor and godly religion mete and conuentent.

Among them that set by the world, a custom it is, that such as are But I
say. etc. to every man among ynu that no man stand high in his own conceit.
etc.
welthy, disdain the poor, he that is poor enuyeth the rich man. But I
command every one of you, whosoever he be, be he rich, or of the common
sort, so that he be of the christian flock, and taken out of the fellowship
of this world, that through pride he think no more of him self, than is
besemyng, but that he be of a sobre and of an humble mind, that first he take
no more upon him, than is mere, and next remember, that all that he has, was
given him by God, not for his works, but for his faythes sake, and given, not
therewith to please him self, but with the same to do every man good.

God does in sondrywyse bestow his gifts, lest either one should disdain at
an other, or lest any man might think him self sufficient, but let brotherly
charity make each man's gift comen to all other.

The text.
For as we have many members in one body, and al members have not one office:
so we being many, are one body in Christ, and every manne among our selves one
another members. Seeing that we have diverse gifts according to the grace that
is given unto us: if any man have the gift of prophecy, let him have it, that
it be agreyng unto the faith. Let him that has an office, wait on his office.
Let him that teaches, take heed to his doctrine. Let him that exhorts, give
attendaunce to his e^hortacion. If any man give, let him do it with singlenes.
Let him that rules, do it with diligence. If any man show mercy, let him do
it with cherefulnes. Let love be without disstmulacion. Hate that which is
evil, and cleave unto that which is good. Be kind one to another with
brotherly love. In geuyng honor, go one before another. Be not sloth full in
the busynes which ye have in hand. Be fervent in the spirit. Apply your
selves to the time. Rejoice in hope. Be pacient in tribulacion. Continue in
prayer. Destribute unto the necessity of the saints: be ready to harbor.
Bless them which persecute you: bliss (I say) and curse not. Be merye with
them that are merye, weep also with them that weep. Be of like affeccion one
toward another. Be not hye minded, but make your selves equal to them of the
lower sort. For unmeet is it, that the grace of Christ in you have less
power, than has the power of nature in every beasts body. For as in the body
of beasts there is of the parts among them self a certain fellowship: so is
there betwixt all such people as of diverse sects and sondrye nations are
shaped into the fellowship of Christ. For as this sensible body, albeit it be
but one, yet is it framed of many members together, now has not every
membre like office, forsomuche as the iyes have one, the feet another, the
stomach and hands another, and yet does not the iye see only for it self,
but for the whole body, nor the stomach for it self prepares not food, but
for all the members: Now in what condition the office of every member is in the
body: in like are the sondrie gifts after diverse sorts given to diverse of
us.

As then the lymmes, which are more noble, for example the iyes, So we being
many are one body ^ Christ
disdain not the viler, but with that they can do, help and succoure al, or
else should the whole body utterly decay: so let every manne, be his gift
singular, or else be it mean, for his part bestow the same for the weal of
the whole body, since we are once planted into Christ our head, and with
him becommen one spiritual body. For as one member is to another member of
the same body, so is one christian manne to another christian manne.

But yet has every manne, (as I before said,) sundry gifts given unto him,
given unto him, (I say) not for his own deserts, but by the liberal
bounteousnes of god, which gives every manne as he knows is expediente. Let
nomanne therefore of his gift be proud, but discretlye If any man have the
gift of prophecy. etc.
and soberly use it for the weal of all men, if he have the gift of
prophecy to expound unknown learnynges, let him according unto the
perfeccion of his faith, (whom only god regards, and not his other
deserts,) without disdain upon other bestow this his gift: or if he be in
such condition and place, where he may help his brother, therein let him
soberly do his duty, if he have the gift of learning, let him not disdain
to enstructe and teach other, or if he can out of y^ Scriptures Let him that
teaches take heed to his doctrine.
with preaching rauyshe men to pitiful and godly life and conditions, let
him with sobernes use that his gift: if he have gooddes, where with to help the
poor and nedie, let him also give unto such, as have need, and therewith
help other, neither for glory, neither for hope to have advantage therbye,
but with a liberal and free heart, or if god have given him to bear rule
over other, and therein can do well, let him not of that office be any
thing the prouder, but careful of his charge, nor let him rule his office
for himself, but for their weal, whose charge and governance he has taken in
hand, or if he help the wretched and miserable, let it be done without
sadness and louryng, for that is a discouraging of him, that is so helped, and
beware that with thy benefit thou hit him not in the teethe, but let thy
thankeful gift be increased and doubled with a merry look and cherefulnes, so
that whatsoever ye give, seem to give it even as it were an other man's, and
with all your hearts. Heathen peoples good deeds be all for the most part,
by such ways corrupted, yea though elswyse they seem to be liberallye done.

In you let dissimulacion have no place, but let there among you Let love
be without dissimulacio^. etc.
reign love and charity, which neither can counterfaicte nor dissemble,
but make every man's doings accepted of god. Beware also that ye measure not
things, after your desire, as noughtie people are wont to do, but esteem and
measure things, by virtue only or vice, abhorring all lewdnes, steadfastly
cleauyng to goodness. And forasmuch as ye are brethren, daily desire your
commen fathers help, and since ye are all appointed to one enheritaunce, let
each of you to Be kindeone to another with brotherlye love.
other through brotherly charity, be ready and well wyllyng. Carnal men
strive for preeminence in honor, strive ye each with other, how one of you
may prefer an other before himself.

Let noman idely live to himselfwarde, but let every man for his part labor
to do his duty, nor be slothful and* stuggyshe, as men, that are with the
infirmity of the flesh faynte, but be in spirit couragiouse and fervent. Ye
have forsaken your carnalnes, and begun now to be spiritual. A fleshly
point is it to be flouthful, for the spirit of god is a thing of actiuitie
and lively. Withstand not evil persons, but do as the time Apply yourselues
to the time.
requires, applying your self to that, which is present, if any hurt
chance, avoid it, if ye can well so do, or else suffer it, not with heavy
hearts, as men that are in wanhope, but be in adversities merry and joyful, for
hope of the reward, that is to come. This wise in the mean season, think
with your self, if ye any thing either bear with, or forgive another, ye
suffer it for gods sake, which will without doubt with advantage make you a
recompense. But now and if the wicked vntollerably vex thee, go not about, to
defend thy self, nor yet seek to be revenged, ne call you for worldly socoure
and defense, but with continual and hartye prayer desire the help of god. If
any christian have lack, let him, that has, give him some thing, not
louryngly and unpleasantly, as one that gives to a crauyng beggar, but even as
one that rekeneth al he has commen. And not only use such liberality upon
them that are present, but upon other also, which are absent. Such as come to
you from fer contreyes abroad, let them have harbroughe, lest they either
shamefully lack, or be compelled among Paynyms to take their lodgyng. And as
it besemeth, that our hands be liberal, so is it also convenient, that our
tongues hurt noman. Bliss them which perstcute you, bliss (I say) and curse
not


Upon such as for hate of Christ and his gospel persecute and trouble you, ye
may not only not revenge, but also not somuche as wyshe them any harm. Yea
even pray for them, rather pray for them (I say) that they amend their life
and curse the^ not at al. Such as ye cannot in deed do good unto, wyshe well
unto them. Each in perfect frendeship assure himself to other, which makes
both joy and sorrow commen, that your gladness, your sadness and tears be
always joined together. In all things be of one mind and of one desire,
whether unto you there fall any prosperouse and lucky chance, or any
adversity. Be not proud and disdaynful one of you toward another, but let
such one as is superior, frame and temper himself, to such as be his
inferiors and underlings.

The text
Be not wise in your own opinions. Recompense to no man evil, for evil.
Provide before hand things honest, not only before god, but also in the sight
of all men. If it be possible (as much as is in you) live peaceablye with all
men. Dearelye beloved avenge not your selves* but rather give place unto
wrath* For it is written: vengeance is mine, and I will reward says the
Lord. Let none among you so stand in his own conceyte, that to himself in his
Be not wise in your own opinion.
own judgment he seem a stout fellow and one to be wondered at. Whosoever is
such one, will never lightly give place to an other. If any man perhaps
offend you, give not check for check, ne one wrong for an other. Though
such doings among Jews and Panyms be taken for well done, yet for evil to do
evil, before Christ is deuilish, and so is it for y^ no^ce to follow that thou
in an other reprouest. Strive ethe with other of you who can do best, and
labor not only, that such things as ye do, upon testimony of your own
consciences only please god, but see that it likewise be of all men allowed,
nor offend the weak person with any act that seems evil. And let your
life be so far not only from great of^ences, but as much as may be fer from
all suspicion of any great offense, y^ even the very noughtie packes find in
it nothing to reprove. So shall ye do, if as much as in you is, ye be at peace,
not with christian men only, but also with such as to Christ are strangers.
Wonderful is the po^^r of this divine and heavenly virtue, as which even
compels her ennemies both to love her, and also to wonder at her. If every
man labor to be reue^ged of his own grief, peace cannot steadfastly continue.
Jews and Paynyms use vengeance, but if there be any wrong done unto you,
de^yre you not to be revenged, but rather give place to men's malice, which
As much as is in you (...) peaceablye with all men.
with thy patience will better wear away, than if thou with like doing and
reuengyng more and more provoke it. If thou with patience overcome his fury,
therein thou gaynest. But and if he in his rage still continue on, let him not
doubt, but that he shall be surely punyshed. Leave him to his judge, which has
from us taken away the authority to revenge, and reserueth it to himself, as
which in the Deuteronomie speaks on this wise, vengeance is mine, and I
will reward says the lord.

The text.
Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him: if he thyrste, give him drink.
For in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil with goodness. Yea I say, be so fer from hurting
another, when thou art hurt, that for an evil turn, look thou do a good: so
that if thine enemy happen to be hungrye, refreshe and help him with thy
meat, if he thruste, give him drink. Scarcely is there any nature of such
wyldnes and so beastlye, but that it with benefits, may be made tame, namely
since by such means even the very wild beasts wax Gentle. Herewith the^
wyn thine In so doing you shall h^ap^ coals of ^y^^ on his head^
enemy. Upon experience and proof had of thy sufferaunce and godlynes he will
peradventure amend, and be ashamed, loathe and repent his outragiouse fiersnes,
and being ouercomme^ with thy charity, fervently love ^he again. By this way
may all debates be finished, whereas by doing like for like, they are without
end still increased. In good deeds it is a godly thing to strive, and in them
each one to pass an other, is an excel lent point, but to strive who can do
worste to an other, is beastly.

But as for this saying even the paynyms self grant. But herin shall your
praise specially stand, if with good deeds ye overcome evil, if with By not
overcome of evil, but overcome evil with goodness.
sufferaunce ye overcome men's furye, if with fair speech ye overcome evil
toungued, and also wrong, with doing your duties. And in great watch must
thou stand, lest he which is evil, with his noughtines overcome thy goodness,
so far that thoroughe him thou begin to be unlike thy self, and to follow
his trade whom thou reprouest. But rather let thy goodness vanquyshe his
wyldnes, so that he being ouercomen through thine example, be as it were
violently pulled into thy part.

The.xiii. Chapter.
The text
Let every soul submyt himself unto the authority of the higher powers. For
there is no power, but of god. The powers that be, are ordained of god.
Whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of god. But
they that resist, shall receive to themself damnacion. For rulers are not
fearful to them that do good, but to them that do evil. Wylt thou be without
fear of the power? do well then: and so shall thou be praised of the same. For
he is the minister of god for thy welthe. But and if thou do that which is
evil, then fear: for he bears not the sword for naught: for he is the
minister of god, to take vengeance on him, that does evil. Wherefore ye must
needs obey, not only for fear of vengeance: but also because of
conscience. And even for this cause pay ye tribute. For they are gods
ministers seruyng for the same purpose. But now and if princes and gouernoures
of the commen weal for Christ's religions sake persecute and trouble you,
suffer it ye must, though it begun through no fault of youres. In any case
take heed, that ye neither move, nor provoke them thereunto, refusyng to do
such things, as they seem by their authority to require, and may of us be
done without the displeasure of god. Every Let every soul submit himself unto
the authority of the hyer powers.
common weal is mayntayned with an order, nor may the same under the pretense
of religion be disquieted. There be in men beastly lusts and desires, with
other like enormities, in whom we may not agree unto other, and again some
things there be, wherein we must for quietness of the common weal, as the time
serves, even consent and bear with ^anims, lest by your example some become
unruly, whom it were expedient to be kept under with fear. Of such things
three differences are there. One is of such, as are in all points godly,
which as things peculiarly belonging to Christ we must in all times and
places prefer and set before other. An other kind is there, of such
mattiers as utterly appertain to this world, as ungracious desires and syn.

These must ye in any condition shonne and beware of. The third kind is There
is ^^ power but o^ god The powers that be, are ordained of god
of such as of their own natures are neither good nor bad, and yet for a good
order to be had in a commen weal, and mayntenaunce of concord, are necessary
to be kept. I would not have such laws through you troubled, albeit they
have of ryghteousnes but a color or shadow, so y^ they be not quite contrary
to the justice of Christ. Persecucion must we suffer, and be subject to
worldly dominion, though it be somewhat unlawful, lest when they persecute
and vex you, men think and judge they do it for just and lawful causes, when
ye only among other set at naught and refuse the commen laws, received by all
men, whom as Christ made not, so them reproved he not, but as one ignorant
went undoubtedly about other matiers. The commen laws therefore must every
man obey and obey also gouernoures, which in earth bear a certain image of
god, and in ponyshyng offenders put gods will in execucion. And in deed thus
ferfurthe is their power given unto them by god. Wherefore whosoe resists any
prince and magistrate, albeit the same be a cursed and a wicked Paynym, doing
yet his office, the same withstandeth not the man so doing his duetye, but
resists god from whom the authority comes. For as the shadow of Moses
law was given by god, so that before this time we might not lawfully refuse
it: so of god is made the justice of the law, so that for the time we must
thereof have some regard. For as gods pleasure is, that in his body the
members should have their order, whereof we before spoke: so would he, that in
the commen weal, wherein are good and badde, that an order there should be. Now
is the order self of it self good, notwithstanding peradventure the man abuse
his office.

Wherefore whosoever disquieteth this order, resysteth god the maker thereof, They
that resist, shall rec^yue to them self damnacion.
and they that resist god, shall as they are well worthy, receive their
damnacion. Now if thou be loathe to be endaungered to magistrates or laws,
think not with stubbernes to come thereunto, but with innocent and hurtles life
and good conditions. Officers can do nothing lawfully but upon such, as been
offenders. Live vpryghtlye and well, and the law with the has nothing to do,
and thou without cause to fear any magistrate. Yea rather at their hands,
such as do their duties, receive rewards and honor. Wherefore as in ponyshing
of offenses the magistrate is gods minister: so is he after a certain sort
his minister to, whiles he rewards such, as are well doers. So that whosoever
well lives, is more then free from the danger and peril of the law. But if
thou commit any offense worthy of correccion then happens it through thy
fauit, that thou must fear the magistrate, for he for such purpose bears
He to the minister of god to take vengeance on him.
a swearde, to ponyshe (I say) hurtful persons, and therein is he servant
and minister unto the justice of god, who in punyshyng of naughty packes uses
the service of such as are even themselves evil.

Since therefore the commenweales state can not be preserved, unless officers be
had in due reverence, for the common weals sake, obey, them also, not only,
lest they being provoked with your stubberne disobedience seame even of right
reason to use extremite against you, more for your Not only for fear of
vengeance, but also because of conscience.
sedition, than because ye are christians, but also for your consciences sake,
which, albeit of them ye fear no punishment, tells you, that it should not
be troubled, which god would have stablished. And forasmuch as herin they
do the comen busynes, and since that which is comen belongs unto al men,
for a reward of doing their office, ye pay the^ a custom and a tribute, and
though they be wicked, yet because they minister commen justice, and because
god himself is justice, they are gods ministers and in his stead are they,
whiles they apply iustlye that thing, that by commen authority is committed
unto them.

The text.
Give to every man therefore his duty. Tribute to whom tribute belongs:
custom, to whom custom is due: fear to whom fear belongs: honor, to
whom honor pertaynethe. O we nothing to any man but this, that ye love one
another. For he that loves an other has fulfilled the law. For these
commandments, thou shall not commit aduoutrie, thou shall not steal, thou
shall not bear false witness: thou shalt not lust: and so forth (if there be
any other commandment) it is all comprehended in this saying, namely love
thy neighbor as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor. Therefore is love
the fulfyllyng of the law, Wherefore if these men forbid you any thing, which
of it self is not unlawful to be done, obey them, since ye are of them,
which are bound to follow honesty, though ye were put in no fear of
punishment. If they command ungodliness to be done, remember, that ye must
rather obey god, than men. Now if by their authority they exact any thing
of you, the loss whereof puts you in no ieopardy of breach of your
religion, the matier is not so great, that ye for the same should provoke
their displeasure, pay unto them all such exactions, as though it were debte.
Christ him self which was bound to noman, paid to Caesar tribute, not that
he owed any, but because he would not displease them. Suffer not, that they by
you be defrauded of their right. If of them any require tribute, pay him
tribute, if he exact custom, pay him custom. If he require to be had in
reverence, forsomuche as the same denied, he might think his authority
despised, in the sight of men do reverence unto him. Again if for his commen
offices sake he would be had in honor, give to him dew honor. If they in
their office laudablye use themselfes, the honor is given to god, if they
otherwise do, that honor is given them for a quietness to be had in the common
weal. And to leave nothing vnsayed, what soever any such parson shall
demand of you, do therein that thing, which is for the commen weal
necessary. But among Owe nothig to any man, but this that ye love one another.
you being christians let there be no authority or debte, but that ye to each
other owe mutual charity. A charitable man needs not by exaction to be
compelled, but of his own accord preuenteth all monicions. If ye pay unto
them their request, ye are out of their danger, but the charitable man
though he satisfy other, yet neu^^ satisfies he himself, but evermore
heapeth up one good turn upon another.

Charity therefore enbrace ye, who briefly compriseth al laws. Whosoever For he
that loves an other, has fulfilled y^ whole law.
with pure and christian charity loves his neighbor, he observes the whole
effect and purpose of Moses law: if charity lack, no laws, be they never
so many, are sufficient: if it be had, there neadeth none other law, when
charity only much more effectually commands all that is in so many and
innumerable laws comprehended.

Moses law forbids men to do adultrye, to commit murder, to do any theft,
to bear false witness, to desire any other man's gooddes, to lend money for
usury, with many such other like. But in the compendious rule of charity are
all these precepts contained, wherein it is briefly said: Love thy neighbor as
thy self.

Charity, as much as it can, does good to al men, though they be evil and
hurts no man. And then what need is it with a long tale and special words
to forbid so many things, to hurt (I say) no man this way, or that way, since
her nature is to hurt no man at all? Will any man (trow ye) murder him, whom he
loves? will he unchastly use an other man's wife, which loves his neighbor
as well as him self? Will he rob an other man's gooddes, whom he is ready to
succor with his own? will Therefore to love the fulfillyng of the law.
he with false witness oppress his neighbor, whom with his own ieopardy he
would have saved? will he lend any money for vsurye to him, with whom he
thinks all that he has commen? will he wyshe him harm, which wishes the
same to another, that he would to him self? will he by any way hurt and
displease him, for whose sake he knows, that Christ once dyed? Charity
therefore, as I said, in a short lesson contains the whole law. By her rule
we shortly learn, what is to be avoided, and what is to be followed.

The text.
This also we know the season, how that it is time that we should now awake
out of sleep. For now is our salvation nerer, then when we believed. The night
is passed, the day is come nigh. Let us therefore cast away the deeds of
darkness, and let us put on the armor of light. Let us walk honestly, as it
were in the day light, not in eating and drinkyng, neither in chamberyng and
wantonness* neither in strife and enuiyng: but put ye on the lord Jesus Christ.
And make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it. To the
desire of charity then even the consideracion of the time exhorts, that we
awake arisyng out of the sleep and darkness of our old It is time that we
should now awake out of sleep.
life. The night seems a time which gives occasion lice^ciously to sin,
forasmuch as at that time shame is away. But such yet as in the night are
wantonly occupied, and use them self but lightly, as soon as the day once
appears, even for very shame, to the sight of men they fashion them self
better: and as though they were becomen new men, instead of dronkardes come
forth abroad sobre, in steed of lecherous, chaste, instead of braulers,
moderate and cold, instead of sluggardes and heavy heads, lusty and quick.
Take therefore must we the time, while it serves, which if we use well, our
weal is not so far of, as it was when we upon boldness of Moses law keeping,
thought it but even at hand. The night of our former life is gone and passed
away, that day draws nigh, wherein men's acts be they never so secret,
shall be disclosed.

Let us be as our day is, and cast away our evil manners and nightly acts, Let
us therefore cast away y^ deeds of darkness.
with all such other wanton points, as we ought to be ashamed of in the day.
If when the sun rises, we use to set on more honest apparel, lest for
lack of cumly array men's iyen be offended, much more now at the bright
risyng of the gospel, let our souls be garnished with thapparel of virtue,
meet for such light, and with such as is not vncumly in the sight of God.
Henceforth let us so frame all our life, that all the world may see that we
walk in the light, even in the sight of God, his Angels, and men, shaking of
the darkness of our former life, not geuyng our self to riottous bankettynges,
or drunkenness, not beastly given to foul and fleshely lusts, not with strife
and enuiyng, unseemly braulyng among our selves, unto which vices ye were
thral, whiles ye wandered in y^ darkness of your former life. This apparel
belemeth not man's soul. But rather since ye are through baptism graffed into
Christ, But put ye on the lord Jesus Christ
him put ye on. Let it appear in your life, whom ye have professed. Express
ye him, whom ye have received, he is chastity, he is peace, he is charity,
such apparel is mete for this light of the gospel. Such things as ye have
hitherto for your pleasures used, he^cefoorth use them for bodily necessity:
and such things as heretofore ye have filthyly given you unto, as wanton
desires moved, henceforth in them let there a sobrenes be used, and use them
no further than nature requires. Norishe so the body that it live and be in
health, and not wax wanton. Let meat and drink be used to drive away hunger
and thyrst, and not in such sort, that they provoke and norishe uncleanly
lusts.

The.xii. Chapter.
The text.
Him that is weak in the faith, receive unto you, not in disputyng and
troublyng his conscience. Due believes that he may eat all things. An other
which is weak, cateth herbs. Let not him that cateth, despise him that
cateth no^. And let not him which cateth not, judge him that cateth. For God
has received him. What a^t that iudgest an other man's servant, whether he
stand or fall? that pertains unto his own master: yea, he shall be holden up,
that he may stand. For God is able to make him stand. BUt surely albeit in the
use of such things there be no difference nor choice among such as are in
the faith of Christ thoroughly instructed, so that they use them Him that is
weak in the faith, recei^e unto you* ^^.
not for pleasure, but for need, as I before told you, yet if there be
peradventure any such among you, as for example, a Jew borne, which by
reason of his long continued custom and trade of life, is some what
sctupulous, and not yet so grown up to that ripenes of faith, that he can
forgo all the rules of his old law, such one may not by and by disdainfully be
rejected, but rather with gentle and courtise manners allured and norished,
until that he like wise profit, and in faith grow stronger, whereunto ye shall
much rather bring him by favorable means, than by co^tencious reasonyng and
disputacions.

Considre in such matters, how unmeet a thing it is, that such acts, as may
without offense be done, should straight be taken in the worse part. But to
thentent that peace and co^corde may among you be maintained and steadfastly
abide, certain things must be wynked at, some things must be suffered, and
some things must gently be taken. Such gentle and favorable taking of things
vpholdeth and preserves the fellowship of this our comen lite.

And since men's minds among them selves are sundry and diverse, surely in a
multitude never will there be steadfast peace, unless in diverse One believes
that he map eat al things
points one give place to an other. For he that is without all serupulositie,
thinks it lawful without any difference to eat what meat him lust, in that
act nothing else regardyng, but what nature requires. Again he that is yet
weak and somewhat supersticious, lest he might chance either upon fish or
other meats forbidden either by the Jews law, or offered up to idols, lives
with herbs. Such things among you ought not so to be regarded, that for them
brotherly peace be broken. Let him that is strong, and eats al meats, so use
his strength, that yet he Let not him that eats* despise him that eats not
^t.
despise not the weaker, which fears to eat. Let him again, which
following the weakness of his mind abstaineth from certain kinds of meat,
neither judge nor condemn him, which without difference takes whatsoever is
set before him. But rather let him that is strong, bear with the weak, in
this sense taking it: this error conceived and gathered by long custom of his
former life, cannot suddenly be plucked out of his mind, it will by little and
little wear away, and as in him godlynes grows, supersticion will vanishe and
avoid. Likewise he that is scrupulous, when he sees an other eat all kinds
of meat, let him this wise think with him self: what matter makes it to me,
what this man does* and likely it is, that he does it of a good mind, since
God has received and taken him unto him, and made him his own, at whose For
god has received him*
pleasure heliueth, against whom only he offends, if there be in such
things any offense, as of them self are not cuil.

Now if it be an arrogant point to despise the weakness of him, that is
supersticious, and deceived through rudenes, how much more intolerable pride
will this be (think ye) if such one as in y^ faith is but weak, take upon him
to judge and condemn him that is stronger, even as the rule and custom of
unlearned people is, which think nothing rightful What art y^ that iudgest
an other ma^s servant*
but that them self do, and think all that good, that they allow? May not a
man well say to such one, what art thou, that iudgest and condemnest an other
man's servant? There is but one lord and master of al, Jesus Christ. To him
stands he* if he be strong in faith, and to him falls he, if he offend, as
thou think, he does. For he in deed for this shall not fall, but rather be
stablished to continue in his strong faith. His master is sufficiently able
and mete to strengthen his servant, that he stagger not at all.

The text.
This man puts difference between day and day, an other man coumpteth all
days alike. Let every manues mind satisfy him self. He that observes the
day, does it unto the lord. And he that does not observe the day does it
for the lord also. He that eats, does it to please the lord, for he gives
God thanks. And he that eats not, eats not to please the lord withal, and
gives God thanks. For noue of us lives for him self, and no man dies for
him self. For if we live, we live unto the lord. And if we dye, we dye unto
the lord. Whether we live thefore, or dye, we are the lords. For Christ
therefore dyed, and rose again, and revived, that he might be lord of dead and
quick. And that I have now told you of the choice of meats, the same in
keeping the sabbath day, and feasts of the new moon, is like wise to be
understand. For he that is weak, and of imperfect faith, makes a This manne
puts difference between day and day.
difference betwixt day and day, as though one were holy and the other were
not, and thinks it unlawful in this day to eat certain meats or to labor,
which man other day might well and lawfully be done. On the other lyde, he
that is perfect and strong in his faith, conceiueth in days no such
difference, but rather thinks all the space of his life consectate and hallowed
to godly conversation.

Break not for such points christian concord among you, but without
condemnyng of other men's consciences, let every one herein do, as he judges
best, specially since both ways are without sin, and with both stands the
chief point of our religion. Whosoever estemeth and judges in his conscience,
that every day is like pure and holy, does so to his lord, and to the, little
belongs it, how well he does. Likewise he that judges, that there is
betwixt day and day some difference, if he be deceived, he does it unto his
lord, thou have therewith nothing to do. Likewise He y^ eats does it to
please y^ lord, ^o^ he gives god thanks.
he that without difference eats all kinds of meat, he eats to his lord,
forasmuch as he gives thanks to God, through whose benefit he eats, whose
free goodness made all things for man's use. Again whosoever through the weakness
of his conscience abstaineth from certain meats, he abstaineth to his lord,
and nothing haste thou to do therewith, since he eatyug herbs and roots
gives thanks to God, as well as thou do. If God allow and accept his
thanks geuyng, why art thou so bold upon him to give sentence? The cause of
both is diverse, the matter one, both one mind, and one lord is there of both.
The one gives thanks for the liberty he has to eat what he lust, knowing
that the gospel puts a difference betwixt minds, and not betwixt meats*
the other, whiles he shonneth the occasion of surfettyng, by the reason of his
abstinence, he is kept within the bonds of temperaunce.

In all such things we are equal, so that it besemeth no man in defense of
his doing to strive with his brother, sufficient it is, if God approve it, to
who^ the judgment of such things belongs, as are either uncertain, or else
such as must for the time be borne with. No christian man has power further
upon other, but y^ each one do good to another. Nor lives any man for him
self, because we are all his, which from sin brought None of us lives for
him seltr. etc.
us to goodness, and from death restored us to life. No man therefore either
lives to him self, or dies to him self, no more than any man's servant
does, upon whose life and death his master has full power and authority. Now
if the servant live, he lives not for his own nor none other man's advantage,
but for the advantage or disauauntage of his master. If he dye, it is to the
gain or loss of his master, whereby it appears what a point of malapertnes
it is, when one servant entermedleth in his fellows matter, namely if in the
mean season the master be pleased. Now among men no servant is so much his
masters, as we are Christ's servants, who bought us neither with gold nor
silver, but even with his own blood. Whether we fall then, to him we fall: or
if we stand, to him we stand, or if we live, to him we live, or if we dye, to
him we dye. Whether we live therefore o^ dye, we are the lorde^.
Other slaves peradventure are their masters no longer, after yt they are once
dead, but we, whether we live or dye, are the lords, to who^ all things live.

Christ has not only power upon them, which are alive, but even upon them
also that are dead, as which for our salvation gave both his life and death.
For he for my cause became man and dyed, and after for my sake rose again from
death, to then^^nt that he might be lord both of the quick and dead. If we
live to godlynes, we are bound to him, if we dye to sin, we are bound to
him. He is our lord, he is our judge.

The text.
But why do thou then judge thy brother? Either why do thou despise thy
brother? We shall all be brought before the judgment seat of Christ. For it is
written: as truly as I live says the lord, all knees shall bow to me, and
all tongues shall give praise to God. So shall every one of us give accoumptes
of him self to God. Let us not therefore judge one an other any more. And then,
why does the servant take upon him any authority upon his fellow, over whom
only God has power? Thou that art somewhat scrupulous, with what boldness (I
say) iudgest thou thy brother, which is stronger than thou art, for that he
freely eats, or because he in like sort uses every day? Or why do thou
which art stronger, disdain at and disp^se thy weaker brother, as though thou
were his master, and not rather his fellow? Why does either of you both usurp
Gods authority We shall al ^e brought before the judgment seat of Christ.
and prevent the day of judgment? One must not judge an other. The only
judge of all will give sentence upon all. For all shall once be brought before y^
judgment place of Christ, there by his sentence to be quited or condemned, who
thoroughly sees the most hidden and secret parts of our heart. Until that
day, let not one servant play the lord upon an other. For this honor has
he for him self only reserved, as him self says by the prophet Esai: as
truly as I live says the lord, all knees shall bow Let us not therefore
judge one an other.
unto me, and all tongues shall give praise to God. In the mean season let
every man, as much as he can, with all his power endeavor, how he may for him
self before this judge make his accoumpte, and take heed that no man judge
others acts to the worse.

The text.
But judge this rather, that no man put a stumblyng block, or an occasion to
fail in his brothers way: For I know, and am full certified by the lord Jesus,
that there is no thing comen of it self, but unto him that judges it to be
comen, to him it is comen. I^ thy brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk
thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat* for whom Christ dyed.
Cause not your treasure to be evil spoken of. For the kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy ghost. For
he that in these things serves Christ, pleases God, and is commended of men.
If we may for this time judge of any thing, let us for the time judge of this,
and devise how one of us may help another and that we neither do any man
hurt, nor give occasion of hurt, as much as we may. Let us comfort them that
stagger, and not make them desperate, no nor let us Judge this rather that no
man put a stumblyng block. etc. in his brothers way.
extinguishe the smolderyng flax, but enkendle it. If the persons dignity and
worthynes were considered, the weaker should obey him, that is better learned,
but christian charity would, that the learned should sometime give place and
bear with the weaker, but yet not so, that he consent and favor his error,
but either to thentent that he may be amended, or else at the lest so stayed,
that he offend not more grievously.

And in this matter to speak somewhat of my self, Moses in his law many
years gone given unto the Jews noted certain meats for unclean, and the same
meats in his language he calls comen, as a man would say, cursed, of who^
men might not lawfully eat, and certain meats calls he clean, which every
man might lawfully use. But now know I, and am by the spirit of Christ surely
persuaded, whose pleasure was that the carnal part of the law should be
abolished, that of his own nature I know and am full certified. etc that there
is nothing comen of it self.
no meat is there vnpure, and that there is no choice of meat at al. But if
any be unclean, only to him it is unclean, that so judges of it, y^ is to
wete, to the weak and scrupulous it is unclean, but to such one, as is
strong and a perfect christian, nothing is unclean, but to them that are
clean, all things are likewise pure. And yet perauenture sometime it were well
done, to abstain from that, which is of it self good and pure, not because
Moses law so commands, but because brotherly charitte, which specially
belongs to a christian man, so requires.

For if for thy bodily food thy brothers conscience be hurt or grieved, whom
thou should as tendrely love, as thou love thy self, then live thou to
thy self, and remembrest not, what mutual charity requires, as which
regardest not, but disdainest the fall and ruin of the weak, which thing
thou might easly remedy. Were it (I pray you) so great a matter so long to
abstain from lawful meats, until such time as thy neighbor being in
ieoperdye be helped thereby? And albeit thy brother be weaker, though he be
ruder, then thou art, yet cou^pt him not for so vile, as for thy meats sake to
suffer him to be destroyed, for whose salvation Christ died. If such one, as
he is, the lord esteemed so greatly, then should he not of the for a trifle be
despised. Nor think it sufficient, that the thing thou do, be right and well
done, but moreover provide must y^, that in it there be no suspicion of evil,
and beware lest that which to the is good, turn unto other men's harm, as
it will, if men among you see debate and strife for meat and drink or for
such other small trifles.

For as in the world to come, in the kingdom of God (I say) there shall The
kingdom of God is not meat and drink. etc.
neither be meat nor drink, which are remedies for this our mortal state:
so the doctrine of Christ's gospel, and perfect christian life stands neither
in difference of meats nor drinks, as which are such things as are not to
godliness effectual. Rather must we study and have mind upon such things, as
may with us be conveyed hence to that heavenly life. And what things been
they? Without doubt justice, peace, joy, which But righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy ghost,
are not given by obseruyng differences of meats, but by the holy ghost.
Ianglyng for meats works malice and debate, it works sorrow, it works
displeasures and grudges. But the spirit of god instead of disse^cio^ works
peace, instead of sorrow, causes gladness, for displeasure and wrong, perfyte
ryghteousnes. For as it belongs to justice to hurt noman: so to peace
belongs it, to strive with noman, and the office of charity is to trouble
and grieve noman. These are spiritual gifts of god, in these, who so serves
Christ, both pleases god, whiles he does such things, as to him are most
acceptable, and pleases also men, whiles he by diligente ways auoydeth all
suspicion and occasion of evil. Carnal they be, which stryuen each one with
other for meats and days. They serve the spirit of Christ, that stand not
in defense of their own acts, but rather such as charitably please each one
another, and change themself into every sort to win all to Christ,
fashionyng themselves to all men's vsuages, to thentent they may please every
man.

The text.
Let us therefore follow those things, which make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify an other. Destroy not the work of god for a little
meats sake. All things are pure: but it is evil for the man, which eats
with hurt of conscience. It is good neither to eat fleashe, neither any
thing, whereby thy brother stombleth either falls, or is made weak. Haste
thou faith? have it with thy self before god. Happy is he, that condemns
not himself in that thing, which he allows: For he that makes conscience,
is damned, if he eat: because he eatethe it not of faith. For whatsoever is
not of faith, that same is syn, We therefore, that are spiritual, leauyng such
contenciouse disputacions let us follow such things, as make to peace, such
things, as nouryshe concord, such things, as increase mutual love, and to
be brief, all such trade of life, as may make us better, y^ one may the
better help another, and not such, as other may therewith be offended. This
is the chief and principal point of our religion. Thou that art stronger,
beware y^ for thy meats sake, thou destroy not the work of God. Much rather
lose thy meat, than through occasion thereof, y^ thing be destroyed, which god
redeemed by ye death of his son. As for meat is a thing, y^ belongs to man
and is requisite for ye aid of worldly necessity, but charity is gods
matier, when both be in ieopardy, let rather that give place, which bears
All things are pure but it is evil for that man^e which eats with hurt of
conscience.
less weight, not because in the meat eating there is any sin, or because
one is pure, another vnpure, as the Jews would have it, or because it is any
offense to eat of every kind of meat, but because thereby occasion of
stoumblyng and misdeming is given, not because thou eatest it, but because
through eating thereof, thou greuest thy weak and feeble brother, by mean
whereof the meat, which by nature is clean, forsomuche as thou in vsyng it
regardest not thy neighbors ieopardye, becomes unclean. This point must
we so greatly take heed unto, and think, that better it were altogether to
abstain from fleashe, and to eat herbs, yea altogether to forbear the
drynkyng of wine, than by eating or drynkyng to give thy brother occasion of
sclaunder.

Nor say thou this again unto me, why fears he, where no need is? mine own
faith and conscience condemns me not: nor say thou what have I with other
men's weakness to do? Do thou counsel me to leave mine own mind, and to
follow his, and so begin to follow and use a certain choice and difference
in meats? No not so. I require not of thee to follow his weakness, but rather
for a time to condescende unto it upon hope of his amendmente. I allow this
confidence of thine, in that thou despiseste such differences of meats, but
yet hide and cover this thy boldness, if thou see that thy brother be like to
fall into ieopardye thereby. Be content that god in the mean time knows and
approves Haste thou faith? have it not with thy self before god.
the strength of thy conscience. And yet must the same for that time be
dissembled, whiles thou auoydeste the danger, and weakenyng of thy neighbors
conscience, by leanyng and fashionyng thy self to his weakness. And in the
mean time take heed of this, that where thou say, thou regardest no such
choice of meats, that this thy saying come forth and proceed of a strong
conscience, and not made for a color to maynteine the pleasure, which thou
have to eating and drynking, nor for wantones. Beware also, lest, whiles thou
dispisest and reprouest another for his supersticion in abstaynyng from meats,
thy self in thy conscience doubt, and so be more strong in word, than thou
art in faith. Blessed is that man, which is of that strength in faith, that
in the act, which he among men approves and maynteneth, he feel not within
him his conscience murmuring against it, and in his heart secretly condemn
that, which in the face of the world it approves. For who soever doubts
iudgyng with himself y^ it is unlawful to eat, is even by his own conscience
condemned. And why is he condemned? Because the act he does, comes not of a
strong faith, and an upright conscience, but of a conscience grudgyng against
his doing. For what soever comes not of faith, is joined with syn. For when a man doubtyng of an act whether it be evil or not, which of it self is not
evil in deed, does it yet nethelesse, he in so doing declares, y^ he would
do a very evil thing in deed, if occasion served. Perfect godlynes in whom
it is, surely auoydeth all such things, as have but even an appearance of
evil. Whosoever of malice does synfully, is well worthy For whatsoever is not of
faith, y^ same is sin.
to be reproved, if such one will not be reformed, even his company must be
avoided also. But when y^ error grows by reason of infirmity, he that is in
such error much more deserves to be taught and warned, and not to be
disdayned or mocked at.

The.xv. Chapter.
The text.
We which are strong, ought to bear the fraylnes of them, which are weak,
and not to stand in our own conceits Let eu^rie man please his neighbor
unto his welthe and edifieng. For Christ plea^ed not himself* but as it is
written: the rebukes of them* which rebuked the, fell on me What soever
things are written af^re time, they are written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the scriptures might have hope. Now then if we
be stronger, than other, as we in deed We which are strong, ought o bear he
fraylenes of them which ar^ weak.
be, in somuche y^ we herein need noma^ to give us counsel, yet must we take heed, lest while we reprove an other man's small error and call it
supersticion, we our selves fall into y^ fer more heinous vice of arrogancy,
but rather the stronger we be, the more besemeth it us to bear with the
weakness of other. For as they, that are either elder, or stronger of body, use
not therefore to throw down nor to trede under feet their yo^gers, or such as
are not in strength able to match with the^, even as though god had for y^
purpose given me^ stre^gthe, to hurt therewith, whom they will, but rather the
stronger they de, the more shame coumpte they it, to hurt tender youth, or
feable old age: so the more judgment and learning we have, somuche the rather
are we bound to temper our selves to the weakness of other, rather than,
whiles we are of our learning proud, and highly stand in our own conceyte,
we provoke to anger our weak brother, rather than either to suffer him, or to
cure his disease.

Let noman therefore for his gift please himself, as though it were given him
to brag therewith, out let him rather dispysyng hymsefe, please his neighbor,
not that he should for every purpose do so, but to do him good therewith, and
to make him better, than he is. And this way of curyng other men's erours,
Christ himself taught us, which being the very fountain of al goodness, used
not the same as one y^ pleases him self, to the auauncyng of his own glory,
but to help such, as were out of the way and had but weak and feeble
consciences, not only despised the glory, which he was worthy of, but was
contented to be spitefully handled, even as David inspired with his spirit
said before, that it should be, in his.ix. psalm: the rebukes of them,
which rebuked the, fell on me. Whatsoever things are written before time they
are written for our learning y^ we through patience.
Which sentence is not only written in the psalms to thentent we should know
it, but to follow it also, by his ensample learning, how patiently and myldely
our neighbor should be suffered and borne with, until such time as he grow
up and be ripe in Christ's religion, and have cast of his weak chyldyshnes.
As he therefore submitted him self to our vileness, to thend he would by little
and little exalt us to a higher state: so meet is it also that we of him take
example, how to allure our neighbor to true godlynes, the example whereof laid
plainly before our iyes, as it were in a table in holy scriptures, must we
continually have in remembrance, that as he bought us not by any worldly
mean, but by his sufferaunce redeemed and saved us, and for his humblenes sake
was finally exalted to true and perfect glory: so likewise should we
through sufferaunce of the weaker and the comfort of holy scriptures
prouokyng us to do as Christ did, trust to receive such reward as is
prepared for all such, as follow his steps.

The text.
The god of patience and consolacion grant you to be like minded one toward
another, after the ensample of Christ Jesus, that ye all agreyng together, may
with one mouth praise god, y^ father of our lord Jesus. Wherefore, receive ye
one another as Christ received us, to the praise of god. And this I say, that
Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of god, to
confirm the promises made unto the fathers: and that the Gentiles might praise
god for his mercy, as it is written: For this cause I will praise the among
the Gentiles, and sing unto thy name. And again he says: Rejoice ye Gentiles
with his people. And again: praise the Lord all the Gentiles, and laud him al
ye nations together. And again Esai says: there shall be the roo^e of Iesse,
and he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles: in him shall the Gentiles
trust. The god of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that ye
may be rich in hope through the power of the holy ghost. The general rule and
sum of your profession is peace and concord. And therefore beseech I god the
author of patience, and him, which by his secret wrytynges encourages us to
sufferaunce, without whose help we can do nothing at all, that he vouchesaue
to grant, that ye be in one mind and consent knyt together, therein following
the example of Jesus Christ, who nothing somuche praised unto us, as mutual
love and concord. And by this way shall we well auaunce the glory of That ye
all agreyng together, may with one mouth praise god y^ father. etc.
god, the father of Christ Jesus, if as he taught and did toward us, we
likewise do one to another: and by this mean shall men also understand that we
are unfeignedly Christ's scholars, if as ye in one assente speak of Christ, ye
through brotherly consent declare also, that ye are all knytte together in one
mind. Among you therefore which are Gentiles called from your ydolatrie to
Christ: and you y^ are Jews called from the shadows of the law to perfect
righteousness, let there no dissencion remain, but labor rather gladly to
please each one another of you. Receive and maynteyne each other of you with
your healping hand, even as our master Christ gladly received you, not
coumptynge upon the offenses of your former life, but brotherly embracyng you,
and all to thentent he would among men set forth the glory of God his father,
that ye doing as he did one to another of you, his own glory might also be set
out and spread abroad. Christ pleased both kinds of men, first the Jews,
to declare that And this I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the
circision. etc.
god the father was true in his word, which performed to their posterity
eue^ the same thing, that he in his prophets sayings had promised to their
forefathers, because they should give him thanks, whose good luck was to
receive y^ truth of such things, as Moses law in figures and shadows only
represented. Christ pleased also the Gentiles, which had no such promise made
unto them, to thentent they being received into this welthy state, without any
deserte, yea without any hope thereof should for that magnify the goodness of
god. To thentent (I say) the Jews should be glad, that they have at the
last attained unto that they have long looked for, the Gentiles also because
they have that they looked not for. That this should so be, was by the counsel
of god long before decreed. For in the psalms this wise speaks Christ to
his father: For this cause For this cause I will praise the among the Gentiles,
and sing unto thy name. etc.
will I set furthe thy glory among the Gentiles, and unto thy name sing a song
of praise. Again in the canticle of the Deuteronomie it is said: Rejoice ye
Gentiles with his people. And again in the. Cxvi. Psalm: Praise the lord all
ye Gentiles, and laud him all ye nations together. Again the same also long
before prophesied Esaie saying: There shall be in that day the root of Iesse and
he that shall rise to reign over the Gentiles, and in him shall the Gentiles
trust. And now ferther I beseech god, which by his prophets saying has put
you in this hope, that it may please him now more abundantly to perform
that thing in you, which he long since promised to do, that all heaviness and
dissencion secluded, it may please him to fulfill you with all joy and
concord, and that through faith: that the hope which ye have now already
conceived of god, may daily more and more be enriched and increased through a
confidence of a good and a clear conscience, through the mighty power of the
holy ghost.

The text
I my self am full certified of you (my brethren) that ye also are full of
goodness, and filled with all knowledge, and are able to exhort one another.
Nevertheless brethren I have sumwhat more boldly written unto you, partly to
put you in remembrance through the grace y^ is given me of god: that I should
be the minister of Jesus Christ among the Gentiles, and should minister the
gospel of god* that the offering of the Gentiles might be acceptable, and
sanctified by the holy ghost. I have therefore whereof I may rejoice through
Christ Jesus, in those things which pertayne to god. For I dare not speak of
any of those things, which Christ has not wrought by me, to make y^
Gentiles obedient with word and deed, in mighty signs and wonders, by the
power of the spirit of god: so that from Jerusalem, and the coasts round
about unto Illiricum, I have filled all countries with the gospel of Christ.
And this speak I not, because I mistrust your goodness, as of whom Nevertheless
brethren I have somewhat more boldly written unto you.
I am thus ferfurth persuaded, that ye of your own good will are full of
charity, and endewed with such knowelege, as are without my council able to
give each other of you in these matiers good advise. But yet have I sumwhat
familiarly and liberally written unto you, not to teach you, as ignoraunte,
neither to command you, as people ylwylled, but to put you in remembrance
what is best to be done, to thentent that it which ye well know must be
done, and your selfs freely do, ye do the same more plentifullye through mine
encoragyng, in this behalf doing my duty committed unto me by god being
thereof unworthy, following the will and pleasure of Jesus Christ, whose work I
labor in, to the vtterest of my power* that by the auauncyng of the glory of
his gospel among you, which are Gentiles, I may unto him offer a pure
sacrifice. And this think I to him a most accepted sacrifice if I offer you
unto him in such cleanness, as besemeth him, eue^ as a holy sacrifice, and
pourged not with carnal ceremonies, but with the holy ghost, which is the
only authoure of perfect holiness.

And since I see, that I have already in many of you brought this to I have
therefore whereof I may rejoice through Christ Jesus.
pass, surely I may lawfully glory, not bosting myself before the world,
but rejoicing before god of my prosperouse preaching, for which yet neither
thank I my self, nor my labor, but Jesus Christ, whose deputy I am, by
whose assiste^ce I execute the office of preaching committed unto me. My mind
can not abide to make rehearsal of other men's acts, lest in so doing I
might seem to take upon me the praise, which they have deserved: but only
speak will I of such things, as Christ has by my own ministry done, which
is, that the wicked Gentiles all given to ydolatrie, are now become obedient
to the gospel, moved thereto partly by my words and deeds, and partly by the
great miracles and wonderful With word and deed, in mighty signs, and
wonders. etc.
works by me showed, for the establyshment of my doctrine, showed (I say) not
so much by my power and strength, as by the myghtie power of the spirit of
god, to whom I am nothing else, but as an instrument and minister. So that then
whiles I thus glory of the luckie success of my preaching. I do not so much
auaunce my own glory, as the glory of Christ. And in this behalf do I
lawfullye glory, which in such sort give the praise of my preaching to god,
that I yet therein give place to no man.

The text
So have I enforsed my self to preach the gospel, not where Christ was named,
lest I should have buylte on another man's foundation: but as it is written,
to who^ he was not spoken of, they shall see: and they that hear not shall
understand. For this cause I have ^ene often let (and am let as yet) that I
could not come unto you: but now seeing I have no more to do in these
countries, and also have been desirouse many years to come unto you,
whenever I take my journey into Spain, I will come to you, for I trust to
see you in my iourneye, and to be brought on my way thitherwarde by you, after
that I have somewhat enjoyed your aquaintaunce. Nor have I preached the gospel
after a commen sort, but have until this time preached in such countreies,
where Christ's name was not yet heard of, and labored busilye for that praise
at gods hand, that by me the foundacions of christian religion might be more
enlarged, and the compass of his dominion more spread abroad. Nor minded I to
build upon the foundacions* which other of the apostles had laid, because as
it is a harder point to set up the begynnynges of religion, than to
maintain that, which is set up already, so thought I that this act more
belonged to the gospel, specially since I perceived, that it was so long before
said by the most holy prophet Esai? To whom (says he) he was not spoken
of, they shall see, and they that heard not of him, shall understand. And this
desire to enlarge the faith of Christ has so greatly To whom he was not
spoken of, they shall see and they yt hear not, shall not understand. etc.
troubled me, that hitherto I could not see you, albeit I was very desyrouse
to do so, but whereas I oftentimes purposed to come thither unto you* business
still hindered me, I think the spirit of Christ so governing me. But now
after that I have gone over all Achaia and Macedonia, in which countries I
see no place, but that in it I have set the foundacio^s of christian faith, and
am now this many ears in great desire to see you, I trust I shall have
occasion to satisfye this my desyer, that when I go into Spain, by the way
thitherwarde I shall see you, and by you be brought on my way thitherwarde, and
yet not before that I have tarried with you for certain days, and have with
your good company partly satisfied my desire. And this (I trust) by y^ favor
of Christ shall shortly be done.

The text.
Now go I to Jerusalem, and minister unto the saints. For it has pleased
them of Macedo^^a and Achaia to make a certain distribucion upon the poor
saints, which are at Jerusalem. It has pleased them verily, and their debtors
are they. For if the gentyles be made partakers of their spiritual things,
their duty is to minister unto the^ in bodily things. When I have performed
this, and have brought them this fruit sealed, I will come back again by you
into Spain. I am sure, that when I come unto you, I shall come with abundance
of the blessyng of the gospel of Christ. But at this present time purpose I to
go to Jerusalem, to deliver unto the poor Jews that there are, and are
christian men, the free alms of the Macedonians, and of them that dwell in
Achaia, delivered by them unto me For so to do they thought good, that with a
su^me of money indifferently gathered of such as were disposed freely to give,
to refreshe the poverty of some that are at Jerusalem, which being poor in
substance, are yet in godly religion rich. Noman compelled the^ so to do, but
so thought they, and For it has pleased them of Macedonia etc.
in my mind, therein they thought well, forasmuch as they are bounden unto
them for religions sake, delivered first unto them at their hand. And for that
cause since the people of Jerusalem first departed the doctrine of Christ with
the gentiles, reasonable it is, that they again depart with the^ with some part
of their money, with such vile reward reco^pensyng ye precious treasure which
they have received. The One sort freely departed with such treasures, as belong to
y^ health of the souls, the other freely and wyllyngly give that, which
appertains to bodily necessities. Therefore as When I have performed this.
etc I will come back by you again into Spain*
sone as I have herein done my duty, and delivered this money to them, to who^
it is purposed, (for both mind I to deliver it my self, and the money sealed,
lest either any part thereof be by some deceitfully taken away, or else lest my
self might be suspected, as one y^ has taken some part thereof, because I
labor in an other man's business for nothing) I will in my journey to Spainward go
by you. And though I make hasty speed into Spain to preach the gospel unto
them, yet will I not think it paineful to tarry and spend some time among you,
nothing doubtyng, but that when I shall come unto you, I shall so come, and find
you such, y^ my coming shall be to y^ great glory and praise of Christ, whiles
both ye with godly minds receive me merrily, and I through the help of God in all
points satisfy your desires.

The text.
I beseech you brethren for our lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of
the spirit that ye help me in my busynes with your prayers to God for me, that
I may be delivered from them, which believe not in Iewry: and that this my
service which I have to do at Jerusalem, may be accepted of the saints, that
I may come unto you with joy by the will of God, and may be with you refreshed.
The God of peace be with you al. Amen. In the mean season I beseech you for
our lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the unfeigned charities sake, which we
have by his spirit received that forasmuch as I can not yet presently have
your cu^pany, that at lest in your godly prayers and peticions made unto God,
ye will help me labouryng and trauailyng in such dangerous business, as I do,
that by his help I may be delivered from the misbeleuers that are in Jury, and
such as resist the gospel of Christ that their malice hinder no part of the
fruit of our preaching, and that this mine office in deliverance of this
money, which I am now about to make at Ieru^^le^, may without any let be
pleasant and tha^keful to the good and devout people there, that when this is
That this my service, which I have to do at Jerusalem may be accepted. etc.
done, as I would have it, both my coming by y^ will of God may be unto you
joyful, and that I may after great labors taken, be a while among you
refreshed. But to finishe the exhortacion that I begun, I beseech, that the
God of true peace, the father, author and mainteiner of co^corde, may always
abide among you, which as resists and goes far from proud and sedicious
persons, so is he gotten and kept with mutual consent and agreement.

The.xvi. Chapter.
The text.
I commend unto you Phebe our sister, (which is a minister of the
congregation of Cenchrea) that ye receive her in the lord* as it becomes
saints, and that ye assist her, in whatsoever busynes she needs of your
aid. For she has succored many, and mine own self. Great Prisca and a^^o
Aquila, my healpers in Christ Jesus, which have for my life laid down their
own necks. Unto who^ not I only give thanks, but also all the co^gregacions
of the gentiles. Likewise great the congregation, that is in their house.
Salute my well-beloved ^penetes, which is the first fruit of Achaia in Christ.
^rete Mari which bestowed much labor ou us. Salute Andronicus and Iunia my
cosyns, and prisoners with me also* which are well taken among the Apostles,
and were in Christ before me. Great Amplias my beloved in the lord. Salute
Vrba^ out helper in Christ, and Stachis my well-beloved. Salute ^ppelles approved
in Christ. Salute them, which are of Aristobulus household. Salute Herodian my
^yusman. Great them that be of the household of Narcissus, which are in the
lord. Salute ^riphena and ^riphosa, which women labor in the lord. Salute
the beloved ^ersis, which lab^red much in the lord. Salute ^ufus chosen in
the lord, and his mother and mine. Great Asincritus, Phlegon, Herman,
Patrobas, Mercurius, and the brethren, which are with them Salute Philologus
and Iulia: Nereus and his sister, and Olimpa, and all the saints, which are
with them. Salute one another with an holy kiss. The congregacions of Christ
salute you. But yet by these letters I commend, unto you our sister Phebe, who
went hence unto you, to whom I delivered these letters to be brought thither,
who has with all diligence succored and sustained the christian congregation at
Cenchris, desiryng you so to receive and use her, as is mete for such a woman
to be received, as Receive her in Christ as it becomes saints.
for good people has done much, and to aid her in all such things, as she
shall need to have your healpe in. And surely mete it is, that ye help her,
forasmuch as she has oftymes both succored many other good people and me
also. Great in my name Prisca, and her husband Aquilla, which is a Jew, of
the country of Pontus, which help me, when I was in ieopardie of the Jews,
liyng in watch for me, and that did he, lest through some naughty people the
preaching of Which have for my life laid down them own necks.
Christ's doctrine might be setted, so farfoorth, that for defense of my life
they put them selves in ieopardy of their own, as folk ready to aue^ture their
lives for the sauegarde of mine, for which goodness not only I give them
thanks, but with me all the congregacions of gentiles, partly because they do
for other likewise as they have done for me, and partly because they think,
that the benefit, whereby I was saved, generally belongs to all men. And
salute not them only, but also all their family. Great Epenetus, for his
laudable manners well worthy to be so called, and to me for this specially
beloved, because I may well call him the first fruits of Achaia, as whom of
all that country I first brought to Christ's religion. Greet Maria, which
not without ieopardye and pain, has done much for me. Greet ye Andronicus
and Iunia, both my cosyns and also imprisoned sometime with me, which are
among the Apoposties Which are well taken among the Aposties, and were ^
Christ before me.
well taken, and in the number of the. lxxii. famous in godly religion, yea
which go beyond me in this title of dignity, that they professed Christ,
before I did. For if we lawfully honor such, as were first borne of their
parents, how much more lawfully ought we to honor them, that are first
borne again in Christ? Salute Amplia, whom for his singular godlynes sake I
love with all my heart. Salute Urban the fellow and helper of my labors, in
such things, as apertayne to Christ's gospel, and Stachis his fellow, whom I
tenderly love. Salute Apelles, which has by many affliccions sufferyng for
Christ's sake been well assayed, tried and found sure. Salute them that are of
Aristobulus household. Salute Herodion my kynsman. Greet them, that be of the
house of Narcissus, especially them, that are newborn in Christ. Salute
Tryphena and Tryphosa, which women with their busye labor and care promote
the gospel. Salute Persis, whom I ^yngulerlye love as one y^ has taken much
pain in auauncyng the gospel of Christ. Salute Rufus a virtuous and a
religiouse man, and his mother whom I coumpte even as mine own mother also.
Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Herman, and other brethren, that
are with them. Salute Philologus, and his wife Iulia, Nereus and his sister,
and Olympa, with all good people, that live with them. Salute each one another
of you with a holy kiss, with a chaste kiss, without dissimulacion, and such
one, as makes a plain proof of perfect concord. All the co^gregacions of
Christ salute you, whose good will and love borne unto you I well know. And
Mark them which cause division, and give occasion of eueil.
this thing I desire you brethren to beware of them, which sow division, and
give occasion of evil among you, laboring to bring you into a new kind of
doctrine, contrary to that ye have received, laboryng to myngle christian
religion and Iewyshe ceremonies together. Know such, that upon the same ye
may avoid them. And it is not hard to know them. For they teach not
sincerely right doctrine, nor go unfeignedly about Christ's busynes, but go
about their bealyes and other advantage, whiles they with flatteryng and
pleasant words, rather than with wholesome, deceive simple men's minds, whom
they easily deceive under the color of holiness. For your obedience is in
every place spoken of abroad, for the which I am very glad.

For the first step to godly life is to be obedient. But yet must every man
diligently take heed, whom he does obey. Simplenes is a thing worthy I would
have you wise unto y^ which is good. etc.
praise, but because the same suspecteth nothing, it is oftetymes deceived.
Wherefore I would have you in such sort to be simple, that ye neither hurt nor
deceive any man, but yet be wise and well aduysed to follow such things, as
are good, and to avoid such things, as corrupt godly life. I am not
ignorant, that there be many, y^ resist the gospel of Christ, which by Satan
labor to let men's salvation. Some persecute, some under a false color of
religion draw men from Christ, and allure them to Moses law. Do ye no more but
continue on, god will assiste your endeuoures, who being your defe^der, no cause
have ye why to fear. For as he is mightier so will he trede down, and break
into pieces Satan your mortal enemy, and with his power overcome and bring him
under your feet, and y^ within short time. The grace of our lord Jesus Christ
be always with you al.

The text.
Timothy my work fellow, and Lucius and Jason, and Sosipater my kynsmen
salute you. I Tertius salute you, which wrote this epistle in the lord. Caius
my host and the host of all the congregacions saluteth you. Erastus the
chamberlayne of the city saluteth you And quartus a brother saluteth you. The
grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen. Timothy of Derbe my
companion in preaching ye gospel greteth you, and with him Lucius and Jason of
Thessalonica, and Sosipater the son of Pyrrhus of Beroe, my kynsmen. And I
Tertius salute you, which for a charitable zeal borne toward you wrote this
epistle, while Paul endyted And I Tertius. etc.
it. Caius also one among few of them, that I baptized, saluteth you, at whose
house I now lodge, and not only I, but all the congregation of christian men,
to who^ all he is a gentill host, when need is. And Erastus chamberlayne of
the city of Corinthe saluteth you. And also Quartus a brother. The fauer of
our lord Jesus Christ be always with you al, which my desire god grant to
establishe and make sure.

The text,
To him, that is of power to stablyshe you according to my gospel, and
preaching of Jesus Christ, in vtteryng of the mystery, which was kept
secret, since the world began, but now is opened by the scriptures of the
prophets at the commandment of the everlasting god, to stere up obedience
to the faith published among all nations: to y^ same god, which alone is wise,
be honor and praise through Jesus Christ for ever. Ame. To him that without my
help is of power and able to stablyshe and confirm you in this kind of life,
which ye have by my ghospel learned, wherein Now is opened by the scriptures of
y^ ^^hetes at the commandment of y^. etc.
I preach Jesus Christ, by which gospel Moses law is not utterly
abolyshed, but the secret purpose of god, which many years paste has been
hydden, is now according to the old sayings of prophets through the brighte
light of the gospel spread abroad and opened, and that by the ordinance and
commandment of god, who has put us in trust to preach and declare the
same secret mystery, that when the secret point of religion expressed in the
gospel is plainly showed to all men, whereby all worshipping of devils is
abrogate, and the ceremonies of Moses law cease, all should through faith be
obedient, and submit themself to god, who only has the true wysedo^, to him
(I say) give we thanks through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory and praise for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
The Argument and whole mattier of the first Epistle of thapostle saint Paul
to the Corinthians by Erasmus of Roterodame.
COrinthe once the chief City of Achaia was for the commodiouse havens thereof
(for it is almost an Island) the most famous, and richest mart town of all
Asia. The manners of such Cities are commonly wont to be very corrupt and
bad, partly by reason of the resort of al nations, which bring in rather
exaumples of vice, than of good maniers: and partly also, because marchau^^
men above other, take upon them to live licenciously. Therefore albeit the
Corinthians had by the preaching of S. Paul already received the gospelle,
yet remained there in them some leauynges of their former life, and properties,
insomuche that it was to be feared, lest they might from true christianity
be withdrawn, either by Philosophers, who disdayned the preaching of Christ's
cross, as a base, and an unlearned doctrine, or else by false Apostles
prouokyng them to Iewishnes. Such a hard matier is it, to alter and change
one man into a new man, both from such customs, as the same was borne
under, and from such as a man has been nozeled in. Yea so hard is it, that
saint Hierome, in the preface of the second book of his comentaries upon the
Epistle to the Galathians says, that some such faults, as Paul lays to
the Corinthians charge, remained in the people of Achaia even until his time.
And in this our time also some suppose, y^ to be but dipped in a little water,
is a sufficient mean to make a perfect christian man. Paul therefore knowing
well, that it is as great an act to bold that, which is once gotten, as it
is to conquer: with as great labor and pain as he had gotten his children
to Christ, (for he was among them a year and a half) with like diligence he
calls them again to Christ, and establishes them in the doctrine of the
gospel: sometime vsyng his apostolic authority, reprouyng them, chiding,
and thretning: sometime like a loving father speaking fair, encouraging, and
mollifying the vehemency of his necessary reproving, by praising of them. And
as the manner of a wise phisician is, temperyng sower and unpleasant medicines
with sweet sugar, eftsoues providing also for every malady mete and convenient
reamedies. First, after riches* follows pride and vurulines. And among unruly
persons, oftentimes arise sects, whiles neither will give place unto an
other, but each man thinks himself best. Besides this, welthines brings
riot and delicate fare. And of riot grows leachery. And to be covetous, is a
thing given peculiarly to marchante men. Nor were the Corinthians proud only
by reason of there welthe, but also because they were learned in the grecians
philosophy, and therefore dessoised they such, as were not learned therein, as
rude and barbarouse. Of pride it came, that every of them auaunced himself
upon the singularnes of that Apostle, of whom he was baptized.

Thereof rose these sediciouse words, I hold of Apollo, I hold of Cephas, I
hold of Paul. Of pride also it came that in their solemn assemblies and
meetings, they disagreed among them selfs, because every manne thought his
spiritual gift best: and whiles in one gift neither would give place to
other, there was such disordre and confusion, so that even their women in open
places both spoke and taught. Of riot and pride also was it, that as often as
they came to the holy supper, which Paul calls the Lords supper, wherein
it were most mete to show christian concord, the rich men without lokynge
for the poor, fell to their meat, and gorged the^ selves until they were
drounke whiles other were hungrye: insomuche as at that supper, there was not
only dissencion and distemperaunce, but also a certain vnseemyng inequality,
not accustomed to be used in that supper. And where as some among them
dysdayned Paul, countyng him but a poor rascalle, lacking eloquence, rude
and unlearned: that rose partlye through pride, and partlye through
Philosophy. But whereas they doubted of the resurrection of the dead, which is
even the pryncipall article and foundation of our religion, that only came of
Philosophy. Of intemperaunce and riot it came, that they used indifferently to
eat such meats, as than were offered to images of dyuelles, without
regardyng of their consciences, which were weak. Of Leacherye it came, which
was in no place less punished than in Corinthe* so far that beside other
enormyties in this kind, there was one found among them, which had in
incestuouse aduoutrie, abused his fathers wife, that is to wit, his own
step mother, nor was, being guilty of such an offense, banyshed out of their
company: so that the Corinthians kept company with him and other christian
men, which were outragiouse livers, as though they had even fauered their
wickedness. Of like wantones came this also, that the men unseemly had long
bushes, and their women were not a shamed in the church to be bare headed, by
their bodylye aparayle vtteryng their lewed womannyshe, and wanton maniers. Of
covetousness was it, that they went to law one with another, not to recover
their good name, nor for avoiding any bodyly ieoperdye, but for money, among
whom the desire of money was grown so far, that christian men, which had vowed
the despisyng of such things, not without the great dishonor of Christ's
name, went to the law before heathen and wicked judges: and were so far from
despisyng the loss of a little money, that in such matiers they went about
wilfullye to deceive other. Finallye they stryued among them selves of
matrimonye, by reason that even at that time some christian men styflye
defended, that me^ should wholly abstain from marriage, because they saw the
Apostles abstain from their wives. And thus have I declared the dyseases of
the Corynthians, not of all, but of some, by whom lest the rest might be
infected, Paul provides these reamydies. First of al, after that he has told
them of his trust, that they would steadfastly contynewe in the gospel of
Christ, he earnestlye reproves and byddeth them beware, and not contenciously
to glory in men, but with one assent and concord to glory in Christ's name,
whom men are bound to thank for all that we have: by the way declaryng, that
the very welspryng of al such dissension is pride. From pride therefore
through worldly Philosophy, he calls them back to the mekenes of the
cross, which albeit it be simple and without all bragges, yet says he that it
is mighty and effectual.

And then shows he also, that the beginners of this mischief, were false
Apostles, which after Paul's departure thrust themselves in, eftsoon warning
them, how he had laid a good and sure foundation, and that they should take heed, lest they builded any thing thereupon, which should afterward be plucked
down: that is to say, that the Corinthians should learn nothing which they
should anon after be feign to forgette. After that, like a father he reasons
the matter with his children, reprouyng in them, that they were grown so
great, that they no we despised their first teacher, as an abject person, and
because that he for the gospels sake had suffered al manner of troubles, whom for
the same they were much more bound to fauer. After which, he encourages his
children to follow the steps of their father, and not wilfully to yield them
self to be bound to new scholemaisters. And these points entreats Paul of
specially, in y^ first, the secound, the third and the fourth Chapters. Now in
mine opinion, the end of the fourth Chapter, belongs to the beginning of the
fyfte. Wherein he gives commandment touching the incestuouse aduoutrer, and
wills by commen consent, that men should avoid his company: partly that he
might amend for shame, and partly lest by his company other might be
corrupted, not only warning the^ to avoid his company, but also the company
of all such, which being called after a sort christian men, live viciously,
and slanderously. As for the company of Paynims (he says) needs not so much
to be avoided, either because it little belongs to christians, what life they
lead, or else because, that such were so common, that if a man would avoid
their company, he should be able to be in no company at all. And this
entreats he of in the fyfte Chapter. Thrydely he shows his mind concerning
suits of the law, that if among them, any such accion rose, as it were a
shame there should among christians, to strive for money, which men should
little set by, that they should not suffer the matter to go so far, as to
have it heard before heathen iugdes, but to finishe it among themselfes, by
the arbitremente of any such, as they thought mete. And this entreats he of
in the sixth Chapter, whereof a great part, in mine opinion, belongs to the
seventh, even from that place, where he being about to entreat of matrimony,
among other vices condemns fornicacion, aduoutrye, and buggorie: and this
matter prosecuteth he, until the beginning of the next Chapter, where he
says: know ye not that your members are the Temple of Christ? Fourthly he
instructs them touching matrimony, wydowhead, unequal marriage, divorces,
virginity: by the way warnyng, that for christian religions sake, they should
not go about to change the civil state of their life. In all which treatise
he so encourages them to single life and chastity, that yet he denies not
the reamydie of marriage, to such as have need thereof: and this does he in the
seventh Chapter. Fifthly he declares, that the flesh offered to Idolles, in very
deed, nothing differs from other, and yet must we abstain from them, if any
ieopardy be, lest any heathen or weak christian be present, which by reason
of thine eating is like to think, that thou fauourest Idolatry. From such and
other like vices, dissuadeth he by old examples.

And this does he in the eight and in part of the nineth Chapter. For in the
mids he enters into the praise of himself, covertly auauncyng his
authority above other Apostles, even above the chief of them, which only
among all the rest freely taught the Corinthians the doctrine of the gospel.
Sixthly teaches he what were mete to be done in the comen metinges of
christians, that is to wit, that the men should not have long hear, nor
the women be bare headed, and that also in the Lords souper, all things
should be commen and equal, showing them, that it was no bealy matter, that
there was in hand, which were more mete to be provided for at home, but in
that spiritual feast, was represented the souper of the Lord. Furthermore he
warns that none of them be proud for any spiritual gift, but that every of
them should bestow his gift for the common weal of the church, exhortyng
them by the exaumple of the members of the body, soberly to use other gifts,
specially yet laboring for the gift of charity, without whom other are not
only not good, but also hurtful. So that among the gifts of the spirit, he
gives the chief preeminence to charity, and the next to prophecy, for by
that name calls he the gift of expoundyng holy scripture, biddyng them in
the use of this gift, to avoid all unquiet disordre and confusion. As he
says they should, if but few spoke at once, and that by course, chargeing
their women in the mean season to hold their peace, in somuche that in the
congregation he suffers not them to ask, no not for their learning. All this
speaks he of in the. xi. xii. xiii. and.xiiii. Chapters. Seventhly, with
diverse arguments he proves the resurreccion of the dead, declaring how and
after what manner it shall be: and this does he in the.xv. Chapter. In the last
Chapter speaks he of certain familiar things: that is to wit, of geuyng of
money toward the relief of the poor, and of his cu^myng again to Corynthe.
And finally he commends unto them Timothe and certain other. Saint Ambrose
thinks that this is not the first Epistle, that Saint Paul wrote to the
Corinthians, coniecturing so, as I think, by that is written in the first
Chapter: I wrote unto you in an Epistle, as though he had before written unto
them of these matters in other letters, albeit the Greek interpreters dissente.
Some think that this Epistle was sent by Tim oath, because of him mention is
made once or twyes, and by Stephana, Fortunatus, and Achaicus, whom he
commends unto them. Some again, because it is written at the latter end, I
will tarry at Ephesus until the fiftyeth day, suppose, that it was sent from
Ephesus. Some again think that it was sent from Philippos, for that title
have the Greek books. And yet cannot I conjecture, with what reason they were
led, that so thought, unless they gather, that it was written by the way,
because Paul says: I will come to you, when I go over to Macedonia: for I
will go through Macedonia. And straight after: for I will not see you no we in
my passage.

The end of the argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the first Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to
the Corinthians.
The.i. Chapter.
The text.
Paul called an Apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and brother
Sostenes. Unto the congregation of God, which is at Corinthum. To them that are
sanctified by Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that call on the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, either of theirs or of ours. Grace be
unto you and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. I
thank my god always on your behalf, for the grace of God, which is given you
by Jesus Christ, that in all things ye are made rich by him, in all
vtteraunce, and in all knowelage, by the which things the testimony of Jesus
Christ was confirmed in you, so that ye are behind in no gift, waityng for the
apering of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall also strength you unto the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day (of the coming) of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Paul no false Apostle, nor usurper of an Apostles authority, as some
are among you, but called to be the Ambassadoure of Christ, and not the
messanger of men: Called (I say) not through mine own deseruyng, but only
because it so pleased god the most merciful father, by my ministry, to
spread abroad the honor of his son, which calling I certify you of,
lest ye should either mislyke me, or be desyrouse to have an other. Paul
therefore, even I, whom ye know well, and also with me Sosthenes, my brother
by profession, and fellow in office, do write this Epistle, not to the
sediciouse sects, that strive one with another, but to the congregation of the
church, which god of his goodness, (at whose commandment I labor in this
embassy) has steadfastly joined together in one accord of mind, and such
mutual charity, as beseems christians, at Corinthe, buyldyng in the old
city, a new and an heavenly, placyng there, in the stead of an earthlye, an
heavenly company, that is to say, a company purged and cleansed from their
old vices and beastelye lusts, from pride through riches, and worldly
learning, and from other diseases, by means whereof, among men debate and
dissencion oftetymes arise, far otherwise than they should, whom one God,
one delyuerer Christ, one baptism, one religion, one reward, does so
dyuersly join and knyt together. Once has Christ frelye taken from you the
sins of your former life, to the entente, that henceforth by virtuous
exercise, ye should preserve and keep the godly state, by him restored unto
you. For neither got ye it through your own deserts, nor are ye for
the same bounden to thank your riches or Philosophy, or the keapyng of Moses
law either, but Jesus Christ: which both purged you first with his blood,
and after called you to a continual perfeccion and holiness of life. Nor
belongen these my words only to you, but generally to all nations of the
world, that profess the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, whether they be
among the Jews, or among ye Gentyles, so that they put no vain trust in
their great riches, and possessions, but wholly lean, and have a confidence,
upon his help and succoure. There is of all but one church and christian
congregation, all are equallye bound to Christ only: both for their
delyueraunce from the most vilanouse bondage of sin, and also for their
calling and chusyng out to godlynes of life. There is neither place nor
countreye, that seuereth the gospel: but as all men have one Christ, so
are all his gifts free to all men. His common grace and peace therefore wyshe
I unto you and to them also, which both no man else can give but he, that
gives you all things: I mean god the father, of whom, as of the very
fountain, all our weal comes, and our Lord Jesus Christ, by Grace be
unto you and peace from god the father, etc.
whom only his fathers pleasure was to give you all things.

Grace obtained, shall save and keep you vnharmefull and innocente, and with an
vnharmefull life, is joined peace and concord. Grace excludes sin, and
brings us into gods favor: peace reconcyleth each one of you to another.
By the one ye in such sort receive gods benefit, that ye forget not the
chief gyuer: by the other a declaracion is made that ye are not only by name
christiannes, but also very christiannes in deed. By grace, partakers are ye
of goods heavenly benefit: by peace and concord, according to your ability,
ye bestow your heavenly gifts each one of you upon another. Some thing is
there in you by gods free gift, for the which I am glad in your behalf,
and give god thanks. And some thing again I mislyke, and would wyshe, were
amended. Some are there among you, that live a christian life, and some there
be, in whom yet the dregs and fylthynes of their old sinful life, remain
still. For as I coumpte your weal mine own, so if ought among you be
amiss, I That in all things ye are made t^che by him.
think my part therein. And therefore on your behalf I thank my God
always, by whose grace and goodness, Christ's free gift is in such plentiful
sort departed among you, that whereas heretofore ye buisylye sought for
earthly, frail, and transitory riches, ye are now through Christ's benefit,
enriched with heavenly treasures, and such riches, as shall never peryshe,
but bring us unto the true and perfect weal. In token whereof no kind of
language or gift of knowledge is there, which ye have not obtained
aboundauntly.

Of late proud were ye of your vain Philosophy, but since in the steed of
a false ye embraced the true wisdom, ye use your selves discretelye. Of late
proud were ye, by reason of your worldly eloquence, highlye standing in your
own conceytes: but since ye were from above inspired with the gift of
tongues, ye speak of heavenly matters, stedfastlye continuyng in that which ye
know is best: by mean whereof both the truth of the ghospel, and the faith
of Christ is in greatter renoume, and more stre^gthned, whiles al me^ clearly
see and perceive, yt the fact, which is wrought in you, was not wrought in you
by any worldely policy, but by the might of God, which giving his gifts unto
us, brought our preaching in credit. Insomuche that, albeit ye neither saw
Peter, nor James, whom some coumpt either the only, or chief Apostles, yet no
gift is there wherewith God is wont to auaunce the ministry of his Apostles,
wherein ye ought to think your selfs behind other, so far that every manne
may well perceive, that notwithstanding the ministers be diverse, yet is the
chief doer one, since one effect does always follow. And as these gifts are
given unto you like earnest money, or as a pledge of the everlasting life to
come: so ye by such plain and sensible tokens, concerning an hope of things,
that cannot be seen, awayte for that day, wherein Christ, which now yet
seems in his members to suffer affliccion, shall plainly show his majesty,
and deuyde the godly from the ungodly, and deliver his servants from all
trouble and vexacion: for desire of which day, ye suffer displeasures, and for
fear of the same ye do your dewtie. Men may peradventure unrighteously
condemn or quyte, but in that day shall God without any wrong at all, apoynte
you, either to everlasting pains or everlasting pleasures. But yet distrust ye
nothing: he for this present time is your ayder and defender, which in that
day shall be your judge. Of his goodness it is, that ye are restored from your
old errors, to godly life, and as ye have begu^ne to lead a godly life and a
pure, so shall ye likewise through his goodness, continue in such a virtuous
conversation, that in the fearful day of our Lord Jesus ye be found
blameless. As my trust is ye shall, not by your strength or mine, but by the
goodness of God, which disapoynteth no man of the hope, he stands in, and
surely perfourmeth, as much as he promised.

The text.
God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the fellowship of his soune
Jesus Christ our Lord. I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no dissencion among
you: but that ye may be a whole body of one mind and of one meaning: For it is
showed unto me (my brethren) of you, by them which are of the house of Chloe,
that there is strife among you. I speak of the same, that every one of you
says: I hold of Paul: I hold of Apollo I hold of Cephas: I hold of
Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? either were ye
baptized in the name of Paul? I thank God, that I baptized none of you? but
Crispus and Caius: lest any should say, that I had baptized in mine own
name: I baptized also the house of Stephana. Furthermore know I not, whether I
baptized any man of you, or no. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the gospel, not with wisdom of words, lest the cross of Christ
should have been made of none effect. For the preaching of the cross is to
them that peryshe, folysnnesse: but unto us which are saved, it is the power
of God. For it is written: I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will
cast away the understanding of the prudente. Where is the wise? Where is the
Scribe? Where is the disputer of this world? Has not God made the wisdom
of this world folyshnesse? And it is not to be doubted, since he of his free
mercy has called you unto him, and made you ioynte inheritoures with his only
son our Lord Jesus Christ, but that he will also favor you laboring to
continue in this godly state, that ye fall not from that honorable
inheritance, whereof ye have already received an earnest penny. Hitherto have I
spoken of such things in you, for which in your behalf I do greatly
rejoice, wherein I would wish, ye should continue, and go forward always, as
ye have begu^ne. Now harken, what I mysselike in some of you, what I would
were amended, and wherein my desire is, ye should be unlike your selfs. I need
not to teach you, what becomes your profession, ye know it your selfs
sufficiently. But only I beseech you, my most dearly beloved brethren, for
our Lord Jesus Christ's names sake, a name I beseech you brethren by the name
of our lord Jesus Christ, that ye al speak one thing.
most to be reverenced and had in honor, of such as have once professed it,
that there be among you no division nor shameful dissencion, but that ye agree
in heart and word, and through concord becomeas one perfect body, whose
parts are steadfastly and fast knyt together. Worldly wisdom, by reason of
sects and diverse opinions, is into soondrye parts divided, by reason whereof
also perpetual strife and contencion is among their scholars and folowers
mayntayned. But Christian wisdom should among al men have like rules and
determinacions, of which as there is but one author and master, so favors
he not such small by paths of carnal sects, and men's opinions. Mete is it
therefore, that as the professors of this Philosophy and learning be al of one
consent and agreement in minds, so they abstain also from such words, as
sou^de toward strife and debate. To be at an inward debate, is wicked and
ungodly: to fight and braule with words, is against honesty. And lest
peradventure ye might think, that I have of this my saying but a vain
suspicion, I assure you they were brought unto me by such godly and perfect
lyuers, as are well worthy to be believed. Ye know Chloe, that notable and
godly woman, ye know her household, and acquayntaunce, which are all of
the same trade of life as Chloe, their ayder, is known to be. By them, which
both zeal your wealth and in my necessities help me, heard I, that there is
strife and contencion among you: as though ye were a sedicion sort of people
quarellyng among them selfs. What other thing else (I pray you) mean these
words, which are comenly spoken among you, whiles (as for an example) one
says: I hold of Paul, another again: I hold of Apollo, an other says: I
I hold of Paul I hold of Apollo. etc.
hold of Cephas, an other: I hold, of Christ? What say you? are not these
names of sedicions and sects? After like sort such as profess the vain
wisdom of this world, one boasts Pithagoras, an other Plato, one boasts
Aristotle, an other Zeno, one boasts Epicurus, an other this master, and
that master, and every one of these, each for his own master, is with other
at continual variaunce. We have but one master, one learning, one ordinance,
but one purpose and intent, and whence come then these diversities of names?
Is Christ divided, or from him self disagreyng? Why part and deal we the
honor of our religion, Is Christ divided?
which is only dew to one, among men, in so doing making of servants
masters? Who gave you grace to live cyghteously? Did not Christ, which with
his own blood washed you? Why then forge ye to your selfs any other name,
than his whose benefit and free gifre this is? Give me leave so to speak, for
example: was Paul crucified for you? Was Paul crucified for you*
If all men, and every manne equally are for this benefit, only bound to
Christ, since he generally dyed for all, why seek you for the titles and
surnames of diverse men, inmaner geuyng that to them, for which Christ
only should have thanks? Through baptism we are planted in Christ, and in
his name are we baptized, from whom all the power of baptism springs. Why
should ye rather than call your selfs Paul's scholars, than Christ's, since ye
were baptized, not in Paul's name, but in Christ's? If upon such occasion the
glory dew to God be taken from him and given to men, then thank I God, that
I baptized none of you, but Crispus and Caius, which (I trow) glory nothing
thereof, but knowledge I thank God that I baptized none of you, but Crispus and
Caius.
me, as a minister, and Christ the chief doer. It might have chanced, if I
had baptized many, that there would have been some, that would have called
themselfes, instead of Christ's disciples, Paul's disciples.

But no we comes it to my mind, that I baptized also Stephanas householde: as
for other that I baptized, I remember none. At my being there, my mind more
ran upon such things, which more advanced christianity. That which in
baptism is done by man, is the least part of baptism. The usual and
accustomed words every man may pronounce. And an easy thing is it, and
without ieopardie at all, to dyp him in water, that is both ready and willing
thereto: but the very office of an Apostle is, by the effectual preaching of
Gods word, to bring a man from his long accustomed life, from the laws and
ordinances of his country, to a new and quite contrary religion, and not to
stycke this wise to do, though he thereby stand in ieopardie of death.
Hereof might we more lawfully glory, if we might challenge in such enterprises
any thing, as our own. Nor yet speak I this to disalowe baptism, but to
prefer that, which is better, and that whereunto I am specially assigned.

Christ never assigned me to this embassy among the Gentiles, to be only the
minister of baptism, but to setfurth and to publishe by my preaching Christ
sent me not to baptize, but to preach ^ the gospel*
the glory of his name, and to win, as many as I could, by the gospel unto
him. Nor yet for so doing have I any cause, carnally to glory. For God would
not have this feate done either by the conueyaunce of man's wit or
eloquence, wherewith no such wonder could be wrought, but would have this
great enterprise brought to pass by a rude, simple, and plain preaching, to
the entente that all the praise of this act should be given to God only, whom
it pleased by the vile, low and reprochefull cross of Christ and preaching
thereof, to renew all the world. Christ's cross seems to be a low try flyng
matter, but yet such a vile tryfle is it, that it subdueth all the gloriouse
majesty and pomp of this world. The rnde and wearysh preaching, by which we
declare to all the world, that Christ was fastened upon a cross, and
thereupon died, seems to be some folishe thing, without any point of learning:
but tell The preaching of the cross is to them that peryshe, folishnes.
me, to whom seems it so? Undoubtedly to them, which being blinded with their
sinful life, receive not in their hearts the preaching of the gospel: and
thereby perysh, by forsakyng him, by whom they might be saved. But yet such as
hereby attain to everlasting salvation, well understand and perceive that it
is no weak and feeble thing, but a thing of Gods own doing, much more mighty
and effectual, than is any man's power and garrisons. By this new and unknown
mean, has it pleased God to renew all the world, as he long before promised
to do, by the I will destroy the wisdom of the wise.
mouth of his Prophet Esai, by whom, he thus speaks: I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding of the politic.
Has he not performed his promise? See we not the world renewed? see we not
men, mistrusting their old religion, and casting away their affiaunce in
Philosophy, embrace the cross of Christ? Understand not men now that thing
to be deuilysh and ungodly, which they before thought good and godly? and that
now to be folysh, which to fore they thought witty? Tell me now, where is the
wise man that was so proud Where is the wise? etc
of his knowledge in the law? where is the Scrybe, that was so proud an
expounder of the law? where is the Philosopher become, which searches out the
priuities of nature, and forgetting God the maker of al thing, maruayleth at
creatures? Every one of these made great crakes, that they could do wonderful
things, but yet were they both deceived themselfes, and deceived other too.
They promised righteousness, and al wealth, when in the mean time themselfes
were miserable, and al to drowned in sin. God suffered the^ for punisheme^t
of their arrogant minds, as they well deserved, through blindness to run on
headlong into al kinds of dishonestie, to make them know and see their own
estate, and in what taking, they were, that they might at length, know their
fault and amend it, and therewith also learn, how vain a thing and
ineffectual their Philosophy was. Has not God declared then, that the
wisdom of this Has not God made the wisdom of this world folishnes?
world is folysh? God had before this time declared his wisdom likewise, by
the beautiful spectacle of this world wrought by his wisdom, to the intent
that by wonderyng at such a maruaylouse piece of work, men might be rauyshed
to love the workman. But that purpose of God, through their own folly,
chanced quite contrary. For they wurshypped creatures, wonderyng at them, and
despised the maker of creatures, as one unknown, leading their life after such
sort, as though either God favored sinful living, or else governed not the
world, which he had made.

The text.
For after that the world through wisdom knew not God, in the wisdom of
God, it pleased God through folyshenes of preaching, to save them that believe.
For the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom. But we
preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews an occasion of falling, and unto the
Greeks folyshnes: but unto them, which are called both of the Jews and
Greeks, we preach Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God. For the
folyshnes of God is wyser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than
men. Brethren, ye see your calling, how that not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many of his degree, are called: but God has chosen
the foolish things of the world, to co^fou^d the wise. And God has chose^
the weak things of the world, to co^fou^d things which are mighty. And vile
things of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen, yea and
things of no reputacion, for to bring to naught things of reputacion, that no
flesh should rejoice in his presence. And of him are yt, in Christ Jesus, which
of God is made unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctifiyng, and
redemption. That according as it is written, he which reioyseth, should rejoice
in the Lord. Wherefore god to bring the same purpose of his to pass, went
another way to work, myndyng that such as through showing his wisdom in
creatures became worse, should be brought home again and restored, by
preaching of that, which to men should seem a low folishe trifle: that such
as were Philosophers and politic men, in steed of God, worshyppyng dumme
stones, should now obtain through faith by the cross of Christ, perfect
salvation: and through faith mistrustyng their worldelye wisdom, have a sure
confidence in the mercy of God. For hope of salvation should they have none,
unless they through faith understood, from whence they should look for
their salvation. To bring this about therefore, the first point was to pluck
out of men's heads, the vain confidence that they had in themselves: out
of all men's heads (I say) not of the Jews only, but also of For the
Jews require asigne. etc.
the Gentiles. For as the faythles Jews, require signs and woondres, and
boaste themselves of the miracles showed unto their auncesters, so study the
Grecia^s for the learning and knowledge of worldly wisdom, thereby assuryng
themselves both bliss and glory. And yet were both deceived of that they
looked for. For the Jews upon confidence of their law fell from Christ, and
the wise men through a vain pride, conceived by worldly knowledge, receive
not the humble and (as at the first sight it appears) the low preaching of
the cross. As for we preach neither of the familiar talk, that Moses had
with god, nor of the angels, that Abraham harbored and showed hospitality
unto, nor how the sun was commanded to stand still, nor no such thing,
whereof the Jews make great boaste: nor preach we on the other side of the
mouynges of heavenly bodies, nor of the influences of planetes and stars, nor
the causes of lightninges, the knowledge of which things make the Grecians so
proud. What preach we the^? We preach Christ crucified. etc.
surely a doctrine, that at the first brunte seems base and folyshe, that is
to wit, that Christ was crucified, which base lowenes was to the Jews an
occasion of falling, which Jews wonder at the miracle of Jonas, and yet find
fault in Christ's acts, greater tha^ Jonas, were he never so great. The
Grecians, which by reason discuss and search out all things, think it a
folyshenes to say that a virgyn by any heavenly power should conceive a
child: that God should be incarnate and take man's nature upon him: that life
should be restored by death: and that he is risen again, which was once
dead. And by this means Christ to both sorts seems but a vile thing, but
especially to such as in their own strength, have a lewd trust and
confidence. But they that by inspiracion of the holy ghost are called to
faith, and are by preaching of the gospel thoroughly changed, be they Jews,
or be they Grecians, clearelye perceive and know, that the same lowly and meke
Christ, that was crucified, is the very strength, power, and wisdom of God:
so that now neither the Jews need to gape for miracles, which find greater
in Christ, nor the gentyles for wisdom, forasmuch as they have now found
Christ the welspring of all wysedo^. God has in manner from his high and
glorious majesty, submitted himself to our vylenes, and from his high
wisdom is come down to our folyshnes: and yet that, which in him seemed but
a folyshe point, passes all the wisdom of the world: and that which in him
seemed weak and feeble, The folishnes of God is wyser the^ m^n:
ouerwayeth and surmounteth al worldly might and puissaunce. What can be more
reprochefull, than as a trespacer, among trespacers to be hanged upon a cross?
and yet by this means he only conquered death, whom before no man was able to
withstand. What is more plain and homely, than the learning of the ghospel?
And yet it homely as it is, made new all the world, which before this time, no
philosophers learning was ever able to bring about. All which was done of god,
because hereof the world should claim no part, as it might have done, if it
had been wrought either by men of power, or by riches, eloquence, or by great
and famous clearkes. Now sith all the worldly wisdom and glory thereof, is
by sealy poor fyshers overthrown, and vanquished, every man easily sees,
that all this glorious act, and y^ renoume thereof, must be given to god only,
whose secret power has wrought and brought to pass one contrary by another.
That I now say, is not only true in poor Christ and his apostles, but in
your own company also, called to god through his grace, ye may see the same.
How few eloquente and wise men be of your noumbre, how few men of
power, I mean after the common reputacion, how few men of great blood and
parentage, labor in the gospel, your selves brethren see and understand.
The glory of the gospel was by men of low degree setfurthe and auaunced,
and enlarged by simple persons: so that now, even the contrary to that,
which was wont to be, simple men and low, vanquishe high, and rude playnes
overthrows craftines. And therefore chose god furthe especially such things,
as in worldly estimacio^, seem rude and unlearned, God has chosen the fo^y^^e
things of the world, to confound the wise.
to make worldly wise men more ashamed of their vain enterprise. And chose
such means, as are in the worlds opinion, but feeble and weak, thereby to
mock them which either by taking of parts, and riches, by tyranny, or any
other means think themselves mighty. And unto him chose such things, as
the world thinks vile and to be despised, yea things of no reputacion at
all, to bring to naught and abolyshe things of high price, to the intent,
that neither this flesh of ours, nor the worldly wisdom thereof, should in
the presence of god, have any thing to rejoice of, albeit it have some vain
thing to boaste upon in the sight of the world, since that betwixt heavenly and
earthly things, there can no comparison be made. And albeit in y^ judgment of
the world ye be rascalles and outcastes, yet have ye through the great
bounteousnes of god the father, gotten the greatest honor, that can be, which
has called you into the inheritance of his son, by whom he has after a
another new sort given you all things, which the rufflyng and proud world
promised, and was not able to perform. By him have ye received the true and
wholesome wisdom, that ye need not Philosophy, nor such worldly wisdom:
by him have ye received righteousness, so that now ye need not the help of
Moses law. By him have ye obtained holiness of life, lest any man think it
came by his own deserts. By him have ye received liberty, as by whose blood
we are redeemed from the tyranny of sin. And to be brief, for all the weal,
that we stand in, bound are we to thank only Christ, and God the father, the
chief author of al goodness, that it may come to pass, that is written, by
the Prophet Hieremye: let neither the wise man be proud of his wisdom, nor
the rich be to bold upon trust of his riches, nor yet the strong man trust
upon his strength, since none of all these bring men to the welthy state: but
if any man will justly glory and rejoice, let him glory, because he knows God
the very fountain and geuer of all good things: but let him so rejoice, that
he assign no part thereof to any worldly power and help.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
And I brethren (when I came to you) came not in gloriousnes of words, or of
wisdom, showing unto you the testimony of God. Neither showed I my self that
I knew any thing among you, save Jesus Christ, even the same that was
crucified. And I was among you in weakness, and in fear, and in much
trembling. And my words and my preaching was not with entising words of
man's wisdom: but in showing of the spirit and of power, that your faith
should not stand in the wisdom of men: but in the power of God. LEt them
tell me then, wherein they are better than you, that thus are ashamed of
Christ's lowlines, and crake among you of their law, of their riches, and
wisdom. I am assured, that I converted you not to Christ by such means. For
when I first came unto you, to teach you the preuey and secret wisdom of
the gospel, I came furnished neither with any meruaylouse and gloryouse
eloquence, nor with any singular knowledge of Philosophy, which kind of
men I knew, how greatly ye regarded. So far abhorred I to take upon me
any of those things, which in the face of the world are coumpted singular,
that I showed my self among you to know nothing else, but Jesus Christ, even
the same, that was crucified. I preached of a man, but of such a man yet,
as was by God anointed, and promised by the Prophets to come and redeem
mannekynde. From that which was in him of lowest reputacion, began I the
preaching of the gospel. And albeit that my preaching among you took effect,
yet thereby claymed I no praise at all, living among you, not like a man of
power, but as a weak one and feeble, nor gaped for any great dominion, but as
one, that stood in danger and ieopardie to be assaulted of deuilyshe
persons, whose tyranny we with patience overcame. Look after what sort my
living was, and after the same was my preaching. And as my life was kept in
safegarde against the violence of lewd and myscheuouse persons, by no man's
hand, but by the only defense of God: so likewise was my preaching, neither
garnyshed with the flowers of thetoryke, nor set furthe with the arguments
of Philosophy, thereby to show, what I could in learning and eloquence: and
yet simple as it was, of that power and might was it, that it quyte changed
you, not by any braggyng learning, but by the spirit and myghtie power of God,
who by his secret inspiracio^ and miracles, aided and assisted my rude
preaching, that whereas ye are from darkness and ignorance brought to the
light of the ghospel, being a thing so unlike and hard to be persuaded in, no man should think the same to be done by worldely wisdom or eloquence,
which we take not upon us, but by the power of God, by whom our preaching was
more effectual and strong, than ever was any disputacion of the Philosophers,
were it never so subtle, were it never so wittye and well set in order. At my
being among you, which were proud of your worldely wisdom, and ignoraunte
of the wisdom of God, I taught you but plain matters, but yet such were
they, as were to salvation necessary.

The text.
We speak of wysedom among them that are perfect: not the wysedom of this
world, neither of the rulers of this world (which go to naught) but we
speak the wysedom of God which is in secret and lies hyd, which God has
or deyned before the world, unto our glory, which wisdom none of the rulers
of this world knew. For had they had knowledge, they would not have
crucified the Lord of glory. But as it is written: The iye has not seen, and
the ear has not heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. We have of Christ deaper
points of wisdom, but of them talk we among such as are perfect. Be
diligente therefore and labor to be perfect, that ye may be partakers of
the secret and hydden mysteries of God. Beside this we, that preach the
cross of Christ, seem to the faythlesse to preach very folyshnesse, but to
such as steadfastly believe, seem we to preach an excellent wisdom, much
differyng from that wisdom which labors in vain to search out by
natural reason the causes of this world: and far also from worldely
policy, whereof the great estates of this world make great crakes, whose
authority with all their wisdom is by Christ abolished and vanquyshed, by
vtteryng their folyshnesse: but we preach of a heavenly wisdom, which has
not an outward appearance of that, which is not within it, but is inwardly
myghtie and effectual. There is in this wisdom no curiosity nor pomp, and
yet simple as it is, all men perceive it not. But as it is secret, so is it
known by secret inspiracion, and that of none, but of such only, as God
vouchesaueth to make partakers thereof. We lay not forth the priuities of this
wisdom before the common sort of people, but utter them secretly to such, as
are able and mete to receive them.

And albeit this wisdom be now at last in our times publyshed, yet god
before all time by his high counsel ordained for his, that as the proud
persons have hitherto folyshly craked of their carnal wisdom, so should
henceforth the meke and lowlye have a more excellent wisdom to rejoice and
glory of. This wisdom delyteth to dwell in simple and clean hearts, and for
this cause none of the great rulers of this world had it, nor Magiciens, nor
Philosophers, nor Pilate, nor Annas, nor Cayphas, nor the phariseis, nor the
devils themselves neither. For had they known, that the low and folyshe
preaching of Christ's cross, would with his glisteryng have darkened the
glory of the world, and for all the weakness and feebleness thereof have put to
flight and vanquished the tyranny of death and sin, never would they have
fastened on a cross, the Lord and captain of renoume and glory. For all
the learning they had in visible things, for all their pride in knowleage of
the law, ignorant were they of this wonderful mystery, mete to be uttered
only to such, as by humble and sobre minds are made at one with God. That it
should so be, Esai long before prophesied, declaryng, that this wisdom,
whereof we talk, should into men's souls be secretly inspired, saying: such
things, as never were seen with man's iyes, or by man's ears heard of, or
conceived in any man's thought, has god prepared for them, that heartily love
him, and ground all their disputacions upon faith, and not upon man's reason.

The text.
But God has opened them unto us by his spirit. For the spirit searches al
things, ye the botome of gods secrets. For what man knows the things of
a man, save the spirit of man which is within him? Even so the things of god
knows no man, but the spirit of god. And we have not received the spirit of
the world: but the spirit which comes of god, for to know the things
that are given to us of God, which things also we speak not with words that
man's wisdom teaches: but with words which the holy ghost does teach,
making spiritual comparisons of spiritual things. The natural man
perceyueth not the things that belong to the spirit of god. For they are but
folyshnes unto him. Neither can he perceive them, because they are spiritually
examined. But he that is spiritual, discusseth all things: yet he himself is
judged of no man. For who has known the mind of the Lord, either who shall
inform him? But we understand the mind of Christ. High minded rulers and
proud philosophers, were not worthy to receive this hydden mystery, which
yet god has opened to us his friends, not by any worldly doctrine, but by the
secret inspiracion of his holy spyrite. Which spirit, because it is of
gods nature, and proceadyng from god, searches forth even the deapest and
most secret priuities of God, whereunto man's busye brain attayneth not.
Every man may easily look on an other man's face, but what lies hidden in the
bottom of the heart, that is no man able to see, for that only knows the
spirit of god, and a man's own conscience. After like sort diverse men behold
and search out the properties of gods creatures: but such things as lie
hidden in gods counsel and providence, no body knows saving his everlasting
spirit, which being of one nature with him, knows all such things, as he
does. One man shows another his secret thoughts, by secret whispering in
his ear: but god to the good opens his counsel, not by the spirit of man,
which teaches nothing but worldly fantasies, but by the spirit of god, so
that of what sort the spirit is, such doctrine it teaches. This world also
has his spirit, with whom whosoever is ravished, both sauereth of
worldlynes, and loves worldly things: but the inspiracion of the heavenly
spirit of god, brings us in mind of heavenly treasures, and makes us to
understand, what god has through Christ's cross done for us. And this is W^
have not received the spirit of the world.
the phylosophie, which as we received by the spirit of Christ, so teach we
it again to the godly and simple people, not with flowers and colors of
thetorike, as the Philosophers are wont to teach them, that they take in
hand, but with rude words, and set out of order, being yet such as teach a
spiritual doctrine. For reason requires* that forasmuch as this kind of
wisdom is far unlike the other, that it should have another kind of
teaching. Worldly wisdom is taught after a worldly fashion, but heavenly and
spiritual things must be taught after a new sort, and yet not to every man
indifferently, but to such only, as have received the spirit of Christ, and
are, by reason that they are spiritual themselves, able to receive spiritual
learning. It besemeth surely, that spiritual learning should have a spiritual
hearer, which has both his understanding cleansed by faith, and wylfull
desires corrected by charity. For the gross, and natural man, which is
proud and arrogant upon the knowledge of things that may be seen, and is
ruled by beastly lusts, regards not such things as apperteyne to the
spirit of god, but coumpteth for folyshnes and laugheth to skorne, whatsoever
sounds contrary to that he thinks. Nor believes any thing, but that he has
either proved by experyence, or concluded by natural reason, and is without
regard of this learning and Phylosophie, which teaches, that Christ was
borne of a virgyn, and that he was both very god and very man, that by dying
he overcame death, and after rose again to life, and will perform in his
members such things, as are already done in himself, that tribulacions are
the way to true bliss, and that by death a man shall come to everlasting
life. Such articles cannot by man's reason be perceived, but by the
inspiracion of the holy ghost. To learn this thou nedeste no wylye and crafty
wit, but rather haste need of a simple and a pure faith. Such an instrument
is mete for the holy gooste to work with, as wholly gives up it self to be
framed and wrought He that is spiritual discusseth al things.
upon by him. But the spiritual manne discusseth and judges all thing, not
passing upon temporal matiers, but studiouse of heavenly things, and yet is
he not judged of any carnal man, which has no skyll upon this heavenly and
secret wisdom. Even as a man judges not gods matiers, so the carnal man
judges not the spiritual. As for such points, as are by our preaching
taught, are no men's inuencions nor fantasies, but came forth out of the
secret counsel of god. For as the prophet Esai said: what man is there on
live, which of himself knows the mind of god immortal, that he can to him
be as it were one of his privy counsel. It pleased gods providence to deliver
his out of thraldom, after such strange means, to deceive thereby all man's
vain curiosity. But we know gods will and mind, because we have received
his spirit.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text*
And I could not speak (unto you brethren) as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal, even as unto babes in Christ. I gave you milk to drink and not meat.
For ye then were not strong, nether are ye as yet. For ye are yet carnal. As
long verily as there is among you envying, and strife and sects, are ye not
carnal and walk after the manner of men? For while one says: I hold of
Paul, and another: I am of Apollo, are ye not carnal? What is paul? What
thing is Apollo? Only ministers are they by whom ye believed, even as the
Lord gave every man grace. I have planted, Apollo watered: but God gave the
encreace. So then, nether is he that planteth any thing, nether he that
watreth: but God that gives the encreace. He that planteth, and he that
watreth, are one. Every man yet shall receive his reward, according to his
labor. Fore we are Gods laborers, ye are Gods husbandrye, ye are Gods
buylding. According to the grace of God given unto me, as a wise buylder have I
laid the foundation. And another buylt thereon. But let every man take heed,
how he buyldeth upon. For another foundacyon can no man lay, then it that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ. THere are in this learning certain points mete
for begynners, certain mete for them, that are well entered, and going forward,
and certain mete for such as are very perfect, of which every sort must
be taught according to their capacities. Therefore when I first came unto you, I
could not teach you the deapest points of our religion, as such should be
taught, as are perfitely spiritual, but submitted my preaching to your
weakness, among y^ rude, vsyng rudnes, among y^ gross speaking grossly,
lisping and stameryng, with you, as women do with their children. For faith
also has her encreasinges. When I saw you therefore in Christ's learning but
even younglynges, I fed you as it were with the milk of gross learning and
not with the substancial food of perfect doctrine, not because I was not able
to teach you greater points, but because ye by reason of carnal affections,
and blyndnes of your former life, ^er not able to understand higher learning,
as diverse among you are not able yet. For sum there be among you, which albeit
through baptism are become Christ's servants, have not yet shaken of al
fleshly affeccions. Such as are in this case, are surely carnal and not
spiritual. What need I many words, or why should I fear to speak that of
you, y^ the deed self speaks? The matier is known by your deeds. For since
the spirit of Christ bredeth unity and concord, and on the contrary side,
envy, contentions and debates rise of nothing else, but of worldly desyers,
since such things are seen among you, may not a man say to your reproach,
that ye are entangled with man's gross affections? If ye deny it, whence
come these words, that are talked among you sounding to debate and strife, but
of a corrupt mind? for whereas there is but one chief doer and ruler over all
the world, yet among you one says: I am of Paul's sect, another says: I am
of Apollos sect, after which sort or like sort of titles y^ students in
philosophy strive one with another, whiles one says: I am Aristotle's
scholar, another says: I am a Platoniste, I am a Stoike, I am an Epicure.
Which thing yet I say not, because any such strife and sects are either in
my name, or in Apollos risen, but because I thought it good to put example in
our persons, to make you more plainly perceive the haynousnes of this your
offense. For if it be an vnseamly thing to give us, which are the true apostles
of god, and such as have taught you nothing, but that we received by the
spirit of Christ, such glory and praise, as is only due to him: who can
bear with you when ye challenge to be of men's sects, not much passing, what
they be, parauenture false apostles, and give over the gloriouse and mighty
work of your salvation and profession to vile persons, which should only
be given unto Christ? As if one named Frangilius, or Benotius, or Angulius, or
Carmilius, or sum other of any other name, (for these put I, but for an
example) have devised sum worldly order or rule of life, will ye straight upon
pride of their names, be at shamfull variaunce among your selves, and by
extinguyshing Christ's name, make men the authors of true religion, whereof
Christ is only the beginner? And if ye this do, there remains nothing else,
but as ye vary in new made names, so likewise labor to maintain and
nouryshe this dissencion of minds with diversity of apparel, with
diversities of meats and drynkes, and in the whole order of life: that as
princes servants some by red, some by yealowe, some by party colors, some
by one cogniza^unce, some by a another, show that they have diverse masters,
whom they do service unto: so must ye, which have given your selfs to the
sects of men, as though ye had by the^ received life and liberty, glory of
their surnames, as though it were not honorable enough to be called
christians. What, are ye ashamed of this name? Is it not sufficient, by hurtles
and godly life, openly to declare your selves to be his? In this break ye
that which is one, and deuyde Christ's glory among lurdaynes. What ma^^er of
men your capitaines are, I speak not yet. But put the case they w^r as good
as Apollo, as good as Paul, yea as good, as the high and chief apostles, are
they yet any more than servants to Christ, in whom ye believe* They be not
chief workmen, but are in another man's business occupied ^o their own
ieopardie. And this authority have they received of Christ only, under whom
as principal guide and ruler, some execute one office, some another, as every
of the^ is by god appointed. As I (for example) first planted, what time I laid
the I have planted, Apollo watered.
foundation of the learning of the gospel* Appollo watered it, and with
gentle exhortacions cherished that, which was by me begun. But to make the
tree grow, and so increase, that it plentuouslye bring forth fruit, that is
the work of god, and not ours. For both he that planteth, and he that
waters, labor all in vain, unless heaven give thereto his secret power and
influence, which is somuche more effectual, because it is priuey and secret.
If the husband manne be of this dysapoynted, nothing in manner preuayleth, the
gardener, nor yet the waterer, but if heaven be seasonable, the whole increase
ought to be aknoweleged to come thence, and from god. For as concerning this
feate, as well the setter, as the waterer are in like case, for both labor in
other men's works, and shall for their pains receive reward, not of you,
but of god, whose woorkemen, we are. We as journey men, labor in the work of
god: ye are his ground and land, which we in his behalf tylle, and not in
our own: ye are a buyldyng rered up for his honor, and not for ours. We owe
him service, but let every man take heed, what service he does him: if he do
true and faithful service, he shall receive an honest reward, but if he
otherwise do, then either shall he lose his labor, or receive such reward,
as he has thereby deserved. I for example, according to the grace, that God
has given me, like a wise buylder have laid a foundation for buyldyng, not
by mine own power, but by his help, that appointed me to this office. Upon the
fou^dacion that I have laid, diverse men diversely build, but let every manne
mark well, what he buyldeth thereupon. As for the foundation, that we have
laid, cannot be changed. What preachers soever come after us, of what
authority soever they be, unless they preach that Jesus Christ was fastened to
the cross, give them no ear. If these allow our foundation, then remains
it, that they thereupon build such a piece of work, as is for that
foundation mete. The foundation is heavenly and spiritual, and such as
wherewith the buyldyng of earthlye and carnal learning agrees not. A vain
counterfaite buylding may happily deceive the judgment of men, but it cannot
deceive Gods judgment.

The text.
If any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, timber,
hay, or stuble: every man's work shall appear. For the day shall declare
which shall be showed in fire. And the fire shall try every man's work, what it
is. If any man's work that he has buylt upon, bide, he shall receive a
reward. If any man's burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall be safe
himself: nevertheless, yet as it were through fire. If any man then upon this
foundation build things that are substanciall and excellent, as gold,
silver, and precious stones: or on the contrary side, if any lay upon it
trifles, as wood, hay and straw, the end will show, how every one has
bestowed his labor. But because ye shall more clearly understand me,
conceive my mind by this more gross declaracion: I laid Christ before you
as a mark, if any manne then as Christ gave exaumple, teach you, that ye
ought to live ryghteously, and that ye ought to do good even to your enemies,
that ye should in your riches put none affiaunce, to despise honors, and that
ye ought, as a very poison, to abhor fylthy pleasures, and to do all your
acts for Christ's glory, for your good deeds, to look for none other reward,
but life immortal, and that men ought for Christ's sake desire to dye: the
same buyldeth a semely and acumly piece of work, mete for the foundation,
which is Christ: but if he thereupon build only men's tradicions, concerning
apparel, of diet, of unfruitfully ceremonies, and other such like of men's
own devises, for their own glory and lucre, and not to the glory of Christ,
so that albeit they begun at this noble fou^dacion, they grow yet out of
kind, and instead of good and godly make men supersticiouse, then has
that preacher laid on wood, hay, and straw. Every man's work shall openly
be tried, what it is, what time it shall be brought nygh to the light of
truth, and be examined by the rule of the gospel. If the learning, that ye
have builded on, have brought you to this perfeccion that ye can overcome all
carnal desires, then may all know, that it is effectual, and of great
power, but if the same have made you unable to suffer damages and losses, if ye
thereby be become such, as will either be soon angry, testie, wayward,
contenciouse, backbiters, or dissemblers, by this ye may easyly know, that
your learning is but counterfaite. Such as are arested to appear by a day
before a wordly judge, by one sleyght or other escape ofttymes: but Gods
judgment searches every man at the vttermoste even as the fire tries metal.
It may be for the time of prosperity and quietness, that the unprofitable
buyldyng be not espied, but as soon as the stormy blastes of persecucion come
on thick and threfold, or pleasant and carnal desires allure, then if ye give
place and shrynke, ye plainly thereby show, that the spirit of God is neither
received with ceremonies nor man's tradicions, with which whosoever is indewed,
suffers for Christ's sake al such troubles and temptacions even joyfully.
These are the fires, wherewith every man's work shall be tried, of what sort it
is. If therefore this preachers or that preachers buylding endure and abide in
the fire, let such one look for no worldely praise at men's hands, but yet
sure is he to have reward of God, for whose sake he took pain: but if eythers
work be with fire destroyed, the workman shall lose his labor, and be
defrauded of his reward: although himself escape free, yet escapes he, as
they, that out of burning convey themselfes naked, for whom there aresteth
nothing else to be done, but with charges to build again upon the foundation,
such a work, as is meet for the same. The chief and most ready way had
been to teach such as have professed Christ, nothing but that, which is for
a christian man necessary. But if teachers do not so, nor the hearers, then
must both take double pains, which must vnteache their scolers, that they
taught them, and to unlearn those things which they before learned. For
there is hope of salvation, as long as Christ the foundation remains. How
agrees unclean life with this profession? How agree cold and waterishe
ceremonies with the fyery and burning charity of Christ? Punishment shall
they suffer at Gods hand, as they have well deserved, which with their
doctrine corrupt you.

The text.
Know ye not, that ye are the temple of God, and how that the sprete of God
dwells in you? If any man defyle the temple of God, him shall God destroy.
For the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. Let no man deceive
himself. If any manne seem wise among you, let him become a fool in this
world, that he may be wise. For the wisdom of this world is folyshnes with
God. For it is written: he compasses the wise in their craftiness. And again:
God knows the thoughts of the wise, that they be vain. Therefore, let no man
rejoice in men. For all things are yours, whether it be Paul, either Apollo,
either Cephas: whether it be the world, either life, either death, whether
they be present things, or things to come: all are youres and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods. Know ye not, that ye are as a temple consecrate
unto God, which the heavenly spirit of God possesses and sanctifies? If
such one be punished, as does defile a temple, that is hallowed by manne, will
not God destroy him, that defyleth his temple? Endeavor must we dilygently,
that this temple be kept pure and holy, since God has once by his holy
spirit cleansed and hallowed it. Keep it clean may ye by vnhurtefull life,
with christian conversation and manners.

But if ye be to much desyrouse of honor, or if ye be leach ^rouse, or
given to strife and debate, and to such other wylfulnes, then suspende ye and
defile it. Sithe then ye are the temple of god builded with lyuelye stones,
very wicked certaynely and ungodly is he, that provoke any of your
company to such manners, conditions, and learnynges, as are not with Christ
agreeable. Christ deceyueth no man especially none of them, Let no man
deceive you
that lean to him. Let every manne beware that he deceive not himself, whiles
he indiscreetly trusts upon man's help. Look ye not for bliss and
felicity either by your Philosophy, or by the law. Nor let one manne
presumptuously think himself better, than other, because he is in worldly
learning excellent: but let him rather, that in worldly reputacion thinks
himself wise, wyselye wax folyshe, that he may be wise in deed. Let him
forsake to be the proud teacher of folyshe wys^dome, and he shall be meet to
be the scholar of very wise folyshnes. For even as the riches of this world
make not a man truly rich, as the honors of the world make not a man
truly noble, and as the pleasures of the world make not a man truly
blessed: even so the wisdom of this world makes not a man truly wise
before god: whose judgment no man can deceive, be he never so wise in the
sight of the world. God mocketh at this wisdom, whiles he declares it, not
only not to be that, whereby we attain salvation, but also to be that which
hyndereth our salvation, by reason that it makes men to be proud and fyerse,
and therefore He compasses the wise in their craftimes.
very hard to be taught. This was long before spoken of in the book, which
is entitled of the patience of Job, when of God he speaks on this wise:
which compasses the wise in their own wilines. And again in the lxiii.
Psalm: the Lord knows the thoughts of men that think themselves to be
wise, that they be vain, and unable to perform such things as they
promise. Since therefore all the pythe of our salvation is altogether of god,
men may of this usurp no portion as their own, nor give any part of this
glory to man as the chief doer, since the whole should be surrendered to God.
And since ye are one body joined together by mutual charity, unmeet is it,
that one of you should stick to one fantasy, and another to another
fantasy, when all things are youres indifferentlye. Whether Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas be of any authority or not, this is sure, by gods free
gift they have one equal authority for your profit: or if the world be in
a rore against you, it shall finallye be for your profit: or if we live any
longer, live shall we to establyshe you in this learning: or if we dye, then
dye we to strengthen you by our exaumple: or if we be in present pleasures,
we pass not much upon them, because they are soon goen: or if things to
come move you, labor stoutelye and with a courage toward them, which albeit
ye see not with your bodily iyes, yet see ye them, with the iyes of your
faith. Away therefore with names of sects, and division, since all things
through one chief master are youres equally, albeit your selves Ye are
Christ's and Christ is gods.
are not your own men, in such sort, y^ ye can give any man right title upon
you, but ye long to Jesus Christ, to who^ al we together owe our selves: and
for Christ are we bound to god the chief Lord and ruler of al things, which
by him has given us all goodness.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
Let a man this wise esteem us, even as the ministers of Christ, and stewardes
of the secrets of God. Furthermore, it is required of the stewardes, that a
man be found faithful. With me is it but a very small thing, that I should be
judged of you, either of ma^s judgment. No I judge not mine own self. For I
know* naught by my self: yet am I not thereby justified. It is the Lord that
judges me. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come,
which will lighten things that are hid in darkness, and ^pen the councels of
the hertes. And then shall every man have praise of God. LEt every man then,
that will unfeignedly and truly rejoice, glory and rejoice in his name, nor
esteem us, as chief auctours and masters, but as reason would, such should
be regarded, which, like servants, are occupied in Christ's affairs: and
as such ought to be taken, which as stuardes bestow others goods, committed
unto their credence, the secret mysteries of God (I say) and not of men.
Since then all such of what behauour soever they be, have taken in hand the
orderyng of a very weyghtie matier, but yet another man's, let men look for
nothing else in them, wherefore they should be had in price, but that they
faithfully bestow that wherewith god has put them in trust, for none other
intent and purpose, but for Christ's glory. Deceytfull stuardes are they,
which instead of godly doctrine, teach men's fantasies, and abuse your
obedience for their lucre and pride, which under the prentense of the gospel
promote and further their own matiers, and under the shadow of Christ's
glory, seek to bear a tyrannouse rule: which, albeit they blind me^nes
judgments, yet deceive they not god, of whom to be allowed is the highest
treasure, that can be. For I coumpte it but a small matier, by your only
judgments to be allowed or disallowed* yea or by any man's judgment else,
wh^ soever he be. It is so impossible, that one man should well judge of
another man's conscience, that I dare not give sentence upon my self, whether
I deserve to be praised of god, or not. Done have I the best that I could to
accomplish the office, whereunto I was appointed, and I cannot remember my
self of any harm or fraud, and yet dare I not thereby claim to be a
righteouse man. For it might be, that I have done some thing unawares,
otherwise than it should have been, either by reason, that I have passed It is
the Lord that judges me
my bonds, or have kept my self to much within them. The which because it
is known only to god, he is the only judge of my office. Let us make him
judge then of hydden and unknown matiers, whose iyes behold all things,
which will, when he sees his time, give sentence upon every matier. Unmeet
therefore is it, that ye being but servants should preue^te gods judgment,
iudgeyng men, before the time come. For it is out of season to give sentence
upon other, until the Lord come to judge both heaue^lye, earthly, and things
under the earth. Then shall he by his judgment bring to light all thing, that
is no we hydden in darkness, and open that before all men's iyes, which
now being hydden in the priuey corners of man's heart, is not by men's
consciences perceived. Then shall we receive of him whose judgments are sure,
and vndeceyueable rewards, according to our deserts. He that has without
corrupcio^ done his duty, be he of men never so little praised, shall of God
receive an everlasting reward: and he that does contrary, be he never somuche
made of, and praised among men, shall by the judgment of God, be put to
shame and suffer punishment.

The text.
These things (brethren) I have for an ensample described in mine own person,
and in Apollos for your sakes: that ye might learn by us, that no man count
of himself beyond that which is above written: that one swell not against an
other for any man's cause. For who prefers the? What haste thou, that thou
have not received? if thou have received it, why reioysest thou, as though thou
had not received it? Now ye are full: now ye are made rich: ye raygne as
kings without us: and I would to God ye did raygne, that we might raygne with
you. But to be plain with you, hitherto have I framed my tale by my self and
by Apollo, not because we are the beginners of any such sect, (for neither
take we any thing upon us, and among you none is there, that braggeth himself
to be of Paul's sect or of Apollos) but because I perceived, that there are
among you diverse favorers of diverse sects: lest some might have been
provoked to impaciencie, I thought it best in feigned names to set forth the
matter, that when this Epistle should be read openly among you, every man
might secretly examine his own conscience. And so is this matter, which would
elswise have caused much spyte and hatred, opened in our names, that ye may
quietly perceive, how uncomely certain of you triumph and braggue upon the
names, of false Apostles, and despise every man in comparison of themself,
surrenderyng ungodly that unto men, which is dew to God: which for none
other purpose exalte each of them for their part the dignity of their own
Apostle, but because themselfes would be had in greater estimacion, iudgyng in
this even as folyshlye of themself, as of them, in whose behalf they do
arrogantly braggue and crake. These things perhaps might be suffered, if they
were only folyshe, but now sith by them deadly debates arise, the matter
cannot be cloked. Ye ought not to esteem men, that supply the Apostles
office, but as reason would that stewardes and best wars of other men's
goods, should be regarded, nor should any manne crake in this man's name or
that, since all that they do, is of God. Considering these things with my
self, I cannot but marvel, why either your Apostles are so shamefully
desirouse of honor, that they claim indiscreetly, that as their own, which is
Christ's, or why the disciples rather rejoice and triumph of a man, which is
but a servant, than of God, which is the chief doer. I provoke the to
answer, whosoever thou be, that standeste in thine own conceyte or
discontenteste thy self, because of the counterfayete glory of him, of whom
thou haste received baptism, being but a small matter: who is author of this
difference, that one seems thereby to have received more, and an other to have
received less? If any of you be baptized, yea and that by an Apostle in a
golden lauer, or in a lauer of preciouse stones, or if that be not sufficient,
by a chief Apostle, whose port and wealth admyt to pass kings riches, and
have princes to your god fathers, who dare say, that this manne has received
more, than if he had been baptized in a fygge tree trough by any of Peter the
fyshers servants, or by any of my servants, which am a coriar? Once again
I provoke the to answer, whosoever thou art, which so west this folishe
error into simple peoples minds, or rather abusest their error, which ought
to be amended: tell me yet once at last, what is that, whereof thou art proud?
Teach thou thine own learning, or others? if thou teach thine own, What
haste thou, that thou haste not received?
then preachest thou thine own glory, and not the glory of Jesus Christ. If
thou preach others learning, how durst thou take that upon the as thine own,
which thou haste received of God? If thou believe that learning to be thine
own, which God has given the, who is more blind, than thou? If thou
understand, that it is none of thine and do yet boast and crake thy self
thereof, as though it were thine own, who is more shamlesse than thou? How
great, and to what heyght are ye Corinthians come, from so low a foundation?
We being there were hungerbaned and famyshed, and among you so poor and nedye,
that to get our daily living, feign were we to sow lether: we byle and
cruelly vexed, syncerely and without corrupcion preached Christ unto you: and
are ye now come, to this to despise us by other Apostles council, and to be so
fyerce through full fedyng, and by reason of your riches, so puffed up with
pride, so wranglyng and sediciouse, by reason of your dominion and kingdom?
Have ye taken possession of so great riches for your self, and thrust us out
of door, that have sustained the greatest brunte of this matter? Whether ye
have obtained any great thing or not judge your selfs. Certainly I would
wish, ye had obtained such a kingdom, as were semely for Christ. Then would
we thrust our selfs, into some one part or other thereof to raygne with you,
because we laid the foundation. For I cannot be brought in mind to think
that ye would be so unmannerly as to thrust such out of the company of your
welthy state, as unto you were begynners of the same, unless we be utterly
borne to this misery, to have no reward at all, but despite, famine, infamy,
emprisonmente, strypes, and to be in ieopardie of our life when other men
with their false learning, get them selfs so great a renoume. If an Apostles
office should be recompensed with worldly rewards, I think we ought of right
to have the best, which first of all, with so great ieopardyes have graffed
Christ in you.

The text.
For me thinks, that God has set forth us (which are Apostles) for the
lowest of all* as it were men appointed to death. For we are a gasyng stock
unto the world, and to the Angels and to men. We are fools for Christ's sake,
but ye are wise through* Christ. We are wea^e, but ye are strong. Ye are
honorable, but we are despised. Even unto this time we honger and thryst and
are naked and are buffe^ed with fystes, and have no certain dwelling place,
and labor, working with our own hands. We are reviled, and yet we bless. We
are persecuted, and suffer it. We are evil spoken of, and we pray. We are
made as it were the filthiness of the world, the ofscowring of al things, even
unto this day. If such lawfully reign among you, as have builded upon the
good foundation we laid, but mean things, then think we our selves only
miserable by the wrath of god. Their riches and fame of wisdom has brought
them in authority, and to bear a rule among you: but us, as it seameth, has
Christ called loweste of all to the apostles office, to be punished and to
suffer deaths, as they do, which for their mischeuouse deeds are cast unto
wild beasts, to be an exaumple to the people. What court of judgment is
there, whyther we have not been drawn? what prison is there, that knows not
our trouble? What commen place is there, wherein we have not been openly
mocked, so that we were not only a gazyng stock to the world, which defyeth
Christ, nor only to men, that are worldly wise, but also to the devils
themselfes, which are with our troubles delighted. O the change of things
turned vpsidown and contrary. We are foles, for Christ's sake despised,
because we preached, y^ he humbled himself, and was fastened to the cross: ye
as wise men upon confidence in Christ, do proudely auaunce your selfs. We like
weak and feeble, for Christ's glory humbled our selfs: ye like strong, are
proud and insolente: Despised were we and rascalles? ye are noble and
honorable. We have no profit, but our pain and travail, but all the profit
is yours. For what reward have we, I pray you, for so many dangers and
troubles: So far have we been until this day, from bearyng any great rule,
as some do, that coumpt themselfes for chief Apostles, that we oftetymes
lack meat, oftetymes drink, oftetymes clothyng, much less got we by the
gospel any great riches. Yea and are oftetymes buffited, so far were we from
obteynyng honor: and that which is a plain proof of extreme need, we wander
abroad having none appointed dwelling place, nor house of our own, wherein to
suffer and endure our pouertye with somewhat less grief, because it is not
seen. So far from poulyng and pillyng any manne, that we got our living with
our own hands. We seek not for worldelye praise, but rather such as reuyle
us, we bliss: and for vnlanyes and reproach oftetymes done unto us, we on our
side give praises. So far are we from oppressing, that we without complaint
suffer cruel persecucion. What need many words? Other among you are in great
renoume, but we for your sakes have been coumpted hitherto, as outcastes of
this world, most vile and least set by. If I, as some men do, would cast
in your teeth my trauayles, my ieopardies, and labors, should I not have a
very good cause to quarrel with you?

The text.
I write not these things, to shame you: but as my beloved sons I warn you.
For though ye have ten thousand instructours in Christ: yet have ye not many
fathers. In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Wherefore I
desire you to follow me, (as I follow Christ.) For this cause have I sent unto
you Timotheus, which is my dear son, and faithful in the Lord, which
shall put you in remembrance of my ways, y^ I have in Christ, even as I
teach every where in all congregacions. Some swell, as though I would come
no more at you. But I will come to you shortly if God will: and will know, not
the words of them which swell, but the power: for the kingdom of God is not
in words, but in power. What will ye? Shall I come unto you with a rod, or
else in love and in the spyrite of softness. I write not this now, as one that
for your unkindness hates you, to make you ashamed, but rather as a most
loving father warn you as my most dearly beloved children, for your own
profit, and not for mine.

For if by my only hurt your matters should well go forward, I would not
pass upon mine own loss, but would rejoice in you, for whose profit I would
not stick to dye. But now, sith I perceive that ye through your new Apostles
become worse, godly love compels me to warn you of the ieopardie, which I
coumpte as mine own. Ye Corinthians may not despise this good will of mine,
which is very fatherly without any fayning. A great difference is there between
a scholemaister, and a father, for he for the time is cruel, to the
vnhurtefull age, and does his duty, if he do it at all, either for rewards
sake, or for fear of eiuill: but a father provoked thorough a natural love,
provides for the profit of his children, though he there by bear losses and
damage. Though ye chance to have, yea ten thousand scholemaisters, surely ye
shall find but few of them to be fathers. And why should I not call my
self a father, and you my children? since I first of all men preached the
gospel unto you, and sith that through me ye are borne again unto Christ?
Have not I in manner begoten you? What mother has taken so much pain in
travail with her child, as I suffered, when I travailed with you to make you
christians? Wherefore I desire you to follow me, as I follow Christ.
Wherefore if ye acknowledge this father to be yours, if ye be unfeigned
children, I beseech you for our mutual loves sake, to follow your father in
living and manners. Since ye are begoten by us, why labor ye rather to be
like other, than to us? Such things, whereof ye ate accused unto me, whence
they came, consider with your self, surely ye learned not them of me. If any
point of our doctrine be out of your memory, forasmuch as I can not come
my self, here I send unto you Timothee, even as mine own self, which is my
son, not one that grows out of kind, but through gods goodness a faithful
child, which as first by me he learned Christ, so swarueth he at no time
from his fathers steps. He shall put you in remembrance, how I order my life,
which I both follow and teach after the example of Jesus Christ, not unto
you only, but to every congregation, that professes Christ. As he is one
commen autour and rewler of all, so must all men have one rewle of living. A
natural child does his duty, not for fear of pain, but gladlye and with
all his heart. There are some among you, which because I am absente, are
paste shame, and so wantonly behave them selfs as though I would never
return. But they shall be deceived, for I will within a while be with you, by
gods grace, what time I will have a trial what these men can do, that
this wise auaunce them self, not in eloquence, but in deeds. For the strength
of The kindome of God is not in words.
the gospel stands not in royal and gorgiouse speech, which every manne
may bse, but in a heavenly strength and power, which is declared by
sufferaunce of troubles, by concord, by righteousness of the wholle life, and
by miracles. Shall I come unto you? I will come in deed. But take ye heed,
that ye receive me, as reason would. In your hands stands you to make me
come, either as a roughe one and dreadful, or as a meek one and gentle. I
have authorytie given unto me by Christ, to punish rebellions and such as are
vnrewlye with the rod of correccion. But rather had I not to use it, but
would wyshe gladlye your manners were such, that I like a loving, merciful,
and meek father, may rejoice in your vnhurtefulnesse, or if there be among
you any small faults, that the same may with an easy and fatherly
correccyon be amended.

The.v. Chapter:
The text.
There goes a commen saying that their is fornicacion among you* and such
fornicacion as is not named among the gentyles: that one should have his
fathers wife. And ye swel, and have not rather sorowed, that he which has
dove this deed, might be put from among you. for I verily as absent in body,
but present in spirit, have determined already (as though I we^ present)
concerning him that has done this deed, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
when ye are gathered together, and my spirit with you with the power of the
Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver him unto Satan, for the destruction of the
flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus. But this
is both better known, than can be denied, more grenouse, than can be
borne with, and more hanouse, than were convenient any longer to be differred:
that of you* whom as a temple hallowed to god, all cleanes beseamed, there
goes a common tale, and a shamfull rumor of fornicacion, and of such
fornicacion, as the like reproach has not been found among painims, and such,
as to Christ are strangers: which is, that one among you uses his fathers
wife, as his own. What a great reproach and slaundre to christian religion
think ye this, that of you such a foul rummoure should be spread abroad?
And yet ye in the mean season, as though so great infamye nothing belonged
unto you, highlye please your self: and are through your worldelye wisdom
proud, whom it more beseamed with commen mournyng and heaviness, to declare
that ye earnestelye disprove this filthy deed, by excludyng the dooer of
such an outragiouse offense out of your coumpanye, and that for three
consideracions. First, lest, if ye use him familiarely, and as one of your
own coumpanye, which has not yet showed himself to be sorye for his
offense, ye might seame to fauer misdoers: and then a gain, lest such an
outrageous offense once receued among you grow more and more. Finally, to the
entente, that the doer of such a mischefe, if ye avoid his company, as one
by common judgment condemned, for shame repent him self, until such time,
as by perfect signs of repentance it be well known, that he his mete to be
received into good peoples company. And this should ye have done, strayghte
way, as soon as it was by commen report known, that the manne (whose name yet
for causes I rehearce not) was of such abomination. If I had been my self
present among you, I would so have done. Now I being absente, (albeit not
utterly absente, for not withstanding my body be away, yet am I by
authority of the spirit present) absent therefore (I say) but as though I
were present I give sentence, which ye must follow, that in a common assemblye
and resort of many, ye determine, (because no one man should take such
authority upon him) which assemblye must with no carnal desire come together,
but have an eye to nothing, but to the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ,
wherein I will (as I said) only spirituallye be present, where shall also
be the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ, in whose name ye shall come
together, which by his power shall make my sentence effectual: that he,
which without all regard of honesty has this outragiouslye dooen, be cast
out of your congregation, and given over to Satan, to be punished in his
flesh and made ashamed by man's judgment, that his spirit and soul be saved
before Jesus Christ his judge, when he shall judge, and shall give sentence,
not only upon these things, or this manne, but upon all the world. In the
mean season expediente is it for him also to preuente the exact and rigorous
judgment of god, assuryng himself, that better is it to suffer temporal
punist, ement, than to be condemned to the everlasting tourmentes of hell. It
beseameth us rather to devise a plaster for the reformacion of offenders,
than punishmente: so vsyng our selfs with them, that they may remain, to
be amended. Nor kill we the manne, but suppress the vice, and save the manne.
This is the punishmente, wherewith christian gentleness ought to be contented.
It is the Jews manner to stone a man to death, and a christian part to cure
and heal. But such matters had ye no regard of, nor were moved with the
commen ieopardie, nor with the commen reproach, but stylle auaunce your selfs,
as though ye had well done.

The text,
Your rejoicing is not good: know ye not that a little leven sowreth the whole
lump of dowe? Pourge therefore the old leven that ye may be new dowe, as ye
are swear bread. For Christ our passover is offered up for us. Therefore, let
us keep holy day, not with old leven, nether with the leven of maliciousness
and wickedness: but with the sweet bread of pureness and truth. Great
difference is there betwixt the rejoicing of worldely people, and the
rejoicing of christian men. To glory and rejoice after this sort is not
only a shame for you, but also ieopardouse. Put the case, ye will say, that
one has done amysse, what matter makes that, to the whole congregation? I no
we ye not, that a litell leaven sauereth a great batche of dowe, and makes it
sower? No we is that called leaven, which remains of the whole lump, which
is after such sort made sower. If any part of your old life continue and
remain in you, not agreyng with the simplicity of Christ, the same is leaven,
whereof ye must utterly be purged, that through a new kind of life ye may
be come new dowe, so that in the whole batche there be no part of the old
malice mingled. For as Christ has once made you free from sin, so must ye
diligentelye endeavor, that no part of your old infeccion in you take place
again, and defile the purity of your christian life. God loves such, as be
without this leaven. Was not this long since figured in the law? what time the
Hebrews were passed over the read sea, and quite delivered out of the bondage
of Egipte, they were for a continual remembrance and token of this benefit
at a certain time of the year commanded yearlye to sacrifice a lamb of one
year old, and for seven days to eat sweet bread without all manner of
leaven, even as they did, what time they prepared to depart out of Egypt.
In the mean season they carried forth with them pure flower, and left all the
leaven to the Egypcians. Nor any is there coumpted woorthye to eat of the
pascall lamb, onles he have for the space of seven days for borne leaven. yea
I say it was a great offense, that for that time any Hebrew should as much
as have any leaven found in his house.

The Jews had but shadows: but we have the very true passover, the most
unspotted lamb which is Jesus Christ, who for our redemption from the most
vilanous tyranny of syn and death was offered up upon y^ cross, neither was
he in vain offered up. And since we have once already escaped out of Egypt,
meet it is, that we hence forth keep holy this feast continually: not
rejoicing, and prowdely auauncing our selves upon such things, as we sometime
were delited with, what time we were under hard and shameful bondage, that is
to say, not in the leaven of Moses law nor in the leaven of old maliciousnes
and hypocrisy, but in sweet bread without all leaven* that is to say, in
vnhurtefull manners, plain, pure, and without all counterfaictyng.

The text.
I wrote unto you in a pistle, that ye should not compaignie with fornicatours.
And I meant not at al of the fornicatours of this world, either of the covetous,
or extorcioners either the idolaters: for then must ye needs have gone out of
the world. But now I did write unto you, that ye company not together, if any
that is called a brother, be a fornicatour, or covetous, or a worshipper of
images, either a tailer, either a dronkard, or an extorcioner: with him that is
such, se y^ ye eat not. For what have I to do, to judge them which are
without? Do ye not judge them that are within? Them that are with out, God
shall judge. Put away the evil from among you. But lest ye be deceived in
that point, whereas I bad you to avoid the company of all such, as are
through foul unchasteness evil spoken of, I mean not so, that ye should
avoid the company of all the unchaste livers of your countreye, and keape
coumpany with none such, as either for covetousness or extorcion are evil
spoken of, nor with any one, that is given to idolatrye, when if ye should so
do, since that in every place some such be, ye might surely he compelled to
forsake all Greece. And yet this also would I wyshe, if any that is called a
brother, be a fornicatoure. and.
if it might be, but since the request is such as can not be done, I require
not that, but this I require, that if among you any christian men be with
such vices infected, as far square from christian religion, as with
fornicacion, covetousness, oridolatrie, railyng, drounkennes, or extorcion, see
that ye so farfurth avoid that man's coumpany, that ye refuse to eat or
drink with him, until such time, as he amend. Greatly stands it you in
hand, that your congregation and company be pure without corrupcion. As for
strangers after what sort they live, little forces it, their sinful life
does neither infect you nor dishonor the name of Christ. Such then, if such
be among you, must ye not suffer to escape unpunished, if their offense be
openly known. This for me is sufficient. For what have I to do to judge of
the^ also, which as they are to Christ strangers, so belong they not to us?
Is not every man judge and controuler at home in his own house, neither
thinks he to perteine to him what is done in an other man's? If a man se any
thing done in his own house, that thinks he to belong to the whole household.
Sufficient is it therefore, that we christians judge of christian men. Such as
are from Christ's profession strangers, the^ leave we to the judgment of god.
And if it so be, that no man will suffer in his own house a mischievous and a
pestilente wretch, then thrust ye out of your company the autour of such a
myschiefe: so to do is both for you expedient, and for him, and it belongs to
the honor of Christ's name. For both he for shame of himself will amend, he
shall be safe from the ieopardie of infeccion and suspicion, and by so doing also
all men shall perceive that Christ approves no such matiers, which taught
both godly life, and put the same in practice. And this have I taught you to
expel and drive our from among you the pestilent leaven of sedicions strife,
and such horrible fornicacion.

The.vi. Chapter.
The text.
Dare one of you having business with another, go to the law under the wicked,
and not rather under the saints? Do ye not know, y^ the saints shall judge
the world? If the world shall be judged by you, are ye not good enough* to judge
small trifles? Know ye not how that we shall judge the angels? How much more may
we judge things that pertayn to y^ life? If ye have judgments of worldly
matters, take the^ which are despised in the congregation ^ make them judges.
This I say to your shame. Is there utterly no wise man among you? What not one
at all, that can judge between brother and brother, but one brother goes to
law with another, and that under the vndelieuers? BEsides these faults I
epsy also among you, some dregs of your former life, which sauer of the
leaven of covetousness. As to you it nothing belongs to judge of such, as are
not of the christian congregation, so an unseemly thing is it, that christian
men should be judged of such as are not christians. First of all this
marvel I at, how any christian man can find in his heart, in strife for
money matters to appeal to any judge, and that, which may worsse be borne
with, to appeal rather unto a heathen judge, than to a christian. Will he
(trow ye) give righteous judgment, whose whole life and profession is
unrighteous? Se ye not the frowardnes of this doing, that the world, whose
ungodliness shall in time to come by the faith and godly life of good people be
condemned, should now, as though it were more vpryghte and better, give
sentence upon good men's mattiers, and determyne their accions? If ye with so
great a mattier be put in trust, that by you the life of the whole world,
that is to say, of all wicked people, shall be condemned, think ye your
selfs unmeet to judge of small light tryfles? Ye are the light of the
world appointed to reprove the erroures of such, as are ungodly. And how
can this be done of you, if in you there be darkness, and such enormities,
as are well woorthye reprofe? But now remove ye your accions and bring them
before wicked judges, as though they were either wyser, than ye are, or as
though they were men of more equity, than are ye. Know ye not, that in time
to come, ye shall not only judge men given to the world, but also wicked
angels the tyrannes of this world? Think it no great matter, among your
selfs to finishe such low quarelles of things appertayning to the use of
our bodyly life. Your faith shall condemn their incredulity, your godly life,
their ungodliness, your vnhurtefulnes, shall condemn their uncleanness, and even
now condemns, if ye be good, and live christianlye. And forgette ye now
your honor by making such to be judges of your suites, of al whose
conde^nacion by you in time to come sentence shall be given? But yet if ye be so
debatefull and contencious, so desirous of transitorye things, whose contempt
ye take upon you, that ye for them are not only at dissencion, but are in
such sort at dissencion, that your matters must needs be heard of a
judge, rather bring them to the vyleste and loweste of your congregation, than
as ye do. I speak not this, because I would have it to be so, but I speak it
to make you ashamed, of your braulyng and suite among your selfs before
heathen judges. If ye be such as ye take upon you to be, the most vile among
you, is better than he, that among the heathen is coumpted chiefeste. Why do
ye so greatly despise your selfs? Is there among you none so wise as in light
matters to sit in judgment, and to finishe strifes betwyxte christian
men? among whom by reason of brotherlye love, and by reason that all things
are commen, it were convenient, that agremente should easily be made. But
now are ye so far from agremente, that one christian manne gooeth to law
with an other christian manne, and that, which is more reprochful, even before
them, which to Christ are strangers, as though such were by the rule of
man's laws hable to give just sentence, and ye not hable to do the same by the
rule of the Gospel. Mark how many ways ye offend herein.

The text.
Now, the^fore there is utterly a fault among you, because ye go to law one
with another. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather suffer ye not your
selves to have harm? Nay, ye yourselues do wrong, and rob: and that the
brethren. Do ye not know, how that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
kingdom of god? Be not disceaued. For neither fornicatours neither worshyppers
of images, neither aduouterers, neither weakelynges, neither abusers of
themselves with mankind, neither thieves, neither couetouse, neither
drounkardes, neither cursed speakers, neyther-pillers, shall inherit the
kingdom of God. First it is shame for you, that ye among your selfs apease
not such small matters, nor go through them without great business or
^angling as ye might, either by geuyng place one to another, or at the least
end your matters by arbytremente, but are come to such stoubernes, that
whiles nether gives place to the other, nor gives over any thing to another,
the matter in syghte of the people must be trauersed before the commen
officers. If such matters were brought and heard before christian judges, it
were not all without fault, but to iangle and strive at the law before heathen
judges even for trifles, how foul a sight think ye it? Our religion is
peace, and for as much as we are now through Christ planted and made one
body, we thereby are become more than brethren. And beside this unity, y^
despising of these vile worldly goods, for y^ which the gross people strive
for one with another, makes us very christian men. But now when men so
eagerlye strive each one with other, so that one christian manne is not ashamed
to call another into the law, and accuse him before a wicked judge, what
(think ye) judge they, that look hereupon? Will they not this wise think
with themself? where is among these christians shamefastenesse become? where
is brotherlye charity? Where is the peace, that they somuche speak of? where
is the community of possession? where is their despisyng of riches? where is
the myldenesse of the Gospel, where by they are commanded even gladly to
forgo their coat also, if any have taken away their cloak? Behold how
shamefully for a small matter they strive, not only with us, but also among
themselves. How comes it about, ye Corinthians, y^ ye yet so much set by
money, y^ for the same ye have so greatly defamed christian name and religion?
But here some one will answer and say: onles I prosecute y^ matter, and labor
for my right, I am sure to take wrong, unless I recover mine own title, I
shall be in the losyng side. But I would advise you take heed, lest whiles ye
fear a small loss of money, ye appayre both your Innocence and good name,
and cause also the gospel to be hindered. Better were it never to win your
goods, than with the recouerye of them to give un beleuers any occasion to
mysreporte and speak evil of Christ. Better were it not to pass upon a small
wrong, than whiles thou labourest for thy right, openly to declare, that thou
haste a mind desirouse to revenge. But now truly so far are ye from being
like to mylde christian men, without revenging to suffer loss or iniurye, that
even wilfully ye do wrong to other, maliciouslye deceive and oppress other,
not only vnbeleiuers, but also such as are by religion your brothers. Sauer
not such doings of the leaven of your old life? Square not such points far
both from your learning and your profession? Whosoever professes Christ,
professes Innocence, and to such a life is promised the kingdom of heaven.
For neither is it sufficient to be dipped in water, nor yet to be graffed
into Christ, unless all your life be agreeable to Christ's doctrine. And for
none other purpose are ye taken out of this world, and planted into the body of
Christ, but to the end ye should hencefurthe in godly life be like unto
Christ your head. Know ye not this, that vnrighteousse livers, be they
baptized never so much, shall be excluded from the inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven? And lest any manne deceive himself, I tell you again
and again, and give you warnyng, that neither fornicatours, nor idolators, nor
aduouterers, nor weakelinges, which growyng out of man's kind live after an
horrible kind of bodily lust, nor such as in stead of women abuse men, nor
thieves, nor covetous men, nor dronkardes, neither cursed speakers, nor violente
pillars of other men's goods, shall be partakers of the kingdom of God.
Nothing shall your new name or title avail you, if your life be with your
old vices defiled: yea to such is Christ rather an occasion of more grievous
and painful damnacion.

The text
And such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye
are justified by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. I
may do all things, but all things are not profitable. I may do al things
but I will be brought under no man's power. Meats are ordained for the
bellye, and the belly for meats: but God shall destroy both it and them. Let
not the body be applied unto fornicacion, but unto the Lord: and the Lord
unto the body. God has raised up the Lord and shall raise us up by his
power. Such as I have now rehearsed, were some of you before that ye were
through Christ borne again. I lay not to your charge that, which ye were
before, so that ye fall no more thereto. Washed are ye, and delivered from
your old sins, and that by Gods free gift, beeware that ye be no more
defiled with the^. By this washyng has God not only by his blood restored you
to innocente and hurtlesse life, but given you also holiness and righteousness,
and that not by the power of the law, nor for your deserts, but by Jesus
Christ, in whose name ye were baptized and by the spirit of our god, by
whose secret inspiracio^ the sacraments of Christ's church been effectual.
So much more then should every of you endeavor, lest ye through your I may
do^ all thing: But al things are not profitable.
own folly lose this benefit frelye given unto you: in so doing, neither
thankful to the geuer, nor yet frendelye nor loving to your self. In such
things, as appertain to natural necessities, I may do all things. For no
man forbyddeth me to use like authority, as other apostles use. But it is not
paraduenture for you always profitable, for me to use my right. Such as are
fed and live with your meat, such as pyll and polle you, being even as
they were bondslaues bought with your money, dare not freely warn you of
your faults, lest ye upon dyspleasure conceived there with, bestow your
liberality otherwise. I might also for my labors take reward, namely since I
took more pains than any other. I wanted not authority this to do, but I
would not do that thing whereby I might be brought under any man's power
and subieccion, and seame bound to any of you: to thyntente it might more
clearly appear, both that if I teach any thing, that I therein seek your
weal and profit, and not mine own, and that also if I did with words
any thing chastise you, that ye should pacientely hear me. For it is a
thing commenlye seen, that such a man's free speech offends not, which
is nothing bound to him, whom he reproves. Else litell mattier makes it,
whose meat a man eat, since men must needs have meat. And since meats
are ordained for the bealye, and likewise bealyes for meats, let every manne
for this time satisfye the present necessitye and need. For within a short
time will God destroy both bealye and meat, which is, that neither our
bealyes shall with houngre trouble us, nor of meats shall there be any use.
But as we which have professed Christ, must obey and serve natural lackes,
even as the heathen and unchristened do: so should there yet between us in
vice be none agremente. Of meats I forbydde none, let every manne ear
what he will, but Let not the body be applied unto fornicacion.
filthye bodily lust I forbydde. Nor is it like, that as the bealye is
appointed for meat, so the body is prepared for carnal pleasure, but rather
our body is consecrate unto the Lord Jesus: and he again coupled unto us.
For so has it pleased him, that by us as members, and him as head, his
spiritual and mystical body should be made and kyntte together. This
knotte holds not for a litell season. Death in deed takes away all
necessity of meats, but it breaks not the knotte, wherewyth we are joined
to Christ. For as Godde the father raised the Lord Jesus our head, from
death: so will he likewise raise up again us his members with him, and with
him reward us with life everlasting. For hable is he, and of power this to
do, albeit some of you think the same vnlykelye. As therefore our soul
shall not of that immortal life be partaker, unless the same for this
present time through godly and continual meditacions have had the same
life in delygente remembrance, so the body raised again shall of that glory
have no part, unless the same for this present time have been free from the
contagion of sin. What a foul sight is it, if the members seame unlike the
head which is in every point pure and clean.

The text.
Either konwe ye not, that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I now
take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God
forbid. Do ye not know, that he which coupleth himself with an harlot is
become one body? For two (says he) shall be one flesh. But he that is joined
unto the Lord is one spirit. Remember ye not, how that (as I before told you)
your bodies are the members of Christ: What then? Sal I now become so mad,
notwithstanding I know this much, with the great reproach of the head to take
away the membre of Christ and make thereof the membre of an harlote? God
forbid. And yet what else does he, which is conuersaunte with an harlote?
Know ye not this plain point, that he which coupleth himself with an
harlote, becomes with the same one body? For so read we in Genesis of the
manne and wife: of both shall one flesh, and one body be made. So that then
as in lawefull matrimonye the honest and godly consent of two minds makethe
one, and the lawefull act of matrimonye betwixt two makes one: so in
unlawful coumpainying together, every manne beecommeth that wherwyth he is
filthylye coupled. As great enormitie therefore as it is, that the womanne
deceauyng her housebande should with an aduouterer be conuersaunte: as foul
an act is it, that the body, which was once consecrate to Christ, should
be coupled with a vile harlote: for he which is coupled unto the Lord Jesus,
by reason of a commen consent betwyxte the head and the body, is with him
made one spirit, which forasmuch as it is most pure and clean, is to
filthy and fleashelye lust most contrary, as which from manne takes away
the use of reason, alteryng him, as it were into a brutishe and beastelye
condition.

The text
Fle fornicacion. Every sin that a man does, is without the body. But he
that is a fornicatour, sins against his own body. Either know ye not,
how that your bodies are the temple of the holy ghost, which dwells in
you, whom ye have of God, and how that ye are not your own? For ye are
derely bought. Therefore glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits,
which are Gods. Dyligentelye therefore flee fornicacion. All other sins by
sinful persons wrought and done, albeeit they have their beginning of the
body, seame yet joined with the harm and dyspleasure of an other man's body,
nor pollute, as it seamethe, the whole manne. But such as commits
fornicacion, doothe wrong and vilanie to his own body, whom he in that foul
act abuses and defiles. The adulterer defiles not the hores body, except he
also defile his own, without which the offense is not committed. The
mannequeller, that with his sword kylleth another, without hurt of his own
body hurts another man's, and seameth but in only one part polluted. But
fornicacion defiles the whole body, as eue^ the common sort well
understands. For after such act the same is woone to use bathes, therewith to
wash away such filthiness as is thereby conceived. An hainouse offense is it to
do wrong or hurt to another man's body, but a ma^to be to his own body
vilainouse and reprocheful, seems apointe of extreme madness. And albeit
fornicacion do most specially defile the body, yet think not therefore y^ the
offense is small. For eue^ the body should also have his honor, forasmuch as it
is the ma^sio^ of the soul, which is immortal, which being cleansed with the
holy water of baptism is in such sort consecrate to God, that it beecommeth
the temple of the holy ghost, which ye in baptism received, whereby ye are
so joined unto Christ, that ye from him shall never be soondred. And if from
fornicacion your own reproach and hurt nothing move you, yet let this move
you, that such acts can not be do one without the great injury of
Christ. Once were all ye his, into whose body ye were coupled and joined. He
has from death boughte you, and made you his own, that ye should be his
servants and not your own men. The right title of any body, that is bought,
is in the buyers hand, the same, whosoever either sells or handeleth otherwise,
than the owners will is, does wrong to him to whom the same body beelongeth.
For ye are dearly boughte.
Nor is it to be supposed, that Christ for a litell boughte us, as he that
for our redemption spente his most precious blood. Wherefore since ye are to
God wholye consecrated, defile not in reproach of him your bodies, but bear
about with you, as well in chaste bodies, as in vnhurtefull minds, the holy
ghost, and among men auaunce his glory. Both are his, keape both chaste,
lest for your filthiness sake among eiuil people, Christ whose name ye
profess, be eyuill spoken of. For as the nobilitee of masters belongs even
to the servants, so the dishonestie of servants is to their masters
reproachful. Wherefore albeeit god be neither with praise made more glorious,
nor with reproach defamed in deed, yet is he after a sort through his naughtye
servants dishonored, and with godly manners and holy life glorified, whiles
among the commen sort he is by their life esteamed.

The.vii. Chapter.
The text.
As concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me: it is good for a man, not
to touch a woman. Nevertheless to avoid whordome, let every man have his
wife: and let every woman have her husband. Let the husband give unto the wise
due benevolence. Likewise also the wife unto the husband. The wife has not
power of her own body: but the husband. And likewise the husband has not
power of his own body: but the wife. Withdraw not your selves one from
another, except it be with consent for a time, for to give your selves to
fasting and prayer. And afterward come to gether again, left Satan tempte you
for your incontinencye. This I say of favor, and not of commandment. For
I would that all men were as I my self am: but every man has his proper
gift of God, one after this manner, another after that. I say unto them that
be unmarried and wyddowes: it is good for them, if they abide even as I do. But
and if they cannot absteyne, let them marye. For i^ is better to mary, then to
burn. Unto the married command, not I, but the Lord: Let not the wife be
separated from the husband. If she separate her self, let her remayn
unmarried, or be reconciled unto the husband again. And let not the husband put
away his wife from him. NOr have I this much said, because I think, that
every act of generation defiles the body, as some labor to bring you in
mind, to the intent, that they like hypocrites may of you be thought to
be holy. There is in matrimonye a certain chaste and lawefull use, but the
unlawful act must generallye of all men be avoided. Lawefull matrimony
must every manne so farfurth use or not use, as is for the preferment of the
gospel expediente.

Wherefore touching the questions, wherein by letters ye ask mine aduyce,
these shall be briefly to answer you. First what such must do, as are
already married, and then, what they ought to do, that are single and widows,
what they also must do, which are either with paynefull, or unequal
matrimony troubled: and finally, what should be done in virgins to be married,
or not married. First of all therefore, for many causes, as the time no we
requires, it were well done of men wholly for this cause to absteyne from their
wives, that they may with more freedom apply Christ's gospel, and godly
life. For albeit matrimony be a holy thing, yet it wrappeth a man, will he or
not, in worldly care, wherein how much more labor is bestowed, somuche the
less is god served. Beside this the use of matrimonye has in it a gross
thing, which for the time, swaloweth up and deuoureth the whole man, which
being after restored to himself, is somewhat less a man, than he was before.
I well see what were specially to be wished, and yet dare I not so much exact
of you, as I would desire, lest whiles ye vnluckely labor toward the best,
by occasion fall into worse. I know, how unruly and violente fleashelye
desire is, and as Let every man have his own wife.
sure am I, how ye specially among other are prone and much given unto it. A
surer way therefore think I it, that every man have his own wife, and every
wife her housebande, that by mutual service each one may remeadye others
intemperancie. For albeeit elswise in other points the housebandes authority
be more, yet herein have both equal power, for neither is the houseba^d so
farfurth lord and master of his own body, that touching the use of
matrimony, he can defraude his wife thereof, and give it to another: nor the
right of the wives body again, concerning the use of matrimony, is in such
sort her own, that she may deny her husband the use thereof, and give it to
another, but her body is the husbands right. The debte of each toward the
other is like, and when time requires, must of both parties be delivered and
paid, as they have made promise. Let the housebande then give that, which he
by the law of marriage is bounden to give to his wife. The wife likewise give to
her housebande, that she is by the law of wedlock bound to give him. In this
each one of them is in like sort bound to the other, in other points
paraduenture the whole governance and autoritye is in the housebandes hands.
To deny this right, if either of both ask it, is a defraudyng. For not
only such defraude, which pay not the money, that they are bound to pay,
but such also, as refuse to do, that they are bound to do. Let neither of
both therefore for love of chastitye defraude other, except it be with
consent of both to Wythdrawe not your selfs one from another, except it be
with consent for a time.
abstain for a season, that ye may with more clean minds give your selfs
to fasting, holy prayers, and to the remembrance of heavenly things, whose
perfeite freashnes such carnal conversation is greatly woonte to make dulle.
Let either both therefore, or neither absteyne, and that by comen consent,
not upon every flight occasion, but for love of heavenly things, nor to long
neither but for a certain time, and so after that return again to your old
custom, not because I think it not best, to live in continual prayer, but
because I know, that there is ieopardy, lest Satan, which still lies in
watch to destroy you, perceauyng your toward disposicion to incontinencie, by
occasion thereof provoke you to worse. Rather had I have in you that, which is
of less perfeccion, so that it be ieoperdlesse, than that which is much
more commendable, being yet such as is joined with no small peril. But yet
speak I not this, because I would either compel any man to marie, or forbid
any man to live continually chaste, if he be able so to do, and if there be a
mutual co^sente in matrimony: but I provide, upon knowledge that I have of
your weakness, a remeadye against your perilles. If this were not, if it
might be, I would wyshe that all men were as my self, which is, that they
were free from the bond of matrimonye, or else used their wives, as their
sisters, living with them in all pureness and chastity. But I dare not of you
exact that thing, which Christ never required of his disciples and hearers.

Blessed are they, says he, that for the love of the kingdom of god have made
themselves chaste: but yet refuses he not such, as chastlye and soberly live
under the law of matrimony. Continual chastity taken upon any man for the
auauncement of Christ's affairs, is a high thing. And so is lawful
matrimony an honest state, whose chief ordeyner and halower was Every man
has his proper gift of god.
God himself. But between bodies and souls a meruaylous great difference is
there, nor are gods gifts in every manne like. It is peradventure a thing
above man's power, wholye to abstain from the act of matrimony. Blessed are
they, to whom god has given such strength: but god in his people has loved
this variety, that some in gifts should excelle other, all which variety
should wonderfullye make toward the sweet armonie and comlynes of the whole.
Let no man therefore reprove another man's state, nor be sorye for his
own, but let every manne according to his power godly use that gift, which
god has given him. There is a chaste wedlock, and there is an unchaste
virginity. And this have ye my counsel, touching marying and keeping your
wives.

Now understand my mind likewise, as touching your question of second
marriages. For among you (as I hear) some are there, which, albeit deny not
but that ye are in a fredome, and may marrye, yet when one by the death of
the other is made free, they would not have you marrye again. Of these
doubts this think I. If any manne by reason of the death of his wife become
single, or if any womanne by reason of her husbands death be wydowe, very
well done were it, if they be able, thencefurth to live chaste, if neither he
seek for a wife, nor she for another husband, but that both dedicate their
freedom unto gods service. That have I for mine own part chosen which I
thought best, because nothing should let me from preaching gods word,
which I so heartily favor, that for love thereof I little set by such
pleasures, as are in marriage.

Now and if I knew, that all men were of the same mind, I would not let
to call and exhort every manne to do, as I do. But since the disposicions of
men's minds and bodies are so unlike, unmeet is it to give all men one
kind of counsel, but in this rather let every manne If they cannot
abstain, let the^ marry: for it is better to marry than to burn.
weyghe his own strength, and so follow that kind of life, whereunto by
nature he thinks himself most meet. Let such one, as upon a proof had
of Matrimony feels himself unable to resist the violente and burning
assaults of the flesh, rather marrye again, that by lawful matrimony he
may remedy his unchasteness, than by living syngle, through the vehemente
desire of the flesh, be in ieopardie of a more grieuouse offense.

So that in this neither compel I men to marie, nor yet forbid marriage, but
leave every man in fredome to weyghe with himself, what is expediente. For
nothing have I herein to prescribe unto you, as taught unto me of the Lord.
But this require I of you, as commanded by Jesus Christ. Such as are
unmarried, stand free, (as I say) either to marie or not marye, as they judge
best, so that in their doings they have an iye to nothing, but to Christ's
glory. But when a man is once married, I would not have that done, which is
among Jews and gentiles commonly seen, that for Let not the wife be
separated from the husband.
every small matier a divorce be made. For god has forbidden men, for
small offenses to refuse their wives, notwithstanding Moses once in this point
favorably bare with the Jews, not because he thought it good so to do, but
fearyng, lest the Jews being a stubberne kind of people and ready to do
mischief, upon denial of divorces might happelye do such things as are
much wurse, than any divorce. One cause the Lord himself excepted, if the
wife with another commyt aduoutrie: which thing he does either because she is
then fallen from the right of wedlock, which promisyng her body to one
manne only has nevertheless departed with it unto another, or else because it
seems an unreasonable thing, to constrayne any manne, to have with her one
house, one bed, one fire, and one table common* which falselye breakyng her
promise made in marriage, than which nothing is more holy, has with a foul
aduouterer abused her body. So strong and steadfast would Christ have this
felowshyppe to be. Unless therefore any such thing chance, let neither the
wife depart from her husband, nor the husband thruste his wife from him. But
if through other displeasures any debate arise, by mean whereof the wife
chances to depart from her husband, lest she through her own folly
stand without hope of reconcilyng, let her abide unmarried: if she continewe
untouched and undefiled, paraduenture her husband, being in a better mood
will be content to receive her again: but a corrupt womanne who will
receive? Now if the womanne cannot so long refrain her self, let her
diligently labor to win her husbands favor again. If she of her
husband cannot obtain somuche, let her assure her of this, that with whom
soever she couple herself, the same knotte may happily be named marriage, but
it is in very deed aduoutcie.

The text.
To the remnaunt speak I, not the Lord: If any brother have a wife that
believes not, y^ she be content to dwell with him, let him not put her away.
And the woman which has to her husband an infidel, and consent to dwell with
her, let her not put him away. For the unbelieving husband is sainctifyed by the
wife, and the unbelieving wife is sancfied by the husband. Or else were your
children unclean: but now are they holy. But and if the unbelieving depart,
let him depart. A brother or a sister is not in subieccion to such. But God
has called us in peace. For how know thou (o woman) whether thou shall save
thy husband or no? Other how know thou (o man) whether thou shall save thy
wife or no* but even as God has distributed to every man. Now touching your
question of unequal marriage, of the Lords authority, nothing have I to
answer you, but yet have I that thing, which in mine opinion I would counsel
you to follow, as a way more profitable.

Such an odiouse act is divorce, that I would not have matrimony broken, no
not for diversity in religion. But if it chance, that a christian woman be
married with a husband, which is not yet christened, and the husband, albeit
he be a stranger in the mysteries of Christ, is not yet to her so hateful,
as for her religions sake to refuse her, if the wife will follow my counsel,
she shall not forsake him. Likewise again, if it chance, that the husband
being a christian man have to his wife such one, as is to Christ a
stranger, (since it is unmeet, that any man be compelled to take religion upon
him) and she upon displeasure of her husbands contrary religion seek not to
be divorced, by my council the husband shall not put her away. For cause is
there none, why the christian man or christian woman should fear, lest by
familiar conuersacio^ of the one had with the other that is unchristened,
either of both might be defiled. For not withstanding the ones religion be
unclean, yet is the marriage whereby they, being elswise inequall, are coupled
together, a good and a lawful marriage. The wyckednes of the wurse infecteth
not the godliness of the better, but rather that that is better and more
effectual, is of greater weight in For the vnbeleu^ng husband i^ sanctified by
the wife etc.
this behalf. The husband therefore, albeit he be heathen, is yet, touching the
act of matrimony, by company of the christian woman made holy. Likewise the
wife, which has not yet professed Christ, is by conversation had with her
christian husband, touching the lawful use of matrimony, made good and holy.
If this were not so, their children, as borne incestuously and by unlawful
means, should be coumpted profane and unclean. But now that they be pure and
clean, as children borne in lawful wedlock, it is well known to be true.
For when the wife, which is baptized, has with her unchristened husband to
do, she in so doing obeys her husband, and not the heathen, nor suffers
she the wicked, but bears with him, whom she trusts will amend.

And that hope may a man conceive of him, which although as yet profess
not Christ, yet in his wife abhors he not the honoring of God. Nor is he
thoroughly a heathen, but rather partly a christian ma^ne, which quietly lives
with his wife, that professes Christ's name, and can patiently be contented
to see the sign of the cross over their common bed. No parties with more a
do continewe together, than such, as through diversity in religion are
divided. Upon this hope therefore ought the woman, which first embraced
Christ, abide with her husband. But if the divorce grow of his side, which
yet believes not, and the same manne for hate of Christ's name refuse his wife,
since But and if the unbelieving depart, let him depart.
there is of his change no hope, no cause has the wife, why to live with him
any longer. Lost has he the right title of matrimony, which despises God
the author thereof. Nor does the promise made in marriage so farfothe bind her
that is christened, that she shall for ever be compelled to suffer her wicked
husband, brawlyng at and cursyng the name of Christ. Let her therefore use the
liberty of divorce given unto her by God, and thencefurth serve Christ
quietly. Nor are we therefore called by God to the life of the gospel to live
in sedicion and chyding, but to live in peace and concord.

Therefore, if such between whom there is an unequal marriage, agree not, and
the unfaithful require to be divorced, let not the christian wife abide with
her husband against his will: but if they agree, in hope that the husband
will amend, let the wife continewe, and likewise let the husband continewe
with his wife, in hope that she will be changed. For how know thou, that
art a wife, whether thou shall by familiar communicacion, by sobre and gentle
behavior, by wy^ely love, cause thy husband to amend, that both of you be
saved. Or how can thou know, that art a husband, whether thou shall by like
ways save thy wife and win her to Christ? And if either of both so do, is
it not a great gain? But if that come not to pass, yet will God approve thy
good will, which intendest such a thing. In the mean season whiles it is
uncertain, whether it will so be or not, let the matrimony upon good hope
continewe and hold on, and let not the diversity in religion change the
state of your life. For neither does baptism deliver the wife from the right
of her husband, if he use it lawfully, nor yet the servant out of the
dominion of his master, if he use him, as right and reason would.

The text.
As the Lord has called every man, so let him walk: and so ordeyne I in all
congregacions. If any man be called being circumcised, let him not add
uncircumcision. If any be called uncircumcised, let him not be circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing, and vncircumcsyon is nothing: but the keeping of the
commandments of God. Let every man abide in the same calling, wherein he was
called. Art thou called a servant? care not for it. Nevertheless if thou
may be fre, use it rather. For he that is called in the Lord, being a
servant, is the Lords freman. Likewise, he that is called being fre, is
Christ's servant. Ye are dearly bought, be not ye the servants of men.
Brethren let every manne wherein he is called, therein abide with God. As the
Lord has given every man, in the same let him serve Christ. In what state of
living at the time of preaching the gospel a man is found, let him in
the same continewe. Our new religion abolysheth our old life, but it
destroys not our old state of life: because christian religion agrees and
stands with every condition of life, nor was given by God to trouble the
civil policy of the world, but to the entente that in every degree and state
of life, every manne might live therein godly and devoutly. This is my council,
which I not only teach you, but also all other congregacions. Nor shall it
be for you paynfull to follow that, which every manne follows. Wherefore if
the inspiracion of Gods holy spirit when he calls, find the married, break
not therefore thy matrimony: if it find the circumcised, without cause art
thou, why thou should loath thy condition, and seek to be uncircumcised. For
nothing either furdereth or hyndereth uncircumcision this new religion. Again
if the same find the uncircumcised, no cause haste thou to wyshe to be
circumcised. For as touching this new religion little force makes it, whether
thou be circumcised or uncircumcised. But to both sorts this egally belongs,
that each live henceforth after the commandments of God, whose rule they
have professed, and not as carnal desires move them. Sufficient is it to
change thy old evil manners, as for to change the condition of thy life
nothing neadeth, because it is such a thing, as cannot be done without
disquietnes and trouble. And as I have said, that ye should do, being called
to god in the state of matrimony or in the state of circumcision, even like
wise must ye judge of the state of bondage. Such as at the preaching and
receuyng of the gospel are bond, let them be content with their fortune, nor
think themselves delyueryd from their masters dominion, because they are
delivered from the tyranny of syn. Again the fre man which is called to
christian religion, has no cause to change his state, and become bond. But
rather let every man endeavor, if occasion serve, to embrace lyberty, and
change his bondage. If the master for displeasure borne to Christ's name
reiecte his servant, let the same seek no new master, nor yet be at
displeasure with him self, because he is maisterles, since he has Christ to
his master, whose free servant he is be come of a bond man. On the other
side, he that is borne fre, and borne again by baptism let him for his state
neither be angry nor pleassed with him self, since that through baptism he
is become bond servant to Christ: so that after sondrye sorts, the bondsman
is made fre, and the fremanne made bond, to thentent that each of them should
with more sobriety bear their fortune. Fredome and bondage are such things,
whereof Christ has in manner no regard. Embrace the better, if thou with
bondage be oppressed, think that albeit thy master has upon thy body a
certain power and authority, yet thy soul being delivered from sin, is to
Christ ward fre. If thy fredom any thing make the proud, remember that thou
were bought by Christ, and bought for no small price. Thou haste a master to
be had in all fear and honor, beware thou fantasy not, that thou art fre,
and may live at thy pleasure. And he that is to any man bond, is this
farfurthe by Christ made fre, that if his master command him to do any
ungodly service, he is rather bound to give ear to Christ his new Lord and
master, than to his old, which by reason of abuse has lost his title. And
yet reason it were, that such, as Ye are derely boughte, be not ye the
servants of men.
Christ with the price of his blood has made fre, should not with any
greuouse master be oppressed. I fauer liberty, if it may be had. For
Christ's service is perfect liberty. That a christian manne should serve an
heathen, seems an unmeet thing. And reason were it, that such as are to a
christian master, servants, should of them be favored as brethren and
children, because both have one common master, by whom both were with one
price redeamed. But yet lest under the color of christian religion the state
of the common weal be disquieted, let every manne suffer his condicyon, and
therein abide, and so abide in it, that in the mean season he remember, that
gods commandments must be set before the commandments of men. Obey
your masters, but yet so, that god therewith be pleased, which paid more for
you, than they. Such points, as I have taught you of freedom and bondage,
have also place in the state of matrimony, and single life. For he that is
under the law of matrimony, is after a sort bound. But he that is single, is
in a more fre state of life. Therefore men must always follow that, which is
more commodiouse, if it may be. If it may be, (I say) for we may not so
desire liberty, that for love thereof we fall into a greater ieopardie.

As concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord: yet give I
counsel, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord, to be faithful. I
suppose therefore that it is good for the present necessyte. For it is good for
a man so to be. Art thou bound unto a wy^e: seek not to be loosed, Art thou
loosed from a wife? seek not a wife. But and y^ thou marye a wife, thou have
not sinned. Likewise, if a virgin mary, she has not sinned. Nevertheless such
shall have trouble in their flesh: but I favor you. This say I brethren, the
time is short. It remains, that they which have wives, be as though they had
none: and they that weep, be as though they wept not, and they that rejoice,
be as though they rejoiced not: and they that bye, be as though they possessed
not: and they that use this world, be as though they used it not. For the
fashyon of this world, goes away. I would have you without care. He that is
unmarried, cares for the things that belong to the Lord, how he may please
the Lord. But he that has married a wife cares for the things that are of
the world how ^e may please his wife. There is difference between a virgin
and a wife. The single woman cares for the things that are of the Lord, that
she may be holy both in body and also in spirit. Again: she that is married,
cares for the things that pertain to the world, how she may please her
husband. This speak I for your profyt, not to tangle you in a share: but
that ye may follow it which is honest, and comely, and that ye may cleave unto
the Lord without separacyon. If any man think that it is uncomely for his
virgin, if she passethe time of marriage, and if so need require, let him do
what he lysteth, he synneth not: let them be coupled in marriage. Nevertheless,
he that purposes surely in his heart, having no need, but has power over his
own will: and has so decreed in his heart, that he will keep his virgyn, does
well. So then, he that joins his virgin in marriage does well. But he that
joins not his virgyn in marriage, does better. The wife is bound to the
marriage, as long as her husband lives. If her husband dye, she is at
liberty to marye with whom she will, only in the Lord. But she is happyer,
if she so abide, after my judgment. And I think verily, that I have the
spirit of God. Therefore as touching the question that ye ask, whether
christian men ought to marie their daughters being virgins, or keep them at
home in perpetual virginity, as hallowed unto Christ, that the same may in
more fredome do him service: albeit herin I have no commandment of god
certainly to answer you with, yet have I counselle to give you, such as I
think best. Nor think I, that ye should disdain my counsel, since I have an
apostles authority, to whom also god of his goodness has given, albeit
unworthy, even as his will and pleasure is, to give wholesome and faithful
counsel, not regarding what is for my self profitable, but what is nedeful and
expedient for you. For liberties sake then I judge it a thing to be wyshed,
that a virgyn bind her self to none, but to Christ: not because I think not
matrimony an honest and a holy kind of life, but because partly through
alyance, and partly through care of bringyng up children, it is a state full
of trouble and carefulnes. This necessity and as it were, bondage, he
escapes, that abstayneth from marriage. Better is it therefore to embrace this
liberty, if it be either in thy power, or ieopardles. For such as are already
under the bond of matrimonye, it is not in their power: and for such as can
not live chaste, it is not without daungier. And therefore, if thou be already
bound to a wife, seek not under the pretense of Christ to be divorced. If
thou be free, seek not the yoke of matrimonye. If thou have married upon
mistruste of thy strength, repent the not thereof, for thou haste not by so
doing sinned.

Thou haste in deed taken upon the a careful enterprise, but yet such, as is
lawful. Nor shall thou therefore to Christ ward be the wurse, because thou
haste a wife, but thou shall be in more trouble, and in more Likewise if a
virgin marrye she has no^ sinned.
worldly cares. Likewise if a virgin have rather to mary, and govern a
household, there is none offense, if she do so. Damage is there none to her,
but that by reason of household business she is in less fredome to study the
scripture, to pray and exercise other godly matters. Whiles therefore I give you
to both ways free liberty, I fauer you two manner of ways, both prouidyng for
his liberty, which can live without wedlock, and remedy also for his
ieopardie, that cannot live without. I commend single life, as a state more
commodiouse, and approve matrimony also, as having less ieopardie. What
therefore herein every manne does, let each for himself take heed. Neither
constrayne I, nor forbydde any manne, namely in such points, as God neither
required, nor yet forbade. This require I brethren generally of you all, since
the time is short, forasmuch as the last day draws nygh, that ye to the
vttermoste of your power make haste to obtain such things, as prepare you
against that day, castyng away such impedimentes, as might let our hasty
journey thytherwarde. Uncertain is it when that day shallbe, but certain it
is, that it is not far of. Of this day whosoever has a continual remembrance,
that it draws nere, shall with frail and transitory things be little
delyghted, whether there chance unto him either pain or pleasure. For that
last day shall from us take away both. Ye and death also shall dispatche
both, if it come before that day.

To what end is it than to be with such things much troubled, or rejoice,
as shall within a short space peryshe, when heavenly matters are in hand? Let
such have wives, as will, but let them be had without regard, as though they
had none, so shall the bondage of matrimony less trouble, and the pleasures of
wedlock less delyght.

Let such, as are with adversities oppressed, weep, as though they wept not.
And such as have this worldely welthe, rejoice, as though they rejoiced not.
Let them, that bye, so bye as though they possessed not the thing bought,
being such as shall shortly be taken away, and whether thou wylt or not, go
to an other. And such as are either by chance, or by necessity entangled with
worldely business, let them use the same, as though they used them not. If
heavenly matters cannot only be regarded, yet let them be regarded chiefly
and first of al, and then next these worldly affairs. Nothing has this world,
but even shadows of good things and badde, wherein nothing is there, that is
either sound or stable, whereunto to be to much given, is not the purpose of
such as labor to life immortal. These things speak I therefore, I would
have you without, care.
because I would have you troubled, as little as might be, with worldly matters,
and to follow such a kind of life, wherein ye are like to be in least worldly
business. And in this behalf better is the state of the single, than is his,
that is married. For he that is single, is not troubled, with diverse cares,
nether how to please his father in law, nor how to please his mother in law,
and other aliaunce, nor how to content his wife and children, how to provide
necessaries for his household daily increasing more and more, nor yet how to
be more worth, than his wives dowrye was: but holy gives himself to Christ,
thinkyng that he has al his desire, if he only please him. On the othersyde,
albeit that he, which is married, partly serve God, yet some service owes he
to his wife, and to such things as apertayne to matrimony. And likewise is
it in the woman, forasmuch as she is not wholly at her own liberty, she
cannot wholly serve Christ, but by reason that she is diversely troubled,
partly serves Christ, and partly her housbande. But the virgin or single
woman has no care else, but to please Christ her spouse, whom she can none
otherwise please, but by chaste living without corrupcion, not in body only,
but also in mind. But the married woman must needs betwixt Christ and her
husband deuyde herself, in such sort endeuouringe to please Christ, that
she yet displease not her husband, to whom she owes obedience. Now this is
the end of all that I have said, wherein I somuche praise single life, (lest
any man mistake it) not to take from you This speak I for your profit, not to
tangle you in a snare.
the liberty to marie, or not marye, or by necessity to compelle you to any
kind of life which ye cannot fantasy, but with friendly counsel to tender
your weal, that when ye know that ye may freely do either of both, ye incline
thytherwarde and chose that rather, which has not only honesty in it, but
also therewith liberty annexed, whereby it shall be lawful for the single
person in such sort wholly with all obedience and love to give him self to
the Lord Jesus Christ, that no wordly trouble or care shall be able at any time
to withdraw him from the same. But this let every man uprightly weigh with
himself, whether that way, which he sees honorable and free, he think the
same ieopardles, and such as he is disposed unto. For he that fears lest he
fall into any reproach or infamy, if he over long keep his daughter a virgin
at home being already marriage able, and minded to the same, and the matter self
requires no less, good leave give I him to do, as he shall think expedient
to be done. For albeit, as I said, matrimony have bondage and care adjoined,
yet is it without sin, both honest and lawful, and also for some necessary.
Let therefore the father in sight of the world and in season provide for his
daughter a husband, lest she by stelth do that shamfully, which done in
matrimony stands with honesty. But if the father seeing himself to stand
in full freedom to mary his daughter or not mary, and not to be compelled to
either of both parts of necessity, purposed and surely in his heart decreed
to keep her a virgin still, in as much as she is not desyrouse to be married, he
does well. For as it is not ieopardles to stay and let one that is of marriage
desirous, so is it not godly to discourage a maidens mind from her love and
godly desire of chastity. He therefore which for fear of peril He that
joins his virgin in marriage does well.
marieth his daughter being desyrouse of marriage, does well. But he that
moves not a maidens mind to marriage, which is desyrouse to live continually
chaste, but is glad to please the godly desire of the maiden, does better. For
beside the honesty of the profession, this also shall the virgin gain, that
she shall have leisure wholly and without intermission to serve her spouse
Christ. For other intent and purpose is there none, why any should seek for
the liberty of single life. In the sight of God a more commendable thing is
it, in the state of matrimony to bestow in Gods service as much time as is
left after necessary business done, than to abuse the pretense of
virginity, to ryote, idleness, or licencious living. So far therefore am I
from restrayning virgins from their first marriage, that whereas the world
little estemeth the second marriage, I let not even wydowes to marry again. What
is for every man profitable, it belongs not to me particularly to prescribe
and apoynte. Herein let every man with himself take advise. What may be done
without offense, that declare I. A virgin may lawfully marry, because she is
free. A married woman is not in like freedom, nor may so do, but has bound
her self unto her husband, with the bond of matrimony, during the time of
his life. This bond is by nothing broken, but by only death. For whosoever
maryeth, for this purpose maryeth, that the knotte made in marriage should not
be broken. But if the husband dye, then is the wife free again, so that if
she mind to marry again, she may marry whom she will, so that it be a
christian marriage, that is to say, neither desired for filthy pleasures sake,
nor contracte with one that is of an other religion. And yet as I grant, that
she synneth not, which maryeth again: so judge I her much more happy, which
for desire of godly life stands and abides in the liberty, that to her is
restored. But this command I not them, as necessary to be followed, but
council it, as a thing more commodiouse. And this now hear you the council
of a man, but yet such, as is well agreing with the will of Christ, which by
his own mouth teaches many things, and much also by his servants.

And since I am both his Apostle, and have (as I verily think) received his
spirit, as other Apostles have, my council with you should not be of small
weight and authority.

The.viii. Chapter.
The text*
As touching things offered unto images, we are sure that we all have
knowledge. Knowledge makes a man swell: but love edifyeth. If any man think
that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know. But
if any man love God, the same is known of him. As concerning the eating of
those things that are offered unto ydols, we are sure, that the image is
nothing in the world, and that there is none other God, but one. And though
there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven other in erath (as there be
Gods many, and Lords many) yet unto us is there but one God, which is the
father, of whom are all things, and we for him: and one Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom are all things, and we by him. Touching the questions concerning
matrimony, I think ye are sufficiently answered unto, because ye shall
hencefurthe upon such matters, with soundry opinions, each one of you no more
strive with other. Now because I know, that ye doubt, whether it be lawful for
a christian manne to eat the flesh of any beast offered unto idolles, which
flesh the painyms take for holy, in this question also this is my mind. Some
there be among you, which because they know, that an idol is nothing, but
either timber, or brass, or stone, and that therefore the flesh, that unto
them is offered, in very deed nothing differs from other flesh, and that a
man's conscience can with no kind of meat be defiled, abusyng this their
knowledge, in every place, and without consideracion, engorge and pamper up
themselves with flesh offered to idolles: iudgyng not a mysse of the matter in
deed, but yet forgettyng the law of charity, which gives no maunne occasion
of mysse thynkyng and slaundre, but confourmeth herself to such as are weak,
until that by little and little they grow up to more knowledge.

What great matter is it, if they understand, that an image has in it no
godly power? What christian manne is there, that understands not that, which
even the very painyms understand, if they be any thing wyser, than the commen
sort? But yet better is it oftetymes to follow Knowledge makes a man swell:
but love edifieth.
the rule of charity, than the rule of knowledge. Knowledge does oftetymes
hurt, being such a thing, as makes a man to swell, and to be disdaynfull:
but the endeuer of charity in all time and place is to do good, and hurt no man. Albeit in very deed, such seem to lack a great part of knowledge
also, which know not, how to use their knowledge. That point teaches
charity, which measures and judges all things by the weal of his
neighbor. He therefore, that in such things as he does, will seem perfitly
learned, must call charity to council. For he, that without charity swells
with a vain persuasion that he is learned, is so far from knowledge, that he
is not come so far as to know how he should use his knowledge. He that to
Godwarde is wise, the same man is the very wise man in deed. But he that
pleases himself, and seeks his own glory, without regard of his brothers
ieopardie, his learning God allows not. But he that unfeignedly loves God,
must also love his neighbor. Such one therefore God acknowledges, as his own
disciple, because that as God humbled his high Godhead, to save mankind: so
does such one submit his knowledge, and compel it to serve the commodity
of his neighbor. To return therefore to our purposed matter: we know in manner
all, that albeit the Gentyles wurshyp idols, as though in them there were some
divine power, and Godhead, We are sure that an image is nothing.
yet is an idol in deed nothing else, but either a piece of timber, or a stone,
and has no more Godhead in it, than an other vnsquared piece of timber, or an
unwrought stone, and therefore in the flesh that to them is offered, there is
no more goodness or hurt, than is in such, as is sold in the shambles. For
where as ye see a stone wrought unto y^ image of a man or some other beast,
since there is but one God, which has none image, (for he cannot be
cou^terfaited) what else represent idols, but devils, to whom miserable people
offer unto instead of god? These men therefore are defiled with such meats,
which receive them as holy, whereas they be unholy and profane. As for
christians such flesh defiles not, which eat them not, as holy, but use
them, as creatures made by god, to apease hunger. And use them for sustenaunce,
and not for devotion, with himself laughing at the folyshe rabble of heathen
gods, being fullye persuaded, that there is no god, but one, to whom all
things are holy. For albeit some there be, which are called gods, whether
they be in heaven, whom they call heavenly, or else in earth, whom they call
gods earthlye, of which sort there be many gods and many lords, yet are
these, by name only, gods and lords, and are to them only such, as
erroniously believe them so to be, and have taken them for their gods and
lords. But to us christians there is but only one god, that is to say, the
father of Jesus, the creatoure and governor of the world, of whom we receive
all goodness, to whom only being addicte, we ought to serve with all honor and
reverence. We have also one lord Jesus Christ, by whom only the father has
given us all things, through whose only benefit we confess the true god,
so that with the false and cursed heathen gods we now have nothing to do at
all, which should no more be esteemed, than if there were none such in deed.
Whosoever therefore through christian strength nothing passes upon an ydole,
nor upon that, which is to them offered, surely judges well, and might
without gilte eat the flesh offered unto them, as well as any other meat,
were it so that every manne were so persuaded, and knew this for truth, as it
is true in deed, for then would no man be offended.

The text.
But every man has not knowledge. Some having conscience because of the image,
until this hour, eat as a thing offered unto images: and so their conscience
being weak is defiled. But meat makes not acceptable to god. Neither if we
eat, are we the better. Neither if we eat not, are we the worse. But take heed, lest by any means this liberty of yours be an occasion of falling, to
them that are weak. For if some man se the which haste knowledge, sit and
eat of meat offered unto images, shall not the conscience of him which is
weak, be boldened to eat those things, which are o^fered to images? And so
through thy knowledge shall the weak brother peryshe, for whom Christ dyed.
When ye sin so against the brethren, and wound their weak conscience, ye
sin against Christ. Wherefore if meat hurt my brother I will never eat
flesh, lest I should offend my brother. But now some sytte at the feast,
which by the laws of their elders even from their chyldehode are in this
persuaded, and throughlye grounded, that an ydoll is an holy thing, and think,
that as many as sit at one feast, are all of like supersticion, nor can be
brought in mind, that such things should so greatly be despised which
they have in such great a we and reverence. And will take the thing, that thou
do upon a right judgment and conscience, this wise, reasonyng with
themselves: since christian men do not somuche abhor our sacrifices, lykely
it is, that the wurshippyng of ydolles is not so deuilishe a thing, as they
make it. There sits or stands by also paraduenture some christian man,
which albeit he has professed Christ, is not yet in strength of faith become
perfect, but is by reason of the infeccion of his old life received of his
elders, by long and common custom, weak and feeble, nor can without grudge of
mind eat flesh offered to ydolles, some thing trustyng or fearyng, lest
that devil, whatsoever he be, may by some mean either do him good or harm.
For what maruayle is it, if this chance to some of the Grecians, since we se
many christened Jews here with to be entangled? A matier of great difficulty
is it, utterly and by the root to pluck that out of men's minds, which is
therein even from youth, by common use, and long custom, bredde and
engendered. No man is there, that suddenly becomes a perfect christian. For as
in nature there is a process, so are there in religion certain degrees. As
therefore we that are by age stronger, even by the course of nature suffer and
nouryshe the weaker, according as Christ gave exaumple: so ought such* as are
in faith stronger, sometimes please and bear with the weaker, until that by
continuance of time they grow more strong. But as in this day among the
Jews christened some there be, which by reason of their old and long
continued religion, can not despise such things, notwithstanding the holy
prophets plainly prophesied, that it should so be, and Christ himself
commanded the same: so were there some at the first publishyng of the
gospel, yea and in this day to some there be, which albeit they confess
Christ, are not yet quite out of fear of their auncetours religion, but eat
flesh offered in sacrifice to ydolles, not as food necessary to satisfy the
hungry stomach, but as holy things vowed to this devil or that devil. When
such one sees thee, whom he thinks in learning and judgment to pass the
common sort, sytte at table with Paynims at such offered meats, supposyng
that thou eateste even with like mind and conscience as he does, the same
manne is through thine exaumple hurt, and follows thy deed amiss, whose
mind and conscience he knows not. And thus he, which before staggered but a
little, and was but somewhat supersticiouse, is through this occasion become
more supersticiouse.

I speak not this, because I allow either his supersticion, or suspicyon. For
christian charity teaches not, that such infirmities should be praised or
nouryshed, but that it should rather in some time and place, be borne with
and suffered. Nor think I it convenient, always to give place to the desires
of such as are weak. For so to do, what else were it but still without end to
nourishe supersticion, and in such sort to please the weak, that thou
forsake thine own strength? Such one as is weak, must be taught, warned,
and reproved: which, when by reason that he is weaker, should give ear unto
and follow the stronger, yet in his conscience judges he and condemns him,
that is his better: and where it beseemed him by following the others exaumple
to increase in the strength of faith, rather strengthens he the disease of
his mind: and where it behooved him to labor for like perfeccion, he
constrayneth the strong to give place to his weakness. But in case the manne
be not yet able to take instruccions and counsel, christian charity wylleth,
that the stronger for a while bear with the weaker, being yet such one, as
will amend, chiefelye in such a matier wherein two points are specially to
be weighed: first, that the supersticiouse mind conceived in our
childehoode, and by long custom and time established, is such a thing, as
can scarcely be shaken of: and also that there is no ieopardie more to be
feared, than the ieopardye of ydolatrie.

But the matter of the weaker will we in another place entreat of. In the mean
season because among you I see men more often offend in the other side,
endeavor must we rather to suppress this arrogante and proud knowledge
Meat makes us not acceptable to god.
without charity. I allow this thy saying, meat makes us not acceptable to
God. For since God for man's use made all things, and of us requires nothing
but godly life, what matier is it to him, whether we eat fish, or beasts, or
wyldefoule? None of all these either increases or abateth godliness. In these a
difference observed, may make a man supersticyouse, but godly it makes none,
since Christ himself taught men to observe among them no such difference. A
light point is it therefore and a rash, if a miserable man will go about to
charge us with such constitucions. But let rather every man according to the
state of his body, eat what him list, so that it be done sparelye and
soberlye, for all things geuyng thanks to God, neither condemnynge an other
manne, because he eats not of the same, nor in thine heart proud, because
for preseruyng thy bodylye health thou forbearest these meats or these. In
some other things there is not paraduenture so great a ieopardie, but herein
where prese^te ieopardie is, regard must be had, of some such, as are
weaker. Whether thou eat such meats, as are offered up to Idols, nothing
shall thou be the better, or if thou eat them not, shalt thou be any point
the worse. But of this yet in the mean season must every man be ware, lest by
using such liberty to eat all meats, ye give the weak an occasion of ruin
and stoumblyng. And must it not needs be so, if one, that is as yet some what
supersticiouse, see the, which art coumpted in learning and judgment to
pass other, to eat like meats, as they do, which have sacrificed to an
idol, albeit with an other conscience, than they do, yet in appearance with
like? Shall not this man's conscience (I say) being something ready to fall
to his old supersticion, by thine exaumple be mayntayned and provoked to
idolatry, and moved with an evil conscience to eat such meats, as thy
self use with a good and a strong faith joined with an upright conscience?
What matter makes it, thought it so be, thou will say? Certaynely herein this
ieoperdie is there, lest by the occasyon of thy strength, thy weak brother
peryshe, which although he be never so weak, yet is he thy brother, that is
to say, a christian man, whom Christ himself so farfurth despised not, that
for his deliverance he vouchsalued to dye. Christ for the weak used his life,
as a thing little worth: and regardest thou thy brothers weal so little, that
for a little sorye meats sake, thou will despise his peril and ieoperdie?
namely when thou lackest not, wherewith without danger of thy brother thou may
provide for thy bealies need. But that ye should not think it a small offense
to trespace against a man, when as often as after this sort ye offend the
weak persons, by such a suspicious example woundyng their weak consciences:
Ye must understand also that ye offend and displease Christ. Be they never so
much younglynges, be they never so weak, yet does Christ acknowledge them
for his members, and as in them he thinks himself offended, so what soever
is done for them, he takes as done unto himself. Nor is it causeless, that
he so often times bade us beware of offendyng of the weak. No man Wherefore
if meat hurt my brother* etc.
better knows than I, that in meats there is no part of goodlynes or
ungodliness: and yet, if I perceive this ieopardye nygh, that by occasion
thereof my brother as yet somewhat given to supersticion, might be provoked to
eat such things as he eats with a grudging conscience: I would rather all
my life wholly abstayn from eating of flesh, than through me Christ's own
member should be in ieoperdy. Meat offered unto an idol defiles not y^
conscience of the strong y^ eats of it, I grant. But the despysyng of any
brothers ieoperdie defiles him y^ eats, who^ we are bound as well to love as
our selves.

The.ix. Chapter.
The text.
Am I not an Apostle? am I not fre? have I not seen Jesus Christ our lord?
Are ye not my work in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle unto other, yet am I
unto you. For the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the lord. Mine answer
to them that ask me, is this. Have we not power to eat and to drink? Have we
not power to lead about a sister to wife, as well as other Apostles, and as
the brethren of the Lord and Cephas? Either only I and Barnabas have not
power this to do? Who goes a warrefare any time at his own cost? Who planteth
a vineyarde, and eats not of the fruicte thereof? Or who fedeth a flock and
eats not of the milk of the flock? CAuse therefore has no man to complain
and say that he is restrained of his liberty. But we may not always only
consider, what may be lawfully done, but also what is profitable, nor straight
do all that may be defended, but rather do as Christian charity requires,
which seeks not so much her own pleasures and commodities, as other men's. How
many things have there been, wherein I might have used mine authority, had
not charity otherwise moved me. I stayed not for lack of knowledge, and well
understood what I might do, but more regarded I that which was for you
profitable. Many things did I, which I well wist, made little to godly life, and
al was to apeace such as I would not have from Christ withdrawn. And many
things did I not, which I might have done, had not your profit moved me
other wise. And why should I not? Am I not an Apostle as well as they be, that
of this title auaunce themself? Was not I by Christ's commandment sent to
preach unto the gentiles? And if I be an apostle as well as other, why have I
less apostolic authority and power? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our lord.
Was it not given to me to see our Lord Jesus Christ, if any man think it ^
great matier, as it is to se him as some did after his resurreccion? And if
apostles be esteemed by their famous acts, what lack find they herein in me?
Is it not an apostolic act to bring Corinthe, once wholly given to worldly
desires, to Christ's gospel and his dominyon? And this act have I by gods
help brought to pass. Whether I be an apostle to the Jews or not, let them
judge which labor to mingle Moses and Christ together, if I be not, at the
least wi^e yet am I unto you an apostle, which through my preaching believed in
Christ, which saw the mighty power of god to assist and strengthen my word.
If men therefore look for acts, ye (I say) are my workmanship, albeit in deed
all the praise of this act, ought to be given unto Christ, and not to me. Are
ye not my testimonial and seal, whereby if need were, I am able to declare
that to me, for the glory of Christ, is committed an apostles office? For so
answer I them, that ask how I can prove that I am an apostle. If I have
among you done as much as has by the chief apostles been done in any place
among other, why am I not as well an apostle, as they be? Now and if mine
authority be as great, as other apostles is, and if I have done as much
good, as they have, what should let me to be of like estate and auctoritye with
them? and since I have labored as much as they have, or paraduenture more,
why should I not in reward be equalle with them? Were we only among
other restrained of that liberty to eat and drink at their costs to whom
we preached the gospel? Is it for us only unlawful to lead about with us
christian matrones to help us with such necessaries of theirs, as it is for
this our life expedient, as other apostles do? not such, I say, as are of the
mean sort, but even the chief apostles, the brethren of the lord, I say,
James, and John, yea and Cephas also, which among the apostles is of
princypall estimacyon. Am I and Barnabas therefore only without like authority
to live at rest, and to preach the gospel at other men's costs, because we
do not as they do? So far are we from hunting for any riches by preaching
the gospel, that we of gift took not so much as a simple and a course living,
as we might have do one lawfully. For who is there, that at any time goes on
warfare at his own cost? Who planteth a vineyard, to eat no part of the
fruit of the same vineyard? Who fedeth a flock, and in the mean season
eats nothing of the milk of the flock? In every labor the charge is borne
by him, for who^ the work is done.

The text.
Say I these things after the manner of men? Says not the law the same also?
For it is written in the law of Moses. Thou shall not mousel the mouth of the
^xe that treads out the corn. Does God take thought for oxen? Says be it
not altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written, that he
which eareth, should care in hope, and that he which thressheth in hope,
should be partaker of his hope. If we sow unto you spiritual things, is it
a great thing if we reap your bodily things? If other be partakers of this
power over you, wherefore are not we rather? But what, have I nothing to prove
this with, but only natural reason? Confirms not the wholly law of god even the
same thing, that the law of nature speaks? Yes surely, for Moses law
forbids, saying: thou shall not mousel the oxes mouth, when he is lead about
to tread out the corn, and al because it is unjust thence not to have food,
wherein any creature laboreth. But what makes this for the apostles, some will
say? Think ye it likely, that god by this law only made provision for oxen,
or is there rather in this some deper meaning, which belongs to us? So far
is god from defrauding the laborer of his living, that he would not that as much
as oxen should be defrauded thereof. Wherefore this sentence is not so much
written for oxens sake, as for ours, to teach, that whosoever labors in the
painful and laborious tillage of the field of the lord, should not be deprived
of the hope of reward: and whosoever in the floor of the lord treads out corn,
beside the hope of reward everlasting, should also with the reward of worldly
need ease his labor. And think it not a great matter if when we give you such
things, as make to life everlasting, we again receive of you such gifts, as
apparteine to the bodily need of this transitorye life: nor if when we sow upon
you spiritual gifts, that we at your hands receive carnal commodities. Nor
cause is there any why such one should vpb^aide a man with his benefits, which
for most precious treasour gives but vy^e trifles. Neither are we endebted
unto you, if we receive such necessaries, as ye offer us, but unthankful were
you to deny unto them a living, which labor and trauil for your weal. But now
and if some have among you used this authority, and if apostles, such as they
be (for of the^ for a while pronounce I nothing) use it still, how much more
lawfully might we do the same, which both first among al other, and most of
all other, have for your weal taken pains.

The text.
^^u^rthelesse we have not used this power: but suffer all things lest we
should ^inder the gospel of Christ. Do ye not know, how y^ they which minister
about holy things, live of the sacrifices? They which wait of the temple are
partakers of the temple. Even so also did the lord ordain: that they which
preach the gospel, should live of the gospel. But I have used none of these
things. Nevertheless I wrote not these, that it should be so done unto me.
For it were better for me to die, then that any man should take this rejoicing
from me. For it I preach the gospel, I have nothing to rejoice of. For
necessitye i^ put unto me. But woe is it unto me, if I preach not the gospel.
If I do it with a good will, I have a reward. But if I do it against my will,
an office is committed unto me. What is my reward then? Verily that when I
preach the gospel, I make the gospel of Christ^ free, that I misuse not mine
authority in the Gospel. And yet wittingly and well advised used we not
among you our right, not because it was unlawful so to do, or because we had
sufficient otherwise, but rather in our great lack of necessaries we suffered
great hardness, lest otherwise some such thing might happen, whereby the
increase of Christ's doctrine might be hindered. For had it not been, that we
more regarded your weal, than our own profit, we well knew, that ye were
certainly assured, that as among the grecians they which minister about holy
things, have a living of the sacrifices: even so among the Jews such as
wait upon the altar, are partakers of the altar. And even so has the lord
Jesus ordained it, that such as preach and teach the gospel, should by the
gospel have a living given them. And with a mean and a convenient living, even
he that faithfully laboreth i^ Christ's service, ought to be content. For god
forbid, that any man should by that grow rich, whereby we are taught to
despise riches. And this ye s^e, for how many causes and consideracions I might
lawfully have done, as other do, and yet none of them moved me to take any
thing of you. Nor purpose I at any time hereafter to take ought of you, lest
any man suspect, that I for this brought so many reasons, because I would with
more excuse do that hereafter, which I heretofore never did. Of wiche mind
I not only not repent my self, but would also rather die for hunger, than
any man should take this glory from me: which since I have once embraced, I
intend steadfastly to keep. Nor sustain we such lackes with sorrowful
cheer, but take them for a pleasure rather, coumptyng it my glory, freely to
preach the gospel, since so to do, I see it for your weal expedient, that
ye also may by mine exaumple learn sumtyme to abstain from that, which is
lawful, if it he for other men's weal profitable. For if I preach the gospel
as other do, cause have I none to glory of. The Lord has given me this
office, whom whether I will or not, I must obey. Praise then deserve I none,
if I execute and do that office, which is given unto me in commission, but on
the other side assured But woe is it unto me, if I preach not the gospel.
am I of punishment, if I in preaching the gospel be slack. If I willingly
and without byddyng have preached the gospel, god shall for that my ready
good will reward me, and if I do it against my will, yet must I needs do that
which I am put in trust with. The gospel is delivered unto me, not to hyde
and keep it to my self, but to preach it to the Gentiles. Now if I bestow
it, I bestow the treasure of the lord, and not mine own, if I bestow it
not, wrong do I to the Lord, which with my self keep that talent without
fruit and ^arayn, which he would have increased with usury. But here ye will
say, if such one as does not his duty be sure to be punished, and he that
does his duty have no reward, what have thou the^ Paul to glory upon?
Certainly thereby shall every man have praise, if he do more then he was
commanded.

The lord gave us in commandment to preach the gospel, but he bade us not
so to do for nothing, and at our own fyndyng, but rather gave us authority to
eat and drink of such things, as those people offered, to whom we preached
the gospel. That therefore which his pleasure was should for us be lawful, I
would not take and use as lawful: and for this used I not the authority given
unto me, because I knew, that so to do was both more, for your profit, and
for the auauncement of gods word freely to preach unto you the doctrine of the
gospel, to the intent I might with more liberty warn you of your duties: and
also ^echuse it should now more clearly appear, that I teach not for
advantage, as some do, which seek their own profit, and not the honor of
Jesus Christ.

The text.
For though I be fre from all men, yet have I made my self servant unto all
men, that I might win the more. Unto the Jews I became as a Jew, to win the
Jews. To them that were under the law, was I made as though I had been under
the law (when I was not under the law) to win them that were under the law: To
them that were without law, became I as though I had been without law (when I
was not without law as perteinyng to God, but under the law of Christ) to win
them that were without law: To the weak became I as weak to win the weak. In
all things I fashioned my self to all men to save at the leastway some. And
this I do for the gospels sake, that I might have part thereof. And as in this
point I used not my power and authority, so in some other points submitted I
my self as though I had to such things been bound, where I was in deed fre,
and might have chose^. For where as I am not under the gentiles laws, and am
by the grace of the gospel made free from the law of Moses, yet of mine own
accord, even as one bound thereto, I please all men, to the end I may win
more unto my lord. To the Jews therefore fashioned I my self, sometime making
a vow, and shauing my head, and causing also Timothy to be circumcised, as
though I had been a very Jew, when in deed I well wist, that Moses law was
abrogate? and this di^ I to the intent that such as could not be drawn from the
supersticion of their auncesters laws, I might, following their minds, allure
the^ either unto Christ, or at the least not make them thereunto wurse willing
by displeasing their minds. Among such therefore, as thought themselves under
the law, I so behaved my self, as though I had been also under it. Again
among such, as were free and delivered from Moses law, sometimes I so used my
self, as though I had been under no law, when yet before god I am not
utterly lawles, but am under the law of Christ, which I much more esteem,
then Moses law. And yet in appearance tempered I my self to their capacities
and minds, as among the people of the Athens I did, not straighte crying out
upon their gods, whom they supersticiously honored, but of a writing, that
was upon an altar took an occasion secretly to bring in Christ, wherein I of
him in such sort tempered my tale, that I taught them, that he was an
excellent manne, and as one that for his great acts was made a god, and
taught not, that he was both god and man, because I well wist that they were
not then able to receive that mystery. Yea and out of their own writers
brought witness, by all the means I could laboring to allure them unto Christ.
And all this did I, not for mine own pleasure, nor yet of any lightenesse or
inconstauncie, but to enlarge the gospel. I might have used mine own strength,
and have been like my self, but that thing minded I rather, which in deed was
to me not so profitable. But for the gospel more expedient was it to temper my
self to the weakness of other, as though I had been likewise weak my self,
all which was to win them unto Christ. And to be brief, among every sort of
men, altered I my self into every fashion, and in every place labored to save
some, by diligent service winning their good wills. Such diligence and
readiness to please, is not flattery, wherewith some seek your favor: but call
it so hardely, if I either took any reward of you, or desired any. The gospels
preferment is it, that I labor about and not mine own, and seek thaduauntage
of the lord, and not mine. Of him and none else look I for reward, if I do as
his will is. Now are not singular rewards given, but for singular virtues. In
the grace of the gospel we must not only so labor, that it seem we have done
our part, but that also we carry away the price and chief game.

The text.
Perceive ye not, how that they which run in a course, run all, but one
receives the reward? So run, that ye may obtain. Every man that proves
masteries, abstame^^ from all things. And they do it to obtain ^ croune that
shall perish, but we to obtain an everlasting croune. I therefore so run,
not as at an uncertain thing. So fight I, not as one that beats the air: but
I tame my body, and bring it into subieccion, lest by any means it come to
pass, that when I have preached to other, I my self should be a ^aste away.
Perceive ye not that such as run in these comen runnyng plains, wherein m^^
strive for a game, that many run? but to him only is the price given, which
first cummeth to the mark. Think it not therefore sufficient, after a sort
to have done your duties, and thereby to escape punishment, but ye must with
all your might labor for the besteso running in the course of the gospel, that
ye obtain and win praise at gods hand the chief master of the game. For his
sake must we both do and suffer al labor. Diverse things, albeit they be
paynful, must be abiden, so that the same help to this reward: and abstain
must we from many things, though they beelsewise lawful, if they let our
victory. Generally whatsoever stands in his way, that hastes toward the
price, must be avoided. Shame it is that we for so high a reward should more
slowely labor, than the common sort of men do for a vile. He that runs in
these common runnyng places, refraynethe himself from meats, from pleasures,
and from many such other things, as of them selves are delectable, because
they be to victory a hindraunce, and also suffers many things, albeit
unpleasant, passing upon no grievous labor, so that he win the chief game,
which he only seeks for. Now if such let pass nothing undone and vnsuffered,
and al to be rowsed and commended of the lewd people, to have a vain praise of
men, and to carry away with them but a sorry reward, how much more should we
do this, to be commended of angels, praised of god, and to have the reward
of life everlasting? When such a high and weighty matier is in hand, shall there
in the midway thereto a little meat of no price, or any such like point let you
from your purposed course? In this goodlye game take ye head, after what sort
ye behave your selfs. As for I run not like a slougarde, as they are wont
to do which hasten to no certain mark at al. Nor play I the champion as some
do, which for their pastime with their hands do beat the air, but by all
means chastise and with sharp correccio^s subdue my body, so suppressing and
taming it, that it may thereby be made obedient to the spirit, that it may, if
the honor of y^ gospel so require, both easily abstayn from that, which is
lawful, and patiently suffer adversity: lest it happen with me as it does with
some, that when by my preaching some are called forth to the game, my self
therein geat no praise. And finally lest when I have encouraged other to the
desire of this praise, my self depart thence with shame, and vnpraysed. But I
labor with a very sure hope of reward, and teach no man any thing with
word, which in living I exercise not.

The.x. Chapter.
The text.
Brethren, I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that our fathers were
all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and were all baptized
under Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and did all eat of one spiritual
meat, and did al drink of one manner of spiritual drink. And they drank of
that spiritual rock that followed them, which rock was Christ. But in many of
them had god no delight. For they were overthrown in the wilderness. Now
draws all this my tale to teach, that toward thattaynyng of the price of
wealth everlasting, men should not think it sufficient, that through baptism
they are become of Christ's household: or because they through his benefit
being delivered from the tirannie of sin, are restored again to fredome, onles
they hencefurth keep themself clear and innocent from fylthie desires and
lusts. Every man generally is baptized, but every man shall not generally
receive one reward. Therefore brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant
of that which is written in our books, that our elders, what time they were
escaped the tirannie of Pharao, Moses being their capitain, were all with a
cloud cast over them by the mighty power of god, defended from the heat of
the sun, and that al equally went on foot through ye sea divided: so that
what gift soever is through Christ given unto us, the same in manner was among
them done before. Baptism, through Christ as chief doer, delivers us from
the tirannie of sin: and they, whiles under the gouernannce of Moses, being
covered with a cloud passed over the sea, which at the stryking of Moses rod
stood a sunder, were after a certain sort baptized, therein long before
figuring our baptism. Again as many of us, as are through baptism purged, are
equally nouryshed with the food of Christ's blessed body and drink al of his
mystical cup. Likewise did all they eat of manna sent down unto them from
heaven, and al drank indifferently of the water, which Moses with the stroke
of his rod caused to spring out of a rock. Nor it is to be supposed, that such
things were done after ye common sort or by chance, but Christ among them at
that time darkely began the same matier, which he has in us now plainly and
truly performed. From Christ rained down that manna, and by the mighty
power of Christ, which is with his always present, was the dry and barain
rock made to give out water plentiously. Briefly Christ it was, which
vouchsalued to endue his children, with such great and honorable benefits.
This honor and benefit was commenly given to them all, but yet all came not to
that place whither their purposed journey was. Nothing aduauntaged them to
escape out of Egipte, if they carried furthe Egipte with them: nothing
auauntaged it them to shake of and to be rydde of their oulde bondage, if they
afterward beecame more slauishelye bond to filthy desires, than they before
were subject to Pharao. Yea with them was god so much the more displeased,
because they were not only noughtie, as they were before, but also
unthankful. For the which offenses by the just vengeance of God diversely
punyshed were they, and destroyed in wilderness, some time with fire, sometime
with sweorde, sometime with pestilence, and some time with serpents.

The text.
These are ensaumples to us that we should not lust after evil things, as they
lusted. And that ye should not be worshippers of images, as were some of them
according, as it is written. The people sat down to ear and drink, and rose
up to play. Neither let us be defiled with fornicacion, as some of them were
defiled with fornicacion, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand.
Neither let us tempte Christ, as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of
serpents. Neither murmr ye, as some of them murmured and were destroyed of
the destro^^^. But as their departure thence in a shadow represents our
baptism, so is their punishment to us an exaumple, that upon boldenes of our
baptism we lead ^ot a life unseemly for such as are baptized: and that we
neither wan^o^ly through desire of hurtful flesh, return again in mind into
Egipte, as they did to their great destruccyo^, lothing ma^na* nor foolishely
or through inte^peraunce fall again to idolatry, or as much as seem to fall
thereto, as they did which despysing the true god, worshipped a calfe, that
was cast in a moulde eue^ as y^ cursed painims did. For in the book of Exodus
thus is it wrtten: when they had offered their sacrifices, the people sat
down to eat and drink, and when they were full, they rose up to play. And
even anon after by the vengeance of god there were of them slain three and
twenty thousand. And it is also an example, that we be not with wicked
harlottes defiled, as some of them were defiled, with the hoores of the
Moabites. But by the displeasure of god therewith enkiendled, there were in one
day destroyed four and twentye thousand men. Nor let us distrusting Christ,
through impacience tempte him, as some of them did, with wicked grudging
provoking his displeasure, al which were with fyrye serpents destroyed: nor
grudge against Christ and his ministers as some of them murmured against god
and Moses, making a conspiracy, whereof Chore was chief captain and
begynner, what time beside such as were swalowed quick into the earth, there
were destroyed fourtene thowsande.

The text.
All these things happened unto them for ensaumples, but are written to put us
in remembrance, whom the ends of the world are come upon. Wherefore let him,
that thinks he stands, take heed, lest he fall. There has none other
temptacion taken you, but such as follows the nature of man. But god is
faithful which shall not suffer you to be tempted above your strength: but
shall in the mids of the temptacion make a way, that ye may be hable to bear
it. Wherefore my dear beloved, fly from wurshipping of images. All which
things in old time chanced unto them, and are in ancient cronacles left in
remembrance: but what soever befell them, was not without cause, but rather to
give us exaumple, what we which are now in this last age, ought both to
follow and fly. The Hebrews because they fell again to wantonness, to
idolatry, to foul plays, to hooredome, and to other vices, which they by
reason of their conuersacyon with the Egipcians had conceived, fell from the
favor of god, nor got they any good, by that they were delivered, because they
in trade of life au^swered not unto the benefits of god. But are now rather so
far forsaken, that in this day no nation is there, that is more out of gods
favor, than are the Jews.

And likewise the greater benefits we receive of god, prouokyng us to godly
life, so much the more ought we to fear, lest we of Christ be more grievously
punished, if we being through baptism delivered once out of Egypt, have under
the title of Christ, manners not beseemyng Christ, but Egypt. Let no man
therefore either upon pride of his strength despise the weak, or upon boldness
of his baptism think he shall be saved, onles he thereto adioyne manners
besemyng such as are baptized. The Hebrews also thought themselves ioly
fellows, because they being delivered out of so many ieopardyes, seemed of god
specially regarded, and yet were they of god more earnestly punished, because
they being divided from the wicked painyms fell yet again to their manners. Let
rather him that thinks he stands etc.
No man without ieopardie trusts to himself. Let rather him that stands
take heed that he fall not. The surest way is for men still to walk forward
from better to better, trusting to noe one standing, for by the devils wylines
many things may chance, whereby if we be slothful, we may be brought out of
Christ's favor. Nor have I now used these terrible examples, because I fear
toward you like ieopardie. And hitherto ye have offended, and are swarued from
the pureness of christian life, but yet see I, that your wound is curable, and
grown through frayltie. Ye rather surely trust I, that god will not suffer you
to be tempted above your strength, but that he will in such sort temper the
matier and make such a way, that if to you any evil chance, ye shall be
hable to bear it. Among you some peradventure there be, which for our
symplenesse despise us, more favoring other Apostles, by reason of their gayer
estate and fair speech, but yet are ye not comen unto the sedicion of Core.
Some of you there be, that to licenciously haunt unto the feasts of the wicked
painims, but yet are they not so far gone, as to offer unto idolles, but that
ieoperdie is not far of. Wherefore my dearly beloved children, always fly
from idolatry. For whosoever eats with them, be his conscience never so
strong, yet shows he an apparaunce, as one that favors their supersticion.

I speak as unto them which have discression: judge ye what I say. Is not the
cup of blessing which we bless, partaking of the blood of Christ? Is not the
bread which we break, partaking of the body of Christ? Because that we
(though we be many) yet are one bread and one body, in as much as we all are
partakers of one bread (and of one cup.) Behold Israel after the flesh. Are
not they which ea^e of the sacrifice, partakers of the temple? What say I then?
that the image is any thing? Or that ^^ which is offered to images, is any
thing? Nay but this I say: that the things which the gentiles offer, they
offer to deuile, and not to God. It needs not in this to use many words in
perswadyng you, forasmuch as of your own wisdom ye sufficiently understand
it. Judge your self, whether I say truth or not: What likeness (I pray you) is
there betwixt our reverend and wholly feasts, and their heathen bankettynges?
Whosoever eats like meat with an other, seems to profess and favor the
same religion. Does not that holy cup, which we with thanks giving
consecrate and receive in remembrance of Christ's death, declare a fellowship
that al we are delivered through the blood of Christ? Does not again
likewise that holy bread, which we as Christ both gave exaumple and
commanded, break among us, show a special league and felowshyppe, betwixt
us, and that all we are under one religyon of Christ? And as bread is in
such sort made of an infinite noumber of graynes, sothat the same by reason
of the myxture can not be dyscerned, and the body made of diverse parts, in
such condycion yet, that there is among them a feloweshyppe, that can not be
broken: so when we become all partakers of one bread, we in that act declare,
that albeit we be in nunber never so many, yet are we in consent of minds one
bread and one body. And so likewise such as are partakers of the heathen
feasts, seem also to allow and fauer the fellowship of their supersticion. Now
mark and consider you, whether it be not like among them also, which after the
custom of Moses law even until this day sacrifice beasts. None among the^,
but such as are of the Jewish religion, are received to the eating of the
sacrificed beast, and such also as eat of their holy meats, seem to fauer and
to consent unto their sacrifices. But whereto makes all this, some one will
say? deniest thou Paul that which thou before said, that is to wit, that an
idol is nothing, and that which is offered to an idol is nothing? No not so,
but this I say: that the sacrifices which the gentiles offer, they offer to
devils and not to god: so that in the thing it self there is no dyfference,
but yet their intentes cause a diversity. The gentiles wurship devils instead
of gods, and believe that in their images their godly power is. Whosoever
therefore with them eats sacrificed flesh, seems to be a fellow in their
wicked error.

The text.
I would not that ye should have fellowship with the deuilles. Ye can not drink
of the cup of the lord, and of the cup of deuilles. Ye can not be the
partakers of the lords table, and of the table of devils. Either do we
provoke the lord? Are we stronger the^ be? I may do all things but all
things are not expedient. I may do all things but al things edifye not. Let
no man seek that which is his own* but let every manne seek that which
belongs to an other. And since ye have once wholly given your selves to god,
I would ye should with devils have nothing to do, for whosoever professes godly
religion, has with idolaters no conversation, forasmuch as it besemeth not one
man to be under diverse religions, nor can ye at one time, drink of the blessed
cup of Christ, and the cursed cup of devils, nor yet be partakers of the lords
table, and also of the devils table, if ye this do either with consent of your
minds, or with the great slander of such as are weaker. There is betwixt
Christ and wicked devils none agreement, nor can both at one time be served
without the great reproach and dishonor of Christ. What, provoke we him to
vengeance for the nonce, keeping company with his enemies? Ye can do him no
greater vilannie. Be we stronger, than he, so that we fear not the punishment
of the lord being provoked through such means? God forbid that any of you
should so think. And idolatry is such a detestable vice, that we must not
only be free of the crime self, but also from al suspicion thereof. For this
persuasion is in manner even planted in men's hearts: that all such are of one
religion, as eat together sacrificed meats. I grant that the thing self is
without offense, but the slander ryseth of men's opinions and mistaking, which
thing in this point, a man must diligently beware of. Touching meats I may
do all things, but all things are not for my neighbor expedient, for
whose sake I must sometime abstain even from lawefull things. I may do all
things, but all things edifye not godly life. Now are we by christian
charity commanded rather to do that which is for the weal of other, than
to please ourselves. I give men leave to use their freedom, but if the same
be with the ieopardye of our brother, more ought we regard, what is for him
expedient, than what our selves may lawfully do.

The text.
Whatsoever is sold in the flesh market, that eat, and ask no question for
conscience sake. For the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. If any
of them which believe not, bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go,
whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake.
But and if any manne say unto you: this is offered unto images, eat not of it
for his sake that showed it, and for conscience sake. The earth is the lords
and all that therein is. Conscience I say, not thine, but of the other. For why
is my liberty judged of an other man's conscience? For if I take my part with
thanks, why am I eyuil spoken of, for that thing wherefore I give thanks?
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the
praise of God. Se that ye give none occasion of eiuill, neither to the Jews,
nor yet to the gentiles, neither to the congregation of god: even as I please
all men in all things, not seking mine own profit, but the profit of many,
that they might be saved. Elsewise, whatsoever is sold in the flesh market,
that eat, nothing askyng whether it were offered to idols or not, and that for
consciences sake, for occasion of slander must be avoided, and not given, if
any such matter chance. No such thing is of itself unclean, since al
things are the lords. Nor can that be unclean, which by him was made for
man's use, as the psalm writer records saying: the earth is the lords, and
all that therein is. If any uncleanness be, that grows of men's minds, and not
of meats. If therefore any that is to Christ a stranger bid you to supper, and
ye also be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you at table, that eat,
neither puttyng any difference nor asking any questyon whether such meats as
are set at table were sacrificed or not, and so do for consciences sake. But
if some one of his own mocion tell you that this was offered to an idol, eat
not of it, not for your own sake, but for his which gave you that warning, not
for fear of hurting thy conscience which is upright and strong enough, but for
y^ others sake, which by his warning seems to think it unlawful for a
christian man to eat flesh offered to idols. And it is to be feared, lest the
same man either think us the devils fre^des, or deuourers, and this wise
think with himself: how much soever christian men, with words abhor our
gods, yet abhor they not the flesh, which to them is offered, which they
would not do, if they with their heart so much despised our religion, as they
do with words. For this man's conscience therefore a way must be found, as
there may be without any great trouble. The man is in an error, but thou must
for a time bear therewith, since it is such as thou canste not take away. In
such things Christ would have us to use all liberty, as which neither
commanded, nor for bad any kind of meat. Why is then my For why is my
liberty judged. etc.
liberty judged of an other man's conscience? Why is that which may be well
done, taken suspiciously? If I eat such meats, as the goodness of god has
given us for the preseruacion of our life, why am I for that of any man eiuil
spoken of, since for the use thereof I give god thanks, and not devils? With
this condition therefore ye shall eat, or not eat, y^ whether ye drink or
eat, or whatsoever ye do, that ye direct al to the glory of god, so ordring al
your life according to y^ times and conditions of me^, that in you there be
nothing found, wherewith any man may justly be offended, be he either Jew,
ge^tile, or christian: therein following mine exaumple, which in all points
fashion my self to every man, eating, not eating,, taking, not taking, vsyng
Iewishnes, not vsyng, tempering all such things, as for the time may either
be well done, or well omytted, not for mine own weal, but to the profit of
many, whom I with my diligence, labor to win, not to have by them any
advantage, but to allure them to everlasting salvation.

The.xi. Chapter.
The text.
Be ye the folowers of me, as I am the follower of Christ. I commend you
brethren, that ye remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances, even as
I delivered the^ to you. But I would have you to know that Christ is the
head of every man. And the man is the woman's head: And God is Christ's head:
Every man praying or prophesying having any thing on his head, shameth his
head. Every woman that prays or prophecieth bare headed, dyshonesteth her
head. For that is even all one, as if she were shaven* If the woman be not
covered let her also be shorn. If it be shame for a woman to be shorn or
shaven, let her cover her head. NOr be ye ashamed to follow your Apostles
exaumple, since it is not so much mine, as the very exaumple of Jesus Christ.
Who to the intent he might win us to his father, in all points applied himself
to our infirmities. Him follow I, as my lord and master: ye children follow me
your father, ye disciples follow your Apostle. And this hitherto think I the
mariers of eating of flesh, and of auoydyng the paynims sacrifices
sufficiently spoken of. Hence forth will I now touch certain points what I
would have in your commen assemblies observed and kept, and what I would were
avoided, that in them nothing be done either unorderly, or contenciously, or
ryottously. And first of al I commend you brethren, that in all other things ye
remember such points, as I gave you in commandment, and mayntayn such
ordinances as in your solemn metinges, I appointed you to keep. One thing
more must I tell you, which is yet of no great importance nor much weighty,
but such as may, if the time and place so require, be changed. But yea^ The
man is y^ woman's head. etc.
this would I have you to know, that as Christ is the head of every man, and
the head of every wife is the husband, so is god the head of Christ. Albeit the
husband be the wives governor, yet is he vnderlyng and subject to Christ his
lord and master: and Christ himself in all points acknowlegeth the
authority of god his father, to whom whosoever be subject, must needs do all
thing for his glory. In secret places a man may do, as he shall think
expedient, but what man soever in the commen assembly either prays or
prophecieth having any thing on his head, shameth his head, showing himself by
coueryng the same to be bond, when beside Christ he has no master: for whose
glory it were convenient that he uncovered his head, not only by puttyng of
his cap but also by shauyng of his here. For the here is rather a coueryng of
the body, than any part thereof. On the other side if a woman in the common
assembly pray or prophecy bare headed, she dishonoreth her head, which should
in secret places peradventure for her husbands pleasure, be open headed, and
not in the congregation, where Christ is honored, and not their husbands. For
as it is in a man to be shorn or shaven: the like is it in a woman to cast of
her veil. And then if it be comely for a woman to cast of the veil from her
head as men do, let her likewise, as men do, either be shorn or rounded,
and in open places preach and prophecy bare headed* But if this wise to do
by all men's consent be in a woman a foolyshe, and an evil fauered sight, let
her by covering her head show her self subject to her husband.

The text.
A man ought not to cover his head, for as much as he is the image and glory of
God. But the woman is the glory of the man. For the manne is not of the woman
but the woman ^^ the man. Neither was the man created for the woman's sake, but
the woman for the mansake. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her
head, for the angels sake. Nevertheless, neither is the man without the woman,
neither the woman without the m^n in the lord. For as the woman is of the man,
even so is the man by y^ woman: but al of god. But yet so to do* beseems not
the manne, which bears the image of God, which is in such sort head and
gouernoure to the womanne, as Christ is to his church, and much more since
that by him is set forth gods glory, which should not be covered. On
the other side, as the womanne is subject unto her husband, so is she
apparayled to his honor, against whom, well may she be coumpted
reprochefull, if she by vncoueryng her head in open places, show her own
vnshamefastenesse, and as though she were free, refuse obedience to her
husband. And as Christ is honored, if the manne do him service, and preach
his glory bare headed: so is the husband honored, if his wife with
reverence, silence, and comelye apparel, show in her a sober obedience. But
some one will say: by what law is the womanne compelled to be subject to her
husband, and not contrary the husband to his wife? Because what time god
first made mankind, the manne came not of the womanne, but contrary the
womanne of the manne. First was Adam made of earth and by the spirit of god a
soul was given him, and then shortly after was Eve taken forth of his side,
as she were a certain portion of the manne, and even contrary to the commen
course of nature, first was made that, which was more perfect, and than
afterward was made the imperfiter. For that, that reason is in manne, the same
in matrimony is the husband: and that, which is affeccio^ in the man, the same
in matrimony is the woman. Beside this, the man was not made for the woman's
sake, but the woman was made and given to the manne for his comfort, Neither
was the man created for the womans sake.
and for a help to bring forth issue by generation: in which act, as the man
is principal doer and fashioner, so is the womanne but the matier and
sufferer. Now good reason is it, that to him the preeminence should be given,
which was both first made, and only made of God, and not to the womanne. And
for as much as at the first beginning of nature the husband has given unto
him the title of preeminence, surely the womanne ought to acknowledge her
condition, and not only with a readynes to please, show her subieccion
toward him, but also in reuerente behaueour to him. But as the shaven head
declares a liberty, so is the coueryng of the head a token of subieccion. But
and if any womanne be so far paste shame, that she regard not the sight of
men, yet for Angels sakes and their testimony being also present at your
solemn meetings, let her head be covered, and in so doing, she
acknowledges what does beseme her. And yet speak I not this either to
encourage the husband to use his wife as a vile dreuell, because she is
commanded to obey, or to discoumforte the wife, because she is subject to
her husband, since both are in christian religion equal, besides that
oftetymes the husband also needs as well his wives healpe, as the wife her
husbands.

And albeit at the beginning womanne was made of man, yet now neither the
wife brings forth child without the manne, nor the manne can become a
father without a womanne. And yet there is no cause, why any person should
for this with himself be either to much pleased or grieved, since it is the
ordinance of god, which after such sort sets all things in an order.

The text.
Judge in your selves, whether it be comely that a woman pray unto God, bare
headed. Does not nature it self teach you, that it is a shame for a man,
if he have long hear? and a praise to a womanne, if she have long hear? For
her hear is given to her to cover her withal. If any manne lust to strive,
we have no such custom, neither the congregacions of God. But to return
again to the mattier, wherewith I began, if yet with so many arguments I
sufficientlye prove not, how uncomely a thing it is for a womanne openly to
pray bare headed, let even every manne after his own judgment and reason
weyghe the mattier, for I think no man is so very a blockeheade that has
lost the judgment of nature. Does not nature her self teach you that it
is shame for a man, to have long hear like a womanne? And contrary, that it
is to a womanne a furniture to have long hear? to whom of nature is given a
more thick and more large growyng of hear, than to the manne, that she,
which is subject to her husband, might not at any time lack a veil. And
this have I showed you, what I think more seemly. If any in this mattier
lust contenciouslye to defend his opinion, let him take his pleasure, so
that he know, that neither have we any such custom, nor other congregacions
of god. Whether it for you be meet to swerve both from your Apostles rules
and exaumples, and from the custom of other congregacions, be ye judges.
Less hurt were it, if ye in such points agreed, since they be but externe
mattiers, nor make so much to the furtheraunce of Gospellike godliness. But
this I earnestlye require of you, and am offended, that ye keep it not, being a
thing which I taught you.

The text.
This I warn you of, and commend not, that ye come not together after a
better manner: but after a worse. For first of all when ye come together in the
congregation, I hear that there is discencion among you: and I partly believe
it. For there must be sects among you that they which are perfect among you,
might be known. Whereas in other things ye remember mine ordinances, I much
commend you, but whereas in this point ye remember me not, wherein it were
most mete ye did, that commend I not: I taught you, that ye should quietly
and orderly come together, without excess, without strife, and with all
equality, which specially nourishes co^corde, so using your selves together,
that every man might return to his house amended. But now are ye come to such
vnrulynes, that better were it not to come together at all, than after such
sort to assemble, and that for many causes, for ye offend many ways. First
when ye come solemlye together, I hear say, that there is dissencion among
you, which truly is a thing more shameful, than I am glad to believe, but yet
upon knowledge, that I have of your conditions, I partelye believe the report.
It could not be avoided, but that there would such sects rise among you. Of
which evil thing yet this good grows, that by the same it more plainly
appears, which are thoroughly perfect, which, whiles other are in a
confusion, and fill their paunches, myldly and so berlye according unto the
Apostles ordinances, and the old custom of the church, keep this holy
feast, wherein we represent the last souper of Christ with his disciples,
remembryng the league, which he made with us, and for an exaumple of mutual
concord of each one of us toward another.

The text.
When ye come together therefore into one place, the Lords supper cannot be
eaten. For every man begins before to eat his own supper. And one is
hongry, and an other is dronken. Have ye not houses to ea^e and drink in?
Despise ye the congregation of God, and shame them that have not? What shall I
say unto you? shall I praise you? In this praise I you not. That which I
delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus the same night,
in which he was betrayed, took bread: and when he had given thanks, he brake
it and said: Take ye and eat: this is my body, which is broken for you. This
do ye in the remembrance of me. But now is there creapt in among you a very
unseemly usage, that as often as ye come together, the Lords souper seems not
to be the great matter, that is in hand, such as he made with his disciples,
but rather some troublous clamorous feast, without equality, because each man
riotously and gloutonously, not lokyng for other, begins before to eat his
own souper. Whereupon it follows, that the poor man is hongry, either because
he has nothing to eat, or because he cummeth not in season, and the rich man
that has begun his souper, is full and drounken, by means whereof that
spiritual feast is two manner of ways dishonored, both because through pride
of the rich men the poor are disdayned, whom Christ disdaineth not, and also
because the Lords souper is with surfeiting and excess defiled. At this
souper is represented the mystery of christian concord, no bealy, nor gut
matter, for whom provision should have been made privately in men's own
housen, and not in the open assembly. If ye delyted to fill your paunches, have
ye not housen, wherein ye may so do out of sight? Despise ye so farfurth the
open congregation of christians, that in presence thereof ye be not ashamed like
glotons to use your selfs, even of purpose in the mean season going about to
make the poor ones ashamed, which have nothing to set at table, whiles ye
openly setfurth your riottouse and costly fare? What shall I herein say unto
you, ye Corinthians? Shall I praise you? Certainly I would wyshe I had good
cause so to do, and for other things I much praise you, but in this I cannot
praise you. These manners far square from that souper of the lord, after whose
example ye should among you keep this holy feast. I maruayle, who they be that
have brought this evil custom among you: for I as an Apostle received of the
Lord, that, which I also have taught you, which is, y^ our Lord Jesus the same
night, in which he was betrayed by his disciple, and taken, took bread, and
when he had given thanks to God, he brake the bread, and said: take, eat,
this is my body, which is broken for you to be divided among all. The thing,
which ye see me to do, the same do ye herafter in the remembrance of me.
Note and mark here, all the disciples sit together at table with their
master: mark how the table and meat was common to all, not somuche as the
traitor Judas excluded from the same, and one bread equally divided among all.
This did the Lord with his disciples: and despise ye your brethren, and such
as are your fellows in religion?

The text.
After the same manner also, he took the cup, when supper was done, saying: This
cup is the new testamente in my blood. This do as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this
cup, ye shall show the Lords death, till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall
eat of this bread, or drink of the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
gyltie of the body and blood of the Lord. But let a man examen himself, and so
let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup. For he that eats or drinks
unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnacion, because he makes no
difference of the Lords body. For this cause many are weak and sick among
you, and many sleep. After the same manner, when he had distribute the bread, he
took the cup also into his hands, when the supper was already done, saying:
this cup is the new testamente, through my blood, as often as ye drink
hereof, do it in remembrance of me. In this supper then all drank of one
cup, and among you the rich men are drunk, and the poor are athruste.
Christ would have this feast to be kept among you in remembrance of his death,
and as a token of his everlasting testamente, yet is it now kept among you
with riot and dissencion. It is a mystical bread, whereof al men should in like
sort be partakers. As the cup also is holy indifferently apertayning to all,
not prepared to apease men's bodyly thruste, but to represente a secret
matter, lest ye might forgette, with what price ye were from the sins of
your former life redeemed. As often therefore, as ye resort together to eat of
this bread, and to drink of this cup, ye go about no bealy matter, but
mistically represent the death of the Lord Jesus, whose continual remembrance
shall cause you to do your duties, until the time he return to judge all
the world. Therefore whosoever eats of this bread, or drinks of the Lords
cup otherwise than is worthy of Christ, haynously offends, as which has
otherwise used the body and blood of the Lord, than he commanded it should be
used: for as much as a thing, which is most full of mysteries, ought with
all pureness and reverence to be used, for auoydyng of which inconvenience,
let every man first try and examen his conscience before. And upon a through
Let a man e^am^^ himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of the
cup.
examinacion had, let him then eat of that bread, and drink of the cup. And
let him that upon examinacion of himself fyndeth an vnmetenesse, abstain
rather, and make sacrifice to his bealy at home. For albeit the body and blood
of the Lord be a healthful thing, yet whosoever thereof does eat or drink
unworthily, the same turns to his poison and destruction, because he without
reverence, and with an vnclensed conscience presumed to come unto so great a
mystery, without due consideracion had, with how great reverence the body of
the Lord ought to be received. When Christ shall come, then shall such be
punyshed for violating this mystery, albeit in the mean season some also for
the same offense are presently punyshed, for of this cu^meth it, that among you
so many syckely persons are found, vexed with sondrye fevers and diseases, yea
and many dye before their time, all which punyshmentes are certain begynnynges
and threatenings of the judgment to come.

The text.
For if we had judged our selves, we should not have been judged. But when we
are judged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we should not be damned with the
world. Wherefore my brethren, when ye come together to eat* ^arry one for an
other. If any man honger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together unto
condemnacion. Other things will I set in order, when I come. For if before
receiving we had tried and judged our selfs, we should not so have been judged
of the Lord.

But yet better is it in the mean time to be judged here, than in that
dreadful day to be damned. For when we by goods judgment are here with
temporal and light means punyshed, we are not utterly destroyed, but with
punishment chastised, lest we might with sinners hereafter be damned for
ever. Which thing I say, because no man should flater himself, if upon
unworthy abusyng of this mystery, he nevertheless be whole and sound in
body. Therefore my brethren, when you resort to this feast, to thentent the
same may (as Christ gave example) be equal, tarry one of you for another.
That and if among you any be so hungrye, that he can not for a time abstain,
let him eat at home, and not at the mystical and common feast, lest that,
which was for your weal ordained, be an occasion of your damnacion. And this
have I now hereof sufficiently spoken. As for other things to this belonging,
I will set in order, when I come.

The.xii. Chapter.
Concerning spiritual things (brethren) I would not have you ignorant: ye
know that ye were Gentyles, and went your ways unto dome images, even as ye
were led. Wherefore I declare unto you, that no man speaking by the spirit of
God, defyeth Jesus. Also no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
holy ghost. There are diversities of gifts, yet but one spirit. And there are
differences of adminystratyons, and yet but one Lord. And there are diverse
manners of operacyons, and yet but one God which works all in all. The gift
of the spirit is given to every man, to edefye withal. For to one is given
through the spirit, the vtteraunce of wysdom. To another is given the
vtteraunce of knowledge, by the same spirit. To another is given faith hy
the same spirit. To another the gifts of healyng by the same spirit. To
another power to do miracles. To another prophecy. To another judgment to
discern spirits. To another diverse tongues. To another the interpretacyon of
tongues. But these al woorketh even the self same spirit, dividing to every
man a several gift, even as he will. But now to speak some thing concerning
the gifts of the holy ghost, (forasmuch as herein ye agree not well neither)
brethren, I would have you remember, how that ye once were gentiles, at which
time, according unto the supersticion of your elders, as ye were lead to dead
and dome images, so went ye forth and followed. Then were ye lead with error,
but now are ye governed by the spirit of Christ. Now your former error is not
imputed unto you, so that this remains, that as at that time your custom and
usage of life was even as badde as your deuylysh religion, so must now the
same be vpryght and godly, as your new religion is true and holy, so that it
appear, that whatsoever is done among you, the same seem to be done by the
motion of the holy ghost. Whatsoever is said or soung to the glory of
Christ, that same comes of his spirit. Wherefore I declare unto you, that no man inspired with the spirit of god the father, defieth Jesus his son. Nor
can any manne with a true heart say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the
inspiracion of the holy ghost. For all the goodness therefore, that is in you,
his fre beneuole^ce ought ye to thank, and to his glory it should be
bestowed, And though all men have one spirit in deed, yet are his gifts
diverse, which he, as his pleasure is, diversely gives to diverse men. The use
also and administracion of such gifts are in sondrye wise bestowed, whereas
the Lord, whose gifts they are, is but one. Yea and y^ effect and operacion
of the spirit in diverse men diversely works and gives life, whereas yet
there is of al men but one god, of whom the power and actiuitie of al things,
howsoever they be wrought in men, have their begynnynges. Al gifts therefore
are to be ascribed to god only, whether they be high or low, and there is no
cause why any man of them, should be proud. Another man's gift is it, that
he has, and whatsoever a man has by the inspiracion of the holy gooste, that
same is for the common profit given him, to edify with all, and not to be
proud of it himself only. For to some one is given through the spirit of
god, wisdom, to give there with sage and trusty counsel. Again another has
by the goodness of the same spirit given unto him, by vtteraunce of knowledge,
and rules of good order, to help the common weal. Another has by the same
spirit given unto him a strong confidence, which according to the Lords
promise moves, yea mountains out of their places. Another has by the same,
the gift to cure diseases. Some there be also, that have a singular power to
work miracles. Some has the gift of prophecy, therewith either to open
things to come, or else other hydden mysteries. Another has given unto him
through wyttie judgment to put difference betwixt the spirits in men,
whether they be of god or not. Some have the gift to speak diverse
languages, which is a mean, that greatly serves toward the knowledge of
holy scriptures. Another has given unto him, either by inspiracion, or by
knowledge of secret learning to expound and declare that, which the other
spoke. For it is not to be supposed, that whosoever knows a language, always
understands the secret meaning thereof. But for having such gifts let no
man either stand in his own conceyte, since that he has is given him by
another, nor yet for lack of them be grieved, forasmuch as the gift is by
the holy gooste frelye given him, which being but one workemanne bestows
all these gifts, as diverse and soundrie as they be, in soundrye persons,
gyuynge every manne, as his pleasure is: wyllyng that through mutual charity
each man's gifts should be common to other, to thentente, that this variety
might make a pleasant consent and comlynes, and not dissencion. And why
should it not so be in the mystical body of Christ, as we se it is in a
natural body?

The text.
For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of one
body though they be many, yet are but one body, even so is Christ. For by one
spirit are we all baptized, to make one body whether we be Jews or Gentyles,
whether we be bond or fre, and have all droncke of one spirit. For the body:
is not one member, but many. If the foot say: I am not the hand, I am not of
the body: is he therefore not of the body? And if the care say: I am not the
eye. I am not of the body: is he therefore not of the body? If at the body were
an eye, where were the^ the ear? If al were hearing, where were the smelling?
But now has God set the members every one severally in the body as it has
pleased him. If they were al one member, where were the body? Now are there
many members, yet but one body: And the eye cannot say unto the hand: I have
no need of the. Again, the head cannot say to the fete: I have no need of
you. For as, albeit every man's body be one whole thing, yet is it made of
diverse members framed together, but so yet, that one spirit gives life to
all the members, of whom notwithstanding every one by himself considered are
many and diverse, yet is there of all made but one body: even so would Christ
have it to be in his body the church, whereof we be, because all we having
equallye received baptism are through the self same one spirit framed into
one body, whether we be Jews or Grecians, bond or fre, men or women, married
or single, high or low. And the same spirit have we all received, not
withstanding it have in diverse of us didiuerse operacions. Nor is our body
made of one part only, but of many and diverse: Now and if the foot
abasyng it self say, I am not the hand, I have with the rest of the body
nothing to do, is it therefore no part of the body? Or if the ear bewayling
her condition say: I am not the iye, I have with the rest of the body nothing
to do, is it therefore not of the body? The diverse placyng and use is not to
the member reprochful, but this variety rather apertayneth to the wealth of the
whole body. And what office soever is given to any part, the same is given unto
it to help the whole body. The iye is a goodly part of the body, but if the
whole body were an iye, where were the^ the ears? Again if the whole body were
aneare, where were the nose? God forseing this, made y^ body of diverse
members, and gave every member his proper place and office, not as they
deserved, but as his pleasure was. Now if this multitude and diversity of
members were al brought to one, for example, to a nose, or an iey, where were
the armonie and comlynes of the body become? But now so is it not, but whereas
every member severally differs from other, yet by reason they have but one
soul, the same make but one body, so that one member cannot loathe an other, be
it never so vile. For neither can the iye as a more excellent part of the
body, or as a more familiar instrument of the soul, say unto the hand, as a
more vile part: I have no need of thy help. Nor yet can the head, albeit it
be the palace of our souls, say unto the fete, as lowest parts: I care not
for your service.

The text.
Yea, rather a great deal those members of the body, which seem to be more
feeble, are necessary. And upon those members of the body, which we think
least honest, put we more honesty on. And our ungoodly parts have more
beauty on. For our honest members need it not. But God has so disposed the
body, and has given the more honor to that part which lacked, lest there
should be any strife in the body: but that the members should indifferently
care one for an other. And if one membre suffer, all suffer with him: if one
membre be had in honor, all members be glad also. So far vnsemyng is it,
that any membre of the body should be despised, that rather contrary wise,
such as seem imperfiter parts of the body, upon them, as necessary, have we
a special care: and such, as in comen estimacion are thought parts of less
honesty, to them outwardly we give great honor: and such as seem ungoodly,
to them join we some comely vesture, with our diligence recompensyng that,
which elswyse seems imperfect, knowing well, that by the vncomlynesse of any
part, the whole body is diswurshypped. For such parts, as of themself are
beautiful, need none outward ornament, for example, neither our faces nor
hands, when that yet our priuey parts must be covered with honest apparel.
And for this cause has God the creator of all, so wondrefully tempered and
disposed the whole body in a meruaylouse consent and agreement of so sundry
parts, that to such as seemed to lack some semelynes (albeit by nature no
part of the body is there unseemly) by our diligence more honor should be
adjoined, least among the me^bres self there might dissencio^ rise, among
whom none is there, whose use is not necessary, but rather that each one
should indifferently care for and defend other, lest if whiles through
dissencion each of them pryuately favors it self, the whole body and his
members decay and peryshe. But much rather, if to any membre any commodity
or discommoditie chance, the rest think the same to belong to themself: or
if any membre be grieved, with the same the rest also are grieved: or if any one
certain membre be honored, also the other be glad and rejoice thereof. Will
ye not at leastwise by this example leave your stryuing one with an other, you
I say, which are by the spirit of Christ more surely joined in one, than the
members of one body are by the natural spirit coupled to gether?

The text.
Ye are the body of Christ, and members one of an other. And God has also
ordained in the congregation, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thyrdly
teachers, then, them that do miracles: after that, the gifts of healyng,
helpers, gouerners, diversity of tongues. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets?
Are all teachers? Are all doars of miracles? Have all the gifts of healyng? Do
all speak with tongues? Do all interpret? Couete after the best gifts. And
yet show I unto you a more excellent way. How is it that nature can do
more, than grace? Are ye not the body of Christ, or at the least some part
of his members? whom he has after such sort placed in his body, which is
the church, that he has given every of them a convenient degree and office.
And in the first and chief place has he ordained Apostles, which being as
stuardes of the grace of the gospel execute here Christ's office. Secondarely
Prophets, either to show things to come, or else to declare secret things.
Thrydly teachers, which being endued with learning and rules of good order,
may bestow that they have, for the common profit. Fourthly such as work
miracles to keep under and subdue the power of deuyls, and to auaunce with them
the name and glory of Christ. Fyftly such as can heal diseases. And after
them such as can with their authority and counsel help other, that are in
trouble, and through a singular discreacion keep the multitude in obedience.
And last of al such as by knowledge of the tongues may be to other profitable.
This variety does not only encourage, but also compel you to mutual love and
concord, forasmuch as each one of you has need of others help. Are al
Apostles? are al Prophets? are al teachers? are all workers of miracles? have
all men the gift of healing? do all men speak diverse languages? have all men
the gift to expound? No not so, but every man has his own proper gift. No
man must be disdayned, but yet must every man endeavor to be endewed with such
gifts as among these are chief, and so still increase to such, as are better.
For it is not to be supposed, that every man has his gift so given unto him,
that he is without hope to receive better. And lest ye grow to arrogant of
the^, I say unto you, they are the gifts of the spirit, but yet is the holy
spirit of God wont with our endeavor and prayers to be provoked both to give
his gifts, and to increase and mayntaine the^. Excellent gifts are these,
which I have now rehearsed, but such, as may be in ungodly men. But I will
show you a more excellent way, than al these, whereunto every man must
spicially endeavor, since that without it nothing avail these gifts, which
we have spoken of, and which ye yet in such sort follow, as though there
were none other.

The.xiii. Chapter.
The text.
Though I speak with the tongues of men and of Angels, and have no love, I am
even as ^ounding brass: or as a tynk^yng cymball. And though I could prophecy,
and understood all secrets, and all knowledge: ye, if I have all faith, so
that I can move mountains out of their places, and yet have no love, I am
nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I
give my body even that I burned, and yet have no love, it profyteth me nothing.
AHygh gift is it to speak with tongues, for which ye specially please your
self. But though I speak with all tongues, not of me^ only, (but to increase
the matter) also with the tongue of Angels, and have not a fervent desire to do
for my neighbor, and to bestow the gift of God to the profit of all men: as
unprofitable shall I be, as brass, that with his vain sound breaks the
air, or as a cymball, that with his unprofitable tinklyng troubles the ears.
Yea and if I have also a more excellent gift than this, for example, the gift
of prophecy, whereby I know all the secret senses of the scriptures of God,
(if so much have chanced to any one man to understand al) yea if therewith ^e
joined a perfect knowledge of all learnynges, and have finally so strong a
faith, that I could with the same move even mountains out of their places, and
lack charity, in vain have I all the other, forasmuch as they profit no
body. If I have so great a gift to help other, y^ what substance so ever I
have, I would be content to bestow it al together for the relief of the poor,
yea if for y^ aid of such as are oppressed I would put my body in all ieopardy,
yea even to be burned, and yet (if it may possybly be) lack charity, y^ is to
say, a mind desirouse even freely to do well to other, of all my other gifts
have I none advantage. By charity only are we taught, how we should use other
gifts, which to have is for a man but vain, if he cannot use them. Other
gifts are sometime defaced with ambicion, sometime with malice, and sometime
with dissencion, from al which infeccions far is charity. Each other gift
has his own peculiar commodity, but charity can neither be corrupted, and
her use is most commen.

The text.
Love suffers long, and is courteous. Love enuyeth not. Love does not
frowardly, swells not, deals not dishonestly, seeks not her own, is not
provoked to anger, thinks no evil, reioyseth not in iniquity: but reioyseth
in the truth, suffers al things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things. Though that prophecyinges fail, either tongues cease, or
knowledge vanyshe away, yet love falls never away. Charity is mylde to
suffer wrongs, and also for this present life commodiouse and courteouse.
Charity enuieth no man, but as much as she has, bestows upon other: Not
evil tounged, but pleasing every manne: not swelling, but lowly humblyng
herself to other, nor thinks any thing unseemly for her, so that she may
do good: nor seeks her own private lucre, nor is thorough iniurye provoked
to revenge: and so far from doing wrong for wrong, that she not somuche as
myndeth to be revenged: so far from doing wrong herself, that she cannot in
other abide it: but rather reioyseth she in pure and godly manners, and of a
ready desire to do good suffers all things, be they never so paynfull: so
far from conceyuing any evil suspicion in any other, that he believes all
things, and despaireth lightly of no man, but through a sure trust of
amendment steadfastly contineweth in hope. And to be brief, charity never
fails, so far that after this life, when one manne shall have no need of an
others service, yet shall charitable love of minds abide still, and never
cease. And in what gift soever for this time a man increases, charity is
never away, but is a perpetual gift, spread generally through the whole life
and state of christian men: though it chance prophesying to fail, or
tounges to cease, or knowledge to be abolished by excess of more ample
knowledge.

The text.
For our knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesying is imperfect. But when
that which is perfect, is come, then that which is imperfect, shall be done
away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I
imagined as a child. But as soon as I was a man. I put away chyldyshnes.
Now we see in a glass, even in a dark speaking: but then shall we see face
to face. Now I know imperfectly: but then shall I know even as I am known.
Now abides faith, hope, and love, even these three: but the chief of these
is love. For that, which we of these things as yet possess, is imperfect, so
that neither our knowledge, neither understanding of mysteries through
prophecy, is yet full and perfect. But when that is come, which is perfect,
that which is now but half perfect, shall after a sort be abolyshed. Even as
it is in nature, so has christian religion her degrees, ages, and increase of
ages. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, and
imagined as a child: but as soon as I became a man, I cast away chyldishnes,
then wholly applying my mind to such things, as are better, until that by
little and little I attain to the best: whereto though I in this present life
come not, yet must I here do my endeavor that I may have it in the life to
come. A small porcio^ is it of God, which we now by these gifts understand,
and that not very clearly neither, but as it were in the glass of faith we see
but even shadows of heavenly things, and by scriptures, as it were in a dark
speaking, we have of the will of God, a conjecture. But when the high
perfeccion shall come, then shall we behold the truth self openly. Now for
this time know I God, but even imperfectly: then shall I being present know him
presently, even as I am known of him. For to be known of him, is to be
beloved of him, and the more beloved any man is of God, so much more fully and
thoroughly shall he enjoy the pleasure of that unspeakable knowledge. And albeit
for this present time other gifts cease as unprofitable and not necessary, by
reason that the doctrine of faith is sufficiently establyshed, for whose
enlarging and settling they served, yet in the mean time abide the gifts of
faith, hope, and charity. Faith wherewith we see a far of the immortal life
to come: hope, by the which we trust to be partakers thereof: and charity,
whereby we both love God again, who has so much done for us, and our
neighbor also for Gods sake. These three gifts excel al other, but yet among
these is charity chief, whom we ought either to thank for our hope and
faith, or at leastwise without whom these are not to salvation effectual.

The.xiiii. Chapter:
The text.
Labor for love, and couete spiritual gifts: but most chiefly that ye
may prophecye. For he that speaks with the tongue, speaks not unto men:
but unto God. For no man he heateth him. Howebeit in the spirit he speaks
mysteries. But he that prophecyeth, speaks unto men, for their edifying,
for their exhortacion, and for their comfort. He that speaks with the
tongue, profits himself: he that prophecyeth, edifieth the congregation. I
would that ye all spoke with tongues: but rather that ye prophesied. But these
things, which we have honorably rehearsed of the excellency of charity,
make not to this purpose, either to show that other gifts are to be despised
or disdayned: but rather to teach, that ye should in such sort labor for
charity, that ye yet nevertheless have in reverence and bear a favor unto
the gift of diversity in languages, and the gift also of interpretacion of
the word, most of al yet endeuouryng to that of both, which is more
profitable: that is to wete, to prophecy, declaryng the spiritual sense to
the wealth of the hearers. For he that does but speak with a tongue,
speakethe not to men, to whom with his voice he does no good, but speaks to
god, whom he prayseth with words not understand. For as touching the
edifying of other, if he be not understand, what makes it mattier, whether he
hold his peace or speak? The Same manne as inspired with the spirit of god
utters mysteries, which, put case himself understand, yet he bestows
the same upon no body: and put the case he do good, yet he does good, but to
himself only. In vain therefore speaks he in the congregation, whom no man hears, and him hears not a man whom he understands not: and
beside this, the spiritual word of god is not understood, unless a man
perceive the priueye and mystical sense, which the heavenly spirit of God
mente by the same words, which thing no man can do, but by the special
gift of the spirit. Contrary, he He that prophecieth speaks unto men for
their edifying.
that does the office of a prophet speaks not only to God, but also to
men, by diverse and sondrye ways profityng them, whiles he both provoke
evil lyuers to amendmente, and such as are slouthful to diligence, and
stiereth up and comfort them, that are faynte hearted. Mark, how great
difference there is betwixt one gift and another. He that speaks but with
tongues, profits only himself. But he, that by the gift of prophecy
expounds the mysteries of scripture, edifyeth the whole congregation.

Now then every good thing the more common it is the better it is. To
rehearse again therefore that, which I before said, lest ye might
paraduenture disdain the gift of tongues, I tell you, that it is of it self
a great thing, and a gift of the holy ghost, and would wyshe, that all ye
spoke with tongues, if it so seem good, but yet would I rather wish that ye
excelled in the other, which is more perfect.

The text.
For greater is he that prophecyeth, then he that speaks with tongues,
except he expound it: that the congregation may have edifying. Now
brethren, if I come unto you speaking with tongues: what shall I profit you,
except I speak to you other by reuelacion or by knowledge, or by prophesying,
or by doctrine? Moreover, when things without life give found (whether it be
a pype or an harp) except they make a distinccion in the soundes, how shall
it be known what is pyped or harped? For if the trompe give an uncertain
voice, who shall prepare himself to the war? Even so likewise when ye speak
with tongues, except ye speak words that have sygnificacion, how shall it be
understand what is spoken? For ye shall but speak in the air. Many kinds of
voices are in the world, and none of them are without significacion. If I
know not what the voice means, I shall be unto him that speaks, an alient:
and he that speaks, shall be an alient unto me. Even so ye (for as much as ye
couete spiritual gifts) seek that ye may excel, unto the edifying of the
congregation. Wherefore, let him that speaks with tongues pray, that he may
interpret also. For if I pray with tongue, my spyrite prays: but my
understanding does no good. What is it then? I will pray with the spirit,
and will pray with the understanding. I will sing with the spirit, and will
sing with the understanding. For else, when thou blessest with the spirit, how
shall he that occupyeth the room of the unlearned, say Amen, at thy geuyng of
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say? Thou verily geuest
thanks well, but the other is not edifyed. I thank my god that I speak with
tongues more then ye all, yet had I lever in the congregation to speak five
words with my understanding to the informacion of other, rather then ten
thousand words with the tongue. More excellent is he that prophecieth, than
is he, which with a language utters holy words, but such as no man
understands, except peradventure he that first spoke with tongues, straight
expound, what he said, that the people may yet thereby take some profit, and
be edified. For in deed some there be, which not somuche as thoroughly
understand themself, what they sounded with their tongue. Of words
understood some fruit may be taken, yfye otherwise think, conceive and
imagyne, that I now first came to you, and could do nothing, but speak with
languages: what good shall I do you, onles I so speak, that after I declare
unto you the misterye that I spoke, by the gift of reuelacion, or else by the
gift of knowledge eloquently entreat of such things, as apertayne to the
knowledge of faith, or by the gift of prophecy open unto you hydden
mysteries, or by the gift of learning, teach you some such points, as belong
to good manners. Moreover, even things, that have no life, as a pype or a
harp, which are made and prepared for nothing else, but to make a sound, yet
except the same make a certain distinction in their soundes, and by convenient
measures and harmony express either the argument or dittie of the song, or else
the purpose, whereunto the song moves: that is to say, if these instruments
do nothing, but give a sound, what profit or pleasure shall the hearer take,
since he can not discern, what is played with the pype or harp, whether it be
merye or sad? Or if the trumpet make an uncertain voice, not puttyng
difference in the very sound, whether it would have men to begin battle,
or to retreyte back, what avails it with a trumpet to make such a noise,
since the soldier knows not, whereunto he is called? And even likewise,
unless ye speaking with tongues utter such words, as represente some certain
and known mattier to the hearers, ye shall speak in vain, since that, which
is said of you, cannot be vnderstande^, by mean whereof the speakers words
shall not enter into the hertes of the hearers, but shall with their vain
noise only fill the air. Many and diverse kinds of tongues are there in the
world, of which every one has his significacion and voice. The voice may
of al men be heard, but if there be to the voice nothing else adioined, in
vain shall one of us speak to another. For albeit each of us pronounce our
languages well, yet because neither understands other, it chances, that
both I, which speak Greek, seem an aliante to him that is of Afrike, and he
again an aliante to me, being ignorant of the Afrike language. Wherefore since
ye people of Counthe of your own accord follow, and much esteem the gift
of the tongues, by mine advise ye shall apply your selves to the obtaining of
higher matiers that ye to the whole congregation may become profitable. Let
him that speaks with tongue, pray that he may interpret also.
Whosoever therefore has the gift of languages, let such one with prayer desire
of god, that he may also receive the gift of interpretacion. Elswyse, if I
pray with a tongue unknown to the people, for an exaumple, among the Grecians
with the language of the Persia^s, or if I speak a language, as well unknown
unto my self, as to other, (as some are wont to do, which delyghte to sing a
song in a strange tongue, learned by them without book, which they
understand not themselves) in such case in deed my spirit and breathe
utters words of prayer, but my soul is without fruit, since I little or
nothing profit my self thereby, and am also paynefull to other, and not only
unprofitable, but also to be laughed at. What must I do then? I will, when
time and place require, pray with my voice, but not therewith only contented,
I will pray with heart and mind, and with the instruments of my voice sing
out the praises of God, but not so contented neither, I will sing with mine
heart and understanding, adjoining thereto the knowledge of the tongue. For if
thou express and sing forth the praises of God with a language, which no man knows, how shall the unlearned, which answers in stead of the
people, make answer with the used word, Amen, when thou haste ended thy
prayer of thanks? For by puttyng thereto this word at the end, that is
confirmed, which was spoken before in prayers or Hymns. For as ye know, this
pageante, (as a man may call it) has diverse parts, so that the learned
begin, the unlearned and confuse multitude approuyng that, which was said,
with one voice answer Amen. And how shall any manne make such answer, if
he know not, what thou say. For notwithstanding that thou say, be a
holy thing, and for thy self paraduenture good, yet in the mean season the
people become nothing better, which is for that purpose resorted together,
that by the hearing of such as are learned, they may be the better, learning
in the open place, how they should live at home. But lest any think me, as
one ignoraunte of the tongues, not to favor that gift, as the common sort of
men uses much to auaunce and praise such points, wherein themselves are
skylfull, and to despise and disprayse such things, as they know not, I give
thanks to God, that in the gift of tongues I go beyond all you, which for
this knowledge most stand in your own conceits. For no kind of language is
there used among you, which I cannot both speak and understand. And
therefore whereas I more highly esteem the gift of interpretacion, tha^ the
gift of tongues, it is a proof that I do it not of malice, but of an upright
judgment, coumptyng the gift of tongues a gift rather to be used in private
places, than in open assemblies. For in the church and assemblye of saints,
rather had I speak four or five words, that I first understanding what I
say my self, may afterward cause, that other likewise understand me, than
in such sort to speak ten thousand words, as no man else understands, nor
parauenture my self neither.

The text.
Brethren, be not ye children in wit. Howbeit, as concerning maliciousnes be
children: but in wit be perfect. In the law it is written: with soundry
tongues and with soundry lyppes will I speak unto this people, and yet for all
that, will they not hear me, says the Lord. Wherefore tongues are for a sign,
not to them that believe, but to them that believe not. Contrarywyse, prophesying
serves not for them that believe not: but for them which be leave. If therefore
when all the congregation is come together and al speak with tongues, there
come in they that are unlearned, or they which believe not: will they not say,
that ye are out of your wits? But and if all prophecye, and there come in one
that believes not, or one unlearned, he is rebuked of al men, and is judged of
every man, and so are the secrets of his bert opened, and so falls he down
on his fare, and worshyppeth God, and says, that God is in you of a truth.
Therefore brethren, since (as I before said) godly life has, as it were,
certain ages and increases, endeavor your selves to grow up from lower to
higher gifts, that ye seem not always children. Certain gifts are there,
meet for such, as have lately begun to profess Christ: and certain other
are there, meet for them, which are in this religion more grown up. Touching
simple and hurtles manners, brethren I would ye continued children still, but
in spiritual gifts, I would ye went always forward, until ye come to the
highest. Nor think it now sufficient for you to hurt no man, but labor
must ye being now full ripe, to be able to do good and to help all men. It
is the manner of children to wonder at small things, and for trifles much to
please themself, but yet in process of time they despise such toys, as they
before were proud of, and labor to obtain greater things. And so likewise
has christian faith her beginnings, wherein it is unseemly for a man to
spend all his life. That this is so, long since testified god himself, this
wise speaking by the mouth of his prophet Esai: with sundry tongues and
sundry lyppes will I speak unto this people, and yet for all that, they will
not hear me. The gift of tongues therefore was given by god for the auauncyng
and furtheraunce of the primative church, that by this miracle unbelievers
might be provoked to believe, whereas to such, as believe already, it is
unprofitable. Prophecy serves not for them that believe not, but for them which
believe.
But contrariwise the gift of prophecy not only serves for unbelievers to
make the^ amend their lives, but profits also the faithful, that they may
daily in their faith become more strong, and every day better in living.
Beside this, how little profit the use of languages has, every manne may
well see, by that the same does sometime hurt and offend. For conceive now,
that the whole congregation were comen together, and that every manne spoke
with diverse tongues, being such as are unknown: for example, if one speak
Hebrew, another Latin, and the third Greek, and if in the mean season some
such enter into your congregation, as are christian men or else unbelievers,
ignoraunte yet of the tongues, will not these, when they shall hear such a
confuse sound of diverse languages, and understand none, say, that ye like
mad and frantike men so fondely behave your selves? Contrarywyse if by the gift
of prophecy one teach, an other give counsel, one exhort, and an other
comfort, and in the mean season some unlearned stranger enter into your
company, or else an unbeliever, which both understands, what ye say, and is
likewise understood, does not such one, whiles he knowledgeth in you
perfect christianity, both in himself condemn his own supersticion, and
abhor his own diuelishe manners in comparison of your godlynes, and plainly
sees his own conscience, whiles he by you hears the right rule of true
religion? from which he sees himself until that time far swarued, fynding
himself in such faults gyltie, as ye in word reprove and detest. By mean
whereof this will finally ensue, that he being changed into a new man, and
repenting himself, will fall down flat upon the ground, acknowledging and
openly testifying, that ye are undoubtedly inspired with the holy ghost, nor
speak like mad men which being with a diuelishe fury possessed power out
words, which neither themselfes understand nor other, vttring a sound, no
man woteth what.

The text.
How is it then brethren? As often as ye come together, every one of you has a
song, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a reuelacion, has an interpretacio^.
Let al things be done unto edifying. If any man speak with tongue, let it be
by two or at the most by three, and that by course, and let an other interpret
it. But if there be no interpreter, let him keep silence in the congregation,
and let him speak to himself and to God. Let the Prophets speak two or
three, and let the other judge. If any reuelacion be made to an other that
sits by, let the first hold his peace. For ye may al prophecy one by one,
that al may learn, and that all may have comfort. And the spyrites of the
Prophets are in the power of the Prophets. For God is not causer of strife,
but of peace: as (I teach) in all congregacions of the saints Let your women
keep silence in the congregacions: For it is not permitted unto them to speak:
but to be under obedience, as says the law. If they will learn any thing,
let them ask their husbands at home. For it is a shame for women to speak in
the congregation. What then must ye do brethren? As often as ye resort to the
comen assembly, each of you brings his gift with him: one has a spiritual
song to praise God with all, an other has doctrine to instruct men's lives
with, one has the gift of reuelacion, to declare the hydden and dark secrets
in holy scriptures, an other has and is endued with the gift of tongues.
Disdain none of these gifts, but let all in the congregacions be bestowed for
the common weal of the whole number, but yet so, that it be done without
disturbau^ce and confusion. And let them also, which are endued with the gifts
of tongues, have their time and place, but so yet, that at one time no more but
only two speak, or at the most three, and yet not they together neither, but
by course, nor let them speak only, but se, that there be one present, to
declare to the people what they said. One interpreter is sufficient for two or
three of them, that have the gift of tongues, because it is not necessary, that
many words be spoken in languages. If there lack a kunnyng interpreter of
the tongues, it is not needful, that he should speak in the co^gregacio^: if
he have nothing, but the knowledge of the tongues, let him use his gift, but in
private places, and there praise God, and edify himself, because that in the
congregation the common business is in hand. Likewise let not all the
Prophets speak, but only two or three, and that by course, but some such
would I to be present, which have the gift to discern the spirit of
Prophets, whether it be true or not, which can disprove the same, if ought be
said, that is unmeet and vnbesemyng the spirit of Christ. But now if whiles
one speaks, he that sytteth by, begin as one inspired by God in the mean
time to speak, lest there might be a confusion of voices, let the first hold
his peace. For then it appears, that the doubt is opened to the one, which
the other sought for, since that by inspiracio^ and moving of the holy ghost he
let the first to speak. And if ye this do, none impediment is there, but
all may prophecy, so that it be done, by course, and each one in speaking give
place to other, that every man may have more fruit of knowledge, whiles every
Prophet shows, wherewith God has inspired him, that all may enjoy and
receive more plentiful comfort, whiles every one upon the common weal
bestows that, which by the spirit of Christ is given unto him. Nor lay for
your excuse, that such as are inspired with the holy ghost are not their own
men, no more then we see ravished men to be. But think it much otherwise in
mad men, than in such as have received the spirit of Christ, which in
such sort rauysheth the mind, that a man is nethlesse his own man, whether
the matter require a man to speak or to hold his peace. Sober is this
inspiracion, and nothing else, but an enforcemente of a man's godly mind to
such things, as make to Gods glory. This spirit should so much the more For
God is no causer of strife, but of peace.
serve unto the common quietness, and so much be further from contencion,
because the same comes of God, which is the author of peace, and not of
confusion and sedicion. And since this is in all congregacions of christian men
observed and kept, mete is it also, that it be kept in your metynges, if ye
will have men to think them good, lest ye be thought to swerve from other in
customs, from whom ye dissente not in religion.

And for this cause let your women in solemn assemblyes hold their peace,
lest if, (as that kind is to much given to babbling) there arise an uncomely
confusion. For women are not authorized, to preach abroad, as chief doers of
matters, but commanded to be obedient unto their husbands. For in Genesis
this speaks God unto the woman: thou shall attend upon thy husbands will and
he shall bear rule over the. Let women knowledge this law, not only by
coueryng their heads, but also with silence, wherewith womanhead is most
commended. Some will say, do thou so farfurth forbid women to speak, that
thou wylt not suffer them for their learning to ask a question? Utterly I
forbid them in open places to speak, but if there be any thing, which they
understand not sufficiently, and are desyrouse to know it, let them ask of
their hushusbandes at home. So shall they neither be defrauded of teaching, nor
do any thing unseemly. For surely an unseemly sight is it to see a woman
speak in the chrstian congregation, namely since so to do is coumpted a foul
thing even among the paynims. What means this, ye Corinthia^s, that ye should
be grieved to keep that custom, which is of al other kept?

The text.
Sprung the word of God from you? Either came it unto you only? If any man
think himself to be a Prophet, either spiritual, let him know what things
I write unto you. For they are the commandments of the Lord. But and if any
man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. Wherefore brethren, couete to prophecye,
and forbydde not to speak with tongues. Let all things be done honestly and in
order, (among you.) Came the gospel first from you, that other must be
compelled to keep your customs? or is the gospel come only to you? If ye
neither be the first, that received the gospel, nor the only men that
profess it, why disdain ye to frame your selfs after the customs of other?
And if any among you be a prophet, or seem otherwise endued with spiritual
gifts, let him be assured, that such things, as I write unto you, are no
commandments of mine, but the Lords. But if any manne through contencion so
use him self, as though he were ignoraunte, despising these things, as though
they were but man's rules, let such one at his own peril be ignorant,
surely god will likewise be ignorant of him and refuse him. I will not strive
with you in this matier, but think this sufficient for my part, that I have
given you warnyng. To finishe therefore this matier, labor brethren, to have
the gift of prophecy, being a gift of much more excellency, but so, that in
the mean season such be not restrained to speak with tounges, which have no
gift else, so that all things be done comely and in an order, as I have told
you, lest by the contrary any dishonesty or trouble chance.

The.xv. Chapter.
The text.
Brethren, as pertaynyng to the Gospel which I preached unto you, which ye
have also accepted, and in the which ye continue, by the which also ye are
saved: I do ^ou to wit, after what manner I preached unto you, if ye keep it,
except ye have believed in vain. But now because I hear say brethren, that
some of you doubt of the rysynge again of the dead, of such I mean, as
through a pride in worldly knowledge still remaynyng in them cannot yet herein
be persuaded, touching this article I need to teach you no new thing but
only call to your remembrance, the gospel, which I first taught you, and
which ye once received, wherein hitherto ye continewe, and by mean whereof ye
obtain salvation: insomuche, that it is both for me superfluous to teach you
the same again, which I once well taught you, and for you also little honesty,
inconstantly to fall back from that, which ye once favored, speaciallye since
ye have experience, that my preaching of the gospel is a doctrine effectual to
salvation. Now is this point, to believe the resurrection of the dead, the
chiefeste part of the doctrine, of the gospel. Wherein ye ought so to be
assured, that ye thereof doubt not, onles ye have given credence thereto in
vain, as god forbid ye should. For what auayled it to fauer and embrace the
gospel if ye deny the principal part of the same, that is to wete, that the
dead shall live again?

The text.
For first of al I delivered unto you, that which I received: how that Christ
died for our sins, agreing to the scriptures: And that he was buried, and
that he arose again the third day according to the scriptures: and that he was
seen of Cephas, the^ of the twelve. Aft^r that was he seen of mo then five
hundred brethren at once of which many remain unto this day, and many are
fallen aslepe. After that appeared he to James, then to all the Apostles. Me
thinks ye should chiefly remember that thing which I first taught you by
mouth, and now rehearse unto you the same by wrytinge, being such also, as ye
once received: which is, that the Lord Jesus Christ dyed, and by his death
delivered us from sin, making a mendes for our offenses as the scriptures
many hundred years before said should be, that he, should like a lamb, be
led to the slaughter, that through his strypes he might heal our sins, and
by his death upon the cross reign and suppress the tyranny of the devil.
Beside this ye must also believe, that he not only verily dyed for you, but was
also buried, and the third day rose again, which also was long before
prophesied, in the dark sayings of prophets, to thentent ye should the
better believe, when that is done in deed, which god by holy men promised
should be. For this speaks O see: after two days, and the third day will we
rise again, and live in the sight of him. Again, David this wise speaks:
thou shall not leave my soul in hell. And because ye should more steadfastly
believe, beside this I taught you also, how after that he was risen again, he
showed him self plainly and euedentlye to many, first to Cephas, then to the
twelve, after that was he seen of more, than five hundred brethren gathered al
together. And lest any might doubt of the truth of this history, of all this
noumber many are alive even until this day, and some are deed. After this was
be seen of James, which was called brother of the Lord, and was first byshope
of Jerusalem. Then was he seen of all the disciples, not only of the twelve,
which were first called apostles, which name was after derived into many.

The text.
And last of all he was seue of me: as of one that was borne out of due time.
For I am the least of the Apostles, which am not worthy to be called an
Apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God. But by the grace of God,
I am that I am. And his grace which is in me, was not in vain: but I labored
more abundauntly then they all: yet not I: but the grace of God which is with
me. Therefore, whither it were I or they, so we preach, and so have ye believed.
And last of al was he seen of me, as of an unseasonable borne apostle, which
after the full time was at the last, like an imperfect child, rather cast,
than well borne. I complain not, because I last saw the Lord, but coumpte it
a great matter, that I deserved to se him. For I am the least of the apostles
and unworthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of god,
whom the apostles stablysh. Unworthy therefore was I even as much as at last
to be chosen into the felowshype of thapostles, but the fre goodness of god
vouchsaued to give me this honor, notwithstanding I deserved it not, so that
whatsoever I am, al is of his goodness, and not of my deseruynge. And I suffered
not his grace in me to be either idle or baraine. For albeit in order of time I
be last, yet in preaching of the gospel am I not behind the^, but have
labored more, than any other of the apostles, which I say, lest for this any
might less esteem mine authority, because I was last chosen to be an
apostle. Howebeit this labor of mine, I vouche not as mine, but give al to
gods goodness, by whose help all was wrought. To return therefore to the
matier, whether in preaching the gospel their authority be more, or mine, it
little forces, sure is it, that we with one assent preach one thing, and
that, which we with one assente preached, that believed ye, as a sure and an
undoubted doctrine. We always teach one thing: this remains, that ye
likewise continewe in one belief, not now doubting again of that, whereupon
ye were once agreed.

The text.
If Christ be preached how that he rose from the dead: how say some among you,
that there is no resurreccion of the dead? If there be no rising again of the
dead: the^ is Christ not risen again. If Christ be not rise again, then is
our preaching in vain, and your faith is also in vain, ye and we are found
false witnesses of God. For we have testified of God, how that he raised up
Christ: whom he raised not up, if it be so that the dead rise not again. For
if the dead rise not a gain, then is Christ not risen again. If it be so,
that Christ rose not again, then is your faith in vain, and ye are yet in
your sins. Therefore they which are fallen aslepe in Christ, are perysshed. It
in this life only we believe on Christ, then are we of all men most miserable.
But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them
that slept. For by a man came death, and by a man came the resurreccion of the
dead. For as by Adam all dye: even so by Christ shall all be made alive: but
every manne in his own order. The first is Christ, then they that are
Christ's at his coming. Then comes the end, when he has delivered up the
kingdom to God the father, when he has put down all rule and all auctoryte
and power. If by all the apostles witnesses it has been, and is still
preached, that Christ the prince and author of resurreccion is risen again
from death, what malapertnes is it, that among you some say, that there is no
resurreccion of the dead? For if there be none, then follows it, that not so
much as Christ him self is risen again. For to what purpose is it, that our
head and captain should rise, but to go before, and prepare the
resurrection of us his members, openyng the way to us all? And if Christ be not
risen, certainly vain is our preaching, vain is also your belefe and trust.
And if we be certainly persuaded, that Christ is risen again, as well
persuaded and believe must we, that we shall rise again, for whose restoring to
life he rose. If we rise not, this follows, that both you and I have not only
lost our labors, I in preaching, ye in beleuyng, but are also found wrongful
against god, of whom we falsely reported, that he raised Christ from death,
whom he raised not, as he in deed raised him not, if other dead men rise not
again. For either must ye believe both, or deny both, because that of For if
the dead rise not again, the^ is Christ not risen again.
the head and members there is but one resurreccion. If the dead rise not,
for whose sake Christ rose, then Christ himself rose not. And if Christ
rose not, vain was your belefe, that he is risen, and in vain believed ye,
that through a trust and confidence in him ye were made free from sin.
Whereupon it also follows that ye are still subject to your former sins, nor
has baptism, whereby we in the mean season through Christ spiritually rise
again from syn, wrought anythyng in us. They also, which have dyed with this
trust, and with this hope have patiently suffered cruel martyrdom and death,
are utterly goen for ever, if there be no hope of resurreccion. And if all our
hope conceived of Christ reach no further, than for the term of this present
life, we be not only wretched people, but also more miserable than they,
which to Christ are strangers. For they yet have after a sort the pleasures
of this present life, whereas we are both here in trouble for Christ's name, and
shall after this life have no reward, if we rise not body and soul again.
But god forbid, that any manne to his own destruction have any such fond
belefe. But rather if ye believe that Christ is risen again, as every godly
manne does, thereof follows necessaryly, that we shall also rise again. For
in him began resurreccion, which shall in us be made perfyte: and as he
taking again his body upon him rose from death, so shall we both body and
soul rise again, lest otherwise the head might be divided from his
members. He as prince and captain first rose again, as the first fruits
of all such, as dye with hope to rise again.

He began resurreccion, other straighte followed, as companyo^s of the lords
resurreccion, and we in time to come shall follow them. For it is not to be
doubted, but that he will likewise do in all his members, as he has done not
only in him self already, but also in many holy men. For we must by
imaginacion conceive two bodies, one subject to death, which began in
Adam, another appointed to life immortal, which had his beginning in Christ.
Therefore as at the beginning through one man's sin death entered, which
being as it were from the head derived into the members rages and infecteth
all men: so by one manne, which was utterly free from all sin, came in
resurreccion of the dead. For through only Adames offense all we that
descended of him, are subject to death: and through Christ's only
innocence, all such shall be restored to life immortal, as have desearued to
be joined into his body. All shall rise again, but yet every manne in his
order: the first of all is Christ, then such as cleave unto Christ, as the
parts of the body cleave unto the head, of whom, a certain, going out of
their graves, rose with Christ, and the rest shall all rise at his last
coming. And when the resurreccion of the whole body is done and paste, then
shall nothing remain, but an end of this worldly alteracions, which shall
not be before the utter abolyshment of y^ tyranny of death, what time Christ
as a victoriouse conqueror shall deliver up a quiet and a peasyble kingdom to
god his father, to whom by subduyug his enemies he restores his dominion: and
after that he has driven away utterly from his whole body, and brought to
naught, all the power, rule, and authority of his adversaries.

The text.
For he must reign till he have put all this enemies under his feet. The
last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. For he has put all things under
his feet. But when he says all things are put under him, it is manyfeste
that he is excepted, which did put all things under him. When all things are
subdued unto him, then shall the son also himself be subject unto him, that
put all things under him: that God may be all in all. Else what do they,
which are baptized over the dead, if the dead rise not at all? Why are they
then baptized over them, yea, and why stand we allwaye then in ieoperdye? By
our reioysyng which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye daily. That I
have fought with beasts at Ephesus after the manner of men, what auauntageth it
me, if the dead rise not again? Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall
dye. Be not ye deceived: evil words corrupt good manners. Awake truly out
of sleep, and sin not. For some have not the knowledge of God. I speak this
to your shame. For so long necessary is it, that the son should labor and
travail about the recovery of the kingdom to god his father, until that he
have utterly subdued all his enemies, and so tread them down vnderneyth his
feet, that there be no rebellion at all, nor fear of evil. Through sin
death reigns, and through death, y^ devil. When sin is extinguished, then
shall death reign no longer. And albeit in this life we to our power labor
about it, yet shall we not fully have it, until that by the last resurreccion,
all the power of death shall be quite abolyshed, when our last enemy of all,
which most stubbernly rebelled, shall be vanquished for ever. For by this
way has the father decreed, that all things shall become subject unto his
son, as it is written in the psalms: thou haste put all things under his
feet.

But when scripture says, that all things shall be under the fete of the
son, it is not to be understood that the son shall only possess that
kingdom the father being excluded: for the kingdom of the father and the son,
is all one kingdom. This new and peculiar kingdom, wherein there shall be no
rebellion of sinful desires against the will and pleasure of God, the father
recouereth unto himself by his son, which he in such sort uses with his
son in common, that nethlesse in the father the authority remains, as in
him, of whom the son received the same kingdom, which is in such sort fully
and wholly the sons, that yet the father loses nothing, since of both there
is but one will. And then when all things shall be subject to the son, then
shall the son self, wholly, that is to say, with his body mystical, yield
and submit himself to the father, by whom as chief doer, al things became
subject to the son, that thencefurth no not in the members shall there any
thing be left, which shall to Christ be contrary: but that the whole son
shall consent with the father, of whom as of the first begynner, al things
shall depend, to whom as chief doer, all men shall give thanks for all that
ever in any time and place has been well done. Now whereas I long since taught
you this, and ye likewise learned the same, what means this, that some no we
doubt a fresh, whether the dead shall live again? Whereof if there be no hope,
vain is their labor, which albeit more supersticiously, tha^ godly, in stead
of the dead receive baptism, fearyng lest such one, as dyed without
christenyng, shall not rise among ryghteouse people. And to avoid this, they
prepare one, which in stead of the dead may answer, that he believes, and
desires baptism. These men's faith I allow, but their doings I allow not.
For as it is folyshnes to think that another man's baptism helps the dead,
so believe they truly and well, there shall a resurreccion be. For if they
thought, that the dead man should no more rise again, never would they for his
sake be so careful. Yea and we By out rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus
out lord I dye daily
our selfs do folishly, which for Christ's doctrine daily put our life in
ieopardie, if after such grievous torments no reward follow. Nor are we only in
ieopardie, but also in manner dye daily, by that we oftetymes stand in some new
ieopardie, nor are dispached with one kind of death. And as in this my saying
I lie not, so may I always glory in this rejoicing, which I have through Jesus
Christ our lord, to whose glory turn all the miseries, which we suffer. Whereas
among the Ephesia^s for Christ's gospel I suffered so much trouble, yt I could
not chose, but fight with be astes, as one most surely appointed to dye, what
profit was there in, or what gained I thereby, if the dead rise not again? What
madness is it without compulsion to sustain so many troubles, if as soon as a
man is once dead, it nothing force, how he has lived? If we after our death
be paste all hope, what remains there, but y^ we, as the wicked persons spoke
in Esai, distrusting the promises of y^ life to come, and measuring all the
whole state of blysful life by worldly commodities, say: let us eat and
drink, for to morrow we shall dye. That we took in this life, that and nothing
else is our own, for after death we be nothing. The philosophers or false
Apostles sing such songs in your ears paraduenture, but beware lest with
their tales they deceive you, and bring you into a perylouse error, always
remembering, what was truly said of a certain poet of yours: evil words
corrupt good manners. Of idleness and wanton living grows this distruste,
whiles some knowing their own enormities, deny that there shall any
resurreccion be: in such blyndenes of sin are they which live with out
regard of godly life. But awake ye through the study of ryghteousnes, leaving
your pleasures, lest ye fall with other into the great ieopardye of distrust.
For albeit there be some among you, which swell and are proud of their
worldely wisdom, yet are they ignorant of the highest part of wisdom, in
that they know not God, nor believe that by his might the dead can be restored
to life again, not with standing his almyghtie power: nor yet remember, that
it is an easyer thing to restore that, which is decayed, than of nothing to
make somewhat. This tell I you, not of any displeasure, but to the entente ye
should for shame he^cefurth no more give ear to such, as labor to make you
believe such folishe and deuilishe points.

The text.
But some man will say: how arise the dead? with what body shall they come?
Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quyckened, except it dye. And what
sowest thou? Thou sowest not that body that shall be: but bare corn (as of
whete, or of some other) but God gives it a body at his pleasure, to every
sede his own body. All flesh is not one manner of flesh: but there is one
manner of flesh of beasts, another of fishes, and another of birds. There is
also celestial bodies, and there are bodies terrestrial. But the glory of the
celestial is one, and the glory of the terrestrial is another. There is one
manner glory of the Sun, and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of
the stars. For one star differs from an other in glory. So is the
resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corrupcion, it ryseth again in
incorrupcion. It is sown in dishonor, it ryseth again in honor. It is sown
in weakness, it ryseth again in power. It is sown a natural body, it ryseth
again a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual
body, as it is also written: the first man Adam was made a living soul, and
the last Adam was made a quickenyng spyrite. Howbeit, that is not first which
is spiritual: but that which is natural, and then that which is spiritual.
The first manne is of the earth, erthy: the second manne is the Lord from
heaven (heavenly.) As is the erthy, such are they that are erthy. And as is
the heavenly, such are they that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image
of the erthy, so shall we bear the image of the heavenly. This say I brethren,
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God. Neither does
corrupcion inherit vncorrupcion. Behold, I show you a mystery. We shall not
all sleep: but we shall all be changed, and that in a momente, in the
twinkling of an lie by the last trompe. For the trompe shall blow, and the
dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible
must put on incorrupcion, and this mortal must put on immortalytie. When
this corruptible has put on incorrupcion, and this mortal has put on
immortalytie: then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written: Death is
swalowed up in victory: Death where is thy styng? Hell where is thy victory?
The styng of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks
be unto God which has given us victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore my dear brethren, be ye steadfast and immovable, always rich in the
work of the Lord, for as much as ye know, how that your labor is not in
vain in the Lord. But now since it is certain, that a general resurrection
shall be, some curious person will ask: after what sort shall it be, and in what
kind of bodies shall men rise? since the bodies, which we now have, are turned
into ashes, and earth, or into some other thing more vile. Thou fool, which
maruailest, how God can once do in renyuing bodies again, that nature daily
works in a sede cast into the ground. Thou sowest a dry dead sede into the
earth, and there again the same being putrified seems to dye, and so finally
growyng out of the earth, as it were, lives again and grows, nor could
the same in any wise live again, unless it be first dead and buried. But now
grows the sede up in another form, that it had, when it was cast into the
earth. Into the earth is cast a little, vile, black and dry grain, which
beeng by continaunce of time putrified there, in due season grows up, and
becomes first a tender grass, and then a stalk, and so at the last an
ear. Of all which three there appeared none in that small grain, which thou
before dydest cast into the earth. Every sede has his power, which, when it is
grown up, appears, so that it may now seem utterly to be an other, where
thou in deed know it to be the same, save that it is changed into a better
form. See thou not, of a little kernel, how great a tree grows? how
mighty a stem there is, how the roots spread, how large boughs, what a
noumbre of branches, how pleasant blosomes, and plentefulnes of fruit
there is? Of all which there was nothing, when thou did cast that sealye small
kernel into the ground. And yet at that time all these things did thou
hope for, upon trust conceived of y^ works of nature* and dare thou not upon
trust of Gods almyghtye power surely look for the like to be done by God? A
kernel it was, that thou sowedste, and not a tree, and yet gives God to that
kernel once quickened, a body, such as his pleasure is, which gives every
kind of sede a special property, that whereas all grow again, yet have they
not in all points the same form they had before. And after like sort is it in
all kinds of beasts, whereof every one has his several sede, so that of every
seed every beast can not be engendered. And though this to all beasts be
commen to have All flesh is not one manner of flesh.
a fleshy body, yet is there betwixt one flesh and an other no small
difference. For the flesh of men is of one manner, and the flesh of beasts,
fyshes and birds is of another. Likewise also though such creatures, as lack
life, be called bodies, yet is there a diverse form in heavenly bodies, and in
earthly, as in stones, water and earth. Yea and as there is of heavenly bodies
one beauty and comlynes, and of earthly an other, even so a diversity is
there among the heavenly bodies them self. First nether is there like glory
and bryghtnes of the Moon, with the son, nor of other stars with the
Moon, and briefly even the very stars self in brightness diffre one from
another, for all are not as bright as the day star is. Likewise at the
resurrection all men shall rise with their own bodies, but yet in an unlike
glory, without doubt as it shall please God to give them, and as they in this
life have deserved. For the ungodly shall rise in one form and the good in an
other. Among them also that are good, every one, as he has in this life used
himself, so shall he excel other in the gloriousnes of his new body. Yet
generally all good men shall have a much more active body, than was that,
which they by death forsook. And as it is in nature to cover the seed under the
earth, the same is in the matier of resurrection, the burial of the dead
body. And that which in the seed is growyng again, is in the body rysyng
again. And as in the one, that is much better, which grows up, than was
that, which was cast into the earth: even so here, albeit it be the same body,
that ryseth again, yet is it far unlike. There is sown as it were a grain
into the earth, a body subject to corruption, but the same shall rise again
without all corruption. There is hydden in the earth a vile body and loathsome,
but there shall rise again a body both gloriouse and honorable. There is
buried a body, which even when it lived was weak, but it shall rise again
full of power and might. There is buried a body, which albeit were alive, yet
were it gross and heavy, and by the reason of that bourdaynouse to the soul,
governor of the same, but there shall rise again not a natural, but a
spiritual body, which shall to the soul be no let, whither soever it move.
For this is a difference of bodies also, one is natural, which has need of
meat and drink, and is weryed with labor, which is diseased, which with
age wears away, which with his gross and fautie instruments, ofttimes
lets the intent of the soul, which by reason of froward desyers oftentimes
provoke to vice, to whom if the soul be obedient and give over, the same is
as it were turned into the body, and grows out of his nature into flesh:
another is spiritual, which being in this life by little and little purged from
sensual appetites and desiers, and after by resurrection renewed again, is in
manner transfourmed into the nature of the soul, to whom it by godly desire
applied it self: that as our soul obeyng the spirit of god is ravished and
in manner transformed into him: so may our bodies being* obedient unto the
soul be pourged, and shaking of his grossenes be purified into such a body, as
is very like to the soul. This gross and earthly body received we of our
first father Ada^, which as he was made of earth, so was he subject to earthly
desiers. But there is an other second Adam, not somuche the begynner of our
nativity, as of our resurrection, which as he has an heavenly beginning, so
was he fre from al infeccion of earthly desyers. And so read we in Genesis:
The first man Adam was made to live through y^ benefit of the soul, but yet
so, that the soul being as it were bound to the gross body should do nothing,
but by bodily instruments, or at the least by some material mean. But after
him was given a second Adam, which as he was conceived by the holy ghost, so
should he give life to his, not this gross life, which we have in many
points common with beasts, but a spiritual and a heavenly life. By Christ
therefore are we repaired in all points into a better state. For that thing,
which is in time first, is also in substance more gross, and that by the
order of nature. We now bear about with us a natural body, and in time to
come we shall have a spiritual body. As the gross parent of our stock went
before, so followed Christ the begynner of a new generation. And what sort of
one the earthly parent was, such are his posterity, that is to say, men
given to earthly desires. And again what kind The first manne is of the
earth earthly.
of one the heavenly Adam was, such are they, which are borne again in him,
that is to wete, wholly delyted with heavenly things. For we must for this state
begin that here, which we intend herafter perfitely to enjoy. As before
baptism in ungracious manners we resemblyd the nature of our first father, so
being borne again unto Christ through baptism, we must now in heavenly life
resemble our heavenly father. And if we this do not, neither shall we be here
parts of Christ's body, nor in time to come gloriously rise again. In deed
admitted are we into the kingdom of god: but this I tell you brethren, that
flesh and blood, that is to say, men of the first generation cannot come to the
enheritaunce of the kingdom of God: nor the life which is with sin
corrupted, shall have the inheritance of life immortal. And because ye shall
be ignorant of nothing apertaynyng to the manner of resurreccion, behold I
tell you a mystery. We shall not all dye, for the last day shall
peradventure find some of us alive, but yet shall all we be changed to the
glory of immortal life, which here after a sort abstayning from the
infeccion of sin through godly conversation, begin the immortal life to
come. This change shall not be made by little and little, as we see natural
things changed, but in a minute and twynkling of an iye, at the sound of the
last troumpe. For the troumpe shall blow, at the voice whereof such as then
are dead shall rise immortal. And we, which shall at that day be found alive,
being suddenly changed shall live after an other sort, that is to say, as
they do, which are risen again. For necessary it is, that before we perfitly
possess the kingdom of heaven, we utterly put of al earthlynes, and that this
our corruptible body be made incorruptible, and this our mortal body become
immortal. When this is so, than shall that verily be performed, which the
Prophet O see foreseing says, rejoicing at the Death is swalowed up in
victory. etc.
utter destruccio^ of death* death is swalowed up through victory. Where is now
death thy styng* o hell where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin, and
the strength of sin is the law, which by occasion giving provoke us to
sin. When the law is taken away, the power of sin is faint and feeble, when
sin is taken away, the power of death cease, by reason that the styng is
taken away, wherewith she is wounte to stryke us. Unable were we utterly to
fight against such violent adversaries, were it so, we had no strength but our
own: thanks therefore be given to God, which has caused, that if we will, we
may win this glorious victory through Jesus Christ our Lord, which for our
sakes with his death overcame death, and took upon him to purge our sins.
Therefore my dearly beloved brethren, since it is certain, that the
resurreccion shall be, and since it is known what bliss and glory men shall
enjoy thereby, which yet no man shall receive, but such as here, by forsaking
sin, and by godly living begin it, doubt not of that ye have once believed,
nor suffer your selfs with the talking of ungodly persons to bemoued from your
right received faith, but rather apply continually to profit in such things,
as may bring you into Gods favor, that ye become every day better than other,
preparyng your selfs against the resurreccion to come. Nor shrynke ye to take
pains, assuryng your selfs, that through Christ's help for transitory
labors ye shall receive joys without end.

The.xvi. Chapter.
The text.
Concerning the gathering for the saints, as I have ordained in the
congregacions of Galacia, even so do ye. Upon some Sabbath day let every
one of you put aside at home, and lay up whatsoever is mete, that there be no
gatheringes when I come. When I am come, whosoever ye shall allow by your
letters, them will I send to bring your lyberalitie unto Jerusalem. And if it
be mete that I go also, they shall go with me. I will come unto you when I go
over to Macedonia. For I will go through our Macedonia. COncerning the
gathering for the relief, through your liberality, of the saints which are
at Jerusalem, as I appointed unto the Galathians, that money should be gathered
for that purpose, if any of his own free will were disposed to bestow any,
even so would I have the same done among you, that in this point also ye agree
with other congregacions. Upon the first day of the weke, that is to say in
the sunday, let every one of you set aside at home, and lay up as much as he
for this purpose thinks mete. And for this give I warnyng here of, because
that which every man has purposed to give may be in a more readiness, lest
when I come, there be then a gathering of money to be made. But when I come
unto you thither, whom soever ye shall choose as messangers, them will I with my
letters send to Jerusalem to carry thither your liberality. If ye think it
needful, that I also go my self thither, they shall go with me, lest any
man might suspecte, that I in any wise go about my own business. I will see
you, after that I have gonne through Macedonia, for them mind I only to see by
the way.

The text.
With you peradventure I will abide a while: or else tarry all winter, that ye
may bring me on my way, whyther soever I go. I will not see you now in my
passage: but I trust to abide a while with you, if God shall suffer me. I will
tarry at Ephesus, unto the fyftieth day. For a great door and a fruitful is
opened unto me, and there are many adversaries. If Timotheus come, see that he
be without fear with you. For he works the work of the Lord, as I do: let
no man therefore despise him: but convey him forth in peace, that he may come
unto me. For I look for him with the brethren. With you peradventure will I
abide for a while, and am not sure whether. I shall tarry with you all the
winter, that at the beginning of the next spring, ye may bring me forth, that
I may go whyther soever the busynes of the gospel calls me: had not this
been, I would have commen to you now, but I would not see you now houerly, and
in my passage. For I trust, I shall at another time have opportunity to tarry
with you certain days, if the Lord Jesus suffer me. In the mean season I
will tarry at Ephesus until y^ fyftyeth day. The matter re^uireth some leisure
because that albeit in that place there be a great door opened unto me, and a
great hope of auancing the gospel, yet many adversaries are there. If in the
mean season Timothy come unto you, see that he be put in no ieopardie by any
high hearted and proud persons. He is a young man, but yet he is my fellow, and
in preaching the gospel labors purely and freely, as I do. Let no man
therefore despise him, because he is young, but rather let him go without harm
and displeasure, as an Apostle and my fellow, and of love bring him forth, that
he may come to me. For him look I for with other brethren of his company.

The text.
To speak of brother ^pollo (I certify you, that) I greatly desired him, to
come unto you with the brethren, but his m^nde was not at all to come at this
time. Howbeit, he will come, when he shall have convenient time. Watch ye,
stand fast in the faith: quyte you like men, be strong. Let all your business
be doeu with love. And whereas ye rather desired, that Apollos should have been
sent unto you, surely it came not of me, that he went not. For I vehemently
exhorted him to go to you with certain brethren, but all was in vain. For
certain consideracions in no wise minded he now to come to you, and yet come
will he, as soon as convenient leisure shall serve. Watch against the deceytes
of such, as give you evil counsel. Stand fast in the faith, which ye
have once received: quite your selfs like me^, against such things, as
resist the gospel, be strong and valiant. Whatsoever be done among you, let
it be done with love, and not with contencion.

The text.
Brethren, ye know the house of Stephana (and of Fortunat^s and Achaicus) how
that they are the first fruits of Acha^a and that they have appointed
themselves to minister unto the sayn^res: I beseech you that ye be obedient
unto such, and to all that help and labor. I am glad of the coming of
Stephana and Fortunatus and Achaicus: for that which was lackyng unto me on
your part they have supplied. For they have comforted my spirit and yours.
Look therefore that ye know them that are such. I beseech you brethren, but
what need we besechynges? Ye know the householde of Sthephana, well worthy of
you to be made much of, both because the same as first fruits of Achaia I
got first unto Christ, and because they are given to help the poor. Meet
is it therefore, that ye again make much of them, and not only of them, but of
as many as with us promote the gospel, and are partakers of our labors. If
pleased me well, that ye sent hither Stephana, Fortunatus, and Achaicus. For
their cumming hither in all your names, supplied with their gentilnes, that
which was lacking unto me on your part. For the^ coumforted my spirit, yea I
might say your spirit, as which regards nothing, but your weal, nor is
with any thing more delighted, than with your furtheraunce. Such then know ye,
bearyng toward them your special favor.

The text.
The congregacions of Asia salute you, Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in
the Lord, and so does the congregation that is in their house (with who^ also
I am lodged.) All the brethren great you. Great ye one another with an holy
kiss. The salutacion of me Paul with mine own hand. If any man love not the
Lord Jesus Christ, the same be Anathema Maranatha. The grace of the lord Jesus
Christ be with you: My love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen. The
congregacions of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla with all the company of
christians, which are in their house, salute you with all their hearts. All
such as here profess the name of Christ, salute you. Bear ye also good will
each one of you to another, and salute one another of you with an holy and a
chaste kiss, the token of true concord. And I Paul salute you, and that
subscribed I with mine own hand, thereby both declaring my love toward you,
and that this epistle is not counterfayte. If any man love not the Lord Jesus,
the same be Anathema Maranatha, forasmuch as he refuses him, by whom only he
might obtain salvation: and denies, that he is come, whom every man knows
to be come, to the great bliss and commodity of such as believe in him, and
to the damnacion of such as believe not. The grace and mercy of the Lord
Jesus Christ be with you. And I desire, that as I bear a christian love
toward you, that ye likewise unfeignedly love each one another, with that
charity, wherewith Jesus Christ has joined and knytte you together.

Amen.
The Argument upon the second Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul to the
Corinthians, by Des. Erasmus of Roterodame.
AFter that Saint Paul has at the beginning of this epistle somewhat spoken
of his great troubles and affliccions which he had suffered for Christ's
gospelles sake, declaryng that in all them god was his coumfort, first he
shows the causes why he came not again to the Corinthians, as he had in his
other epistle promised. And straight after that, brings again in favor with
y^ Corinthians the haynouse fornicatour, whom he by his former epistle had
commanded to be given over to Satan, desyring them louyngly to receive him
upon his amendment, whom they had banished for his offense. And this in manner
is all that he does in the first and second chapter. Then reherseth he his
great labor in preaching the Gospel, by the way checkyng and reprouyng
other false Apostles which sekyng for their own advantage and glory in all
times and places, allured men to Moses law, which they in such sort labored
to myngle with the law of Christ, as though without it, there were no hope of
salvation. And therefore prefers he the light of the gospel before the
shadows of Moses law, eftsoon exhortyng them, not to the ceremonies of the
law, but to be vpryght of conscience, and to lead a christian life, showing
in the mean season, how without corrupcion he had preached Christ's gospel,
and what miseries he had suffered for the gospels sake in hope of heavenly
reward. And beside this declares, in what points christianity specially
stands. Of all which matters Paul entreats in the latter end of the
second chapter, and in the third, the fourth, fyfte, and in the beginning of
the syxte. For in the rest of this chapter, and in the beginning of the next,
he exhorts them to know their own dignity, and the holiness of their
profession, willing them to absteyne with all diligence from the corrupcion and
viciouse life of painyms, as men with whom they had nothing to do. Fourthly
he mollifieth the sharpenes used in his former epistle, praysyng their
obedience, for that they in all points obeyed his epistle, notwithstanding the
sharp earnestnes thereof: rejoicing, that the short heaviness, wherein he had
cast them by his letters, had made both, that is to we^e, the Corinthians and
him mearye, even as men are wont to be when they by bitter medicines are
restored to health. Fyftlye he provoke every one of them, as well by the
exaumple of the Macedonians, as by diverse arguments and records of
scriptures, to bestow according to their abilities, and as their good will was,
some thing toward the relief of the saints, that were at Jerusalem,
remembryng that he by Peter was commanded so to do, for y^ same purpose
sending thither Tytus with a coumpanion, which was (as the more part does
suppose) Luke, whom he commends unto them: and this does Paul in the.viii.
and in the.ix. chapter. Sixtely the false apostles, whom in his other epistle
he but privily checked and taunted, he in this plainly and openly reproves,
which with proud and high lokes took upon the^ the honor and dignity of
apostles, bringing Paul into dis^eine, saying y^ he was but a ^ase person, as
which used shomakers craft, and that he was rude, and unlearned: and beside
this ofttymes wronged, and beaten. Against them Paul defends his
authority, declaryng that at alttymes he had an apostles power and authority,
which yet he would not use to other men's pain, as some did, but only to the
commodity of his hearers, and the glory of Christ. Then because he was
compelled somewhat to boast of himself, he desires them first to bear with his
folishnes, and then first he makes himselfequal with the chief apostles, and
by an by setieth himself before them al, and that for many causes, either
because he more enlarged the doctrine of y^ gospel, or else because he only
taught the same freely, as which was nether by him self, nor by any of his
chargeable to the Achaians: or finally because he had for the gospels sake
suffered more persecucion than any of them al, coumpting such miseries and
troubles as matter to glory upon, for y^ which other thought him more to be
despised. After which of an humble and low mind he confesses his rudenes and
barbarousnes in language, but yet knowlage and learning takes he upon him,
lest they might in him for this find any lack. Finally because the false
apostles among the simple people made great crakes of feigned visions of
angels, Paul shewethe them a very notable and a true vision, as who was
taken up into the third heaven, and was there taught such things, as passed
all men's capacities: and of these things entreats he, in the, x, xi, and
xii, chapter. Seventhly, lest through false apostles they might fall again
into their old vice, he says that he purposed to se them again: eftsoon with
threateningts warnyng them, not to be found such in their order of life, as
thereby he might be compelled, by vsyng extremity, to be unlike himself: or
else, lest, as he was compelled vehemently by letters to write unto them, so
might he being present, be compelled to use his authority, otherwise than he
had done in times past, when he might have lawfullye done so. And this does
Paul in the latter end of the.xii. chapter, and in the xiii. The greek
titles declare, y^ this epistle was sent from Philippos by Titus and Lucas. But
the brief arguments which are found in latin books, without any autours
name, record and testify that it was by the same messangers sent from Troas,
for of this place Paul makes mention in the second chapter of this present
epistle.

The end of the Argument.
The pharaphrase of Erasmus upon the second Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Corinthyans.
The first Chapter.
The text*
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of god and brother Tymothye. Unto
the congregation of god, which is at Corinthewyth all the Saints which are
in all Achaia: Grace be with you, and peace from god our father and from the
Lord Jesus Christ* Paul an ambassadoure in Jesus Christ's behalf,
authorized by god the father: and Timothy, in religion my brother, and fellow
in office: unto the christian company, not of them only, which are at
Corinthe, but also to all the saints, that through the whole countreye of
Achaia (whereof Corinthe is the head city) do faithful searuyce to
Christ: Grace wyshe we unto you, peace, and concord, by the free gift of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and God his father, which is also father to us all.

The text.
Blessed be God (the father of our Lord Jesus Christ) which is the father of
mercy and the God of all coumforte, which coumforteth us in all our
tribulacion, insomuch y^ we are hable to comfort the^ which are in any manner of
trouble, with the same comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. For as
the affliccions of Christ are plenteous in ^s, even so is our consolacion
plenteous by Christ. With all good and luckye words, blessed, magnified, and
praised be God, the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the very fountain and
autoure of all goodness, no fearful God to the righteous and godly, but one of
whom all our comfort comes, which cease not to aid and comfort us his
messangers in all such troubles, as may any ways befall us, which he doothe
not only for our sakes, lest we might happily through vehement persecucion
fall from him, but for your sakes also which as through our troubles, for y^
love ye bear toward us, are in great heaviness, so are ye for our relief,
and ^easte, glad and joyful: and by our exaumple in hope of gods healpe
manfully continue in suffreyng persecucion and troubles, standing in a sure
trust and confidence, that as god, which as ye se, aided and strengthened us
being oppressed with miseries, and wellnygh dead, so will hein your troubles
healpe and succor you, whose goodness is such, as will according to our
temptacions measure his merciful comfort. Nor loath we such affliccions, as we
suffer and endure, for Christ's sake: and as Christ gave exaumple, knowing
this, that y^ more grievous torments he suffered, the more comfort and honor
is he in. And the greater tormentynges we likewise for his glory suffered and a
bode, by his mean so much more plentiouslye has god relieved us, being
delivered out of trouble, to the intent ye should likewise stand in hope and
look for that which ye see already done in us.

The text.
Whether we be troubled for your consolacion and health, (or whether we be
comforted, ^^ is for your comfort and salvation) which salvation shows her
power in that ye fu^^re the same same afflicions, which we also suffer: or
whether we be comforted for your consolacion and salvation, our hope also is
steadfast for you: in as much as we know how that as ye are partakers of the
affliccions, so^^, all ye be partakers also of the consolacion. Therefore
whether we be troubled with adversities, that does god to encourage you, and
for us so to be, is to your wealth an expediente mean, that ye being
through our exaumple strengthened, may stoutly abide even the most extreme
violence, that may be laid upon you, whose sufferaunce albeit ve paynfull,
yet is it very wholesome: or else if we be refreashed, so that the storm of
persecucion be paste and alayed, even this does god also, intendyng by
relieuyng us to refreashe your courages, lest ye might with sorrow and pain
faint and despair, but rather upon a remembrance, how there is a change from
soro we to pleasure, ye might likewise be hable to suffer such troubles as
we do. And trewlye in great hope are we that ye will surely do so, that
ye may be also of our joys partakers hereafter, as ye are already partakers
of our affliccions: and as ye were heretofore sorye for our affliccions, so
should ye now rejoice of our deliverance, since it is meet and conueniente
that friends and lovers should be in like condition of pains and pleasures.

The text.
Brethren I would not have you ignoraunte of our trouble, which happened unto
us in Asia. For we were grieved out of measure passing strength, so greatly
that we despayred even of life. Also we received an answer of death in our
selves, that we should not put our trust in our selves: but in god, which
raised the dead to life again, and which delivered us from ^o great a death,
and does deliver. On whom we trust that yet hereafter he will deliver by the
help of your prayer for us, that by the means of many occasions, thanks
may be given of many on our behalf, for the grace given unto us. And
perfeitely know I, ye would much more rejoice, if ye throwghlye wiste, how
vehement a blaste of persecucion happened unto us in Asia. For there suffered
we affliccions above al measure, as which were more vehement than our strength
was hable to bear, by reason whereof we were brought to that point, that we
despayred of our life, as utterly unable to suffer so many and such extreme
troubles. Yea and of such violence was that persecucion, that not only other
despayred, how we should be hable to endure them, but ^ummyne own mind
upon distruste conceived of my strength, had ever death present, so that my
heart gave me to look for nothing, but for my last day. To which extremiti^
it pleased god we should be brought, because we should in our own strength
put none affiaunce, but trust to his healpe, which is commonly most wont, the^
to be at hand and to succor, when al worldly aides most disapoint us and
fail, which when his pleasure is, not only delivers y^ oppressed from the
ieopardies of death, but restores also such as are dead to life again. As
for any thing then that in me was, even than dead was I, and destroyed, from
which death yet god than delivered, and does even now still deliver me, of
whom also I stand in such a confidence, that he will hereafter deliver us:
specially if ye healpe me with your prayer to procure and obtain the favor
of god, to the intent, that as we were saved by the wishes of many, and for
the weal of many, there may diversely by many men, for our deliverance,
thanks be given to god, that it may appear, that this benefit of god in my
deliverance is not only bestowed upon me, but upon al such as have good
thereby.

The text.
For our reioycyng is this, even the testimony of our conscience, that in
singlenes (of heart) and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by
the grace of God, we have had ou^ conversation in the world, and most of all
to youwardes. We write none other things unto you, then that ye read, and
also know. Ye and I trust ye shall find us unto the end, even as ye have
found us partelye: for we are your reioy^ing, even as ye are ours in the day
of the Lord Jesus. Were not this, as touching my self, I have in my own
breast, wherewyth to comfort me sufficientlye in the mids of my troubles:
yea and to make me rejoice and to glory: that is to were, my conscience,
which is witness, and privy to this point, that we never labored in the
ministry of Christ's gospel, sekyng for any gaynes by auauncing our selfs
in worldly wisdom, as among you some do, but taught it with all
simplicity and godly purity both in all Greece, and specially among you,
for whose sake albeeit we have suffered such great things, yet never looked
we for, or took any reward at your hands, lest some might take occasion to
think, that we for our advantage so much sought upon you. And this much
have I said, not arrogantly, but as y^ truth is. Nor boast we this otherwise
of our self, than ye have had experience of, for never found ye us other,
than such as we say we are by these letters, which ye read, nor make we
ourselfes other in words by writing, than we among you showed oureselfes in
dooyng. Yea and I trust more over, that of what sort ye have hitherto partly
found us: such shall ye always find us hereafter: that each of us may
glory of other, if ye like thankful and apt children on your sides in godly
life and deeds, be like unto your father and teacher, as I have in all points
been unto you gods true messenger* Let them in the mean season boste
themselfes never so much among men, that disdeine at me, as an outcaste, and
one in affliccions, yet certaynelye, when the Lord shall come, before whom
painted colors shall nothing serve, then will I rejoice of you, whom I have
won unto Christ, then shall ye also glory of me, whom I nothing taught but
Christ's true doctrine.

The text.
And in this confidence was I minded first to have come unto you, that I might
have had one pleasure more with you, and to pass by you into Macedonia, and to
have come again out of Macedonia unto you, and to be led forth of you
toward Iewrye. When I thus wise was minded: did I use lightenes? Or think I
carnally those things which I think? that with me should be yea, yea, and
nay, nay. God is faithefull. For our preaching to you was not yea and nay.
For Gods son Jesus Christ which was preached among you by ^s (even by me
and Siluanus and Tunotheus) was not yea and nay: but by him it was yea. For all
the promises of God, by him are yea: and are in him Amen: unto the lawde of God
through us. For it is God, which stablisheth us with you in Christ, and
stands by us, and has anointed us, which has also sealed us, and has
given the earneste of the spirit in our hertes. I call God for a record unto
my soul, that for to favor you with all I came not any more unto Corinthum.
Not that we be lords over your faith, but are helpers of your joy For by
faith ye stand. And upon confidence of this my upright conscience, and hope
conceived of your increase and furtheraunce, occasion had I, and minded before
this time to visit you, thereby purposyng to do you double pleasure, both with
mine epistle first, and also by the way after with my presence. For my
purpose was to see you as I went into Macedonia, and again in my returnyng
from Macedonia, to come unto you, as I promissed in my other epistle, and
thence to be led and brought furthe by you into Iewrye.

But in the mean season some will think, since I this wise minded to do,
whether it came of lightness, that I changed mine intent: or whether I
perform not that of any worldly policy, which I once purposed to do, in
this alteryng my mind, as occasion serves. No nor so, but for good
consideracions and advisedly followed I not mine own destre, because I well
understood that it was for your weal more expedient to do otherwise, that by
defferryng my return, some of your congregation might be amended, whom I
would not see in their uncleanness: in this point always constaunte and like
my self, that I at all times seek your weal, so that in this behalf I never
waver, but always do that, which shall be for your profit, and always
shonne that, For our preaching to you was not yea and nay. etc.
which I think unprofitable for you, not because I think it lies in us to
perform as much as we purposed, but because we know, that god deceaueth not,
by whose healpe our word, wherewith we preached unto you his gospel,
wauered not, but was at all times like it self. For we preached not unto you
worldly and carnal matters, but taught you a weightye, effectual, and an
unchangeable doctrine: constauntly, and after one sort, both I, Siluanus,
and Timothy, that is to we^e, that Jesus Christ is the son of God, whose
name was not among you ineffectual, but mighty and full of power, not by our
strength, but by his free gift. Until this time have ye received the gifts
of the holy ghost, possessing them, as an earneste penny, and as sure shall ye
be of such things, as are in time to come promissed, For all things, that
are promissed, are through him sure, and out of all doubt in him, to whom
this glory is dew. Neither are these our promises, which we laid before
you, and showed you of, but god is the chief geuer of the^, we are only
ministers and messangers. So that to his glory makes it, if that which we
preach in his name be found true and effectual. Beside this, whereas we
have constauntelye preached Christ, and ye have constauntelye continewed in
Christ's religion once received, that is gods gift also, which because we
should in his promises have more confidence, has also anointed us with his
secreate gifts, and printed a certain mark in our hearts, yea and given
into our souls his spirit, as an earneste and pledge of the blessed state
promissed unto us hereafter. Let no man therefore think it lightenesse,
because I until this time differred my coming unto you, god take I to
record, that whereas I hitherto came not to Corinth, that was not done for
any displeasure borne toward you, but rather of a loving mind, left if I
had commen rather, I should have been compelled to use extremity toward
such, as were not yet amended, whom I trusted yet, would in the mean season
cumme to amendment. Better thought I it sommewhat the later to cumme unto
you, so that my cummyng might be both to you and me more pleasant, than to
be among you after an earneste behauioure and sad. Nor let any think these
my words to be spoken proudelye and after a threatening sort, but for your
correccion. We bear no lordelye rule upon any Not that we be lords, o^e^
your faith.
other than such, as have sinned. Touching therefore your faith, wherein ye
continue, we bear no rule upon you but in the order of life some thing is
there which I would were amended. And so far are we from threatenynge
such eiuil livers, to show thereby what authority we have upon you, that by
these ways we provide to keep you in gladdenesse, which I would not, should
through the corrupt manners of some, and mine earnestness, which I could not
choose but use, be in any wise appayred with sorowefulnesse.

The second Chapter
The text.
But I determined this in my self, that I would not come again to you in
heaviness. For if I make you sorry, who is it that should make me glad, but the
same which is made sorry by me? And I wrote this same unto you, lest if I came
unto you, I should take heaviness (upon heaviness) of them of whom I ought to
rejoice. This confidence have I toward you all, that my joy, is the joy of
you all. For out of great affliccion and anguish of heart, I wrote unto you
with many tears: not that ye should be made sorry: but that ye might
perceive the love, which I have, most specially unto you. But rather,
forasmuch as I with my former letters, of necessity made you heavy and
pensife, by condemning the incestuouse fornicatoure, I thought it not meet
with my coming thither with any new heaviness to vex and trouble either
you or my self. Feign would I always unto you be pleasant, and never
painful ^nlesse ye provoke me. But if I at any time be thoroughe your
outragiousnesse compelled, whiles I correct a few, to make you all sorye,
when I my self am by these means made sorye, who can make me glad again,
but the same manne, which is by me made heavy and sad? And surely joyful
shall I be if I through such sharp correccion find him healed, and find
you likewise now rejoicing of his recouerye, as ye to fore were of his sorrow
partakers.

And even for this cause wrote I this epistle unto you before my cummyng,
lest, if when I come unto you, I might by such take sorrow, by whom mete were
it, and seaming, that I took pleasure and comfort, specially since I surely
persuade my self, that ye are after such sort minded toward me, that
whether I mourn for the correccion and punishemente of some, that my
heaviness will be commen to you all: or if I be glad for some of your
amendementes, ye will also all be glad with me. Nothing is there more
grievous unto me, than if I among you see such things, as beseame not your
religion, and again no man is more glad, than if I see nothing in you
worthy reprofe. I therefore being exceadynglye astonished with such an
outragiouse offense, being such as was well known among you, wrote unto you ye
same letters, not without great heaviness of heart, and great affliccion nor
without many tears, not with them to make you sorry, but that ye might perceive
my love and good will toward you, which the more ready it is, and more
plentiful toward you, so much ye more greueth it me, if there be any
dishonestie among you.

The text.
If any man has caused sorrow, the same has not made me sorry, but partelye,
(...) I should grieve you all. It is sufficient unto the same man, that he was
rebuked of many. So that now contrary wise ye ought rather to forgive him and
coumforte him, lest the same person should be swalowed up with over much
heaviness. Wherefore I exhort you that love may have strength over him. For
this cause verelye did I write, that I ^ighte know the proof of you whether
ye should be obediente in all things. To whom ye forgive any thing, I
forgive also. For if I forgave any thing, to whom I forgave it, for your
sakes forgave I it, in the sight of Christ: lest Satan should preuente us.
For his thoughts are not unknown unto us.

And if any manne have given you occasion to be sorye, the same has not
only made me sorye, since he has with me made also all you sorye. As for the
manne, (whose name I utter not, nor yet rehearse the fault, whereof the do^^ is
ashamed) is sufficiently punished, in that he was in such sort openly rebuked
before all the people, and avoided of every man's coumpanye. This much was
done unto him, partelye to cure his disease, and partelye to fear other from
the like. Now remains this, that ye increase not his sorrow, but rather
forgive him upon his repentance, whom for offense ye abhorred, and comfort him
in his sorrow, lest he be with desperacion swallowed up. Wherefore I
beseech you, that forasmuch as ye condemned him even of love, and not for
displeasure, and for no purpose else condemned him, but to the intent he
should amend and be saved, see that he in this find your love effectual
toward him by receauyng him hartylye and louyngly, whom ye excluded with
heaviness. For this also was another cause, why I wrote these letters unto
you, because I would have a trial, whether ye would in all points obey my
commandments. In condemnyng him, whom I commanded to be condemned, ye
obeyed me: and likewise will ye (I trust) obey me, receauyng him into your
favor, to whom I would have you reconciled, that once wylles may in every
point agree. Whom so ever ye forgive any thing, him forgive I also, coumptyng
my self fullye content, if I see you satisfied. For if I forgave any thing,
for your sakes forgave I it, as Jesus Christ is my witness and approuer,
lest Satan elswise might take any of ours from us through desperacion, and use
the^, as his own. Nor are his sleighty thoughts unknown unto us, which does
not only lie in watch to disceaue us by pleasures, but also by heaviness and
sorrow, by the one alluring us to outrageous offenses, by the other casting us
down headlong into the deep do ungeon of desperacion.

The text.
When I was come to Troas, for Christ's Gospels sake (and a great door was
ape^^^ unto me of the Lord) I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not
Titus my brother: but took my leave of them, and went away into Macedonia.
Thanks be unto God, which always gives us the victory in Christ, and
opens the favor of his knowledge by us in every place. For we are unto god
the sweet favor of Christ, among them that are saved, and among them which
perish. To the one part are we the sauoure of death unto death. And unto the
other part are we the sauoure of life unto life: And who is meet unto those
things? ^^ we are not as the most part are, which chop and change with the
word of God: but ^^^ ^^^^ of pureness, and by the power of God, in the sighe of
God, so speak we in Christ. But after that I came to Troas, there to preach
the Gospel of Christ, where there was by the favor of god a plentiful hope
of increase opened unto me, greatly was my mind disguieted, becaused therwyse
than I looked, I found not my brother and fellow Titus there, of whom I had
great need, to bear out that great and weighty matter.

Leaving them therefore I went into Macedonia, and that not without great
ieopardye, but thanks give I unto god, which victoriously carries about by
us the triumph of christian religion, making it more glorious, by that the
glory of his Gospel dailye spreads more and more, which by our preaching
enlarges in all places abroad the knoweledge of himself, vsyng us, as though
we were sweet incense* For when we preach in all places of the world the
glory of his gospel, what else do we, but spread abroad the sweet
favor of Christ, of it self in deed (as I say) to all men pleasant
and wholesome, but yet to some through their own fault deadlye poison: holsom
to such, as through faith in the gospel obtain salvation, unwholesome and
deathlye to such, as refuse it, thereby doubling their damnacion to death
everlasting, as men encreasyng their former offenses with unthankfulness and
stubbernesse of minds, But who is meet this to do and preach? Whosoever
myndeth to labor in this, must therein nothing regard, but the only glory
of Christ. But some there be, which teaching the gospel either for honor,
or for advantage, spread not somuche abroad the sweet sauers of Christ, as
their own countrefaite devises, profityng themselfes, and no^ Christ, whose
manners we abhor. Nor corrupt we the word of God with worldly doctrine
sekyng our own commodities, but even with a pure heart teach it, as a thing,
that came from god, and not of our selfs, and that to the glory of Jesus
Christ, as god himself is witness.

The third Chapter.
The text.
We begin to praise our selves again. Need we as some other, of epistles, of
recommendacion unto you? or letters of recommendacion from you? Ye are our
epistle written in our hertes, which is understand and red of all men
forasmuch as ye declare that ye are the epistle of Christ, ministered by us and
written not with ink, but with the spirit of the living God, not in tables of
stone but in fleshely tables of the heart. But this fear I, lest any manne
think, that we again praise ourselfes unto you: to thyntente we may both
of you and other be had in price and more esteemed. But what need has any man
to seek for commendacions, when the matter self commends him? Need we such
letters of recommendacion, as false apostles carry about with them, obtained
either of other unto you, or of you to other? Nothing pass we upon such
letters. The lively epistle, wherwyth we think our selfs sufficiently
praised, are ye Corinthians, written in our hearts, which I with much less
pain carrye about with me, than they do theyrs. This epistle in all places
where I come, every manne reads and understands, so that I need none
other epistle, since that by your Godly life, all men perfeitelye know,
what manner of apostles we were, and so far forth assure we our selfs of
your good will toward us, that seeing that our own diligente labor does
abundantly commend us, we need no men's letters of commendacion, whiles ye in
perfect faith, and christian life, declare that ye are Christ's epistle,
written by him in deed, but yet by our ministry and labor. Written (I say)
not with y^ke, as theirs are, which teach human and carnal fantasies, but
with the spirit of the living god: nor written again in tables of stone, as
man's laws are, but in the fleashye tables of the heart. Your hearts wherein
we printed the doctrine of the gospel* used we in stead of parchmente, my
tongue was in stead and served for a pen, but Christ himself with his
holy spirit, indicted that thing which we wrote.

The text
Such trust have we through Christ to Godwarde, not that we are sufficient
of ou^ selves to think any thing, as of our selves, but if we be hable unto
any thing the same cummethe of God, which has made us hable to ministre the
new Testamente, not of the letter but of the spirit. For the letter kills,
but the spirit gives life. If the ministracion of death through the letters
figured in stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not
behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance (which glory is
done away) why shall not the ministracion of the spirit be much more
glorious? For if the ministryng of condemnacion be glorious, much more does
the ministracion of righteousness excede in glory. For no doubt that which
was there glorified, is not once glorified in respect of this exceadyng
glory. For if that which is destroyed* was glorious, much more that which
remains is glorious. Seeing then that we have such trust, we use great
boldness, and do not as Moses, which put a veil over his face, that the
children of Israel should not see for what purpose that served which is
put away. But their minds were blinded. For until this day remains the
same coueryng untaken away in the lecture of the old testament, which veil
shall be put away in Christ. But even unto this day when Moses is re^ad,
the ^a^^ hangs before their hearts. Nevertheless when they turn to the
Lord, the veil shall be taken away. The Lord no doubt is a spirit. And
where the spirit of the Lord is, then is liberty. But we all behold in a
mirroure the glory of the Lord with his face open, and a^ changed unto the
same similitude from glory to glory, even as of the spy^yte of the Lord. But
as much as the doctrine of the gospel passes and is better, tha^ Moses law:
somuche more fruitful and better is our labor, than his. Nor yet take we
thus much upon us arrogantlye, but speak the truth, as God is my record:
which by our service through Christ performed it, that we speak of. For
had not his healpe been, certainly far were we even from thinkyng upon any
such thing of our own power, and much farther from doing it. But if we be
either hable, or have been hable to do any thing, all that came of the free
bounteousnesse of God, which as he has healped us ^^ our labors, so has
he committed unto us this ministerye and dispensacion of the new testamente,
to thentent we should bestow among you, not the gross old testament, as the
false Apostles teach it, and stands in the knowledge of the letter, the
administracion whereof was committed to Moses, but the new testamente, which
is heavenly and spiritual, and stands in affeccions of mind and not in
ceremonies. The law and gospel have both one maker, but the ministerye* of
boothe is soondrye, and of the two the apostles is of much more excellency.
For the letter committed unto Moses, by reason of certain rules and laws
drives men to death, forasmuch as it by occasion both provoke to sin and
also conde^neth y^ sinner to death: whereas contrary, y^ spirit, which is
given by preaching the ghospel, both forgeueth the offenses of our former life,
and to such as have deserved death, offerethe life. Now and if the first
law, which being graven in stone wroughte death to the transgressour, and
gave no grace, was of such great majesty and glory, that when Moses the
second time brought down the tables, the Hebrews could not beeholde his
face by reason of the glory and majesty of that, which was sure once yet to
be abolished: why should not much rather the ministerye of the Gospel have
his honor and majesty, whereby through faith and the free gift of the
spirit everlasting salvation is given? If the law, which could condemn and
was not hable to save, had such honor, certainelye much more honor
desearueth the Gospel, by preaching whereof sin is not only forgeuen, ^ut
also rihgteousnesse is given. In which two things such difference is there,
that if a man more narowelye compare each one of them with other, that
which by it self is glorious, will appear but base, being as it were
darkened with the bright and excellent glory of the Gospel. For if the law,
which was given but for a season, and should within a while after be
abrogate, was among men in such honor, of much more dignity is the law
of the Gospel, which is both generallye given to all men and shall never
be abolished. For the new testament, whereby the old is abrogate, Christ
himself calls an everlasting testamente, as I in my other epistle taught
you. Of which thing we being most certainlye persuaded and assured, in our
^eachynges use no dark riddles, but freelye and openly set forth the light
of the Gospel, surely beleuyng, that both the glory of this law is such,
that it should not be hidden, and ye of that ^ireyngthe and clearness of
conscience, that ye are hable to look thereupon. And therefore we do not,
as it is read that Moses did, which when he brought down the second
tables, after that the first were broken, covered his face with a veil, that
the children of Israel should not look thereupon, nor deaue thereto for
ever, since that even this was a proof and significacion to them, that the
glory of Moses law should be abolished, which even at that time, when it
was made, was not very glorious, for in vain is that thing glorious, which a man can not see. In this figure was represented the grossness of that
nation, which seeing saw not, and hearing heard not, insomuche that, which
was done in Moses face, the same was most verelye done in their hearts,
which in them were blinded, being as it were ouercaste, with the veil of
dullness. Yea and in this day the blyndenesse remains in that nation stille,
so that when they read the books of the law they understand them not: and
with stubberne minds of a zeal toward the law refuse him, at whose coming
the law self grants that she shall be abolyshed. Therefore when they in
such sort read the old testament, that they will not embrace the new
promised therein, hold they not fast Moses veil, nor see by faith castyng
of the same, that thorowghe Christ all the darkness of the law is a
brogate? Stu^bernelye yet stycke they to their Moses, when he is cumme, to
whom Moses bade them give ear. Him read they in their synagoges, but they
read him carnallye, sekyng for nothing but corporal things, whereas the law,
if men well look thereupon, is in deed spiritual* Let are they
doubtelesse even until this day, with a veil cast over their hearts, which
is removed through faith in the gospel.

But when the time shall come, that they shall leave their gross minds, and
receauyng the universal faith turn unto the Lord, then shall their veil be
taken away, so that they shall see such things, as without the bright eyes of
faith can not be seen* Moses was gross and carnal, but the Lord Jesus is a
spirit, not teaching such things, as may be seen with our bodyly iyes,
but things invisible, which are by faith believed. Moses law, because it with
fear of punishemente kept men in order, was a law of thraldom, and the
veil also is a token of bondage. But where the spirit of the Lord Jesus is,
which secretelye moves a man without byddyng and compulsion to lead^ a
Godly life, there is liberty. No man is compelled to believe: but he that
believes, as he should, of his own accord auoydeth filthiness, and uncleanness
of life, and follows al goodness, dooyng more wyllinglye by the mocion of
charity, than could ever begotten of the Jews with fear of punishemente.
Blind are they therefore, that lack the iyes of faith: when we through pure
faith without veil behold the glory of the Lord, whose brightness whiles we
receive, as a glass, altered are we after a sort into the same glory,
plentifully pouring upon other that brightness which we received of God. And as
then Moses face, by that he talked with god, shyned even as glass doothe laid
against the son, so is our soul every day more and more secr^atelye
enamoured, increasing from glory to glory by reason of the continual
conversation of the spirit of God, who inuisiblye now woorkethe in us that
which hereafter shall openly be accomplished.

The fourth Chapter.
The text
Therefore, seeing that we have such an office, even as God has had mercy
on us, we go not out of kind: but have cast from us the clokes of
unhonesty, and walk not in craftines, neither handle we the word of God
discreatefullye, but open the truth, and report our selves to every man's
conscience in the sight of GOD. If our Gospel be yet hid, it is hid
among them that are lost, in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the gospel of the glory
of Christ (which is the image of God) should shine unto them. Since then god
of his mercy would have us to be ministers and preachers of such a blisfull
state, geuyng unto us the authority of an apostle, we execute not our
commission ^louthfullye, but as we preach a veraye gloriouse matter, so refuse
we all clokes which are meet for dishonestie, and not for glory, neither
leadyng our life craftily, nor with deceitfulnes of woorldely learning,
corruptyng the word of god, but frealy and plainly, and without all deceyte,
declaryng to al men the bare truth, without any cloud, in this office so
using our selfs, that though no man praise us, yet our life commends us
to all men, which know and are witness of our perfectnes, and not only
to men, which may be deceived but also to God which seethe all things.
By us therefore in all places shyneth the truth of the gospel, so that every
man may see it euedently. And if there be some yet to whom it is not known,
and therefore gives not them salvation, the fault is theirs, and not ours,
nor the gospels. for as I told you of the Israelites, so have they likewise a
veil cast over the eyes of their heart, by reason whereof they see not such
things, as are very bright, but are blind in the mids of the son light.
For they bring with them vncleare iyen, and such as are corrupt with worldly
desires, whose unfaithful minds, Satan the God of this world (for their God
make they him, which to him give more ear, than to the true God) has
blinded, covering their iyes, that to them the bryghtnes of the gospel can
give no light, whereby the glory and majesty is declared, not of Moses, but of
Christ, which is the image of god the father, so that by the son, which is
egall to the father, a man may know the father.

The text.
For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus to be the Lord, and our
selves your servants, for Jesus sake. For it is God, that commanded the
light to shine out of darkness, which has st^yned in our hertes, for to give
the light of the knowledge of the glory of god, in the face of Jesus Christ.
But we have this treasure in erthen vessels, that the excellency of the power
might be Gods, and not ours. We are troubled on every iyde, yet are we not
without shyfte. We are in poverty* but not utterly without somewhat. We suffer
persecucion: but are not forsaken therein. We are cast down: nevertheless we
peryshe not. We all ways bear about in the body, the dying of the Lord
Jesus, that the life of Jesus might also appear in our body. For we which
^^ue, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life also of
Jesus might appear in our mortal flesh. So then death works in us, but life
in you. Nor auaunce we our selves by preaching, as some do, teaching the
gospel for our advantage or glory, but we preach Jesus Christ our Lord,
his doctrine teach we and not ours: for him labor we, as for our Lord and
master, what pain soever we take, so far from taking any thing arroga^tly
upon us, that we grant our selves to be your servants, and to ministre the
gospel unto you, neither for fear of you, nor yet for hope of advantage, but
for Jesus sake: for whose love, whereas we are free, we even as servants
submit our selves to all men. After like sort were we once in the same
blyndnes, wherewith some are now diseased still. Nor yet got we this light to
our selves, but god, at whose commandment light was first made, from whom
all light proceeds, after that he had expelled the darkness of our
understanding, commanded, that in it the light of truth should appear, or
rather, as he is light everlasting, lightened our heart y^ by us the glory
of his majesty might more be spread abroad among all me^, being more notified
by preaching of the gospel, wherein we preach But we have this trea^ure in
earthen vessels.
the Lord Jesus, in whose face most brightly shines the image and glory of
the father. But yet is this great matier only wrought in our souls
secretly: for touching the body, we seem, but vile abiectes, so that we ^arie
about with us this preciouse and high treasure in earthen vessels, that is to
say in our sealye bodies, subject to vilanye and punishment: as it has
pleased god, it should be, and good cause is there, why it so pleased him. For
he provided, y^ we should not be proud by great and high miracles wroughte by
us, whereby we might claim some part thereof, but know our own infirmity,
and so understand the self same high power, which is given to the apostles,
not to be wrought by our strength, but by gods power only: for we touching
our own infirmity, are daily greatly troubled, and yet by gods helps we
suffer al these troubles, and continue not ouercomen, we are on every side
ouerlayed with adversity, yet are we not without shifte, we are brought to
beggary, and in our beggerye we are not forsaken, we suffer persecucion, and
yet in our persecucion we are not dismayed, we are beaten down and tredden
under feet, but yet so, that we peryshe not, in that behalf following the
lord Jesus* as nyghe as we may, whom we preach and setfoorth. He once dyed
for all men, we, in that we are daily and continuallye in ieopardie of death,
bear about in our bodies an image of his death, ready to bestow this life
for your sakes: that as we dyeng for you follow the death of Jesus, so may the
life of Jesus whereunto he rose from death, in our body be declared, whiles we
are either by him delivered from death, or by despising our temporal life,
plainly testify and affirm, that the dead shall rise again. For if we
believed, that when our body is once dead, it would never live more, we would
not so little regard our temporal life. By this strange way therefore ye
see, how the everlasting life of Christ, through the affliccions of our
corruptible body, is to you the better known. The difference is, in that the
violent ieoperdy of death falls upon our body, but the fruit of life, which
grows by our death, is yours, for whose sakes we put our selves in these
ieopardyes.

The text.
But seeing that we have the same spirit of faith (according as it is written:
I believed, and therefore I spoken:) we also believe, and therefore speak. For we
know that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also by the
means of Jesus, and shall set us with you. For all things do I for your sakes
that the plenteous grace by thanckes given of many, may redounde to the praise
of God. Wherefore, we are not weryed. But though our vtward man peryshe, yet the
inward man is renewed day by day. For out ^^^buiacyon which is momentany and
light, prepares an exceadyng and an eternal weight of glory unto us, while we
look not on the things which are seen, but on the things which are not
seen. For the things which are seue, are temporal: but things which are
not seen, are eternal. And yet for all this we repent us not of preaching the
gospel: for since we have also even the same gift of faith, that ye have,
whereby ye look for life immortal, by my preaching powered into your hearts,
it follows, that as David in his mystical psalm says, that he therefore
spoke, because he believed: so fear we nothing, no not with ieopardye of our
life, to preach the truth of the gospel, undoubtedly assuryng our selves,
that he, which raised the lord Jesus from death, will through him raise us
again dying for his sake, and bring us all together to the general glory of
resurreccion, as we are here in like faith knytte together. But whether in the
mean season we be troubled, or delivered from trouble, all is done for your
sakes that the truth of the gospel may be more spread abroad among you, that
the more amend their life, so many more give thanks, not to us, but to god,
to whose glory it appertains, that his faith, which he would have common to
all men, be most plentifully enlarged. In hope and sure confidence that it
will so be, no troubles werye us, but through them we rather ware stronger,
knowing well, that albeit our vtwarde body be by little and little worn away,
yet our inward and better part in the daily and continual decay of the
body, becomes more quick and sustie, as it were with miseries growyng young
again, and beginning to taste of before, the life everlasting to come.

For albeit the bodily affliction which we for the gospelles sake abide, be
light and transitory, yet light as it is, it prepares in us no small, but an
exceadyng and an unspeakable weight of glory, whiles both for such transitory
torments suffered for Christ's sake we are made worthy of bliss everlasting,
and for temporal death sustained for him we receive the reward of
everlasting life, in hope whereof we little esteem our bodyly life, not somuche
passing upon such things as are seen with owre bodylye eyes, as upon such,
as are not seen, but only with the eyes of faith. For such things, as are
seen here in this world, beside that they are things neither thoroughly good,
nor thoroughly bad, of which sort are lucre, honor, pleasure, life, loss of
gods, reproach, torments and death, are also not continuallye abydyng,
whereas such things, as are seen with the eyes of faith, are both true
riches, and such as will endure for ever.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
For we know that if out earthly mansyon of this dwelling were destroyed, we
have a byldyng of God, an habitacyon not made with hands, but eternal in
heaven. For therefore sygh we, desyryng to be clothed with our mansyon which
is from heaven: so yet, if that we be found clothed, and not naked. For we
that are in this tabernacie, sygh and are grieved because we would not be
unclothed, but would be clothed upon, that mortality might be swalowed up of
life. He that has ordained us for this thing; is God: which very same has
given unto us the erneste of the spirit. ANd upon this sure trust, certainly
little regard we even our life, knowinge well, that if it chance our souls
in this world to be chaced out of the mansion of our body, (which I might
more properly call a tent, than a mansion, being such, as a man may not
long tarry in, though nomanne drive him thence) that we have prepared for us
another house in heaven, from whence we shall never be excluded. As for this
house of ours, because it is made of claye, and builded by manne, whether we
will or not, decays daily, albeit no man pull it down, even as we see other
buyldynges in continuance of time to be destroyed. Men's workmanshyp can not
be of long continuance, but that, which is repaired by god, and once becomen
heavenly, is out of all such ieoperdies, as chance by reason of time. And so
little fear we to depart out of this wretched body, that until that be, we
sygh, here desyring to be discharged of the burdayne of our mortal carkas,
wherewith our soul is here in earth much burdeyned and kept down, desyrouse
to fly hence to another place, and to be clothed with the mansion of a
gloryfied body, which shall from heaven be given unto us: so that when we be
unclothed of this body, we be not found utterly naked, but through a
confidence of our good life clothed with the hope of life immortal. For we
groan in this mean season for the heaviness of our body thrall and subject to
so many miseries, not because it is a thing of it self to be desired of any
man to depart hence, but because we desire to have this body restored into a
better form, and for mortality, by rysyng again to receive immortality, so
that we seem not utterly spoiled of the body, which we for a time forsook,
but better clothed with the same, as who for a corruptible body shall receive
an incorruptible.

And albeit this seem never so unlikely, that there shall for a mortal body
rise an immortal, fre from all miseries, yet must we not mistruste the son.
It is god, which has prepared us to receive the glory of life immortal, who
has also in the mean season given us, as a pledge or an earneste penny, his
holy spirit, to confirm and establyshe us with his present inspiracion, in
hope of that, which is to come.

The text.
Therefore, we are always of good cheer, and know, that as long as we are at
home in the body, we are absent from God. For we walk in faith, not after the
outward appearaunce. Nevertheless, we are of good comfort, and had lever to
be absent from the body, and to be present with God. Wherefore, whether we be at
home or from home, we endeavor our selves, to please him. For we must al
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the
works of his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad.
Seeing then that we know, how the Lord is to be feared, we fate fair with
men. For we are known well enough unto god. I trust also that we are known in
your consciences. For we praise not our selves again unto you, but give you an
occasyon to rejoice of us, that ye may have somewhat against them, which
rejoice in the face, and not in the heart. For if we be to feruente, to God
are we to fervent. Or if we keep measure, for your cause keep we measure. For
the love of Christ constrayneth us, because we thus judge, that if one dyed for all, then were all dead and he dyed for all* that they which live, should not
hence forth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose
again. Wherefore, henceforth know we no man after the flesh. In somuche
though we have known Christ after the flesh, now yet hence forth know we him
so no more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature. Old
things are passed away: behold, all things are become new. Nevertheless, all
things are of God, which has reconcyled us unto himself by Jesus Christ,
and has given to us the office to preach the atonement. For God was in
Christ, and made agreement between the world and him self, and imputed not
their sins unto them, and has committed to us the preaching of the
atonement. Now then are we messengers in the rowme of Christ, even as though
God did beseech you through us: So pray we you in Christ's stead, that ye be
reconcyled unto God: for he made him to be sin for us, which knew no
sin, that we by his means should be that rightewesnes, which before God is
allowed. And therefore what tempests soever befall us, always are we of good
there, knowing, that as long as we are at home in this bodylye mansion, we
straye abroad, and are divided from god, to whom by departure out of it, we
are more nyghly joined: not meaning so, that god is not for this present time
with us, but that he is not yet so clearly seen, as he shall be then. For
albeit in the mean season he be after a sort seen by faith, yet is it, as
it were a far of, which shall then presently be seen, even as he is end
not obscurely. And therefore if the pleasure of god be, that we in this body
shall yet suffer more afflictions, in good hope stand we, that we shall easyly
suffer them in hope of the reward to come: and yet is this of us much more to
be desired, to depart (I say) out of this bodylye mansion, that after such
departure, we may be more nyghly joined to god. Therefore whether we be
compelled to continewe in this house, orels, (as we much more desire) to
depart hence, that is to say, whether we live or dye, all our endeavor is to
be allowed of god. For unless a man depart hence in gods fauer, let him
not look for the reward of immortal life, which point I give you warnyng
of, lest any think baptism a mean sufficent thereunto without godly living.
As for wicked sinners to their damnacion they receive again bodies, which
they here abused in their own sinful lusts, and not to the glory of god.

And as every man's deseartes have been for this life, such shall his reward
be: what every manns deseartes are, is a thing as yet vnkowen, but yet must al
we in open sight of the world appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
where nothing shall be hydden, but every man shall reap, as he has sowed in his
body: and when body and soul are joined together, enjoy such reward as his
works were, whiles he here lived, whether they were good or badde. We therefore
having always that terrible day before our iyes, diligently labor in all
points to please both God and man. For albeit we deceive men with some
counterfaite kind We are known well enough unto God.
of holiness, yet does God thoroughly know us, as which sees even the very
bottom of our hearts, which thing no man can do. Howbeit my trust is, that I
have in such sort used my self among you, that ye thoroughly know and perceive
the synceritie of my life, for with this glory are we contented. For we
auaunce not our office again, either because we would of you be more made of,
or because we seek for any aduau^tage at your hands: but forasmuch as I
perceive, that some make great boste, for that they were assigned unto their
office by chief Apostles, we give you occasion to glory likewise of us
against them, which for this respect little set by you, because ye have but an
abject and a vile one to your Apostle: which albeit saw not the Lord in his
mortal body, as other Apostles did, yet saw I him immortal, and of him
received mine Apostleshyp, as other did, and have by his help done no less,
than other have. This rehearse I for your sakes, because ye should have some
thing wherewith to answer them, which being not contented with the praise of
their own conscience for their good deeds, with high and proud looks seek
for worldly commendacion, whereas their consie^ces do inwardly co^demnethe^. For
if we be to feruente, to God are we to feruente.
Nothing speak we for our own sakes: but whether we speak of our great acts,
and thereby seame to be peuishe, peuishe are we to godwarde, to whose glory we
rehearse such things, as we by his help did: or if we keep a measure in
speaking of our selfs, and thereby seem wise, to you are we wise, to whose
weakness we te^per our tale. We make not our selfs equal with other Apostles by
boastyng, but the love of Christ constrayneth us openly to speak that thing,
which appertains to his glory. For to his praise makes it, and not to ours,
if there were by us, through his gift, any thing notable done, that all people
should the better know, how his death was not unfruitful, forasmuch as it
does indifferentlye profit al people, so farfurth, that even by us whom they
despise, it shows his power, and not by them only, which saw Christ in his
manhood, nor by such only, as have carnal allyaunce with him. But rather this
wise reason we the matter with our self: if Christ alone indifferently dyed
for all, than follows it, that generally all such people were before thrall and
subject to death, as his pleasure was by his death to redeame from death. And
because he would have all men indifferentlye bound unto him, therefore dyed he
for all, that such as by his benefit live, being through him new borne
again, should no longer live to themselfes, but to him, which boeth dyed and
rose again for them.

By this should men be esteemed, and not by carnal affinity. Yea and albeit we
may glory our selfs of the stock of Jews, yet since that time we professed
Christ's religion, we know no man, because he is one of our stock, but
coumpte such of our kynred, as are by like faith joined unto us. A vain crake
is it therefore, which some make, that they be Christ's own country men, or
else because they are his kynsmen, and lived familiarly with him: his flesh was
given but for a season presently, but now since that his body is taken away,
and his holy spirit sent, his will and pleasure is to be known after the
spirit, and coumpteth him nyghest of his kynne, which has in his promises
most affiaunce. Nor let any man for this cause less esteem us, which are
later Apostles, because we knew not Christ living here in earth in his mortal
body, since that, if we had so known him in deed, now yet would we have
forgone that knowledge, as which hyndred the spirit, and would now, since
that he is become spiritual, love him spiritually. Whosoever therefore is through
baptism Therefore if any man be in Christ he is a new creature.
graffed into Christ, let him forsake his old fantasies, nor think, this man
is a Jew, that man is a Grecian, this a bond man, and that is a fre man, but
remember rather, how that every man, which is borne again to be a new man,
is of a carnal man becomen a spiritual. Old things are paste and gone, and
behold, through Christ al things are so day^ly made new. Away therefore with
these words: this is a Grecia^, this is an aliaunt, this is a Jew, this is a
worshypper of idols, this is a spoyler of holy places. The man has forsaken
to be such as he was, and is by the workmanshyp of Christ, altered into a new
creature, so unlike to that he was, that no beast is there more unlike a man.
But whatsoever is given us by him, all that came from the father, which
reconciled us unto himself, va^quishing sin by his son Jesus Christ: the
preaching of which reco^ciliacion, the same father has put us in trust with,
that as the son among men did his fathers message, so should we execute and
do Christ's message. For albeit Christ, when he was here mortal in earth
among mortal men, seemed but a simple man, yet was God the father in him,
reconciling God was in Christ and made agremente between the world, and
himself.
by his ministry the world unto himself, and by him making it new again, by
whom once he made the world, and with such mercy received men into his fauer,
that he not only took no vengeance upon us for the sins of our for
merlyfe, but also would not as much as lay unto any man's charge his sins
done before baptism, as though he now were not the same manne he was before.
This favorable reconciliacion it pleased God the father to give by his son,
and would have the same to be preached by us. We therefore in Chrstes behalf
executing the embassage committed by him unto us, even as God exhorted you by
us, beseech you in Christ's name, to leave your old vices, and to be
reconcyled to God. For he, to the intent he would once deliver us from sin,
where his son is very justice self, altered him in manner into sin, that
he rakyng our flesh upon him, which in us is subject to sin, should become a
sacrifice to purge our sins, and as a heinous offender among offenders was
fastened to the cross, to the entente that by him he might change us, which
were nothing else but sin, into righteousness, not into our righteousness,
nor yet the righteousness of the law neither, but of God, by whose fre goodness
our sins are forgeuen, that he hencefurth might take us for righteouse being
planted in Christ, who for our sakes used Christ as a sinner.

The.vi. Chapter.
The text.
We also as helpers exhort you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.
For he says: I have heard the in a time accepted: and in the day of
salvation, have I suckered the. Behold, now is that accepted time: behold now
is that day of salvation. Let us give no occasion of evil, that in out office
be found no fault: but in all things let us behave our selfs as the
ministers of God. In much patience, inafflicci^s, in necessities, in
anguisshes, in stripes, in priso^mentes, in stry^es, in labors, in watchinges,
in fastinges, in pureness, in knowledge, in long sufferyng, in kyndenesse, in
the hoy ghost, in love unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God,
by the armor of rightewesnes of the right hand and on the leaft: by honor and
dishonor: by evil report and good report: as deceyuers, and yet true: as
unknown, and yet known: as dying, and behold we live, as chastened, and not
killed: as sorowyng, and yet always merry: as poor, and yet make many rich: as
having nothing, and yet possessing al things. O ye Corinthians, our mouth is
open unto you. Our heart is made large: ye are in no strayte in us: but are in
a strayte in your own bowelles. I promise unto you like reward, as unto
children. S^tte your selfs at large, and bear not the yoke with the
unbelievers. For what feloshyp has rightewesnes with vnrightewesnes? Or what
company has light with darkness? Or what concord has Christ with Belial?
Either what part has he that believes with an infidel? Or how agrees the
temple of God with images? For ye are the temple of the living God, as said
God: I will dwell among them, and walk among them, and wylbe their God, and
they shall be my people. Wherefore, come out from among them, and sepatate your
selfs from them (says the Lord) and touch none unclean thing: so will I
receive you, and will be a father unto you and ye shall be my sons and
daughters, says the Lord almyghtie. SO would Christ, and so would God, ye
should do, that his benefit should in you take effect. We therefore as helpers
both executyng Gods will, and also providing for your weal, beseech you, that
since your sins, are once freely forgeuen, that ye no more fall to your old
living, and thereby show, that ye have received the grace of God in vain. If
it chance us for this present time to fall, we may amend, but we shall not
always be able so to do. For in the Prophet Esai this speaks God: in a time
accepted have I heard the, and in the day of salvation have I suckered the.
Behold now is the accepted time promised by God, and favorable, wherein God
refuses not the sinner, that repents with all his heart: behold, now is
the day, wherein we may, living godly, obtain salvation. After this time will
follow that terrible day, wherein we shall in vain seek to be reconciled. We
therefore in this behalf laboryng to do our duties take heed, that we in no
point give any man occasion of evil, lest by our fault the gospel of Christ,
whereof we are ministers, be reproved and blamed: as it might be, if we lead
our lives, as men not believing such things, as we teach other, but in all
points show our selfs to be such in deed, as it is convenient they be, which
labor in Gods service, and not in their own. And how prove we our selfs to
be such in deed? surely, neither with high lokes, nor with ba^des of men, nor
with gaynes taking, nor by chargeyng men with ceremonies, as some do, but
even as Christ approved himself, that is to say, with much patience, with
daily affliccions, necessities, distreasses, with sufferaunce of stripes,
enprisonmentes, sufferyng sedicions, fasting, cleanesse of life, with
apostolic knowledge, courteousnesse, kyndnesse, with the holy ghost, with
pure and unfeigned charity, and with the word of truth, bold in all
enterpryses, not upon any worldly strength, but upon the power of God, not
furnished with By the armoure of righteousness.
weapons, nor with any worldely defense, but on every side surely fensed with
the armoure of justice, on the right hand, with an vpryght conscience, that we
in prosperity wax not proud, and with the same on the leafte side also, that
we be not in adversities dismayed. And upon trust of this help of God, we
through all ieopardies thruste and break in to preach the gospel: through
honor and dishonor, through good report and evil, coumpted for deceyuers,
whereas we tell truth, taken for men unknown, whereas we are known: like
to such as are a dying, when as ye see, we live: as men chastened, and not
killed, as men being sorry, whereas we are always meary: as poor men,
when yet we euryche many: as men, that have nothing, and yet by Christ
possess all things, and should through the peoples charity be more
enryched, than are other with all their patrimony, if we lusted to use our
right. But whither am I plucked with the vehemence of this my tale? So moved am
I that I cannot refrain, but utter unto you al my mind. For toward you, ye
Corinthians, my mouth is open, and my heart enlarged. Such a confidence have
I in you, so bold am I to glory of you. Since I loathe not my condition,
repent ye not of yours. If ye content my mind, both have I cause to glory
of you, and ye no less cause to rejoice of me, and without cause are ye, why
ye should for my sake be of a straight and narrow mind. So that if in you
there be any straitnes, the same grows of your evil minds. For your wealth I
leave nothing undone and vnsuffered, but ye toward me again bear not like
love. I in hope of resurreccion, and of love borne toward you, manfully abide I
promise unto you like reward, as unto children.
and suffer all troubles: and since ye look to have the same reward, since I
have hitherto loved you like a father, meet is it, that ye in strength of
minds resemble your father, which vnreadines I lay not unto your charges, as
to mine adversaries, but rehearse it, as to my dearly beloved children.
Despise the watryshe ceremonies of the Jews. Despise the world, and trust to
such good things, as are verily yours. Of a vile and strait mind it
cummethe to be content with present things. Of a strait mind is it to
desire nothing but these worldely vanities, which will soon after peryshe.
Christ for you is abundantly rich, abundantly gloryouse, abundantly
myghtie, and welthy, let him be sufficient for you, him embrace ye with all
your hearts. Know your condition, and look upon your welthy state, and
coumpt your self greater, than with unbelievers to have any thing a do. There
is betwixt you and them more difference, than will suffer you to be yoked
together. For what agreement can there be betwixt ryghteousnes and
unrighteousness and unrighteousness? or what company has light with
darkness? or what concord has Christ with Beliall? The gods are
diverse, the religions diverse, diverse manners, and diverse hopes. How agrees
the temple of God with heathen images? For ye are the temple of the living God,
as God himself in holy scriptures testifies saying: I will dwell among them,
and walk among them, and will be their God, and they again shall be a people
specially consecrate and hallowed unto me. If the Jews then abhor a Gentile,
as vnpure and cursed, and fly his infeccion, come ye good people which are
verily consecrate to the living God, out of the company of the vnreligious,
keep your selfs out of their felowshyppes, as the Lord by the Prophet Esai
exhorts you, saying: since ye are holy, touch no unclean thing. Wicked
manners are verily unclean, and full of ieopardouse contagion, with whose
company beware, lest your cleannes be defiled. But when I this counsel you to
fly, that stands not somuche in chaungyng of your places, as in chaungyng
your minds. If ye this do, then will I knowledge you, and receive you holy,
as I am holy my self: then shall ye find me as a father, and I will embrace
you as my sons: so says the Lord almightye, less ye might mystruste the
promise maker.

The.vii. Chapter.
The text.
Seeing that we have such promyses (dearly beloved) let us cleanse our selves
from all ^lthynesse of the flesh and spyrite, and grow up to full holiness
with the fear of God. Understand us* we have hurt no man: we have corrupt
no man: we have defrauded no man. I speak not this to condemn you: for I
have showed you before, that ye are in our hearts to dye and live* with you. I
am very bold over you. I rejoice greatly in you. I am filled with comfort,
and am e^ceding joyous in all our tribulacion. For when we were come into
Macedonia, our flesh had no rest: but we were troubled on every side. Outward
was fightyng, inward was fear. Nevertheless, God that comfort the
abiecte, comforted us by the cummyng of Titus. And not by his cummyng only but
also by the consolacion which we received of you: when he told us your
desire, your feruente mind for me, so that I reioysed the more. For though I
made you sorye with a letter* I repent not^th ^uch I did repent. For I
perceive that the same Epistle made you sorye, thought it were but for a season.
But I now rejoice, not that ye were sorye, but that ye so sorowed that ye
repented. For ye sorowed godly: so that in nothing ye were hurt by us. For
godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of*
contrary wise worldely sorrow causes death. For behold, what diligen^^ this
godly sorrow that ye took, has wrought in you: yea, it caused you to clear
your selves. It caused indignacion, it caused fear, it caused desire, it
caused punyshement. For in all things ye have showed your selves, that ye were
clear in that matter. Wherefore, though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his
cause that had done the hurt, neither for his cause that was hurt* but that
your good mind for us might appear among you in the sight of God. Therefore,
we are comforted, because ye are comforted: yea and erceadynglye the more ioyed
we, for the joy that Titus had: because his spyryte was refreshed of you all.
I am therefore not now ashamed though I ^^^sted my self to him of you. For as
all things which we speak unto you are true, even so our boasting, that I
made unto Titus, is found true. And his inward affeccion is more abundant
toward you, when he remembers the obedience of you all: how with ^eare and
trembling ye received him. I rejoice that I may be bold over you in all
things. Upon sure trust of such promyses of God therefore, let us so use our
selfs, dearly beloved, that we seem worthy the same, cleansyng our selfs not
only from all filthynesse of body, but also of the soul, that we both may
lead a hurtlesse life among men, and have therewith an vpryght heart to God,
furnyshed with full and perfect holiness against the cummyng of Christ: in
the mean season doing our duties, not of dissimulacion, as Hypocrites do,
but for fear of God, who gives every manne reward according to his deseartes.
So wide and large is the love, which I bear toward you, that I claspe and
embrace you all together with my whole heart: receive ye me likewise, as I am,
into your hearts, specially since that ye receive other, which both love you
less, and are with their costly fyndyng and disdaynfulnesse, chargeable unto
you, and beside this, lode you also with ceremonies. Never hurt we any of you,
nor with false learning We have hu^t ^o man, we have defrauded no man.
corrupted any of you, nor violently exacted ought of any man: which ye must
not take as spoken to condemn or reiecte you, but to make you the better. For
by that I have already written unto you, it may be clearly perceived, that I
with all my heart love you, and am with the strong band of charity so knytte
unto you, that I am ready both to live and dye with you. Such a great trust
have I in you, that upon your head I dare waraute any thing, and great cause
have I to glory of you, whom I have in all points found obediente.

For your offense I let not freely to reprove you, but now I see you
amended, my heart is so coumforted, and so full of gladness am I, that in all
mine affliccions, which was elswyse in many daungerouse storms, it clearly
wyped a way all the sorrow of my mind, taking it as a pleasure to suffer for
such men's sakes. For when we were commen into Macedonia, my body had no
rest, but it was troubled on every side. Outwardlye vexed by such as
adversaries fought against the gospel, inwardlye through fear, lest false
Apostles by some crafty means might peruerte you: of the adversaries of the
gospel beaten were we, for other were we afraid, lest they being dismayed
with our miserable state might despair. But God which coumforteth the low
and abiecte persons, coumforted and refreshed us by the cummyng of Titus, not
only because he was come, God that comfort the abiecte, comforted us by the
cu^myng of Titus.
whose company I specially desired, but also because he came from you merye
and glad. And as he was by you made merye, so made he me glad and merye
likewise, when he told me, how desyrouse ye were of me, how ye weap^e and
wayled, because that being offended I came not yet unto you: and showed me
moreover, how diligently ye obeyed my commandments, insomuche that when I
was of this enfourmed by Titus, I took more pleasure of your diligence in your
amendment, than I was sad through your offenses. Loathe am I at any time to
make you sorye, but yet since that fortuned well, I repent me not, for that in
my other letters I made you sad, albeit I before did repent. For although
the same Epistle, which was both to you and me sorrowful, for a season made you
sorye, yet am I now well therewith pleased, not because we made you sorye, but
because that sorrow brought you to repentance. This world has in it a
certain kind of sorrow, unfruitful and hurtefull as when men either for
loss of money, or for losyng their pleasures, or for wrath and envy are
disquieted in their minds. There is in Christian religion also a certain
sorrow, but such as is profitable and good, by mean whereof ye are so far
from being the worse by me, that by the same ye are well amended and become
godly. For he that is for this sorye, because he has displeased god, shows
thereby, that he is amended: Godly sorrow causes repentance unto saiuacion.
and sorrow after this sort so brings one to repentance, that it suffers
a man no more to fall again unto his old faults. But contrariwise the
sorrow, which grows of worldelye desires, works death and is hurtefull
both to body and soul. Does not your state declare this manner? For what a
diligence has this godly sorrow of youres wroughte in you? What speak I of
diligence? I might much rather say a satisfaccion, wherewith to me ye have
cleared your selves, playnelye showing, that ye approve not that unhappy
deed: yea I might say an indignacion, as who were so sharp against the
offender, that I was compelled to move you to be favorable and gentle: yea a
fear, as though one man's leopardye had belonged to all: yea a desire
forthwith to amend the fault: yea a zeal and love to follow sin banishyng
dishonestie: and to be short, a desire also to revenge, as it appeared, by
that he, which did the fault, was straighte punished, so that ye have in all
points declared your selves to be clear and free in that matter.

Wherefore* though I wrote unto you all of the matter, as though it had
belonged to all, I wrote not only for his fake, which did the fault, or
for him, against whom it was dooen, but rather because ye should all
perceive what great care I have of you, (as god is my witness,) which was
sopensyfe, both lest this infeccion might crepe among you, and the fault of
one or two infecte the whole body, and again lest it should be unknown,
what love ye bear toward me, whose will ye so gladlye obeyed. And since this
was unto you coumfortable, as which rejoice, that such are amended, as it was
meet should be, glad am I also of your gladness, but this pleasure of mine
was by the gladness of Titus increased, which upon my commendacion was so
received among you, that his heart was by all you refreshed, when he saw
howeye esteemed me. So that now, if I have to him any thing bosted of your
virtue and obedience, I have for that taken no shame, for in this ieopardye is
he, that prayseth any manne.

Him praised I unto you, and you I praised to him. And both chanced well, for
as ye in all points found Titus such one, as I told you he was: even so
found he all such things true, as I before of you had bosted unto him, and
therefore neither before him, nor before you am I ashamed of lying. And whereas
he heretofore loved you, now yet upon proof of your gentleness, even from the
very heart root he loves you, whiles he bethinketh himself and calls to
mind, how gladlye all ye obeyed our mind, which he brought unto you, and
also with what fear and reverence yo received him at his cummyng. And
certaynlye glad am I, that I find you such, as I may in all things
hereafter be bold upon you, so that hencefurthe I will not fear to require
any thing of you.

The.viii. Chapter.
The text.
I certyfy you brethren, of the grace of God, which was given in the
congregacyo^s of Macedonia, how that the abundance of their reioising is,
that they are tried with much tribulacion. And though they were exceading
poor, yet have they given exceading richely, and that in synglenes. For to
their powers, (I beat them record) ye and beyond their power they were wyllyng
of their own accord, and prayed us with great instau^ce that we would receive
their benefyte, and suffer them to be partakers with other in ministryng to the
saints. And this they d^d, not as we looked for: but gave their own selves
first to the Lord, and after unto us by the will of god: so that we could not
but desire Titus, to accomplish the same benevolence among you also, even as he
had begone. Therefore, because ye should herein also satisfy both my desire,
and resemble the godly devotion of other congregacions, I certify you
brethren* how god asisted me in the churches of Macedonia. For with ready and
joyful minds received they the gospel, and were so far from being
discouraged through the affliccions of Silas and me, which were with us also
in trouble, that through a confidence in the gospel they joyfully endured al
persecucions. And briefly the greater torments we suffered, the more glad
were they of our deliverance. And whereas they are needy and exceading poor,
yet such hearty minds had they, that the little, which was left in their
empty cofers, they departed with for the relief of the poor. By mean whereof
the poorer they became and more brought to need through their godly
liberality, the rycher are they grown in gentle hearts and singlenes. For we
not only found them not hard in geuyng their goods, but also bear true
witness with them, that they would of good will not only give according to
their abilities, but also more than their abilities were, insomuche that, when
we fearyng lest after such exceading great liberality by reason of need they
might of that they had done, be sort, refused to receive their free offer,
they most instantelye besoughte us to suffer them to be partakers of this
praise, which is, that they geuyng some part of their substance for the
relief of saynctes, might again be partakers of their godlynes, in so doing
not only satisfying my desire, but also doing more, than I looked for, which
not only offered their goods, but also freely gave themselves first to god,
and then to us also, as the will of god was, by whose inspiracion they were
moved so gladly to obey us. ^ hose good mind so greatly pleased me, that I
exhorted Titus, that as by his good counsel ye had already begun this
liberality upon good people, he would in you accomplish that, which was
begun, to the intent ye should be the more beholding unto him, by whom ye
have obtained this godly praise of benevolence, that in this point ye be
behind none other.

The text.
Now therefore, as ye ate ^ychein all parties, in faith, in word, in
knowlage, in all feruentues, and in love, which ye have to us: even so see that
ye be plenteous in this benevolence also. This say I, not commanding: but
because of feruentues, I do allow the unfainednes of your love toward other
men. For ye know the liberality of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was
tyche, yet for your sakes he became poor, y^ ye through his poverty might be
made rich. And I give counsel hereto. For this is expediente for you, which
began, not to do ^u^ly, but also to will a year ago. Now therefore perform
the thing which ye began to do: that as there was in you a tedines to will,
even so ye may perform the deed of that which ye have. For if there be first
a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according
to that he has not. But rather, as ye in other gifts pass other, that is to
wit in the gift of faith, in the gift of tongues, in the gift of knowledge, in
the gift of diligent ministering, in the gift of charity, which ye have
declared toward us, be ye likewise in this gift excellent, not because I
require so much of you, but for this rehearse I the ready minds of the
Macedonians, that ye being through their example provoked, freely declare your
unfeigned charity, in this behalf following the lord Jesus Christ as much as
ye be able: who albeit he were rich and lord of al, yet because he would do
us good, of his free goodness made himself poor, and hydyng his almightye
power became manne, to the end that through his poverty ye might be
enryched, making as it were a change, wherein he received the poverty of our
humanity, because he would make us partakers of the riches of his Godhead.
Therefore as in my other letters I required you not, to lead a syngle life, but
for your weal and profit counsayled you thereto: so in this matier I
command you not, but give you counsel, and for this give you counsel,
because I think it shall be profitable for you, namely since the thing I give
you counsel in is such, as ye have already without my counsel not only
begun to do, but also gladly of your own minds begun to will it. Now
remains this, that such things as ye have begun to do, ye perform in
deed, that as ye willyngly minded this a year paste, so ye perform it, as the
Macedonians gave you exaumple, not above your ability, as they did, but every
manne as he is able. That which a man gives against his will, is not
acceptable: if a man's will be good and ready it is sufficient, though his
gift be measured by his ability: for no man is required to give that he has
not

The text.
It is not my mind, that other be set at ease, and ye brought into cumbrau^ce,
but that there be egalnes now at this time, and that your abundance may
succor their lack: and that their abundance supplye your lack, that there
may be equality agreeing to that which is written: he that had much, had not
the more abundance, and he that bad little, bad nevertheless. Thanks be unto
god which put the same good mind for you in the heart of Titus, which accepted
the request, ye rather he was so well willing, that of his own accord, he
came unto you. Nor must men so use their liberality, that such, upon whom it
is bestowed, live at rest and pleasauntly, and they that give, be brought to
poverty. But for an egalnes to be kept among you, that is to wit, that
through your riches, whereof ye have abou^dau^ce, their poverty may be
relieved: and again that their faith and godliness, wherein they pass you, may
recompense that, that perchance wants in you, whiles each of you departs
with other, so that neither of you lack any thing, but that there be an
equality observed. As we read it chanced with our elders in gatheryng
manna, that he which had gathered more, with him remained there no more, than
with an other which had gathered less. For so is it written in the book of
Exodi^he that had much, had not the more abundance, and he that had little,
had nevertheless. These temporal riches have we but for a season, to live by
them from time to time, because no man should long before cast his
penyworthes, what he shall have left him. For if ye go that way to work, no
man will think, that he has for himself sufficient, and spare to give unto
other. For this present time this man has need, and thou have to much. Of that
which thou have more than enough, give as the present need requires. If
hereafter it chance, that thou thyselfe need, thou shall with like
liberalitiie by some other be eased. And thanks give I unto god, which
inspired this good purpose in Titus heart, as well as in mine, which gladly
accepted my request, being elswise well disposed thereto: yea, which came unto
you* not so much at my request, as of his own good will, albeit he was through
mine encouraging the better willed.

The text.
We have sent with him the brother whose laud is in the gospel throughout
all the congregacions: and not that only, but is also chosen of the
congregacyons to be a fellow with us in our journey concerning this
benevolence that is minystred by us unto the praise of the same lord, and to
stiere up your prompt mind. For this we exchewe, that any manne should rebuke
us in this plenteous distribucion that is ministered by us (to the glory of the
lord) and make provision for honest things: not only in the sight of the
lord, but also in the sight of me^. With him have we sent the brother, whose
faith and entyrenesse in preaching the gospel throughout all the
congregacions is well tried, and so well tried, that of all the congregacyons,
he was chosen out of the rest to be as it were a fellow and companyon of our
journey, to be my helper in gatheryng money, which ye of your liberalytye
give to the glory of the lord, by whose mocy^n, this matier is wroughte, for
a plain declaracyon to all men of your prompte minds. Dyscrecion would,
that perfect and tried men were put to this business, lest weak persons
conceive a suspicion, that this great sum of money, which ye of your free
goodness give, is not so much gathered for other as for our selves, whereas
we thereof take nothing to our selves, but the labor and travail to gather it
and to convey it. For well know we that to gather money, specially if the sum
be great, has an apparentesuspicyon of griedines and as well know we, that
men's consciences is with nothing sooner corrupted.

The text.
We have sent with them a brother of ours, whom we have often times proved
diligent in many things, but now much more diligente. The great confidence
which I have in you, has caused me this to do, partly for Titus sake,
which is my fellow and helper as concerning you. Partly because of other
which are our brethren, and the messengers of the congregacions, and the
glory of Christ. Wherefore show ye unto them the proof of your love, and of
our boasting of you in the sight of the congregacions* To these two, of whom
ye have good experience, we have adjoined the third, a certain brother of
ours, whom albeit ye know not so well, yet in diverse things have we often
times found him dilygente and faithful, and in this business more diligent,
than in other, so that I nothing doubt, but that ye will with any sum of
money trust them, partly upon consideracion of Titus, which is my fellow and
partaker of the labors which I undertake for your sakes, and partly in
consideracion also of other adjoined with him, which besides that they be our
brethren, are also chosen to do this business by the voices of the
congregacions, by whom the glory of the gospel is so set forth, that they
may be well called not only Apostles, but also the glory of Christ. With
these shall ye in such sort use your selves, that ye now specially declare,
how greatly ye love us, and that I have not without cause boasted of you unto
them. And such gentleness as ye show unto them, ye shall show toward all
congregacions, whose messengers they are.

The.ix. Chapter.
The text.
Of the ministering to the saints, it is but superfluous for me to write unto
you: for I know the redines of your mind, whereof I boaste my self unto them
of Macedonia, that Achia was prepared a year ago: and your ensaumple has
provoked many. Nevertheless, yet have I sent these brethren, lest our boasting
which I make of you, should be in vain in this behalf, that ye (as I have
said) may prepare your selves: lest peradventure if they of Macedonia come
with me, and find you unprepared, we (I will not say ye) should be ashamed
in this matter of boasting. Wherefore, I thought it necessary to exhort the
brethren, to come before hand unto you, and to prepare your good bles^yng
promised before, that it might be ready, so that it be a blessing, and not a
detraudyng. How for me to bestow any labor with my letters to move you to be
charitable upon the poor, I think it superfluous, since I have of your ready
good minds such sure and perfect knowledge, that I nothing doubt to boaste
thereof among the Macedonians, so far that by your exaumple not only
Corinthe, but welnyghe all Achaia is dysposed, ready, and well minded to like
liberality. And albeit we were well assured of your good mind before, yet
thought we it not amysse to send these our brethren before, lest it happily
appear by some mean* that we have of you made a vain boaste in this point,
which in other things hitherto have done, as I said of you. Now the purpose
why we sent them before, is, that as we before wrote unto you, the money be
gathered in good time, and that it be in a readiness, which every man is
willing to give, lest if the Macedonians, to whom I have boasted of you, come
with me and find you unprepared, we be put to shame as one that has made a
vain brag of you: I will not say, lest ye be put to shame, as men in
this unlike your selves, which in all other gifts excel other.

And for this cause thought I it good to desire these brethren to go thither
unto you, before I came myself, to prepare the contribucion, which ye had
before purposed and appointed, that it might be in a more readiness, wont to be
called when we speak Greek, eulogia, that is to say, a blessyng, because
every benefit should gladlye and without murmuryng be both given and taken:
if it so be not, than is it rather extorcion, than a fre gift. He that will
give let him freely give, and as much as he will. This point I warn you of,
the more a man gives, the more reward shall he have.

The text
This yet I say: he which sows little, shall reap little, and he that sows
plenteously shall reap plenteously. And let every manne do according as he
has purposed in his heart, not grudginglye, or of necessity. For god loves
a cherefull geuer. God is hable to make you rich in all grace, that ye in all
things having sufficient unto the vtmoste, may be rich unto all manner of
good work, as it is written: He has sparsed abroad, and has given to the
poor, his righteousness remains for ever. He that ministrethe seed unto the
sower, ministre bread also for food, and multiply your seed, and increase the
fruits of your righteousness, that on al parts ye may be made rich into al
singlenes, which causes through us that thanks are given unto God. For the
office of this ministracyon, not only supplyeth the need of the saints: but
also is aboundaunte herein, that for this laudable ministryng, thanks might be
given to God of many, which praise God for the obedience of your consentyng to
the Gospel of Christ, and for your synglenes in distributing to them, and to
all men, and in their prayers for you which long after you, for the
aboundaunte grace of god in you. Thanks be unto god for his unspeakable gift.
Whosoever sows little, shall reap but little, but he that sows plenteouslye and
with a good chere, shall likewise reap that he sowed, so that he this do, not
because we bad him, but because he in his heart has so purposed. For more
largely and freely gives he, which gives with a good will. More sparingly
gives he, which gives with a heuie chere as one compelled. But god loves a
cheerful geuer. For he that does his duty against his will, before him
is coumpted, as though he did not his duty. And cause is there none, why ye
should fear, lest ye lose this your alms. For God which coumteth that to be
done unto him, which is for his love bestowed upon his saints, is
sufficiently able, albeit ye receive no recompense of men, to make your alms
deeds gaynfully to return unto you, in that he will give you substance enough
for the mayntenaunce of your life, and also enryche and plentifully increase
you in all godly works. For the alms deeds, which are bestowed to relieve
the poor saints, are a good part of justice and godliness. Eue^ as the psalm
writer testifies also: he dealed abroad and gave to the poor, for the which
his justice continues from time to time perpetually. And my prayer is, that he
which ministers sede unto the sower, and gives him bread for his
nouryshmente, and substance to help the poor people, maintain always your
riches, eftsoon to help them, and so multiplye your seed, and increase the
fruits of your righteousness, that ye may be e^riched in all kinds of virtues,
and therewith always grow forward into al synglenesse and gentle dysposicion
of heart, and that ye daily regard your money less and less, which while they
be bestowed, not upon every rascal, but upon the saynctes, do cause your
lyberalitie to auaunce Gods glory, in that the Godly people being
refreshed with your alms, do through us give thanks unto God: so that I
herein claim some reward, which bring this matter to pass. For in the
execucion of this office, we not only by your liberality attain the
relief of poor men, but also the greater your alms is, the more give thanks
to God, which having an experience of your Godliness, for this your
^ounteousnesse, praise God in that they do perceive your obedience to the
Gospel with one accord, by reason whereof ye do freelye and frankelye deal
your substance, not only to them for whom we sue at this present time,
but also to all other. For the poor must be helped, wheresoever they be.
Finallye this ensues, that in their prayers, which as thankful men, they
offer unto God for you, they wish to see you, that they may euidentelye see
before their face your singular godliness, which they know to be given you
by god, by the greatenesse of your alms, wherewith they are refreashed. But
for this unspeakable gift, specially thanks ought to be given to God, which
both moves your mind to give, and provoke them not to abuse your gifts to
idleness or riot, but to praise god.

The.x. Chapter.
The text*
I Paul my self beseech you by the meekenes and softenes of Christ which
when I am present among you, am of no reputacion: but am bold toward you,
being absente. I beseech you that I need not to be bold when I am present
(with that same confidence, where with I am supposed to have been bold)
against some which repute us as though we walked carnally. For though we walk
in the fles^, yet we ^o not war fleshly. For the weapens of our warrefare are
not carnal things, but things mighty in God to cast down strong holds,
wherewith we overthrow councels and every hye thing that exalts itself
against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity all imaginacion to the
obedience of Christ, and are ready to take vengeance on all disobedience,
when your obedience is fulfilled. Look ye on things after the utter
appearaunce? But to let pass these things, and to come to other, I that am no
mean apostle, but the very selfsame Paul, whom ye know well, which for
your sake both have suffered and do suffer so great troubles, do beseech
you, for the mekenes, softenes, and mercy of Jesus Christ, whose exaumple
following, I do humble my self among you, outwardelye so behauyng my self, as
though I were some rascal and an outcaste, not taking upon me an apostles
dignity and authority, which the false apostles think to stand in high
looks, and yet in mine absence, (as these caytifes quarrel) fraye you with
roughe and cruel letters, being bold upon your obedience: I beseech you (I
say) so to redress your life, that at my cummyng, I be not compelled to
execute the selfsame authority once again, which I seame to have used
against certain false apostles, which thinkyng me to be such as they be,
report, that I carnally live among you, as a flatterer, while I am present to
courye fauel for fear, and being absente, b^ letters, boaste my self, as
though I feared nothing. Nothing do I of any carnal mind, but whatsoever I
do* alis for your weal, and for the glory of the gospel. For though we be
clothed with this mortal fleashe, yet war we not under the rule and
governance of the fleashe, but helped with the assistence of the spirit of
god. As low and weak as ye think us, yet are we not unweaponed, nor without
strength to suppress the adversaries of the gospel. For the weapons of our
spiritual warrefare, are not mighty by reason of iron or steel, as worldly
men's are wont to be, but mighty by the power of god, able to throw down all
that euerseameth stronglye builded against him. ^ith these overthrow we and
turn vpsyd down al crafty devises, and every high state of wicked people,
which exalte and auaunce themselfes upon their worldly wisdom against the
wisdom of god, which we by the gospel profess: and not only suppress, but
also subdue and bring into captivity al worldly imaginacion, to make the same
henceforth obediente unto Christ, whom it before resisted. But and if any
manne stubbernly rebelle, ready are we to revenge upon al disobedience, which
power for your sakes we have hitherto forborne, lest by using extremity upon
such as are among you, and such as some of you as yet favor, supposyng that
they be excellent apostles, we might trouble your commen quietenesse, which
I will yet hereafter use paraduenture when I see your obedience grown to such
perfeccion, that ye can quietly be contented, that such should be excluded
out of your coumpanye, as ye were with the punishemente of the heinous and
incestuous fornicatoure. I tell you that the dignity and power of an apostle
is not a bodily power, but a spiritual. Are ye yet no wiser, but to judge an
apostle by such things, as are seen, like as the commen people esteame a
Lord to be a gaye fellow by his outewarde ambicious por^e, gifts of fortune,
and band of men?

The text.
If any manne trust in himself that he is Christ's, let him consider this
again af himself, that as ^e is Christ's, even so are we Christ's. For
though I boast my self s^m^what more of our authority (which the Lord has
given us to edify and not to destroy you) it shall not be to my shame, lest I
should seame as though I went about to make you afraid with letters. For
the epistles (says he) are sore and strong, but his bodily presence is weak,
and his speech rude. Let him that is such, think on this wise: y^ as we are
in words by letters when we are absente, such are we in deeds when we are
present. For a time I nothing speak of false apostles, but generally speaking
this I say: if any man think that he is Christ's, either because he saw him
in his mortal body here in earth, or because he is unto him of nigh aliaunce
and kindred, let him again likewise remember this with himself, that as he
is Christ's so are we Christ's, and so in this beehalfe, we are as good as
he, so y^ nothing has he, wherewith to please himself, and to despise us. It
is the spirit which makes us ^igher to Christ, and not carnal kynred.
Nothing do I yet hitherto, but make my self equal with other apostles. But
now and if I somewhat took upon me above them, and gloried of mine authority,
or rather not mine but given unto me of the Lord, and given unto me to doo^
you good, and not to hurt, I think it should not be to my shame, as though I
had more vaynly bosted of my self, than truly. But of my high authority will
I speak nothing, lest any think, that I with threatening epistles would make
you afraid.

For so says one, whom I for honors sake name not: Paul sends arrogante
and vehemente letters: But when he is present, he is altogether unlike
himself, that is to we^e, both of a weak body, wherein there is no majesty,
and in his speech so rude, that it in no part resembles that authority,
wherwyth his epistles, as it were, thunder and lyghten. He that for this
despises our authority, I do him well to we^e, that as my speech is in mine
epistles, when I am absence, which these men say is vehemente, such is
our power and authority being present, if we see cause, why to use it. To
brag with words such things, as I cannot in deed perform, is for
light persons, and not for me.

The text*
For we cannot find in our hertes to make our selves of the noumbre of
them, or to compare our selfs to them which praise themselves. Nevertheless
while they measure themselves with themselves, and compare themselves with
themselves, they understand naught. But we will not rejoice above measure:
but according to the measure of the rule, which God has distributed unto us,
a measure to reach even unto you. For we stretche not our selves beyond
measure, as though we reached not unto you. For even to you also have we come
with the Gospel of Christ, and we boaste not our selves out of measure in
other men^es labors. Yea, and we hope it will cumme to pass that when your
faith is increased among you, we shall be magnified according to our measure
more largelye, and that I shall preach the Gospel in those regions which are
beeyonde you: and not to boaste of those things, which by another man's
measure are prepared already. But let him that reioyseth, rejoice in the
Lord. For he that prayseth himself, is not allowed, but he who^ the Lord
prayseth. Nor can we find in our hearts to accoumpt our selfs in the
noumbre of them, or to compare our authority with such, as with deceytefull
means, and crakyng words auaunce themselfes, and not with deeds: which in
the mean season forgea^e, how they measure not themselfes by their own
doings, but settefoorthe themselfes in comparison of men without courage,
as they themselfes be, nor by any other way prove their own syngularnesse,
but by deprauynge other men's acts, and praysynge their own. God forbydde,
that we should without end glory, as these do. For and if every manne
had the desire to be taken for so great, as he with arrogauncye would make
himself, certaynelye there would be of boastyng ney^her measure nor end.
Nor yet take we upon us other men's glory, but according unto the measure
and condition of such acts, as we have by Gods help done, esteame our
selves, as we be. So that as much as he gave us, so much take we upon us,
and beyond this, glory not we. And surely we have not sklendrelye enlarged
the dominion of our captain, as which came even as far as to you, not of
mine own head only, but sent by God. A sufficient matter to glory of have
we, in that we came not unto you after the commen sort, but after such a
sort, that by us the gospel of Christ was preached unto you, so that we
need not with high words to praise our selfs, as though we in deed
reached not unto you, which else wise were not very easy to be wo^^e. Nor
came we unto you being already brought into belief, as false apostles use to
do, but first of al other persuaded you in it.

Nor boaste we our selfs above measure of other men's labors, taking upon
us the praise of other men's acts, as cowardly capitaines do which challenge
the praises of winnyng a hold which another manne got. But rather we
trust, that as your faith daily increases and grows more and more, we
shall also through you geate more praise, according unto the mark appointed
unto us by God, and preach also the gospel of Christ in countries beyond
you, and so auaunce his banners further then we have hitherto done, not
dooyng these acts through another guidyng, as an under soldier, nor
enteryng upon that, which is already gotten, and so malapertly taking upon us
y^ praise of other men's labors, but at this point are we rather, not only
not to boaste our selfs of other men's acts, but also not to take upon me
the glory of mine own, knowing that whosoever does rejoice, must rejoice in
Christ's name, whose business he does. Nor is he commended of god, which
blows abroad his own praises, but he that is chosen of God as a meet
person, and faythefullye doothe the office committed unto him, is the only
one, whom the Lord approves and prayseth.

The.xi. Chapter.
The text.
Would to God, ye could have suffered me a little in my folishnesse: yea ye
do also forbear me. For I am gelous over you, with godly gelouslye. For I
have coupled you to o^^ manne, to make you a chaste virgin to Christ. NOr can
I yet refrain, but that I must somewhat gloriouslye set forth my self,
notwithstanding I know, that it is taken for a point of folishnes, if a man
praise hy^ self, but would to god ye would a little while suffer me t^ play
the fool, yea I doub^^ not, but ye will bear with me. For to this folishenesse
am I driven, neither of an arrogant mind, nor yet for any desire of
advantage, but of a vehemente and a feruente love I bear toward you, and as I
might call it, a ialousye. For certainelye I am ^al^us over you, for every
thing afraid for you, as whom I tenderlye love: Nor love I you after a
worldelye sort, but godly: nor am for my self ialouse, but in Christ's
beehalfe. For to him, as your only spouse have I spirituallye married you as
a chaste and vndef^ied virgin, from whom ye may never been divided. I take
nothing of yours as mine, Christ is your spouse, I was but the marriage maker

The text.
But I fear, lest it cumme to pass that as the serpente beeguyled Eve
through his subtlety, even so your wits should be corrupt from the
singleness that ye had toward Christ. For if he that cummeth preach an
other Jesus, then him whom we preached: or if ye receive an other spirit,
then that which ye have received, either an other Gospel, then that ye have
received, ye might right well have been content. For I suppose, that I was
not behind the chief Apostles. But though I be rude in speaking, yet I am
not so in knoweleage. Howebeit ^monge you we have been known to the vtmoste
what we are in all things. Did I therein sin, because I submytted my
self, that ye might be exalted: and because I preached to you the Gospel of
God free? I robbed other congregacious, and took wages of them to do you
service. And when I was present with you and had need, I was chargeable to no man: for that which was lackyng unto me, the brethren which came from
Macedonia supplied, and in all things, I kep^e my self so, that I should not
be chargeable to any manne, and so will I keep my self. I delivered you unto
him a pure and a chaste virgin: but as the crafty serpent once beguiled the
simple mind of Eve, corrupting the pureness wherein she was made, so fear I
lest through the subtlety of false Apostles, your simple wits be
corrupted, and change you from that pureness, which ye have hitherto used
toward Jesus Christ your husband, whom in all points pure, ye purelye
received of us. If it so were, that this new Apostle, which has entered
upon my labors, taught you an other Jesus, than the same which we preached
unto you: or if by him ye received an other spirit, which ye received not by
us: or if he taught you a gospel, which we taught you not: then might ye
lawefullye suffer him braggyng and auauncynge himself above us, as one which
had given you, that could not be given by us. Now if ye of them receive
nothing, but that which we plentifullye gave you, what should the matter
mean, that ye in manier dysdayne us, and bear with their arrogante hautenes?
Be it that they be high Apostles, yet touching the increase of the gospel,
surely I think my self in no point behind any of the chief apostles. Be
it, that they be more eloquente than I am, yet in knowledge will I give them
no place.

There is no need of a painted tale, when the thing self is present. Let
them never so much with their blasyng words boaste themselves, we have with
veraye deeds showed toward you our minds, and power apostolic, so that
ye could in us find no lack, except peradventure this displease you, for
the which ye should most commend our good minds, because we have not with
disdaynefulnesse been painful unto you, as they be, but among you humbled
and submitted my self, not to deceive you thereby, but through mine humblenes
to exaulte you in the faith: or this, because I was not costlye unto you, but
freelye and at mine own finding preached unto you the gospel of God, so
far forth sparing you, that not withstandyng I was in great pouertye, yet
rather had I rob other congregacions, because I would without any charge of
yours do you service not so much as at that time chargeable to any manne,
when I was among you though I than were in great need. For than was I in my
poverty relieved by such as came from Macedonia. So that not only in this
thing, but also in all other, I have and will likewise hereafter so warely keep
my self, that I to no man be chargeable.

The text.
If the truth of Christ be in me, this reioysyng shall not be taken from me
in the regions of Achaia. Wherefore? because I love you not? God knows.
Nevertheless what I do, that will I do, to cut away occasyon from them,
which desire occasyon that they might be found like unto us in that wherein
they rejoice. For such false Apostles are disceateful woorkers, and fashion
themselves like unto the Apostles of Christ. And no marueil: for Satan himself
is changed into the fasshyon of an angel of light. Therefore it is no great
thing though his ministers fashion themselves as though they were the ministers
of righteousness, whose ^^de shall be according to their deeds. Nor speak I
this arrogantly, but so always favor and aid me the truth of Christ, as not
only at Corinthe, but also in the whole country of Achaia this glory of mine
in preaching of the gospel freely, shall not be taken from me. And why do I
this? Despise I your liberality for any hatred borne toward you? God knows,
that this is not the cause, but that which I do, and mind to do
hereafter, is to cut away all occasyon from such, as in us seek to find
fault: that where as these men are rich, pretending openly that they refuse
rewards, and yet receive them secretlye, that not so much as in this point,
wherein they seek for a false praise, they be found better than we, which
not so much as in our poverty receive ought of any man, not sufferyng that
they should pass us, no not in this vain and counterfaycte kind of
godliness. For these in deed preach the gospel, not of good will, but for
their own lucre and auauncemente, and whereas they are neither sent by Christ
nor do Christ's service, yet take they falsely upon them the honor of an
Apostles name, and make as though they were hired into the vineyarde of the
lord, and that they are his woorkemen, when they hinder his business, and
under the pretense of the Gospel seek their belly fare, enterlasyng their
own doctrine, much like them, which intendyng to deceive, mingle with the
pureste wine that can be had, deadly poysone, taking upon them in the mean
season an apostles person, that under the color of that authority, and shadow
of that high name, they may the rather deceive simple people, more like to
interlude players, then to Apostles. And surely it is the most deuelyshe kind
of deceit, under the color of religion to sow the venomous poison of
ungodliness. They say that Christ is their master, when in deed they do the
devil service. Nor marvel is it any, if the scholars resemble their
masters. For even the dark devil satan himself with no other crafty mean
more hurts men, than when he by dyssemblyng what he is, by enchauntemente
turns himself into the likeness of a bryghte angel. But such as are the
unfeigned dysciples of Christ use no deceit, thereyn resemblyng their master.

And it is no new thing, that the minysters of the devil take upon them a
contrary person, that whereas they serve vuryghteousnesse, they may yet seem
the minysters of righteousness, which being most false traitors,
pretending frendshyp are extreme enemies. I use not yet mine authority upon
them, but for a quietness leave them to their malice. But they shall not
escape punyshement, for all evil works shall have an evil end.

The text.
I say again, lest any manne think that I am foolyshe: orels even now take
ye me as a fool, that I also may boast my self a little: That I speak, I
speak it not a^^^ the ^orde, but as it were folyshelye, in this matter of
bostyng. Seeing that many ^^^oy^e after the ^^eshe, I will ^e^oyce also. For ye
suffer fools gladlye, seeing ye your selves are wise. For ye suffer if a man
bring you into boudage: if a man devour: if a man take: if a man exalte
him self: if a man smite you on the face. I speak as concerning rebuke, as
though we had been weak in this behalf. And now must I again desire you to
bear with me, that I may sumwhat truly boaste of my acts, lest some think
it foolishenes for me to praise my self. If I can not obtain this much of you,
yet bear this much with my foolyshenesse, if ye can, that since these
marcha^ntes among you so much crake of themselves, that I may also somewhat
glory of my self. For that, which I am now about to say, shall not sauer of
that pure spirit of Christ, but rather worldly foolyshenes: for glory will I
of such things, which nothing the more bring us into Gods favor, but
are such whereof the foolyshe commensorte is woonte to brag and crake,
whereas in them, true glory rests not. I know that it is like
foolyshenesse, that I do, but these false preachers crakes co^pel me to it,
whom yet ye fondly suffer to glory. Since therefore there be among you so many,
which would be coumpted for apostles, and yet boaste of no such things, as
make to an apostles dignity, I will also sumwhat of my self glory, in this
following their foolyshenes, which our foolyshenes ye shall in the mean season
take in good woorthe: for wise men, as ye are, gladly bear with other men's
foolyshenesse. And good reason is it that among so many as continually
glory, ye for a while suffer me, since my reioysynge shall not unto you be
paynefull as theyrs is. In them ye suffer willyngly to be brought into
bondage, whereas Christ would have you free: or if any of them with costs
devour and wear you out whereas we freely taught you: in them ye suffer, if
any by receiving presents and gifts diminishe your substance, if any
through pride use tyranny upon you, yea and that which is a point of
extreme vilannye, smite you in the face with his hand, or if they this do
not, yet they so handle you some other way, that the vila^^^^ is no less.
These for their this dooyng, ye think high apostles, having them in price for
such things, for which it is commenly coumpted foolyshenes for any manne to
auaunte himself. As though we could not abuse the same tytles with power and
authority to keep you under, had we not rather had a greater respect to
your wealth than to our dominion.

The text.
Howbeit wherein soever any man dare be bold (I speak foolishly) I dare be
bold also. They are Hchrues, even so am I* They are Israelites, even so am I.
They are the sede of Abraham, even so am I. They are the ministers of Christ (I
speak as a fool) I am more. In labor more abou^daunt: In st^^p^s above
measure: In prieson more plent^ous^y: In death out. Of y^ Jews ^^ue t^mes
received I every ^^ne forty stripes save one. Thrice was I beaten with ^oddes.
I was once stoned. I suffered thrice ^^^pwracke. Night and day have I been in
the d^pes^a. In ^ourneing often: ^^ parels of waters: ^^ parels of robbers: In
^^opardies o^ ^^ne o^ne ne^^o^: in ^eoperdies among the Heathen: in parels in
the ^^t^e: in parels in wy^dernes: in parels in the ^ea: in parels among false
brethren: in labor and trauail: in watching often: in hunger: in thi^ste: in
fast^nges often: in could and in nakedness: beside the things which ou^^ardly
happen unto me. I ^^ ^^^ bred daily and do ^ar^ for all congregacions. ^ho is
weak, and I am not weak? Who is offended, and I burn not? If I ^ust needs
boaste, I will boaste o^ the things that concern mine infirmities. And (for a
while to speak like a fool) what crake they of, or what is it that makes
them so much to stand in their own conceits, wherein I can not match the^? They
would have it seem a great matter to be an Hebrew, as though god much regarded
of what sto^ke a man cu^meth, and yet if it be any thing wurth to be an
Hebrew borne, I am an Hebrew also. They are Israelites, so am I: they are of
the sede of Abraham, even so am I. For with such vain tytles brag they
themselves, in which yet if we lusted to glory, we are as good as they, and in
such points, which verily make toward the glory of an apostle, we pass
them. They are the ministers of Christ, let it be so, but (to speak this
foolishly but yet truly) more am I. That I so am, I declared neither with high
look, nor with taking of presents, nor by braggyng of my kyndred, but by
such means, as ^uide^tly proved mine apostolic spirit. I have taken more
pains than any of them, more stry^es have I suffered, more often times
emprisoned, in ^eop^rdie of death more often And if ye lust to hear a
particular rehearsal, of the Jews five times received I every time fortye
stripes save one: thryse was I beaten with ^argeauntes rods, once was I
stoned, thrice suffered I shipwreck, night and day have I been in the deape
sea, not without extreme desperacyon of my life. What need I of these to make a
syngulare rehearsal? since I for the gospels sake have of^times been in
ieoperdie, not only by sea, but also by land: oftentimes in ieoperdies of
waters, in peril of robbers, in peril by reason of per^ecucion of the Jews,
in ^eoperdies among the violent Heathen, in peril in the ci^^^s, in peril in
wilderness, in peril in the sea, when we were like to have been slain of the
mariners: in ieoperdie of such, which under the false name of christian men
resisted our gospel. Now will I let pass my continual labors and trauayls
taken for the Gospels sake, and not rehear^e my continual and often watchinges,
my hunger and thrust suffered often times, my often fastings, nor the pain of
coldenesse and nakedness. But the pains, which I have hitherto rehearsed,
appertain only to bodily affliccion, which in the mean season was likewise in
no less trouble and carfulness of mind, which I take for such a multitude
of congregacions, which I so heartily tender, that whatsoever chances unto
them, I think it to chance unto my self. For whose miseries am I not as sorry
as for mine own? Who is weak and diseased, with whose weakness, I am not also
g^ieued my self? Who is offended, with whose displeasures I am not in mind
offended? If I must needs bost, rather will I bost of such things, which show
mine infirmity, than of such, as show my greatness. Let other bost, how for y^
gospels sake they are much made of that they grow rich, that under Christ's
title they bear great rule, more ^u^ly think ^ it to boast, y^ I for Christ's
sake have suffered vilany and affliccion.

The text.
The God and farher of ou^^ Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for
evermore, kneweth that I lie not. In the ^ne of Damasco, the gou^^nou^e of the
people under king ^retas, laid watch in the city of the Damascens, and
would have caughte me, and at a wynd^we was I let down in a basket through
the wall, and so escaped I his hands. God and the father of our Lord Jesus
Christ knows, that I lie nothing. When I was at Damasco, he, whom king
Areta father in law to Herod had made ruler over that countreye, had laid
watch in the city of Damasco, labouryng by all the means he could to take
me, to do the Jews a pleasure, and would have killed me, as the auctour of
sedicion: what should I do? Learned had I of the Lord, sometime in cruel
persecucion to fly. My mind gave me, that the time was not yet comen to
suffer martyrdom, but rather that the time required to preach the gospel
abroad: but the tyranne had round about besette me, so that refuge was there
none, but that in a basket through a wyndowe from the wall, I was with a rope
let down, and thus escaped I the rulers hands.

The.xii. Chapter.
The text.
Doubtless, it is not expedient for me to boast: I will come to visions and
reuelacions of the Lord. I know a man in Christ, above fourtene years a go
(whether he were in the body I cannot tell, or whether he were out of the body
I cannot tell, God knows) how that he was taken up into the third heaven.
And I know the same man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell,
God knows) how that he was taken up into Pa^adyse, and heard secret words
which no man can utter. Of this man will I boast, but of my self will I ^or
boast, e^cepte it be of mine infirmities. For though I would b^a^^, I ^^* al
not be a fool. for I would say the troth. Nevertheless, I spare you: lest
any man should think of me, above that which he sees me to be, or that he
hears of me. And lest I should be exalted out of measure through the
excellencye of the reuelacious: there was given unto me unquietness through the
flesh, even the messenger of Satan to buffer me* because I should not be
exalted ou^ of measure: For this thing besought I the Lord thryse, that it
might depart from me. And he said unto me: my grace is sufficient for the.
For my strength is made perfect through weakness, Very gladly therefore will
^* ^^ioyce of my weakness, that the strength of Christ may^ dwell in me. THis
far forth have we rehearsed such things, as declare cure troubles and
miseries, and such^ ma^iers, as in men's judgments br^ng us rather in
contempt, than in any renoume. But now whether I should also rehearse other
things or not, I have not fully determined, of which yet some falsely boaste
themselves. Should I glory or not? Yea sometime expediente is it to glory,
namely since the brifte of mine epistle has brought me to the visions and
reuelacions of the Lord Jesus, of which sort since false apostles feign
many, and wantonlye boaste them, even against my will, as one compelled,
(lest in this I seem behind the^) I will reh^arse but only one, and that
not to my glory neither, but to the glory of god. I know a certain manne,
which above. xiiii. years a go was taken up, whether it were in the body,
or without the body I cannot tell, god knows, which yet was taken up into
the third heaven, and ^hence again taken up into paradise, and in both
places heard secret words, which no man can utter.

For this man's sake, to whom through gods fre goodness such blisfulnes
befell, glory will I, but of my self boast will I not, saving in the rehearsing
of such things as declare my weakness and infirmity. And yet if I in this
matier also minded sumwhat to speak of my self, since I should neither lie
nor of my self speak vaingloriously, though I have acknowledged folishnes,
yet could I not justly be condemned thereof: but yet for your sakes, and not
for mine own abstain I from rehearsing of them, lest some think more in me,
tha^ there is, and suppose that I am some greater one, tha^ either mine acts,
or my preaching pretend. And peradventure it is not without ieopardie neither,
to glory of such things as make us great, and thereby nigh unto the
ieopardie of arrogancy. For this cause lest I might be to proud by reason
of high reuelacions, or else among men be taken for greater than it is expedient
I should: I have by the sufferaunce of the most There was given unto me
unquietness through the flesh.
merciful god, given unto me unquietness and affliccion of body, both to put
me in remembrance of my condition, and also to teach all men, that I am a
mortal manne, under like miseries, as other been. There is given (I say) to
truble me, which do Christ's service, the messanger and minister of Satan, to
resist my gospel, and with most cruel persecucions to vex me, as one that
on the head gives me buffettes, keapyng under and suppressyng me, lest I
might to much be exalted. And because this punishemente exceadynglye
disquieted me, thryse besoughte I the Lord, that he would from this
affliccion deliver me, but he seeing, what was better for me, than I could my
self, he answered me after this sort: Paul be content with my goodness
toward thee, and desire no more. As for thine affliccions appertain both to
the magnifying of my glory, as who through my aid canste not be ouercommen,
be the storms never so great, and also to thy salvation, which by bodilye
affliccions, art in spiritual treasures of the soul dayelye more and more
enriched.

And so does man's weakness make perfect the power of God, For my strength
is made perfect through weakness
and infirmity accomplish strength. For when by preaching of vile and weak
persons the gospel not only holds on, but also flourisshethe against
the devil and the world, vsyng against it all kinds of cruelnesse, it
makes a plain proof that this gear is not, by any worldelye power brought
about, but by the power of God. Now then the more affliccions we suffer, the
more is Gods glory set forth, which by us woorketh and shows his
power. Since than I was thus answered of God, hencefoorthe will I of nothing
more gladlye rejoice, than of my affliccions, whereby I seem rather feeble,
than great, in which also if there appear any greatenesse or heygthe, all
is to the glory of god: that where for Christ's sake I seem feeble, by him I
may seem strong and mighty.

The text.
Therefore, have I delectacion in infirmities, in rebukes, in read, in
persecucyons, and in anguyshes for Christ's sake. For when I am weak, then am
I strong. I am beco^e a fool in boasting my self, ye have compelled me: For I
ought to have been co^mmended of you. For in nothing was I inferior unto the
chief Apostles: though I be nothing, yet the tokens of an Apostle were wrought
among you with all patience, and signs and wonders, and myghtie deeds. For
what is it, wherein ye were inferiors unto other congregacio^s? Except it be
herein, that I was not chargeable unto you. Forgive me this wrong. Behold,
now the third time I am ready to come unto you: and yet will I not be
chargeable unto you. For I seek not yours, but you. For the children ought not
to lay up for the fathers and mothers, but the fathers and mothers for the
children. And therefore I specially rejoice and triumph in mine affliccions, in
my reproaches, in my poverty and persecution, and in my distreasses suffered
for Christ's sake. For when I am in suffering them most forsaken, and despair
in mine own strength, than am I through Christ's healpe verily strong and
mighty. But whither am I driven through the vehemency of this mine oration? Me
thinks I am now with boasting fallen to plain folishnes, but ye are the
occasion, who compelled me thereto. For since all that ever I was able to do,
was given me for your weal, it besemed you to have spoken that thing to my
commendacion, which I now unseemly am compelled to report of my self. I
seek not for the praise of that thing, which I never did, but if I have done
as much as any other, why are other more made of then I? I am but a poor man,
For in nothing was I inferioure unto the chief Apostles.
of a low degree, troubled and beaten under foot, not eloquent: I neither
refuse nor improve any of these, these things are mine, if there he any
incommodytie in them. Yet as vile as I am, touching you, ye found me in no
point behind other Apostles, I will not say, of the mean sort only, but
not so much as behind the highest. I boaste not of that in my self, which ye
have not found in me, for I have plainly proved, that I am a very Apostle, and
thereof make I your selfs judges. The first and chief argument and proof of an
Apostle is, for the gospelles sake gladly to suffer all troubles, in which
point I have certainly showed my self to be an Apostle. Neither lacked we
such gifts, wherewith God for the unbelievers sake brings my preaching in
credence, as signs, miracles, and mighty deeds. If I say not truth, tell me
wherein ye are behind other congregacions, or what gave any of these great
Apostles to any congregation, which we gave you not? Except this only be a
lack, that I was not costly unto you, as other Apostles were, ye ca^ in me
find no lack: in which point if I have offended you, forgive me this
displeasure, even because I have not offended you, though in deed I repent me
not of my so doing. Now have I twyes already been among you, and was
chargeable to no man, and lo, now purpose I the third time to see you, nor
yet mind I more to be chargeable unto you now, than I have been before. And
though I show yet none earnest cause for it, yet is it not For I se^^ not
yours, but you.
without a cause, but for what cause soever I do it, al is for your weal, and
in this matier I use my self as a true father. For the children ought not to
lay up for their fathers and mothers, but contrary the fathers and mothers,
for their children. Fathers love is such a thing, that they are not content to
bestow only the goods, which they with great labors have gotten, for the
weal of their children, but also their lives.

The text.
I will very gladly bestow, and will be bestowed for your souls: though the
more I love you, the less I am loved again. But be it that I was not
chargeable unto you: nevertheless when I was crafty, I took you with gyle.
Did I pyll you by any of them, whom I sent unto you? I desired Titus, and with
him I sent a brother. Did Titus defraude you of any thing? walked we not in one
spyryte? Walked we not in like steps? Again, think ye, that we excuse our
selves unto you? We speak in Christ in the sight of God. But we do all
things (dearly beloved) for your edifying. For I fear, lest it come to
pass, that when I come* I shall not find you such as I would, and that I
shall be found unto you such as ye would not. I fear, lest there be found
among you debate, envying, wrath, strife, backbytinges, whysperynges,
swellynges and discord. I fear, lest when I come again, God bring me low
among you, and I be constrained to bewail many of them which have sinned all
ready and have not repented of the v^c^eanesse, fornicacion, and wantonness,
which they have committed. And therefore so far am I from exacting any thing
of you, that I not only am ready with all my heart to bestow, that I have upon
you, but also my self, if it be expedient for your soul health. Sufficient is
it for me, that I as a father this do for my children, albeit I am not
ignorant, that it is with me toward you, as it is with many fathers with
their children: that whereas I tenderly love you, I am not likewise loved
again, but less regarded than they, which would you not so well as I. Put
the case, that I was not my self chargeable unto you fearing envy, but yet
that through crafty conueyaunce, I beguyled you, workyng that by some hiered
thereunto, which I was ashamed to do my self. For paraduenture some will make
this cauilacion, thinking me to be such as other be. Tell me I pray you,
exacted I any thing of you by any of the^, which came unto you in my name? I
desired Titus to go unto you, to Did I pyll you by any of them who^ I sent
unto you?
him adjoined I as a companion, the brother, which is well tried and known of
all the congregacions. Exacted Titus any thing of you? Had we not both one
mind? Walked not we both like steps? For I refuse not to have that laid to
my charge, which was done by such as I sent unto you. But no we think ye
again, that whiles we this speak, we plead our own matter? no not so, but
whatsoever we speak, whether it be in humbling of our self, or exalting,
laying your unkindness to your charge, al is done for your weal, dearly beloved
brethren, as God is my witness which knows my conscience, and as Christ
also is my witness whose cause I have in hand. I assay all ways, I leave no
mean unsearched, I shape my self into al fashions, and all to bring you to
better frame. I nothing fear these counterfayte Apostles for my own sake, but
this fear I, lest when I come, unto you, I find you not such, as I would ye
were, and ye again find me such, as ye would not. My desire is to see you in all points faulteles, that ye may again see me mylde and well pleased. But if
ye continue to give ear to some, I fear, lest I shall find among you
debate, envying, wrath, strife, backbytynges, whisperinges, swellings, and
discord, so that if I come again, I fear lest it chance, that whom it
seemed to be seen of you merry and pleasant, as one sufficiently troubled with
your outragiousnes already, the Lord among you bring me low again, so that
in stead of a tryumphe I be compelled to morn in all their behalfes, which
have already sinned, and not repented as yet their uncleanness, fornicacion and
wantonness, which they have committed.

The.xiii. Chapter.
The text.
Now come I the third time unto you: in the mouth of two or three witnesses
shall every word be stablyshed. I told you before, and tell you before: and
as I said when I was present with you the second time, so write I now being
absent, to them which in time past have sinned, and to all other: that if I
come again, I will not spare, seeing that ye seek experience of Christ which
speaks in me, which among you is not weak, but is myghtie in you. For
though he was crucified in weakness, yet lives he throw the power of God. And
we no dout are weak in him: but we shall live with him: by the might of God
among you. THis shall be my third cummyng unto you, against which let every of
you be in a readiness. For I will no longer wynke at matters, but mind in them
to proceed straightly, and as the extreme rigor of the law will. Whosoever
shall be accused, shall by the wytnes of two or three either be quited or
condemned. Once have I already warned you, and again now warn you, and as I
said, when I was present with you the second time, so write I unto you now
being absent, not only to them, which even at that time had offended, but
also to all such, as are offenders, if I find them vnamended, forasmuch as I
have now twyse given you warnyng, I will no more spare you, as I have
hertofore done. For what mean you? Seek ye to your own displeasure to have
experience, whether such things as I speak, I speak of my self, or by the
spirit of Christ, which by me speaks unto you? What, despise ye him also,
as weak? He toward you was not weak, though he once were such unto the
Jews and Pilate, but rather among you he declared himself mighty, by whose
name ye saw the dead to live again, devils to flee, and the sick to be made
whole. For albeit he once touching the weakness of nature, which he had taken
upon him, would he fastened upon a cross, yet must he not therefore be coumpted
as weak. He dyed by reason of the infirmity of his body, but he lives
through the power of God the father. Likewise we Apostles, though following the
steps of Christ our master, to unbelievers seem feeble, whiles we are of them
beaten, emprisoned, and reviled, yet through the power of God, mighty shall we
be by him against you, if you with stoubernes provoke my patience.

The text*
Prove your selfs: whether ye are in the faith or not. Examen your own
selves: know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you,
except ye be cast awayes? I trust ye shall know, that we are not cast awayes.
I desire before God that ye do none evil, not that we should seem
commendable, but that ye should do that which is honest* and let us be
counted as castawayes: We can do nothing against the truth, but for the
truth. We are glad when we are weak and ye strong. This also we wish for,
even your perfectness. Therefore write I these things being absente, lest
when I am present, I should use sharpenes, according to the power, which the
Lord has given me, to edify, and not to destroy. Finally brethren, fare ye
well: be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the
God of love and peace* shall be with you. Gr^^^ on: another in an holy kiss. All
the saints salute you. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of
God, and the fellowship of the holy ghost be with you all. Amen. Seek not to
have a proof of us, but rather prove your selfs, whether ye continue in the
gift of faith, or else be fallen from it. Search and examine one an other of
you. Ye had plain experience by your workyng of miracles, and by sondrye other
gifts how that not so much as in you was Christ weak. If that power be gone
from you, it is a plain proof, that either your faith is waxen faynte, or that
Christ being displeased with your evil life has altered his good mind to
ward you. Ye know not your selfs, and will ye have experience of me, when
your selfs know not, whether Christ be in you, or not? For he is in you,
if the strength of faith be in you, unless peradventure your faith being
after a sort safe, ye have through unclean living deserved to be rejected of
Christ. But howesoeuer the matter go with you, I trust ye shall in us
evidently perceive, that we are not forsaken. My faith is whole, and thereby
shall Christ in me be able to punyshe al such, as will not with a good will
come to amendmente. But what said I, (I trust?) yea rather contrary much
more wyshe we and desyer God that through your faults I be not compelled to
show my power, not because we fear, lest we be found weak, if we go about
to show the same, as some vaynly talk of me: this rather is my desyer, that we
be coumpted as castawayes, so that ye be upright and honest. For if ye
contynewe in faith and godly life, cause have I none, why to use my power
against you. Nor refuse I after this sort to We can do nothing against the
truth but for the truth.
seem weak, and for this to be reakened to have no power, because ye gave me
none occasion to exercise it. For against the truth we can do nothing, but
whatsoever we can do, all is for the truth: in somuche that we against
innocents have no power, but against offenders are we of power. If there be
in you nothing found worthy of correccion, ye shall as it were unarm us, with
innocence declaryng your selfs mighty, by reason that ye shall fro me as a
weak one take away the power given unto me to punish with all. The
slaunderers of my name will say I can do nothing, affirmyng that I could not
for some lack in me, do that thing, which by reason of your integrity I
could not do. But glad am I, as often as after this sort ye be strong,
though we be judged weak, yea we be not only glad, if this so be, but also
most heartely wyshe, that I seem to lack somewhat, so that ye be perfect.
And for this cause thought I it good more earnestly to warn you by letters,
lest when I come, I might be compelled to use rigor. Much more wyshe I to
have you amended with threatnynge words, than to use my power in punyshyng
you, given unto me of the Lord for your weal, and not to hurt you. Against
innocents I can do nothing, but it makes much matter, that such as with
haynouse vices corrupt your congregation, escape not always unpunished. I have
now in aduertising you done my part, it remains, that ye do yours.
Diligently apply your self unfeignedly to rejoice, all occasions of sorrow
set a part, increasing still from better to better, until that ye become
perfect, amending such things, as hurt your innocence, that when your
faults are sufficiently corrected, ye may of your amendment take comfort.
Agree together, and strive not each one with other of you through sondrye
opinions, let there be among you peace and mutual love. If ye so do, then
will the god of love and auctour of peace, always favor you and with you be
contented. Greet each one another of you in a holy kiss, not after the common
sort, but even with your hearts, All the saints, which are here, great you.
The favor of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of god the father, and the
fellowship of the holy ghost be among you al: that acknowlegyng the benefit of
the son, the charity of the father toward you, which in such sort loved
you, that he gave you his only son to be your redemer, and the goodness of
the holy ghost, by whom he always gives us his gifts, ye may after the
exaumple of the undivided trinite, live in a like unity, that is to wit in
concord, both pure, and perfect.

Thus ends the Paraphrase upon the latter Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to
the Corinthians.
The argument or whole matter of the Epistle of saint Paul to the
Galathians, by Des. Erasmus of Roterodame.
ALbeit the Galathia^s are Grecia^s, yet are they originally descended of
Frenchemen, and (as s. Hierome says) in dulnes of wit resemble the^. This
thing also Hillary, who was himself a Frenchma^ borne, in his hymns
testifyeth, in the same calling his countrymen dullardes. Saint Paul also in
this present Epistle reproving the^ calls them Anoetous, that is to say,
witless or foolish: to whose capacity temperyng his matter, he more
vehemently and sharply reproves, then in other of his Epistles he does
other, rather checkyng then teaching them, to thentent that such, as could not
with reason be brought to a better mind, might yet at lestwyse with authority
be called home again and amended. In this Epistle laboreth Paul about that
matter, which he else where in every place does: to call men (I say) from the
bondage of Moses law to the grace of the gospel, which matter in his epistle
to y^ Romans he also entreats of, because both people were in like error,
but yet after a sundry sort fallenthervnto. For the Romans were first
brought to Iewishenes, and afterward amended: but the Galathians contrary
being by the Apostle first well taught, were through the sleightie desceiptes
of false apostles brought back again to Iewishe religion. In the Romans,
simplenes it was, that they were through misteachyng begiled, but of wisdom
and discrecion it came, that after warnyng they sone amended: on the other
side, whereas the Galathians sone received and favored Christ's doctrine, that
was a point of easines: but straight after to fall again from it, and to become
Jews was even lightness and folishnes. To them there came false apostles taking
upon them as though they had been sent from the chief Apostles Peter and James,
which labored to abate Paul's authority, teaching them, that to him there
should no credence be given, as which was inconstant, sometimes obseruyng the
ceremonies of the law, as it appeared, by that he made a vow, shauyng his
head, and caused Timothe to be circumcised: and sometimes with the Gentiles
reprouyng and condemnyng the law, bearyng them in hand also, that such rather
ought to be believed, as had with Peter and James been conuersaunt and other,
which had seen Christ in his manhod, whereas Paul had neither seen Christ,
nor was, but a disciple of such as were disciples, and not the messenger of
Christ. Paul therefore vehemently and sharply, (for none epistle is there more
sharp) with a wholesome earnestnes and favorable sharpnes both cures the
Galathians error, and also defends his own authority, openyng the false
apostles disceiptes, at the beginning of the epistle, making him self equal
even with the chief apostles, yea, and in this point above them, because he
was at that time by Christ put in authority to preach, after that he was
become immortal, and upon boldness of this authority, for a certain time both
in Arabia and Damasco preached Christ, before that he had talked with any of
the Apostles, after which enterprise he grants, that he saw in deed at
Jerusalem for a few days Peter and James, of whom yet he was nothing helped,
after which time he says he preached. xiiii. years in Syria and Cilicia,
until such time as he was by God commanded to return unto Jerusalem with
Barnabas and Titus, where Paul compared and examined his gospel with such as
were Christ's Apostles: not because that he then began to doubt of his so many
years preaching, but to the intent that by their approbacion and allowaunce,
whose authorities were chief among all men, other might the more be confirmed:
at which time he so compared with Peter, that of him he learned nothing as
touching the gospel, and was not only by Peter not compelled to charge the
Gentiles with the burden of the law, but what time Peter at Antioche eat in
company of the gentiles such meats as were by the law forbidden, and after
for fear of the Jews that came withdrewe him self from that company, he
checked him even to his face, declaryng that through faith men obtain the
grace of God offered by the gospel, and not by keeping of the law which was at
that time abolished. And though he begun this disputacion, as it were with
Peter, yet persueth he the same more at large turnyng his matter to the
Galathians, instructyng them and declaryng, that Moses law was given but for a
time, and that al things taught therein appertained and directed to Christ
only: that in the law was but flesh, in the gospel was the spirit, in the
law there were shadows, in the gospel light, in the law images, in the
gospel the truth, finally in the law bondage, in the gospel liberty: and that
it was in the Galathians extreme folishnes after they had tasted of better
things, to fall to worse. Which points saint Paul entreats of in y^ first,
the second, the third and fourth chapter, then after that he has very
earnestly warned them that by receiuyng circumsicion they should not shamefully
cast them selves into the bondage of the law, he teaches, that christian
liberty is not a liberty to do what a man lust synnefully, but a willing
and a joyful mind to do well even for love, and not because the law so
commands. Finally he exhorts the Galathians to christian concord, to
help such as are weak or fallen, and to do for such as have taught us
christian faith, and that such works, because they be works of the spirit,
are with everlasting glory rewarded, whereas temporal ceremonies deserve but
glory temporal, incidently bringyng the false Apostles into displeasure and
hatred, as which for nothing else labored to have the Galathians circumcised,
but because they might thereof glory, as bryngers to pass of such an high
art. Like diseases have such now a days, which find out new and strange
kinds of religions, that it may be said, such a kind of men made he.

All this epistle Paul as it seems, wrote with his own hand, to show how
tenderly he loved the Galathians, whereas in other epistles his manner is no more
but to subscribe: The latin arguments show that it was written from the city
of Ephesus, but the greek titles read that it was sent from Rome.

The paraphrase upon the epistle of the Apostle saint Paul to the Galathians,
by Des. Erasmus of Roterodame.
The first Chapter.
The text.
Paul an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and by God
the father, which raised him up from death: and all the brethren, which are
with me. Paul an Apostle, and an Apostle of no mean sort, (which I say),
lest either some despise me, as one of less reputacion, or with the power and
authority of other Apostles abate and suppress mine. For neither was I of any
man put in this commission and office as other some have been, which either
being but disciples and underlings, to the Apostles auaunce them selves, as
though they were of the highest sort, or else by unlawful means procuryng
men's favor, violently break But ^y Jesus Christ and by God the father.
into the office of an Apostle. Nor was put in authority to preach the
gospel by any excellent person, but by Jesus Christ him self the son of God,
who not with any man's eleccion or consent had, commanded me to be the
preacher of the gospel, but by his own mouth, what time he was becomen
immortal, even from heaven called me forth to do this busynes, undoubtedly by
the decrees and authority of God the father, who raised his son Jesus from
death. For he is not therefore to be supposed dead, because he is of us no
longer seen. But rather if such be worthyly taken for high Apostles, whom
Christ appointed being as yet among mortal men mortal, then surely should I not
be coumpted their inferior, whom he at that time from heaven, not as man, but
even God, called to be his Apostle and messenger.

For as I am in this point equal even to the highest Apostles, in that I was of
the same Jesus Christ institute, so this preeminence may I lawfully challenge,
that Christ chose them, what time he was to our bodily infirmities subject, but
me called he a sonder to be his preacher, what time he had put of all
conditions of man's weakness.

The text.
Unto the congregation of Galacia: Grace be with you and peace from God the
father, and from our lord Jesus Christ, which gave him self for our sins,
to deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God our
father, to whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen. Paul therefore even I an
Apostle, and such an Apostle write this Epistle to as many of you as through
the whole country of Galacia consent and agree in Christ's doctrine: and lest
one man's authority be of to small weight, not only I, but also as many as are
here, (of whom there is a great number) which with me profess the name of
Christ, which forsakyng Moses law embrace the faith and doctrine of the gospel,
first wish you grace, and than peace and concord: grace that upon fre
deliuerau^ce from your old lynnes, ye may hereafter live an innocente and a
pure life: concord, that ye neither dissent from other congregacions, nor yet
from your selves: which both gifts we must look to receive, neither of
Moses nor of any other mortal man, but of God the father, from who^ as from a
welspring al our wealth comes, and of his son our Lord Jesus Christ, by who^
it pleased God to give us all things, who^ we must both thank for all the
miseries that we have escaped, and also for all the goodness, that we have
obtained unto. For Moses circumcision made no man innocent, but Christ of his
own fre goodness offered him self to death, because he would for our sins make
amends, purposyng through the grace of the gospel to supply that, which Moses
law was not able to do, that we through his only benefit being delivered from
sin, and sinful minds, whereunto the world is bound, may neither be
slauishely under uncleanness, nor man's ceremonies: For so has it pleased God,
and our father, by whom being first made, when after through our folly we fell
again into the bondage of sin, we were restored again, like men new borne,
of yearthly becomen heavenly, and of carnal made spiritual. To him therefore,
of whom al our goodness flows, honor, and glory be given, not transitory as
Moses law had, but such as shall never have an end.

Amen.
The text.
I marvel that ye are so sone turned from Christ, which called you by grace,
unto another gospel: which is nothing else, but that there be some, which
trouble you, and intend to pervert the Gospel of Christ. Whereas I lately
preached this unto you, and since that ye once received the same, I marvel
not a little, what has chanced, that ye are fallen from so good a father, and
so sone fallen from him, which freely forgeuyng al your trespaces, has called
and provoked you to everlasting salvation, not for Which called you by grace
unto an other gospel.
your keeping of the law, but through the grace and bounteous mercy and
benefit of Jesus Christ, and that ye are suddenly fallen again into the
bondage of Moses law, as it were into an other gospel, when in deed beside
that which we preached unto you, there is no other gospel at all.

Whence is this so great unstableness, from whence is this lightness, to change
such fredome as is freely given unto you, with such wylfull bondage? As for
your wits I reprove not, but think this fault rather to be laid to certain
false Apostles, which being rather the preachers of Moses, than of Christ,
abuse your rudenes, and trouble you with the titles of high Apostles, manacyng
and threatenyng you, as though it so stood with you, that ye could without
circumcision not attain unto salvation, in so doing, not only laboryng to
renew the ceremonies of the old law, who^ it were meet, were now abrogate
and abolished, but under this color also utterly peruertyng the gospel of
Christ. For since that the same gospel through faith and godly life, assures
al men, that embrace it, of perfect weal and salvation, well may it be
coumpted a vain and a deceiptful doctrine, if (as they teach) no man have
entrey to everlasting wealth, unless he be circumcised, as the custom of Moses
law requires. God defend, that any man's authority should remove you from
the pureness and sincerity of the gospel.

The text.
Nevertheless, though we our selves, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other
gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him be
acursed. As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other
gospel, then that ye have received, let him be accursed. Rather be so far
from being moved through the names of Peter, James, and Ihon, be y^ same never
so great, which names men abuse to bring you under the burdaine of the law,
that if even an angel sent from heaven preach unto you any gospel other then
that we preached, let the same of you not only not be heard, but be also taken
as one to be abhorred and accursed. And lest any think that these my words
are spoken either of hastynes, or of vnpacience, I rehearse the^ again and
again, that whosoever, whether he be an angel, or an Apostle of high name,
preach unto you otherwise, then ye have learned of us before, accursed (I
say) be he and abominable.

The text.
Do I now persuade men or God? Either go I about to please men? For if I had
hitherto studied to please men, I were not the servant of Christ. For as often
as men are in hand with the right line of Christ's faith, neither man's
authority, no nor angels ought to preuail or take place. Who so preaches
Christ's gospel, laboreth in no man's busynes, but in Gods. Either go I about
to please men.
And if this be so, why should I fear any man's authority? I was by no man but
by God put in trust to preach y^ gospel. In which office I pray you, whether
should I in such wise handle my self to please men, or God, who^ only I
acknowledge for my author and master? The Jews upon a worldly zeal labor to
set forth among al men their rites and ceremonies, to thentent that they may
under this color be the more made of, as the nature of men would have ever
such ways seem best, wherein them selfs were brought up. Wherefore some sekyng
to have the Jews favor, labor to bring men in mind to be circumcised, and
preach of keeping the sabbath day, with obseruyng a difference in meats, as
though when they so reach, they taught men a high and a singular point. But
God forbid, yt I should so farfoorth labor to please the Jews being rather
carnal then spiritual that I should suffer with any Iewishe ceremonies ye purity
of the gospel to be corrupted. When I in time past was given to Iewishenes, I
pleased my countrymen, by all ways I could, persewyng them, that professed
the name of Christ. But whiles I went about to please men, I displeased God;
who would have Moses abolished, and the glory of his son Christ to be set
forth. As long as I was bond to the law, al mine intent and For if I had
hitherto studied to please men etc.
endeavor was to keep Moses rules, and for that sought I praise at men's
hands: but now has God called me an other way, whose only praise I desire,
and look for. If I should hence forth still look for the same praise of men,
certainly I were not Christ's servant. For how can any man think me his
servant, if I more apply my self to win the favor of men tha^ to do his
commandments, if I more fear to displease ye Jews, than God the father of
Christ, and author of ye gospel? I was never slauishely bond to the ceremonies
of Moses law, who^ I well wist were through the light of Christ's gospel quite
abolished, after such time as I had once wholly given my self to Christ. For
albeit once or twyse for appeasyng of a commocion which might elswyse have
been, being among the Jews, I observed certain of their customs, yet never
thought I in the^ any hope of salvation, but for a time applied my self to the
minds of my countrymen, that I might thereby bring more unto Christ.

But since I perceive, that this submission of mine is by them wrest into a
wrong meaning, so that now the matier is gone so far, that they stycke not
to charge with ye burden of the law, as a thing necessary, even them, whom
the gospel found free from that burden, I think it high time freely and
plainly to speak again Moses rites, and openly to deteste all that makes to
the derogacion of Christ's glory. And from so doing shall there none Apostles
authority fear me, be he never so notable, assuryng my self wholye of
Christ, whose will and commandment I follow through thycke and thyn in all
ieopardye.

The text.
I certify you brethren, that the gospel which was preached of me, was not
after the manner of men. For I neither received it, nor learned it of man, but
by the revel ac^on of Jesus Christ. But because ye shall the better
understand, that I not without consideracion fell from Moses law, and now
with such boldness preach the liberty of the gospel, Ioo you to will
(brethren,) that the gospel, which I taught you, is no such worldly
ordinance as may for any man's pleasure be altered, as that may be, which
is made by man. Such as to you preach circumcision, let them for their part
take heed, whence they learned their gospel. Surely the joyful tidings,
which I taught you, neither received, nor learned I of man, by mean whero^ I
might be coupelled, either to lean to his authority, or to follow other men's
interpretacions. For I neither received it, nor learned it of man.
Christ himself vouchesaued to show, unto me the mystery of the new law
and the abolyshment of the old, because no man shall think, that I was
without consideracion and rashely changed, or else received the gospel, which
I preach, of no person of grave authority. Christ is in such sort man,
that yet he is no mortal man, nor yet under such delites, as all men else are.
Christ is also in such condition man, that he therewith is also God, by whose
secret power, and spirit I was suddenly changed into a new man, being elswyse
more stubbernly given to Moses law, taught unto me by mine elders to be had in
reverence and honor, than was like by any worldly persuasion to be plucked
out of my head, had not the holy ghost enspired mine heart.

The text.
For ye have heard of my conversation in time paste, in the Jews way, how
that beyond measure, I persecuted the congregation of god, and spoiled it, and
prevailed in the Jews way, about many of my companions in mine own nation,
being a very seruent mainteiner of the tradicions of the elders. Of this my
tale I think you not ignorant, who of lykelyhod by report know, after what
sort I used my self under the Jews law, for love borne thereto so greatly
abhorryng the gospel of Christ, whose secret knowledge I had not yet received,
that by all the means I could. I persecuted the new congregation, which at
that time by the spirit of god began to be gathered to the doctrine of the
gospel, and with the most tyra^nie I could, destroyed them, thinking in the
mean season, that I did a noble act and such an act as hyghlye pleased god,
whiles in deed like a fool ignorauntly I fought against god.

And surely the matier went well forward: for in my Iewyshe profession, whom
only at that time I thought good and godly, among my companions I got the
praise, that I passed well nyghe all that werre of my companions, for that
rekened more holy and religiouse, because I more styfly cleaued unto my
forefathers laws: in so doing being deceived for lack of right judgment and
knowledge, and not for lack of a good intent and purpose, and for a zeal
borne to the law resisting the maker thereof. Which blyndnes it pleased god by
his secret counsel to suffer for a time, to thentent that I being suddenly
changed from so great a bolsterer of the law into a preacher of the gospel,
might by mine example draw and provoke many to Christ.

The text.
But when it pleased god, which separated me from my mothers womb, and called
me hereunto by his grace, for to declare his son by me, that I should preach
him among the Heathen: immediately I communed not of the matier with flesh and
blood, neither returned I to Jerusalem to them which were apostles before me:
but went my ways into Arabia, and came again unto Damasco. Wherefore as soon as it pleased God, which long before that, even from my mothers womb, had
purposed and chosen me out for his business, upon me to declare and notify his
pleasure, and whereas I no such thing deserved, of his own free goodness to
call me to this office, that by me, as by an instrument, the glory of his
son Jesus might be known, whom as yet but very few of the Jews knew,
and of the Gentiles almost none, among who^ specially he would have me to be
preacher, what think ye, did I? Did I still cleave unto my forefathers laws?
was I slack to I communed not of y^ matur with flesh and blood.
set upon the busynes, wherewith I was put in trust? mistrusted I y^ word of
God? compared I my gospel with any of the Apostles, that were my countrymen?
or went I to any man to ask his advise? went I to Jerusalem, to have my
gospel stablyshed by their authority, who, because before me they were called
to the dignity of apostleship, are highly esteemed? No I did not so. Nor
thought I it convenient, that it should by man's authority be confirmed,
which was by Christ's commandment immediately commuted unto me. But furthwith
as soon as I perceived mine error, and had received from heaven this
commission, without any delay went I into Arabia, where I nothing doubted to
preach Christ's name, being as yet to the wild and harbarouse people either
unknown or hated: with no less zeal preaching then he grace of the gospel,
than I exste preached Moses law. And from Arabia returned I to Damasco, where
straight from my baptism I had begun to profess Christ's name.

The text.
Then after three years, I returned to Jerusalem to se Peter and abode with
him xv. days. Other of the Apostles saw I none save James the Lords brother.
The things therefore which I write to you: behold before god, I lie not.
Thence after a three years space came I to Jerusalem, rather to see Peter,
than any thing to compare with him. And with him abode I no more but. xv. days,
though he among the Apostles seemed chief. As for other of the Apostles
labored I to see none, saving James, whose surname is Iustus, who was for
perfect holiness of life called the Lords brother: and he therefore became first
Bishop at Jerusalem.

So far as ye see, was I from mistrustyng my gospel, and sekyng for any
man's aid and assistence. Now that I in all these things say true, witness
is god himself, at whose commandment I have taken upon me to preach the
gospel.

The text.
After that came I unto the coasts of Siria and Cicilia, and was unknown, as
touching my person unto the congregacions of Iewrye, which were in Christ.
But this they heard only that he which persecured us in time paste, now
preaches the faith, which he before destroyed. And they glorified god in me.
These things done I went into the countries of Syria and Cilicia, in every
place there preaching the name of Christ. For even in these countries a
certain noumber of Jews began to fauer Christ's doctrine, but to them yet was
I by syghte unknown, notwithstanding I was a Jew borne, only this they
knew by report, that I was he, which by gods will of a persecutor of the
christian faith, was suddenly become a preacher of the same faith, so that the
same I before to the vtterest of my power assaulted, now even with ieopardy of
my life I defended. For which change they two manner of ways glorified god,
one for that they were from such greuouse persecucio^ delivered, and for that
they had gotten such a defender of their profession.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
Then fourtene years thereafter, I went up again to Jerusalem, with
Barnabas, and took Titus with me. I went up by reuelacion, and commoned with
them, of the gospel, which I preach among the Gentiles, but specially with
them, which were coumpted chief, lest I should tun or had run in vain.
But after I had fourtene years preached the doctrine of the gospel speacyally
to the Gentiles, then went I again with Titus and Barnabas to Jerusalem,
whom I minded to take with me, as witness of that, which was done. And this
did I, not now of humanity, as I did before, but at gods commandment, to
the intent the Jews should better know, when they should see so great a
number of Gentiles without circumcision called to everlasting life, as well as
they, that salvation ought to be looked for, not for circumcisions sake, but by
faith geuyng to the gospel. With them therefore I w^t up by reuelacion, and
co^muned ^^ them.
compared I my gospel, which I by Christ's will hitherto preach among the
Gentiles, and with them especially communed I, whose authority was among the
Jews most esteemed, least any of them which still believed that Christ's
gospel should be myngled with Moses law, might say, that either I in the
course of the gospel had run in vain, or do still now yet run, in that
through the gift of faith without mention making of circumcision I had
promised them the same salvation, that we which are circumcised puttyng our
confidence in Christ, trust to have and enjoy.

The text.
Also Titus which was with me, though he were a Greek, yet was not compelled
^o be circumcised: and that because of inco^mers being false brethren, which
came in privily to spy ante our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that
they might bring us into bondage. To whom we gave no coume, no not for the
time (as concerning to be brought into subieccion) because the truth of the
gospel might continewe with you. And so far were we from chargyng the
Gentiles with the burden of circumcision, that not somuche as Titus, when he
was both at Jerusalem, and conuersaunt also among Jews, that styfly defended
circumcision, was by the chief apostles of the Jews compelled to be
circumcised, because he was a Grecian and not a Jew. And how much less then
should ye lo do there in Galacia by compulsion of any false apostle? Such as
among the apostles were chief, required not of us to have a Grecian
circumcised, therein undoubtedly intendyng, that the bondage of the law
should by little and little wear quyte away, and the liberty of the gospel
be establyshed. But into our company there crepte certain false And that
because of incu^mers. etc.
christian men, whom I may for good cause so call, because they exact that,
which Christ would, should wear out of use. Traitorously and falsely came
they within us to espy our liberty given unto us through the gospel of
Christ, whereat they envied, intendyng nothing else but through circumcison to
bring us again backwarde into the bondage of the law. Of them was it more
lykely, that we should through their importune means, be compelled, lest by
resistyng, some commocion might be stiered up.

And yet not so much as to them gave we so ferfurthe place, no not for the
time so satisfyeng their minds, by submitting our selfs, that Titus should
be circumcised, which thing was by us done for your sakes, lest that which
was in Titus done of necessity, ye without necessity following the same might
fall from the truth of the gospel, into a Iewyshe supersticion.

The text.
Of them which seemed to be somewhat (what they were in time passed it makes
no matier to me: god looks on the outward appearance of no man) nevertheless
they which seemed great, added nothing to me. But contrariwise, when they saw
that the gospel over the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the gospel
over the circumcision was committed unto Peter (for he that was myghtie in
Peter, in the apostleshyp over the circumcision, the same was mighty in me
among the Gentiles) when they perceived the grace, that was given unto me, then
James, Cephas, and John, which seemed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas
the right hands of that fellowship, that we should be apostles among the
Heathen, and they in the circumcision, only y^ we should remember the poor.
Wherein also I was diligent to do the same. Now if some of them, whose
authority is chief, at any time either exacted of any other circumcision, or
else permitted it, whither they therein well did or not, that little
appertains unto me, this is for me sufficient, that they have forsaken their
old opinion, and are now of the same, that I am of. How soever the matier
go, it is among men a great mattier to be well esteemed, but with god are not
regarded such outward apparences, but the very truth. Be it so y^ their
authority is greater, than mine, yet as touching the pure preaching of the
gospel, they so little furthered me, that they had rather by me therein some
increase and furtheraunce. For after y^ upon declaracion and trial had of my
preaching unto them, they perceived, that Christ had as well put me in trust
with preaching of his gospel among the Gentiles, as he had done Peter among the
Jews, and when they saw also that my preaching without circumcision was no
less effectual, than Peter's was, with circumcision joined with his, and upon
our report they understood that god had given us with the^ equal grace of
the gospel, so far were Peter, James, and John who among them were thought
principal pillars, from reprouyng my preaching, that with me and Barnabas
gyuyng us their right hands, they made alegue of fellowship, that we should
with one consent and mind preach one gospel, every man in his portion: we
among the Gentiles, and they among the Jews. Nor gave they us any iniunction,
to call any of the Gentiles to circumcision. Only this desired they of us,
that what time we among the Gentiles preached the gospel, we would remember
the poor people, which were at Jerusalem, that they thereby might by some of
them be relieved. In which point, forasmuch as it well agreed with the
doctrine of the gospel, we diligently obeyed that their commandment, as we
would not have done, had they given us in commandment to circumcise the
Gentiles. For an unmeet thing is it, that with us any man's authority should
so take place, that for fauer borne unto him we should not after a right trade
see unto the ghospel. For as at the beginning the matier required some thing
for a season to bear with such as from Iewyshenes were turned to the gospel
(because they could not utterly be brought from y^ religion, wherein according
to their elders laws was, they were nozeled even from their youth) lest by
that occasion many might from Christ be discouraged: so was there a diligence
to be used, that through our advertisement such people might be content to
leave any longer to be borne with, specially since therein there was more
ieopardy, than advantage. For of them, which of Jews embrace the doctrine of
the gospel, a very small noumber is there, in comparison of them, whom we of
the Gentiles by our preaching, have enryched Christ with.

And of their further increase also stand we in great hope, since the Gentiles
dwell so fer and wide abroad in the world, whereas the Jews in comparison be
contained, but within a very narow cumpace. Now of the Gentiles the greatest
part in such sort abhor circumcision, that more like were they to forsake
Christ, and his gospel, then upon them to receive the yoke of such an odiouse
law. Beside all this also, this greater ieopardy is to be feared, lest if men
long and in most places abroad use such kind of sufferaunce and bearyng, it
come to pass, that the free benefit of our salvation, for the which gods
goodness and our faith should be thanked, greatly seem to hang upon the
ceremonies of the law. Which if men se observed by the chief apostles, then
will such, as are somewhat bent to supersticion, take it, as though without
them the faith taught by the gospel to the attaynyng of everlasting salvation
were not sufficient. For what is externally done, all men se, but with what
minds and purpose things are done, that se they not. And in matiers of
suspicion it is a known thing, that men are commonly given always to suspecte
the wurste. Bye mean whereof, that they shall do for the time, gyuing place to
the exceadyng supersticion of the Jews, and against their conscience, will
other judge, as done of devotion, and not bear with their weakness. Men have
for a season borne with the Jews inevitable strupulositie, from whom they must
now by little and little increase to better. But to exact that of the Gentiles,
which was but for a time suffered in the Jews, that may by no means be
borne with. The Jews first were excused by reason of a certain persuasion
received of their predecessors, and beside that by a long custom, whose power
is as much effectual, as is the power of nature: again by that god was y^
author of their law, by diverse other things also, of which none may be
brought for defense of the Gentiles, if they should likewise myngle Moses law
and Christ's together. But now am I specially put in trust with the Gentiles,
as Peter's charge is over the Jews. And meet it is that each of us
pryncypallye have a regard to his own cure and charge.

The text.
But when Peter was come to Antioche, I withstoode him openly, because he was
worthy to be blamed. For yet that certain came from James, he did ear with
the Gentiles. But when they were come, he withdrewe and separated himself from
the^, fearing them which were of the circumcision. And the other Jews
dissembled as well as he: in somuche that Barnabas also was brought into their
simulacion. Wherein surely I will give place to no man's authority, in somuche
that when Peter came to Antioche, albeit among the apostles I well wist that
his authority was chief, yet nothing doubted. I plainly and even at his face
to withstand him, more esteamyng the gospel, than the dignity that he was in.
Nor let I before all men to reprove his waueryng inconstancy and pretended
fear, since the act self was for this well worthy I withstode him open^y.
reprofe, because the same made to the great danger of many, which were
lykely otherwise to take it, than was by him meant, even as though he had so
done upon a conscience, and not to bear with the Jews infirmity. For where
he before syttyng at dinner with certain, which of Gentiles were come to the
profession of the gospel, with the^ eating indifferently all kinds of meats,
straight when certain Jews sent from James He did eat with the Gentiles.
came upon them at diner time, he withdrewe himself from the table, pretending,
as though he had not with them indifferentlye eaten commen meats: without
doubt fearyng lest he should offend their consciences, whom he thought as
yet somewhat more supersticiouse than could wholly forsake and leave such
choice of meats, and to be also such, which judged, that it could not well
stand with godlynes, that a Jew should with a Gentile as much as sytte at
one table. Which cloak and pretense of Peter, albeit it came of a good mind,
yet was it some thing indiscreet And y^ other Jews disse^bled aswelas he.
and like to have turned to the utter destruction of many, because not only
the rest of the Jews that sat with us, favored Peter's dissemblyng, but also
my fellow Barnabas moved with Peter's authority, even with Peter withdrewe
himself from that syttyng.

Whose dissemblyng there was no doubt, but that all the rest welnigh would have
followed, had not remedy been founden with fierce and vehement resistance and
contencions.

The text.
But when I saw that they went not the right way after the truth of the
gospel. I said unto Peter before them al: If thou being a Jew, live after
the manner of the Gentiles, and not as do the Jews: Why causest thou the
Gentiles to live as do the Jews? For we which are Jews by nature, and not
sinners of the Gentiles, know, that a man is not justified by the deeds of the
law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: And we have believed on Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the deeds of the
law: because that by the deeds of the law no flesh shall be justified. When I
perceived therefore, that certain, one while appliyng them to the gentiles
fredome, and other whiles to the Jews weakness, haulted as it were betwixt
both, nor went the right way, nor steadfastly forward, as the truth of the
gospel would, which at that time was so brymme, that it was time without all
clokyng steadfastly to profess the same, that the ceremonies of the law were
abolished, and to salvation offered by the gospel help nothing, to remedy the
peril that every manne was in, plainly in every man's sight I resisted and
gainsayed Peter: that upon correccion of the head, all might by his example
amend, as they would when they should see, that even he obeyed my reformacion.
And by these words resisted I him, and said: what meanest thou Peter? for what
purpose is it, that thou this wise withdrawest thy self? Why do thou,
whiles thou indiscreetly fear for thy Jews, draw these my Gentiles If thou
being a Jew. etc
into a dangerous supersticion? For if thou being a natural Jew thy self and
yet not regardyng y^ supersticious vsages of thy cou^treymen, live even as the
Gentiles do, coumptyng nothing unclean, but that which is to Godwarde
unclean, since again thou have at other times heretofore done likewise with
Cornelius Ce^turio, and even now at this time also here in our company, why art
thou now become unlike thy self, why do thou inconstantly withdraw the
from diner, even as though it so were with the, that whereas before this time
thou shewedst thy self not to regard the differences in meats, nor yet to be
with gentiles conversant, that such acts of thine were not done upon any
such judgment and discrecion, but to please men withal: nor semest thou to
understand, that this thine example not only confirms the Jews in their
supersticion, which were mete to be abolished, but y^ the Gentiles also,
which are becomen christians, are like to be compelled through thine example,
which art among the Apostles chief, to be charged with the ceremonies of the
Jews, from who^ Christ would have men free, not only them, whom the grace of
the gospel found fre, but also y^ Jews self, who^ it found bond. We that are
no Gentiles borne, whom the Jews call sinners and vnpure, A man is not
justified by the deeds of the law.
which at the time of preaching the gospel were in deed Idolaters, but are by
nature Jews, borne under the law, whereunto for a season we well obeyed, being
yet taught, that through the keeping of the law noman is justified, but rather
by a certain confidence, whereby we trust through the fre mercy of Christ to
have remission of sins* mistrustyng the law of our elders, we resort to
Christ's religion, trustyng by mean thereof to obtain righteousness, not such
as may bring us into men's favor, but into the favor of God, which the keeping
of the ceremonial law, as a thing not sufficient, was not able to bring
about. And shall we now be beginners and authors, that the Gentiles mistrustyng
Christ shall now seek upon the succor of the law, specially since we well
know, that through the benefit of the law no man before God is made
righteous? If men were, what need were it to resort to the faith of the
gospel?

The text.
If while we seek to be made righteous by Christ, we our selves are found
sinners, is Christ then the minister of sin? God forbid. And if after our
once receiuyng the faith of the gospel, we be nevertheless found subject to
sin, so that we need yet an other remedy, as much as we had need of being
under Moses law, and being disapointed of the hope we stood in, so that we
now again are compelled to seek upon the law, that of us was forsaken, what
shall we say? shall we say that Christ, Is Christ the^ the minister of sin.
whom we believed to be the author of perfect justice, is the minister of
unrighteousness? who not only delivers us not from our old unrighteousness,
but is also an occasion of increase thereof, and not only gives unto us not
the welthy state which we looked for, but also causes our co^demnacion to be
more grievous, forasmuch as upon hope of him we forsook the law: whereunto if
we again be compelled to return, we might seem not without fault and
unadvisedly to have forgone it, of which fault Christ seems the very
occasion. But God forbid, that any man so judge of Christ, or think that the
grace of his gospel does lack any perfeccion, so that toward the attainement
of salvation we should need to seek somewhat out of Moses law.

The text.
For if I have builte again the things, which I destroyed, then make I my
self a trespacer. For I through the law, have been dead to the law, that I
might live unto Christ, For to return again to Moses, after we once have
received the law of the gospel, it is a certain falling away from Christ and
reproach to the gospel, yea, what Jew or stranger soever so does, therein
declares he him self also to be a transgressour of Moses law. For if the
law any thing made to salvation, why forsook he it? if it nothing made, why
falls he to it again? If the buildyng thrown down with mine own hands, I
begin even from the foundation to build the same again, which I erste
destroyed, show not I therein my folly, which set that up again, which I
unadvisedly destroyed? No cause is there then why after we have once embraced
the faith of the gospel, by whom the goodness of Christ would we should receive
perfect righteousness and salvation, to regard the succor of the gross law,
whereunto we are now no longer bond. For as the death of either of the two
married delivers the party that is left on live from the bond of matrimony:
so had I, which am a Jew, with the law somewhat to do, as long as that
mutual right endured, that is to say, as long as the law lived unto me, and I
lived to the law.

The text.
I am crucified with Christ, Nevertheless I live: yet now not I, but Christ
lives in me The life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of
the son of God, which loved me, and gave him self for me, I despise not the
grace of God: For if righteousness come of the law, then Christ died in vain.
But as soon as through the death of Christ and the sacrament of baptism I
became prentice to the spiritual law of faith, I was in manner to the gross
and carnal law dead, yet not so dead, that I lived not, but so dead, that I
begun to live after a better way and condition. Hitherto lived I to Moses,
but now live I to God. For God is a spirit.

As Christ lived before a mortal man, having a body subject to miseries, as
ours is, so he being now dead to the flesh, and also to the world, lives to
God the father, free from all corrupcion and miseries of death. But I, which
through baptism am crucified with Christ, and also dead with him, am so far
from being bond to these gross and carnal, rather than spiritual and godly
obseruaunces, that to them I am dead. For I live not gross and carnal as I
once was, subject also to worldly desires: Dead is Saul the stout de^ender of
the law, and persecutor of the gospel, and yet through the spirit of Christ
have I received life now much better. Or rather I live not my self, which of
my self am nothing but carnal, Not I, but Christ lives in me, etc.
but in me lives Christ, who^e holy spirit at his will and pleasure governs
all mine acts. But whereas I am not yet free from all contagion of death, but
have still a body, somewhat subject to man's weakness, and the disco^modities
of this mortal life, yet in manner live I a life immortal, conceived in my
soul through sure hope, assuryng my self upon the promise of the son of
God, through whose bounteous mercy I have received y^ gift of faith, and
through faith righteousness, through righteousness, life everlasting, not by
keapyng of the gross law, but through the singular goodness of Christ, who of
his own good will loved me deseruyng no such thing, so greatly that for my
sins he suffered the punishment of the cross, and for my wealth gave him
self to death. Free is all that he gives.

His pleasure was, that for our salvation we should to him be beholding, and
not to the keeping of the law. He it is which freely gives this I despise not
the grace of God. etc.
benefit to all men. He it is which takes a way sin, and gives pure and
innocent life. Were not I most unkind, yea were I not spiteful against
Christ, if I refused his offer? And refuses he not it, who after baptism
received, looks back again for help of the law, as though to abolishe all the sins of the world, and to give every manne everlasting salvation,
Christ's death were not sufficient? If through innocent and hurtleslife we
become immortal, whence (I pray you) rather look we to receive both, by
confidence in the law, or by the fre mercy of Christ? If by his free mercy, why
hang we still on the law? If by keapyng of Moses, then is Christ dead in vain,
forasmuch as that, for which his pleasure was to dye, by his death we geate
not.

The third Chapter.
The text.
O ye folishe Galathians: who has bewitched you, that ye should not believe the
truth? To who^ Jesus Christ was described before the eyes, and now among you
crucified COmenly among men for your folishenes and childishnes are ye evil
spoken of, but this may I truly say: O ye folishe Galathians, which would be
brought in to an opinion so far from all reason, that where the Jews through
the faith of the gospel preached unto them, are delivered from the burden of
the law, ye being free men borne, will wilfully cast your self into bondage*
The harm which is herein done, I lay not wholly to your charge, but blame your
lightenes to believe, and easynes to be persuaded: but much more blame I the
malice of certain, who have altered your former minds, which would God ye
would rather have followed simple as they are, than the ungracious counsel of
some other.

What was he, that through an envy and grudge borne against your weal, under
which ye have hitherto continued, through the liberty of the gospel, has
bewitched you, and charmyng out your christian mind has by enchauntment cast
you into this frensye, that ye as men mistrustyng Christ, should seek for help
of the cold and baraine law? Where That ye should not believe y^ truth
is that singular confidence become, whereby through the death of Christ ye
were in sure hope to have perfect righteousness and salvation, without heal^e
and aid of the law? Ye I say, in whose hearts Jesus Christ the only author
of our salvation was so farfoorth graven and printed, who^ with the iyen of
your faith ye in such sort saw by his cross reco^cilyng all the world to
his father, as though he had been painted before your faces, and as though your
selves had been witnesses of that deed doing, which was in deed done at
Jerusalem. The Jews that saw him hangyng on the cross, and yet denied him,
saw not so much as ye did. Among you, which by his death trusted to receive
everlasting salvation, was he verily crucified. Your iyen were always upon the
brazen serpent hanged up upon the tree, of whom only ye trusted to receive the
wholesome remedy of all your sins. And whither now suddenly cast ye your iyen?

The text.
This only would I learn of you, whether ye received the spirit by the deeds
of the law, or by preaching of the faith? Are ye so unwise, that after ye have
begun in the spirit, ye now end in the flesh? So many things ye have
suffered in vain, if it be also in vain. If there be in you yet any wit
left, even consider me this, which unless ye be blind, ye may easily
understand, and so do I, because I will not subtily reason the matter with you,
nor seek for far fetched arguments. Ye remember, that lately at my
preaching of the gospel, how through baptism and puttyng of my hands upon you
ye received the spirit of Christ. It was no vain persuacion. The wonderful
work of God ensuyng thereupon, as the gift of languages, of prophecy, of
healyng, and other gifts made plain proof, that this came by the power of
God, and by no man's crafty conueyaunce.

This spirit of God (I say) whether (I pray you) received ye it by Moses
circumcision, or else by that, through my preaching ye believed the gospel of
Christ? Notwithstanding that ye to Moses were strangers, yet gave Christ unto
you through faith his strong and mighty spirit, as an ernest penny of the
blissed state, he promised unto you. And why should ye now elsewhere of any
other look for salvation, than of him, of whom ye have received so plain a
gage of bliss to come?

If I to you preached circumcision, and if by trust therein ye received the
heavenly spirit of God, then am I content, that for some part of your
salvation ye shall give thanks to Moses law, but if I nothing taught you, but
Jesus Christ, and that by puttyng your confidence in him only ye found in your
self even the same gifts, that the Jews through baptism receive, why should
ye in dispite of Christ seek for the heavy and paineful burden of Iewishnes?
Wise and thriuyng scholars from rude beginnings grow forward and increase,
but ye from such godly and commemdable rudimentes fall back to the worse.

The Jews borne under the bondage of the gross law, forsakyng the ceremonies
of their elders, repair unto the spiritual doctrine of the gospel. Ye contrary,
from the godly beginning of the gospel and your heavenly profession, grow out
of kind into a Iewishe supersticion. They of Jews become christian men, and
labor ye of christians to become Jews? What neded us to be indaungered and
become debtor to Christ, if Moses law sufficiently work our salvation? Why
forsake ye now him for whose sake ye have suffered such affliccions, even of
them that hated Christ's name and glory? For who so through circumcision
thinks to be saved, the same man is fallen from Christ.

Will ye in such sort use your self, that men of you shall think, ye have
for Christ's sake suffered in vain such great affliccions? But God forbid,
that ye have suffered them in vain. Out of the right way are ye, but so are ye
not for lack of good will, but for lack of knowledge, not of malice in your
party, but rather staggeryng through the enticeme^t of other. Amend by times,
and fear not, but that ye shall nethelesse enjoy the fruit of your old
faith.

The text.
Moreover he that ministers to you the spirit, and works miracles among
you, does he it through the deeds of the law, or by the preaching of the
faith? even as Abraham believed God, and it was ascribed to him for
righteousness. Tell me now then, whether God, who gives you his holy spirit,
who in marvelous works by you shows his mighty power, whether (I say) does
God this, because ye have through keeping of Moses law wo^ne his favor, or else
rather, because at our preaching ye gave credence to the gospel? If Gentiles,
when they become Jews, work such miracles as soon as they be circumcised, as
ye do, then some cause were there, to be desirous of the law: but if these
wonderful works be seen in none, but such as have received the faith in the
gospel, why should you elsewhere look for the end, then whence ye see the same
begun? The beginning and author of circumcision is Abraham, whose children
the Jews glory that they be, and are circumcised as he was. But not so much
as he obtained through circumcision the praise of perfect justice, but only by
credence geuyng to Gods promise, at what time he was not yet circumcised. Nor
read we in Genesis, Abraham was circumcised, and thereby became righteous, but
Abraham believed God, and that to him was coumpted for righteousness.

The text.
Ye know therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham. The promise therefore made long since to Abraham's posterity is none of
theyrs, nor belongs to any of them, that have nothing else but Abraham's
circumcision, but to such as by faith geuyng to the gospel are his natural
children. They that of their circumcision are proud, and boste them self to
be Abraham's children, make such vaunte and crakes al in vain, since they be
bastardes, and not the lawful begotten children of Abraham. For such and none
else are natural children to him, as faithfully and with all their hearts give
credence unto God, and as Abraham did, put their trust in him, speaking unto us
by his gospel, of what stock so ever they be descended. It is not carnal
kynred, that is herein regarded and esteemed, but like perfeccion of minds.

The text.
For the scripture seeing before hand, that God would justify the heathen
through faith: showed before hand glad tidings unto Abraham, saying: in the
shall all nations be blessed. So then they, which are of faith, are blessed
with faithful Abraham. Now mark and considre, how this my saying scriptures
many years gone testified and meant, that is to wete, that al men through faith
should look for salvation, and not only a few Jews by circumcision. That now
is preached unto you by the gospel, the same many hundredth years gone God
promised to Abraham, saying: in the shall al nations be blessed, and win
praise: But now could it in no wise be true, that al nations should be borne of
Abraham, and yet through him is the blessyng promised unto all people, as
though all were his posterity, as they in deed be, not because all are of his
blood and stock, but by resemblyng his faith. For it besemeth children to
resemble their parents. Therefore, such as mistrustyng the ceremonies and
works of the law, have an undoubted trust in the promises of the gospel, as
true children of Abraham, shall with their faithful father enjoy the blessyng
promised unto him, from which such shall be excluded as bastardes and
unlawfully begotten, more worthy to be cursed, than blessed as by circumcision
trust to be saved.

The text.
For as many as are of the deeds of the law, are subject to the curse For it
is written, Cursed be every one, that continues not in all things which are
written in the book of the law, to fulfill them. For as many as hang upon the
obseruaunces of Moses law, who^ they keep not in deed, but break, are under
all Gods indignacion and curse. The Jews self cannot deny this, forasmuch
as in the book of Deuteronomie this wise it is written, cursed be he that
continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the law, and
does not such things as by the law are commanded. By which words ye see,
that such as keep the law ceremonial, are not for that promised to be made
righteous, but the transgressers thereof are threatened gods curse. What man
is he, that is able to perform the whole law, specially since it is such a
thing, which when through inhibicion it has provoked men to syn, gives no
strength nor ablenes to suppress and overcome desyers.

The text.
That no man is justified by the law in the sight of god it is evident. For
the just shall live by faith The law is no^ of faith, but the man that
fulfilleth the things contained in the law, shall live in them. But brieflye
to grant, that a man may throughlye keep the law, such one happily shall
among men be taken and accoumpted for ryghteouse, but not be likewise coumpted
before god, at whose hand, if no man through keeping the ceremonial law of
Moses, be judged for righteous, without doubt true is it, that by the prophet
A^acu^ is written, that the righteous lives by faith. For as syn is the seed,
whereof death grows: so is godly life, the beginning and well spryng of life.
The law hangs upon keeping of certain prescript ceremontes, and not upon
faith, which ceremonies who so observes and keeps shall live in deed* but not
the everlasting life whereof we are through faith put in assurance. Look
what righteousness the law gives like kind of life gives it. Among men, so
is it, that whosoever breaks not the rules of the law, he is ryghteous and lives
among men out of all fear of punishment, but before god neither shall he be
accou^pted for righteous, nor yet for living, unless he surely trust upon the
promises made in the gospel.

The text.
Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law inasmuche as he was made
as cursed for us. For i^ is written, cursed is every one, that ha^geth on tree,
that the blessing of Abraham might come on the gentiles, through Jesus Christ,
that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith. Christ only
among other was not under the curse of the law, but as an innocente and
hurtles lamb to the law nothing endaungered. We were in danger to it, and by
reason thereof accursed, which wretchedness and curse he delivered us from,
turnyng our offense into innocence, and our curse into blessing. So that
much less would he have you now under the bondage of the carnal law. But
how delivered he us? Without doubt, by that he being without all spot or syn,
upon his body took the pain, that was for our trespaces dew, and the
curse, under whom we were, took upon himself, whereas he was from that, free,
and partaker of blessyng. To^e he not our trespaces upon him, which as an
offender, among offenders for our redemption suffered the shameful vilanie of
the cross? For i^ the book of Deuteronomie this we read, cursed is every one
that hangs on a tree. And why would god have it so? Surely, to the intent,
that the curse of the law being taken away, the blessyng, that once was
promised to Abraham, should in steed of it, through faith take place. Take
place (I say) not in the Jews only, but in the Gentiles to, not through the
benefit of the law, whom Christ^ would have abolyshed, but by the free
mercy of Jesus Christ, by whose death we being brought again into gods
favor, and delivered from the burden of the gross law, may through faith
obtain the blessyng of the gospel promised to Abraham's posterity, the
spiritual posterity (I mean) and not the carnal. Let us surely trust in
god, for he will of his promise deceive no man, but what he promised, that
will he perform.

The text.
Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it be but a man's
testament, yet if it be allowed, no man dispiseth it, or adds any thing
thereto. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made, he says not in his
seeds, as many: but in thy seed, as of one, which is Christ. But to the
intent ye shall the better understand this, lo a worldly and familiar example.
For though betwixt god and man, there be no comparison, yet a man's
testamente and couenaunte, when it is once allowed and ratified, no man
either breaks, or puts any thing to it, contrary to the will of the maker:
how much more stable and sure then should To Abraham and his seed were the
promises made.
the couenauntes and promises of god be? God promised Abraham a blessyng,
which by his seed all nations of the world should have. Wherein it is to be
observed and marked, that scripture said not seeds, but seed, lest we by
David, Moses, or any other might look to have gods promise, but in his words
noted the only seed, and the very seed of the everlasting Abraham, which is
Jesus Christ, into whom through baptism and through the receyuyng of the
spirit, we through him look for the same gifts, which god has already
given unto him.

The text.
This I say, that the law which began afterward, beyond four hundred and
thirty years, does not disanull the testamente that was confirmed before of
God unto Christwarde, to make the promise of none effect. For if the
inheritance come of the law, it comes not now of promise. But god gave it
unto Abraham by promise. But further to compare the former example, the promise
and covenant which god, before the law was given made with Abraham, which
promise he would have to be stable, the law which followed and was given
after the same promise and covenant, could not defete nor disanul. And yet
should it restrain and disapoynt the promise, if the inheritance of gods
blessing promised to Abraham's posterity, were due to such only, as keep the
law, forasmuch as in the promise there is no condition of y^ law expressed.
For how could therein of the law be any mention made, since the law was not
at that time given? For in case the law had not followed the promise at all,
yet would god netheles with Abraham's posterity have kept the covenant made
with Abraham. Now if the promise of this blessed state be due by reason of
gods promise, and the promise made before the law had no condition of keeping
the law joined with it, For if the inheritance cu^ of the law. etc.
for what cause exclude we from the promise, such as to y^ law are strangers,
and not strangers to faith? For if by the law men enjoy thenheritau^ce then
is gods promise and covenant frustrate and broken, which god without keeping
of the law will not perform. Even like as when a man has agreed with an
other to give him his daughter in marriage, after that the bargayne is made, he
go from his word, denying that he will so do, unless the other again will
promise him his sister, whereas at the bargayne making he had no sister borne,
nor at time of the couenaunte, of mutual marriage no mention made. The promise
of god was free, and upon the only condition of faith confirmed, whom who so
perfourmeth, the same man has right to the promise.

The text.
Wherefore then serves the law? The law was added because of trangression
(until the seed came to whom the promise was made) and it was ordained by
angels in the hand of a mediator. But here some will say, if by faith in
gods promise every manne must look for salvation, for what end and purpose
made god the unprofitable law afterward? No, say not, al unprofitable, for
albeit it make not a man upright and innocent, yet restrayneth it our
liberty to syn, whiles it with ceremonies keeps noughtie desyers and
appetites within a due measure and compace of right reason. And had not the
unruly The law was adde^ because of transgressio^.
malice of men so required, there had no law be given at al, and yet was not
the same law given neither, that all men should thereto wholye for ever be
bound, but given by god for a time, shadowyng for the season Christ to come,
with punishementes fearyng men from sin, and with promises prouokyng them to
do well, for this purpose made and ordained by angels at gods commandment,
to endure until that after many ears the only seed should come, whereby the
god of Abraham promised salvation to all Abraham's lawful children.

In such sort was the law made by angels, that yet the whole power and
governance of it had Christ in his hands, who in such wise was a mean and
came betwixt Moses law, and the grace of the gospel, that he was the end of
the one, and the begynner of the other, in such sort also a mean betwixt
god and man, that to thentent he would betwixt both make atonement, in himself
he comprised both natures.

The text.
A mediator is not a mediator of one. But god is one. Is the law then
against the promise of God? God forbid. Now a mediator that is a mean
betwixt, must needs be a mean betwixt many. For no man is there, that with
himself is at dissencion. Of them that disagreed, god the father was one* who
with mankind was at variaunce. Wherefore necessary was it, that there should
a certain third parson be, which in himself contaynyng both natures should
bring both at unity and concord, with his death first pacifying gods wrath,
and then with his doctrine alluring all the world to the true honoring of
god.

Is the law then contrary to gods promises? no not so. Forasmuch as the
law following the promise made by god, made not the same promise vain, but
kept men in a continual expectacion and loking for gods promises, that by so
doing they might be more apt and ready to receive the grace to be offered by
the gospel. Nor is not the law abolyshed, because it was against gods
promises, but because it was convenient and meet, that shadows should give
place to the truth: and the vnfectuall, to that which was mighty and
effectual.

The text.
For if there had been a law given which could have given life: then no
doubt righteousness should have come by the law. But the scripture concludes
all things under syn. That the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ should
be given unto them that believe. But before faith came, we were kept under the
law, and were shut up unto the faith, that should afterward be declared.
For if there had such a law been given, as could unfeignedly and truly have
given life, then should the same never have been abrogate, nor should we have
had any need of the healpe and aid of the gospel, for as much as then by the
law every man might have attained unto perfect righteousenes. Sufficient had
it been therefore in that case to trust upon the law, for all them that were
of everlasting salvation desyrouse. But now, lest men upon boldenes of their
works might despise the But y^ scripture concludes all things under sin.
grace of Christ, for this purpose was the law given, declaryng and
prescribyng, what was to be done, and what was to be avoided, that all men
should perceive themself in danger of syn, whiles they shu^ne not, that they
by the law knew was evil, being undoubtedly ouercommen with their noughtie
desyers, and by these means knowing their own disease, might more willyngly
embrace the remedy to be offered by the grace of the gospel. For before the
law was given, men without correccion fell to syn, to whom all that lyked,
was straight thought lawful, and in defense of men's sinful life some thing
had they to lay for their excuse. But the law had them in such a brake, that
they could not choose, but grant, that they had well deserved punishment, for
somuche as it could not be denied, but that it was good and honest, which was
by the law commanded. After that god therefore by his great wysedom had by
such means taken away our vain confidence in our selfs, and had set
before our iyen our sinful living, than declares and perfourmeth he his
promise made to Abraham, and that, which the Jews only looked for, as
peculiarlye belongyng to them, being as they said, the only children of
Abraham, generally to belong to all such, as were through faith becommen
Abraham's very children, not for their deserte of keapyng the law, but because
they with all their hearts put their affiaunce in the ghospel, and believed
also that through the death of Jesus Christ, godly life shall all people have,
and receive glory also and salvation.

For this purpose likewise for a season served Moses law, that partly with
manacyng of punishments, partly with hope of promises made therein and partly
with rude expressing of Christ to come, the Jews after such sort within
their bonds, lest Christ at his coming should have found them strayed out
into all kinds of mischief, neither worthy, nor yet apt to receive the grace
of his gospel. By the promises then of the law had the Jews a certain rude
knowledge of the mystery of the gospel. By the obseruaunce of this law then
were men so long stayed and vnderpyght, until that was by the gospel
opened, which the law in shadows represented, that if men will now awake,
they may clearlye see even that put in ure, whereof they before had but a
dream.

The text.
Wherefore the law was our scholemaister unto Christ that we might be made
ryghteouse by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under the
scholemaister. For ye are the children of God, because ye believe in Christ
Jesus. For all ye that are baptized, have put on Christ. The law therefore
brought not men to perfect righteousness, but was as a scholemaister given to
the rude people, that whom the regard of honesty was not yet able to keep in
good order, they might with fear of That we might be ^^de righteous through
feyth.
punishemente be kept from extreme noughtines: that through such means
encreasyng by little and little, they might be brought from trustyng upon their
old ceremonies unto Christ, of whom only they should look to receive perfect
righteousness.

Now is not the child ^o under his scholemaister, that the scholemaister with
him must al way be at hand, but only until such time, as they being more
ripe and grown up to better knowledge even of their own accord fall to
honesty, nor have need with fear of punishemente to be kept from evil, but
by their fathers encouragyng freelye and wyllyngly study goodness and honesty,
an other while now rulyng their scholemaister, whose wholesome and sharp
correction they for a time endured. As the father therefore, though he tenderly
love his children, compels them yet for a time to be under a scholemaister,
whose master the children in short time after shall be: so has god with
sharpenes of the law kept under his rude and gross people, until that they
concerning the doctrine of his ghospel, being made their own men should no
longer need to be under correccion of their scholemaister, but live freelye,
as free children under their most merciful father.

And though it so were, that god gave unto the Jews only, a scholemayster,
For ye are y^ children of god because ye believe, it.
yet took he not them only for his children, but ^ather coumpted all such as
by faith in the gospel are graffed into the body of Jesus Christ, and
endued with his holy spirit, to be gods children, as soon as they are with
Christ made one. Now if that, whereby we are joined unto Christ, generallye
belong to all men, what let should there be, why God should not
indifferently coumpte all for his children? Through baptism have ye received
the spirit of Christ, and not by circumcision.

As many then, as are baptized, are become with Christ ioynte enheriters, in
that behalf no point inferior to the Jews, boast they themself of the
priuelege of circumcision never somuche.

The text.
There is no Jew neither Gentile: there is neither bond neither free: there
is neither man nor woman, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. If ye be
Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. In
things, that hang upon men's fauer, the condition, state, and persons are
regarded, but god would this benefit of his to be both free and also commen
to all men. Through baptism are we new borne again, and suddenly altered, as
it were into a new creature. And as touching this gift, it is laid to noman,
nor passed upon, whether he were before baptism, Jew or Gentile, bond man or
free, manne or woman. All ye through baptism are belonging to Christ's body,
equally partakers of this gods gift, which is from the head conuayed into
all the members.

And if Christ be the very seed of Abraham, by whom god promised For ye are
al one in Christ Jesus.
his blessyng to all nations of the world, forasmuch as ye are planted in
Christ, needs must ye be Abraham's posterity. Farther then, if ye be Abraham's
posterity, even like heirs ye have right to y^ promise of god. If through the
fellowship of Christ ye become gods children, and into it are all received
through faith and baptism, necessarily it follows, that the inheritance
equallye appertains to all men.

The fourth Chapter.
The text.
And I say, that the heir, (as long as he is a child) differs not from a
servant, through he be lord of all, but is under tuters and governors until
the time that the father has appointed: even so we also, when we were
children, were in bondage under the ordinances of the world. LOng since by
Gods promise due was the title of inheritance, but now and not before are we
received into it, because (as we before said) as by man's laws and
ordinances, the heir, while he is within age, uses not his right, yea he
nothing differs from a servant, where he is borne to be lord over all, but
is kept under with fear, and ruled as other men will, passing that time under
creansers and governors, until he be grown up to that rypenes, which either
the law or his father has appointed: so likewise in time past, when we were
yet not apt to receive this gift, which requires even heavenly minds, our
vndersta^dinges also thereto, not of strength sufficient as yet, we were like
children with such certain gross laws, as were mete for our infirmities, kept
in due order, being such at that time, as could not savor heavenly learning,
but rather such as would with such things be more moved, as might with our
fleshely iyen be seen, as are the material things of this world, for example,
differences of days, differences of meats, differences in apparel,
sacrificyng and killyng of beasts circumcision. As long as we were not apt to
receive higher instruccions, even as servants we for a season obeyed and were
under these.

The text.
But when the time was full come, God sent his son made of a woman, and made
bond unto the law to redeem them, which were bond unto the law: that we
through eleccion might receive the inheritance, that belongs unto the
natural sons. But as soon as we came out of wardship, and were grown up to a
ryper age, when that time was paste, which the everlasting father in ^^s
secret counsel had appointed, he suffered us no le^ger to be under the carnal
rules of the law, but sent for our deliverance neither Moses, nor prophet,
but his only son Jesus Christ. He sent his son (I say) not to be seen, as
things are seen in a dream or vision, so that a man might doubt, whether it
were so or not, but openly before every man's iyen, to be a man borne of a
woman, under the weakness of our natures, to the Tha^ we through eleccion
might receive thinheritaunce.
intent he would readyly heal our wretchedness, whom God would have to be
circumcised, and suffer all the bondage of the law, to the end he would deliver
the Jews from the burdaine of the law, whom he found thereto subject, that
noman should thencefoorth like a child within age, live under governors, but
be all called to the liberty of children, for bondage is contrary to the name
of a child.

The text.
Because ye are sons: God has sent the spirit of his son into our hearts
which cries abba father. And because God would of his goodness evidently
declare, that we are restored into the fredome of children, he puttyng away all
fear of punishment has powered even into the bottom of our hearts, the
spirit of his only son, who is to us a most certain witness, that we are Gods
children. The spirit of seruage sauoreth and cries out after one sort, the
love and good mind of children after an other. The one desires to escape the
displeasure of his master, the other with a great confidence cries, O father,
father.

The text.
Wherefore now thou art not a servant, but a son. If thou be a son, thou
art also an heir of God through Christ. Wherein it is not to be doubted, but
that God does much more tha^kefully knowledge the name of godly love and
charity, than the name of fear. If this were not as I say, neither would
Christ have called his scholars, brethren, nor have taught men to pray unto
God under the name of a father, when he teaches us to say, O our father which
art in heaven. To whom soever therefore God gives the spirit of his son, the
same man is no longer a servant, but a son. And if he be through Christ, his
son, by him likewise must he be Gods heir. Namely since whosoever by adopcion
receives an other into the name of his son, he in so doing gives him a
right to his inheritance.

The text.
Notwithstanding when ye knew not God, ye did service unto them which by
nature are no Gods. But now after that ye have known God, (yea rather are
known of God) how is it, that ye turn again unto the weak and beggarly
ordinances, whereunto again ye desire afreshe to be in bondage? Ye observe
days, and months and times, and years. I am in fear of you, lest I have
bestowed on you labor in vain. But as the Jews for a season were with a gross
religion, or rather supersticion kept under, because they should not utterly
slide from al religion, so, what time the true God was unknown unto you,
according to the ordinances of your elders, ye worshipped devils, beleuyng
them to be Gods, which are in deed none, because he seems much nigher true
religion, which is under a false, than is he, that thinks there is no God at
all, dispisyng all religion. God lays not to the Jews charge, because they
for a time lived under their elders laws, from whom when they were taught
better learning, they turned to the very right trade of godly conversation. Nor
is your worshippyng of idolles, whom ye erroniously supposyng to have an
heavenly power in them had in honor, laid against you, since the time, that
by preaching of the gospel ye knew the living God, or else (to speak it
better) since the time ye were But now after that ye have known God. etc.
known of God, ye found him not, but he by his holy spirit drew you unto
him, even as that, whereas ye now tenderly love him, as a father, comes by
none other means, but because he first loved you. God favorably and gentilly
forgatte your old error, but of your own accord from the truth once known
wylfully to return again to the same, that offense is outrageous and damnable.

The Jews being taught the true religion, forsake their ceremonies: and will
ye being called from idolatry, and taught by preaching the gospel what
perfect religion is, after the receiuyng of the holy ghost, cast your self
again headlong into a Iewishe bondage, so that whereas ye are fre, ye had
rather to be under the gross beginnings of this world, which neither are
able to make you righteous, nor been effectual to salvation. How is it that ye
turn again unto the weak and beggarly ordinances. etc.
Fall ye not to them again, when Iewishely ye observe days, months, and
years, with other such differences of time, as though the Iewishe sabbath day,
the feasts of the new moon, holy days, and other times, wherein the Jews
either do certain things, or abstain from certain other, as from unlawful
acts, any thing healped onward to salvation, when to christian men all times
are free to honor God in?

If ye have in Christ a sure confidence, whence is this supersticion? If ye
have not, then tear I, lest I have in vain bestowed so much labor upon you
for your instruccion. Ye fall from Christ, if ye myngle with him Iewishenes.
Suffer not, that either I, which have by such great and sundry troubles
taught you the gospel, lose therein my labor, or that ye in vain have suffered
for Christ sake such affliccions.

The text.
Brethren I beseech you, be ye as I am, for I am as ye are. Ye have not hurt me
at all. Ye know, how through infirmity of the flesh, I preached the gospel
unto you at the first. And my te^ptacion which was in the flesh, ye despised
not, neither abhorred: but received me as an angel of God: even as Christ
Jesus. But rather regard not the ceremonies of the law, as ye see me to do,
but put my trust in Christ only. My self sometime was such one as ye now he,
iudgyng that it was an high point of godlynes to be circumcised, to keep the
Iewishe sabbath day, to observe differences in meats, to sacrifice beasts:
for zeal of who^, I then persecuted the church of God, all which points now
reaken I for trifles.

Whereas I brethren somewhat vehemently complain upon you, surely this may ye
believe me, I seek not mine own weal, but yours. I might Ye have not hurt me
at al.
with the quiet vprightnes of mine own conscience be with my self contented.
I am not displeased with you, for ye have done me no wrong. I pity to see you
go from such good beginnings, look rather that ye be stable and constant,
encreasyng still from better to better, rather than from better to worse.

What time I first preached unto you the gospel of Jesus Christ, I submitted
my self to your weakness, now an other while rise ye up to my strength, and
lose not the gloriouse praise of your faith. Of late, when I preached unto you
y^ gospel, ye knew, I took no great royal state upon me, but even the behauour
of a low, simple, and abiecte person. I pray you, what saw ye me, but a sealy
man, ready to take harm, hated of many for Christ's name, under diverse
troubles and vexacions, and beside this, one of a simple and rude language? I
taught you nothing, but that Jesus Christ was for your sakes fast upon the
cross, at which time such was the readynes of your faith, that ye with such
vileness in my person being nothing offended, neither forsook nor despised my
gospel, what time by faith therein I promised you life everlasting.

Yea (I say) ye received me heartely, and with great honor, not as Paul, but
as the angel of God, yea as Jesus Christ him self, because ye perceived, that
I brought unto you no worldely doctrine, but a heavenly and godly: and that I
went not about mine own busynes, but labored in Jesus Christ's behalf. God
therefore, and Christ worshipped ye in me.

The text.
What is then your felicity? For I bear you record, that if it had been
possible, ye would have plucked out your own iyes, and have given them to me.
Am I therefore become your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Which acts in
you well declare the singular faith ye once had, which was so ready, so sound
and constant, that it abated not, notwithstanding mine affliccions,
notwithstanding my vileness. Joyful was I for it, blessed I judged you, and my
self lucky, in that I had gotten such good disciples. But if ye of such good
beginnings repent you, where is your felicity becomen, where is also mine,
which was, what time I reioysed of you, and ye likewise of me? This ought I
truly to testify of you, such love bare ye toward me, that if need had
been, ye would have plucked out even your iyen out of your heads, and have
given them unto me. And why now slide ye from me by calling unto you new
Apostles, to learn of them Iewishnes? With flatteryng and colored words they
allure and geat your favor, not preaching such things, as help to salvation,
but such as make to their lucre and auauncement. Am I therefore become your
enemy, because I both plainly and truly taught you such things, as I well
wist belonged to your salvation?

The text.
They are jealous over you amiss. Yea they entende to exclude you, that ye
should be fervent to them ward. It is good always to be fervent in a good
thing, and not only when I am present with you. But I well see Galathia^s,
wherabout they go, some ielously woo you and as it were enuiyng at me, labor
to win your favor, but yet so do they neither of good ne godly purpose. For
they do not this to profit, but to pluck you back from the liberty of the
gospel into a Iewishnes, under which them selfs are. Busily labor they to
make other like them, to the end they may seem both to follow and teach a
marvelous and a goodly kind of doctrine. Think not that in every manne,
every thing must be followed, but follow such things, as are good, and that
constantly, not only while I am there present among you, but also when I am
absent. Ye saw me despise the ceremonies of the law, and to preach no thing
unto you, but Christ, and ye followed my preaching, while I was present. And if
that were well done, why follow ye now in mine absence other, in such things,
as are not good?

The text.
My little children (of whom I travail in birth again, until Christ be
fashioned in you) I would I were with you now and could change my voice, for I
stand in a doubt of you. Would God ye could with your iyen se the secret
parts of my heart, there should ye clearly perceive, with how great grief I
write this. O my little children, once begotte I you to Christ, not without my
great travail and pain, and now after your swaruyng from Christ labor I to
bear you again, until that Christ in you be thoroughly fashioned.

I had sowed good seed, whereof it was me^te that perfect christians should
have grown, but by enchauntment (I wot not how) ye are turned into Jews, and
changed into an other kind. Christ is heavenly and spiritual, and will ye be
carnal and yearthly? But this epistle expresses not sufficiently the
vehemency of my mind. Would God I might be I would I were with you now ^ co^^^
change my voice.
now presently among you, with lively words to set out that I after a sort
signify by letters, the vehemency of whom would partly with my countenance,
partly with my tears, and partly with my voice be increased. To bring you
again to Christ, I would change my self into all sorts, and sometimes
speak fair, and sometimes require, and sometimes chide. And according to the
varieties of your natures, and necessity of the matter, would I better apply
and temper my words. And would assaye every medicine, until the time I had
brought all you to health. But now forasmuch as I see some of you fallen to
Iewishenes, some other in ieopardie of falling, and some (I trust) constant in
my doctrine, my mind is in much care and fear, uncertain, with what kind
of letters to reamedie this great harm.

The text.
Tell me (ye that desire to be under the law) do ye not hear of the law? For
it is written, that Abraham had two sons, the one by a bond maid, the other
by a free moman. Yea, and he which was borne of the bond woman was borne
after the flesh, but he which was of the free woman, was borne by promise.
But peculiarly to speak unto such of you, as are contented to fall back to
Iewishnes, I beseech you answer me: If Moses law so greatly please you, why
follow ye not the authority of it, if ye distrust the gospel? Even very Moses
law self would such as are received into the fellowship of Christ, to be free
from bondage of the law. Ye received the law, but ye give none ear to that
it said, or if ye gave ear unto it, ye understand it not, because ye cleave
to the litterall meaning only, and pearce not to the spiritual sense thereof.
For it is written in the book of Genesis, that Abraham the beginner and father
of all right beleuers had two sons, of whom the elder called Ismael he
begatte of Agar the Abraham had two sons, etc.
bond maid, the younger called Isaac, he had of his lawful wife Sara. He that
was borne of the handemaide, was borne as children are comenly wont to be, and
was nothing but Abraham's son, even as the Jews be, be they never so far
from Christ. He that was borne of the free wife, contrary to the common course
of nature was borne of a barrain mother, of an old father, according as God
had promised: so that them, whom age and weakness of body put in desperacion of
having an heir, Gods promise put in perfect assurau^ce to have a child. The
first child therefore was the child of nature, the other was the child of
faith.

The text.
Which things are spoken by an alligorie. For these are two testamentes, the
one from the mount Sina, which gendereth unto bondage, which is Agar, for
mount Sina is Agar in Arabia, and bordereth upon the city, which is now
called Jerusalem, and is in bondage with her children. But Jerusalem which is
above is free, which is the mother of us all. Nor is it to be supposed, that
this tale has, beside the truth of the history no secret hidden mystery.
For comenly such is Moses law, that as in a ma^ne under the gross flesh and
coueryng of the body, is hidden the soul the ruler thereof: so under the letter
and history, a more priuey thing and higher mystery is covered. Let us then
search forth, what in the alligorie these two mothers and the two sons
signify. Surely the For these are two testame^tes* etc.
two mothers represent the two testamentes, of whom the one brought forth a
people subject to the bondage of the law, the other brought forth a people
through faith free from that burdain. For Sina is a mountain in Arabia, which
in the Chaldees language has the name of the bondmaiden Agar, and bordereth
upon the mountain of Sion, wherein stands the city, that once was called
Iebus, and is now called Jerusalem. Now are they, that inhabit the mountain
Agar, even in these days, bond, in their state resemblyng the beginner of
that nation. But Jerusalem, which as inheritance fell to Isaacs posterity, is
free. This city, forasmuch as it stands in a high place, represents
heaven, into whose freedom we be called. That city is not only mother to the
Jews, but to all us, which believe in Christ.

Moses law is yearthly, the law of the gospel, forasmuch as it came But
Jerusalem which is above ^s free. etc.
from heaven is heavenly. As the body is servant to the soul: so that which
is gross, is bond, and that which is spiritual, is free. Moses law brought
forth her child first, the law of the gospel, albeit it had issue after, yet
how many more children brought it to God. Moses law brought forth but one
nation, and the same of no great multitude neither, the law of the gospel
contains all nations of the world.

The text.
For it is written, rejoice thou barren, that bear no children: break
forth and cry, thou that trauailest not. For the desolate has many more
children, than she which has an husband. And lest some think, that this was
but a chance, Esai long before said it should so be, who by the spirit of
prophecy foreseyng the great noumbre of Gentiles resortyng to the gospel of
Christ, re^oyseth by these words: Be glad thou barren, that bear no
children, break forth and cry thou that trauailest not, for many more
children haste thou, which semedst desolate and barren, than has she that
has a husband, and seemed to put men in a marvelous hope of posterity. In the
Jews state before time few were there, that came through it unto Gods favor,
but faith in the gospel has brought in many, and will without end bring in
more. Thus see ye the two mothers and their two children, the beginners of
two nations.

The text.
Brethren we are after Isaac the children of promise. But as then he that was
borne after the flesh persecuted him that was borne after the spirit: Even so
is it now. Such as yet styfly cleave to Moses law, belong to Ismael, which
was borne of the handmayde. But we, which gyuyng over our confidence in the
law, through perfect faith hang only upon Christ, are Isaacs children, who was
borne of the free and lawful wife, not by the cour^e of nature, but by the
promise of god. Nor are we received into y^ welthy state, taught by the
gospel, because we were borne under the law, but because god long since
promised all them salvation, that thorough faith would come into the fellowship
of his son Jesus Christ. Yea and in this also the allegory featly agrees,
that both posterities sauer of their beginners. For as tha^, the elder son
Ismael, carnal son unto Abraham, persecuted the younger called Isaac, who was
borne by gods promise* eue^ at the time, when they playeo together, taking
more upon him, than was mere: so in this time, they that cleave fast to the
carnal law, hate such as embrace the spiritual law of the gospel, labouryng
to be more esteamed, chalengyng as theyrs, the right of the first begotten,
which is only dew to Christ: labouryng also by the title of aunciencie to
make the free mothers children bond as they be, to thentent, that being elder
servants, they may over us that are younger, bear rule.

The text.
Nevertheless, what says the scripture* put away the bond woman and her
son. For the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with the son of the
free woman: so then brethen we are not children of the bond woman* but of the
free woman* But the free mother allows no such alteracion, nor will suffer
these two borne after such a diverse sort to be conuersaunt together: But, as
y^ Put away^ the bond womanne with ^^^ son.
scripture says, with great indignacion cries out: put away the bond
woman, and her son, for I will not suffer, that the bond woma^nes child shall
with my son Isaac be inheritour. The Iewyshe Synagoge to much hangs by them,
which believe the gospel. The Jews require to much of christians, whose
liberty they envy at. Yt the bond mother will not gladly depart, let her
rather be thrust out, than with her slauyshe company, she corrupt my son. The
inheritance of everlasting life is promised to Isaac, and to him is it dew.
Let Agar, if she lust, carye furthe with her the water pot of the unsavory
law, whom she so greatly loves. But my son Isaac by drynkyng the
effectual lickor of the gospel, shall still with good luck grow up, until he
become a perfect man. Wherefore, suffer (my brethren) that the Jews, which to
stubbernly delight in the servile law, have still their own bondage, nor grow
out of kind from their mother. We which were sometime our self under the
bondage of the law, and like unto the children of the bond woman Agar,
persecuted the very natural children of y^ church, are now delivered from
that old bondage, and received into the title of Saraes children.

And for this liberty thank we Christ, into whom through faith we are so
planted, that we are become inheriters of the promised inheritance of heaven.
So that into what liberty Christ has by his death after our falling from him
restored us, that are Jews, into the same are ye, that are Gentiles, called
through preaching of the gospel.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, and
wrappe not your selves again in the yoke of bondage. Now remains there
nothing, but that ye stedfastlye continewe in that ye have once gotten. For
what madness is it to forsake the liberal gift and freedom, wherein Christ of
his especial fauer has set you, and to become bond? We, which of that
paynfull bondage have had experience, are glad and rejoice of our liberty,
and are ye of your liberty in such sort weaty, that ye are content to
become bond?

The text.
Behold I Paul say unto you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall
profit you nothing at all. But this wise peradventure ye deceive your self
saying, we renounce not Christ, but because we would be of everlasting
salvation in more assurance, we join Christ and the law together. But I
tell you, that as Christ would have this his whole benefit comen to all, so
would he only be thanked for all, nor in this bounteouse gift of his, will
he have any copartener. But because ye shall the better understand, how great
a ieopardy it is to turn back to Iewishnes: behold, I Paul the Apostell of
the Gentiles, whom ye well know, yea and an apostle appointed by Christ
himself tell you plainly, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall nothing at
all profit you. If ye perfitelye believe, that he is able to give all men
health everlasting, why seek ye for circumcision? I^ ye mistruste and fear,
lest he be not able, then know ye not yet the benefit of Christ, whereof
such as mistrust, cannot be partakers: since that gift is given to such as
believe and trust, and not so much for any desearte of our works. Either
must ye whollye become Jews, and forsake Christ, or else christians wholly,
and forsake Iewyshnes* As for such as play with both hands, he cannot away
with, nor will have new wine poured into old bottels, nor yet old wine into
new bottels. Nor can he bear with to have new clothe sowed or patched to an
old garmente, nor old clothe to be patchedlye sowed into a new.

If the bondage of Iewyshenes were easy, it neded not peradventure to be
passed upon: if the reward for it were great, then should the pain thereof in
some part be thereby recompensed. But now, besides that the burden is
exceadyng paynful, ye shall not only by taking of it not have advantage, but
also great hurt.

The text.
I testify again to every man, which is circumcised, that he is bound to
keep the whole law. Christ is become but in vain unto you: as many of you,
as are justified by the law, are fallen from grace. Beware, lest with such
standing in your own conceytes ye deceive your selves, saying we will not to
the whole burden of the law be bound, somewhat will we take of the law, as for
example circumcision only, lest we seem utterly to refuse it, as for
sacrificyng of beasts, with such other obseruaunces of the law, them will we
not meddle with. But because ye shall not be deceived, I tell all men plainly
whosoever does circumcise him self, whether he be Jew or Gentile, the same
man makes himself bond to the keeping of the whole law. For as through
baptism men wholly belong to Christ: so, whosoever is circumcised, byndeth
himself to all the law, for circumcision is the mark, whereby he becomes a
Jew. The uncircumcised Gentiles stand in liberty to gather here and there out
of the law, such things as are needful, but the circumcised are bound to
the whole law. Whosoever is content to receive circumcision, must likewise
therewith receive sacrifices, keeping of the Sabbath, feasts of the new Moon,
washynges, choice of meats, standing fasting days, with such other like. Now
wylfully to submit your self to so great a burden, is it not a plain point
of madness, specially for no other reward, but to be under a most paynful and
unprofitable bondage, falling from Christ y^ only gyuer of liberty and
salvation? For if, as I now have often times As many of you, as are ^^ stified
by the law. etc.
told you, ye look to purchase perfect justice by help of the law, which by
a confidence in works promises a certain perfeccio^, surely ye are gone and
departed far from the fellowship of Christ, who would have his gift to be
free, and not given for deserts. And then, if ye be once departed from
Christ's fellowship, the law will do you no good neither, but rather be your
confusion. For if there were of the law any use and profit before the light
of the gospel (as there was) all that, by the gospel preached and taught is
quite gone. If ye esteem the law, Christ is abolyshed. But if ye receive
Christ, then must the law give place. When I speak of the law, I
understand the groce and carnal part of Moses law, whom the Jews stiffly
maintain by the corporal obseruaunces thereof promysing themselves perfect
righteousness, thinkyng that the blood of beasts sprinkled upon them, pourgeth
the soul from sin, and that washyng in water, scoureth out the filthiness of
souls, and that clean or unclean meat pourgeth or defiles the mind.

The text.
We look for hope in the spirit to be justified through faith. For in Jesus
Christ, neither is circumcision any thing worth, neither yet uncircumcision,
but faith which works by love. We contrariwyse embracyng the spiritual part
of the law, look not for y^ righteousness promised by any supersticiouse
obseruaunces of corporal ceremonies, but by that we through the gospel
believe, that by Christ's death we freelye receive innocence of life, and full
salvation.

Nothing skylleth it, whether ye come to Christ, circumcised or uncircumcised,
since all this mattier stands, not in keeping of the law, but in faith,
which albeit be without the works of Moses law, yet is she not idle, but
secretly works a vehement onwardnes to all godlynes, not so much because the
law so byddeth, but for charities sake, which without bydding even of her
own accord does much more than is any law with manacing words or
punishment able to get out. If ye have charity, what need is there to have the
rules of the law? If ye lack her, what avails you the keeping of the law?

The text.
Ye did run well: who was a let unto you, that ye should not believe the
truth? (co^sente unto noman.) Even the counsel which came not of him, that
calls you. A little leaven does leaven the whole loumpe of dowe. In the
course of the gospel, ye did once run apace, making hastye speed even the
very right way toward the chief game of everlasting bliss, who was he that
stayed your course? why approve ye not continually that thing wherewith ye were
once well pleased? Why go ye from your intended purpose, following other men's
minds an other while? Beware that no man's authority weyghe so much with
you, y^ it make you draw back from your course appointed. It is a foul shame
for you now to fall to shadows, after that ye once gave crede^ce to the
truth. I taught you nothing, but that was commanded me by god. But they y^
labor to persuade you the contrary, lettyng thereby the increase of your
faith, and Who was a let to you y^ ye should not believe the truth.
calling you from your profession, to a Iewyshenes, follow not god, as their
author, (who through faith has called you into his favor, and not to a
Iewyshnes, through receiving of circumcision) but follow worldly desires,
seeking for their gaynes, glory, and maynteynaunce of their tyranny.
Diligently take heed, and beware of their persuasions. They are but few, but
onles ye avoid the same fewes company, it is to be feared, lest they
corrupt the whole multitude, and deface the purity of your religion, even as
ye see, a little leaven sowreth the whole batche, wherewith it is myngled,
castyng by little the sournes of it self, throughout the whole dowe, which
before was sweet. Be there never so small a point of Iewishnes myngled with the
gospel, the same little will corrupt in you the pureness thereof.

The text.
I have trust toward you in the Lord, that ye shall be none otherwise
minded. But he that troubles you, shall bear his judgment, whatsoever he be.
But forasmuch as ye have hitherto staggered through the enticement of other,
I despair not, but that ye will hencefurth stedfastlye continewe in your old
godly purpose, standing in this trust, much upon knowledge and trial of
your natures, but specially upon the help of Christ, who wrought in you to
begin with a merry chere, and will likewise work in you grace, manfully to
continue. But whosoever he be, that has with new learning troubled the
quietness and pureness of your faith, albeit he deceive men, yet shall he not
escape gods judgment.

Him at this time for certain consideracions utter I not, nor use extremity
against him, but at gods hands, to whom he is not unknown, he is sure to
be punyshed, who is without regard of any man's authority, whom he has
much rather offended than me. Nor let this move you, though some say, that I
abhor not the keeping of the law* which have with the Jews lived like a
Jew, and caused Timothy to be circumcised. I did so by compulsion, and
oftentimes resisting, gyuyng yet place at that time, wherein I saw no great
ieopardie at hand in so doing, and contrary, if I had not done it, there had
been a great commocion. But now upon diversities of the time and
circumstaunce, expedient it is to follow another way. And to tell you briefly
herein my mind, it is not all one to suffer and permit circumcision, and to
preach it. I suffered Timothy to be circumcised, but I never taught, that
either he, or any else should be circumcised.

So likewise when I oftetymes was conuersaunt among the Jews, I abstayned from
meats forbidden by the law, but never enjoined I unto any man, that such
choice in meats should be had, but rather taught the contrary, that it
forced nothing what kind of meats a man eat, so that he use them soberly and
with thanks geuyng to god. The time was, when it was needful to bear with
the sinistre rooted persuasion of the Jews, but now, since the gospel is
clearelye known, and the Jews stubbernely labor to draw the Gentiles into
their supersticion, it is neither well done, nor ieopardiles to bear with it
any linger, but rather besemeth it every man, boldly to preach, that Moses
law is expired, and that all men ought to embrace the liberty of the gospel.

The text.
Brethren if I yet preach circumcision, why do I then suffer persecucion? Then
is the sclaunder of the cross ceased. I would to god, they were separated
from you, which trouble you. For if this were true, that they report of me,
that I preach, and set forth circumcision, what cause is there then why
until this day the Jews so maliciously and hatefully persecute me? Thence is
al my country men's displeasure against me, because I in such sort preach
Christ's gospel, that therewith I teach, that Moses law is gone and
abolished. The Jews think, that they among men should be more made of, if the
rites of Moses law might be myngled with Christ's doctrine. But now great
envy have they that all other people through faith are received into gods
favor, whiles they upon them carry about them the unprofitable mark of
circumcision. And this is the cause, why they without al pity have long time
gone about my destruccio^, because I every where preach and promi^e all men
perfect weal, without any help of circumcision. If it so were, that I
preached circumcision, as some falsely report of me, why do the Jews still
persecute me, since the cause of al their displeasure Why do I th^n suffer
persecucion?
borne toward me is utterly taken away? Trust ye me ye people of Galacia, my
preaching has always ben one, and so shall it hencefurth continewe like.

On your part see likewise, that your faith be, as mine is. For so far am I
from the mind to agree with them, that teach circumcision, that if their
stubbernes will not suffer them to forsake their law, rather tha^ they should
utterly withdraw you from the gospel, and with their persuasions pluck you
out of the right way, I would wyshe them utterly separate from the fellowship
of the gospel. If they be so frowardly given to circumcision, god grant them
not only to be circumcised, but also to be utterly cut of, that they may
more plenteously have their desyer. Better is it, that they only perish, than
draw so many other with them in to damnacion.

The text.
Brethren ye were called into liberty: only let not your liberty be an
occasion unto the flesh, but by love (of the spirit) serve one an other* For
all the law is fulfilled in one word which is this: thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thy self. If ye byte and devour one another: take heed, lest ye
be likewise consumed one of another. Since they are so content, let them still
continewe on in their shameful bondage. But ye my brethren through the
gospel are called to liberty, and not to be bond. So that nothing else now
remains, but to take heed, that the liberty given unto you by the spirit of
Christ be not applied, to y^ occasion of fleashlye lusts. The bondage of the
law is in such sort taken away, that in her steed is come charity taught
by the gospel, which by fair means obtayneth more than the law was able to
do with compulsion. And yet for all that among friends, of whom one is glad to
do for an other, there is nor may stershyp nor bondage. The law byddeth noman
to put his life in ieopardye for defense of his friend, nor that a man should
by defraudyng nature ease his brothers need, nor that thou which art
stronger, should bear with the weaker, or the learned with the unlearned,
or the better with the worse, all which yet commands charity, which so
always tells, that things are to be done, not by force, but even of good
will* and voluntarily. Beside this only charity comprisyng in her the whole
strength and effect of the law briefly, brings that about, that the law
with so many rules and threatenings is not able to do.

For all that the brablyng law with so many rules laboreth to bring For the
law is fulfilled in one word. etc.
to pass, all that is in a short sentence concluded, written in Liuiticum,
which is this, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Wherefore if ye with
charity be knytte together, ye shall one by an others diligent labor help an
other, and with mutual service labor to comfort other. But contrary, if ye,
as carnal men are wont, do disagree each one hating an other, and not only
help not each one another, but also backbite and gnawe one another, and not
only backbyte and gnawe, but like outragiouse wild beasts, as much as in you
is. devour other, great cause surely have ye to fear, lest ye like beasts
tearyng one another be with eythers wounds destroyed.

To this inconvenience fall they, which being without the charity taught by
the gospel stycke still to the carnal law, whiles they measure al things by
their private commodities, whereas contrary christian charity is in a readynes
to do other men good.

The text.
I say* walk in the spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh. For the
flesh lusts contrary to the spirit, and the spirit contrary to the
flesh, these are contrary one to an other, so that ye cannot do, whatsoever
ye would. But and if ye be led of the spirit, then are ye not under the law.
The whole effect of my words draw to this end, that forsomuche as ye are
delivered from the bondage of Moses carnal law, ye should lead your life
according to the spiritual law of charity, as ye shall in deed do, if ye
neither esteem perfect righteousness to stand in Iewishe ceremonies, nor live
under carnal desires. If ye live under carnal lusts ye shall always be under the
law. Endeavor ye therefore to lead a spiritual life, and if ye thus do, then
shall ye abstain from such acts, as the flesh The flesh lusts contrary to
y^ spirit.
shall provoke you unto. For as* in one manne there is a gross and heavy body,
and a soul that is heavenly and immortal, and as in one law there is a gross
part, whom we call the letter, and again a heavenly thing, which is called
the spirit: so in one man's soul one power there is, which still calls to
goodness, and an other to this power contrary, like unto the body and the letter
of the law, which provoke us to dishonestie. Between these parts there is a
continual battle, whiles the flesh fights against the spirit, and the
spirit against the flesh. Well may the flesh be restrained from her desires,
but yet will it not be so oppressed, but that it will labor and strive against
the spirit. And if the flesh happen to have the upper hand, it is sometime
seen, that where a man has a desire to godliness, yet being ouercomen by the
flesh, he does such things, as he knows should be avoided. And if the
spirit of Christ sufficiently move you to do willyngly such things, as are
good and godly, then has Moses law upon you none authority.

The text.
The deeds of the flesh are manifest, which are these, adultrie, fornicacion,
uncleanness, wantonness, worshippyng of idolles, witchecrafte, hatred, variaunce,
zeal, wrath, strife, sedicion, sects, enuiyng, murder, dro^kennes, glotonie,
and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have told you in time
past, that they which commit such things, shall not be inheritors of the
kingdom of God. But because ye shall not be ignorant, the spirit whereof we now
speak, is a thing that cannot be seen, the flesh may be seen. And yet is it
not The deeds o^ the flesh. etc. are th^se, adultrie. etc.
hard to conjecture, whether a man be servant to the flesh, or be led by
the spirit of God. For as the welsprynges be, such are the waters and other
that flow from thence. A man's life, manners, and doings plainly show what a
man is within. But because we will not at this time speak of doubtful or hidden
matters, these be they, that make plain proof, that a man is still servant to
the flesh, notwithstannyng he be baptized, and have shaken of the bondage of
the law, aduoutry (I say) fornicacion, uncleanness, wa^tonnes, idolatry,
witchecrafte, hatred, variance, zeal, wrath, strise, sedicion, sects, envy,
murder, dronkennes, glotony. To these whosoever be bond, albeit the same man
be baptized, yet is he not thoroughly* free, but bondslaue to naughty desires.
Nor be over bold, because ye are baptized, or for your workyng of miracles.
What time I was among you, I warned you, and now by my letter I earnestly warn
you again, that al they which do such things, shall be excluded from the
enheritaunce of the kingdom of heaven.

The text.
Contraryly, the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long sufferyng,
gentleness, goodness, faythfulnes, mekenes, temperancie. Against such there is
no law. They truly, that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with the
affeccions and lusts. On the othersyde, such as are perfitely free, and ruled
by the spirit of God are known by these fruits. For with this spirit are
joined charity, joy, peace, long sufferyng, gentleness, goodness, faythfulnes,
mekenes, temperancie. They that of their own good will do these, have no need
to be pricked forth with compulsories of the law, for them their own
innocence makes free from it. Beside this, they that truly are Christ's, as
it besemeth spiritual people, have crucified the flesh with all the vices and
desires thereof. For by baptism we dye with Christ, and are buried also with
him.

The text.
If we li^e in the spirit, let us walk in the spirit. Let us not be desirous
of vain glory, prouokyng one an other, enuiyng one at an other. We may not
stand doubtfully between the flesh and the spirit, whether of both we should
follow. If the spirit give life to the body, reason it is that the body be
under the governance of the spirit. If we have received life through the
spirit of Christ, and not by the law, let us live according unto the
inclinacion of the same spirit. If we have truly tasted of the spirit of
Christ, let us bring forth the fruits of it, and abstain from al carnal
works. Let us not be desirous of vainglory, for the same prouokyng each one an
other of us to debate and strife, enuiyng one an other of us. For even them,
that profess the rule of godly life, these vices oftetymes trouble, which,
yet are in very deed the pestilence and destruction of true godlynes.

The vi. Chapter.
The text.
Brethren, if a man also be taken in any fault, ye which are spiritual,
healpe to amend him, in the spirit of mekenes: considering thy self, lest
thou also be tempted. HItherto have I showed you (brethren) to what end all
they, that have taken Christ's religion upon them, must enforce the^ selfs.
Yet because baptism takes not from us, but that we are men still, if any among
you by reason of weakness fall into any offense, your part is, which are
stronger, and by the spirit of God have not given place to fleshly desires,
with gentle and meke words to restore him again, encouragyng him up, that he
may rise again, not with rough speech causing him to despair. Hipocrites use
such proud lokes and high words, but Christ's spirit, forasmuch as it
desires al men's salvation, with meke and gentle means calls men to
amendment. And oftetymes it chances, that who^ a sharp earnestnes
withdraws utterly, them gentle and brotherly correccion makes humble and
boweth. Moses law after such sort suppresseth sin, that it destroys the
siner, but christian charity so remedyeth vice, that she yet saves y^ man.
The better thou art, by so much the more gentlely condescende thou to thy
brothers weakness. If Christ's own example move the not sufficiently so to do,
who most mercifully suffered his children, until time they Considering thy
self, lest y^ be tempted.
amended, at lestwyse yet let this encourage you, because ye know, that the
like may chance unto your selfs.

The text.
Bear ye one an others burdaine, and so fulfill the law of Christ. For if any
man seem to him self, that he is somewhat, when in deed he is nothing, the
same deceives his own mind. This man is fallen, remember that thou art a
frail man also.. Let his fall be unto the a lesson, neither to be bold upon
thy self, nor yet to trust to much in thine own strength. Use thy self
toward him that is fallen, as thou would be glad to be used, if the like
chanced to the. And a mischaunce may befall any worldly man. Such as at the
mocion of certain false Apostles have staggered, must not with cruelnes be
banished out of your company, but charitably be called again to their old
stedfastnes. The time may come, that they being made strong may again bear
with your weakness. He that has upon him a heavy burdain, must be eased, and
not thrown down. Wherefore if each of you bear others burdaines, then shall ye
in every point fulfill the law of charity, which Bear ye one another
burdaine
law is Christ's own law. Christ whereas he neither was under sin, nor nigh
the ieopardye thereof, yet bare he upon him our wickedness, and of his great
mercy healed us, and condemned us not, as one without pity. Let no man think
him self to be righteous, and upon confidence therein despise his brother, that
is with some kind of sin entangled.

For a man to seame just to him self, is a proof of a fained righteousness.
Wherefore if any man think him self somethyng, when he in deed is nothing, he
deceives him self.

The text.
Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have reioysyng, only in
his own self, and not in an other. For every man shall bear his own
burdaine. For neither is any man therefore righteous, because he auaunceth him
self before the sinner, nor is therefore one man defiled with other men's
sin, if he submit him self to restore him again. Nor is he therefore good,
because he co^pareth him self to a worse. Every man shall be judged by his own
deeds. Yet must noman in his own deeds have a confidence, but every manne must
search with him self, whether that, wherein he bears him self in hand to do
well, be such, as of God should be allowed. If thine own conscience condemn
the not, yet glory not, because other a^e weak, but glory of thine own
strength, and glory inwardly, geuyng God thanks for his gifts bestowed upon
the, nor bost it among other, ne despise them, that are not so strong as thou
art. Help him, if thou be able, if thou be not able, let God his judge alone
with him. Neither shall his sin diminishe thy reward, nor thou for an other
man's offense be punished, but before God every man shall bear his own
burdaine.

The text.
Let him that is taught in the word, minister unto him that teaches him in
all good things. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. For what soever a man
sows that shall he also reap. For he that sows in his flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corrupcion: but he that sows in the spirit, shall of the spirit
reap life everlasting. But as long as we be in this world, we are bound each
one to help an other. And as it belongs to them, whose gifts are above
others, with teaching, comfortyng and exhortacion to help their brothers
weakness, so let such, as be helped, remember, that they be not unthankful to
such as have done for them. And so among you shall al good things be Be not
deceived God i^m not mocked.
comen, if they, that can preach the gospel, teach, comfort, and bear up
the rude, and they again that are taught, of their substance give their
teachers and counsailours necessaries, so that one do for an other. Let them
that teach, take heed that their doctrine be christian, and savor of the
spirit of Christ, or else better were it for a man not to believe his teacher at
all. Beside that, he that for corrupt teaching the gospel receives mede of
him, who^ he so teaches, the man he deceives, yea, and him self to, but God
can not of him be deceived. Wherefore my counsel is, that ye teach sincerely
the gospel, for God is not mocked with. But such seed as every man sows,
such shall he mow. Whosoever teaches carnal doctrine, for his sede he shall reap
fruit which is corruptible. But he that teaches spiritual doctrine, shall for
his spiritual and heavenly counsel receive like reward, which is life
everlasting.

The text.
Let us not be weary of well doing. For when the time is come, we shall repe
without wearynes. While we have therefore time: let us do good unto all men, and
especially unto them, which are of the household of faith, Therefore let us
always endeavor to do for all men, nor cease at any time to do good deeds,
whether we have gentle scholars, or ungentle, whether we have a reward of men,
or not. For when the time shall come, we shall gather fruit, which shall
never dye, and receive for our temporal labors, wages everlasting. Sowyng
time shall not always continue, the When the time ^o come, we sh^l reap
without we^ ^yn. ^.
time shall come, when we shall neither with our own deeds be helped, nor with
other men's. For the time of this present life we may with good works will
gods favor, and help other, but at the day of judgment, neither shall
our good works have place, nor we be able to do for any other. Therefore let
us take the time, while it serves, endeuouryng to do, both for all men, and
specially for them, that are of the same religion and faith, that we be of. The
Jew favors none, but Jews, but the christian following the example of
Christ is desyrouse to do good for all men.

The text.
Ye se, how large a letter I have written unto you with mine own hand. As
many as desire with outward appearance to please carnally: the same constrayne
you to be circumcised, only lest they should suffer persecucion for the
cross of Christ. For they themselves, which are circumcised, keep not the
law, but desire to have you circumcised, that they might rejoice in your
flesh. Ye se (ye people of Galacia,) how I am in this matier delited, which
with mine own hand wrote unto you ^o long an epistle. Ye know my hand
writing. No cause have ye to think, that it is a counterfaite letter, it is
all mine, and a declaracion of my good will toward you. And look, that it with
you be of more weight, than any false apostles doctrine. Such as endeavor
rather to please men, than god, such (I say) move you to be circumcised, to
the intent they may bring you in hatred of the Gentiles for Christ's sake, and
in displeasure with the Jews for lack of circumcision. Jews are they, that
so teach, and fear the displeasure of their cou^treymen, if they should
without circumcision preach Christ, as men abolyshyng the law. Such
rather stand in fear of men, than of God, and seek for praise at me^nes
hands, rather than at gods. Such fear lest the sincere profession of the
cross of Christ might stiere up other, y^ hate Christ's name, to persecute
them, and fear also, lest they should be coumpted for unlearned, if they
should nothing else teach, but this simple lesson: that Christ was
crucified. Nor do they this for a very zeal borne to the law of their
country, as I once erroniouslye did, persecutyng the flock of Christ,
forasmuch as no not the Jews self keep y^ law, notwithstanding they be of
their forefathers circumcised, but abuse your rudenes, chargyng you with
circumcision to the end, that they among their companions may vaunte
themself, that through their preaching and teaching ye are fallen to
Iewyshnes. This policy use they to pacify the envy of their country men,
which could not abide, that through the gospel of Christ the law should
be abrogate. As for I neither so fear the hatred of the Jews, nor persecucion
of the Gentiles, y^ I should with less ^inceritie preach Christ's gospel.

The text.
God forbid, that I should rejoice, but in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in Christ
Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing at all, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature. God forbid, that I should in any thing else rejoice, but in the
cross of my lord Jesus Christ. The Gentiles, (I know) coumpte his cross for
a vilanie and reproach, the Jews hate and envy it, yet therein only put I all
my glory, which nothing regard worldly praise, as one, to whom through
baptism being graffed into the body of Christ the world is Whereby the
world is cru^^^ified unto me, and I unto the world.
dead, and contrary wise I to the world, nor am I with adversities thereof a
fearde, nor with prosperities delited, nor pass upon the displeasure, nor
covet the commendacion, without all fear of worldly reproach, and without
desire of vaynglory. Christ only is for me sufficient both for all, and
against all. To whose profession, whether a man come, circumcised out of the
stock of the Jews, or not circumcised out of the stock of the Gentiles, it
forces not. Into whose body, whosoever through faith is transfourmed, is
sodaynely in such sort changed, that he is become a new creature, and
called regenerate. A button therefore for all worldely differences. Whosoever
professes Christ, let him nothing else remember, but that he is a christian
man.

The text.
And as many as walk acordyng to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon Israel, that pertayneth to God. From hencefurthe let no man put me to
busynes. For I bear in my body the marks of the lord Jesus. Brethren the
grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen. Let this be a sure
rule, which rule, whosoever follow, to them wyshe I peace and mercy, ^or
meet it is to wyshe them the same thing, which David wished to the Israelytes
in the Psalms, where he says: peace be upon Israel. But there be of
Isralites two sorts, one, which is so acoumpted before men, and an other
before god. For he is not straight a vecie Israelite, which is but
circumcised, but he, whose mind is circumcised, and he that through faith is
strong to godwarde. To such Israelites then, of which noumber ye also be,
wyshe I peace and mercy. Away with false Israelites, such as stubbernly and
maliciously strive against the gospel of Christ, they shall never from this
doctrine move me, but, what I have preached, that will I ever preach. And
therefore in this matier I bear in my body the marks of y^ lord Jesus.
let no man here after trouble me. So far am I from to be moved from the truth
of the gospel with any vilanye or affliccion, that whether socuer I go, I
carry about in my body all the spite, that I have for Christ sustained, as
emprisonmentes, scourgynges, chains, stonynges, with other adversities
suffered for Christ's name, as tokens and marks of my Lord Jesus Christ,
blasyng them out, as certain signs of my victories, coumptyng this for my
glory, that I, as far as may be, deserve to follow the cross of Christ,
whom I preach. The grace and good will of our Lord Jesus Christ (brethren)
be ever with your spirit, y^ through his aid ye may continewe in the truth
of the gospel: which desyer of mine, that it may take effect, he grant,
by whose spirit I wrote these.

Finis,
To the Christian reader, John Old wysheth grace / mercy and peace / from God
the father and from his son Jesus Christ our Lord and only savior.
Forasmuch (most gentle reader) as every pryest vnd^^ a certain degree in
schools is bounden by the kings Majesty's most gracious iniunctio^s to have
provided by a day lymited for his own study and erudicion y^ whole Paraphrase
of D. Erasmus upon the new testamente ^oth in Latin and English: And where I
heard nevertheless in the beginning of this last somer by the Pryntout* my very
hertie good friend Edward Whitchurche, that the Paraphrases upon seven of
Paul's Epistles, that is to say, to the Ephesians, Philippians, both
thepistles to y^ Thessalonia^s, both to Timothee, and thepistle to Philemon
were neither translated ready to the Prynte, ne ye^ appointed certainly to be
translated of any man, so as thafore mentioned iniunction should be like in
this case to be frustrate of his due execucion, the ignorant priests
iniunction breakers (as they are in other things ynowe bebesydes that) and the
simple vulgar people hungryng and thirstynge after ryghteousnes, by wantyng of
these Paraphrases, vnfedde: and not only vnfedde for lack of such lively
plain exposicions of the scriptures, as the Paraphrases in most things are,
but also by reason of the continuance of accustomed vanities (yea rather
blasphemies) in the church, they are brought through the Popish persuasions
of the covetous gredye missal sacryficers, into daily encreace of error and
ignorance more and more. And although it might be justly answered unto me,
that it is not the only lack of the translated Paraphrases, whereby the
commune people communely continue still in ignorance, but much rather the
lack as well of good will as ability in the priests and curates, that read
the good Homylies al ready set forth, and the scriptures with cuttyng,
hackynge, hummyng, cheopping and mynceyng after such sort, as y^ people are in
most Parishes not only brought into a great tedious wearynes because of the
unsavory and imperfite reading pronou^ceing and pointing of those good
things, but also into a certain co^te^ptuous lothsomnes and hatred thereof,
seeing their curates bear so little good will and so unto ward to the
furtherau^ce of gods word and glory, to their parishene^s erudicion, and so
diligent to continue and advance their popyshe pryuate masses and other
strange tounged service to pass away the time and to keep both themselves
and the people blind still: yet mine unfeigned hope and trust is, that like as
y^ almyghtie euerlyuing God the father of our lord Jesus Christ (and by
Christ of al perfect christians) has of his own unspeakable mercy to this
most Imperial Realmewarde, given so gracious, so godly, so virtuous, so
learnedly toward and so faithful a Christen King, and most worthy supreme head
eue^ our most sovereign lord king Edward y^.vi. to rule govern, nourishe and
defend it: who by thaduise, ministry and travail of his victorious and most
noble uncle the Lord Protectours grace, and other of his most honorable
Counsayll, seeks the kingdom of heaven and the righteousness thereof, as well in
free setting forth of the most holy sacred scriptures by iniunccions and
visitoures, as in diligent placeing and sendyng abroad of most excellently
learned readers and preachers to instruct his subjects in the true knowledge
of them selves and of God, and in their bounden duties to their superiors, and
also in christian charity to their neighbors: so he will also of his most
haboundaunte riches of mercy and inscrutable power continue (with daily
encreace) such forewarde hertynes and hertye forewardenes of earnest godly
procedynges in the Kings most Roial Majesty, by the advice, ministry, and
travail foresayed, as (the ignorant ministers being charitably amoued from
their ecclesiastical cures having competent in other trades of life to rest
upon, and reasonable necessary provision for the honest mayntenaunce of
learning and good ministers being had) that father of mercies and Lord of
glory, whose ways are unsearchable and judgments incomprehensyble, by
whose wisdom all things are swetely disposed and ordered, will (in case we be
seruent in hear^^e prayer and not slack in rendryng thanks unto him for his
exceeding manifold benefits) send convenient, w^llyng and l^stye forewarde
workmen into this his most copious great harvest of England, as well to the
extirpacion, banyshement, and ^o^yng out of popyshe faith, false religion,
cankred opinions, heathnyshe rites, idoiatrous worshyppynges, supersticious
deuoucions, disguysed myssall sacrificeinges, aduouterous conversation, and
other gross vile iniquities arysyng and growing (to the contempt and dishonor
of the living God) as branches out of the root of the Romyshe Antichristian
religion: as also to the plantyng, setting forth, and glorifyeng of the most
undefiled law of the Lord that conuerteth souls from naughtynes to godlynes:
to the sincere teaching of the most sacred religion of Christ, and the true
wourshyp of God: to the reformacion of manners and also to the expressyng of
godly behavior in outward conversation both in the ministre and parishene^,
to walk in love as Christ has loved us, in Christen almose deeds, in
scripturely fasting, in ghospellike prayer, in rendryng thanks, in lifting up
pure hands, in patience, long suffryng, perfect charity, temperaunce,
sobriety, chastity, brotherly compassion and true obedience toward the
Kings majesty and all other set in authority under him: and in other offices,
works, deeds and virtues, that God requires and commands by his acts,
proclamacions, and decrees most earnestlye and straightely mentioned in his
most holy perfect book the Bible, so as God (I doubt not) shall vouchesafe
long to preserve unto this Realm y^ most unspeakable worthy Jewel y^ kings
hyghnes: and defendyng it from the dangerous plagues and curses due unto the
wicked children of unbelief, shall vouchesafe also to power upon it the mercies
and blessings in most pleyntuous habundaunce that he has promised by the same
book to the believing children of obedience. Upon these respects, hope and
consideracion, and seeing thaforenamed seven Epistles (which in deed are as
necessary and requisite pieces of scripture to the furtheraunce of Christ's
religion, and christen manners as y^ rest of the new testament is) to be left
vntra^slated: I took in hand to translate the^ at such seldom leasures as I
possibly could from mine other profane travails incide^t to my drudging
vocacio^ spare, and now at last have finished the^: not doubting, albeit I
confess my self (eue^ from y^ botome of mine he^t) as unmeet for this kind of
office as a carts of husba^dry to be a caruer at a noble man's table, yet y^
this my rude tra^slacio^ is both according to y^ text in every sentence
agreably to the Paraphrastes mind, and plainly Englished to the understanding
of the most unlearned English men, for whose erudicion I did take upon me
this labor. For although curious sought terms of Rhetorical English, in
this translacion would better please the delicate ears and fine wits of men
fynely brought up in trickynge of terms and tounges, yet in as much as these
translated Paraphrases are set forth for the informacion and plain teaching of
the Kings majesty's plain English subjects that understand none other but
their own native barayne tongue, I thought it rather better to seek the
edification of the plain unlearned by plain termyng of words, than by
tedious circum^ocucion to make a Paraphrase upon a Paraphrase, and by that
means, not only to leave the simple vulgar people untaught or never the
better, but also in vain seeking after curiosity to be justly laughed to
scorn, for bunglyng at the thing that is far above my capacity. Therefore
where unnecessary fynesse wants, accept true meaning playnesse. And (good
reader) be not of the no^bre of those men, which lead and get an easy and a
wealthye life almost altogether by deprauinge, comptrollyng, querellyng,
mysreportyng, and fault fyndyng at other men's doings (whose study is to do
some good) and loyter the time them selves and do no good at all. But in case
thou chauncest to find any notable fault in this my gross translacion,
which has escaped me either for lack of leisure or learning, I beseech
thee correct it charitably with aduysednes, so as the readers and hearers
thereof, may the better and more expressly perceive the Paraphrastes mind*
considrynge how profitable doctrine for these our present dangerous days
the Paraphrases do importe, as well in teaching Christ sincerely, and in
setting forth of Christen manners plainly, as in rebukyng vice and wicked
customs sharply. I meant not by this my translation to hunt after worldly
commendacion or temporal rewards, God is my witness, but to do good to the
best of my poor unlearned talente, unto the simple vulgar sort, who I
perceived by most evident experience at y^ kings highness visitacion, wherein I
unworthy was a waiting ministre, were glad and conformablye willing to hear
the pure word of God, and obedient to receive the Kings most godly iniu^ccions
traynyng them to y^ same: and so they would continue, in case their ordinaries,
Curates, and ministers were not try^lers and hynderours thereof, and if they
were not seduced, and taught by sedicious earewhisperours contrary to the word
of God and the Kings hyghnes most godly gracious procedinges, only for
pelf, belycheare, ease and lucre. But take me not, that I mean all them to be
triflers, hynderours, or sinistre resisters, that are ordinaries, curates or
ministres. For there are some of the chief and Bishops, and ordinaries which
with all their possible earnest labor and pains tender the gospelles affairs,
god be thanked for them: And sundry other curates and ministres (who^ I know)
although to few, are honest and diligently well willing toward the truth
in diverse shyres, where I waited upon the kings hyghnes visitours, especyally
in Lincolneshyre and in other shires of that Diocese. And I verayly trust in
God, that the nombre of the honest sort shall daily encreace there about more
and more, by the industruous ministry and uniform concurrence in wholesome
doctrine of the Bishop and Deane of Lincoln, and the rather by the helping
forewardnes and forewardyng help of the devout woman of God, the Duchess of
Suffolk. But I mean only certain sorts of ministers, whom ou^ noble
learned Paraphrast Erasmus paynteth notablye out in the person of the
Evangelists and apostles: of who^, one sort are those, that being altogether
unlearned had leauer continue still like Horses and Mules without understanding,
than to acknowledge their ignoraunces and blyndenes and labor for better
knowledge to become the children of light. These are dogs y^ can not back,
and overseers that can not see. These are also the blind guydes, whom when the
blind do follow, not the blind guydes only but the blind folowers also (as
our savior Christ him self testifies) do fall both in to the ditche of
error and endless da^nacion. The second sort are they, which being noseled
and roted in worldly pelf, belycheare and promocio^ obtained by cou^trefaite
crouching, hipocritical lowting, and by means of their courtely fre^des will
rather obstinately resyst and murmr against y^ kings majesty's most godly
travails and procedinges as much as in the^ lies, and with slau^derous
dissuasions, and perplexe impertine^t interpretacio^s go about to bring the
most pure plain word of God in to contempt, yea and to ince^se the people to
tumultes, sedicions, rumors and rebellions, (as practiced experience has of
late days most lamentably taught us) than they would lose or forgo any
jot of their worldely wicked pompous Mammon, or (for conscience sake) submytte
the^ selves to the truth of y^ scriptures, or any sincere godly quietness.
These are the cursed shepeherdes of Israel, that eat up the fat of the
sheep, and clothe them selves with the wolle: that slay the best ^edde and
nourishe not the flock. These are the damnable hipocrites that shute up the
kingdom of heavens before men, in forbyddyng, dissuading and discourageing
them from reading or meddlyng with the scriptures, (which be the bread of
the soul) and will nether enter* in them selves, ne suffer them that would.
These are y^ false doctors, that S. Peter prophesied of before hand, which
slyghtyly bring in pernicious sects among the people, denyeng even y^ lord
that bought them, and through covetousness by feyned words make marchaundise
of men. These are the incarnate angels of Satan, which with their fine manner
of crepe a bosom and outward pretense of holiness, transform them selves into
the angeles of light. These are the y^ching eared masters and spirits of
error, that teach doctrines of deuilles and inconvenient things for fylthy
lucres sake, having their consciences marked with an ho^e iron, and teaching
genealogies and endless riedles that engendre questions, more than edify to
Godwarde. These are the Antichrists that against all the whole scripture, and
to the undeniable de^ogation of the merit and dignity of Christ's death and
blodsheading done once for all, take upon the^ daily to sacrifice for the
^emyssion of sins of the quycke and the dead: and teach sweet to be sour,
and sour sweet, light to be darkness, and darkness light. These are also y^
right sons of their right father the devil, that has been a murtherour and
alyer from the beginning. Finally these are the whelps of the roaring Lion the
devil, y^ goes about sekyng by their ministry, who^ he may devour. A third
sort there is, which for the sauetie of their pelf and promocion, employe
their studyes and forecastyng pollycies to please all parts, thinking in
their own fantasies that to be possible to them, that Christ our most true
doctor says is impossible, to serve both god and Ma^mo^. These are they, by
whose occasion y^ people halt between two opinions, not knowing what is best
for the^ to follow, wheth^^ God or Baal. These are the messagiers of Laodicia,
whose works are another cold nor whote, but between both, smellyng neither to
much of the ghospel, nor to little of pope^ie. And yet they must be called
fauourours of the truth, for they would feign all things were well, so it
were not long of them. These would feign have Gods corn to come up, but yet
they dare sow none, longer than the world (as they say) makes fair wether.
And notwythstandyng the more part, yea and to much the more part, of
ecclesiastical parsons be of these three sorts, that is to say, either of
blockeheaded asses, plain professed enemies, or doublefaced friends: Yet God
of the habundaunt riches of his exceeding great mercies, has reserved unto him
self some sincere Bysshoppes and preachers in this Imperial Realm, to erecte
and confirm the towardenes of the true meaning fauourours, to comfort the
weakeharted, and to confound the stow^e rebels, (the golden cupped
courteours of the proud whore of Babylon) with ^he mighty swearde of the
spirit, which is the word of God. And for theuidenter declaracion of his
mercies to his English flock, and for the glorouse^ enhaunceyng of his own
kingdom and glory in this Realm, in forewardyng the godly labors and
industruous travails of his faithful ploughmen the ministres, (in despighte
of all his enemies) God (in whose hand all kings hearts are) has put in to
the heart of our most Royal worthy king, Edward the. vi. not only,
like a most Christen Josias, by the ministry, travail, and studious
endeavors of his most faithful dear Uncle the lord Protectours grace and
other of his most honorable Counsel, to abolyshe idolatrous sacrificeinges,
and supersticious customs, and to restore the true worship, religion and
gospel of Christ in to his pristine sincerity, pureness and liberty again,
but also like a most prudent young Solomon to build up perfitely the Lords
house, and to walk (after thexample of the old Solomon) as it were before the
porche of the temple, like Gods true minister, to expel and keep out all
false worshyppinges, popish Gods service, vain ceremonies, pernicious
sects, sedicious tumultes, filthy errors, and noughtie lurkyng heretical
opinions, from among his Christen English subjects, which is the living
temple of God, and to train, order and govern them with the rule of wholesome
laws (to the banishemente of ungodly licencious liberty, that men are now a
days to much given and bent unto, and to the nourishement of virtues, which
God requires) and also to keep and defend them from all intestine tumultes,
dangers and invasions, that might perchance be intended by forayne or
homedwellyng enemies. Forasmuch than as all the kings majesty's obedyent true
subjects, are now most straytely debtebounden generally to render most humble
perpetual thanks to God, through our lord Jesus Christ, for his excedyng
unspeakable mercies and most bounteous liberal benignity powered in most
habundaunt wise upon us, now already seen by manifold proved miraculous
experiences, in sendyng us so godly a young King, in placeing so noble and so
religious a Protector, and inprouiding so worthy a prudent Cou^sail: And like
as we may be most undoubtedly sure, in case we lay fast hold on y^ promises of
god, and stick hard to his gospel with co^stau^t belefe of our heart, with unfeigned
confession of our mouth, and frame our co^uersacio^ without grudging agreably to
y^ same, y^ he will continue, maintene and increase his trasoures, blessings,
and liberal benefits upon us: Eue^ so it stands us in hand with al vigilau^t
circu^spection generally to beware, y^ we take not these graces of god so
ge^tly, so freely and so bounteously given unto us, in vain, lest for our
neglygente unthankfulness, contemptuous stubburnes, outrageous licenciousnes,
and dissolute unthriftiness, he withdraw his blessings, and take away these
most precious Iewelles, treasours, and benefits from us, and so for our own
wicked deserts justly leave us to our selves, to work the things that are
not conuenyent even with gredynes, and to receive therefore the reward of
error. Therefore to be plain with the (good reader) seeing that our most
bounteouse merciful God almyghtye, does as well in powryng these his most
plentcouse proved blessings upon us Engyshe folks without our deservings, as
in his long sufferaunce and wynkyng at our daily practiced naughtines, inuit
and most gently provoke us unto repentance: I think it not best for us to
mock on still with God, and to contemn the riches of his goodness and long
suffraunce. For God will not be mocked for us. And yet if a man any thing
earnestly mark the manners of this royal rufflynge world, it would seem,
that men think that there is no God, either that God is a sleep, or else that
he is not so grievously displeased with the fylthynes of sin and disobedience,
as the holy scripture in all places reports him to be: or at least that the
scripture is not the word which declares the commandment and truth of
God. For it is a monstrous matter to mark, how shamelesly the Romyshe ympes,
slander, deprave, and abuse the most holy sacred word of God, the Bible, and
the true preachers and expounders of the same, namyng it falsely the new
learning, and the^ new fangled fellows: and how hansomly they uphold, and how
stubburnely they continue their popyshe baggage of dumme ceremonies, idolatrous
worshyppynges, heathnyshe rites, cankred opinions, disguysed devotion, missall
sacrificeinges, faythles phantasied workings, and other trades of
countrefaycte supersticious religion, estemyng the truth of God to be a lie,
and the lying Prophecies of Methodius and other fond imaginations to be the
truth. It it is an horrible thing also to hear the blasphemous swearyng,
sturdye disobeyeng, traitorous rebellynge, false rumors inuentyng, deuelishe
backbyting, slanders caryeng, sedicious murmuring against the truth and al
godly procedynges, and to see the hellyshe works of palpable darkness that are
exercised now a days. When was there ever more disdain, and more excess of
costly apparel used, and less clothyng of the poor than now? When was there
more haftyng and craftyng to scrape money to gether, and less succouryng of
pore wydowes, fatherles children, and poor neady impotent persons, than now?
When was there at any time more forecast to join house to house, and land to
land, and less hospitality, than now? When were there in any age i^o many
gorgious buyldynges set up, for wealthye men's pleasures, and fewer hospitalles
mayntened for poor men's succors, than now? When was there more destroying
and enclosyng of whole towns, villages and co^mins to some one man's private
use for the nourishynge, rearyng and stoaring of sheep and brute beasts,
whereby strange Realms, are enryched, and so little study to maynteyne tyllage
and to nouryshe tall yomen, to thencrease of the commen strength of this their
own natyue Realm and to serve to kings Majesty in his necessary affairs,
than is now? When was there ever more pollyng, pylling, theuing, robbyng,
extorcionyng and brybyng, and less restitucion making than now: When was
there at any time more wholesome laws made for the comme^ wealth and good order
in every estate, and less observed and obeyed, than now? When was swearyng
and taking of oaths upon the holy eua^gelistes more solemnly used, and less
truth or promysse kept than now? Wha^ was excessyue riotous bankettyng,
pottecompanyonyng, and belychearynge more outragiously used, and the pore
hungriousnes less refreshed, than now? When was shameless whoremongyng more
licenciously frequented without punishment, than now? When was holowe herted
flatterye and craftye deceauyng, more practiced, and less hertye frendeshyp
steryng, than now? Wha^ were parents more negligent in virtuous bryngyng up of
their children, and children more disobedient to their parents, than now?
When were masters more vnlouyng or strayterlaced to their servants, and
servants less diligent and trustye to their masters, than now? When was
there more quycke bargaynyng among men, and less true dealyng, than now? To
be short, wha^ was there mo gospel talkers, and fewer gospel walkers, than
are now? When was there so many gospel bablers, and so few gospel
folowers, as now? And finally, when went Christ in his ministres so
diligently on preaching and found less faith upon earth, or was less
entreteyned, than now? These things therefore respectively weighed and
conferred together, are euydent profes, that light is comen in to the world,
and men have rather loved darkness than light. And it is also an aunciente
practice of the father of the popes malignaunt church (that most diligent
preaching prelate doctor devil) when he can not get him damnable disciples
ynowe to sactisfie his gredy lust, through his poperye, by reason of the
clear light and power of the gospel shynyng forth, to take upon him to be a
fine forewarder of the ghospels liberty: that is to say, to instigate men, in
pretense of the gospel, to scrape and cloyne in to their hands as much
possession as they can, to the intent that (the godly learned preachers and
ministres now living being once dead, and no competent prouysion for preaching
nor learned men being had) there may grow in more blind popery, barbarousnes
and ignorance in our posterity, than was in or before our time. And so the
last error shall be worse than the farther. For (as Solomon says) when
preaching cease, the people shall run havoc. And it is that subtle
Satan's practice also, in pretense of the ghospelles liberty, to cause men to
make their belies their Gods: as we see daily (alas therefore) every light
headded idle person, and every raungeyng ruffion shamelesly pampre his paunche
with flesh and delicates, regarding neither order nor common wealth, sparyng
nether place nor time, ne yet giving god any thanks at al either for flesh or
fish, meat or drink, as it may appear by their impudent abominable lyuinge,
and covetous gredynes of worldly pleasures: in swearyng, whoring, dyceing,
cardyng, braullyng, raylyng, braggyng, querelling, fighting* piking, stealing,
robbing, bawdy talkyng, and in all kinds else of hellishe iniquity. And so by
that reason (over their own damnable estate) the poor simple untaught weak
brother, for whom Christ died, seeing this liberty and this iniquity joined
together, is by and by offended, and defyeth the word of God, because of that
rash beastly bellyed man's wickedness, which prateth of the word and
lives clean contrary against it. Thus the devil (I say) purchases to him
self and to the fire of hell, as many or rather mo slaves by his countrefaite
ghospellyng, than he did before with open idolatrous popery mayntenyng.

Now therefore go down in to thy self (good reader) and see what case thou
stand in, for thou see by experience that the days are evil. Love not
the good oportunytie that God has lent thee. For all that say, Lord, Lord,
shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the fathers will
which is in heaven. Although we are made ryghteous before God through only
faith, yet we must express our faith by such charitable works before men,
as God commands, or else our faith is dead, and become no faith. And
though we are saved through grace, yet we may not abide in sin still, that
grace may abound. For like as when a sinner repents, there is a merye
heaven, the Angels rejoicing for gladness: even so when a man repents not,
but lives still in infidelity and sin, he makes the holy ghost sad and a
sorrowful, heaven. And though we are quyckened together with Christ of his
own fre mercy without our deservings, yet we are commanded by his holy
word, to mortyfie our carnal members upon earth, that like as we have in
times past made them servants of ungodliness from one naughtynes to an other,
so we should henceforth make them servants of purity into santtification.
For he that gave us Christ to be our new garmente, badde us (by his Apostle
Paul) put of the old Adam: or else Christ would not stycke clean on our
backs, unless old Adam be stryped clean of, with all his ragged rotten
patches of infidelity and sinfulnes. And he that says: Let us put on the
armor of light, says first: Let us cast a^uaye the uuorkes of darkness. For
like as God loves to be wourshypped only according to his own word and
byddyng: so he curfeth all them that invent or use other kinds of worshyppyng
or seruyng of him besides his word. And like as God fills them with his
grace that reverently and truly use his holy name: so he fylleth them also full
of wikednes, that be swearours: and makes his plague of vengeance to hang
still over their houses that abuse Gods name. And like as God promyseth
reward to them that help their pore neighbors at their need: so he
threateneth punishment to them also, that hurt their neighbors by word or
by deed. And like as the holy ghost allows chaste wedlock for holy and
honorable among all men: so does he pronounce whoredom and bawldrye to be
cursed and abominable among all men. Christ that gives the penny to the
diligent workers, byddeth auaunt, I know you not, to them that are loyterours.
The Prophet David that says: Prope est dn^s oi^bus eum inuocantibus, says
also: Long a peccatoribus salus. And that gospel, which is the power of God
to save all that believe it, shall also be a witness at the last day against
all them that show them selves in this world unbelievers by the fruits of
their ungodly behauyour. Assure thy self of this, good reader, that like as
there is God, so is there the devil. As there is heaven, so is there hell. As
there is life and eternal salvation, so is there death and eternal damnacion.
Therefore cast of careless security, and be diligent in reading or hearing
Gods word. If Christ be thy savior, make no more mediators for thee but
only him. For like as he will not give away the glory of his passion to any
other: so will he not give away the glory of his intercession to any other.
Cast of feyned custom, and lay hold upon vnfailyng verity: Forsake blind
broad byewayes* and follow the straight narowe pathe way: Away with fylthy
whoremonging, and take thee to chaste wedlock. If thou will be chosen, make
sure thy vocation. If thou defyest the devil, meddle not with false teachers
and deuely she living. If thou love not the deuylles savor, dwell not upon
his donghill of stynkyng ydolatrie and supersticio^. If thou be the son of
Abraham, do the works of Abraham. If thou be justified through only faith
in Christ, lead the life and do the deeds of a faithful justified christen
man. If Christ be thy Lord, be thou his true servant. If thou will take
upon the to be Christ's disciple, see that thou wear his badge, Christen
charity. If Christ be thy good shepeherde, harken to his voice and none
other. If Christ have borne the on his own shoulders into his shepefolde,
when thou wast run astraye: see thou run not out again, lest thou drop
into the pit and be drowned through thine own folly. If thou will take God
for thy father, see thou be holy as he is holy. If thou will have the holy
spirit of God to be thy comfortoure, make him not sad with the resisting
waiwardnes of thy spirit. And than may thou be surely bold to preace unto
the throne of his grace, and shalt be sure to find mercy in convenient time.

Take heed by time, for now is the time and very hour for us to rise up from
sleep: and therefore, I say, take time of repentance, while time is, for time
will away. But and if thou will not arise and hear the voice of thy
Shepeherde Christ, having the liberty of Gods word (the rather by the
ample enterpretyng of these Godly Paraphrases) to teach thee and to be thy
warraunt: and thexample of the Kings Majesty with his gracious Uncle the lord
Protector and the test of his most honorable Counsel to encourage, aid and
defend thee: but wylt tomble and walowe still in wylful ignorance, and
error, stickyng to old heathenyshe idolatrous worshippinges, supersticious
deuisinges, mass meritinges, beade droppinges, popyshe customs, disobedyence
against superiors and parents, blasphemous swearyng, aduouterous living,
theuyshe stealyng* murder and robbynge, covetous cloynynge, bawdye talkyng,
holoweharted flateryng, false witness bearyng, untrue dealyng, craftye
deceauyng, dronken drinkyng, paunche pampryng, subtyl vnderminynge, and other
wyckednesses and vilanies against the written word and commandment of God:
and so differrest repentance from day to day, and heapyng sin upon sin,
say: the mercy of God is great. Tushe let God send me a merry life, and
enough in this world, and than let him do with me in an other world what he
will: Be thou assured, that thou enforcest God to take away his holy spirit,
and his good gifts from thee, and layest up wrath in stoare for thy self
against the day of wrath, when God shall judge the secret thoughts of men,
by Jesus Christ. Thou shall have the immortal worm of thy conscience to
g^awe contynually upon thee, so as falling into desperacyon and grudgeynge
against God, thou shalt begin thine hell even in this world, having
anguyshe and trouble upon thy soul for thy wicked living. And at that great
feast day, when thou shalt appear without the wedding garment of a
perfyte faith, garnysshed with works of charity, and good living: Christ
the king shall command thee to be bounden hand and foot, and to be cast into
the utter darkness, where shall be weepyng and gnashyng of teethe: and for the
reward of thine error and wickedness, thou shalt be constrained perforce to
pledge the Devil of his own cup, that is prepared euerlastyngly for
hypocrites to drink upon, whereinto the Lord God shall rain, snares, fire,
brymston^, storm and tempest. Than it will not avail the to repent. Than it
wylbe to late to cry, had I wyste. Remember thy self therefore in time: seeing
that God of his courteous gentylnes, by his holy word gives thee so courteous
warning. And take in good part this my simple translacyon, intended to none
other purpose, but to thy forwardynge help, as the Lord is my witness: God
send thee perfyte understanding (gentle reader) in his truth, and well to
fate.

Amen.
Thus ends the Prologe.
The argument upon the Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul unto the Ephesians
by. D. Erasmus of Roterodame.
EPhesus was sometime the chief city of the less Asia, a city
supersticiously given to the wurshipping of deuilles, and especially of Diana,
for which cause it is called in the acts of the Apostles, the wurshipper of
Diana, not of Diana the huntour, unto whom the Poets attribute bow and
arowes, but Diana with many pappes, whom the Grecians call Polymaston, and
say, she is the nource of all manner of beasts, after Hieromes reporting. For
the temple of Diana at Ephesus, was in the greatest estimacion of all the world,
so much that the Ethnike writours make special mention of it, almost in all
their writings. These men give their whole studies unto curiouse arts and
sciences: as we may gather where we read, that at the preaching of the
Apostles, they brought in their books of enchauntmente, and burned them in the
fire, and when they had coumpted the price, they found it to be fifty
thousand siluerlinges, as it is purported in the.xix. Cap. of the Acts. And
therefore to thentent he might withdraw them from those great errors, he
tarried still among them three years, trauaylling all that while, to the
uttermost of his power, to bring the thing to pass, that might be to the
profitabe forwarding of their salvation, albeit many of them made great
resistance against him, as he specifyeth himself in an other place. And there
he was cast to beasts: like as he makes mention, in his secounde Epistle to
the Corinthians. And when he departed from thence, he commanded Timothee to
remain there still among them. And like as that City was full of Curiouse
men, and such as were given to magical arts, even so had it many great
learned men in it. By reason whereof, Paul, as he tempereth himself according
to the manners and natures of all men, makes often mention of devils and
spirits, when he shows the difference of good men and bad. Besides these, he
opens certain dark hard sentences. For there is none of his Epistles, that
has so dark and hid sentences in it, as this to the Ephesians. So as it
should seem, that this Epistle was the chiefest occasion, why Petre wrote
after this sort. Even as our derely beloved brother Paul, according to the
wisdom given unto him, wrote to you, yea, almost in every Epistle, speaking
of such things: among which, many things are hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned, and unstable, pervert, as they do other
scriptures to their own destruction. Therefore because these men aboade
constauntly in the faith, he exhorts them to continue and go still forward,
until they were become perfect: putting them in remembrance, what manier of
people they were, when they were addict unto naughtines, and did service unto
wieked spirits: and what they are become now, that they are engraffed unto
Christ: and teaches them withal, that although the grace of the Gospel was
promised unto the Jews, yet that by the eternal decree of God, it was
rightfully enlarged unto the Gentiles also: and that he was a minyster ordained
of God, to that same office. And forasmuch as he wrote this Epistle, being in
prison, he exhorts them, not to cast down their hearts for his affliccions,
but rather think, that they have so much the more cause to rejoice. These
things he treats of in the first and second Chapters. In the other three,
he prescribes the form of godly conversation unto them, showing what is to
be followed, and what is to be avoided: the duetyes of the husbands to the
wives, and of the wives unto the husbands: the offices of parents to their
children, and of the children to their parents: the duties of masters to
their servants, and of servants to their masters. This Epistle was written
from the city of Rome by Tichicus the Diacone, whom he speaks of in the end
of the Epistle, calling him a faithful minister. Ambrose says furthermore,
that he wrote it in prieson, when he was carried from Jerusalem to Rome, and
lived under suertie without the tents, in the tenement that he had taken for
hyre.

The end of the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle of saint Paul the Apostle to the
Ephesians.
The.i. Chapter.
The text.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God. To the saints, which
are at Ephesus, and to them which believe on Jesus Christ. Grace be with you
and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Blessed be God
the father of our lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all manier of
spyrituall blessyng in heavenly things by Christ, according as he had chosen
us in him, before the foundacions of the world were laid, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him, through lou^. Which ordained us before
through Jesus Christ to be heyrs unto himself, according to the good pleasure
of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherewith he has made
us accepted through the beloved. By whom we have redemption through his blood,
even the forgeuenes of sins, according to the rich^s of grace whereof he has
ministered unto us aboundauntly in all wisdom and prudence. And has opened
unto us the mystery of his will according to his good pleasure, which he had
purposed in himself, to have it declared, when the time was full come: that he
might set up al things perfitly by Christ (both the things which are in
heaven, and the things which are in earth) even by him, by whom we are made
heyrs, and were thereto predestyna^e according to the purpose of him by whose
power all things are wrought, according to the purpose of his own will: that
we (which before believed in Christ) should be unto the praise of his glory. In
whom also we believe, for as much as we have heard the word of truth, even
the Gospel of your salvation: wherein when ye had believed, ye were sealed with
the holy spirit of promise which is the earnest of our enheritaunce forth
recovering or the purchased possession, unto the praise o^ his glory. Paul an
apostle, not of Moses, nor of any man, but of Jesus Christ, whose business I
take in hand, being sense, not upon mine own head or by men's Commissyon,
but by the Authority and commandment of God the father, which, by his
son, has commannded me to preach the doctrine of the Gospel among the
Heathens. I write this Epistle to al them that lead their life at Ephesus, and
lead their life after such sort, that they apply their endeavor to keep
them unspotted from the vices and vncleanesses of this world, and with a
sincere conscience, believe the Gospel of Jesus Christ, not lookyng for
reward of innocencye and holiness, any where else, than from whence they
received the example: nor waiting for the end of their felicity, of any
other, than of whom sprung the beginning. In the mean season, Grace be unto
you ^ peace.
I wish unto you, not as those use to do, that measure their felicity, by the
dignities of this world, but I wyshe, that God the Autour of all goodness
(whom now, we may call even our father, not for that, that he created us
only, but much rather, that being engraffed unto the body of Christ, we are
received into the enherytaunce of Children) may daily increase in you his
beneficence, wherewith he has freely delivered you from the transgressyons of
your old life, and of ungodly has made you folowers of Innocencye and
righteousness: and so continue you in concord, that you may be of one mind
among your selves, and that being reconsiled once to God, you may take heed,
that you break not (in falling to sins again) the promysse, that you
couenaunted with him, through Jesus Christ his son, by whom and with whom,
he gives unto us al things, whom also we shall from hensfoorth woorthely call
our lord, forasmuch as he has set us at liberty from the tirannye of the
devil, with the price of his holy sacred blood, and taken us to himself, and
having delivered us from the deuilles servitude, has made us his own. The
servitude is fortunate, that unites us to Christ. How beit this thing happened
not unto us by chance, nor by our own merit. But God Blessed be God the
father.
the father of our lord Jesus Christ, is altogether to be praised on our
behalf, that of his free favor, has powered all gentle kyndenesse upon us,
not bestowyng those things unto us, that perteyne to the use of this life, and
bodily susteynaunce only, but also those excellent gifts, that avail to
the salvation of soul, and life immortal: which life abides us in heaven,
through Christ, by whom the father has set heaven gate wide open. And because
no man should be curious to ask, how comes this so an exceadyng favor?
from whence cummeth such a wonderful gentleness? It was so resolutelye
determined through the goodness of God, by an eternal decree, even before the
foundacions According as he had chosen us.
of the world were laid. For even than he had chosen us, that by his son,
by whom he created, governs and restores all things, our former vicious
living should be wyped away, and we be cummen holy and faultles, not only in
the sight of men, but also of God himself, who estemeth man according to the
secret affectes of the mind, and that, not with the terror of Moses law, (the
severity whereof is tried unto this purpose altogether ineffectual) Through
love.
but with the belief and love required in the Gospel, which wynneth more of
such as be willing, than the law enforced by rigorous compellyng. For it is
not a perfect service, that the servants do constrainedly, for fear of
inconvenience, or for their masters dyspleasure, but that, that children do
uncompelled byloue and good affection. Which thing was impossible to be Which
ordained us.
performed by any strength of us, had not God by his eternal decree chosen us
into the room and heritage of children, through only Jesus Christ, unto
whom he has so incorporated us, through faith and love, that being made his
members we may be one with him, so that by his participacion, we attain that
thing that was not due to our deservings. And therefore we may in no wise
attribute any thanks unto our selves. In as much as it stood with the good
pleasure of him, that is naturally good, to declare and manifest his free To
the praise of the glory of his grace.
liberality bestowed upon us, more plain and open to the whole world. We (as
concerning our own strength) could not possibly be any thing else, than the
enemies of God, and very abject slaves, but that he has reconsiled us to
himself, by Christ, whom he loves more than can be expressed, and of
damnable wretches, has made us acceptable dear children. As long as being
shared with the danger of sin we were members of the devil, we could
neither love God, nor be loved of God. But masmuch as his most dear son has
redeemed us with the price of his most holy blood from the bondage of sin, and
encorporated us as members unto himself, the father can not possibly choose
but love those, whom it pleased him to make partners with his son. This
benefit is surely inestimable, but notwithstanding such was the will and
bounteous largess of almighty god, which although it be manifestly appare^t
in every thing, yet it more peculiarely abounded upon us, forasmuch as he
opens unto us (as a merciful hearted father unto his children) the secret
mystery of his eternal will, so many long years hidden from the world, the
knowlage whereof is most high wisdom and chief prudence, much more excellent
than that knowledge, wherein being singularely learned in humayne disciplines, ye
have excelled other sorts of men ever unto this day. Man's wit atteineth the
knowledge of In all wisdom and prudence.
the secrets of nature, and yet when they are known to the uttermost they
make no man anything more godly at al. But this secret mystery, that we here
speak of, no reason of man's mind could attain, onles God himself had
opened it unto our knowledge to bring us to true perfect felicity. But if a
man would According to his good pleasure.
ask, for what cause has God kept it close so long, and now at length
manifested it planiely: I have nothing to answer, but that it so pleased the
good will of him, that wills al for the best, in as much as he is goodness it
self. That, that is new unto us, is not new with him. For that that he showed
open to the world in sending his son now in the later days, was eternally
decreed with the father and the son, albeit he would by his certain and
unspeakable counsel have it secretly hidden, until his determined time were
fulfilled, to open this secret unto mankind. Wherein the losses of time, that
the people in times past mi^^en^ in vain seking salvation, some by the outward
obseruacion of Moses saw, some by the study of philosophy, some by
supersticyous religion and wurshipping of devils, should be expelled, and the
whole su^me of all things y^ apperteine to true innocence and to true
godliness, should be ascribed only to Christ, besides whom no man ought to
desire any thing, for as much as he, being the only foantayn, is content to
gratify our peticious* with any good thing, that is either in heaven or earth.
For God the father has appointed him to be the head of all, that all men
should depend of him only, and to trust to receive at his hand, whatsoever is
rightly to be desired, and to acknowelege that it cummeth of him, whatsoever he
of his bounteous liberality bestows upon us. By whom also, such abundant
felicity has chaunsed unto us, that we were chosen unto the lotte and
enheritaunce of immortality, not of our own deseruinges, but because we were
predestinate to it by his decr^ long a go, by whose arbitrament and power all
things are ordered and disposed by his vnscarcheable counsel on our behalf,
according to his own will, who, forasmuch as he is the best and the most wise,
he cannot possibly will any thing, but those things That ^e may to his praise.
that are both best and wisest. Such was his determinate will, that we should be
called unto this enheritaunce and fellowship of Christ, no^ for our own
deserts, but of his fr^ benignity, we that through the monicyon of the
prophets sayings, had in a manner fixed our hope in Christ promised unto us,
yea e^^ before the truth of the gospelcame to light: so that this benefit
should not be ascribed to the obseruacion of Moses law, but that all the praise
should wholly redound to the glory of the goodness of God, who was content freely
to give it to us by his s^^^. Nevertheless we Jews were not called alone to the
promised fellowship of Christ, although in distrusting the shadows of Moses
law, we have In whom we also.
embraced the truth of the gospel, whereof we trust assuredly to receive true
salvation, yea without any help of the law at all: but you also albeit you
are uncircumcised, yet as soon as ye believed in the same gospel, you were
chosen in^^ the same fellowship. For we are not debtours unto Circu^cisio^, in y^
we are received into the hope of immortalitle, but unto faith, which if you
have as well as the Jews, what should let you from the gentle goodness of god?
The cutting a way of y^ foreskin is a mark to discern y^ Jew from the
Heathen. But y^ mark of the gospel exte^deth further and is not printed upon
the body, but in the soul. With this sign, all are marked indifferentlye of
what nation soever they be, that embrace the doctrine of the gospel, and believe
his promises. Some will ask, what token is it, that discerns the Christians
from the wieked* Truly the holy ghost, and the inward affect (not a servile
bond affect, but such a one Which is y^ earnest
as is commonly in good children) which makes us with all our heart to believe
the promises of the gospel, yea although they do not yet in this world
presently appear. For y^ enheritaunce wherinto we are engraffed, shall not be
fully performed, but at the resurreccion of y^ bodies. How beit, he gives us
his spirit in the mean season, as a pledge and ernest of y^ promised
enheritaunce. By this token we are surely certified, y^ god accepts us for
his children, not doubting, but he will take his own to himself, who^ he has
redeemed by y^ death of his son. For y^ merciful ge^tilnesse of god is
desirous to win many, and would have Unto the praise of his glory.
his* magnificence most specially known and notified to mankind, which, y^
more it is opened abroad, y^ mo shall speak of it. God in times past cared
peculiarlye for y^ Jews, in that he delivered the^ from the servitude of y^
Egipcians But it was a small matter, to have y^ goodness of god set forth only
in one nacio^. His will is to be praised and extolled of al me^, ina^nuche as he
has freely redeemed al from the bondage of sin. For y^ he estemeth as
pertinent to his glory, y^ not only the Jews, but all the nations of y^ whole
world through belief of the gospel, should be partakers of salvation.

The text.
Wherefore I also (after that I heard of the faith which ye have in the Lord
Jesus, and lo^^ unto all the saints) cease not to give thanks for you, making
mencio^ of you in my praie^^ that the God of our Lord Iesue Christ, the father
of glory, may give unto you the spirit o^ wisdom and reuela^o^ by the
knowlage of him self, and lighte^ the eyes of pour minds, y^ ye may know what
the hope is, whereunto he has called you, and how rich the glory is ^t his
inherytaunce upon the saints, and what is the excedyng greatenes of his power
to vs^^^e, which believe accordig to the working of that his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead; and set him on
his right hand in heavenly things, about all rule, and power, and might and
domymon, and above every name y^ is named not in this world only, but also in
the world to come: and has pur all things under his f^^e, and has made him
above all things, the head of the congregation, which is his body, and the
fulness of him, that sylleth all in all. For this co^sideracio^, I pass not
whether you be circumcised or not, wha^ I seeuident tokens in you of
eua^gelical salvation, first in that you have reposed your whole trust in the
lord Jesus, tha^ in that you declare your Christian charity toward al Saints
the members of Christ. For this cause I cease not to give thanks for you. For
Eua^gelicall sincerite is of such efficacy, y^ it causes us to be glad of
other men's commodities, no less tha^ of our own. And I make always mention
of you in my prayers, where with I daily call upon God for y^ aduau^cement of the
gospels business, y^ he, which is god of al sorts of people indifferentile,
and of Jesus Christ also after his human nature, of who^ also Christ has to
be god (unto who^, as unto the author and fountain of al goodness, the s^^^e May
give unto you y^ spirit of ^^sedome.
of al glory does wholly belong) may give unto you, more and more y^ ernest when
of I have spoken, his spirit, to inspire into your minds this heavenly
wisedo^, and the knowlage of this mystery: that you may know him, that is
thouly author of all health, and that you may behold him in the mean while, as
it were, with iyes, not with bodily eiyes but with the iyes of the heart and
mind, that see through the light of faith, wherewith the things are also
seen, that are to come, which cannot be seen with the gross bodily iyes:
whereby you may know that, which no humayne philosophy teaches, how blissed
the enheritaunce is, which he has called us to trust upon: and how excellent
y^ dignity

of this most ple^teous enheritau^ce is, which the saynctes shall receive, and
how great the largeness, and how excedyng the greatness of his power is,
which he declares eue^ now in us: the which also (as it were with a certain
secret enforcement y^ cannot be expressed with tongue) has transformed and
al^red us from our old trade, after such sort, that we conte^ne al other
thiges, and trust only to him, and co^te^ning those things which wese, we
hope after such things of him, He has wrought in Christ. etc.
as we se not, and such as he has openly declared before in our head Christ:
who^ of his mighty power having raised from death to life immortal, he has
exalted unto so high honor, that he has set him on his own right hand in y^
kingdom of heaven, and given him authority over al other rule, potestate, power
and lordship, and every other name of dignity or power, how excellent so ever
it be above these before rehearsed, either in this world or in the world to
come, that he may be lord not only over bodily and earthly things, but also
over spiritual and heavenly things. So far has he subdued al things
without excepcion under his feet. And to make our hope more steadfast and
certain, that And has made him above all things the head.
we shall also come to the fellowship of the same glory, for as much as he has
made Christ lord over all things, his pleasure was also that he should be
the head unto all the whole flock of the believing, that cleave so fast to
Christ, as the whole body is coupled to the head, that the one can not be
disceuered from the other. Finally the glory of the head is common to the rest
of the members, whereunto the head is so set about, that it powers his good
nourishment into every one of them. The body is not perfect, onle^s the head be
at it: and the head wants sum what, if the body be not set to perfitly
consummate in all his me^bres: whereunto Christ does severally power his
excellent gifts in such wise, that by himself he fulfilleth all things, and
lives and reigns now whole and entierely perfect, having his members united
unto himself.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
And you has he quyckened, where as ye were dead in trespasses, and sins, in
the which in time passed ye walked, according to the course of this world,
even after the gouerner that rules in the air, the spirit that now works
in the children of unbelief, among who^ we all had out conversation also in
time past, in the lusts of our flesh, and fuli^lled y^ will of the flesh
and of the mind: and were by nature the children of wrath, even as well as
other. But God which is rich in mercy, (for his great love wherewith he
loved us) even when we were dead by sins, quickened us together in Christ
(by grace ar^ ye saved) and raised us up together with him and made us sytte
together with him among them of heaven in Christ Jesus. That in times to come, he
might show the exceeding riches of his grate, in kindness to us ward through
Christ Jesus. For by grate are ye made safe through faith, and that not of your
selves. It is the gyite of God, and comes not of works, lest any man should
^^ast him self. For we are his worckema^shyppe, created in Christ Jesus unto
good works, which God ordained, that we should walk in them. Now mark me
this, how the father has begone in a manner to accomplish even now in you, that
that is accomplished already in Christ, and shall be after ward accomplished in
you. Christ dyed and rose again, and shall never after dye any more. Certes he
was not subject to sin, albeit, forasmuch as he took upon him an human
body, he was subject to mortality. To be brief, like as sin is a certain
death of the soul, and the forewarning of eternal death: even so is
innocence a certain life of the soul, and the beginning of eternal life. But
of this manner of life, God, that gives us his spirit, is the prince. And the
devil is y^ author of death, having also a spirit of his own, wherewith those
that ve enspired, are rapt unto the pleasures of this world, and plainly
distrust the promises of eternal life. Christ dyed for our offenses, and rose
again to make us sure of the immortality to come. In the mean time, after his
exaumple, you also being engraffed to Christ through baptism, are dead to your
sins and wickedness: wherein as long as you lived ungodly, you were dead in
deed, for as much as you had affyaunce in nothing, but noisome shadows of good
things, wherewith this world for a time disceaueth such, as wantyng the In
the children of unbelief.
spirit of God, are lead by the spirit of Satan, whose tirannye in the mean
while is permitted over this lower element. His spirit (I say) and he himself
sets out as it were his own power in them, that having no trust in the
promises of the Gospel, set their whole felicity in visible and transitory
things: and give no ear to God the father, that allureth them to true
felicity, but had leauer serve that wieked cruel master, whom in times past
you served, and not you alone, but all we also. For albeit the law restrained
us from the wurshipping of Images, yet our life was altogether defiled with
noisome lusts of corporal things, by the enforcemente whereof, we passed of
the time, not doing those things, which the holy ghost commanded, but those
that our own mind, given to filthy affectes, bad us do. By reason whereof it
came to pass, that like as they, which are encorporated to Christ through
faith, appertain to the enheritaunce, that is promised to obedient children:
even so we as disobedient children, should have belonged to a far contrary
enheritaunce: that is to say, we should have becomen the companions of him, to
whom we had joined our selves. That death is eternal, that is appointed to the
wicked. And were by nature the children of wrath.
Whereunto we also were subject, as much as other, touching our own state, and
condition. We had addicted ourselves unto it of our own free choice, but it
was not in our power to wind us again out of that most miserable servitude.
Now you have heard of our death, now you have hard of our destruction, but
whereof comes life, whereof comes salvation? Truly not of But God which
is rich in mercy.
our deserts, nor yet by the benefit of Moses law. Whence than? Surely of
the free largess of God the father, whose bounteousnesse and loving affection
is so plenteous and so exceadingly great to mankyndewarde, that he has not
only not punished us according to our deserts, but also when we were dead by
reason of our sins, he has called us again to life together with Christ.
This I say, was not of our deserving, but came of free gift. And he has not
only called us again to life with his son, but also he has carried us up
from these things yt are benethe, unto the things that are in heaven, and
there has placed us through Christ Jesus: by who^ we have indifferently
together whatsoever he (our head) has: and do possess now in hope, all yt we
shall shortly after possess in very deed. Thus it was his will, that at the
resurreccion, when his promises shall evidently appear, he may declare his
most abou^dant liberality, which it pleased hi of his free goodness to power
upon us, not for our own good deeds By grace are ye made safe.
sakes, but for the merits of Jesus Christ. For the thing is often to be
rehearsed, yt ought to be fixed most depely in your hearts. It cu^meth of fre
grace, I say, that you have obtained salvation, from the destruccio^, wherein ye
were tangled: lest ye should follow the error of some of the Jews; which think
to be saved I^ is the gift of god.
for observing the prescriptes of Moses law. You are endebted for your
salvation to faith, whereby ye believed the gospel, and yet you may not brag of
faith, as though it come of your self. Christ loved you first, and having
drawn you to himself, he has given you power, that you should love him
again.

And he it is, that has freely powered into you the gift of faith: by the
which you should set darkness apart, and see the light of the Ghospels
verity. It is wholly therefore to be ascribed unto his fre gift, so that no man
has thereof to For we are his workmanship.
boast as though it were of his own. In that we are created, we are endebted
to God. Again, in that we are regenerate by faith and baptism, and as it
were made a new, after an other manner, we are divorced from the fellowship of
our parent the sinful Adam, and engraffed in Christ, the prince of innoce^cie:
to the intent that by the help and exaumple of him, we should from hensforth
apply the offices of true godliness, and that renouncing the old man, we
should represent the new man in new deeds, and become so far unlike to
oureselues in conditions, that a man might justly say, it were not we. For God,
by the doctrine Unto good works which god ordained.
of the gospel, has opened unto us the reward of Immortality, to the
intent we should preace hard unto it through innocence of life and well doing.
For the euangelical faith is not an idle mattier, but has an inseparable
companion, charity, which causes more duties to be done of the willing, than
the prescriptes of the law are hable to enforce of the constrained.

The text.
Wherefore, remember that ye being in time passed Gentiles in the flesh, were
called vncircumcisyon from that which is called circumcisyon in the flesh,
which circumcisyon is made by hands. Remember (I say) that at that time ye
were without Christ, being aliantes from ye commen wealth of Israel, and
strangers from the testamentes of the promise, and had no hope, and were
without God in this world. But now by the means of Christ Jesus, ye which
sometime were far of, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our
peace, which has made of both, one, and has broken down the wall that was a
stop between us, and has also put away, throw his flesh, the cause of
hatred, even the law of commandments contained in y^ law written, for to
make of twain one new man in him self, so making peace, and to reconcyle
both unto God in one body through the cross, and slew hatred thereby: and came
and preached peace to you which were a far of, and to them that were nigh.
For through him we both have an entrance, in one sprite unto the father. The
yoke of Moses law is not laid upon you. For one only law of Christian
Charity, is sufficient to accomplish all duties. The Jews are not endebted
to their law for their salvation, but yet you are so much more bounden to the
goodness of god, as you were more far of than they from the true wurshipping
of god, and from true religion. Therefore y^ ye may the more understand, how
much you are bounden to the bounty of God, for being now as ye are, your
duty is to remember, what ye have been before time. For you were sumtyme
Heathens, after the corporal distinccion of kynred, whom the nacyon of the
Jews, bragging of their carnal circumcision that is done with hands, name
contumeliously uncircumcised, and repute them for profane persons and
abominable, supposing this felicity, that was promised long ago by the
oracles of the prophets, to belong peculiarely to themselves: and not
understanding that they be reputed as unclean persons before God, whose
inward minds are uncircumcised. But you at that time were uncircumcised both
in body and Having no hope.
soul, being so much more abject and in miserable condition than the Jews,
in that ye had no hope of Christ's benefit to youwarde, that is to say,
because you were utterly astraunged, as well from the title and fellowship of the
nation of Jews, unto whom he seemed to be peculiarly promised, as also
exileled Gene.xxii.
from the couenauntes of God, wherein he promised in saying to Abraham the
father of that nation. In thy seed shall all nacyons be blessed.

And to be brief, there remained no apparente hope of your salvation, in
afmuche as being wurshippers of devils, ye had no knowledge in this world of
the true God, where as the Jews called him their God, and he again called them
his people. Nevertheless, as soon as the truth of the Gospel But now by
the means of Christ Jesus
showed forth his light, Christ turned the course of things vpsyde down, and
brough^e so to pass, that you, which seemed nothing to perteyne unto God,
were no we knyt most nere unto him not by the circumcision of the foreskinne,
but by the blood of Jesus Christ, with the price whereof ye were not only
delivered from the sins of your old conversation, but also reconcyled unto
God the father. In times paste, you were at discord with the Jews, yea you
were at discord with God: but Christ the Autour of peace and concord, For be
is ou^ peace.
stroke away all the difference of circumcised, and not circumcised: he took
away the ceremonies of Moses law, as it had been a wall, that divided the
concord between the Jews and the Gentiles, so that two sorts of people,
being before most far different one from the other, should agree and grow
together in one, utterly expelling their old grieves. For before Christ's
cummyng, the gentiles did wonderfully adhorre the Jews obseruaunces, as
supersticious things: and the Jews contrariewise were in such conceit with
themselves by reason of their ceremonies, that they held al such accursed as
were without them. Christ therefore by his woonderful devise, abolished and
brought out of use that ha^ed law, that consists only in the prescribed
carnal ceremonies, so that he would neither alyenate the Jews, nor press the
Gentiles with the burden of it. For he being very God, and very man after the
flesh, observed Through his flesh.
the commandments of the law, and yet he testified, that the salvation,
which he brought after the spirit, belonged no less to the Gentiles than to
the Jews, so that now you should neither be abominable because of your
uncircumcision, nor the Jews any stouter because of their circumcision, but
that in dispatchyng the old cankerdnesse of both those nations, he might of
two make one new, to grow together into one new man Christ, the common savior
indifferentlye of them both. And like as he made the Jews and the Gentiles at
one between themselves, even so he made them both at one with Making peace.
god, that there should be nothing to break the atoneme^t, but that the
things in heaven and the things in earth, should be joined together as it
were into one body. The death of Christ, which he suffered for our sins,
has united us to God, with whom no man is at peace, that has delyghte in
sin. And forasmuch as this peace is bestowed both to the Jews and to the
Gentiles indifferently, there is no cause, why either of them should think
them better than the other: specially in as much as the pledge and gage of the
holy ghost, whereof we spoke a little before, is given commonly to them both,
without difference. Now we se it come to pass, that Esaye by inspiracyon
prophesied long ago, should come. For Christ has not offered the doctrine of
the gospel to the Jews only, unto whom this blessed felicity seemed to be
peculiarely To you which were a far of.
promised, and which also after their sort, were the true wurshyppers of God,
but also unto you, which were far of, both from the kindred of the people of
Jews, and from the wurshippyng of the true God: teaching thereby, that
through his death, both the flocks of sheep should go together into one
shepefolde, and know him to be their only shepehearde.

He it is, that has opened unto us the entrance to the father, who before was
displeased at our sins, and none other has opened this entrance to the
Jews, than he who has opened the same to the Gentiles: but we are all
bounden to him alone, in that we are now bold to approach both to that
merciful father, having confidence in that commune spirit, which inspireth
this assured trust indifferently into the hearts of us both.

The text.
Now therefore ye are not strangers and foreyners, but citesens with the
Saints, and of the household of God: and are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and propheres, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone, in
whom what building soever is coupled together, it grows unto an holy temple
in the Lord, in whom ye also are built together, to be an habitacion of God
through the holy ghost. Now therefore, to the intent you should not think
your selves the wurse, because you came not of the stock of David or Abraham,
as concerning the kindred of the flesh, or because ye are without the law of
Moses, in as much as after the spirit, ye are citezens and fellows of saints,
perteining to the house of God, which is builded, not of the Jews only, but
of al them, that purely believe the Gospel. The foundacions of this house, are
the Apostles, the preachers of the Ghospel, and the Prophets, who showed long
a go in their prophecies, that the gift of the Gospel should now be
indifferently common to all men. To this foundacyon you are also fast laid.
And to be short, Jesus Christ is the chief head stone of this building,
which being laid in the corner, coupleth and keeps the wall together on
both sides: by whose power and couplyng, all the buildyng of the beleuers,
compacted together on every side, daily increases, and ryseth unto a
perfitely holy spiritual temple, consecrated of the lord himself. And of this
holy building you are also part, whilst, like lyuelye stones laid upon the
same foundacyons, and holden together of the same corner stone, you make, in
pureness of mind and spirit, unto God an holy habitacle unspotted from all
sins, and void of lusts. There be none received into Moses temple but
Jews, but to this temple all they perteyne indifferentlye, that embrace the
faith of the Gospel.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
For this cause, I Paul am a prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Deathen: If ye
have heard the ministracion of the grace of God which is given me to youwarde.
For ^yteuelacion showed he the mystery unto me, as I wrote before in few
words, whereby when ye read, ye may understand my knowlage in the mystery of
Christ, which mystery in times passed was not opened unto the sons of men, as
it is now declared unto his holy Apostles and Propheres by the spirit: that
the Gentiles should be inheritours also, and of the same bodi^, and partakers
of his promise in Christ, by the means of the Gospel, whereof I am made a
minister, according to the gift of the grace of God which is given unto me
after the working of his power. Unto me the least of all Saints is this grace
given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of
Christ, and to make all men see, what the fellowship of the mystery is, which
from the beginning of the world has been hid in God, which made al things
through Jesus Christ: to the intent, that now unto the rule^s and powers in
heavenly things, might be known by the congregation, the manifold wisdom
of God, according to the eternal purpose, which he wrought in Christ our
lord* by whom we have boldenes and enteraunce with the confidence which is
by the faith of him. ANd that you may give the more constaunte creden^e
hereunto, understand, that I Paul, am laden with these bonds for no cause
else, that is to say, not for any naughty deed, but for Jesus Christ's sake,
unto who^e I trauayll to win you, Gentiles, whereat the Jews have
indignacion. If ye have heard tell, that this office was committed to me of
Christ himself, that I should preach the salvation of the Gospel (which some
before tymeiudged to belong to none but to the Jews) in every place, yea even
among the Gentiles, of whose noumber you are. This secret mystery, being hidden
before to other Apostles, Christ opened most chiefly By ^^uelation showed he
this mestery unto me.
to me, like as we begone to speak briefly of before, in our writings to
other nations, by readyng whereof, you may know, that I am not ignorant of the
secret counsel of Christ, who when he told Ananias beforehand, that I carry
his name among the Gentiles, he commanded me than to go and do his message
unto the Gentiles that dwelled far of. Which thing before seemed abominable,
that wieked persons and Image wurshippers should be called to the fellowship of
the gospel. Notwithstanding it was so decreed with God long ago, yea even before
the world was made, and in a manner opened unto the prophets by inspiracion,
albeit it was not plainly opened to the world, as it is now by me, that the
Gentiles, through only faith of the Gospel, without help of Moses law, should
attayn salvation: yea in so much that the chiefest of the Apostles durst not
admit such as were not circumcised, unto baptisine. But now it is plainly
opened unto the holy Apostles of Christ, and to his prophets, by inspiracion
of the holy ghost, that the Gentiles through faith are so united unto the
Jews, that they are comen in to the fellowship of y^ self same enheritaunce,
and grow in to all one body, reioycyng in their common head, Christ, and by
reason thereof, are becomen partiners of all the proinisses, that abide such,
as believe the Ghospel of Christ: to preach the which Gospel, authority is
committed unto me, and I cease not to do my commanded office, laboring
constauntly hitherto in the Ghospels business, even unto emprisonme^tes and
fetters, not that, I am any thing mete, of mine own strength, for so painful a
business, but he that appointed that office to me, has laid his own helping
hand to the same. And so it is, that I being (as concerning mine own
ability) feeble and weak, am by his benefit strong and full of courage
against the storms of al mischiefs. I boast not mine own worthiness, Unto me
the least of al Saints is this grace given etc.
for I confess that I am the least of Saints: but yet (as little as I am) it
has pleased the goodness of God, to put me in trust with this business of
most weighty importance, that I should publishe and preach among the
Gentiles (which before this time knew nothing of God) the unsearchable
richesse of Christ, which he offers plenteously to all men: and bring to
light the thing, that before was hidden, that the benefit of the gospel is to
be dispensed and ministered to all manner of nations, which before was supposed
to be given only to the Jews, although it was otherwise decreed eternally of
God, the maker and governor of all things: notwithstanding, his will was to
have this Counsayll of his divine intent, to be yet hitherto kept secrrete:
which in these times he would so openly manifest, and that by the
congregation, wherinto he powered such abundance of spiritual gifts, that
his manifold wisdom which with wounderfull devises disposes all things,
through death geuyng life, through shame exaltyng to glory, through humility
aduauncyng Gods majesty, which no man in times paste could have Imagined,
should now be brought to light, not only to the broad world, but even to
princes, and chiefeste of Angels and deuilles, that have to do in the skies
and in the vppermoste part of the air: which things, albeit they might
guess should come to pass, that mankind should once be redeemed, yet this was
not known, by what reason, the wisdom of God had eternallye decreed, to
bringit to pass: which thing now at length was openly known, when he sent
his son into the world, who having taken upon him an humain body, would by
unspeakable means, unite and couple the congregation to himself, whereof our
lord Jesus Christ should be the head: by whom, like as Innocence chanced
unto us, in that, that our sins were done a way, even so chanced unto us an
assured trust also, that as children, we should not be afraied to approach
unto the father, whose displeased countenance we durst not before behold. For
what should we be afraid of, having such a head, that in no wise suffers
any of his members to perish, albeit here in the mean season we suffer sum
affliccion?

The text*
Wherefore I desire that ye faint not because of my tribulacions that I suffer
for your sakes: which is your praise. For this cause I bow my knees unto the
father of our lord Jesus Christ: which is father over all that is called
father in heaven and in earth, that he would grant you, according to the
riches of his glory, that ye may be strengthed with might by his spirit in
the ^^^er man, that Christ may dwell in your hertes by faith, that ye being
rooted and grounded in love, might be hable to comprehend with all saints,
what is that breadth and length, depth and height: and to know the excellent
love of the knoweledge of Christ, that ye might be fulfilled with all fulness,
which cummeth of God. Unto him y^ is hable to do exceading abundantly above
all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us, be praise
in y^ congregation by Christ Jesus, thorow^^t al generacious from tune to
time. Amen. This secret counsel of God, forasmuch as I preach boldly in
every place, I suffer exceadyng punishemente, of such, as yet cannot possibly
be persuaded of this matter. But I beseech you, let not mine affliccions,
which I suffer for your sakes, anythyng disquiete or dismaye you. For there is
no cause why you should be ashamed of such an Apostle, though I be laden
with fetters. For like as the cross of Christ is our glory, even so my
fetters, which I we are not for any evil deeds, but for the sincerity of the
Ghospel, are for your honesty, That he ^^ul^ grant you according to y^ riches
o^ his glory.
and no rebuke. For, the more displeasures we suffer with a constaunt mind for
the Gospel of Christ, the more entierly we cause the people to believe, that
the promises of Christ are not vain, inasmuch as through assured hope of
them, we faint not for any displeasures of this life. And it is not Joyous to
me only to suffer for the ghospelles business, but it also becomes al men,
that are entered unto Christ, to follow the example of their autour and head.
And truly for this cause sake, I bow my knees, and pray earnestly even from
the botome of mine heart unto God our father, and the same, the father of our
lord Jesus Christ, of whom, as the supreme head, depends all spiritual
kynred, whereby which is father of all.
by are incorporated together whether they be angels in heaven, or faithful
people upon earth: and of whom only, as of the fountain, springs
whatsoever is belongyng to true felicity: that like as he has begone to
declare his aboundaunte glory in you, so he may more and more augmente his
liberal goodness to you ward: that as you are engraffed to Christ through
baptism, and as it were borne new again, so you may gather courage and
strength with daily increase, not accordong to the body, but according to
the mind and soul, that is to say, by the gift of the spirit of the
father, continually encreacyng in us, by whom we are made strong and
valiant, to withstand al dredes of persecucion: and that the constancy of
your faith may be such, that you think surely, that Christ will never
fail you, but rather dwell in wardly in your hertes, for ye faithful trustes
sake, wherewith you commit your selves wholly unto him. For with such is he most
specially present, as distruste their own strength and depend wholye of his
help. And this shall the rather come to pass, if having a Ghospellike faith,
you practyse also a Ghospellike charity, knittyng the oue to the other, so as it
may utterly rest and take rote in Ye being rooted and grounded in love.
your souls, to ye intent, that being established and grounded upon this sure
fou^dacion, you may ware greater, and greater in your spirit, and after a
certain wise, be correspondent to the unmeasurable spirit of God, that you
may grow and go forward so perfitely, that not only with the Jews, but also
with the universal multitude of Saints, which are encorporated to the body
of Christ, through the belief of the Gospel, you may be hable to
comprehend how infinitely the goodness of God extends it self, and how it
is not restrained might be hable to co^prehende
within narrow bonds and limittes: in height reachyng up to the angels, in
depth pearcyng down to the helles, in length and breadth spreadyng it self
unto all coasts of the world: and that you may be hable also to understand
the inestimable charity of Christ toward mankind, whose knowledge
excels all the knowledge of man, how excellent so ever it be. And that you
may in these gifts so encreace, that as perfect and lustye members, you may
be answerably mete for so noble a head, and so high a father. For like as the
bodyly birth has degrees of ages, has his increases, and has his measure, as
long as his growing time endures, even so this spiritual generation also has
his childehood, has his springing time, and than his perfect lusty grown age.
For these things (I say) I pray often upon my knees unto God the father.
Which things in deed although they be great, and far about man's power, Unto
him that is hable.
yet I desire them of him, whose power is so mighty that we cannot possibly
Imagyne so great a matter, but he is hable to do much greatter: and is so
good and so gentill, that he does not only accoumplishe our desires with
his own liberalitye, but also gives us much more than we can hope for: And
yet there is nothing in this behalf dooen other through our merits or
powers. For we are nothing else, but the instrument of the divine power, that
woorketh his own might in us, so that all glory, that florisheth in the
congregation, is wholly to be ascribed to his largess, through Christ Jesus, by
whose participacion the congregation is endowed with so excellent gifts: and
of this glory there shall be no end, but it shall endure through all ages to
ternally, like as the congregation of Christ shall also have none end. That,
that I have said, is certain and undoubtedly true.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
I Therefore (which am a prisoner of the Lords) exhort you that ye walk
worthy of the vocacion wherewith ye are called, with all lowlines and mekenes,
with humblenes of mind, forbearyng one an other through love, and be diligente
to keep the unity of the (...) through the bond of peace, being one body, and
one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling. Let there be
but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and father of all, which is
above all, and through all, and in you all. NOw inasmuche as ye perceive, from
how vile a condition, unto what great dignitye, from how deep desperacion, to
what excellent benefits you are called, I beseech you for these cheines
sakes, wherewith I am tied, not for mine own faults but for the glory of God
and your salvation, that as much as remains behind, you would conform your
selves in honest co^uersacion answerably to your profession, and to the
mercifulnes that God has showed to youwardes. And that shall be done, in case
the excellencye of your profession make you not to high minded nor to fearcely
stomaked. But see that all the custom of your life resemble in all things,
true modestye, gentilnesse and lenyte of mind, so that one disdeyne not an
other, but every one suffer other through mutual charity: rather one bearyng
with an others weakness for the time, than when every one goes about to
hold his own with tothe and nail, you break concord and uniform love,
wherewith you are made one and united together through the bond of peace. For
it is not conueniente, that such men's minds, should be divided among
themselves, that have so many things commune. You are al one body, you
depend all of one head, you have all received of one self spirit of Christ,
and you are also indifferentely called all into one hope of inheritance. There
is one lord of al Jesus Christ: al have but one profession of faith, there is
but one baptism of al, that by the means of Christ's death is indifferently
effectual, unto all that believe the Gospel, whether they be circumcised or
uncircumcised. Finallye there is but one God and father of al, that as the
prince and autour of all things, has dominion over us all in such sort,
that by his spirit, wherewith he governs us, he gives himself unto all,
and keeps continual residence with us, releuyng and helpyng us in all things:
so that it is the gift of only one, what good thing soever we have.

The text.
Unto every one of us is given ^race according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says: when he went up on hye, he led captivity
captive, and gave gifts unto men. That he ascended, what means it, but that
he also descended first into the lowest parts of the earth He that descended,
is even the same also that ascended up, above all heavens, to fulfill all
things. And the very same made some Aposties, some Prophets, some
Eua^gelistes, some shepeherdes and teachers: to y^ edifiyng of the saints, to
the work and ministracion, even to the edifiyng of the body of Christ, till
we all come to the unity of faith and knowledge of the son of God, unto a
perfeit man, unto the measure of the full perfeit age of Christ. This ought in
no wise to hinder our concord, that the gifts of God be not all after one
sort nor all alyke appearyng in all men no more than we see the me^bres of
the body not agree or to be racked one from an other because they be not
indifferently apt al to one use, or feel not al alike the influence of ye
head. But this manner variety ought rather to be ye occasion of unity. For
inasmuch as no member of the body is hable fully to uphold himself of himself,
it comes to pass, yt every one must have need of an others office, so that
one may not contemn an other. But this distribucion of gifts, depends not
of us, but of the will of God, who distributeth unto every man less or more
as it seems expedient in his own syghte. There is no cause, why he should
be disdeyned, that has less, nor why he should exalte himself, that has
more. That one is after Gods measuryng, this other is after Gods plenteous
enlargyng, and all by Christ, which gives also these things equally with the
father. Certainly this is the thing yt the Psalmiste by the inspiracion of the
holy ghost spoke of so long ago. For Christ having all ready conquered the
helles, is ascended alive again into the high kingdom of the father, and has
carried with him the ensign of his conqueste, even the flock of us miserable
captives, whom he has freely delivered from the tyranny of the devil and sin.
And from thence, of the fathers liberality, he has given through the holy
ghost soondrye kinds of gifts, and bestowed them among men, as it is the
solemn manner of such as win the maistrye in a tryumphe, to throw down
tokens of tryumphe abroad among the people. He sent down gifts from heaven
and heavenly things they were, that he sent. To be brief, where it is said:
he ascended, does it not consequently follow, that he before descended? And
there is no descencion but from above: so that the descencion is before, and
the ascencion after. For none deserves worthelye to be exalted on high, but
only through lowliness and humbleyng of himself. To conclude, after most
low humblyng, follows most high aduauncing. From the most high heaven,
than the which nothing can be higher, Christ dejected himself even unto the
helles, than the which nothing can be lower. And for this cause sake he was
worthily exalted above the higheste of all the heavens, and so took his bodily
presence out of our syghte, to the intent to accomplish all things from
above with heavenly gifts, and after an other manner of reason, to be now more
effectually present with us, than when he was conuersaunt among us upon earth.
He forsook not his body, but divided his gifts unto every of his members,
after such wise, as none of them all should want any thing, albeeit some were
endued with more excellent gifts than some. For some he would have to be
chief, as Apostles, ryng leaders and autours of the Gospel preahing, and some
to be prophets that could expound the hid meanynges of Moses law, some to
be evangelists to occupye the Apostles roumes, and to carrye about the
gospel from place to place. And some to be pastors and doctors, as
bishops, to feed the flock of Christ, with the meat of holy doctrine, and
wholesome example of goodlyfe. And the test he instructed, some with one gift
and some with an other, to the intent, that of all these conferred together,
the coumpanye of saynctes should be perfeitelye consummate and furnyshed, to
the use of every good office: and that the perfeit body of Christ being
fully grown together in all his menbres, should so be cherished one with the
succor of an other, and that the stronger membre should beat for the time
with the weaker, and the weaker mark and follow the exaumple of the stronger,
until we may all at length cumme to equal strength of faith, and with like
perfeccion know the son of God, through whose help we may wax bygge and
lustye in the secret increase of mind, after such sort, that at length we
may grow unto a perfeit manne, and according to our measure, frame our
selves aunswerably to our most perfect head: In whom was neither imbecillitie,
nor error neither yet any defaulte.

The text.
That the hence forth should be no more children, waueryng and carried about with
every wind of doctrine, by the wylmes of men through craftyues, whereby they
lay awayte tor us, to deceive us. But let us follow the truth in love, and in
all things grow in him, which is the head, even Christ, in whom if all the
body be coupled, and knitte together thorowoute every joint, wherewith one
ministers to an other (according to the operacion as every part has his
measure) he increases the body unto the edifiyng of it self through love.
There is an age of the body, that gives full strength to all the members, and
puts away the tenderness of chyldehood. And in semble ble wise unto this,
there is a like procedyng in the order of godliness, whereunto we ought all to
give diligent endeavor, that we be not from henceforth, as we have been,
waueryng like children, in uncertain opinious, not addicte to any certain
decrees to attain salvation, but as men void of truth, catryed about now
into this, now into that judgment with every wind of doctrine: submittyng
our selves (as it were pieuishe children) to the subtlety and craft of some
certain men, which travail not to teach us Christ sincerely, but to catch
us through their subtle arts, and to snare us with their crafty deceates, or
with philosophical reasons to bring us in doubt of those things, which by
faith ought in no wise to be doubted of: or else instead of the Gospelles
veritye to set before us the shadows of Moses law. But no we having once
embraced the verity of the Gospel, let us rather join unto it sincere
charitable love toward al men, enforcing our cominuall study to this end,
that we may profit not only in the knowledge of the truth, but also in the
continual diligente works of charity, so as all we being members may be
answerably like unto our head. And truly Christ is our head, who also is the
truth self, and has so loved us, that he has given himself to make us
safe. To this head, it is requisite, that the members be agreeable: Inasmuche as
from him, the spirit of life flows into all the whole body, being compacte
and set together of sondrye members joined ordrelye one to an other, and
pearcyng through every joint of the lymmes, which could not be, except the
parts of the body were joined agreably one to an other, that life may have
passage into the^ from one membre to an other. For the hand or the foot being
cut of, cannot possiblye have any part of the virtue, that comes from the
top of the head. But forasmuch as the whole body is perfeitly conglutinate
in it self, it comes to pass, that the spirit of Christ practices his
efficacy in every membre, according to their several capacity and order:
and forasmuch as all the members study through mutual love to profit every
one other, the whole body wareth bygger and bygger, and is made lustye and
strong, so as it will not give place in any condition to the wyndes of false
opinions, alluryng this way and that ware, to bring it out of the truth.

The text.
This I say therefore, and testify through the Lord, that ye hence forth
walk not as other Beutiles walk, in banitie of their mind, while they are
blinded in their understanding, being farte from a godly life, by the means of
the ignorauncie that is in the^, and because of the blindenes of their hearts:
which being paste repentance have given themselves over unto wantonness, to
work all manner of uncleanness, even with gredines. But ye have not so learned
Christ. If so be that ye have heard of him, and have been taught in him, as
the truth is in Jesus: (as concerning the conversation in time paste) to late
from you that old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceanable lusts.
Now of all these matters, that I have gone about to open unto you, with so many
similitudes, this is the whole Su^me. I do not only monish but also desire and
beseech you for the lord Jesus sake, unto whom you are endebted for your
salvation, that as soon as you are once encorporated unto him, frame your
selves like unto him, not only in the synceritie of faith, and verity of
doctrine, but also in vpryght integrity of life. When you were of the noumbre
of the gentyles, you were answerablye like unto their condition. But no we you
are becomme other men and regenerate into Christ, it becomes you also to be
of other manners. The gentyles, forasmuch as they have not received the truth
of the Gospel, are leadde with vain opinions, woorshpping dumme Images in the
stead of God, and mesuring their felicity after the temporal commodities of
this world. And the cause why they worship dead wares, and trust in
transitorye things is, that they have no knowledge of the true eternal life,
which is God. And forasmuch as he cannot be seen, but only with the
scourediyes of the soul, for that cause he is not seen of them, whose heart is
abscured, yea rather blinded, with the darkness of naughtye lusts, and clouds
of infidelttie. And being given over to their own naughtines, are grown at
length to so high mischeafe, that as men out of hope to return to amendment,
and as those that feel not their own vile miserye, run headlong into al
kinds of abominacion and insaciable lusts, to do all thing that filthy is,
tuen so far, that it were shame also to speak of. But the doctrine of the
Gospellis far difference from such kind of men. For of it you have not
learned folishe humayne opinions, but Christ himself, the fountain and
example of all Innocence, in case you have truly herd him speak in wardly,
and are truly taught by his spirit, that you to your powers may diligently
follow those things that were truly in Jesus, that is to wete, like as he was
utterly void of all sin, and now having conquered death, dwells in the
glory of Immortality, even so you being also regenerate unto him, put of the
old man that represents the first original poison afreshe through naughty
venomous lusts.

The text.
To be renewed also in the spirit of your mind, and to put on that new man,
which after God is shapen in righteousness and true holmes. Wherefore put
away lying, and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, for as much as we
are members one of another. Be angry, and sin not: let not the sun go down
upon your wrath, neither give place unto the backebyter. Let him that stole,
steal no more, but let him rather labor with his hands the thing which is
good, that he may give unto him that needs. Forasmuch as you are engraffed
unto the new man Christ, through baptism, be you also renewed with him,
not after the body, but after the mind wherein the spirit of Christ does
most chieflye work: and laying away the manner of your old cankered life,
put on the new man, which was made after a certain spiritual sort lately
in you by the work manshippe of God, yea made, as it were, by a certain
transformacion, that unrighteousness being abolished, Innocence should
succeed, and the uncleanness of humayne lusts being taken out of the way,
the holiness of the Gospelles verity should take place. Look therefore that
you follow that holiness in every condition, and see ye you desceaue not one an
other with countrefaict speech nor liyng, but that euety one consider with
himself the thing, that true is, and deal truly with his neighbor,
remembering that inasmuche as we are al me^bres of one body, no man can hurt
an other, but he must needs also hurt himself. It is a great perfeccion not
to be moved with anger, but in case through the frailty of man's nature any
rage of anger come in your mind, remember (as the holy psalmographe gives
warning) so to restrayn your anger, when it would barste out, yt it break not
out into scoldyng, or injury, or malicious hatred. And let not your anger be
only vnhurtefull, but also let it remain so litel while with you, that it be
sooner out of your stomakes, than the sun from besides the earth: lest when
the earth in the night season is naturally cold, you contrary wise chaufe
your selfs in the mean time hootelye with anger. There is nothing but
concord yt is hable to defend you safelye against the assaults of the
devil, and if it be broken through malice and displeasures one agianste
another, you open a wikette for your enemy to break in to your utter
destruction. Where as concord is, the devil is feeble, and where discord is,
there is he mighty, so that if you give place to malice, you must perforce
give place also to him. He that after the old naughty facion of living robbed
and polled others, now let him absteyne not only from other men's goods,
but also give away liberallye of his own. And if he have not to do with
all, let him not disdeyne to get with his honest hand labors, wherewith to
succoure such as be nedye.

The text,
Let no fylthy communicacion proceed out of your mouth: but that which is good
to edyfye withal, as often as need is that it may minister grace unto the
hearers. And grieve not ye the holy spirit of God by whom ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption. Let all bytternes and fearsnes and wrath and roryng
and cursed speaking be put away from you, with all maliciousnes. Be ye
courteous one to another, merciful, forgeuyng one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgeuen you. It is not enough to keep still the hands
continente, except the tongue be also vnhurtefull. Many pestilent mischeafes a
naughty tongue is wont to occasion: with filthy communicacion it infecteth,
with backebiting it infameth, with false accusacion it destroys, with lying
and perjury it desceaueth. Let no evil communicacion therefore proceed out of
your mouth. For such as the speech is, such is the mind, if you be of a pure
mind, it besemeth not impure communicacion to proceed out of it. And it is not
enough for a Christian man's co^municacion to be vnhurtefull, but it ought
also to be of such sort, that it be spoken in season, and to so good
purpose as it may be commodious unto the hearers. But in case you do
otherwise, you shall not only offend men with unprofitable, unseasonable,
and noisome communicacion* but also the holy spirit of God, that dwells in
Christian hearts, by whom your souls and bodies are, as it were, marked unto
God. And it is furthermore conueniente for you, to bring forth that mark safe
and fair in that day, when you shall receive the reward of your Innocencye,
at which day you shall be dysseuered from the coumpanye of the eiuyll. And
trewelye this spyryte is driven away and dyspleased with all kind of
uncleanness, and can not abide to have a do with wrath, with reuengement,
nor with filthye communicacion, he is peaceable, gentle and bounteous, and if
you have truly received him, let al bitterness, swelling and fearcenes be
far from your conversation. Let anger, loud speaking, and scoldyng be so fer
from you, yt no leaven of malice remain in your stomach, whereof these manner
of myscheafes are wont to budde out. But rather be you tractable and gentill
among your selves, ready to have mercy, to pardone and to forgive every one
other, if any thing chance to be dooen amyste through error and man's
imbecillitie: to forgive (I say) for Christ's sake forasmuch as God has
forgeuen you your offenses by Christ once for all, how beit the lord has
forgeuen his servants upon this condition, that after his exaumple, we should
also every one forgive our fellow servants. For concord can not possibly in
any wise continue among men, onles they can bear patiently every man with the
faults of others.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
Be ye therefore folowers of God as dear children, and walk ye ^^ love even as
Christ loved us, and gave himself for us an offering and a sacrifice of a
sweet sauer to God. As for fornicacion and al uncleanness, or covetousness, let
it not be once named among you, as it be comes saints, or filthynesse or
foolish talkyng, or testyng, which are not comely: but rather geuyng of
thanks. For this ye know that no whoremonger, either unclean person, or
covetous person (which is a worshipper of images) has any inheritance in
the kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words.
For because of such things comes the wrath of God, upon the children of
disobedience. Be not ye therefore companions of them. Ye were sumtime darkness
but now are ye lyghtm the Lord. Walk as children of light. For the fruit of
the spirit consists ^^ al goodness and righteousness and truth. Accept
that which is pleasyng unto the Lord. THan forasmuch as by the holy ghost you
are the children of God, see that you be like your father in holiness of life,
that you may worthylye be loved of him for ever. For truly thus shall he
show his love toward you perpetuallye, if you she we love among your selves
one unto another. And how aboundauntelye great the fathers love was toward
us, it appears playnelye by his son, who loved us so enteirlye much, that
not only he has freely pardoned al our sins, but also offered himself unto
death upon the cross, to thintente, where God the father was before displeased
and angered with us, he should by mean of this sacrifice and offreyng of good
savor that smells sweet in his prefence, become loving and merciful unto
us. This loving charity in case we follow, as it becomes us to do, we shall
not only be tractable, if any thing shall chance to be committed against us,
but also we shall not dread, if occasion so require, for the commodity of our
neighbor to put our lives in danger. But now to what purpose need we to
speak earnestly unto you, touching such vices, as be to filthye and to
gross, as whoredom and al kind of uncleanness, and insaciable desire of money:
from the which monstreous abominacions, a Christian man's conversation ought
to be so far alienate, yt it were shame to have the^ once spoken of among
the^. For there be some things so execrable, that an honest pure heart would
even abhorte once to think of the^. And it becomes saynctes, to be not only
of honest clean co^uersacion, but also to be chaste mouthed and of pure
communicacion. And we may not think it enough, to be pure of word and
clean of life only, except we abhorte also to talk of foolish frivolous
fables, and vain flirtes and iestes, which as in other they may be tolerated
or commended, so truly in Christians they are nothing ^^^^e nor congeuen^e.
For Christians in their most spedye Iournaye to heaven, have constinuall
ba^ayle with byees, and so dangerous battle, that they can haueno laysure
to apply such tryfles and sportes, but rather they have to weep. And when the
mind would make merye, because of good success and well spedyng, it ought
to make metye in hymns and thanks geuyng to God. Howebeit I know well
enough, there be philosophers, that teach Carnal copulacion out of marriage to
be no s^^^^, because it is not punished by man's law. And that covetous
besyre of money is no fault, because there is no temporal pain appointed
unto it. But I would have you understand for a certayntye, that whosoever is
an who re^onger, or spotted with any kind of vncleanelustes, or given to
Covetousness (which, forasmuch as he reposeth his principal felicity in dumme
transitory substance, is reckoned lite^ better than a woorshipper of Images)
shall not be admitted into the enheritannce of Immortal life, that God has
promised his to ^nherite commonly with Christ. And if you think that this
pain is but light, than give credence to them, that go about to persuade
unto you; that those sins are but light. Suffer not your selves to be
deceived with s^che manner of vain frivolous communicacion, but take heed
rather to the doctrine of the Gospel, seeing that for such manner of sins,
although they be not punished with man's law, yet the vengeance of God
commonly falls upon the children of disobedience, for distrusting the
promysses of the heavenly father, and ^^posyng their felicity in such kind
of things. Onte you diuorted your selfs from such men's company, and
professed Christ. It stands you therefore in hand to beware, that your
conversation be not like unto the ^^^ghtynesse of them, that profess one way
and live far wide an other way. The darkness of Ignorance has been yet
hitherto the occasion of error: And the truth of the Gospel is sprongen up
and wyped away all darkness. And you in times paste, walked as in the dark
night, and committed the shameful vices that are done in the night. But now
God by the light of the Gospel, has enlumined your hearts, that you may
clerelye descerne, how a bominable the things are now, that before appeared
to be pleasant and sweet. The night has no shame and covers many things,
that no man would be bold to do in the clear day. Therefore see you order
your conversation all together after such sort, as you forgette not to
consider, that you live in the day, and are always seen to theiyes of God.
He that takes a Iourneye in the night, many times stombleth, because he sees
not, where he should go by. And the day on the other part has this
commodity: it shows what is to be followed, and what is to be avoided. For it
teaches us in every condition to flee from malice, cursed speaking and
dissimluacion, and in steed of them to follow goodness, righteousness, and
truth: and generallye to mark rhat thing always, not that is pleasyng unto
me^, nor yt is sweet or delectable unto us, but yt which is acceptable unto the
will of god, after whose appointment our co^uersacion ought altogether to be
governed.

The text;
And have no fellowship with the vnfruictful works of darkness: but rather
rebuke them. For it is shame even to name those things which are done of the^
in secret: but all things when they are rebuked of the light are manifest. For
whatsoever is manifest, the same is light. Wherefore he says: awake thou that
slepest, and stand up from death, and Christ shall give the light. Christ is
the fountain of our dayelyght: and if you will continuallye clean unto him,
your endeavor shall be to do fruictefull honest offices of godliness, and such
as be worthy of the light: and from henceforth be a shamed to have a do with
the vnfruictefull works of darkness. Now therefore take so good head, that
you s^yde not again into your old former darkness, that you may rather with
your light bewray and reprove those naughty deeds, that they commit in their
darkness. For wha^ they are not afraied to offend God, as often as the night or
secret place has taken away shame, the things that they do than, are so
abominable, that it were very shame even once to make rehearsal of them. But as
long as they offend, while no light appears* they offend ^^cenciouslye
without punishment. But as often as they are bewrayed with the open light,
than the vileness of the thing begins to be known; and the faults so
be^wrayed, are amended and turned into better: that is to were, when the night
is turned into the day, and the blyndenesse of heart utterly expulsed. And if
your conversation be light, they shall be ashamed of their own filthynes, when
they see your Innocence. And than it shall come to pass, that being moved
through your honest godly demeanor, they shall be styrred up to Innocence,
if they see the light of Christ* shynyng in you. For in deed thus says the
prophet. Wake thou that sleapeste, and rise up from the dead, and Christ
shall give the light. It is a very dead sleep, yea rather death it self, to
be over whelmed with the pleasures of this world, and not to respect the
things that are eternal and vnfeynedlye good. And yet they cannot otherwise
awake nor by any other means return to life, unless Christ spring into
their hearts and wrpe away the gross darkness of ignorance.

The text.
Take heed therefore how ye walk circu^spectly: not as unwise, but as wise men:
a^oiding occasion, because the days are evil. Wherefore, be ye not unwise, but
understand what the will of the Lord is, and be not droncke with wine, wherein
is excess: but be filled with the sprite, speakinge unto your selves, in
psalms and hymns, and spyritual songs, singyng and making melody to the
Lord in your hertes, geuyng thanks always for all things unto God the
father, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, submittyng your selves one to
another in the fear of God. Therefore you of the Ephesians, unto whom
Christ, our bright sun, gives his clear light, take heed and look about
you, how and after what manner you walk, not leadyng your life now after the
manner of the gentyles, which through blyndenesse of heart perceive not what is
honest, but as it becomes them, that understand truly the doctrine of the
Gospel, and with loss of all you have redeem this opportunity to obtain
salvation: which the more gredelye is to be laid hold upon, y^ this time is
so per^ously naught, and many things flow in on every side, that are hable
to withdraw uncircumspect men from the synceritie of Christian doctrine.
Therefore it stands you in hand to take the more circumspecte head, that
through unadvisedness you give not occasion unto the wicked, y^ either they
may be open adversaries to the Gospel, or else draw you back from your
profession. This is the whole Sum of your salvation, and in this behalf you
ought to be warely wise, to wynke at other things, and to declare that you
understand perfeitlye what the lords will is. For his desire is to have al
men brought to the salvation of the Gospel, if it were possible. And it shall be
requisite for such as take that business in hand, to be sobre. For drounkenship
is hartelesse, and vncircumspecte, and not only harteles, but also rash and
temerarious.

Therefore be in no wise drounken with wine, which is a thing vnnecessari^,
and provoke ^a^ciuiousnes: but be you filled with the sweet wine of the holy
ghost. For that is a fortunate ebrietie, that can stir us, not to wanton
dauncynges or folyshe ballettes, wherewith the gentiles cry upon their
deuilles: but unto psalms, and hymns, and spiritual song^s, wherewith to
rejoice, and sing, and make merye among your selves unto the lord: not with
uncomely yellyng noyses, as mad drounken men are used to do, but in wardelye
in your souls and in your hertes. This is a pleasure, this is a love, this is
a ba^kette woorthye of Christians, lest they should excede the gentiles in
drounken bankettynges. After their drounken pastimes, sorrow does ensue, and
many times also disease of body. But your mirth is a continual merimente. For
whatsoever chances unto you, whether it be gladness or whether it be
sadness (gladness from our merciful God, sadness from him that labors
for your salvation) you are bounden always to give thanks for all things,
being assured, that nothing can happen, but to the best advantage of your
eternal felicity. But the thanks are to be given unto God, the autoure of
al good things to al men: and the same is also the father and God of our lord
Jesus Christ, by whom he gives us all things, and him he will have praised
in all things equally with himself. Christ has submitted himself obedie^tly
unto y^ father, and in like case it becomes us to submmitte our selves unto
him, not that it besemeth a Christian to be a terror unto a Christian, but
those that reverently follow Christ, as apperteineth, do not grudge to submit
themselves every one to other, inasmuch as he, being the supreme head of al,
has submitted himself humbly under al. Let the inferior acknoweledge the
authority of the superior. And on the other side, let the superior confourme
himself unto y^ capacity of the inferior: so as y^ rather he may do him
good. For he yt among Christians bears most rule, rules to none other end,
but to do the most good he ca^.

The text.
Ye women, submit your selfs unto your own housebandes, as unto the Lord.
For the housebande is the wives head, even as Christ is the head of the
congregation: and the same is he that ministers salvation unto the body.
Therefore, as the congregation is in subieccion to Christ, likewise let the
wives also be in subieccion to their housbandes in all things. Ye housebandes;
love your wives; even as Christ also loved the congregation, and gave himself
for it, to sancrifye it; and cleansed it in the fountain of water through the
word, to make it unto himself a glorious congregation, without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should he holy, and without blame.
So ought men to love their wives, as their own bodies. He that loves his
wife, loves himself. For no man ever yet ba^ted his own flesh: but
nourysheth and cherishes it, eue^ as the Lord does the congregation. For we
are members of his body; of his flesh, and of his bones, For this cause shall a
man leave father and mother, and shall be joined unto his wife; and of two shall be
made one flesh. This is a great secret, but I speak of Christ and of the
congregation. Nevertheless, do ye so, y^ every one love his wife eue^ as
himself. And let the wife fear her husband. Let the wives therefore
acknowledge the authority of their housebandes, and be in subieccion unto them,
none otherwise, than the congregation is in subieccion The houseband is the
wives head even as Christ is y^ head of the congregation
to the Lord Jesus. For like as Christ is the head of the congregation, even
so is every housband the head of his own wife. Nevertheless like as y^ head has
preeminence over the body, to the intent the health of the body should depend
of it: even so is the housebande in autoritye over the wife, not to thintente
to use her cruelly like a tyranne, but to provide for her wealth, because his
wit is more substanciall than hers. And yet the wife may not bristle against
her housebande, because he seeks at her hands to be more loved than feared.
But her duty is to be so much more in subieccion in all points, like as ye
congregation is so much ye more in subieccion unto Christ, as he has more
lowly submitted himself for the salvation of her his spouse. And on the other
part, you yt Ye housba^des love your wives as Christ al to has louedtde
congregation.
be housba^des, a buse not your authority like tyrannes over your wives, but
rather use them with like loving charity, as Christ has and does love his
congregation, whom being an aduouterer and an obstinate rebel, he did not
only not cast of, but also gave himself unto death, for the redemyng of her
salvation: and so of adefiled one he made her pure and holy, and where she was
unclean and foul, he made her fair and goodlye: and yet cast her not in the
teeth with her vile filthiness, but washed her clean with the stream of his
own blood, and scoured her in the fountain of life that works profitably by
the inuocacion of the name of God, so as through his own diligent goodness he
might prepare for himself a glorious wife, even the congregation: which now
should neither have spotte nor wrincle, nor any such like, that might be
displeasaunt in the housebandes iye, but in every point both fair and
faultles. And so it becomes the housebandes to be likewise affected to wards
their wives, that they leave nothing undone, whereby they may make their wines
perfect Christian woomen, and to be no less careful for their wives health,
than the head is careful for the health of the body. For the wife is the
housebandes body. Admit thy wife be of crooked conditions, or a nyce wanton,
or given to other vnthriftynesse: destroyeher not with ragyng cruelty, but
heal her and amend her with so bre lenity. Correct the faulres, so as thou
love thy wife nevertheless for all that. For what would the head do, if it
see his body be full of sickness or disease? would it begin to hate it, and
for sake it? or rather heal it, if it could, and if it could by no means
heal it, yet at least bear with He that Loves his wife loves himself.
it, and cherishe it? Might it not be thought a great absurdity, if the head
would wish evil to his own body? He that loves his wife, loves himself,
for she is part of himself: what man had ever so little felyng of the senses
of nature, to hate his own body? What man does not rather nourishe and
cherishe his body, what a manner a one so ever it be, to make it better and
lustier? Seeing that the very Ethnikes do naturally no less than so, why does
not Christian charity work the same in us a great deal more, inasmuche as we
are moved thereunto by the exaumple of Christ, who did not forsake his wife
the congres gacion (though she was disteyned before time, many sundry wa^yes,
and a very whorishe naughty pack) but he cleansed her, he pyked her, and made
her perfectly trim in every point. Therefore, you house bands do the same
unto your wives, that Christ has dooen unto us, that are the members of his
body, which is the congregation, like as the wife is the body of the
housebande, of whose flesh and bones she is made, to thintente it may be
manifestlye known, that that thing ought in no wise to be divorced asondre
that is all one self same thing. For thus we read in the book of Genesis.
For the wives sake, man shall rather forsake father and mother, than forsake his
wife: unto whom he shall so keep himself, that of two there be made one, in
most perfect coupling together both of bodies and souls. Next after God, we
are most bounden to father and mother, and yet the wife is preferred a boue
them. Herin is meant a certain unspeakable great mystery, how that the thing
that was done in Adam and Eve under a figure, should be performed in effect
mistically in Christ and in the congregation. This inseparable co^iunccio^,
whosoever will well weigh, shall perceive that there lies hid a great mystery.
For like as Christ is one with the father, even so would he have all his to be
al one with him. And albeit this mystery imports greater circumstaunce, than
can be now presently expressed, yet it is enough to have applied the exaumple
to this end, that every man should love his wife, none otherwise than he
loves himself: and considre that both he and she are al one selfsame thing,
even as Christ loved his congregation whom he united entierely to himself.
Finally it shall be the wives part, not only to love her husband again, as her
companion to live together, but also reverence him, for the authority sake that
he has over her. And than shall hearty love continue long together goodly, in
case both parties do their duties accordingly.

The.vi. Chapter.
The text.
Children, obey your fathers and mothers in the Lord: for that is right.
Honor thy father and mother, (the same is the first commandment in the
promise) that thou may prosper, and live long on the earth. Ye fathers move
not your children to wrath: but ye shall bring them up through the norter and
informacion of the Lord. Ye scruauntes be obedient unto them that are your
bodily masters, with fear and tremblyng, even with the synglenes of your
heart, as unto Christ: not dooyng service unto the eye, as they that go
about to please men: but as the servants of Christ, dooyng the will of God
from the heart with good will, seruyng the Lord and not men. Knowing this,
that whatsoever good thing any manne does, the same shall he receive again of
God, whether he be bond or free. And ye masters do even the same things
unto them, puttyng away threatenynges: Knoweyng, that your master also is in
heaven, nether is there any respect of person with him. LEt authority be
governed by charity, that in any wise it practice no tirannie. And on the
other side, let reverent fear hold under the lower sort, so as through to
much sufferaunce they wax not rebellious. For there can no concord nor
quietness possibly be, where all is havoc without order. Over the wife the
husband only has authority. But the children are bounden to acknowledge the
authority both of father and mother. Therefore according to this rule, you
children be courteous and obedient unto your father and mother at al their
honest Christian commandments. For this does even the equity of nature
also require, that we should honor them to whom we are bounden for bringing
us in to the world: and be kind unto the^, by whose goodness, we are nourished
and brought up. And to be brief, the very law of god commands the same,
and says: honor thy father and thy mother. And it was not enough to give
that commandment, as it does in the other commandments. Thou shall do no
murder. Thou shall not steal. etc. But he added also a reward unto it, to
allure them the rather to do their duty: although those things that are
honest, ought to be dooen freely without reward. But what reward does the
scripture promise? That it may happen well unto the, says it, and that thou
may be long lived upon earth. Verily it is to be thought, that person not
to be worthy of long life, that is unkind and rebellious against them, by
whom he has received the use of his life. On the other part, you fathers
abuse not your authority, and the obedience of your children, thinking that you
may lawfully do to the^ what you lust. They are children, and not bond
servants. Let gentleness mitigate authority. You must beware that through
waiwardnes of your old age, or through strayt dealing, or immoderate
frowardnes, you amend them not, but provoke their stomakes to be wurse. In
case they do amiss, by reason of youth, they ought so to be admonished, that
they may be rather taught than discouraged. Let this be the speciallest point
of your charge, so to inform them with mouicions and instruccions from their
tender years, and so to allure them with the exaumples of godliness, that it
may appear, they were brought up under Christian parents according to the
doctrine of Christ. For by this means shall they sooner be brought to good
frame, then with threatninges, or cruelty, if Ye servants be obedient to
your bodily masters. etc,
they be taught and not altogether compelled. You servants, let it appear by
you, that the profession of the gospel, has made you better and more
profitable. And the duty that other do to their masters, unto whom they are
bounden after the temporal condition of servitude, look you on your behalf
do it much more aboundauntly. For the office of baptism is not to give this
liberty, that you should be in bondage no more, but that you should do
your bounden service the more diligently: nor that your will should be to
disdain your masters, because they are become brethren with you in
profession, but so much the more you ought to have them in reverence, and be
the more afraid to offend them: Nor do not, as the common sort of servants
does, your duty for fear, and in your mind curse them and watch them: but
with an upright sincere conscience obey them, considering this with your self,
that you do this duty unto Christ, unto whose will you are obedient, although
peradventure your masters deserve not that obedience. By this means shall it
come to pass, that you shall not be like to the common trade of servants,
that do their masters commandments, while they be presently in sight, for
fear of displeasure. But as soon as they think no body sees them, than they
will do as they lust. In deed this is to serve unto the eye and not of a
conscience, and nothing else but to covet to please men and not Christ. In
whose syghte nothing is acceptable, that is counterfayetly done or else by
coaccion. But be you as it becummeth the servants of Christ, heartily and
faithfully courteous and diligent in your duties doing toward your masters,
not because necessity enforces you, but because God so wills you. And see
you alienate not your selves from doing your duties, albeit you have crooked
and wieked me^ to your masters. For in deed it is an expediente forwardenes of
the Gospel, that you should be courteous unto them, so that your obedience
turn not unto ungodliness. And considre with your selves, that you do that
unto Christ, that you do unto them for the Gospels sake, and that you do it
unto God, and not unto men, inasmuche as you do it to men for the love of God.
And in case you win them unto Christ, through your diligence, it is a right
well bestowed duty. But and if they show themselves unthankful, yet know you
for a certainty, that no man shall lose the reward of his well doing. And
although he shall not receive it at man's hand, yet he shall once undoubtedly
receive it of the lord, not only the bondsman but also the freeman, whatsoever
good turn he shall heartily bestow upon an unthankful man. Now to conclude,
like as those bondseruauntes that profess Christ ought to be so much the more
profitable unto their masters, even so is it requisite, that christian
masters be the more gentle in commanding their servants, and in their
behauiours to use themselves in such wise, as they may appear, to covet rather
to be loved then feared, and to be heartily loving unto their bond servants,
inasmuch as they be received into the fellow ship of brethren: and not always
ready to threate and to beat, as the common sort of masters is accustomed to
do. Let your servants perceive, that you are become the more gentle by
reason of the Gospel, so as they also may the rather be allured unto that
profession as well as you, if peradventure they have not yet already professed:
and considre, that masters authority is but a temporali thing and only
established by man's law: And for all that it becummeth not us in any wise to
disturb it: yet nevertheless there is no respect of persons with god. For he
makes never a whit the less of any man because he is a bond servant, nor
makes the more of any manne, because he is a gentleman borne. According to
man's laws, you masters have power over your servants upon earth, but for
all that in the mean time you have a master in heaven as well as they. And
his will is, that you care for your servants commodity, through reasonable
commanding, and not to press the^ with tirannie. These things that we have
hitherto treated of, tend to this end, that you should as well be like unto your
head Christ in holiness of life, as to agree together among your selves in
mutual concord.

The text.
Finally my brethren, be strong through the Lord and through the power of his
might. Put on all the armoure of God, that ye may stand against the
assaults of the devil. For we wrestle not against blood and flesh: but
against rule, against power, against worldly rulers, even gouernoures of the
darckenes of this world, against spiritual cra^tyues in heaven. y things.
Whertore take unto you the whole armoure of God, that ye may be hable to
resist in the evil day, and stand perfect in all things. Stand therefore,
and your loins girde with the truth, having on the brestplate of righteousness,
and having shoes on your ^ere, that ye may be prepared for the Gospel of
peace. Above all, take to you the shilde of faith, where with ye may quench
all the ficrie darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation, and the
^^^^de of the spirit, which is the word of God. Now this remains for a
final conclusyon, that forasmuch as the wieked do lay sundry engines to
overthrow your tranquillity, you must also be armed with a strong lusty
inward conscience to resist them, not with the aid of your own powers, but by
the mean of the lord Jesus your defendour, who will not suffer his body to
be destitute. Verily as for us, we are feeble members, but he is valeaunt and
mighty, that has taken upon him to be our protector. Desire therefore of him
all manner of spiritual armor and weapons, that therewith being in every point
surely harnessed, you may be hable to stand valeauntly against the assaults of
the devil. For we have not war and battayl with men, whose wrongs our duty
is to overcome with pacyence. But our battayl is with wicked spirits, the
enemies and foes of Christ, whose champions and instruments those are, that
ragingly assault us. And by their ministry the princes and powers of devils
give battle against us from above, and exercise their tirannye upon such as
be addycte unto them through the naughtiness of this world, and lay wait
in the darkness of this world for those that love the light of the Gospel.
Against those (I say) we must necessarily abide battayll, and they are not
only mighty of strength, but also exceadingly perfect in spiritual policy,
and that in the coasts of the air, so as they may the easelier come upon us,
and so as it is the harder for us to apprehende them. To war against this
kind of enemies, no humayne weapons nor armor can do any good. But it is the
only armor of God that must defend us from harm. Therefore as often as you
must enter battayl with your adversaries, do always, as noble warriers are
accustomed, when they have a do with a dangerous enemy. Get on all your
harness, and do every thing accordyngly, that when the danger of the battayl
shall be, you may be hable to keep your place, and steadfastly stand upon the sure
rock Christ. When men go to war one against an other, first they cover
themselves on every side, that they lie not open any way to their enemies
ordinance. Than they make ready to bea^e back the inuader. The middle parts
of their bodies, because of the tenderness, they girde with an Apron of maile.
The upper parts they harness with a breast plate. Upon the legs and feet
they wear boots, and an helmet upon the head. Than on the left side a shylde
is buckled, to keep of all arowe shot. And so in like case, you that have
spiritual battayl, with wicked spirits continually, in steed of the girdle,
put on truth to girde up the loins of your mind, so as you stand vpryghte
and shrynke not at any naughty enticement of false goods and false opinions.
For the breast plate, put on innocence and righteousness, to keep the inward
parts of your mind safe and sure with the mayles of virtue and godliness. For
boots to put on the legs and fete, look you have a sincere affeccion that
coueteth after nothing, but such things as be heavenly, and is afraid of
nothing but only of ungodliness: so as you may be always readilye prepared to
defend the Gospel, whose defense consilieth not in styrryng of tumulte but in
patience and quietness. And for that cause sake it is called the gospel of
peace. The preachers whereof, the prophet in times past respecting, was in an
admiracion to considre how excellently fair their feet were. But we must
diligently see y^ we have in continual readiness on every side, y^ buckeler of
faith, whereby we may assuredly trust to all the promyses of God. What larum
so ever happens, with this buckeler it shall be vaynquished: what fyrie darts
so ever our subtle adversary shall throw at us, this buckeler shall keep them
of, so as none of them shall pearce any part of our lively members. For what
thing can wound the soul, that defieth death it self? And if you have also
with this buckler, the helmet of a vigilaunt mind, that can take good
circumspect head, you need not in any wise to be afraid of your health.
Finally, have always in your right hand the sword of the spirit, as well to cut
of naughty lusts from your minds, and to pearce to the inward parts of the
heart, as also to keep of the resistours of the gospels verity, and to
suppress false head, that truth may prevail. This sword is the word of
God, that pearceth with a constaunt power of faith, not after the manner of
man's cutting reason, but rather renneth through than cutteth. For the word
of man is but a weak watrishe word, forasmuch as it entreats only of
vain transitorye matters: But the word of god is effectual, and can skill of
nothing out of heavenly things, and pearceth through unto the joints of the
soul, and searches even to the inward boanes and marye. These be the enemies
that Christians have battle withal, whereas with men they are at peace: And
these are the weapons wherewith they defend themselves and get the vietorie, not
with their own powers, but by the help of Christ the mighty Captayn, through
whose luckie aid their batayl has good success.

The text.
And pray always with all manner of prayer and supplication in the spirit:
and watch thereunto with all instaunce and supplicacion for all saints and
for me, that vtteraunce may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth
freely, to utter the secrets of my gospet (whereof I am messenger in bonds)
that therein I may speak freely, as I ought to speak. But that ye may also
know what condition I am in, and where I do Tichicus the dear brother and
faithful minister in the Lord, shall show you of all things: whom I have
sent unto you for the same purpose, that ye might know what case we stand
in, and that he might coumforte your hearts. Peace ^e unto the brethren, and
love with faith, from God the father and from the lord Jesus Christ. Grace be
with all them, which love our lord Jesus Christ unfeignedly. Amen. Therefore it
stands us in hand to pray always unto him with continual supplicacions, and
to desire this of him from the bottom of our hearts, without ceassing in our
prayers day and night, that al saints may have the upper hand by this sweorde
of the spirit. And it is also your duty, to help me with your prayers, and
to beseech God that he would give me plenteous vtteraunce of the gospel,
whansoeuer I shall preach it: and that it would please him to use my mouth as
an instrument unto his own glory, and to your salvation, so as I may boldly
and without shrinking declare unto al men the mistical doctrine of the gospel,
whereunto all men are called indifferently. And that I be not hindered by such
as labor by all possible means, that the glory of the Gospel should not be
spread abrod, for the doing whereof, I am made an ambassador, yea even now being
laden with chains, and suffering excedingly, that I may boldly go about the
office committed unto me. And that this mind may still persevere with me unto
the end, and that by the help of Christ, I may freely speak, as it
becummeth me to speak. For it is a rebuke for a preacher of the gospel to be
afraid of anything, that should hinder him from doing the office of the
gospel. To conclude, as concerning the state of mine own things, and how
the matter stands with me here, you shall know all of Tichicus my well-beloved
brother, and not a brother only for the sincerity of his faith, but also a
minister and an helper in the gospels business: whom I have sent unto you for
this purpose, that you might know certainly in what state we are, and that you
should be much cou^forted by his being there, lest your hearts should be
discouraged through mine affliccions. For I am so tied and bound, that the
gospel of Christ does triumph, notwithstanding, even out of the prieson. My
prayer is, that peace and mutual love joined with sincere faith, may be unto all the brethren. Of faith springs charity, and charity nourishes concord.
These three with prosperous procedyng, grant unto you God the father, and the
lord Jesus Christ. The love and merciful goodness of God be for ever with
all them that with an unfeigned conscience and unspotted life, love the lord
Jesus Christ: and despysyng the transitory tryfles of this world, follow the
things that are eternal and heavenly. And to confirm this mine hearty
prayer, I beseech god grant mercifully.

Amen.
Thus ends the paraphrase upon the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the
Ephesians.
The Argument upon the Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle to the Philippians.
By D. Erasmus or Roterdaine.
THe Philippians are in the first part of Macedonia, as it is declared in the.
xvi. of the Acts, a people deducted out of the city of Philippos, so called
of Philip the buyldour of it. And Thessalonica is the head city of the
Philippians, which are worthilye much praised of the Apostle, because they
persisted constantly in the faith, after they once received it: and would
not allow the false apostles among them, whereas the Corinthians and Galathians
had received them and given credence unto them. Unto these Philippians, Paul
being warned of the holy ghost went and tarried among them a good maynye of
days, not without great trauayll. For there Paul was scourged with whippes,
and was cast with Silas in to prison* at which time the keeper of the prison
and all his household were Baptized. In this city was also Lydia the
purpleseller, who first being converted received Paul into her house. There
also the soldiers, knowing that Paul was a cetezen of Rome, desired him of
their own mind, to goo whither he would: and so the name of Christ was
notified abroad with luckye prosperous success.

And also when Paul was in prison at Rome, these Philippians sent to him such
things, as were necessary for him to live with by Epaphroditus: as they had
done before, when he was at Thessalonica, as he him self witnesses in this
Epistle. For the which having set them forth with praises and commendacions,
he exhorts them to persevere and goo forewarde, showing them, that they ought
to rejoice even in those afflictions, which make for the aduau^cement of
Christ's gospel: and that he was not only not afraid of death, but also that
he would gladlye wish it, if Christ so would. Than he gives them a special
exhortacion to mutual concord, which can not possible be among such as be
stout stomaked. And because they should be the better content, he promyseth
to send Tymotheus unto them, and that he will come again to them shortly him
self. In the mean time he sends Epaphroditus, which was amended of his
extreme dangerous sickness. These he treats of, in the two first chapters,
for in the third he confirms their consciences against the false apostles,
alluryng men every where unto the Iewyshe sect: whom he calls dogs, the
workers of wickedness, the enemies of Christ's cross, and making their belyes
their god, and in no place he is more apertely stomaked against them than in
this Epistle. The fourth chapter is full of co^mendacions and salutacions, but
only that he intermingleth certain monicions here and there by the way, and
thanketh the Philippians for their liberal gentilnesse showed toward him.
This epistle he wrote from the city of Rome by Epaphroditus, wha^ he was laid
the second time in prison: for after his first defense he was leadde again
in to prison: whereof he makes report in his Epistle to Tymothee.

The end of the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the
Philippians*
The.i. Chapter,
The text.
Paul and Tymothe the servants of Jesus Christ. To all the saints in Christ
Jesus which are at Philippos with the Bishops and Deacons, Grace be unto you,
and peace from God our father and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Paul and
Timothe, fellows in the office of the gospel, and servants of Jesus Christ:
To all the company of the saints, that purelye and entierlye profess the
name of Christ, and to them also, that have the oversight and ministracion of
the Christian flock at Philippos: We wish grace and peace unto you, from god
our father and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

The text.
I thank my God with all remembrance of you always in all my prayers for you,
and pray with gladness: because ye are come into the fellowship of the gospel
from the frist day unto now: And am surely certified of this, that he which
has begone a good work in you, shall perform it until the day of Jesus
Christ: as it becomes me, so judge I of you al, because I have you in my
berte: for as much as ye all are companyons of grace with me, even in my
bonds, and in the defendyng and stablyshynge of the gospel. For God is my
record how greatly I long after you all, from the very heart rote in Jesus
Christ. And this I pray, that your love may increase yet more and more in
knowledge and in all understanding, that ye may accept the things that are
most excellent, that ye may be pure, and such, as hurt no man's conscience
until y^ day of Christ, being filled with y^ fruit of rightewisenes, which
fruit comes by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God. Verily as often
as I call upon God in my prayers, as I do in deed with out ceassyng, I make
continual mention of you all, with rendryng of thanks and excedyng reioycyng
on all your behalfes, that ever since the first entrance of your profession,
even unto this day, in that you have releued me with your help and gentilnes,
you have showed your selves to be of the felowshyppe of the gospel. And my
continual prayer is, that you may increase in those virtuous doings more and
more: not doubtyng, but God, which has entered these godly parts in you, will
perform y^, which he has begone in you, unto the day y^ Jesus Christ shall
come and recompense eternal reward to well done deeds. For so it is
convenient, ye I should judge of you, through ye help of God, in as much as
always hitherto I have had such experience of your constaunte and true
gospellike love to me ward, as I may easyly gather, that of a very good
beginning, shall come a very good ending. For ye which cause sake my mind is so
affectuously set toward you, ye even in these bands, and wha^ I am arraigned
at Neroes bar, where I must plead for my head guilty or not guilty, and in
other mine afflictions, through the which y^ power of y^ gospel is not hindered
nor obscured, but confirmed and aduau^ced, I have ever borne you a singular
good will, because I have always perceived you as glad as my self, that the
word of Christ does florishe through my painful affliction. For god him self
knows, from who^ nothing is hidden, how disirously affected I am toward you
all, not after the manner of man's affection, either to the intent to get any
thing of you, or yet in any wise to flattre you for your lyberalitie showed
to me, but I love you with a pure christian affection, for none other purpose,
but because I see, that you love Jesus Christ constauntly and purely. I thank
God heartely for bestowynge his gifts upon you, and I beseech him, that this
your charity may increase more and more, in all knowledge and in all
understanding, that you may know, unto whom your duty is to minister the
offices of charity. For the commandment of charity, is, that you should
mind to do good deeds. And discretion shows how and where you should do
good deeds. Than what so ever you shall bestow for Christ's sake, upon the
preachers and promotours of the gospel, it is best bestowed of all other,
because you shall receive it again with great advantage. And for this cause I
wyshe and pray, that you may always increase in both these gifts, so as you
may be hable to prove, what is best to be done: and that you may be of a
sincere affection, to give respect to nothing but only to Christ: and to
set out the profession of the gospel, with such vprightnes of life, that you
give not any man occasion to be offended, but rather allute all men to the true
wourshyppe of God, and so persevere still unto the day of Christ's coming,
that you may than appear rich, and aboundauntlye full of good works, whereof
in this world you make as it were a seedenesse, and shall reap ye fruit thereof
at y^ day with most plenteous increase: by ye meritours goodness of Jesus Christ,
and not to the glory of you and me, but to the glory and praise of god, to
who^ as y^ fountain of al goodness al things are to be referred.

The text.
I would ye should understand (brethren) that the things which happened unto
me, chanced unto the great furtheraunce of the gospel: So that my bonds in
Christ, are manifest through out all the judgment hall and in all other places:
In so much that many of the brethren in the lord being encouraged through my
bonds, dare more boldly speak the word without fear. Some preach Christ
of envy and strife, and some of good will. The one part preaches Christ of
strife and not sincerely, supposyng to add more adversity to my bo^des.
Again the other part preach of love, because they know, y^ I am set to defend
the gospel. What then? So that Christ be preached any manner of way, whether
it be by occasion, or of true meaning, I am glad thereof, yea and I will be
glad. For I know, that this shall chance to my salvation, through your prayer
and ministrynge of the spirit of Jesus Christ according to my expectation, and
hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed: but that with all bold nesse, (as
always even so now also) Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be
through life, or through death. For Christ is to me life, and death is to me
advantage If it chance me to live in the flesh, that thing is to me fruitful
for the work, and what I shall chose I wot nor. ^or I am constrained of these
two things. I desire to be lo^ced and to be with Christ: which is much and
far better. Nevertheless, to abide in the flesh is more nedfull for you.
And this am I sure of, that I shall abide, and continue with you all, for your
furtheraunce and joy of your faith, that your reioysyng may be the more
abundant through Jesus Christ in me, by my coming to you again. Now to the
intent, ye may the more amplye be partakers of my joy, I would ye should
understand, brethren, that y^ emprisonme^t, fetters, arraigneme^tes, and my
other calamities, where with I was tossed and turmoyled for ye gospel of Christ,
did not only not hinder ye sitting abrod, and co^firming of ye doctrine of the
gospel, but also happened to the great furtheraunce of it: and did not only not
withdraw the faithful from the profession y^ they had taken upon the^, but
also confirmed the^ in it a great deal ye more, and made the^ more hearty and
of a better courage, so as they understood, y^ to be most undoubtedly true, y^
I preach, for y^ which I am not afraied to suffer these things: and made the^
bold to entreprise y^ like by mine example. For this, for ye most part, is the
common chance, yt happens to matters of honestye and of weightye
importau^ce: the more they are holden under and turmoyled hereawaye and
thereawaye, so much more they come forward, and appear, not withstanding ye
endeavor of ye wicked, trauailling to the contrary.

So in deed my bonds, gave occasion, that the word of Christ came not
only to a few, and those but of the simple sort of the commune people, as
it was before: but it floryshed also throughoute all Neroes hall, and all the
whole city, so as sondrye of the brethren, which professed the gospel
before that time, as men half afraid, now being encouraged with my bonds,
as the Lord Jesus ordreth the matter, they begin alid through mine example,
to profess the word of the gospel more freely and boldelye, all dread set
aparte. And albeit, all men did it not with a like synceritie, as they did not
also with like dylygence, yet the matter chanced by occasion to the
furtheraunce of the gospel. For there was among them, some that did it of a
maliciouse purpose, to procure the greater hatred against me, and to kyndle
Neroes stomach so much the more fearcely against us, as he saw this sect
increase and come forward, which, in his erroneous conceipte, he judges to
be hurtefull to his Empire: In consideration whereof they thought, he would
the sooner have dispatched me out of the way. Perchance there be many, that
having disdeigne at my glory, (which notwythstandynge I challenge not to my
self, but resign it whollye unto Christ,) have gone about through
malicious envy to obscure my commendacion, if they might seem to be more
diligente than we. Again, there be of them, that preach Christ, as I do,
with a sincere good conscience, though it be not thoroughly perfect. For as
concerning favor after the outward manner of man, I can not want any at
their hands, which love me, and see me endaungered for this cause, that I go
stedfastlye about, according to the office committed unto me, to defend the
gospel against the wicked: although, that even those that preach upon the
most naughty purpose, have furthered the glory of the gospel also. For they
preach Christ, but not of a Christian conscience, nor of an vpryghte purpose,
but labor to the intent, they might cause me, now I am taken and bounden,
to be more greuouslye punyshed, in case through their earnest hoote cockled
ghospellyng, they could have brought us in to more heinous displeasure. This,
how so ever it shall happen unto me, shall make no great matter, so that it
turn to the glory of Christ, unto whom I owe such entier hearty love, that
I am glad, to have him notified unto all men, by what occasion so ever it be.
They deserve the greatest commendation before God, that preach Christ, upon
the same intent that I do. And they are to be borne wythall, that upon a
certain pryuate affection toward us, set forward the doctrine of the
gospel. But those y^ preach Christ, for displeasure of me, in y^ they hurt
themselves I am sorye: in y^ they go about to hurt me, I defye the^: in that
their froward purpose turns to the furtheraunce of ye gospel, I am very
glad, so that they teach Christ truly, although their intent be nothing
vpryght. And I do not only rejoice now presentlye, but also I will rejoice
hereafter, in raze they go on still, in despite of me, to set out the doctrine
of Christ. It greueth not me, that their intent is by this means to destroy
me, seeing I know well enough, that with the help of your prayers, the
spirit of Jesus Christ forwardynge and gouernyng this business, it shall prove
unto my best commodity, whether I dye or live. And my faithful trust that I
have conceived of him, shall never desceaue me, which is, that I am most
certainly persuaded, that he will never leave me destitute nor put to shame in
preaching the gospel, which he has committed unto me, so as I shall not be
enforced with any afflictions, either to re^ante it as vain, or hold my
tongue from speaking the thing, that I am sure, is most true: but rather,
like as the afflictions which I have suffered at men's hands after the
body, have always hitherto turned to the advantage of the gospel, either
when I was stoned, or when I was scourged with whyppes, or when I was cast to
wild beasts, even so, this afflyction whereby I am in ieoperdye of my head
and life, shall prove also to the glory and praise of Christ, whether I
chance to live or dye. For as the former storms of mine afflictions,
although they troubled this ca^cas, did never for all that wythdrawe mine
heart, nor made me to shrynke from the steadfast preaching of Christ, no more
shall also this hoote tempest any thing withdraw me. If I live, I shall
defend the truth of the gospel boldly: if I shall dye, even my death,
which I shall gladlye suffer for the ghospelles sake, shall further the glory
of Christ. Whether way so ever happens unto me, I shall be in sure sauegarde.
And as for death, I am not only not afraid of it, but I think it also rather
to be wyshed for, if it might be to the spedye furtheraunce of the gospel.
And yet I am not wearye to live, though, I live in this payefull estate, for I
measure all the felicity of my life, by the success of the gospel. And on
the other part, I am not affrayed of death. For it shall be my vauntage, and
bring me to the joys of heaven, where after this life I shall truly live.
And yet in the mean time, this vile corporal life wants not his fruit,
forasmuch as in amplyfyinge of good deeds, the reward of immortality is
amplyfyed also, and besides that while we live in this world, the gospel of
Christ is set forward and confirmed through our trauayll. And it is in the
hand of Christ, whether his pleasure be, rather that I live or dye. For mine
own part, I am so readyly prepared for either way, that I can not tell,
whether is better for me to chose. There is cause, why I should wyshe to dye,
and there is cause, why I should not refuse to live. But when I have cast what
is best for me* and examyned mine own heart, I perceive it were a great
deal better for me, to be losed from the troublous toylynges of this life,
and to be in present company with Christ, and to go again unto that
unspeakable felicity, that I had a taste of, when I was ^apte into the third
heaven. Again, when I consider, what is best and most expedyent for you, I
perceive it profitable, yea rather necessary for you, that I continue yet for
a while in this mine office. And I know this for a certayntie, that I shall
tarry still yet in this life, and tarry so, as I shall once have your company
again, and be at such liberty, as you shall go forward more aboundauntlye
in faith, and as I shall have much more cause to be glad of the encreace of
your faith, and as you on the other part may be glad of my coming unto you
again, when you shall see, that by the help of Christ, I have not only not
given place to these myscheuous troubles, but also that I am preserved for the
increase of your best profit.

The text.
Only let your conversation be, as it becomes the gospel of Christ: that
whether I come and see you, or else be absent, I may yet here of your condition,
that ye continue in one spirit, and in one soul, labourynge as we do to
maintain the faith of ghospel: and in nothing fearing your adversaries,
which is to them a cause of perdicion, but to you of salvation, and that of
God. For unto you it is given of Christ that not only ye should believe on
him: but also that ye should suffer for his sake, having even such a sight,
as ye saw in me, and now hear of me. Do you see now how little I regard
mine own feli^itie, in comparison of your commodity? What man is it, that
would not loothe the cares of this world to be in the third heaven? Who
would not desire to be in the upper paradise, and to be delivered out of these
miseries? Who would not contemn the communication of man, when he remembers
the secret words that were spoken to him above? Who would not in stedde of so
many daungiers, so mani ieoperdies, so many deaths, rather chose to be in the
quietness, that never shall have death? Nevertheless I set so much by
brotherlye charity, that I regard more the profit of others, than mine own
desire. And therefore it shall be your parts to apply your selves the more
diligently, that you may do likewise, according to my mind in this
behalf. And that shall be, in case you will frame your life answerably unto the
gospel of Christ, for whose sake I abide all these troubles, that I be not
frustrate of this fruit, for the which only thing, I would wyshe to be
separated from the most blessed felowshyppe of Christ. Therefore endeavor
your selves, that in case I see you again, I may find you such, as I
would wyshe you to be: or if there be any let, that I can not see you again,
yet at least, I may here of you in mine absence, that like as you have done
always hitherto, so continue still in one spirit, which you have commonly
received: and agree all in one mind, holdyng up with your diligence and
prayers, the faith of the gospel, that warreth against the wicked: and be
not afraid of any persecution, to resist the enemies of Christ manfullye in
every place, whose wicked doings shall work nothing else, but their own
destruction and your salvation, and cause the glory of the gospel the more
to flourishe, and their own wicked purposes to prove always worse and worse.
It is a very goodly thing to suffer for Christ, but it is an excellent thing,
by him to conquer the adversaries. Howbeit we can in no wise attribute that to
our selves. For it is given you of God, not only to believe in the gospel
of Christ, without dyssemblyng, which I preach, but also readyly to suffer for
it, as you see me do: And shrynke not to abide the same conflicte for the
ghospelles sake, that you have seen me suffer so many ways before, when I was
there, and you have hard of me being now in bounds and in haserd of my
head. These things happen not by chance, at all adventures, but are
appointed by the goodness of God, unto them specially, whose godlynes he will
have more notablye seen through the afflictions of this life.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
If there be therefore any consolacion in Christ, if there be any comfort of
love, if there be any fellowship of the spirit, if there be any compassion and
mercy: fulfill ye my joy, y^ ye be like minded, having one love, being of one
accord, and of one mind, that no thing be done through strife or of vain
glory, but in mekenes of mind, let every man esteem another better then him
self. Look not ye every man on his own things, but every man on the things
that are other men's. Now therefore, if there be any mutual consolation
among them, that have professed all one Christ: If there be any comfort of
brotherly love, that makes commune whether it be sadness, or gladness, among
them that the spirit of Christ works his efficacye unto: if there be any
commune loving affections among you, whereby men are commenly grieved with their
friends heauynes: if there be any merciful compassions, whereby we even of very
natural instincte, mourn and be sorry for the hu^tes of them, who^ we love
heartily, and suffer for our sakes: by all these, I bes^che you, O Philippians,
make good this my joy, which I have conceived of you. Whatsoever you owe unto
me, in any manner of behalf, I will acknowledge it for full paymente, in case,
you stick together in perfyte concord of heart, in case you have love among
you, one unto an other, in case you be all of one mind, and of one consent.
For peace and concord can not possibly continue among them, that are hot
stomaked and high minded: forasmuch as an hot mind, and a swellynge stomach
causes contention, causes ambition, and causes anger: which are the very
present poisons of brotherly love, and frendshippe that ought to be among men.
Seeing than, you are made all one among your selves by the spirit of Christ,
and profess the doctrine of Christ, see that no thing be done by contention,
or vain glory, that one provoke not an other by fearce demeanor, while none
will give place to an other: by means whereof among worldly disciples, arise
chydynges, braulinges, and dissension. And therefore let not wrath, or
ambition, or pride be of your counsel, for they are very naughtye
counsaillours, but rather brotherly love, and her companyon, modesty of mind:
so that no man prefer him self before an other, but think every other
better than him self, and without boastes of his own doings, be content and
gentlye glad of other men's better qualities: And let not every man respect
his own private commodity, for there as they do so, public concord is not
like to continue. But let every man regard the commodities of others before
his own, through christian charity: whose property is not to seek after the
things that be her own.

The text.
Let the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ Jesus: which when he
was in the shape of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God:
Nevertheless he made him self of no reputacion, taking on him the shape of a
servant, and became like unto men, and was found in his apparel as a man.
He humbled himself, and became obedyente unto the death, even the death of the
cross. Wherefore God also has eralted him on hye, and given him a name which
is above all names: that in the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both
of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth: and
that all tongues should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord unto the
praise of God the father. Let not this wicked thought come in any of your
minds: why should I, being the better, give place, wyttynglye and wyllynglye,
unto him that is worse? Be not ashamed to follow the example of Christ. For
why does it not become you, being companyons and but fellow like, to be so
louinglye minded one to an other, as Christ was to us all? In case he have
challenged superiority to him self: In case he have gredylye sought after his
own gain: than may you honestlye enough strive one with an other for such
things. But he where he was very God by nature, and declared him self to be
God, by express deeds, in that, that he restored dead men unto life again
with a beck: in that, he altered the elements and natures of things: in that,
he makes deuilles obedyent to his commandment: in that, he heals all
kinds of dyseases with a word: yet to the intent, he might set us an
example of perfect modesty, he thought it no rauyne to be equal with God,
and nevertheless humbled and made himself basse among men, lokynge to receive
glory of the father: the entrance whereunto, his example teaches to be, not
by proud ambition but by low humility. And where he was the most highest,
he humbled him self so low nevertheless, that he was not only conuersaunt
as a man among men, being payned for lack of sleep, and suffryng thirst,
honger, weariness, poverty, and other daungiers and injuries after the
condition of us, but also he took upon him the shape of a servant, and that
of an hurtefull servant, whereas he is very innocence it self. For what is
it else, but the deserts of an hurtefull servant, to be taken, to be
bounden, to be scourged with whippes and to be spytte upon? But Christ
submitted him self not to abide thus much only, but also, as though he had
been an evil dooer, he humblye suffered the punishment of death, and that the
most shameful death of the cross. Such was the decreed will of the
father, that Christ should suffer these pains for our offenses, and he
showed himself wyllynglye obedyent in all things, not shrynkyng in any
condition to abide what so ever was auayleable to our salvation. They that are
of a worldely affected mind, are corruptelye provoked unto feyned boastyng of
them selves, through ambicion and strife, though other deserve the praise:
But he that is a christian, and seeks after true glory that never shall
decay, must preace unto it the same way, that Christ entered into it. The
way unto true glory is by false feyned slanders, and the entry unto
immortal thirfte, is through loss of transitory things, that fade away in
a moment. It behooves not to strive for commendacion, but to deserve
commendacion. Will you hear, what Christ deserved by his humilytie? Certes he
used not arrogauntlye among men, to boaste of his majesty before the time:
but God the father advanced his son unto most excellent highness, and
through humility, and shame of the cross, exalted him and gave him a name
that passes all the glory that man can report of: y^ is to say, y^ in the
name of y^ same Jesus, which was spitte upon and crucified, every knee should
bow and make courtesy, not only of things that that are on earth, but of al
things also y^ are either under ye earth or in the heavens above. And yt there
should be no kind of tongue, either of men or of aungelles or deuilles, but it
should confess that Jesus is the prince and Lord of all things, and that he
sytteth on God the fathers right hand, as equal possessor of all his
kingdom and glory, and that unto the glory of God the father, from whom
proceeds, and unto whom redoundeth all the glory of the son. What man's
ambicion, what riches, what kingdom, what humayne diligence, did ever win
any man so excellent renoume with men, as Christ's humility won unto him?
And as for these things, he did all for our sakes, and not for his own. For
he neither deserved to be brought low, nor neded to be advanced higher: But
that you should learn to practice like humility, in as much as without it you
can not possyblye be preserved.

The text.
Wherefore (my dearly beloved) as ye have always obeyed, not when I was
present only, but now much more in mine absence, even so work our your own
salvation, with fear and tremblyng. For it is God, which works in you,
both the will and also the deed, even of good will. Do al thing without
murmuring and dysputyng, that ye may be such as no man can complain on: and
unfeigned sons of god without rebuke, in y^ mids of a crooked and perverse
nation, among whom see that ye shine as lights in the world, holdyng fast the
word of life, that I may rejoice in the day of Christ, how that I have not
tun in vain, neither have labored in vain. Yea, and though I be offered up
upon the offryng and sacrifice of your faith: I rejoice, and rejoice with you
all. For the same cause also do ye rejoice, and rejoice with me. Now therefore
my dearly beloved brethren, see that you go forward also in this behalf, to
be like your selves still, that even like as according to the example of
Christ, you have always obeyed the ghospel preached by us, so look you do
still herafter, not only when we shall be present, but much more now when we
are absente, and show that diligente endeavor one to an other, that I would
have bestowed unto you, in case I had been present with you. Do the business
of your salvation, not carelessly, but with all carefulnes and tremblyng: and
considre, how weyghtie a cause you must take in hand, to defend, and what
manner of aduersaties you must have to do with all. There is no opportunity to
sleep or to be careless: and again, there is no cause why you should be
discouraged. For your part is, to stycke to it with all your possible powers:
But it is God, that works this ability in you, that as perteynynge to your
salvation, you may both will and do the thing, that your good purpose
puts you in mind, that you should not be ignorant, vu to whom it is to be
ascribed, if your will put any thing in to your mind. It stands you in
hand, with all circumspect behavior to commend the doctrine of the gospel
expressly in your own conversation, even to them that be strangers to it.
Which thing you shall do, in case they see you live in perfect concord, and
like trusly affiau^ce: and that, what so ever you do, be done without
murmurynges and puttyng of doubts: of which the one apperteyneth to them, that
do things against their wills, the other comes of them, that have none
affiaunce in that they do. But be you rather syncerely vyryghte in all
things, and of so pure and unspotted demeanor, that no man be hable iustlye
to complain of you: and that it may euindently appear unto al men, that you
are the veraye right children of God, and no bastardes nor unlawful children:
but perfitelye resemblyng your heavenly father in your heavenly
conuersacyon: and so order your life in the mids of a frewarde, cruel,
corrupt nation, that your sincere vpryghtenesse be not spotted in any
condition, but rather let your innocence of life so shine among their
darkness, as it were certain lyghtes of the world set before all men's
eyes. For you are they, of whom Christ speaks in the gospel, saying: you
are the light of the world, which hold up the lyuelye word of the
gospel, that every body may see, and express the doctrine of Christ even
in your conversation: so as I am in assured trust, that at the coming of
Christ, I shall also rejoice in you for your constaunt persevering, that I
have not labored in vain, nor run vnprofitablye in this raze of the
ghospel, in that I have won such disciples unto Christ. And I do not only
not repent my labors, whereby I have offered you as a most acceptable
sacrifice unto God, but also incase I my self chance to be offered upon the
oblacion and sacrifice of your faith, I shall be gladly content both on your
behalf and mine own. On your behalf, in that I have converted you unto the
gospel, and offered you as a most acceptable sacrifice unto Christ: and on
mine own behalf that having fynished such a sacrifice, I shall also be
offered up all together my self. For like as I see well, that mine afflictions
chanced unto the furtheraunce of you, even so I know, that my death shall
chance to the furtheraunce of the gospel: And for this cause sake, death
shall be even heartily welcome to me. And if it be conueniente, that you should
be equal parteners of my joy, you ought in no wise to be sorye for my death,
which shall be so pleasauntly welcome to me.

The text.
I trust in the lord Jesus, for to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I
also may be of good comfort, when I know what case ye stand in. For I have no
man that is so like minded to me, which with so pure affection will care for
your matters. For all other seek their own, and not the things which are Jesus
Christ's. Ye know the proof of him, how y^ as a son with the father, so has
he with me bestowed his setuice in the gospel* Him therefore I hope to send,
as soon as I know how it will go with me. I trust in y^ lord, that I also my
self shall come shortly. Now ye perceive in what behalf you are bounden to
be glad of my state: but I trust, through the grace of the Lord Jesu, to see
you shortly by Tymotheus, inasmuche as I can not come my self as yet.
Therefore I send him, even as it were my self, to the intent, like as you are
glad, now you know what state I am in: so I may be as glad when Timotheus
comes hither again, to know what state you are in. For I thought him
chieflye the most mete man to send upon this message, seeing there is never a
one of all the rest, that contenteth my mind so well as he in the ghospelles
business: and because in applyinge your necessaries, he will be as willinglye
diligent and faithful as I my self: For you must understand, I have just
cause to regard him as mine own son. There be other, whose ministerye I
might better spar^, than his, but I would send never a one, but of thoroughly
tried integrity. For all the rest almost seek to be sent on such messages,
not to do so much good unto other, as to provide for their own gain, rather
than to win unto Jesus Christ. And you know that I have always abhorted
such purposed intentes. I think it not necessary, that I should praise him
unto you, because you have all ready seen his demeanor, and can remember,
afterwhat sort he behaved him self with me in the ghospelles affairs, and as
a right son did represent me his father in all things. Him therefore I
trust to send, as soon as I see to what ^nde my matters will grow. And I
trust for all this, by the grace of the Lord, that I my self shall also
shortly come unto you.

The text.
But I supposed it necessary to send brother Epaphroditus unto you, my
companyon in labor and fellow soldier, your Apostle, which also ministers
unto me at need. For he longed after you all, and was full of heaviness,
because that ye had heard say, that he had been sick. And no doubt he was
sick, in somuche that he was nigh unto death. But god had mercy on him: and
not on him only, but on me also, lest I should have sorrow upon sorrow. I
sent him therefore the more dylygently that when ye see him, ye may rejoice
again, and that I may be the less sorrowful. Receynt him therefore in the
Lord with all gladness, and make much of such, because that for the work
of Christ he weute so far, that he was nigh unto death, and regarded not his
life: to fulfill that which was lackyng on your part toward me. Furthermore I
thought this also very requisite, that Epaphroditus, who is both my brother,
and companyon and fellow soldier, and your Apostle, should bear Tymotheus
company unto you, to the entente he might be commendablye welcome unto you
both for my sake and for your own: who also brought unto me your loving
charity, wherewith you are wont to releue me at my needs. He was a good while
a go much desirous to come see you, and was wonderfully afraid, lest it
grieved you to sore, to hear tell that he was so perylouslye sick. It was true
that you heard say, for he was so sooze sick, that he was in ieoperdye of
his life, and vearye like to have dyed. But God restored him again, and had
compassyon upon his servant, and not upon him only, but also upon me (that
was in ieoperdye, when he was in ieoperdye) lest upon the sorrow, that I
conceived by his sickness, I should have had double sorrow, for the death of
so faithful a felowsouldyour. And therefore I was the more diligent to send
him unto you, specially, that you might be glad to see him well amended
again, and peradventure not believe the tale as it was told you: than that all
my sorrow may be wyped clean out of my mind, if I perceive you vnfeynedlye
joyous and glad of his welfare.

Receive him therefore with a loving Christian affection in all ioyfulnes: and
have not him in price only, but all them also that are like him. For he, when
you sent him hither, was not only nothing afraid of Neroes cruelty, whom
he knew to be much grieved at me, but also for the gospel of Christ he put
him self in such haserde, that he was very like to have died, preferrynge
the doctrine of the gospel, before his own health, for this consideracion,
that because of his being away, he thought he did not the offices, that were
lackyng on your part toward me: and that by means of him you might be in a
manner presentlye here with me, in that he brought your charitable tokens unto
me, and with his ministeries served me in this danger, that he might one
alone represente you all unto me.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
Moreover (brethren) rejoice ye in the Lord. It greueth me not to write one
thing often to you. For to you it is a sure thing. Beware of dogs, beware of
evil worckers. Beware of dissencion. For we are circumcision which serve God
in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh: though I might also rejoice in the flesh. If any other man thincketh
that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh: I have more: being
circumcised the cyght day, of the kynred of Israel, of the try be of
Benjamin, an Hebrew borne of the Hebrews: as concerning the law, a Pharisaye:
as concerning feruentnes, I persecuted the congregation, as touching the right
wysnes which is in the law, I was unrebukable. But the things that were
vauntage unto me, those I counted loss for Christ's sake. Ye I think all
things but loss for the excellencye of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.
For whom I have counted all thing loss, and do judge them but vile, that I
may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own tyghtewesnes of
the law: but that which is through the faith of Christ: even that right wesnes
which comes of God through faith, that I may know him and the veriue of
his resurreccion, and the felowshyppe of his passions, while I am conformable
unto his (death) if by any means I might attain unto the resurreccion of y^
deed. Not that I have attained unto it already, or that I am already perfect:
but I follow, if that I may comprehend that, wherein I am comprehended of
Christ Jesus. Brethren, I count not my self that I have gotten it as yet: but
this one thing I say: I forget those things which are behind, and endeavor
my self unto those things which are before, and (according to the mark
appointed) I preace to the reward of the hye calling of God through Christ
Jesus. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus wise minded: and if ye be
other wise minded, God shall open the same also unto you. Nevertheless, unto
that which we have attained unto, let us proceade by one rule, that we may be
of one accord. NOw brethren, this remains moreover, that when you know what
things are done here, and having Epaphroditus sent to you again in health,
you may rejoice: and neglectinge the affliccions, wherewith the world has
turmoiled us, you may be glad, y^ our lord Jesus Christ's business goes
always forward better and better: On the behalf whereof I am not so much
afraid of them that be Ethnikes, which impugn the gospel openly, as of
these half christians, which preach Christ after such wise, that they
myngle the Jews manner of doctrine, in withal. Of this matter, I have with
much carke and care oftentimes warned you, but yet it shall be no pain unto
me, to put the same in writing that you may be more sure. For you can almoost
never be ware enough of these pestilent wicked, shameless kind of me^, that
always lie in wait in every place. They have envy at your lybertye, they
bark against sincere doctrine, they deprave other men's lyuinges, they
labor in the gospelles business: howbeit to none other end, but to cortupte
it. They brag of their foreskynnes circumcision, when their inward mind is
all together uncircumcised. Beware brethren, that they begyle you not, take heed of such dogs, take heed of naughtye workers, beware of the vncircumcysed
circumcision, yea rather concision. They have no cause to brag of them
selves, though they bear about the fylthy mark of their high brag, whereas
their conscience is unclean and wicked. If circumcision be worthy y^
boasting, we are circumcised in deed, we are very Jews in deed, we are the
right children of Abraham, that worship God, not with beasts blood but in
spirit (for so he would be wourshypped:) we boaste not in the little skin
cut from a part of the body, nor yet in Moses, but in Christ Jesus, who, by
his spirit, has cut away all our sins from our souls, and has prynted
in our hearts a very excellent goodlye mark, whereby it may manifestlye
appear that we are the sons of God. This now is a glorious and a true
circumcision. God from hence forth estemeth not man after the state of his
body. But these men neclecting the care of ye soul, repose al their whole
trust in the flesh, wherein if any man may boaste, I for my part will give
place in this behalf to none of them all: so as they can not have, to quarrel,
that I set naught by circumcision because I have it not. If any man stand in
his own co^ceite because of his circumcision, I may brag of my self a
great deal more, for I was lawfully circumcised the eight day according to
the commandment of the law. I am an Israelite, not by engraffynge, but by
kyndred: not a strange foundlyng, but a Jew, being borne of the Jews: and
not of an uncertain kyndred, but of a special chief kynored, that is, of
Benjamin, which has been always joined to y^ tribe of Judah, whereof Kings and
Levites and priests also are ordained: where as many suppose them selves
Israelites, because they descend of the kyndred of the concubines of Israel. I
am an Hebrewe of the Hebrews, after my birthe, and after the sects of the
law, a Pharisee, whose order has had always the highest dygnitie. And if
they will esteem any man after the study and obseruacion of the law: they
have not also in any of these, wherein to preferte themselves before me. For I
regarded the dyligent study of the law of my fathers so earnestlye much, that
for the defense of it, I persecuted the congregation of Christ by all possible
means I could: and I so entierlye observed those things, that the law
commands, that there was nothing, wherein I could be iustlye found
withal, as a transgressour. And if any of this gear deserved any prerogatyue,
I might with iuster cause boast, than these men, that would seem to be half
gods, because they be circumcised. At that time in deed, forasmuch as I was
not yet taught Christ, I thought my self a iolye fortunate man, as well for the
nobylitie of my kyndred, and dignity of my sect, as also for my sitayte
obseruyng of y^ law. But as soon as I lea^ned by the gospel of Christ, in what
things true righteousness consists* and that matters of far greater
excellency were signified by these figures and shadows of Moses law: by and
by I cast away and renounced the things, that I haunted before as matters of
wondrous holiness, and thought it damage unto me, what soever it were, that
hindered me never so litell from the doctrine of Christ: not that I condemn the
law, if a man use it as it ought to be, but that I attribute so much unto the
gospel of Christ my lord, that I do not only set less by the carnal law
of Moses, wherein these men boast, tha^ the excellent knowledge of Christ, but
also I think it loss, what soever this world has, of how excellent or of
how glittering a show soever it be. This knowledge therefore as soon as I
begone any whitte to taste, there is no advantage of any thing, how goodly so
ever it be, but I esteem it as loss, yea I regard it no more than the
rubbyshe of a rotten wall, or if any thing be more vile than it: so that with
the loss of it I may win Christ the fountain of all good things, that
are truly good. I take mine own righteousness to be nothing worth (where in
obseruyng of Moses law, my righteousness was thought among men to have been
much auayleable) so that I may atteyne unto true righteousness: which I may
not call mine, forasmuch as it is not gotten by our own merits, but frelye
given to them, y^ dystrust them selves, and put their whole co^fydence symplye
in Christ. Nevertheless there springs a certain ryghteousnes also of the
law, howbeit it is not auaylable to give salvation. But that righteousness,
which is given of god, is so not ours, that notwithstanding it gives us true
perfect salvation, in case we believe the gospel, and through faith come to the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, whose nativity is more wanderful, than can be
understood by any mortal man's wysedom: whose resurrection is of more
power, than can be persuaded by any arguments of man. Only faith is hable to
persuade these unto us, and has so persuaded in deed, that being establyshed
in the hope of the promysses, I am gladly content to come unto the fellowship of
his affliccions, to be bounden and to dye for his gospelles sake, like as he
was beaten and crucified for us: that it may by some means chance unto me,
that like as I follow the example of his death, so I may come to the glory of
his resurrection, being raised up by him. This most certain constaunt hope
does so comfort me in these afflictions, because I assuredly trust in the
promysses of Christ, who has promised the feloweshyp of his kyndome to them,
that will not shrynke from the fellowship of his cross. Nothwithstandyng I meant
not to speak thus, as though it were in me, to atteyne so high a worthynesse.
For I am not come as yet to the end of my race, I have not yet won the game,
the match is not yet all together at an end, howbeit I preace unto it to the
vttermoste of my power, that I may atteyne the thing that I pursue after. For
every body wynneth not the game, how so ever he runs, but he that preaceth
lustily, and he that labors constauntlye. I am in good hope, that I shall
catch it, in as much as Christ has catched me to this same end, that being
pulled back in the myddle of my race (which in times past I purposed wickedly
against his congregation) I might run well in the race of the gospel, and
win the game o^ immortality, lest you should fall into slouthe and naughty
security, in trustyng to the promised game. Brethren, I do not think, that I
have yet atteyned the thing that I go about, and hope to atteyne. It is a
very weightye matter of importance, that I follow, and is not lyghtlye
atteyned by any man. I know that Christ is true, but the nature of man is so
frail and so mutable, that it will not suffer me as yet to be careless.
Wherefore by the means of this excellent great hope, I set all things a
side, and go about this one thing only, that in the race of the gospel, I
may forget, as it were, the things that are behind me, and preace with all
my possible endeavor to those things, that are before me: howbeit I rushe not
here away and there away rashely I care not whither, for he loses his game,
that runs naught. But I bend my self streyghte toward the prick of the
gospel, that is set before our e^es, and to the reward of immortality,
whereunto God the master of our game lokyng out of heaven upon our endeavor,
calls us, by the help of Christ Jesus. Therefore, what other thing go those
men about, that myngle the law with the gospel, than to hyndre us in our race.
And for that cause, as many of us as be perfect, let us be of this affected
mind, that we set nothing before us to run at, but the very mark of the
gospel. And if there be any among you that be somewhat weaker, than can utterly
contemn the law of their fathers, wherein they have been nousled, let them be
borne withal, until they wax perfect also. God has showed unto you that
the aid of the law is nothing necessary: and so peradventure it shall come
to pass, that he will reuele the same also unto them.

The text.
Brethren, be folowers together of me, and look on them which walk even so,
as ye have us for an ensample. For many walk (of whom I have told you often,
and now tell you weeping) that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is damnacion, whose bellye is their God and glory to their shame,
which are worldly minded. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence we
lake for the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall change our
vile body, y^ he may make it like unto his glorious body: according to the
workyng, whereby he is able also to subdue all things unto him self. Now while
we are in this world, let us goo on still in the race, that we have taken in
hand, according to the rule prescribed unto us: and let us truly agree in
it, that we suffer not our selves, to be drawn back from that purpose: but
let us make spedye haste, every man to his power, to atteine the game of
immortality. There be some, y^ keep not the race a right, them it is not good
to follow. But rather follow me: for I run straight to the gospelles game.
And mark them, that you see tread forward after the example of us. Christ
has set us the best facion of example, after the which you see me preace to
the same place, that he went unto. All they that run in this race, wyune not
the game: and therefore it is not good following of every one, that runs
before. For there be very many, whom I have oftentimes told you of before,
and now I tell you again with weeping tears, that preach Christ after such
sort, that they are the enemies of Christ's cross for all that. For they will
in no wise follow the example of his life and death, to the intent they may
euerlastinglye live with him: but for their own lucre and vain gloryes sake,
instead of true godliness they teach Iewyshe observations, circumcision of
the foreskynne, choice of meats, dyfference of days, to the intent, that
other men being burdened with these wares, they them selves may reign and
live at ease for all that, as though after this life they looked after none
other. But let the end of them fraye us away from their conditions. For like
as through slanderous reproach of man, we draw to eternal glory, and by
afflictions of this world, preace unto immortal felicity: even so they by
transitorye pleasures of the world, procure to them selves everlasting
destruction, because instead of God they honor their belie that can not help
them: and by countrefaicte vain glory among men, which they repose not in
Christ, but in things that they ought to be ashamed of, they make speed to
everlasting shame. For what soever is earthly, is but temporal and
countrefayte? and what so ever is heavenly, is true and everlasting. But they
study for nothing else but those things that are of the earth. In them
they repose their glory, in them they set their pleasure, in them they put
their hope of help, and so run astraye far from the mark of the gospel.
But we, that follow Christ aright, though our bodies be deteyned upon earth,
yet in soul our conversation is in heaven, sighing continuallye thither, as
our head is gonne before, from whence also through faith we look for our lord
Jesus Christ, which shall raise us from death, and deliver us possession of
those things, that he promyseth us: and shall transform this vile naughtye
body of ours, and make it like unto his own glorious body, for this
consyderacion, that the members, which were fellows of his afflictions in this
world, should be called there into the fellowship of his felicitye. This
matter shall not seem incredible to any man, that will dyligentlye pondre the
great power of him, that shall do this deed. For there is nothing, but he can
bring it to pass, in whose hand it is also, to subdue all things to
himself at his own pleasure. This power he shall openly show than unto al
men, although in the mean season he do many times keep it close.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
Therefore my brethren (dearly beloved and longed for) my joy and crown, so
continue in the Lord ye beloved. I pray Euodias, and beseech Sintiches, that
they be of ^ne accord in the Lord. Ye and I beseech the faithful
rockefelowe, help the women which labored with me in the gospel, and with
Clement also, and with other my labourfelowes, whose names are in the book of
life. INasmuche therefore as you are established with the hope of such great
high matters, my dearly beloved brethren and longed for, whose good success I
repute to be mine own joy, whose victory, I take to be my crown: like as
you have begone, see y^ you so continue, and suffer not your selves to be
drawn away from Jesus Christ. Moreover, my well-beloved brethren, I eftesones
beseech Euodias, and I desire Sintiches and either of them by them selves, that
they agree in one true concord of minds in promotynge the gospel of Christ.
And I also require the, mine own true natural wife, which agreist with me in
the travail of the gospel, help these women that were partetakers of my
labors and dangers in the gospel, and Clement also, with the rest, that wet
my labourfelowes in y^ gospel. Whose names, what needs me to rehearse,
inasmuche as they are written in the book of life and shall never be scraped
out. In that book are the names of all them written, that with their dilygences
help forewarde the business of the gospel, of whose nombre you are also.

The text.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say: rejoice. Let your softness
be known unto all men. The Lord is even at hand. Be careful for nothing,
but in all prayer and supplycacion let your pericyons be manifest unto God
with geuynge of thanckes. And the peace of God (which passes all
understanding) keep your hertes and minds through Christ Jesus. For these
causes sakes, rejoice always, even in the mids of your afflyctions: Again I
eftesones say, rejoice and be of good cheer. And how hottely so ever the
iniquity of the wicked rage against you, yet let your patience and modest
softenes be known and seen unto all manner of men, not only unto the brethren,
but to them also that are strangers from Christ, so that they being provoked
the rather by your good demenoure, may be allured unto the fellowship of the
gospel. For gentilnesse of behauioure wynneth and breaks the ungodly. Covet
not in any wise to revenge you of the^, nor yet envy not them their pleasant
delytes. For the coming of Christ is at hand, which shall render unto you
the joys of immortality, for contemnyng the commodities of this world. And
as for them, they shall suffer the peynes of their own fond folyshenes. Live
you for your part without care for any thing. But care for this only, that
when Christ shall come, he may find you readyly prepared: of him depend you
entierlye with all your hearts. If you have need of any thing, trust not to
the help of the world, but call upon god with continual supplicacions, and
make your moan to him with fervent desires, when you require any thing. And
give him thanks, what so ever chances to you, prosperity or aduersite,
being certainlye assured, that he will also turn your adversity into
prosperity. For he knows well enough, what is profitable for you, although
you ask nothing: But yet he loves to be called upon with such manner of
intercessions, he loves to be entreated, and (as it were) enforced, with godly
besechinges. And so the peace, whereby you are reconsyled unto god, (being a
thing of more gracious efficacy than man's reason is hable to perceive) shall
strengthen your hearts and your consciences, against all terrouts that can
possiblye happen in this world. For what should that man be afraied of, which
knows that God loves him dearly through Jesus Christ? Therefore like as I
would have you without care of those things, wherewith this world either
flattereth or makes afraid* even so you must apply your selves with all your
diligent endeavors, to ware ^iche in virtues, which may make you acceptable
to God.

The text.
Furthermore brethren, whatsoever things are true, what soever things are
hon^^^, whatsoever things are just, what soever things are pure, what soever
things are co^^^nyent, what soever things are of honest report: y^ there be
any virtue, y^ there be any praise of learning those same have ye in your
mind, which ye have both learned and received, heard also and seen in me:
those things d^, and the God of peace shall be with you. I rejoice in the Lord
greatly, that now at the last your ^are is reuyued again for me, in that
wherein ye were also careful: but ye lacked opportunity. I speak out because
of necessyte. For I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be
content. I can both be low, and I can be hye. Every where and in all things I
am instructed, both to be full and to be hongrye, both to have plentye and to
suffer neade. I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me.
Nothwithstandinge ye have well done, that ye bare part with me in my
tribulacion. In consideracion whereof, what soever things are true, and without
countrefaicte: what soever are honest and comelye, and worthy of them that
deteste folyshe vile trifles: what soever are just, what soever are pure and
holy, what soever are commodious to the nouryshement of concord, what soever
be of good report: if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, that
bea^eth virtue company, let these things delight you to study and care for,
let these things be always in your minds: these, I say, and such like,
which you lately learned and received of us: and not heard of me only but
also seen in me. For I have not taught you, but as I have done my self in
deed. Look therefore, that you have not only these things in your
remembrance, but do them also in deed, according as you see example in us.
And to such as do thus, God that is the author of peace, will be ready with
his present help, where as he is at concord with none, but those that are
folowers of virtues. To be brief, it pleased my mind excedynglye, that your
accustummed loving charitablenesse toward me, (which was entermitted for a
small space,) encreaced again, and was as fresh as ever it was toward me.
Howbeit your good will was not slaked, but though it were as loving as ever it
was, yet you wanted opportunity to send the things that you would have done.
Wherefore I am glade, not s much for mine own commodity, as for your louinge
kyndenesse, whereby I rejoice, that you are made worthilye acceptable to God.
For it moves me not much, that my poor penury is releued by your good
liberality. For I am not unacquainted nor vnskylled in those matters: because
I have been a great deal practiced in learning to suffer these incommodities
patientlye. I have learned to be content with my present fortune whatsoever it
be. I can be poor and basse among the poor, and I have learned to excede
among the rich. If I want, I am more sparing: and if I have plentye, I
bestow it to the use of others, and play the lyberall geuer. Lack is the
surer, and wealth the better fellow. As for me, I have learned to conform my
self to all places, to all times, and to all occasions, I am so framed and
taught to abyd e fortune, whether way soever it be. Nether plentye corrupts
me, though I have abundance of things: nor honger throws me down,
though I have nothing to put in my belie. Nether wealth makes me high, when
I have more than Inede: nor want dyscourageth me, though I have less than is
necessary for me to live withal. For why should these things grieve my
stomach, seeing that I pass not upon fetters and whyppes for the gospelles
sake? There is never a one of these, but I can suffer them patientlye enough
without grefe of stomach, being confirmed and strengthened by Jesus Christ,
through whose aid I am strong, whereas of my self I am nothing.
Nevertheless I mean not by these words, as though I set no stoore by your
kind lyberalitie, but I excedyngly commend your godliness, in that you have
planted your selves in to the fellowship of mine afflicitions: for the which,
God shall also make you partakers of my rewards. Certes I take the vndesyred
readynesse of your good will, in very thankful part. For I am not used to
demand any such duties at any man's hand.

The text.
Ye of Philippos know also that in the beginning of the gospel, when I
departed from Macedonia, no congregation bare part with me, as concerning
geuynge and receauynge, but ye only. For when I was in Thessalonica, ye sent
once and afterward again unto my necessite: not that I desire gifts: but I
desire aboundaunt fru^e on your part. Nevertheless, I received all, and have
plenty. I was even filled after that I received of Epaphroditus the things
which were sent from you, an odoure of a sweet smell, a sacrifice accepted
and pleasant to ged. My God shall supplye all your neade through ^ys glorious
tyches by Jesus Christ. Unto God and our father be praise for evermore: Amen.
Salute all the sainetes in Christ Jesus. The brethren which are with me, great
you. All the sain^^es salute you most of all they which are of the Emperors
household. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all: Amen. You of
Philippos are witnesses your selves, that, when I first preached the gospel of
Christ in the countries there about you, and departed from Macedonia, no
congregation, did communicate unto me, I mean, as concerning the matter of
geuyng and receauyng. For they neither gave me any thing, nor I looked to
receive any thing of them. But you only gave me, of your own free mocions,
as well when I was there with you, as also when I was at Thessalonica, you sent
to me in mine absence once and afterward again, such things as you thought
necessary for me. The Thessalonians were welthyer tha^ you, but you were a
great deal kinder hearted than they. I find no fault at them, but I rejoice
at your good forewardenes: and am glad rather for your advantage than for mine.
For verily he wynneth a great gain, that for Christ's gospelles sake
diminysheth his stock of worldely substance, and exchaungeth transitory
riches for true riches that never shall decay. I do not require gifts, but I
require the fruit, that apperteigneth unto you, through your prompte and
undesired lyberal geuyng. Somewhat is decreased in your money reckenynges, and
somewhat is abated in the stock of your householdes: But it is a great encreace
of heavenly rewards, that you may surely reckon upon. And as thouchinge my
part, you need not to be sorye, as though your frendely liberality had not
be very acceptable unto me. I have received every thing, and now I am afloate,
by your lyberall sendyng. And I am fullye refreshed by the things, that
Epaphroditus brought me from you, you sent me so much. Howbeit I received it
not as a gift sent from men to a man, but as a most thankeful oblacion to
God: unto whom no smell of sacrifice is more acceptable, than the willing
ministracion of a gospellyke charity done undesired. Fynallye, like as you
pass not for your own ability, so that I want nothing: even so on the
other part, I beseech my God, fulfill unto you, what so ever you want in this
life. For in as much he is aboundauntlye tyche, he will not suffer, that any
thing shall want unto the necessary uses of you, which wax poor for his
gospelles sake. For that perteyneth to the glory of him and of Christ. Now
therefore, all glory be to god our father euerlastynglye world without end.
Amen.

Salute all them, that according to the doctrine of Jesus Christ, lead a
godly and an upright clean life. The christian brethren that are with me here
at Rome commend them hartelye unto you: And not these only, that are
famyliatly conuersaunt with me, but all the rest also, especially those of the
Emperors household, y^ have embraced y^ doctrine of Christ, and are not
afraid to profess Christ, for all their ^aging lord and master as cruel
as he is. The gracious savor and goodness of our lord Jesus Christ be
always with your spirit.

Amen.
The end of the Paraphrase upon the Epistle of Paul to the Philippians.
The argument of the Epistle of saint Paul to the Colossians by Des. Erasmus
of Roterodame.
THe Colossians are a people of Alia the less, dwelling nigh unto the
Laodicians. Them had not the Apostle Paul him self seen, as which were
instructed in the faith of Christ, either by the preaching of Archippus, or (as
S. Ambrose says) of Epaphras, who were with this matter put in trust. In great
leopardy were these people by reason of false Apostles, which labored to bring
them into a very pestilent opinion, teaching them that the son of God was not
the mean and author of salvation, but that al men have access and entry
unto the father by the healpe of Angels. These men said further that forasmuch
as in the time of the old testament all things were done by the ministry and
service of Angels, that Christ the son of God was neither comen down into
the earth, nor would come. Beside this the same teachers with Christ's
doctrine myngled Iewishnes and supersticious Philosophy, obseruyng and keeping
certain points of the law, supersticiously also honoring the Sun, the
Moon, and stars, with such other small trinkettes of this world, bearyng
the Colossians in hand that they were also bound to do the same. Them bids
Paul to remember their profession, evidently declaryng that whatsoever they
had until that time obtained, was given unto the^ by none Angel, but by Christ
the creator of Angels, that he only was head of the church, and that
salvation should at nomans hand be sought for, but at his, in which treatise he
also defends his own authority, against such as labored to empayre it.
After which he gives them diligent warnyng to take heed, lest they be
deceived with y^ high words of false Apostles, or forged visions of angels,
and so by mean thereof fall either to Iewishnes, or else into thesupersticion of
Philosophy. All which points Paul in the two first chapiters entreats of.
In the other two he exhorts them to virtuous and godly living, namely geuyng
rules, how the wife should use her self toward her husband, how the husband
again should use his wife, after what sort the father should be toward his
children, and the children likewise toward their fathers, the servants to
their masters, and the masters to their servants. The last partsauyng that
he warns Archippus of his duty, is all spent in commendacions. This Epistle
was written out of prison in Ephesus, and sent by Tychicus, as Paul him self
in this present epistles says. The latin arguments show, that it was also
sent thither by Onesimus, for so him self writes also in the last chapter.
The Greek titles record, that it was sent from the city of Rome, and in deed
thence sent he Onesimus, whom Paul being prisoner there had made a christian
man.

The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle of the Apostle saint Paul to the
Colossians,
The first Chapter.
The text.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God and brother Timotheus. To
al saints, which are at Colossa and brethren, that believe in Christ. Paul an
Ambassador of Jesus Christ, and that not by any man's ordinance, but by the
will of God the father, and Timothe, whom for perfect consent in preaching the
gospel I coumpt as my brother, to the dwellers at Colossa, which have both a
confidence in Jesus Christ, and also according to his doctrine live a holy
life, now through like kind of profession becomen our dearly beloved
brethren.

The text.
Grace be unto you and peace from God our father and the lord Jesus Christ.
Grace and peace be there among you from God our father, that as ye are freely
reconciled unto him, ye may likewise even as brethren that have one comen
father, one toward an other of you always norishe mutual unity and concord.

The text.
We give thanks to God the father of our lord Jesus Christ always for you in
our prayers. For we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love
which ye bear to all saints, for the hopes sake which is laid up in store
for you in heaven, of which hope ye heard before by the true word of the
gospel, which is come unto you^ even as it is fruiteful (and grows) as it is
also among you, from the day in the which ye heard of it, and had experience
in the grace of God through the truth, as ye learned of Epaphra our dear
fellow servant, which is for you a faithful minister of Christ, which also
declared unto us your love which ye have in the spirit. And albeit it has
not yet hitherto been my chance to see you, yet in my continual prayers made
to God, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ both for your sakes I give
him thanks for his benefits bestowed upon you, and desire him also daily to
increase the same his gifts, and also to preserve them, after y^ by Epaphra we
heard of your faith, whereby We have heard of your faith i Christ Jesus. etc.
my trust is, ye shall be saved, not by help of Angels, but through the free
bou^teousnes of our Savior Anointed, by who^ it has pleased God the father to
give us al goodness. For him both Anointed would he have to be called, because
of him al should receive health, and Savior, because no man should elsewhere
look for salvation. And by him not only perceived we and understood your
confidence in him, but also your charity joined there with, which as Christ
gave example, ye bear toward good people, earnestly mindyng to do for them,
not for any hoope of advantage, that ye think to receive thereby, but in hope
of the everlasting life, which ye well know is laid up in heaven for your
godlynes. And suerly i^to this trust Of which hope ye heard before by the true
word of the gospel.
are ye brought through the preaching of Christ's gospel, which ye persuade
your self to be a doctrine of such truth, y^ albeit it make great promises,
and such as never were heard of before this time, yet for so much as God is the
author of them, ye think that the same cannot be but true. And as the same
gospel throughout all the world has been daily more and more enlarged: so is
it now come to you, every day growyng and encreasyng, more and more plentifully
spreadyng it self abroad, bringyng forth the fruit of good works, which
freely grow out of christian charity, as it has done in you, growyng still
from better to better, even since that time, wherein ye first heard and knew,
that through the free goodness of God all their sins are forgeuen, which
believe the gospel, if to their right faith they adioyne pure and unfeigned
charity. For so were ye taught by my dearly beloved fellow in service, and
messenger of trust Epaphras, who has among you sincerely done mine office,
after such sort in Jesus Christ's behalf preaching the gospel, that he has
in all points been found without corrupcion. As I therefore by him taught
Which also declared unto us your love which ye have in the spirit.
you, so by him again understand I your good will again toward us, not
meaning such usual good will, as that is, when men wish well to to their
friends and acquaintance, but a spiritual and heavenly favor, wherewith we use
to love all such, by whom the glory of the gospel is set forth and
stablished, though we with our bodily iyen never saw them.

The text.
For this cause we also, ever since the day we heard of it, have not ceased to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk
worthy of the lord, that in all things ye may please, being fruitful in all
good works, and encreasyng of y^ knowledge of God, strengthed with all might,
through his glorious power, unto al patience and long sufferyng, with
ioyfulnes, geuyng thanks unto the father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of saints in light. Which has delivered us
from the power of darkness, and has translated us unto the kingdom of his
dear son By who^ we have redemption through his blood, even the forgeuenes
of sins, which is the image of the invisible God, first begotten of al
creatures, for by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be majesty or lordship, either
rule or power. All things were created by him and for him, and he is before
all things, and by him all things have their being. And for this cause we
again not as one unworthy of this your favor, heartely love you again, though
I never saw you, by and by even from that day wherein we were first certifyed
of your faith and charity, in my daily prayers calling upon God for you, and
with fervent peticions besechyng him, that it may please him in you to make
perfect and to bring at full such gifts, as he has begun to give, that ye
both may more Ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge. etc,
thoroughly know his pleasure, being taught neither by worldely wisdom, nor
yet by any supersticious and vain persuasion of some men, but by a spiritual
wisdom and policy, whereof as yehaue already gotten a good part: so would I
wish, that ye lacked nothing, that ye may in such godly perfeccion pass over
your life, that the same be to gods honor, and in all points also please him,
lettyng no good thing undone, for so doing is the mean to please him.

For to give only a credence to the gospel is but a beginning to salvation,
but the same is with godly and holy works made perfect and full. Nor
suffiseth it to have learned through preaching of the gospel, that God through
his son Jesus Christ is the author and worker of salvation, unless by the
same knowledge ye grow up and bring forth the fruits of christian
charity, continually profityng from better to better, so surely, constantly,
and manfully standing in them, that neither violence nor storm of persecucion
drive you out of y^ right course, for whose perfourmau^ce surely ye need great
assistence and strength. Of strength Strengthed with all might through his
glorious power. etc.
of our own powers we cannot assure our selfs. God it is, which must give
it, to the end that the whole glory of all such things as are by us
valiauntly done, may be given again unto him, which of his goodness enrycheth
us with great patience and long sufferyng to endure and abide for Christ's
gospelles sake all such troubles, as may in the mean time befall us. In which
persecucions suffering it is not enough to be strong without all fear, but
rather besemeth it us, even joyfully and with a good courage to undertake and
suffer them, geuyng thanks to God the father, who has vouchesaued to call you
to such honor, that whereas heretofore ye worshipped devils and idols, ye are
now of his goodness called unto the fellowship of the Jews, which by reason
that they worshipped the true God were in comparison of you, holy, which has
also vouchsaued to call you to the enheritaunce of life everlasting, in hope
whereof al things which in this world either fear or flatter us, must be
despised, both Which has made us mete to be partakers of the inheritance of
saints in light.
for that he has given you wanderyng before in the deep doungeon of
ignorance, the light of the gospel, and for that also ye which heretofore
were under a vile and stauishe bondage subject unto the tyranny of the devil
prince of darkness, are delivered thence and conueighed into the kingdom of
his most derely beloved son, to thentent, that ye being joined into his body
should with him enjoy one kingdom.

Wherein such as are thral to sin, have no place, and therefore has God by
his son made us free, by who^ the sins of our old life are forgiven. So
that now his are ye becomen, by whose benefit and mercy ye are restored.
Consider now, how good a change ye have made. Before your reconciliacion ye
were members of the devil, now are ye planted into Christ's body, whose
dignity is so great, that he is the image of God the father, which father
dwells in light, whereunto no man can come, which is such as can be seen of
no man, though after a certain sort he be through the son seen, which to
the father is in all points very like and equal. For neither is the son
less wise, nor less of might, or of less goodness than is the father. Nor of
late days received he these perfeccions, but euerlastyngly before any thing
was made, was he the image of his everlasting father, not made, but borne of
him, by who^ all things are made, and by him, which only has no beginning.

He therefore of him self begotte his son, and by his son, and with For by
him were all things created.
his son made and create all that is either in heaven or earth, both that may
be seen and not seen, the very angels self not excepted, no not the chief of
them, whither they be majesty's, lordshippes, rules or powers. And albeit these
orders and powers far excede all other creatures, yet are they passing
measure under him, to whom ye are joined: forasmuch as whatsoever is made,
must to his maker needs be inferior. Now are al things not only made by
Christ, but also by him governed and preserved, in which point he is also to
his father like and equal. Nor was the son begotten after other creatures,
but was before al other things, by who^ al things have their being, and
should without him perish, were they not by him maintained. Thus see ye the
excellency and preeminence of Christ, which thing I tell you of, lest any
manne of Angels think more, than he should.

The text.
And he is the head of the body, even of the congregation: he is the beginning
and first begotten of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence. And lest perauenture his glorious and excellent majesty so fear
you away from him, that to aspire and comevnto the favor of God the father ye
think it necessary to seek upon some other mean, hear again and learn to
know, how good he is. Christ is in such sort chief ruler and Lord of
Angels, as I said, that he nethelesse vouchesaueth also to be head of the
church, whom he has so joined unto him, that it cleaves and is coupled unto
him, even as the natural body cleaves unto the head. Whatsoever therefore is
already done in the head, the same must to us be common.

He first of all other rose again from death, not to the intent he would He is
the beg^nnyng and first begotten of the dead. etc
be immortal only him self, but to the end he might enhaunce us his members
to the fellowship of his immortal life. Look what is in the first fruits of
grain offered, the same is generally in the whole heap. He is in deed prince
and author of resurreccion, and so shall we through him also rise again. And
as among things create he is chief, in such sort yet, that himself was not
create and made: so is he in testoryng creatures chief, so that as we are for
our being and birth bound unto his goodness: so should we for our second
birth baptism to live euerlastyngly, be much more beholding unto him.

The text.
For it pleased the father, that in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to
reconcile al things unto him self, and to set at peace by him through the
blood of his cross both things in heaven and things in earth, For so has
it pleased the father, that the son should with all fulness of godly power and
goodness be replenished, which should in him so abide That in him should all
fulness dwell. etc.
and dwell, that we should need no where to borowe any thing, since the father
neither will nor can do any thing but that the son can do and will. And sith
the fathers pleasure was, that so it should be, it besemeth not us curiously to
demand and search why, fynce it can not be but best, whatsoever his wisdom
has once decreed.

This wise to do (I say) God the father thought best, both for our weal and
salvation, and most for his own glory, to reconcile al things unto him, not
by the ministry of Angels, but by his own son, which with his blood
sheddyng, and tourmentyng upon the cross, should abolishe sin, which broke
the peace and concord betwixt heavenly and yearthly creatures, and set all
things at peace, both heavenly and yerthly, making them in Christ to agree
together, and to be at an unity one with an other.

The text.
And you which were sometime far of and enemies, because your minds were
set in evil works, has he now yet reconciled in the body of his flesh,
through death in make you holy and unblameable, and without fault in his own
sight, if ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moved
away from the hoope of the gospel, whereof ye have heard, how that it is
preached among all creatures which are under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a
minister, Of this number so reconciled are ye now becomen, ye, (I say) which
in years past were in such sort strangers to God, that in steed of him ye
worshipped images of devils, not only wilfully dissentyng from him, but also
using your selfs as his cruel adversaries, whom he has yet to him self
reconciled being such as neither looked for so much at his hand, and much
less deserved it, and made of you his enemies, his friends and sons, not by
the ministry of Angels but by the bodily death of his only begotten son,
whom for that purpose his pleasure was, that he should take our mortal flesh
upon him.

And because there can be betwixt God and sinners no peace, it has pleased
him freely to forgive all the offenses of our former li^e, to thentent he would
in his sight make you holy, unblameable, and faultles. Who I pray you can lay
your old debtes to your charge, if he be once contented? And surely contented
will he be, if once upon his fre receiuyng of you unto the faith of the gospel,
ye continually abide in your profession, and leanyng upon this sure and sound
foundation she we your selfs so steadfast and stable, that neither man nor
angel be able to move you from Christ, of who^ ye must hope to receive all
such gifts as the gospel promises, whet unto ye gave credence, which has
not only been preached unto you, but also to all nations contained under
heaven.

Unstedfastnes it is to fall away from that, which ye have once allowed, an
impudent and a shameless point to reken and coumpte that thing for vain, in
belief whereof all the world agrees, and finally to flit from that whose
preacher and minister I Paul am, which would not leave and forgo inf^^e own
countries law, and change it with the gospel of Christ; were I not fully
persuaded, that this gear is heavenly and comes from God.

The text.
Now joy I in my sufftynges for you, and fulfill that which is behynd of the
passions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the
congregation: whereof I am made a minister, according to the ordinance of God,
which ordinance was given me unto you ward to fulfill the word of God, y^
ministry which has been hid since y^ world begun, and since the beginning
of generacions, but now is opened to his saiutes, to who^ God would make
known, what the glorious riches of this mystery is among the gentiles, which
riches is Christ in you, the hope of glory, whom we preach, war^yng all men,
and teaching all men in all wisdom, to make all men perfect in Christ Jesu,
Wherein I also labor and strive, eue^ as farfourth as his streugth works in me
mightily, Now am I so thoroughly persuaded, y^ the gospel is a thing of truth,
that I not only am so far from being ashamed or repentyng my self thereof,
that I will also joyfully suffer, and coumpte stripes, emprisonment and
chains, even matier to rejoice and glory of, which tormentynges I Now joy I
in my suff^ri^ges for you etc.
endure not for any offense of mine, but suffer them for your weal, whom I
say, though the Jews never so much say nay, have no less right to the
benefit of the gospel, than have the Jews themselves. And why should I not
say, that I for your weal suffer, for whom Christ suffered? Why should the
Apostle be loathe to do that, which Christ our prince and master disdayned not
to do? Christ suffered for us not only in his own body, but also in manner
suffers in ours, eue^ as one supplying and fulfilling by his ministers such
things as might in his affliccions seem imperfect, not that his death of it
self is insufficient, but because the affliccions and punishments of the head
and members, of the prince and ministers, are in manner one. These punishme^tes
the greater and more vehemente they be, the more redounde and make they to the
fulness and perfeccion of your salvation. And not for your salvation only, but
for y^ weal also of Christ's whole body, which is the church, do I the
office committed unto me, for to me is committed the cure and over sight of the
congregation. For Christ has set and placed me in his stead, and has
delivered For his bodies sake which is the congregation.
unto me the custody of his own body, specially for that portion, which is
of the Gentiles to be received to the gospel, to the intent I should with my
labor supply that, which he seemed to lack, and to publyshe y^, which was so
many hundred years before this time hidden from the Gentiles, and to teach,
that not only the Jews, but the Gentiles also have through faith an entry into
this welthy state of the gospel. This to do was by god long since purposed, but
yet was this his purpose hidden until this time from the world, and is now
through my preaching opened to all such, as forsakyng their former ungracious
life embrace y^ doctrine of Christ, to whom it has pleased god to declare,
how glorious his riches is toward us, when by publyshing this his so long
hidden mystery the whole world perceyueth, how that free salvation, which
men first thought was offered only to the Jews, is now commen unto al
nations, and that the keeping of Moses law is not required, but faith only,
so that men doubt not of the promises made in the gospel. Instead of all
such things, wherein the Jews have had a foolyshe confidence, Christ only is
for you sufficient. If he be in you, ye have no cause to be sorye of the hope
ye stand in, being both sure enough, and also through him glorious, who Whom
we preach, warnyns all men and teaching etc. ^
of himself will undoubtedly perform, as much as he has promised. Him
preach we of, and not Moses nor angels, aduertisyng and teaching not only
the Jews, but also all people of the world, and in so doong leauyng nothing
untouched, which appertains to the wisdom of the gospel. And this do we to
the intent all men should understand, that whither they be circumcised, or not
circumcised, their weal is in nothing else to be set, but in Christ Jesus. To
bring which faith into men's minds I in such sort labor, that for
auauncing thereof I think it not paynfull to put my self in so many ieopardies
and perilles, which are in deed more weighty, than our weakness is able to
abide and suffer. But strong and mighty is he, by whose aid and mayntenaunce
I do these acts, who also when need requires, with working of miracles by us,
brings my preaching in eredence.

The: ii. Chapter.
The text.
For I would that ye knew, how great care that I have for you and for them
that are at Laodicia, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh,
that their hertes might be comforted when they are knyt together in love, and
in all riches of full understanding, for to know the mystery of God the
father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. ANd this much have I said, (ye Colossians) not to boste my self
unto you, but because I couete, y^ ye should know, how careful I am, and
what ieopardies I put my self in, not only for such, as I have presently
taught the gospel unto, but for them also, which by syghte know me not,
especially for you and the Laodicians, whom though I never saw with my bodily
iyen, yet see I them co^tinuallye with the iyen of my heart, glad of your
increase and furtheraunce, fearful it I espy your entiernes and godly
conditions either to be in ieoperdie or to be inconstant and waver. Nor is it
for my self so greatly anaylable, that such as never saw me, know what
labors and pains I take for them, as it does advantage them. For by my That
their hertes might be comforted. etc.
pensyfenes, by my ieopardies, and affliccions are they more pricked forth and
enforced to consent and cleave more together in godly charity, like y^ members
of one body knyt and surely mortised, whereby also men more clearly perceive
and more certaynely believe the bountiful goodness of god the father toward all
mankind, yea toward al creatures, abounda^tly flowyng abroad, by openyng now
through Jesus Christ the secret mystery, which has hitherto been hidden,
which is, that beside him only we should desire no worldly wisdom, be that
never so great, which the wise Philosophers promisen, or teachers of Moses
law, or any such as boste that they by speaking with angels are taught,
forasmuch as in him alone are contained and hydden all the treasures of
wisdom and fruytful knowledge. Of this fountain may we easly draw, as much
as is to perfect salvation required.

The text.
This I say less any man should beguyle you with entising words. For though
I be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, ioying and
beholding your order, and your steadfast faith in Christ. These points for
this end thought I it good to warn you of, because ye should with all
diligence take heed, least any being instruct with worldly wisdom against the
playnes of Christ's gospel, blind and deceive you with false tales, being yet
such tales, as have a colorable appearance of troth and lykelynes. For so are
the wise men of this world with cap^touse and subtle reasons of their inuencion
wont to entangle simple people, of which sort I know that some there are
among you, watching how they may corrupt your faith.

For albeit I be absent from you, and see not presentlye, what is done Though
I be absente in the flesh. etc.
there, yet am I in mind among you present, with all my heart reioysyng to see
the good order and condition of your life, and therewith the soundnes and
strength of the sure confidence, which ye have in Jesus Christ, to whom ye
have once wholly committed your selves.

The text.
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the lord, even so walkeye in him, so
that ye be roted and buylte in him, and stablyshed through faith, as ye have
learned: and therein be plenteous with geuyng thanks. Now remains this, that
ye upon this good beginnyug continue and profit more and more, and as ye have
once received and believed, that Jesus Christ our lord is all goodness, the
head and welspring of our felicity: so set all your life agree and consent
with your faith and profession, providing always that as ye are through
baptism graffed into him: that ye like wise abide in him and gather strength.
And as the sure and strong foundation of the doctrine of Christ's gospel is
once already laid in you: so labor ye to build up there upon such a work, as
is for such a foundation mete and convenient. And take heed, that ye waver not
this way or that way, as every blaste of new doctrine moves you, but stand
steadfast and stable in that ye have once learned, and endeavor not only to
stand steadfastly, but also to increase every day from better to better, that
your faith and fruits of godly life being daily more and more augmented ye
may always have some new thing to give god thanks for, who^ ye must in deed
thank for all that is by you well done.

The text.
Beware, lest any man sporle you through Philosophy and disceitfull vanity,
after the tradicion of men, and after the ordinances of the world, and not
after Christ. Such as would bring you from your simplicity, watch busely,
watch must ye on the other side likewise, least being as it were enchaunted
And disceitfull van, tie after the tradicion of me^. etc.
with the royal and glyttering appacences of their Phylosophie, ye be ^ro^
your sound faith altered and brought to the vain deuties of men, and so become
as it were a spoil or pray for your adversaries, as ye shall un doubtedly be,
if ye turn from the truth of the gospel and beled with the rules of men's
only making, which stand in such things, as may with our carnal eyes be
seen, and in the gross points of this world, where as Christ's doctrine is
heavenly and spiritual, and teaches the right and true religion, which
stands in minds, and not in meats and drinks, nor in bodily apparel, no
nor in keeping of days, nor yet in wasshyng of hands, which things to true
religion make nothing. Such points withdraw us rather from Christ, and
divide us from the welspring, from whence it were mete we sought for all grace
and goodness.

The text.
For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete
in him: which is the head of all rule and power* by whom also ye are
circumcised with circumcision which is done with out hands, for as much as ye
have put of the sinful body of the flesh through the circumcision that is in
Christ, in that ye are buried with him through baptism in whom ye are also
tysen again through faith, y^ is wrought by the operacion of God, which
raised him from death. For into him are not some certain gifts derived, as
out of the river In him dwells all y^ fulness of y^ godhead bodily. ^c.
a little water runs into the dyche, but in him rests and dwells
corporally the hole fulness of the godhead, so that if ye have him, ye need not
to seek either for the shadows of Moses law or the subtle conueyaunce of
worldly wisdom. The troth is plainly delivered us, as al ou^ senses bear
record, no need have we to seek for figures or doubtful promises. Since ye
are once graffed in Christ, and framed into one body with him, why should
you elswher look to have any thing? For since he lacks nothing, and would
have all his treasure common to al men, through him and in him needs must ye
be made complet, whither ye lack wisdom or power. For as he is the welspring
of wisdom, which can never be dried up, so is he the head of all power and
rule. Nor is there any power, no not of the highest order of Angels (I say,)
but that the same to him boweth his knees. Jews paradue^ture endeavor to
bring you in mind, that it is a weightye matier, to have you circumcised, as
they be* as though the state of man's body and such externe things brought
us into gods favor. But rather be in this persuaded, that whosoever have
Christ, enjoy with him all the glory and commendacion of circumcision. And
who so have not Christ to them is all their circumcision vain and
unprofitable. They have but the shadow of circumcision, ye thereof in your
souls have the very truth. For sithe the Jews circumcision means, that
groce and carnal desyers, should be cut out of al their souls, which now look
for nothing but heavenly things, uncircumcised needs must they be, which
with covetous minds still labor to have more, which please their bealyes,
which with envy and malice pyne a way, which vayngloriously seek for worldly
praise, and despair of heavenly rewards. But ye contrary are through Christ
verily circumcised, not with that circumcision, which is done with man's
hands, but after a spiritual kind of circumcision. Nor have ye a little piece
only of the carnal man pared away, but from you is cut the whole body
defiled with syn, and all corrupted with carnal lusts, and that through the
spiritual circumcision of Christ Jesus. For as he dying forsook his body,
that was subject to death, and rysyng again received a body, which could not
dye: so are ye in baptism through the spirit of god with him spiritually
dead, castyng of all the sins of your old life, and not only dead with him,
but also buried with him. For when sinful desyers are killed, perfect quyetnes
of mind follows. And after such forgoyng of your bodies, which were thral to
sin (which sin is In whom ye are also r^se^ again through faith. ^^.
the very death of the soul) ye are through Christ with him risen again free
from sin, nor for your deserts, but only because ye steadfastly believe in
god, who by his mighty power restored Christ again from death to life, and
that he also in you by his power works, that upon free remission of all your
sins through the death of his son, ye should hencefurthe live with him
subject to no sin, but through innocent and vprighte life make haste forward
to the life, that shall never have end. Thanks then should god the father
have for all such things, which he through his son gives you. Nothing
auauntaged it the Jews, because they were circumcised, and uncircumcision to
you which are Gentiles, was no hinderau^ce. But to be uncircumcised was
therefore a deadly lack, because ye were wholly given to groce and wicked desires
and thereby subject to death, or rather because ye were without the grace of
god, who is the life of man's soul, ye were spiritually dead.

The text.
And ye when ye were dead through sin and through the uncircumcision of your
flesh has he q^ickened with him, and has forgyuen us all our trespaces,
and has put out the hand writing, that was against us, contained in the law
written, and that has he taken out of the way and has fastened it to his
cross and has spoiled rule and power, and has made a show of them openly,
and has triumphed over them in his own person. This kind of uncircumcision,
I say, was to both sorts of us comen, which god has with his holy spirit
cut of and taken away forgeuing us all our sins, and in such sort
forgyuyng them, that we are out ^^ the ieopardie of having the same offenses
any more hereafter to be laid unto our charge, because we have advisedly
sworn to be obedient to Moses law, for breach whereof our adversary the
devil might have an action against us, as against men bounden by their own
hand writing. And has ^ut out the h^n^wry^ing ^^^t was aga^^^t us etc
yea the old obligacion, by right whereof the devil sued us, has Christian
rased out, as soon as we professed the faith of his gospel, through whom the
offenses of our old life are forgyuen, so that the same are laid to no man's
charge. For whatsoever might of us by right of this writing be required, that
same has Christ for our sakes paid upon the cross, where the writing was
rent, torn, and utterly cancelled. Nor have we now any cause to fear the
tyranny of Satan, since Christ has in the cross by his death vanquyshed the
author of death, and thereby delivered us, triumphantly subduyng all the
powers and rules of deuylles, carrying us into his heavenly kingdom, as
though we had been a rich price or botye. For then declared he them freely
and plainly to be ouerco^men and vnhar^ysed* when that in sight both of men
and angels, he carried us about as it were in a triumph, showing that our
enemies were subdued and put to ^lyght, not by the aid of angels or men, but
by his own mighty power, what time he upon the cross hanged up so royal a
sign of victory, and that in such a high place, whereas every manne might
see it. Only take heed to this point, that ye no more fall into your old
sins.

The text.
Let no man therefore trouble your conscience about meat and drink or for a
piece of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the sabbath days which are
shadows of things to come: but the body is in Christ. Fear not, least for
disp^syng the ceremonies of Moses law any man condemn you, either for meat
or drink, be it clean or unclean, or for not puttyng a difference betwixt
holy day and workyng day, or for not keeping holy the feast of the new
Moon, or for breakyng the rest of the Sabbath day. For thiese obseruaunces
were shadows long before signifieng and rudely purtrahing such things, as
should afterward unfeignedly Which are shadows of things to come etc.
be exhibit by Christ. Wherefore since we have now the body self and since
we have the very troth self openly showed unto us, why should we any longer
fear shadows? Whosoever cleaves to Christ being now in heaven regards nothing
else but heavenly things, but walks forth even the right pathwaye to the
reward of immortal life.

The text.
Let no man make you shote at a wrong mark by the humblenes and holiness of
Angels in the things, which he never saw, being causeles puffed up with his
fleshly mind, and holds not the head, whereof all the body by joints and
couples receives nouryshement, and is knyt together, and increases with the
encrasyng, that comes from god. Beware therefore, lest any man by calling you
back again to earthly things fas^y and sleyghtly deceive you of that reward,
which ye have already begone to labor for, instead of heavenly doctrine,
teaching you small matters, and instead of Christ's true religion, a
supersticious worshyppyng of Angels, and so auaunce and exalte himself among
the simple people of certain feigned visions, being desirous of worldly glory,
In the things, which he never saw.
teaching the people such things as learned by angels, which he has of his
own head by himself forged and imagened, without sure trust in him, in
comparison of whom it besemeth every christian to despise al things, be they
never so high, in the mean season so trustyng upon his angels, that he
falls from Christ his heavenly head, of whom depends the whole body of
the church, which is from it with all spiritual gifts derived into every
member through the joints and couplynges nouryshed and increased unto the
highest perfeccion spiritual, that can be, and unto such perfeccion, as
besemeth god to have, to whom we are through Christ joined and coupled.

The text.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why as
though ye yet lived in the world, are ye led with tradicions? Touch not,
taste not, handle not, which all peryshe through the very abuse, after the
commandments and doctrines of men, which things outwardly have the
similitude of wisdom by supersticion and humblenes of mind, and by hurtyng
the body, and in that they do the flesh no worship unto the need thereof. If
Christ be to this visible and groce world dead, and live now in heaven, and
if ye in your kind of life be likewise with him dead to the vsuages of the
world, having an eye to nothing, but to heavenly things, whereto makes it to
be subject to man's ordinances being such, as prescrybe no such things, as
sauer of Christ, but are groce and carnal ordinances of ye world, as though
ye were not now dead to such things, but still lived worldly. Why give you
ear to any Jew prescribyng such things to be observed according to the
carnal meaning of Moses law? Touch not this carkas, it is not clean, taste
not this meat, Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all* etc.
it is not clean, touch not this thing, it is holy, and may lawfully be
touched of no secular person. So ready are ye to give ear unto the traditions
and doctrine of men, which labor to bring you in mind, that in difference of
meats, in obseruyng of days, and in other Iewyshe rules godly religion
stands, as though it so were, that Christ's doctrine were not for you
sufficient. Meat, drink, or apparel bring us not into gods favor, but are
for bodily needs used, and with long long abuse wear away, and are not the
steadfast perfeccions of souls, which cannot be spent* and yet such as teach
such doctrine, among fools and unlearned pretend a feigned color of wisdom,
and with how much more supersticion, and faulty humility they fyl me^nes
minds, by so much more are they made of. For a plain supersticion is it to
make Angels equal with Christ. And a faulty humblenes it is through Angels to
look for that, which should of Christ him self be asked, or at y^ lestwyse
through Christ of the father. Meats, drinks, with such other visible things
are given, not to be compelled with hurt of our bodies to abstain from them,
but to the end that with them our bodies may be helped, and with any kind of
apparel against wind and wether to be maintained and succored, and be ^ed
with any kind of meats, and that in all times and places without any
difference, whansoeuer it be, and as much as for the time shall be thought
nedeful. Jews they been whose hearts are not yet circumcised from the gross
and carnal meaning of the law, which put such differences.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
If ye be then risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affeccion on heavenly
things, and not on yearthly things. BAse and low are these things, and
vnbesemyng the true me^bres of Christ. But if ye to worldly affairs be verily
dead, and risen again with Christ to the desire of high and everlasting
treasures and commodities, set at naught such vile matters, and seek for
heavenly pleasures and things above, where Christ your head sits at the
right hand of God his father. For mete it is that all the studyes and cares of
the members were directed to that place, whereas the head is now present, and
where the same shall with the head hereafter reign for ever. For there lives
every man, where he loves.

The text.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. Whenever Christ,
(which is our life) shall show him self, then shall ye also appear with him
in glory. To this world ye seem dead, as which are neither delited with
worldly wealth, nor yet regard such pha^talies, wherewith the worldly people
are delited. Wherefore ye live not here among men, and yet live ye with Christ
before God, though y^ in the mean season after y^ judgment of the world your
life be hidden. But whattyme Christ shall come again, and show both his glory
and the glory of his body to all the world, then shall men see you with your
head, partakers of glory.

The text.
Mortify therefore your yearthly members: fornicacion, uncleanness, unnatural
lust, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is worshippyng of idols: for
which things sake the wrath of God uses to come on the children of unbelief,
among whom ye walked sometime, when ye lived in them. But now put ye also away
from you al such things, wrath, fiersnes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking,
filthy communicacion out of your mouth. In the mean season diligently
endeavor, that all the body be like unto the high and heavenly head, whose
me^bres if they here dye not utterly to carnal desires, they cannot in heaven
live with Christ. The devil has also his body, which I else where called the
body of sin. His members are fornicacion, which among worldly people is eue^
praised, uncleanness, unnatural lust, and such other desires more filthy, than
are mete to be named, desire of hurtful things, as of glory, honor, and
vengeance, especially desire of money, which sin among al other nighest
draws to the most outrageous wickedness of all, that is to were, to the
worshippyng And ^^uetonsnes which is worshippyng of idols.
of idols. To these sins whosoever be subject, cannot be partaker of the
glory of Christ. So far are they from being the true children of God, which
are with such outrageous vices corrupted, that for the like, he fiercely raged
even upon his own people the Jews, destroiyng and disenherityng them as
disobedient children. With such like horrible vices was your life also once
corrupted, what time ye were not yet through baptism dead with Christ, but
lived as your froward desires led you. Now since Christ has in him left
nothing that is mortal and yearthly, meet it is, since through him ye are
borne again, that ye cast away all the filthynes of your old and former life.
And not only cast away such great enormities, as we now spoke of: but also
such things, wherein the comen sort of me^ is wont to bear with them selfs,
as wrath, fyersenes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, that ye not only have your
hearts pure from such desires, but also your mouth clean from al filthy
communicacion.

The text*
Lie not one to an other, seeing that ye have put of the old man with his
works, and have put on the new man which is renewed into the knowledge and
image of him, that made him, where is neither Gentile nor Jew, circumcision
nor uncircumcision, Barbarus or Sithian, bond or free, but Christ is all in
all thing. Christ is truth self, it is not mete that ye being his members
should lie one to an other of you. And to be brief, since ye have put on
Christ, put of all the old yearthly man, with all his works and desires, and
put on a new man which will never be old, but by reason that in him the
knowledge of God daily more and more increases, florisheth and buddeth up And
image of him that made him.
into better and greater, after the image of Christ, which being a new man him
self, builded in us a new man, extinguishyng the old. For as many of us as
are planted into Christ's body, are so far gone from that we were, as though
we were new made again, in somuche that now no difference is there betwixt
Gentile and Jew, betwixt the circumcised and uncircumcised, betwixt the
wild Scithian, and the Grecian and man of Athens, nor yet betwixt the free and
the bond. Among men such differences are passed upon, but before God there
is of such things no regard, but Christ which is indifferently comen to
all, only gives al things to al men. Christ is to ye bondsman, fredome, to
the poor man riches, to the wild and barbarous, civility, to the
uncircumcised, circumcision. And to be brief, through him among you are all
things made equal, because none should disdain other.

The text.
Therefore as clecte of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kyndnes,
humblenes, of mind, mekenes, long sufferyng, for bearyng one an other, and
forgeuyng one an other, if any man have a quarrel against an other, as Christ
forgave you, even so do ye. Wherefore instede of your vile members and
vnbesemyng Christ, put on other members, contrary to those filthy members,
which we before rehearsed, and instede of them put on such as are mete for
the^, whom God has chosen out to be holy, and vouchsaued to love. What members
are they, some will say, without doubt such as Christ him self both taught,
and put in execucion, I say, tender mercy, that ye be in a readynes to help the
weakness of other, kyndnes, because ye should in comen co^uersacion of life be
tractable, humblenes of mind, lest ye arrogantly auaunce your self before
other, mekenes, lest ye upon offenders use cruelty, long sufferyng, lest ye
be hasty to revenge, but bear each one with other of you, and each forgive
other, if through man's infirmity any thing be among you, by reason whereof
one might have a quarrel again an other. It besemeth you to forgive each others
offenses, since Christ, who offended no man, forgave us all our trespaces.

The text.
Above all these things, put on love, which is the bond of perfitenes. And
the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which peace ye are called in one
body. But above all other garments especially apparel your selfs with
christian charity, who is so far from hurtyng any man, that it laboreth to
do every man good, yea to do good for evil. This is the perfect and most sure
bond, wherewith the body of Christ is joined together, and the members abide
fast, which would else fall on sonder. With charity will follow peace and
concord, not the comen peace which men speak of, but such as is made and
maintained by the mighty power of Christ, steadfastly. Let her always in your
hearts win and have the upper hand, let her against malice, pride, wrath,
and contencion, have the victory. For God has called you to concord, and has
for that purpose reconciled you all unto him, and made you as it were, one
body, to the intent y^ ye like members of one body, should among your selfs be
of one mind.

The text.
And see that ye be thankeful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously
with all wisdom. Teach and exhort your own selves in Psalms and Hymns,
and spiritual songs, syngyng with grace in your hearts to the lord, Be not
unthankful, and forgetful of Gods great goodness toward you. With him should
we not now have been at peace, had he not freely forgeuen us all our sins:
and does one brother forgettyng this, make battle again his brother for a
little displeasure? Strive not among your self for preeminence in worldly
wisdom. Let the word of Christ, which teaches things belongyng to perfect
godlynes, dwell and continue in you ple^tifully, that in him ye sauer and grow
wise, so that not only your self know, what is to Christ acceptable, but be
also able one to teach an other, if any be out of the way, and to give an
other warnyng, if he in his duty be slack, in y^ mean season at all time
merry and joyful in hope of the bl^sse to come, geuyng praise to God in Psalms,
in Hymns, and in spiritual songs, praisyng God, not with our mouth only, but
also more speacially with our heart. For such are the songs, with who^ God is
delited, lest any think it a great praise to God, only with his mouth to make
a noise.

The text.
And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the lord Jesus,
geuyng thanks to God the father by him. Finally whatsoever ye do either in
word or deed, do it so, that it make to the glory of our lord Jesus, so that
all your life and conversation sauer, express and resemble him. Whiles ye are
this wise doing, if any thing befall you, whether it be prosperouse or other
wise, be not there with either proud, or dismayed, but for all give thanks to
God the father through his son, by whom he turns all such chances to our
weal and advantage.

The text.
Ye wives, submit your selves to your own husbands, as it is comely in the
lord. Ye husbands, love your wives and be not bitter unto them. Ye children
obey your fathers and mothers in all things, for that is well pleasyng unto
the lord. Ye wives submit your selves obediently unto your husbands, so
besemeth it such as have taken upon them Christ's name, for whom it is mete in
all goodness to go beyond other. Ye husbands again love your wives, whom ye
must remember in such condition to be subject unto you, that yet to them ye
should not be sharp and bitter. Ye children be in all things obedient to your
fathers and mothers, though they command you paineful business, so that the
same be not ungodly. For it is Christ's will and pleasure that ye should so do.

The text.
Ye fathers, provoke not your children (to a^get) lest they be of a desperate
mind. Ye servants be obedient unto them that are your bodily masters in all
things: not with iye service as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart
fearyng God. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartely, as though ye did it to the
lord, and not unto men: knowing that of the lord ye shall receive the reward
of inheritance: for ye serve the lord Christ, Again ye fathers abuse not your
authority upon your children, nor provoke them so with cruelnes, that they
despair. Ye servants in all points obey y our masters, whom by the law
of man ye are bound to serve, not only because they see, and look upon you,
and for fear, as the comen sort of heathen servants are wont to do,
thinkyng that they have done their duties, if they offend not their master
veyng but a man, but also with a simple and an vnfamed heart doing your duty,
not only for fear of man, but also for fear of God, who sees, with what
mind ye do, whatsoever ye do,. Nor consider in your service, what your master
being but a man deserves, but what service soever ye do unto him, what kind
of one soever he be, coumpte it, as done to Christ, and not to men, assuryng
your self, that of him ye shall receive the reward of heavenly inheritance,
though your unkind master give you nothing for your labor, nor accoumpte you
among his children. For whiles ye for Christ's sake do service to unmeet
masters, ye serve Christ.

The text.
But he that does sin, shall receive for his sin, Neither is there any
respect of persons with God, For as the master if he against his servant any
thing offend, though he among men be not punyshed, he shall not yet before god
escape punishment: so the servant that well does his duty, albeit he have no
reward of men, which with themselves think, that they to their servants
are nothing bound, when they have done their duties, yet shall they not loose
their reward at gods hand, who puts no difference betwixt persons but
betwixt minds, nor co^sidereth a man's condition, but how well he does*

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
Masters do unto your servants, that which is just, and equal, knowing
that ye also have a master in heaven. Again ye that are masters abuse not
the authority given you by men's laws, and not for any perfeccion of nature,
to exercise tyranny upon your servants, but give them that is just and
lawful, departing with them sufficiently, in such things as are for natural
uses necessary, and make not for your pleasure to much of some, intollerablye
oppressing other, assuring your selves, that ye are rather with them fellows in
service, tha^ masters, for as much as ye have with them one commen master in
heaven, at whose hand ye shall fi^de like fauer, as your selves have showed to
your servants.

The text.
Continue in prayer and watch in the same, with thanks giving, praying also for
us, that god may open unto us the door of vtteraunce, that we may speak the
mystery of Christ, (wherefore I am also in these bo^des) that I may utter it,
as it becomes me to speak. And because I would ye should be more worthy
me^bres of Christ's body, continue in prayer, not as dull and heavy people by
reason of any surfettyng, but as sober and wakefull, in the same also geuyng
god thanks, so yt ye not only desyer of god things to salvation profitable,
but also give him thanks for his daily gifts, to the intent that when he
sees you both tha^kfull and mindful, he may be toward you more
beneficial. In the mean time ye shall also deiyre god for us, yt it may
please his goodness in such sort to take away al impedimentes, that his
gospel may freely be preached, yt he through faith openyng men's hearts the
mystery may enter into al men's minds which being hitherto hidden, ye
father would now have known unto all, as touching Christ, through whom
without help of the law he offers unto al people salvation, for preaching
whereof I lie in these bonds, so yt nothing let me among al men to publish
and sprede abroad ye gospel of Christ, which am desirouse so to do freely and
without fear, eue^ as he commanded me.

The text.
Walk wisely toward them, that are without, and lose no opportunity. Use your
selves soberly and discretly with such, as are to Christ's religion
strangers, so that in your manners nothing appear, yt may either move them to
persecute you, or withdraw their minds and fauer from the gospel. For since
it can not be avoided, but that ye must needs with Heathe^s, be conuersau^t,
and with them live familierly, let them in you find, that through your new
profession ye are in all points becomme^ thereby better and more courteyse,
namely if any such thing chance, wherein without breach of religion ye may do
them pleasure. Now must we specially for the present time endeavor, that all
be allured to the profession of the gospel.

The opportunity whereof must not with ianglyng and vain contencions be ioste,
but be bought rather with all the precious goods and treasures that we have.
For this give over your honor, depart with your money, for this away with
your desyer to revenge. If with the loss of such things the gospel be
furthered, then think as it is in deed that your advantage is great.

The text.
Let your speech be always well sauoured and poudred with salt, that ye may
know, how ye ought to answer every man. Let not your speech to them be
reprochefull and roughe, but let it sauoure of courtesy and gentleness, and be
poudred with the salt of wisdom, reme^bryng that gentle speech rather
soupleth fierce stomachs, and discrecion teaches, what, to whom, and with
what sobernes we ought to answer. We must otherwise use our self toward
princes and governors of the world, otherwise with mean men, and otherwise
with low persons, after one sort with such as are gentle, and after an other
sort with such as are furnishe, otherwise with learned, otherwise with
unlearned. After such sort must our language be tempered unto every man's
condition, that it may further and promote the gospel. Some time better is it
to give place when he whom ye intend to teach, with reprochefull words
gaynsayth your teaching, or he whom thou speak unto, goes covertly about
to hurt thy doctrine.

The text.
Of all my business shall ye be certified by Tychicus, the beloved brother and
faithful minister, and fellow servant in the lord, whom I have sent unto you
for the same purpose, that he might know what ye do, and that he might
comfort your hearts, with one Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother which is
one of you. They shall show you of all things which are a doing heree. Of my
state I write not unto you, but of that shall Tichicus, the bearet of these
letters, certify you, through one common profession, my well beloved brother,
faithful minister, and fellow servant in preaching the gospel, whom I for
this purpose sent thither, both to the intent that by him ye should know,
what is here done among us, and by him to be certified, how ye do, that your
minds may through his communicacion be refreshed, and mine also by his good
report made of you. And with Tychichus have I sent Onesimus, whom I would ye
should not esteem and judge by his old kind of life, since he is now my
faithful, and beloved brother, whom for this cause ye ought to make the more
of, because he is a Gentile as ye be, and of an uncircumcised one, turned to
Christ. These two shall to you make faithful report, of such things as are
here done among us, as far as is expedient for you to know.

The text.
Aristarchus my prison fellow saluteth you, and Marcus Barnabas systers son:
touching whom ye received commandments. If he come unto you, receive him:
and Jesus, which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These only
are my workefelowes unto the kingdom of god, which have been unto my
consolacion. Aristarchus saluteth you, and albeit he be a Jew, yet for his like
faith, ye should make much of him. For him have I for Christ's gospels sake of
my enprisonment fellow and pertaker. Mareus also, Barnabas systers son whom ye
well know, saluteth you, whom I at an other time commended unto you,
commanding you than, as we now do, that if he come to you, that ye with all
gentleness receive and enterteyne him. Jesus also, whose surname is Iustus
greteth you.

These are in deed, to you of a strange nation, I say of the Jews, and yet
of you worthy to be favored, because they in preaching the kingdom of god are
my workefelowes, and were unto me in the affliccions, which I suffer, very
cherefull.

The text.
Epaphras the servant of Christ, (which is one of you) saluteth you, and
always labors fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
full, in all the will of god. For I bear him record, that he has a fervent
mind for you, and them that are of Laodicia, and them that are of Hierapolis.
Epaphras greeteth you, which is one of you, not only by the profession of
Christ's name, but also one of the same country, whose hartelye favors you,
that he most fervently for you makes his prayer to god, y^ ye y his help
may steadfastly continue in that ye have begun, and not be imperfect
christians, but in doing al such things, as god requires, perfect and full.
For in this I bear him record, that he has a fervent love toward you, and
not toward you only, but also toward all them, that are of Laodicia and
Hierapolis, which border nigh unto you.

The text.
Dear Lucas the physicion greteth you and Demas. Salute the brethren which
are of Laodicia, and salute Nymphas, and the congregation, which is in his
house. Lucas the physicion, who^ I singulerly love greteth you, and so does
also Demas, which as yet is with me. Salute as well other brethren, that be at
Laodicia, as also especially Nympha, with all the congregation, that is in his
house.

The text.
And when the epistie is red of you, make that it be red also in the
congregation of the Laodicians, and that ye likewise read the epistle of
Laodicia. As Soon as this epistle is rehearsed among you, cause that the same
also be read in the congregation of the Laodicians, and again read ye the
Epistle, which from Laodicia I wrote to Timothy, that they may profit more.

The text.
And say to Archippus: take heed to thy office, that thou haste received in
the lord, that thou fulfill it. The salutacion by the hand of me Paul,
remember my bonds, the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. Say
in my name these words to Archippus your ruler: look about and take heed, what
charge thou have taken in hand. It is no man's busynes Take heed to thy
office.
and cure, but gods, which is committed unto the. See thou perform that thou
haste undertaken, as which shalt thereof to the lord yield accoumpte. But
because this Epistle with you should be of more credit, lo I subscribe
gretynges to you all with mine own hand, with Paul's hand (I say) whom ye
well know. Remember my bonds, whom I bear for your sake, and live after such
sort, that I of them be not made ashamed. The grace of Jesus be always with
you.

Amen.
Finis,
The argument of the Epistle of saint Paul to the Colossians by Des. Erasmus
of Roterodame.
THe Colossians are a people of Asia the less, dwelling nigh unto the
Laodicians. Them had not the Apostle Paul him self seen, as which were
instructed in the faith of Christ, either by the preaching of Archippus, or (as
S. Ambrose says) of Epaphras, who were with this matter put in trust. In great
ieopardy were these people by reason of false Apostles, which labored to bring
them into a very pestilent opinion, teaching them that the son of God was not
the mean and author of salvation, but that al men have access and entry
unto the father by the healpe of Angels. These men said further that forasmuch
as in the time of the old testament all things were done by the ministry and
service of Angels, that Christ the son of God was neither comen down into
the earth, nor would come. Beside this the same teachers with Christ's
doctrine myngled Iewishnes and supersticious Philosophy, obseruyng and keeping
certain points of the law, supersticiously also honoring the Sun, the
Moon, and stars, with such other small trinkettes of this world, bearyng
the Colossians in hand that they were also bound to do the same. Them bids
Paul to remember their profession, evidently declaryng that whatsoever they
had until that time obtained, was given unto the^ by none Angel, but by Christ
the creator of Angels, that he only was head of the church, and that
salvation should at nomans hand be sought for, but at his, in which treatise he
also defends his own authority, against such as labored to empayre it.
After which he gives them diligent warnyng to take heed, lest they be
deceived with y^ high words of false Apostles, or forged visions of angels,
and so by mean thereof fall either to Iewishnes, or else into the supersticion
of Philosophy. All which points Paul in the two first chapiters entreats
of. In the other two he exhorts them to virtuous and godly living, namely
geuyng rules, how the wife should use her self toward her husband, how the
husband again should use his wife, after what sort the father should be
toward his children, and the children likewise toward their fathers, the
servants to their masters, and the masters to their servants. The last
part, saving that he warns Archippus of his duty, is all spent in
commendacions. This Epistle was written out of prison in Ephesus, and sent by
Tychicus, as Paul him self in this present epistles says. The latin
arguments show, that it was also sent thither by Onesimus, for so him self
writes also in the last chapter. The Greek titles record, that it was sent
from the city of Rome, and in deed thence sent he Onesimus, whom Paul being
prisoner there had made a christian man.

The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle of the Apostle saint Paul to the
Colossians.
The first Chapter.
The text.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God and brother Timothcus. To
al saints, which are at Colossa and brethren, that believe in Christ. Paul an
Ambassador of Jesus Christ, and that not by any man's ordinance, but by the
will of God the father, and Timothe, whom for perfect ronsent in preaching the
gospel I coumpt as my brother, to the dwellers at Colossa, which have both a
confidence in Jesus Christ, and also according to his doctrine live a holy
life, now through like kind of profession becomen our dearly beloved
brethren.

The text.
Grace be unto you and peace from God our father and the lord Jesus Christ.
Grace and peace be there among you from God our father, that as ye are freely
reconciled unto him, ye may like wise even as brethren that have one comen
father, one toward an other of you always norishe mutual unity and concord.

The text.
We give thanks to God the father of our lord Jesus Christ always for you in
our prayers. For we have heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love
which ye bear to all faintes, for the hopes sake which is laid up in store
for you in beauen, of which hope ye heard before by the true word of the
gospel, which is come unto you: even as it is fruiteful (and grows) as it is
also among you, from the day in the which ye heard of it, and had experience
in the grace of God through the truth, as ye learned of Epaphra our dear
fellow servant, which is for you a faithful minister of Christ, which also
declared unto us your love which ye have in the spirit. And albeit it has
not yet hitherto been my chance to see you, yet in my continual prayers made
to God, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ both for your sakes I give
him thanks for his benefits bestowed upon you, and desire him also daily to
increase the same his gifts, and also to preserve them, after y^ by Epaphra we
heard of your faith, whereby We have heard of your faith i Christ Jesus. etc.
my trust is, ye shall be saved, not by help of Angels, but through the free
bou^teousnes of our Savior Anointed, by who^ it has pleased God the father to
give us al goodness. For him both Anointed would he have to be called, because
of him al should receive health, and Savior, because no man should elsewhere
look for salvation. And by him not only perceived we and understood your
confidence in him, but also your charity joined there with, which as Christ
gave example, ye bear toward good people, carnestly mindyng to do for them,
not for any hoope of advantage, that ye think to receive thereby, but in hope
of the everlasting life, which ye well know is laid up in heaven for your
godlynes. And suerly i^to this trust Of which hope ye heard before by the trae
word of the gospel.
are ye brought through the preaching of Christ's gospel, which ye persuade
your self to be a doctrine of such truth, y^ albeit it make great promises,
and such as never were heard of before this time, yet for so much as God is the
author of them, ye think that the same cannot be but true. And as the same
gospel throughout all the world has been daily more and more enlarged: so is
it now come to you, every day growyng and encreasyng, more and more plentifully
spreadyng it self abroad, bringyng forth the fruit of good works, which
freely grow out of christian charity, as it has done in you, growyng still
from better to better, even since that time, wherein ye first heard and knew,
that through the free goodness of God all their sins are forgeuen, which
believe the gospel, if to their right faith they adioyne pure and unfeigned
charity. For so were ye taught by my dearly beloved fellow in service, and
messenger of trust Epaphras, who has among you sincerely done mine office,
after such sort in Jesus Christ's behalf preaching the gospel, that he has
in all points been found without corruption. As I therefore by him taught
Which also declared unto us your love which ye have in the spirits.
you, so by him again understand I your good will again toward us, not
meaning such usual good will, as that is, when men wish well to to their
friends and acquaintance, but a spiritual and heavenly favor, wherewith we use
to love all such, by whom the glory of the gospel is set forth and
stablished, though we with our bodily iyen never saw them.

The text.
For this cause we also, ever since the day we heard of it, have not ceased to
pray for you, and to desire that ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge of
his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, that ye might walk
worthy of the lord, that in all things ye may please, being fruitful in all
good works, and encreasyng of y^ knowledge of God, strengthed with all might,
through his glorious power, unto al patience and long sufferyng, with
ioyfulnes, geuyng thanks unto the father, which has made us meet to be
partakers of the inheritance of saints in light. Which has delivered us
from the power of darkeues, and has translated us unto the kingdom of his
dear son By who^ we have redemption through his blood, even the forgeuenes
of sins, which is the image of the invisible God, first begotten of al
creatures, for by him were all things created, that are in heaven, and that are
in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be majesty or lordship, either
rule or power. All things were created by him and for him, and he is before
all things, and by him all things have their being. And for this cause we
again not as one unworthy of this your favor, heartely love you again, though
I never saw you, by and by even from that day wherein we were first certifyed
of your faith and charity, in my daily prayers calling upon God for you, and
with fervent peticions besechyng him, that it may please him in you to make
perfect and to bring at full such gifts, as he has begun to give, that ye
both may more Ye might be fulfilled with the knowledge. etc.
thoroughly know his pleasure, being taught neither by worldely wisdom, nor
yet by any supersticious and vain persuasion of some men, but by a spiritual
wisdom and policy, whereof as yehaue already gotten a good part: so would I
wish, that ye lacked nothing, that ye may in such godly perfeccion pass over
your life, that the same be to gods honor, and in all points also please him,
lettyng no good thing undone, for so doing is the mean to please him.

For to give only a credence to the gospel is but a beginning to salvation,
but the same is with godly and holy works made perfect and full. Nor
suffiseth it to have learned through preaching of the gospel, that God through
his son Jesus Christ is the author and worker of salvation, unless by the
same knowledge ye grow up and bring forth the fruits of christian
charity, continually profityng from better to better, so surely, constantly,
and manfully standing in them, that neither violence nor storm of persecucion
drive you out of ye right course, for whose perfourmau^ce surely ye need great
assistence and strength. Of strength Strengthed with all might through his
glorious power. etc.
of our own powers we cannot assure our selfs. God it is, which must give
it, to the end that the whole glory of all such things as are by us
valiauntly done, may be given again unto him, which of his goodness enrycheth
us with great patience and long sufferyng to endure and abide for Christ's
gospelles sake all such troubles, as may in the mean time befall us. In which
persecucions suffering it is not enough to ve strong without all fear, but
rather besemeth it us, even joyfully and with a good courage to undertake and
suffer them, geuyng thanks to God the father, who has vouchesaued to call you
to such honor, that whereas heretofore ye worshipped devils and idols, ye are
now of his goodness called unto the fellowship of the Jews, which by reason
that they worshipped the true God were in comparison of you, holy, which has
also vouchsaued to call you to the enheritaunce of life everlasting, in hope
whereof al things which in this world either fear or flatter us, must be
despised, both Which has made us me^e to be partakers of the inheritance of
saints in light.
for that he has given you wanderyng before in the deep doungeon of
ignorance, the light of the gospel, and for that also ye which heretofore
were under a vile and slauishe bondage subject unto the tyranny of the devil
prince of darkness, are delivered thence and conueighed into the kingdom of
his most derely beloved son, to thentent, that ye being joined into his body
should with him enjoy one kingdom.

Wherein such as are thral to sin, have no place, and therefore has God by
his son made us free, by who^ the sins of our old life are forgiven. So
that now his are ye becomen, by whose benefit and mercy ye are restored.
Consider now, how good a change ye have made. Before your reconciliacion ye
were members of the devil, now are ye planted into Christ's body, whose
dignity is so great, that he is the image of God the father, which father
dwells in light, whereunto no man can come, which is such as can be seen of
no man, though after a certain sort he be through the son seen, which to
the father is in all points very like and equal. For neither is the son
less wise, nor less of might, or of less goodness than is the father. Nor of
late days received he these perfeccions, but euerlastyngly before any thing
was made, was he the image of his everlasting father, not made, but borne of
him, by who^ all things are made, and by him, which only has no beginning.

He therefore of him self begotte his son, and by his son, and with For by
him were all things created.
his son made and create all that is either in heaven or earth, both that may
be seen and not seen, the very angels self not excepted, no not the chief of
them, whither they be majesty's, lordshippes, rules or powers. And albeit these
orders and powers far excede all other creatures, yet ace they passing
measure under him, to whom ye are joined: forasmuch as whatsoever is made,
must to his maker needs be inferior. Now are al things not only made by
Christ, but also by him governed and preserved, in which point he is also to
his father like and equal. Nor was the son begotten after other creatures,
but was before al other things, by who^ al things have their being, and
should without him perish, were they not by him maintained. Thus see ye the
excellency and preeminence of Christ, which thing I tell you of, lest any
manne of Angels think more, than he should.

The text.
And he is the head of the body, even of the congregation: he is the beginning
and first begotten of the dead, that in all things he might have the
preeminence. And lest perauenture his glorious and excellent majesty so fear
you away from hun, that to aspire and come unto the favor of God the father ye
think it necessary to seek upon some other mean, hear again and learn to
know, how good he is. Christ is in such sort chief ruler and Lord of
Angels, as I laid, that he nethelesse vouchesaueth also to be head of the
church, whom he has so joined unto him, that it cleaves and is coupled unto
him, even as the natural body cleaves unto the head. Whatsoever therefore is
already done in the head, the same must to us be common.

He first of all other rose again from death, not to the intent he would He is
the beginning and first begotten of the dead. and^
be immortal only him self, but to the end he might enhaunce us his members
to the fellowship of his immortal life. Look what is in the first fruits of
grain offered, the same is generally in the whole heap. He is in deed prince
and author of resurreccion, and so shall we through him also rise again. And
as among things create he is chief, in such sort yet, that himself was not
create and made: so is he in restoryng creatures chief, so that as we are for
our being and birth bound unto his goodness: so should we for our second
birth baptism to li^e euerlastyngly, be much more beholding unto him.

The text.
For it pleased the father, that in him should all fulness dwell, and by him to
reconcile al things unto him self, and to set at peace by him through the
blood of his cross both things in heaven and things in earth, For so has
it pleased the father, that the son should with all fulness of godly power and
goodness be replenished, which should in him so abide That in him should all
fulness dwell. etc.
and dwell, that we should need no where to borowe any thing, since the father
neither will nor can do any thing, but that the son can do and will. And sith
the fathers pleasure was, that so it should be, it besemeth not us curiously to
demand and search why, since it can not be but best, whatsoever his wisdom
has once decreed.

This wise to do (I say) God the father thought best, both for our weal and
salvation, and most for his own glory, to reconcile al things unto him, not
by the ministry of Angels, but by his own son, which with his blood
sheddyng, and tourmentyng upon the cross, should abolishe sin, which broke
the peace and concord betwixt heavenly and yearthly creatures, and set all
things at peace, both heavenly and yerthly, making them in Christ to agree
together, and to be at an unity one with an other.

The text.
And you which were sometime far of and enemies, because your minds were
set in evil works, has he now yet reconciled in the body of his flesh,
through death in make you holy and unblameable, and without fault in his own
sight, if ye continue grounded and stablished in the faith, and be not moved
away from the hoope of the gospel, whereof ye have heard, how that it is
preached among all creatures which are under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a
minister, Of this number so reconciled are ye now becomen, ye, (I say) which
in years past were in such sort strangers to God, that in steed of him ye
worshipped images of devils, not only wilfully dissentyng from him, but also
using your selfs as his cruel adversaries, whom he has yet to him self
reconciled being such as neither looked for ^o much at his hand, and much
less deserved it, and made of you his enemies, his friends and sons, not by
the ministry of Angels, but by the bodily death of his only begotten son,
whom for that purpose his pleasure was, that he should take our mortal flesh
upon him.

And because there can be betwixt God and sinners no peace, it has pleased
him freely to forgive all the offenses of our former life, to thentent he would
in his sight make you holy, unblameable, and faultles. Who I pray you can lay
your old debtes to your charge, if he be once contented? And surely contented
will he be, if once upon his fre receiuyng of you unto the faith of the gospel,
ye continually abide in your profession, and leanyng upon this sure and sound
foundation show your selfs so steadfast and stable, that neither man nor angel
be able to move you from Christ, of who^ ye must hope to receive all such
gifts as the gospel promises, whervn to ye gave credence, which has not
only been preached unto you, but also to all nations contained under heaven.

Unsteadfastness it is to fall away from that, which ye have once allowed, an
impudent and a shameless point to reken and coumpte that thing for vain, in
belief whereof all the world agrees, and finally to flit from that whose
preacher and minister I Paul am, which would not leave and forgo mine own
countries law, and change it with the gospel of Christ, were I not fully
persuaded, that this gear is heavenly and comes from God.

The text.
Now joy I in my suffrynges for you, and fulfill that which is behynd of the
passions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the
congregation: whereof I am made a minister, according to the ordinance of God,
which ordinance was given me unto you ward to fulfill the word of God, y^
ministry which has been hid since y^ world begun, and since the beginning
of generacions, but now is opened to his saints, to who^ God would make
known, what the glorious riches of this mystery is among the gentiles, which
riches is Christ in you, the hope of glory, whom we preach, warnyng all men,
and teaching all men in all wisdom, to make all men perfect in Christ Jesus,
Wherein I also labor and strive, eue^ as farfoorth as his strength works in me
mightily, Now am I so thoroughly persuaded, y^ the gospel is a thing of truth,
that I not only am so far from being ashamed or repentyng my self thereof,
that I will also joyfully suffer, and coumpte stripes, emprisonment and
chains, even matier to rejoice and glory of, which tormentynges I Now ioy^ I
in my suf^^ri^ge^ for (...) etc.
endure not for any offense of mine, but suffer them for your weal, whom I
say, though the Jews never so much say nay, have no less right to the
benefit of the gospel, than have the Jews themselves. And why should I not
say, that I for your weal suffer, for whom Christ suffered? Why should the
Apostle be loathe to do that, which Christ our prince and master disdayned not
to do? Christ suffered for us not only in his own body, but also in manner
suffers in ours, eue^ as one supplying and fulfilling by his ministers such
things as might in his affliccions seem imperfect, not that his death of it
self is insufficient, but because the affliccions and punishments of the head
and members, of the prince and ministers, are in manner one. These punishme^tes
the greater and more vehemente they be, the more redounde and make they to the
fulness and perfeccion of your salvation. And not for your salvation only, but
for ye weal also of Christ's whole body, which is the church, do I the
office committed unto me, for to me is committed the cure and over light of the
congregation. For Christ has set and placed me in his stead, and has
delivered For his bodies sake ^ which is ^^e congregation
unto me the custody of his own body, specially for that portion, which is
of the Gentiles to be received to the gospel, to the intent I should with my
labor supply that, which he seemed to lack, and to publyshe y^, which was so
many hundred years before this time hidden from the Gentiles, and to teach,
that not only the Jews, but the Gentiles also have through faith an entry into
this welthy state of the gospel. This to do was by god long since purposed, but
yet was this his purpose hidden until this time from the world, and is now
through my preaching opened to all such, as forsakyng their former ungracious
life embrace y^ doctrine of Christ, to whom it has pleased god to declare,
how glorious his riches is toward us, when by publyshing this his so long
hidden mystery the whole world perceyueth, how that free salvation, which
men first thought was offered only to the Jews, is now commen unto al
nations, and that the keeping of Moses law is not required, but faith only,
so that men doubt not of the promises made in the gospel. Instead of all
such things, wherein the Jews have had a foolyshe confidence. Christ only is
for you sufficient. If he be in you, ye have no cause to be sorye of the hope
ye stand in, being both sure enough, and also through him glorious, who Whom
we preach, warnyng all men and teaching etc.
of himself will undoubtedly perform, as much as he has promised. Him
preach we of, and not Moses nor angels, aduertisyng and teaching not only
the Jews, but also all people of the world, and in so doong leauyng nothing
untouched, which appertains to the wisdom of the gospel. And this do we to
the intent all men should understand, that whither they be circumcised or not
circumcised, their weal is in nothing else to be set, but in Christ Jesus. To
bring which faith into men's minds I in such sort labor, that for
auauncing thereof I think it not paynfull to put my self in so many ieopardies
and perilles, which are in deed more weighty, than our weakness is able to
abide and suffer. But strong and mighty is he, by whose aid and mayntenaunce
I do these acts, who also when need requires, with working of miracles by us,
brings my preaching in credence.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
For I would that ye knew, how great care that I have for you and for them
that are at Laodicia, and for as many as have not seen my person in the flesh,
that their hertes might be comforted when they are knyt together in love, and
in all riches of full understanding, for to know the mystery of God the
father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge. ANd this much have I said, (ye Colossians) not to boste my self
unto you, but because I couete, y^ ye should know, how careful I am, and
what ieopardies I put my self in, not only for such, as I have presently
taught the gospel unto, but for them also, which by syghte know me not,
especially for you and the Laodicians, whom though I never saw with my bodily
iyen, yet see I them co^tinuallye with the iyen of my heart, glad of your
increase and furtheraunce, fearful if I espy your entiernes and godly
conditions either to be in ieoperdie or to be inconstant and waver. Nor is it
for my self so greatly auaylable, that such as never saw me, know what
labors and pains I take for them, as it does advantage them. For by my That
their hertes might be comforted. etc.
pensyfenes, by my ieopardies, and affliccions are they more pricked forth and
enforced to consent and cleave more together in godly charity, like y^ members
of one body knyt and surely mortised, whereby also men more clearly perceive
and more certaynely believe the bountiful goodness of god the father toward all
mankind, yea toward al creatures, abounda^tly flowyng abroad, by openyng now
through Jesus Christ the secret mystery, which has hitherto been hidden,
which is, that beside him only we should desire no worldly wisdom, be that
never so great, which the wise Philosophers promisen, or teachers of Moses
law, or any such as boste that they by speaking with angels are taught,
forasmuch as in him alone are contained and hydden all the treasures of
wisdom and fruytful knowledge. Of this fountain may we easly draw, as much
as is to perfect salvation required.

The text.
This I say lest any man should beguyle you with entising words. For
through I be absent in the flesh. yet am I with you in the spirit, ioying
and beholding your order, and your steadfast faith in Christ. These points
for this end thought I it good to warn you of, because ye should with all
diligence take heed, least any being instruct with worldly wisdom against the
playnes of Christ's gospel, blind and deceive you with false tales, being yet
such tales, as have a colorable appearance of troth and lykelynes. For so are
the wise men of this world with capciouse and subtle reasons of their inuencion
wont to entangle simple people, of which sort I know that some there are
among you, watching how they may corrupt your faith.

For albeit I be absent from you, and see not presentlye, what is done Though
I be absente in the flesh, etc.
there, yet am I in mind among you present, with all my heart reioysyng to see
the good order and condition of your life, and therewith the soundnes and
strength of the sure confidence, which ye have in Jesus Christ, to whom ye
have once wholly committed your selves.

The text.
As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the lord, even so walk ye in him, so
that ye be roted and buylte in him, and stablyshed through faith, as ye have
learned: and therein be plenteous with geuyng thanks. Now remains this, that
ye upon this good beginning continue and profit more and more, and as ye have
once received and believed, that Jesus Christ our lord is all goodness, the
head and welspring of our felicity: so set all your life agree and consent
with your faith and profession, providing always that as ye are through
baptism graffed into him: that ye likewise abide in him and gather strength.
And as the sure and strong foundation of the doctrine of Christ's gospel is
once already laid in you: so labor ye to build up there upon such a work, as
is for such a foundation mete and convenient. And take heed, that ye waver not
this way or that way, as every blaste of new doctrine moves you, but stand
steadfast and stable in that ye have once learned, and endeavor not only to
stand steadfastly, but also to increase every day from better to better, that
your faith and fruits of godly life being daily more and more augmented ye
may always have some new thing to give god thanks for, who^ ye must in deed
thank for all that is by you well done.

The text.
Beware, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy and disceitfull vanity,
after the tradicion of men, and after the ordinances of the world, and not
after Christ. Such as would bring you from your simplicity, watch busely,
watch must ye on the other side likewise, least being as it were enchaunted
with the royal and glyttering apparences of their Phylosophie, ye be from And
disceitfull vanity after the tradicion of me^. etc.
your sound faith altered and brought to the vain devises o^ men, and so become
as it were a spoil or pray for your adversaries, as ye shall un doubtedly be,
if ye turn from the truth of the gospel, and be led with the rules of men's
only making, which stand in such things, as may with our carnal eyes be
seen, and in the gross points of this world, where as Christ's doctrine is
heavenly and spiritual, and teaches the right and true religion, which
stands in minds, and not in meats and drinks, nor in bodily apparel, no
nor in keeping of days, nor yet in wasshyng of hands, which things to true
religion make nothing. Such points withdraw us rather from Christ, and
divide us from the welspring, from whence it were mete we sought for all grace
and goodness.

The text.
For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily, and ye are complete
in him: which is the head of all rule and power* by whom also ye are
circumcised with circumcision which is done with out hands, forasmuch as ye
have put of the sinful body of the flesh through the circumcision that is in
Christ, in that ye are buried with him through baptism in whom ye are also
risen again through faith, y^ is wrought by the operacion of God, which
raised him from death. For into him are not some certain gifts derived, as
out of the river In him dwells all y^ fulness of y^ godhead bodily. etc.
a little water runs into the dyche, but in him rests and dwells
corporally the hole fulness of the godhead, so that if ye have him, ye need not
to seek either for the shadows of Moses law or the subtle conueyaunce of
worldly wisdom. The troth is plainly delivered us, as al our senses bear
record, no need have we to seek for figures or doubtful promises. Since ye
are once graffed in Christ, and framed into one body with him, why should
you elswher look to have any thing? For since he lacks nothing, and would
have all his treasure common to al men, through him and in him needs must ye
be made complet, whither ye lack wisdom or power. For as he is the welspring
of wisdom, which can never be dried up, so is he the head of all power and
rule. Nor is there any power, no not of the highest order of Angels (I say,)
but that the same to him boweth his knees. Jews paradue^ture endeavor to
bring you in mind, that it is a weightye matier, to have you circumcised, as
they be, as though the state of man's body and such externe things brought
us into gods favor. But rather be in this persuaded, that whosoever have
Christ, enjoy with him all the glory and commendacion of circumcision. And
who so have not Christ to them is all their circumcision vain and
unprofitable. They have but the shadow of circumcision, ye thereof in your
souls have the very truth. For sithe the Jews circumcision means, that
groce and carnal desyers, should be cut out of al their souls, which now look
for nothing but heavenly things, uncircumcised needs must they be, which
with covetous minds still labor to have more, which please their bealyes,
which with envy and malice pyne away, which vayngloriously seek for worldly
praise, and despair of heavenly rewards. But ye contrary are through Christ
verily circumcised, not with that circumcision, which is done with man's
hands, but after a spiritual kind of circumcision. Nor have ye a little piece
only of the carnal man pared away, but from you is cut the whole body
defiled with syn, and all corrupted with carnal lusts, and that through the
spiritual circumcision of Christ Jesus. For as he dying forsook his body,
that was subject to death, and rysyng again received a body, which could not
dye: so are ye in baptism through the spirit of god with him spiritually
dead, castyng of all the sins of your old life, and not only dead with him,
but also buried with him. For when sinful desyers are killed, perfect quyetnes
of mind follows. And after such forgoyng of your bodies, which were thral to
sin (which sin is In whom ye ate also rise^ again through faith. etc.
the very death of the soul) ye are through Christ with him risen again free
from sin, nor for your deserts, but only because ye steadfastly believe in
god, who by his mighty power restored Christ again from death to life, and
that he also in you by his power works, that upon free remission of all your
sins through the death of his son, ye should hencefurthe live with him
subject to no sin, but through innocent and vprighte life make haste forward
to the life, that shall never have end. Thanks then should god the father
have for all such things, which he through his son gives you. Nothing
auauntaged it the Jews, because they were circumcised, and uncircumcision to
you which are Gentiles, was no hinderau^ce. But to be uncircumcised was
therefore a deadly lack, because ye were wholly given to groce and wicked desires
and thereby subject to death, or rather because ye were without the grace of
god, who is the life of man's soul, ye were spiritually dead.

The text.
And ye when ye were dead through sin and through the uncircumcision of your
flesh has he quickened with him, and has forgyuen us all our trespaces,
and has put out the hand writing, that was against us, contained in the law
written, and that has he taken out of the way and has fastened it to his
cross and has spoiled rule and power, and has made a show of them openly,
and has triumphed over them in his own person. This kind of uncircumcision,
I say, was to both sorts of us comen, which god has with his holy spirit
cut of and taken away forgeuing us all our sins, and in such sort
forgyuyng them, that we are out of the ieopardie of having the same offenses
any more hereafter to be laid unto our charge, because we have advisedly
sworn to be obedient to Moses law, for breach whereof our adversary the
devil might have an action against us, as against men bounden by their own
hand writing. And has put out the handwryting that was against us. etc.
Yea the old obligacion, by right whereof the devil sued us, has Christ
rased out, as soon as we professed the faith of his gospel, through whom the
offenses of our old life are forgyuen, so that the ^ame are laid to no man's
charge. For whatsoever might of us by right of this writing be required, that
same has Christ for our sakes paid upon the cross, where the writing was
rent, torn, and utterly cancelled. Nor have we now any cause to fear the
tyranny of Satan, since Christ has in the cross by his death vanquyshed the
author of death, and thereby delivered us, triumphantly subduyng all the
powers and rules of deuylles, carrying us into his heavenly kingdom, as
though we had been a rich price or botye. For then declared he them freely
and plainly to be ouerco^men and vnharnysed, when that in sight both of men
and angels, he carried us about as it were in a triumph, showing that our
enemies were subdued and put to flight, not by the aid of angels or men, but
by his own mighty power, what time he upon the cross hanged up so royal a
sign of victory, and that in such a high place, whereas every manne might
see it. Only take heed to this point, that ye no more fall into your old
sins.

The text.
Let no man therefore trouble your conscience about meat and drink or for a
piece of an holy day, or of the new Move, or of the sabbath days which are
shadows of things to come: but the body is in Christ. Fear not, least for
dispisyng the ceremonies of Moses law any man condemn you, either for meat
or drink, be it clean or unclean, or for not puttyng a difference betwixt
holy day and workyng day, or for not keeping holy the feast of the new
Moon, or for breakyng the rest of the Sabbath day. For thiese obseruaunces
were shadows long before signifieng and rudely purtrahing such things, as
should afterward unfeignedly Which a^^ shadow^s ^^ things to come etc.
be exhibit by Christ. Wherefore since we have now the body self and since
we have the very troth self openly showed unto us, why should we any longer
fear shadows? Whosoever cleaves to Christ being now in heaven regards nothing
else but heavenly things, but walks forth even the right pathwaye to the
reward of immortal life.

The text.
Let no man make you shote at a wrong mark by the humblenes and holiness of
Angels in the things, which he never saw, being causeles puffed up with his
fleshly mind, and holds not the head, whereof all the body by joints and
couples receives nouryshement, and is knyt together, and increases with the
encrasyng, that comes from god. Beware therefore, lest any man by calling you
back again to earthly things fasly and sleyghtly deceive you of that reward,
which ye have already begone to labor for, instead of heavenly doctrine,
teaching you small matters, and instead of Christ's true religion, a
supersticious worshyppyng of Angels, and so auaunce and exalte himself among
the simple people of certain feigned visions, being desirous of worldly glory,
In the things, which he never saw.
teaching the people such things as learned by angels, which he has of his
own head by himself forged and imagened, without sure trust in him, in
comparison of whom it besemeth every christian to despise al things, be they
never so high, in the mean season so trustyng upon his angels, that he
falls from Christ his heavenly head, of whom depends the whole body of
the church, which is from it with all spiritual gifts derived into every
member through the joints and couplynges nouryshed and increased unto the
highest perfeccion spiritual, that can be, and unto such perfeccion, as
besemeth god to have, to whom we are through Christ joined and coupled.

The text.
Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the ordinances of the world, why as
though ye yet lived in the world, are ye led with tradicious? Touch not,
taste not, handle not, which all peryshe through the very abuse, after the
commandments and doctrines of men, which things outwardly have the
similitude of wisdom by supersticion and humblenes of mind, and by hurtyng
the body, and in that they do the flesh no worship unto the need thereof. If
Christ be to this visible and groce world dead, and live now in heaven, and
if ye in your kind of life be likewise with him dead to the vsuages of the
world, having an eye to nothing, but to heavenly things, whereto makes it to
be subject to man's ordinances being such, as prescrybe no such things, as
sauer of Christ, but are groce and carnal ordinances of y^ world, as though
ye were not now dead to such things, but still lived worldly. Why give you
ear to any Jew prescribyng such things to be observed according to the
carnal meaning of Moses law? Touch not this carkas, it is not clean, taste
not this meat, Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all. etc.
it is not clean, touch not this thing, it is holy, and may lawfully be
touched of no secular person. So ready are ye to give ear unto the traditions
and doctrine of men, which labor to bring you in mind, that in difference of
meats, in obseruyng of days, and in other Iewyshe rules godly religion
stands, as though it so were, that Christ's doctrine were not for you
sufficient. Meat, drink, or apparel bring us not into gods favor, but are
for bodily needs used, and with long long abuse wear away, and are not the
steadfast perfeccions of souls, which cannot be spent, and yet such as teach
such doctrine, among fools and unlearned pretend a feigned color of wisdom,
and with how much more supersticion, and faulty humility they fyl me^nes
minds, by so much more are they made of. For a plain supersticion is it to
make Angels equal with Christ. And a faulty humblenes it is through Angels to
look for that, which should of Christ him self be asked, or at y^ lestwyse
through Christ of the father. Meats, drinks, with such other visible things
are given, not to be compelled with hurt of our bodies to abstain from them,
but to the end that with them our bodies may be helped, and with any kind of
apparel against wind and wether to be maintained and succored, and be fed
with any kind of meats, and that in all times and places without any
difference, whansoeuer it be, and as much as for the time shall be thought
nedeful. Jews they been whose hearts are not yet circumcised from the gross
and carnal meaning of the law, which put such differences.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
If ye be then risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits on the right hand of God. Set your affeccion on heavenly
things, and not on yearthly things. BAse and low are these things, and
vnbesemyng the true me^bres of Christ. But if ye to worldly affairs be verily
dead, and risen again with Christ to the desire of high and everlasting
treasures and commodities, set at naught such vile matters, and seek for
heavenly pleasures and things above, where Christ your head sits at the
right hand of God his father. For mete it is that all the studyes and cares of
the members were directed to that place, whereas the head is now present, and
where the same shall with the head hereafter reign for ever. For there lives
every man, where he loves.

The text.
For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. Whenever Christ,
(which is our life) shall show him self, then shall ye also appear with him
in glory. To this world ye seem dead, as which are neither delited with
worldly wealth, nor yet regard such pha^ta^ies, wherewith the worldly people
are delited. Wherefore ye live not here among men, and yet live ye with Christ
before God, though y^ in the mean season after y^ judgment of the world your
life be hidden. But what time Christ shall come again, and show both his
glory and the glory of his body to all the world, then shall men see you with
your head, partakers of glory.

The text.
Mortify therefore your yearthly members: fornicacion, uncleanness, unnatural
lust, evil concupiscence, and covetousness which is worshippyng of idols: for
which things sake the wrath of God uses to come on the children of unbelief,
among whom ye walked sometime, when ye lived in them. But now put ye also away
from you al such things, wrath, fiersnes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking,
filthy communicacion out of your mouth. In the mean season diligently
endeavor, that all the body be like unto the high and heavenly head, whose
me^bres if they here dye not utterly to carnal desires, they cannot in heaven
live with Christ. The devil has also his body, which I elsewhere called the
body of sin. His members are fornicacion, which among worldly people is eue^
praised, vnclenues, unnatural lust, and such other desires more filthy, than
are mete to be named, desire of hurtful things, as of glory, honor, and
vengeance, especially desire of money, which sin among al other nighest
draws to the most outrageous wickedness of all, that is to wete, to the
worshippyng And covetousness which is worshippyng of idols.
of idols. To these sins whosoever be subject, cannot be partaker of the
glory of Christ. So far are they from being the true children of God, which
are with such outrageous vices corrupted, that for the like, he fiercely raged
even upon his own people the Jews, destroiyng and disenherityng them as
disobedient children. With such like horrible vices was your life also once
corrupted, what time ye were not yet through baptism dead with Christ, but
lived as your froward desires led you. Now since Christ has in him left
nothing that is mortal and yearthly, meet it is, since through him ye are
borne again, that ye cast away all the filthynes of your old and former life.
And not only cast away such great enormities, as we now spoke of: but also
such things, wherein the comen sort of me^ is wont to bear with them selfs,
as wrath, fyersenes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, that ye not only have your
hearts pure from such desires, but also your mouth clean from al filthy
communicacion.

The text,
Lie not one to an other, seeing that ye have put of the old man with his
works, and have put on the new man which is renewed into the knowledge and
image of him, that made him, where is neither Gentile nor Jew, circumcision
nor uncircumcision, Barbarus or Sithian, bond or free, but Christ is all in
all thing. Christ is truth self, it is not mete that ye being his members
should lie one to an other of you. And to be brief, since ye have put on
Christ, put of all the old yearthly man, with all his works and desires, and
put on a new man which will never be old, but by reason that in him the
knowledge of God daily more and more increases, florisheth and buddeth up And
image of him that made him.
into better and greater, after the image of Christ, which being a new man him
self, builded in us a new man, extinguishyng the old. For as many of us as
are planted into Christ's body, are so far gone from that we were, as though
we were new made again, in somuche that now no difference is there betwixt
Gentile and Jew, betwixt the circumcised and uncircumcised, betwixt the
wild Scithian, and the Grecian and man of Athens, nor yet betwixt the free and
the bond. Among men such differences are passed upon, but before God there
is of such things no regard, but Christ which is indifferently comen to
all, only gives al things to al men. Christ is to y^ bondsman, fredome, to
the poor man riches, to the wild and barbarous, civility, to the
uncircumcised, circumcision. And to be brief, through him among you are all
things made equal, because none should disdain other.

The text.
Therefore as elect of God, holy and beloved, put on tender mercy, kyndnes,
humblenes, of mind, mekenes, long sufferyng, forbearyng one an other, and
forgeuyng one an other, if any man have a quarrel against an other, as Christ
forgave you, even so do ye. Wherefore instead of your vile members and
vnbesemyng Christ, put on other members, contrary to those filthy members,
which we before rehearsed, and instead of them put on such as are mete for
the^, whom God has chosen out to be holy, and vouchsaued to love. What members
are they, some will say, without doubt such as Christ him self both taught,
and put in execucion, I say, tender mercy, that ye be in a readynes to help the
weakness of other, kyndnes, because ye should in comen co^uersacion of life be
tractable, humblenes of mind, lest ye arrogantly auaunce your self before
other, mekenes, lest ye upon offenders use cruelty, long sufferyng, lest ye
be hasty to revenge, but bear each one with other of you, and each forgive
other, if through man's infirmity any thing be among you, by reason whereof
one might have a quarrel again an other. It besemeth you to forgive each others
offenses, since Christ, who offended no man, forgave us all our trespaces.

The text.
Above all these things, put on love, which is the bond of perfitenes. And
the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which peace ye are called in one
body. But above all other garments especially apparel your selfs with
christian charity, who is so far from hurtyng any man, that it laboreth to
do every man good, yea to do good for evil. This is the perfect and most sure
bond, wherewith the body of Christ is joined together, and the members abide
fast, which would else fall on sonder. With charity will follow peace and
concord, not the comen peace which men speak of, but such as is made and
maintained by the mighty power of Christ, steadfastly. Let her always in your
hearts win and have the upper hand, let her against malice, pride, wrath,
and contencion, have the victory. For God has called you to concord, and has
for that purpose reconciled you all unto him, and made you as it were, one
body, to the intent y^ ye like members of one body, should among your selfs be
of one mind.

The text.
And see that ye be thankeful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously
with all wisdom. I each and exhort your own selves in Psalms and Hymns,
and spiritual songs, syngyng with grace in your hearts to the lord, Be not
unthankful, and forgetful of Gods great goodness toward you. With him should
we not now have been at peace, had he not freely forgeuen us all our sins:
and does one brother forgettyng this, make battle again his brother for a
little displeasure? Strive not among your self for preeminence in worldly
wisdom. Let the word of Christ, which teaches things belongyng to perfect
godlynes, dwell and continue in you ple^tifully, that in him ye sauer and grow
wise, so that not only your self know, what is to Christ acceptable, but be
also able one to teach an other, if any be out of the way, and to give an
other warnyng, if he in his duty be slack, in y^ mean season at all time
merry and joyful in hope of the bliss to come, geuyng praise to God in Psalms,
in Hymns, and in spiritual songs, praisyng God, not with our mouth only, but
also more speacially with our heart. For such are the songs, with who^ God is
delited, lest any think it a great praise to God, only with his mouth to make
a noise.

The text.
And whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of the lord Jesus,
geuyng thanks to God the father by him. Finally whatsoever ye do either in
word or deed, do it so, that it make to the glory of our lord Jesus, so that
all your life and conversation sauer, express and resemble him. Whiles ye are
this wise doing, if any thing befall you, whether it be prospetouse or other
wise, be not therewith either proud, or dismayed, but for all give thanks to
God the father through his son, by whom he turns all such chances to our
weal and advantage.

The text.
Ye wives, submit your selves to your own husbands, as it is comely in the
lord. Ye husbands, love your wives and be not bitter unto them. Ye children
obey your fathers and mothers in all things, for that is well pleasyng unto
the lord. Ye wives submit your selves obediently unto your husbands, so
besemeth it such as have taken upon them Christ's name, for whom it is mete in
all goodness to go beyond other. Ye husbands again love your wives, whom ye
must remember in such condition to be subject unto you, that yet to them ye
should not be sharp and bitter. Ye children be in all things obedient to your
fathers and mothers, though they command you paineful business, so that the
same be not ungodly. For it is Christ's will and pleasure that ye should so do.

The text.
Ye fathers, provoke not your children (to anger) lest they be of a desperate
mind. Ye servants be obedient unto them that are your bodily masters in all
things: not with lie service as men pleasers, but in singlenes of heart
fearyng God. And whatsoever ye do, do it heartely, as though ye did it to the
lord, and not unto men: knowing that of the lord ye shall receive the reward
of inheritance: for ye serve the lord Christ. Again ye fathers abuse not your
authority upon your children, nor provoke them so with cruelnes, that they
despair. Ye servants in all points obey your masters, whom by the law o^
man ye are bound to serve, not only because they see, and look upon you, and
for fear, as the comen ^orte of heathen servants are wont to do, thinkyng
that they have done their duties, if they offend not their master being but a
man, but also with a simple and an unfeigned heart doing your duty, not only
for fear of man, but also for fear of God, who sees, with what mind ye do,
whatsoever ye do,. Nor consider in your service, what your master being but a
man deserves, but what service soever ye do unto him, what kind of one soever
he be, coumpte it, as done to Christ, and not to men, assuryng your self, that
of him ye shall receive the reward of heavenly inheritance, though your
unkind master give you nothing for your labor, nor accoumpte you among his
children. For whiles ye for Christ's sake do service to unmeet masters, ye
serve Christ.

The text,
But he that does sin, shall receive for his sin, Neither is there any
respect of persons with God, For as the master if he against his servant any
thing offend, though he among men be not punyshed, he shall not yet before god
escape punishment: so the servant that well does his duty, albeit he have no
reward of men, which with themselves think, that they to their servants
are nothing bound, when they have done their duties, yet shall they not loose
their reward at gods hand, who puts no difference betwixt persons but
betwixt minds, nor co^sidereth a man's condition, but how well he does*

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
Masters do unto your servants, that which is just, and equal, knowing
that ye also have a master in heaven. Again ye that are masters abuse not
the authority given you by men's laws, and not for any perfeccion of nature,
to exercise tyranny upon your servants, but give them that is just and
lawful, departing with them sufficiently, in such things as are for natural
uses necessary, and make not for your pleasure to much of some, intollerablye
oppressing other, assuring your selves, that ye are rather with them fellows in
service, tha^ masters, for as much as ye have with them one commen master in
heaven, at whose hand ye shall fi^de like fauer, as your selves have showed to
your servants.

The text.
Continue in prayer and watch in the same, with thanks giving, praying also for
us, that god may open unto us the door of vtteraunce, that we may speak the
mystery of Christ, (wherefore I am also in these bo^des) that I may utter it,
as it becomes me to speak. And because I would ye should be more worthy
me^bres of Christ's body, continue in prayer, not as dull and heavy people by
reason of any surfettyng, but as sober and wakefull, in the same also geuyng
god thanks, so y^ ye not only desyer of god things to salvation profitable,
but also give him thanks for his daily gifts, to the intent that when he
sees you both tha^kfull and mindful, he may be toward you more
beneficial. In the mean time ye shall also desire god for us, yt it may
please his goodness in such sort to take away al impedimentes, that his
gospel may freely be preached, y^ he through faith openyng men's hearts the
mystery may enter into al men's minds which being hitherto hidden, y^
father would now haueknowen unto all, as touching Christ, through whom without
help of the law he offers unto al people salvation, for preaching whereof I
lie in these bonds, so yt nothing let me among al men to publish and sprede
abroad y^ gospel of Christ, which am desirouse so to do freely and without fear,
eue^ as he commanded me.

The text.
Walk wisely toward them, that are without, and lose no opportunity. Use your
selves soberly and discretly with such, as are to Christ's religion
strangers, so that in your manners nothing appear, y^ may either move them to
persecute you, or withdraw their minds and fauer from the gospel. For since
it can not be avoided, but that ye must needs with Heathe^s, be conuersau^t,
and with them live familierly, let them in you find, that through your new
profession ye are in all points becomme^ thereby better and more courteyse,
namely if any such thing chance, wherein without breach of religion ye may do
them pleasure. Now must we specially for the present time endeavor, that all
be allured to the profession of the gospel. The opportunity whereof must not
with ianglyng and vain contencions be lost, but be bought rather with all the
precious goods and treasures that we have. For this give over your honor,
depart with your money, for this away wrth your desyer to revenge. If with
the loss of such things the gospel be furthered, then think as it is in
deed that your advantage is great.

The text.
Let your speech be always well sauoured and poudred with salt, that ye may
know, how ye ought to answer every man. Let not your speech to them be
reprochefull and roughe, but let it sauoure of courtesy and gentleness, and be
poudred with the salt of wisdom, reme^bryng that gentle speech rather
soupleth fierce stomachs, and disc^ecion teaches, what, to whom, and with
what sobernes we ought to answer. We must otherwise use our self toward
princes and governors of the world, otherwise with mean men, and otherwise
with low persons, after one sort with such as are gentle, and after an other
sort with such as are fumishe, otherwise with learned, otherwise with
unlearned. After such sort must our language be tempered unto every man's
condition, that it may further and promote the gospel. Some time better is it
to give place when he whom ye intend to teach, with reprochefull words
gayusayth your teaching, or he whom thou speak unto, goes covertly about
to hutte thy doctriue.

The text.
Of all my business shall ye be certified by Tychicus, the beloured brother and
faithful minister, and fellow servant in the lord, whom I have sent unto you
for the same purpose, that he might know what ye do, and that he might
comfort your hearts, with one Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother which is
one of you. They shall show you of all things which are a doing heree. Of my
state I write not unto you, but of that shall Tichicus, the bearer of these
letters, certify you, through one common profession, my well beloved brother,
faithful minister, and fellow servant in preaching the gospel, whom I for
this purpose sent thither, both to the intent that by him ye should know,
what is here done among us, and by him to be certified, how ye do, that your
minds may through his communicacion be refreshed, and mine also by his good
report made of you. And with Tychichus have I lent Onesimus, whom I would ye
should not esteem and judge by his old kind of life, since he is now my
faithful, and beloved brother, whom for this cause ye ought to make the more
of, because he is a Gentile as ye be, and of an uncircumcised one, turned to
Christ. These two shall to you make faithful report, of such things as are
here done among us, as far as is expedient for you to know.

The text.
Aristarchus my prison fellow saluteth you, and Marcus Barnabas systers son:
touching whom ye received commandments. If he come unto you, receive him:
and Jesus, which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These only
are my workefelowes unto the kingdom of god, which have been unto my
consolacion. Aristarchus saluteth you, and albeit he be a Jew, yet for his like
faith, ye should make much of him. For him have I for Christ's gospels sake of
my enprisonment fellow and pertaker. Marcus also, Barnabas systers fo^ne whom ye
well know, saluteth you, whom I at an other time commended unto you,
commanding you than, as we no we do, that if he come to you, that ye with all
gentleness receive and enterteyne him. Jesus also, whose surname is Iustus
greteth you.

These are in deed, to you of a strange nation, I say of the Jews, and yet
of you worthy to be favored, because they in preaching the kingdom of god are
my workefelowes, and were unto me in the affliccions, which I suffer, very
cherefull.

The text.
Epaphras the servant of Christ, (which is one of you) saluteth you, and
always labors fervently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and
full, in all the will of god. For I bear him record, that he has a fervent
mind for you, and them that are of Laodicia, and them that are of Hierapolis.
Epaphras greeteth you, which is one of you, not only by the profession of
Christ's name, but also one of the same country, who so hartelye favors you,
that he most fervently for you makes his prayer to god, y^ ye by his help
may steadfastly continue in that ye have begun, and not be imperfect
christians, but in doing al such things, as god requires, perfect and full.
For in this I bear him record, that he has a fervent love toward you, and
not toward you only, but also toward all them, that are of Laodicia and
Hierapolis, which border nigh unto you.

The text.
Dear Lucas the physicion greteth you and Demas. Salute the brethren which
are of Laodicia, and salute Nymphas, and the congregation, which is in his
house. Lucas the physicion, who^ I singulerly love, greteth you, and so does
also Demas, which as yet is with me. Salute as well other brethren, that be at
Laodicia, as also especially Nympha, with all the congregation, that is in his
house.

The text;
And when the epistle is red of you, make that it be red also in the
congregation of the Laodicians, and that ye likewise read the epistle of
Laodicia. As Soon as this epistle is rehearsed among you, cause that the same
also be read in the congregation of the Laodicians, and again read ye the
Epistle, which from Laodicia I wrote to Timothy, that they may profit more.

The text.
And say to Archippus: take heed to thy office, that thou haste received in
the lord. that thou fulfill it. The salutacion by the hand of me Paul,
remember my bonds, the grace of our lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. Say
in my name these words to Archippus your ruler: look about and take heed, what
charge thou have taken in hand. It is no man's busynes Take heed to thy
office.
and cure, but gods, which is committed unto the. See thou perform that thou
haste undertaken, as which shalt thereof to the lord yield accoumpte. But
because this Epistle with you should be of more credit, lo I subscribe
gretynges to you all with mine own hand, with Paul's hand (I say) whom ye
well know. Remember my bonds, whom I bear for your sake, and live after such
sort, that I of them be not made ashamed. The grace of Jesus be always with
you.

Amen.
Finis,
The Argument upon the first Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the
Thessalonians by Des. Erasmus of Roterodame.
THessalon'ca is the principal City of Macedonia: whereof the enhabitauntes of
the country are called Thessalonians. They, when they had once received the
faith, persisted in it with such a constancy, that they suffered, according to
Paul's example, persecucions even of their own Citezens, with a glad stomach
and without shrynkyng, so as the false Apostles could turn them by no manner of
persuasion, from the ordinance of the gospel. And yet Paul being afraid of
it, because he knew the false Apostles ouerth wartnes well enough by
experience, inasmuche as he could not go see them himself, he sent Timotheus:
by whom, when he was returned, Paul hanyng report of their constancy,
prayseth them, with thanks geuyng to God. This matter he treats of in the
first and second Chapiters. In the other three, he instructs them in sondrie
offices of godliness, signifying unto them as it were with privy ynclynges,
that there were some among them, which were not yet altogether pure from all
unclean demeanoure of living: and that they were not all without such, as
being given to loyteryng, were a chargeable burden to others: and a sort of
busye bodies that disturb the quietness of their congregation, he commands
to be correct. Moreover where some were not of a thoroughly confirmed Judgment
as yet, concerning the resurreccion, seeing they bewailed their dead friends, as
though they had perished and not rather departed unto better promocions, them
he enstructeth and confirms. And on the other side, where some disputed of
the day of the Lords coming, as though it might well have been foreknowen
and told of before, where as it is uncertain to all men: Paul says it shall
come suddenly, and wha^ no man looks for it: to the intent we should be the
more ready at every moment. This Epistle he wrote from Athenes by Tichicus a
ministre after the greeks writings: and our Latin arguments say also, that
Onesimus baxe him cumpanye: howbeit there is no certain auctour in the commune
exemplares.

The end of the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the first Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to
the Thessalonians.
The.i. Chapter.
The text.
Paul and Syluanus and Timethe. Unto the congregation of the Thessolonians, in
God the father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be unto you, and peace
from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. We give God thanks
always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers without ceasyng, and
call you to remembrance because of the work of your faith and labor in love,
and because ye have continued in the hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the
sight of God our father. PAul and Siluanus and Tymothe, unto the congregation
of the Thessalonians, co^senting together in God the father and in our Lord
Jesus Christ: wish unto you grace and peace. We rejoice, as it is convenient
we should, for your good forewardenesse, and render thanks always unto God,
making mention of all you, on the behalf of you all, as often as we talk with
God in holy supplicacions, in that, it can never be out of our minds, how
diligently you trauayled to defend the profession of your faith: than what
exceeding labor you took for the love, that you bear unto the preachers of the
gospel: how ma^fully and without shrinking you abode al things, through the
hope and expectacion of the rewards, which our Lord Jesus Christ has
promised in the life to come, unto them that for his names sake care not for
the displeasures of this life. You shall not lose the hyre of your well
doings, for God our father that sees upon what respect you did them, is he
that shall pay the hyre.

The text.
We know brethren (beloved of God) how that ye are elect. For our gospel
came not unto you by word only, but also by power, and by the holy ghost,
and by much certainty, as ye know, after what manner we behaved our selfs
among you, for your sake. And ye became folowers of us and of the Lord
receiving the word with much affliccion, with joy of the holy ghost: so that
ye were an ensample to all that believe in Macedonia and Achaia. For from you
sounded out the word of the Lord, not in Macedonia and in Achaia only: but
your faith also which ye have unto God, spread herself abroad in all quartars,
so that it needs not us to speak any thing at all. For they themselfes show
of you, what manner of entryng in we had unto you and how ye turned to God from
images, for to serve the living and true God, and for to look for his son
from heaven, whom he ^aysed from death: even Jesus, which delivers us from
the wrath to come. You your selfs know, well-beloved brethren, that you were
not changed by the persuasion of man, but that you were chosen to these
purposes even by the will of God. Neither yet have we so slenderly preached the
gospel unto you, as nothing has been showed unto you saving bare words, but
the power of God has confirmed our doctrine even with evident miracles. And
the holy ghost was also given by us, so that we were behind in nothing, that
should in any wise make for the perfect beleuyng of the gospels doctrine. For
whatsoever they of Iewry atteined by other men's preaching, the same did you also
atteine at our gospel teaching. And in this behalf, how sincerely, how humbly,
and how paynefully we behaved our selfs among you, you can tell well enough.
For there was nothing whereby we might win you unto Christ, but we abode it.
And you for your part showed not your selves unto ward scholars, but you
followed straight after the example of us, yea rather not of us but of the Lord
Jesus, that humbled himself so low and suffered al things, that he might win
us unto himself. For you have so heartily embraced ou^ gospel preaching, that
for the love of it you have suffered affliccions patiently, how many and how
greuouse soever they were, not only with much boldness, but also with much
gladness, because the holy ghost, whom you received by our preaching as a
pledge for the time, of the fel^ city to come, has placed himself in your
hearts: through hope of which felicity, al sorrows become sweet, whatsoever
are laid upon us for the gospel of Christ. And the valiantness of your
faith was so passing excellent, that you were an ensample to all the faithful
in the rest of Macedonia and Achaia. For the example of that noble chief city
moved all Thessalonica.
men's minds so sore, that the fame of the gospel sounded as it were the
noise of a Trompet wide and broad, and published the feruencie of your faith,
that you have to Godwa^de, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in all
other countries: so that now we see it is no need for us to make report of
your godliness. For if we begin at any time to speak of those matters, they
are more ready of their own mind to tell us, being instructed by the commune
brute, than we can tell them: how we entered first unto you to open the
Gospels doctrine, and with what diligent readiness you received us ^etting al
perils aside, that seemed like to God make us Englishmen ^^ght Thessalonians.
happen unto you for our sakes, and how ea^ely you were trained from the
supersticion of your forefathers, wherewith you wurshipped the images of devils,
unto the true wurshippe of God: so as ever sense that time you abhor false
and dead Gods, and serve the true living God: and trusting upon his promises,
you pass nothing upon y^ pleasures of this life, no more than you do upon the
displeasures of it: but look that his son Jesus (by whom he has delivered
us freely unto salvation, and promised us the rewards of the life to come)
shall come again from heaven, and give openly unto the world, the things that
he has promised. For God raised him up again unto life to this end, that we
might also be raised again unto life by him, and to have the fruicion of the
good things that never shall dye, which in this life suffer the displeasures
of this world for his sake. And than his coming shall be joyfully welcome unto
us, inasmuche as he has cleansed us from our sins in his own blood, and
reconciled us unto God, and delivered us from the eternal punishemente that
was due for our transgressions.

The. if. Chapter.
The text.
For ye your selves (brethren) know of our entrance in unto you, how that it
was not ^^ vain: but even after that we had suffered before, and were
shamefully entreated at Philippos (as ye know) then were we bold in our God,
to speak unto you the gospel of God, in much st^yuing. For our erhortacion
was not to bring you to error, nor yet to uncleanness, neither was it with gyle:
but as we were allowed of God that the gospel should be committed unto us: even
so we spoke, not as they that please men, but God, which tries our hertes.
Neither led we our conversation a^ any time with flattering words, as ye
know: neither by occasion of covetousness. God is record: neither sought we
praise of men, neither of you, nor yet of any other, when we might have been
in authority, as the Apostles of Christ, but we were tender among you, even as
a norsse cherishes her chrildren, so were we affeccioned toward you: ou^ good
will was to have dea^te unto you, not the gospel of God only: but also ou^
own souls, because ye were dear unto us. WHat needs us to make rehersall,
seeing ye your selves know, that albeit we came not unto you, with bragging and
staring, nor curiously mincing a sort of great words, nor setting out any
high Philosophy: Yet our entrance unto you was not ineffectual. But where as
we had suffered many things at Philippos before, as you your selves know, and
were shamefully handled with many spightefull rebukes, and so was S^^as also,
because of castyng the prophecieng spirit out of the Damsel, that was
possessed: yet nevertheless through the help of our God, we were not afraied
even to preach the gospel of Christ frelye among you also, and not without
excedyng great daungier: whereas in case we had preached a forged vain thing,
we should never have been in danger of our head for that matter. For such men
as teach their own doctrine, and not that, which they have received of
Christ, and teach for their own avauntage, intending thereby to disceaue
others for their own lucres sake: those have no authority of their doctrine at
al, and draw themselves quite a way, as soon as they dread any daungier of
their lives or substance. But the doctrine, whereunto we allured you, was not
cou^terfaicted, ne feigned, neither purposed unto disceate, ne yet under
colorable pretense of it, we have cloked impure sciences, as the false
apostles do, nor have done any thing fraudule^tlie* pretending in outward
apperaunce one way, and purposyng inwardly clean contrary an other way, and
under the title of Christ go about our own pelf, after the manner of them,
that make themselves Apostles: but like as god by his son God send us such
preachers.
has chosen us unto this office, that we should syncerely preach the
gospel committed unto us, even so do we preach unto all men, not to crepe in
favor or commendacion with men, but to do our office so as god may allow
it, who sees the inward secrets of our hearts, and according thereto estemeth
every man. For we have not flatred any man, as you know at least, nether have
we turned the word of the gospel, nor your tractable beleuyng in to our own
gain, god himself is witness unto our consciences: nether have we hunted
after the praise of men by means of the gospel, either at your hands or of
any other, whereas we might have used our authority, and brag no less tha^ the
false Apostles: which though they teach vain things and to their own gain,
yet they require to be honored and waited upon of you. But we considering what
becomes the apostles of Christ, which humbled himself for our saluacions
sake, have not taken upon us to brag and look high, but have showed our selves
gentill and sobre among you, not eagrely abusing you, as disciples, but with al
lenity bearing with your weakness, none otherwise than a mother nource would
chearishe the tender age of her children: and so we being lovingly affected
toward you, were heartily desirous to impart unto you, not only the gospel
of god as the food of your souls, but also to bestow our own life: not that
we looked for any reward at your hands, but that we loved you entierly with all
our hertes, none otherwise than a mother loves her own children. We upbraid
you not of our diligence, but we rehearse our loving affeccion.

The text.
Ye remember brethren our labor, and travail. For we labored day and
night because we would not be chargeable unto any of you, and preached unto you
the gospel of God. Ye are witnesses, and so is god, how holyly and justly and
unblameably, we behaved our selves among you that believed, as ye know, how
that we bare such affeccion unto every one of you, as a father does unto
children, exhortyng, confortynge, and besechyug you, that ye would walk
worthy of God, which has called you unto his kingdom and glory. For this
cause thank we God also without ceassynge, because that when ye reaceaued of
us the word (wherewith ye learned to know God) ye received it not as the
word of man: but even as it was in deed, the word of God, which works also
in you that believe. You remember brethren, that we forsook no labor nor no
travail for your sakes, thyrsting nor mynding any other thing else than your
salvation. And we hunted so litell for reward at your hands, that we wrought
with our handelabour day and night, to get our living withal, because we would
be a burden to none of you all. The false apostles cloute in their gospel
among you, and wrythe to them selves as much as they can get: and we have
preached the gospel of god unto you freely without any thing. And you are my
witnesses, and god himself is my record, how holily, how vprightelye, and how
vnblameablie we have behaved our selves toward you that believed, as you know
by proved experience, with how sincere a love we did al things, that toward
every one of you we were even so affected, as any father is toward his own
children, now beseching, now comforting, now chargyng you, not to give us any
thing, but to lead a life worthy of god, which, when you were before time
void of all godliness, has called you through fayeth to the study of true
godliness, and has also through temporal affliccions, called you into his
kingdom and glory Immortal. Al is well: you acknowlage the goodness of God:
and for that cause we also redet thanks unto him continually, for kendlyng
your hearts after such sort, that when we came in a poor basse estate unto
you and having no show of dignity to set us forward, yet as soon as you had
heard the gospel preached of us, you received it, not as a fable or the word
of man, but as the word that came from god himself, as it was in deed: for he
himself spoke eue^ by us.

The text.
For ye brethren became folowers of the congregacyons of God which in Iewry
are in Christ Jesus: for ye have suffered like things of your ky^smenne, as we
our selves have suffered of the Jews. Which as they killed the Lord Jesus,
and their own Prophets, even so have they persecuted us: and God they please
not, and are contrary to all men, and hinder us, that we should not speak unto
the Gentiles, that they might be saved, to fulfill their sins always. For the
wrath of God is come on them, even to the utmost. The word of man is weak and
vneffectual, but the word of god is effectually mighty: which, as soon as you
had dronken of it, was not idle, but began to work his power in you, so as it
might evidently enough appear, y^ you had received the same spirit, in y^ you
incontinently began to follow the examples of the other congregacio^s of god y^
professed Jesus Christ in Iewrie. That, which Christ: that, that we: that, that
the rest of the Jews which embrace the doctrine of the gospel, have suffered
of their own country men, unto whom this doctrine is odious, the like have
you also suffered of your own towns men. For like as they killed the lord
Jesus, and slew his prophets before him, because they could not abide the
truth: even so do they also persecute us that are the true gospel preachers,
with such blindness of heart, that they provoke even the wrath of god upon
themselves, because they rebel against his will, and go against al men, as the
very enemies of mankind, and as men that envy al men's salvation which is
offered through faith, and go about to draw al men with them into destruccio^. For
they do not let us after this sort of any private displeasure, but they envy
all the gentiles their wealth, and trouble us for this intent, that we should
not preach the gospel unto the gentiles, whereby they might be saved: as
though it were but a small matter for the^ to have slain the Prophets before,
and byanby Christ after the Prophets, except they persecute and dispatch us
out of the way also: so as they may finish the whole heap of their mischeues,
and lay this, as it were the Su^me total of their wickedness, always to be
like manered to themselves, and never to repent from their madness. By reason
whereof they provoke the wrath of God so sore upon them, that they are to be
despaired of, for so much as of a purposed malice they spurn away the mercy of
God from the^, and by all possible means oppugn the gospel, through whose
only help they might be delivered from destruction.

The text.
For as much brethren as we are kept from you for a season, as concerning the
bodily presence (but not in the heart) we enforced the more to see you
personally with great desire. And therefore we would have come unto you, I Paul
once and again: but Satan withstode us. For what is ou^ hope or joy, or crown
of rejoicing? are not ye it in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ's at his
cumming? yes, ye are our glory and joy. But the more I love you, brethren, for
the readiness and promptitude of your faith, the more I am enflamed with the
loving desire of you, because being kept from you for a time, I could not
have the fruicion of your company, whereof I was wondrefully desirous, although
we were never absent in mind. And yet this could not satisfy y^ lone that we
bear toward you, except I should also presently se you even with my
bodylyeies. Wherefore I thought it not enough, to send any body to you, or to
speak with you by letters, but I Paul went about once and eftesones to come to
you my self, so as I might the more thoroughly confirm your consciences: But
Satan withstode this purposed endeavor, which by the wicked Jews hyndred my
cumyng unto you. And what maruayle is it, though I be so desirous of you? For
what other thing is there in this world, wherewith I can content myself, whereof
I may aduau^ce myself, whereof I may persuade myself to enherite felicity? I
defy all things incomparison of the gospel of Christ. Than what is our hope,
or what is our joy, or what is our crown? Among others of the gentiles whom I
have won unto Christ, are not you also? albeit not in the sight of the
world, yet verily it is with the Lord Jesus Christ. When the enemies of the
gospel are thrown under foot, and the triumph openly kept at his cu^ming,
what ensigns and what other tokens of victory shall I bring forth in that
royal cumpany, but you and such other like as you be? In the mean time I am
inassured hope of these things. You are the fruit and the matier of our
glory, you are our joy, in case you persevere unto the end in those things
that you have begone.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
Wherefore, sense we could no longer forbear, we thought it good to remain at
Athens alone, and sent Tymothe ou^ brother and minister of God, and the helper
forth of our labor in the gospel of Christ to stablishe you: and to comfort
you concerning out faith, that no man should be moved in these affliccyons.
For ye your selves know, that we are even appointed thereunto. For when we
were with you, we told you before, that we should suffer tribulacion, even as
it came to pass, and as ye know. For this cause when I could no longer
forbear. I sent, that I might have knowleage of your faith, lest by some
means the tempter had tempted you, and lest ou^e labor had ^eue bestowed in
vain. Therefore, inasmuche as we could not suffer the want of you any longer,
and seeing I could not come my self to you, I thought it good, to do that by
my most faithful companion, that I could not do by my self: and to put him
instead of my self. Therefore we tarried still alone at Athenes, and from
thence sent Tymothe our brother, a tried minister of God, and an helpefelowe
of our office, which we have to do in the gospel of Christ: because we had
leauer want the comfort of that so dear a singular and so necessary a
companion for the time, than to give occasion that you should think we had
utterly given over lokyng to your state of things. And verily we have sent
him, not for any cause of our own, but chiefly for your sakes, that he might
establishe and comfort your consciences, and to show you, that for all these
paynfull affliccions, wherewith I am tossed hereawaye and therawaye, mine heart
is nothing discouraged, but the glory of the gospel is a great deal better
auaunced, lest any of you should be dismayed, by reason of mine affliccions,
which you hear tell of. For you must not think it any neweltie, though these
things happen to the preachers of the gospel, in as much as you knew a good
while a go, that I was chosen of god to this same end, that through suffering
of affliccions of my body, I might auaunce the name of Christ: and so in this
behalf to be like my Lord and master. For even than when we were present with
you, we told you the same before, that we should suffer affliccion for the
gospelles sake. And as I told you before it should be, so you see it now
happened, like as also you have known it happen before. As for me, there was
nothing hapened unto me unlooked for, nor any thig that I told not you of
before, so as you have the less cause to be discouraged. Wherefore, considering
that for the great care I take for you (even when all thing is at the surest) I
could not be quiet but long after you still, I sent Tymothe (as I said before)
for this purpose, that by him (as well in a manner as I were present there my
self) I might know the steadfastness of your faith, and might try, if he
that keeps continual watch to subuerte them that be good, had tempted any of
the weaker sort of you, and so in them my labor had been lost.

The text.
But now lately, when Timothe came from you unto us, and declared to us your
faith and love, and how that ye have good remembrance of us always, desi^yng
to see us as we also desire to see you. Therefore brethren we received
consolacid by you, in all our adversity and necessity through your faith. For
now are we alive, if ye stand sted fast in the Lord. For what thanks can we
recompense to God again for you, over all that joy, that we joy for your sakes
before our God: praying night and day exceadyngly, that we might see you
presently, and might fulfill the things which are lackyng unto your faith? God
himself our father, and our Lord Jesus Christ shall gyde our journey unto
you: the Lord also shall increace you and make you flow over in love one
toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you: that he may
make your hearts stable and unblameable, in holiness before God our father, at
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all sayn^tes. But when Tymothe of late
returned from you to us again, and brought us merry tydinges, showing that you
persiste as well constauntly in your faith without shrinking, as also that your
unfeigned charity is the same that it was, and that our being a sondre has
not brought us out of remembrance with you, but that you have us in mind
always continually, and that you are ever desirous to see us, as we are to see
you: there is no necessity nor any sorrow, that I am pressed withal, but I
^an hear it patiently sense I knew that you abode constantely in your faith,
which when I was afraid of, I was nothing afraid of my self. For I think
that I am altogether safe, if your faith continue safe. Now we live, and
think our selfs delivered from al manner of dau^gter, in case you, through the
help of Christ Jesus, persiste constantly in y^ you have begun. It yrketh not
me to suffer these evils, so that the fruits be answerable in you, for whose
sakes I abide them. Which thing, for as much as I perceive to be in deed, so
as the gospel grows in acquayntaunce among the Gentiles daily more and more,
what thanks worthy so great a benefit are we able to re^dre unto God? by
whose goodness so excellent joy, wherewith we rejoice withal our hearts for your
foreward proceeding, chances unto us even among these sorrows, our God bearyng
record of the same, unto whose goodness you are bound for that you continue
steadfast: of whom our duty is in our prayers day and night, to desire
this thing in more ample wise, that by his mercy we may at one time or other
see you again. For with personal presence, some thing is done, that another
letters nor messenger, how trusty so ever he be, can be hable to accomplish.
For this cause sake therefore, I am desirous to see you, to the intent if any
gospellyke discipline be wanting, I might supply it and amend it. Furthermore
my prayer is, that where I cannot so do by means of wicked persons, God
himself our father and his son Jesus Christ our Lord would vouchesafe to
take away those lettes, and open me a free passage unto you, and also in the
mean season so to encreace you with his gifts, that I may see you to my great
comfort. Which thing shall be, in case he make you aboundaunte and plenteouse in
mutual charity among your selves: and not among your selves only, but also
toward all men, like as we also have a certain excellency of love toward
all you, being ready even to suffer death for your salvation: and that he would
so confirm your consciences, that your vprightenesse cannot be blamed on any
behalf, not only with men, but much rather with God the father, whom
nothing escapes, in the cumming of our Lord Jesus Christ, at which time it
shall openly appear in the sight of all Saints, not only what every one has
done, but also with what conscience every one has done it.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
Furthermore, we beseech you (brethren) and exhort you by the Lord Jesus* that
ye increace more and more, even as ye have received of us, how ye ought to
walk and to please God. For ye know what commandments we gave you by our
Lord Jesus Christ. For this is the will of God even your holiness, that ye
should abstain from fornicacyon, and that every one of you should know how to
keep his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence as
do the hethen, which know not God, that no man opresse and defraude his
brother ^^^ bargayning: because that the Lord is the auenger of al such
things, as we told you before, and testified. For God has not called us unto
uncleanness, but unto holiness. He therefore that despises, despises not man, but
God, which has sent his holy spirit among you. Moreover brethren we beseech
and exhort you by the Lord Jesus, forasmuch as you are now sufficiently
taught of us, after what sort you ought to behave your selves, and with what
endeavors to please God, give your diligence not only to persevere still in that
you have learned, but also to excede your selves in daily encreaces of
forewardenesse. For you know and remember what precepts I gave, not by the
authority of my self, but by the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ. I gave
none of these things in commandment that the false Apostles cloute in among
you, of the ceremonies This is the will of god even your holiness.
of Moses law, of the excellency and visions of Angels, as though there were
entrance by them unto salvation: but those things only that I knew certainly
to be acceptable unto God. For this is the will of God, that you keep your
selves holy and unspotted, and not only to be chaste in soul, but also in
body, that you may abstain from whoredom wherewith the bodies are defiled. The
body is the dwelling house of the soul, and the soul is the Inn of God. Than
like as it is necessary for the soul to be pure, because of the geaste God:
so is it decente for the body to be pure because of the enhabitour, the soul.
Therefore let every one know how to give this honor to his sely carcas, as a
frail vessel, that he keep it clean and undefiled: and not suffer it to be
spotted with the disease of filthy desires and lusts: which thing is so far
unworthy the state of Christians, that it is the state of no nation of people,
but of them that have no knowlage of God, but think that every one may
lawfully do what he lusts without punishment, and that all is honest that is
pleasant to the body. But the mischief of lust doubleth his mischief, in
case a man Join it with the Injury of his brother: as when a man usurps an
other man's wife. Let no man therefore either in this case or in other
matters, in vsurpyng ouermuche to himself, defraude his brother, inasmuche as
God will suffer none of these things unrevenged: and seeing that baptism shall
not only not avail them that commit these offenses, but also make to their
more greuouse punishemente, like as we have told and recorded unto you before.
For God has not called us from the ordinance of our former life, to the
entente that being once washen clean we should be walowed into the same
filthiness again: but to mainteyne in holiness and purity of life the
innocence that was once freely given us. And that we should not through filthy
desires cast away from us the holy ghost, which is the lover of Chastity.

These matters (I say) I have both recorded and do record again, that they
are not the precepts of me but of God: so that whosoever contemns them,
contemns not man which is the warning geuer, but God that is the
commandment maker: who has emparted his holy spirit unto you, for this
purpose, that you should by his inspiracion embrace godliness. Against this
holy spirit every one works dispite, that through filthy lusts polluteth
his own body.

The text.
But as touching brotherly love, ye need not, that I write unto you. For ye are
taught of God, to love one an other, ye and that thing verily ye do unto all
the brethren which are in all Macedonia. We beseech you brethren, that ye
increase more and more, and that ye study to be quiet, and to meddle with your
own business, and to work with your hands, as we commanded you: that ye may
behave your selves honestly toward them that are without, and that nothing be
lackyng unto you. Furthermore, as concerning the love that christians owe to
christians, I think it not necessary for me to admonish you by these my
letters. For you are taught immediatelye from heaven by the spirit of Christ
(whereof you have tasted) that ye should love one another. Which thing you
declare in very deed, in that you love all the brethren with a christian love,
not only that are at Thessalonica, but also in all Macedonia. Mine exhortacion
therefore shall not be unto you, to do the thing that you do of your own
accord, but in that, that you do by admonicion of the spirit, to excede your
selves, and go forward always better and better. And look you give
circumspect head, that your quietness be not interrupted by means of idle
persons, and such as be curious meddlers of other men's mattiers, but let
every one apply his own business. And if any want substance whereof to
live, let him provide with his own hands, so as he may both help himself,
and releue them that be nedie, like as we commanded you before: to the intent
ye might behave your selves honestlye toward them, that have not professed
Christ: at whose hands it were shame for your profession, either to beg or
to do any vncomelier thing for need. But rather let every one get with his
hands, so as he want no necessary thing. And that man is easily satisfied,
that is content with a litell.

The text.
I would not brethren that ye should be ignoraunte concerning them which are
fallen aslepe, that ye sorrow not as other do, which have no hope. For if we
believe that Jesus dyed, and rose again: even so them also which sleep by
Jesus, will God bring again with him. For this say we unto you in the word
of the Lord, that we which shall live, and shall remain in the coming of the
Lord, shall not come ere they which sleep. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven, with a showte, and the voice of the Archangell and trompe
of God. And the dead in Christ shall arise first: then we which shall live
(eucn we which shall remain) shall be caught up with them also in the clouds,
to meet the Lord in the air. And so shall we ever be with the Lord.
Wherefore, comfort your selves one another with these words. Finally, as
touching the mystery of the resurreccion, I cannot be content to have you
ignorant, lest you should make importune sorrowful mourning for them, that
sleep in the trust of the promyses of the gospel, as though they perished:
that you should not mourn, I say, after the example of the gentiles, which
bewail the death of their friends, because they have no hope of their
resurreccion. But the death of christians is nothing else but a sleep, from the
which they shall awake again at the coming of Christ, to live a great deal
more blissefully. For why should we not trust, the same thing to come to
pass in the members, that we know already performed in the head? For if we
believe verily, that Jesus was dead after y^ manier of man, and rose again to
immortal life, it follows of necessity, that we ought to believe also, that
god the father, which raised up Jesus, will also bring with him those that
professed Jesus and slept in the assured trust of his promyses, alive again
at the coming of his son, so as the head shall not want his members. We
babble not unto you an humayne fable, but we tell you the thing that we learned
of Christ himself, that is to wete, that we, which shall be found remaining
alive in this world at the lords coming, shall not be presented in the sight
of Jesus, before that they which were dead before, be presented also. Some will
say: how shall it be possible for them to be presented, that were buried and
turned into duste? Even the Lord Jesus himself by the voice of the angel
soundyng out of heaven with the trompette of God shall raise them up and warn
them to awake and come quickly. And than such as had slept in this hope, shall
return again unto life, and rise out of their graves. And that done, we that
shall remain and be found alive in the cumming of Christ, shall be suddenly
taken up together with them that are raised again unto life, through the
clouds, that we^ may mete the Lord in the air. And from thence he shall
carrye us with him into heaven, to live with him perpetually. Now therefore,
see you comfort every one another with these sayings, so as the death of the
godly vere you not to sore, inasmuche as it is more worthy gratulacions and
reioycinges, than your sorrowful lamentacions.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
Finally of the times and seasons (brethren) it is no neade that I write unto
you* for ye your selves know perfectly, that the day of the Lord shall come,
even as a thief in the night. For when they shall say, peace, and al things
are safe, then shall soden destruccyon come upon them (as sorrow comes upon a
woman trauaylyng with child) and they shall not escape. But ye brethren are not
in darcaenes, that that day should come on you as a thief. NOw you have the
manier and order of the resurreccion, inasmuche as it was convenient for you to
know it. But as for the times and the very seasons when these things shall be,
it is no part of our office to write unto you. And it is so vnauayleable, that
even the lord himself would open no such thing unto his disciples when they
demanded it of him. For you know plainly, and we have taught you before,
that the day of the Lord shall come sodaynely upon the world unlooked for, even
as a thief in the night, breaks in upon them that are aslepe: and shall
ouerlaye them that are careless, than most chiefly, when it shall be the least
looked for. For when such as believe not the ghospel, shall say in their most
Ioylytie, there is no daungier, but all is peace and safe, the Lord will not
come: than their destruction shall come sodainlye upon them, like as a woman
with child is suddenly payned with sorrow in her travail, before the day
comes that she looked for. And they shall have no way to escape oppression,
before they feel it suddenly upon them. That day shall be a dreadful day, to
them that being blinded in their own viciousnes, lead their life as it were
in the night: but unto you brethren, it is not so dreadefull lest it should
take you unprovided.

The text.
Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day. We are not of
the night nether of darkness. Therefore let us not sleep as do other: but let us
watch, and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep in the night, and they that be
dro^cken, are droncken in the night. But let us which are of the day, be
sober, armed with the breast place of faith and love, and with hope of salvation
for an helmet. For God has not appointed us to provoke wrath unto our selves,
but to obtain salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, which dyed for
us: that whether we wake of sleep, we should live together with him. Wherefore,
comfort your selves together, and edifye every one another, even as ye do. For
all you that follow Christ, belong not to the kingdom of darkness but to the
kingdom of light and of god, namely if our diligence of godliness be
aunswerable to our profession, and if we live so, as it may appear that we
watch in the dayelight and not lie snourtyng in darkness.

Therefore if we will not be taken unawares, let us not sleep, as other do, that
have no knowlage of Christ's light: but let us watch and be sobre, taking
always circumspect head, that we commit nothing through unadvisedness, that
may offend the iyes of God and men. For like as they that sleep after the
body, sleep in the night, and those that are wynedrunken, are drunken in the
night: even so those that yawne and slumbre in naughtiness, are occupied in
darkness of the soul, and those that are drunken with the lusts and
daliaunces of the world are entangled with darkness of the mind. But as for
us unto whom the day of the gospel has cast his light, it stands us in
hand to be sobre and watchyng, always prepared and ready against the sudden
assault of the enemy, that keeps continual watch for our destruction: and
to be harnessed with spiritual armor: In stead of a breast plate to put on
faith and charity: for the helmet, hope of eternal salvation. And than shall
you not need to distruste. God will be ready himself to defend those that be
watching. For god has not called us to the doctrine of the gospel for this
purpose, that living otherwise than it makes mention, we should double the
wrath and vengeance of God upon us, but that in obeying him we might obtain
salvation, by the help of our Lord Jesus Christ, who suffered death for us, to
the intent, that if it chance us to live, we may live with him through
godliness and hope of immortality, and if it chance us to dye, we may live
with him never to dye. To the intent that you may so do more and more, encourage
every one other with mutual exhortacions, and stir one another to go on
forward, like as you do already even of your own accord.

The text.
We beseech you brethren that ye know them which labor among you, and have
the oversight of you in the Lord, and give you exhortacion, that ye have them
in hye repucacion through love, for their works sake, and be at peace with
them. Furthermore we beseech you, brethren, to have co^sideracion of them, that
labor among you, and have oversight of you in teaching of the gospel, and do
admonish you with what things you ought to please Christ: that where you are
bounden to give honor unto all men, yet have them in regard above others,
requiting the^ the love, that they bestow unto you in susteynyng so many
labors and daungiers for your sakes. And if they reprove you for your faults
at any time, yet have peace with them. For he is not worthy to be hated, that
reproves a man for his profit.

The text.
We desire you (brethren) warn them that are vnruelye, comfort the feeble
minded, lift up the weak, be pacient toward all men. Se that none recompense
evil for evil unto any man: but ever follow that, which is good, both among
your selves, and to all men. Rejoice ever. Pray continually. In all things
give thanks. For this is the will of God through Christ Jesus toward you.
Quench not the spirit. Despise not prophecyinges. Eramen all things, keep
that which is good. Abstain from all euel apperaunce. The very god of peace
sanctify you through out. And I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul
and body, may be preserved: so that in nothing ye may be blamed in the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Faithful is he which called you, which
will also do it. Brethren, pray for us. Great all the brethren with an holy
kiss. I charge you in the Lord, that this Epistle be red unto all the holy
brethren. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen. And thus I
beseech you (every man according to his ability) to lay your helpyng hands
to the forewardyng of their offices. Admonish them that live after their own
lusts and disquiet the order that you observe. Comfort the weak hearted,
releue the feeble, be gentill and pacie^t toward all men, not only toward
the Christians, but also them that are strangers from Christ. Beware that none
recompense wrong for wrong, nor requite evil deed for evil deed. For truly
it is vnsemyng to follow the ecample of naughty persons in a naughty matier,
and become like condicioned unto them. But rather give diligence to do good
unto all folks, not only the christians unto christians, but also unto all
manner of folks, whether they have deserved it or not deserved it: being
certainly assured, yt your diligence shall not be lost: for Christ is your
suertie. In consideracion whereof, whatsoever chances unto you, rejoice
always so that godliness be safe: call upon God with your prayers
continually without ceassyng, and give thanks whatsoever befalls you. For so
it stands with gods pleasure, that there shall be occasion always, to render
thanks unto the father for his bounteousnes to you ward by Jesus Christ. And
this furthermore stands you in hand to take heed of, that no variaunce rise
among you by reason of every ones sondrye sorts of gifts. Unto some one
chances the gift of tongues, to sing in the spirit: albeit it is but a gift
of the basest sort, yet quench it not in any wise, but cherishe it rather, yt
it may profit better and better. Unto some chances the gift of prophecy,
to declare the mystical sense of the scripture: reiecte it not in any wise
whatsoever is spoken. Suffer the one patiently that he may go on forward,
hear the others setence, with judgment: but after such sort that he be not
to much molested in his speaking. Let no man make so much of his own gifts,
that he contemn another man's. Try al things, but let every man hold the
thing that he judges requisite. Whatsoever it be that has ye similitude of a
good thing, is not to be despised. Notwithstanding it behooves you to abhor
so much from evil, that you ought to absteyne even from those things, that
have the show of evil. But unto these matters, it shall be your part to
apply all your diligent studies. And god the auctor of peace, unto who^ is
acceptable both the like consent of mind and the like speech of words that
me^ do wholly use together in such things as be honest, bring to pass, yt you
may be perfitely holy, and unspotted, so as the soul may be answerable unto
the spirit, the body aunswerable to the soul, and the spirit self
answerable to God: y^ there be nothing to find you faulty in, and that you
may still persevere in this state of holiness continually, until the cumming
of our lord Jesus Christ. There is no cause for you to distruste of. For he is
sure of his promise, that has called you unto this holiness, and to the
rewards of the same: he himself shall finishe that he has begone, and
perform that he has promised. Brethren, help you forewarde with your
prayers the labors that we go about. Salute all the brethren with a kiss,
not such a one as the commune sort of salutours do give, but with an holy
kiss and worthy Christian love. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle
be rehearsed to all the holy brethren. The grace and beneuolent favor of our
Lord Jesus Christ be always with you.

Amen.
Thus ends the paraphrase upon the first Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to
the Thessalonians.
The Argument upon the second Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the
Thessalonians by Des. Erasmus of Roterodame.
Forasmuch as Paul could not have liberty to go see the Thessalonians
again, he confirms their consciences by Epistle, that they might manfully
suffer the affliccions laid upon them for Christ's sake: seeing that they
shall not want reward, nor the adversaries escape punishment. Again,
concerning the day of the Lords cumming, whereof he touched somewhat in the
farther Epistle, he warns them that they be not styrred with the sayings of
some, that affirm as though it were at hand: and as some think signifies
closely that the Empire of Rome must be first dispatched and Antichriste to
come after that. Moreover he beats into their heads very earnestly, to
restrain such as with their idleness and nice curiosity have been disturbours
of the commune quietness and order: and to enforce them unto labor, in as much
as Paul himself labored among them with his own hands. This Epistle he
wrote from Athens by the same men that he sent the farther Epistle by, as it is
recorded by our arguments.

The end of the argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the. ii. Epistle of S. Paul to the
Thessalonians.
The first Chapter.
The text.
Paul and Syluanus and Timothe. Unto the congregation of the Thessalonia^s, in
god our father, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be unto you, and peace from
god our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. We are bound to thank God
always for you brethren (as it is mete) because that your faith grows
exceadyngly, and every one of you swymmeth in love toward another between your
selves, so that we our selves boast of you in the congregacions of God, over
your patience, and faith in all your persecucyons and tribulacyons, that ye
suffer, which is a token of the ryghtewes judgment of God, that ye are
counted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer. It is verily a
ryghtewes thing with God, to recompense tribulacion to them that trouble you:
and to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself from heaven with the angels of his power, with flaminge fire, which
shall render vengeance unto them that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punyshed with everlasting
damnacyon, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power,
when he shall come to be glorified in his saynctes, and to become marvelous in all them that believe: because our testimonye that we had to you, was believed
even the same day. Wherefore also, we pray always for you, that our God will
make you worthy of this calling and fulfill all delectacyon of goodness, and the
work of faith with power: that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be
glorified by you, and ye by him, according to the grace of our God and of the
Lord Jesus Christ. PAul and Siluanus and Tymothe, unto the company of the
faithful that are assembled in spirit at Thessalonica, and be of one mind
toward god our father and the Lord Jesus Christ. We are bounden to render
aboundaunt thanks always to god for his aboundaunt liberalytie to you ward,
in that you do not only through his help continue steadfast in those
things that you have begone, but also for that you daily encreace excedinglye
more and more in faith and love among your selves one to an other, so much
that I think it not necessary now to kyndle you unto the applyeng of godlynes
by the examples of other, seeing we rather make boaste of you to the other
co^gregacions of god, and inflame other unto virtue by your example: in
rehearsing your patience and stedfastenes of faith in all your persecucions
and affliccions, which you suffer, that the just judgment of god may be
declared in you hereafter, at such time, as when you have suffered vexacio^ in
this world for y^ glory of his name, he shall admit you into the felowshipe of
his kingdom: And contrary wise shall commit them unto eternal punnyshement,
that have persecuted you for malice of him. For certainly this shall be the
dealing of gods righteousness, to pay unto either part reward worthy their
deeds: to them that punnyshe the innocent, affliccion: and to bestow unto you
that are troubled with us, refreshing and comfort with us in that day, when
the promises of the gospel shall appear, and when the Lord Jesus shall show
himself out of heaven openly unto the world, not than after a low base degree
as he did at his first coming, but waited upon with the companyes of angels,
as it is comelye for a myghtie prince: nor than gentill and tractable to heal
the wicked, but armed with an horrible fiery flame to render vengeance unto
them that would not know god in this world, nor obey the gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ: so as they shall feel by experience that he is righteous and
mighty, whom being merciful and gentill they set naught by: and so as at
least they may learn by their own punyshmentes perforce to confess the
things to be true that the gospel spoke of. For they, inasmuch as they never
made end of their wicked doing, shall suffer pains y^ never shall have ending:
when they have looked upon the divine face of the lord and the majesty of his
power, who^ they contemned in this world as a rascal or a vile person. For at
his first coming he came to save al men, but than he shall come to show him
self glorious, not in himself only but in all his members also, that are
godly people, to the intent he may appear wonderful in all them that believe his
gospel. For in that day the things shall be openly seen of al men in you, which
trusted in Christ at our record bearing, where y^ ungodly contemned them and
would not believe: which day that it may be prosperous and joyful unto you,
we cease not to pray to the lord continually for you, that forasmuch as it
has pleased him to call you unto the hope of this glory, the same may
vouchesafe also to be presentlye ready to help you in your travail
thitherwarde, that your conuexsacion be agreeable to your profession, and to
consu^mate and fynishe perfitely that, which of his goodness he has begone
in you: and to give strength unto your souls, that in manfullye bearing the
vexations of the ungodly, you may declare, how mighty the assured hope of
eternal felycitie is in you, for whose sake you pass not even upon the life of
your bodies: to the intent y^ like as Christ glorified the father by his death,
and was glorified of him again by his resurreccion: so the name of the lord
Jesus Christ may be glorified now by your sufferaunce, and you glorified again
by him in the day of his coming, not according to your own deserts but
according to the mercy of our god and of the Lord Jesus Christ, without whose
help all that you go about were of none effect.

The. ii Chapter.
The text
We beseech you (brethren) by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in
that we shall assemble unto him, that ye be not suddenly moved from your mind,
nor be troubled, neth^r by spirit, neither by words, nor yet by letter which
should some to come from us, as though the day of Christ were at hand. Let no
man deceive you by any means, for the Lord shall not come except there come a
departing first, and that the synful man be opened the soon of perdicyon,
which is an adversary: and is eralted above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped: so that he does sit in the temple of God, boastynge himself to be
God. Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you. I told you these things?
And now ye know what with holds: even that he might be uttered at his time.
For the mystery of the unquite does all ready work: till he, which now
only lets, be taken out of the wa^e. And th^n shall that wicked bevttred,
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the appeareaunce of his coming. FVrthermore brethren, we beseech you by
this coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereof we spoke a littell before, and by
the fellowship of the glory, whereby we being the members shall be fastened unto
our head: that you be not sodaynlye moved from the mind you are in though his
coming be prolonged, and be not astonyed in your minds, nether by feyned
prophecy, ne by probable assercio^, nor by Epistle sent in our name, as though
the coming of the Lord were all ready at hand. Let no man deceive you by any
means. For the lord shall not come, onles a departing come first, and not
before the wicked man appear, the child of perdicion, who like as he is much
unlike unto Christ, so much is he his enemy, and is exalted above the son
of God, and above al, that is called God, or power, that is devoutly
wurshipped: so much that he shall sit in the temple of God, showing himself
as God. Do you not remember, that wha^ I was yet with you, I told you these
things? And now you know, what is the let, yt Christ cummeth not. In deed that
the wicked man (as I said before) may in his propre time openly practice his
tyranny upon the Saints. For now wickedness works his cruelty underhand
by him, and the devil by wicked men rages against the professors of the
gospel, and as you perceive by my tellyng, there is nothing that lets the
adversary of Christ from showing himself openly, but only that in the mean
while every one should hold still that he holds, until that kingdom,
wherewith all other are holden in subieccion, be dispatched quyte out of the
way. And as soon as that shall come to pass, than shall that wicked one show
himself abroad openly, furnished with all kind of iuggling castes and wily
disceytes, to bring mankind to destruction. But for all his rageing with his
deuilish spirit, the Lord Jesus shall cheoke him with the mighty blast of his
mouth, and for all his bostyng of his false counterfaite show of divinity,
the Lord shall obscure and abolishe him with the excellent clearenes of his
cummyng, even as monstreous sightes of the night time and vain appearaunces of
things vanishe and go a way at the shynyng out of the bright son beams.

The text.
Even him whose cumming is after the workyng of Satan, with all lying power,
signs and woonders: and with all deceyuab^enes of vntyghtewesnes, among them
that perish: because they received not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved. And therefore, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies, that all they might be damned which believed not the truth: but
had pleasure in vnrightewesnes. But we are bound to give thanks always to God
for you (brethren beloved of the Lord) for because that God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctifyeng of the spirit, and
through beleuyng of the truth whereunto he called you by our Gospel, to obtayn
the glory of our lord Jesus Christ. For that wily deceiuer shall at his
cu^ming be furnyshed with the spirit of Satan, for the Devil shall practice his
cruelty by him. And to the intent he may the more cruelly work his
myschiefe, he shall not only be armed with a puyssaunt great power, to make
men's consciences afraid, but also with lyeng, countrefaict castes of signs
and wondres, wherein he shall pretend to follow Christ, even as the learned
enchauntours followed the example of Moses among the Egipcians. To be brief,
there shall be no kind of fraud, but he shall be perfitely conyng in it to
work wickedness. Howbeit it shall not avail him in any wise, but only to the
hurting of such, as perish (though he were not) through their own unbelief.
For thus their obstinate rebellion against Christ demeriteth, this is a reward
worthy their deserts, that seeing they received not Christ by whom they might
have been saved, who for his charity sake was desirous to have al me^ne saved,
and for his truth sake opened plainly the things, that belonged to salvation:
now by the suffraunce of God, falsehead takes place with the^ instead of
truth, tyranny for charity, a destroyour for a save our: and so as they shall
believe a wicked ma^s lyenges, inasmuch as they refused to believe the son of
God yt preached nothing but truth. Thus shall it come to pass, yt where they
should otherwise have also perished because of their obstinate mysbelefe, than
it shall manifestly appear in all men's sight, that they are justly damned,
forasmuch as they spightfully forsook Christ, and gave credence at the first
word to a crafty deceiuour and a wicked person. This stormy tempest, like as
it shall declare them worthy damnacio^, so shall it set forth your
steadfastness more clearly. By reason whereof we are bound to render always
thanks unto God (my christianly well-beloved brethren) in that he suffered you
not to continue still in error, but chosed you unto salvation from the
beginning, not by the means of Moses law, but by his own spirit the geuer of
holiness, and by your obedience wherewith you believed the truth simply and
plainly. Besides this, like as he chosed you eternally from the beginning, so
did he call you by our gospel preaching, to the intent the salvation of you,
which believed when the Jews believed not, should grow to the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

The text.
Therefore brethren stand fast, and keep the ordinances which ye have learned:
whether it were by our preaching, or by Epistle. Our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, and God our father (which has loved us, and has given us
everlasting consolacyon, and good hope through grace) comfort your hertes and
stablyshe you in all good saying and doing. The gospel that I delivered unto
you was the true and very right gospel, so that there is none other that you
ought to look for. Therefore stand fast in it brethren, and hold the things
that we delivered unto you, and that you learned of us, either by our
preaching, or by our Epistle. Unto those it shall be your part to apply your
endeavor with all watching diligence. Moreover the Lord Jesus Christ himself,
and god our father, which loved us of his own accord, and called us unto
salvation, and by his spirit has given us eternal consolacion even in these
affliccions, to look in good hope for the rewards of the life in heaven, not
by means of our deseruinges, but by his own free mercy, conforte your hearts
more and more, and establishe and confirm you, to persevere in all goodness both
in word and in deed.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
Furthermore brethren pray ye for us, that the word of God may have passage,
and be gloryfyed, as it is also with you: and that we may be delivered from
unreasonable and froward men. For all men have not faith: but the Lord is
faithful, which shall stablyshe you, and preserve you from cuyll. We have
confydence through the Lord to you ward, that ye both do, and will do the
things which we command you. And the Lord gyde your hertes to the love of
God and patience of Christ. FVrthermore brethren, like as we in our
supplicacions to god help foreward the business of your salvation, even so it
is reason, that you in semblable case set forward the things that I go about
with your prayers to him also: that like as the doctrine of the gospel had
spedy and prosperous increase among you, so it may run abroad and be
published among all men. For the more spedynesse whereof, pray you, that we
may through his help be delivered from such men as be perverse and froward,
which hyndre withal their possible means, that the doctrine of Christ be
not sown without let or hinderaunce. For all they believe not the Gospel
that hear the Gospel: and yet there is no cause why you should not believe,
for all their wicked endeavors. They spurn against the Gospel, but they shall
not spurn it away, for it has a sure protector even the Lord Jesus, which
shall make you steadfast against their unruly wickedness, and keep you from
evil, and finishe that he has begun in you, because he is true in his
promises. He will not fail to succoure you, so that you fail not to follow
his goodness: he will help, but whom* those that are diligent endeuourers.
Thus we speak, not that we doubt of your constant stedfastnes, but we have
rather a firm trust of you, that like as by the help of the Lord Jesus you do
as we gave you in commandment, so ye will do still hereafter. To conclude, the
Lord Jesus with his grace govern your hearts, that they may go on in the
right course, and grow forward in the charity of God, and in the loking for
Jesus Christ. Charity will cause you, to study continually to deserve well of
all men, like as God is bounteonsly good to all men: and the lokyng for
Christ's coming, shall make you to abide manfully all manner of affliccions.

The text.
We require you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every brother, that behaueth himself inordinately,
and not after the institucion which he received of us. For ye your selves know,
how ye ought to follow us. For we behaved not our selves inordinately among you.
Neither took we bread of any man for naught: but wrought with labor and
sweat night and day, because we would not be chargeable to any of you: not
but that we had authority, but to make our selfs an eusa^ple unto you, to
follow us. For when we were with you, this we warned you of* that if any would
not work, the same should not cate. For we have heard say that there are some
which walk among you inordinately, workyng not at all, but being busybodyes.
Them that are such, we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that
they work with quietness, and eat their own bread. Brethren, be not ye weary
in well doing. And if there be any among you, that contemns to follow that
trade of living, which we have prescribed unto you after the rule of the
gospel, and ly^e carelessly as he lusts himself, and through his ydlenes
disquiet your commune affairs, and yet albeit he do naught himself, is a
busye medler of other men's doings: we command you by the authority of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selfs from the company of him, if
he have the name of a christian. For it shall not yrke other to follow the
example of us, which albeit we used both the honor and charge of Apostelship,
yet it grieved us never a whitte to be brought into a basse order among you, and
we took no more upon us than other men did: insomuche that we took not
somuche as a piece of bread of any man's cost, but we forgote the dignity of
our office, and gatte with the labor of our hands working day and night, the
things that were necessaryly requisite to the use of our living, because we
would be a burden to no man: Not that we thought it was unlawful for us to
do as the other Apostles do, but we would not use our right as we might have
done, because we would set our selves for a form and an ensample, that other
men should not be grieved to follow. That which we our selves did in deed, we
commanded you in word, that if any would not work, the same should not eat.

Those deserve a living, that watchenight and day for your salvation. But idle
curiosity and curious idleues deserves no refreshing. For we have heard,
that there be some among you, that disquiet your order, in that they will not
work, and so having naught to do of their own, they must needs meddle of
other men's business. As yet I spare to name them, but whosoever they be, we
command them and if they had leauer we should so do, we hertily beseech them
by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they disturb not the commune quiet through
their idleness: and that inasmuche as they do naught themselfes, they hyndre
not other that are occupied, but let them quietly work also, getting their
living with their own hands, rather than to be greuouse unto other with
shamles crauinges and vnsemelines. In deed they are worthy to have nay of what
they ask, howbeit it stands with christian humanity to do for them that
deserve little, either for that, that they be men, or because peradventure they
may amend and be better. Therefore brethren be not you weary of well doing, to
the worthy and also to the unworthy.

The text.
If any man obey not our saying, send us word of him by a letter: and have
no company with him, that he may be ashamed. And count him not as an enemy:
but warn him as a brother. The very Lord of peace give you peace always, by
all means. The Lord be with you al. The salutacion of me Paul, with myue own
hand. This is the token in Epistles. So I write. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all, Amen. If there be any man that despise to do after
our admonicions, as well that I gave you when I was present with you, as now I
write being absent from you: let this be a punishment enough for christian
charity, that he may have a living that is of those conditions, but yet let
him be noted in that he is put out of your company, to this only intent that
being ashamed he may repent and amend: And cast him not out as an utter
enemy, but rather admonish him as a brother that went astray, whom your mind
is to have amended and not destroyed, eschewyng his company so as you may love
him in your hearts neucrthelesse. For y^ diuorcement that charity allows, is
received but only for a time, that he that has offended may repent.
Furthermore the Lord Jesus the author of peace, grant you perpetual peace in
all your affairs. The Lord be ever with you all. This is the salutacion that I
Paul write unto you again with mine own hand. This token you shall observe
in all mine Epistles written either to you or other. For I write this that no
man shall deceive you by counterfayte letters. The favor and benevolence of
our Lord Jesus Christ be evermore with you all.

Amen.
Thus ends the Paraphrase upon the latter Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to
the Thessalonians.
Erasmus of Roterodame to the Right reverend Bishop and most excellent
Prince of Traiecte / Philip of Burgundye / sends gretyng.
ALbeit in these months / feldes lie here and there bare and barein, most
honorable prelate, yet there is no time of the year but the feldes of
learning bring forth one profitable croppe or other: so that there is none
so rugged a winter, but some profit aryseth of the feldes wherein good studyes
are sown. Me thinks it stands with indyfferent reason than, that a great
portion should be cut therout and given to the Bishop as the chief ploughman
of this husbandrye. For where to our powers we lay our helpyng hands to the
furtheraunce of the gospel, we in some part serve the turns of the office
that you ought to care for. In consyderacion whereof I have done this so much
the more wyllynglye, because the Argument of this matier self provoked me
thereunto. For I have expounded by way of Paraphrase, the two epistles of Saint
Paul to Tymothie, and the one t^ Titus: whereunto I have added, as it were in
stedde of a perfyte end, tha^, that he wrote to Philemon, because it should
not be left alone undone, being the hyndermoost, which though it treat not of
like matier as these other do, yet there is nothing in Paul's wrytinge, that
perteigneth not to the office of a bishop. For in these three former Epistles
he paynteth out after a wondrefull manner and sets forth the image of a
right and a true Christian prelate: and what qualynes and gifts it behooves
him to be garnyshed withal that is called to this so arduous a trauayll and
what his duties are to do that takes that office in hand. For how hard a
mattier it is, to play the parts of a blameles bishop, and on the other side,
how pernicious a daungier it is to the ordryng of man's life, to have a
corrupt keeper of the lords flock, it is euide^tlye appearau^t in that, that
Paul gives commandment of no thing more instauntlye nor more carefully than
he does of it. For how often rehearsal makes he of always one thing, and how
often beats he in y^ same mattiers that he spoke of before? how many times
does he beseech, charge, and adjure by all that holy is, now by fair speech
now by promyses, now by fear allurynge the people with the example sometime of
himself and sometime of Christ? Now seeing Paul was so afraid of their
quayling, whom he had instructed by his own teachinge, whom also he had
ordained by the layeng on of his own hands, and had searched and thoroughly
tried their faithfulness and integrity by so many manner of ways: how much
more daungier is it at this day to commit an office of so weyghtye
importance unto any man at adventure without good ad uisement? In times past
every city had a resident bishop of his own, and yet in those cities how
small a portion of folks were there that-professed Christ?

And besides that, in those days the blood of Christ was yet in fervent
remembrance in men's haries, because it was but lately sheade. And the
heavenly fire that was given men in baptism, was yet flaming hoote: which
things I can not tell how, they both seem to be cold at this present in our
conuersacio^. For these causes sake, a Bishop had not only the charge and
ouersyght of a fewer than now, but also of such as were obedyent without
compulsion. Me thinks it therefore, a matier of much more dyfficultie, at ^
his day to play the faithful incorrupt bishop: not only for that, that one
man has the authority over so many tounes, but much more in that the most
part of them over and besides the dyspensacion and teaching of the gospe^l,
which is ye chiefest and the very peculiar office of a Bishop, are burdened
with the administracion of secula^e offices. But it is a wondrous matter to
talk of, how evil the world and Christ agree one with the other, and how
hard a thing it is for heavenly busynes and worldly affairs to be at one
concord. Than seeing it is a great weyghtye mattier to do either of them both
as it should be, that is to say, either to be a good bishop or a profitable
prince: what a busye piece of work is it for a man that is tangled both the
ways, so to order the mattier, that he leave no paite of his office undone,
either touching his spiritual charge or his temporal autoritic: so to content
his mortal prince, that he offend not the prince immortal: and so to be in
favor with the court, that he come not out of favor in heaven? In times past
who soever took the office of a bishop upon him, must out of hand have
prepared him self wyllynglye to abide al storms of persecucions. And yet it
passes my knowledge to say whether there be more daungier in the
tranquillytie of the world that now goes, in case it be a tranquillity, or
in the stormye tempests of those days. And although by reason of altring the
state of things, it is not possible that the manner of using a bysshoppes
office should be thoroughly in all things always after one sort. And yet the
thing is not to be utterly condemned that varieth from the example of that age,
nether the mutable changeinges of humayne mattiers do always permit a
bishop to bring to pass the thing that he thinks best to be done: like as a
Master of a ship that is both expert and vigilaunt does no good somtymes
with sittyng at the helm, but is carried away as the wind and wether will:
yet not withstanding he shall go the less out of the way, from the sincere
perfyte image of a good bishop, that will have this form of Paul, as it were
a certain directorie always before his eyes. Like as a stout governor of a
ship, albeit he be driven parforce to go sometime a great deal out of his
right course, does not set his eye besides ye compass and loode sterre for
all that, lest he should chance to go quyte out of his ame all together. And
although a man can not do as Paul did in all things yet it is somewhat if he
follow his example in some things. And who so will endeavor himself to those
things that are y^ best to be done, shall not fail of the forewardenes of
Christ's help, whose vicegerent your lordeshyp is, and without his help all
that men goes about is but vain. Fare ye well.

The year. M.D.XIX.
The Argument upon the first Epistle of S. Paul unto Tymothie / by D. Erasmus
of Roterodame.
TYmothies mother was a Jew borne, howbeit she was a christian, and his father
was a Greek. This Timothee being an honest manierly toward young man and well
learned in holy scriptures Paul chosed to be a ministre: and yet because of y^
Jews he was compelled to circumcide him. And forasmuch as he had committed
unto Timothy (as he did also to Titus) the cure of those congregacions that he
could not go to himself, he instituted him in the office of a bishop and in
the dysciplyne of the congregation, giving him not admonicions as a dysciple,
but as a son and as a fellow in office. And to the intent he might do so with
the more authority, he does often vindicate the authority of Apostleshyp unto
him self. Paul admonishes him to reiecte such as would bring in Iewyshe
fables, and to teach those things that pertain to faith and charity. Than,
forasmuch as ye order of a city and tranquillity of a commune wealth
depends of the authority of princes and magistrates, he would not only not
have their authority (though they were Ethnykes) contemned of the Christianes,
but also commands them to be prayed for. He prescribes what is comely both
for men and for women to use in the open congregation. He paynteth out what a
bishop should be and his householde. These he treats of almoost in all the
three first Chapiters. Than he warns him that he receive no Iewyshe fables,
and speaks of choice of meats and forbyddyng of marriage. And than he
teaches him straightwaies how he should behave himself toward old men,
toward yongmen, toward old women, toward yougwomen, toward wydowes as
well rich and poor as those that ought to be found of the commune stock of
the congregation, toward the younger women and toward such as be as yet of
suspecte age. Furthermore he prescribes unto him what he must command to
Masters, what to servants, what to rich men, admonyshing him to reiecte
with all possible means contencious sophistical questions, that have nothing
but a vain show of learning. This Epistle he wrote from Laodicea by Tychicus
the Deacon.

Thus ends the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the first Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to
Timothee.
The first Chapter.
The text.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the commyssion of god our savior, and
lord Jesus Christ which is our hope. Unto Timothe his natural son in the
faith. Grace, mercy and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ our Lord. As I besought the to abide ^^yll at Ephesus (when I
depatred into Macedonia) even so do, that thou command some, that they follow
no strange docrtine, uerber give head to fables and endless genealogies, which
bread doubt more then godly edifying, which is by faith: for the end of the
commandment is, love out of apute heart, and of a good conscience, and of
faith unfeigned: from the which things, because some have erred, they are
turned unto vain iangelynge, because they would be doctors of the law, and
yet understand not what they speak, neither whereof they affirm. Paul an
Apostle and messagier / lest any man would suspecte that I go about mine
own busynes or humayne affairs, and not a messagier of Moses or any other
man, but the messagier of Jesus Christ, which being sent of late in his own
person upon his fathers message, did faithfullye finyshe the busynes of him
that sent him. And as for me I took not this message upon me on mine own head,
nether received I it of man, but was not only called unto it by the
appointement of the everlasting god, but I was also driven perforce unto it by
his commandment and authority: in so much that it By the commission of god
our savior.
was not in my choice to shyfte inyne hands of that office, as payneful as it
is, which was enjoined unto me by the authority of God, the only au toure of
all our salvation. For what so ever the son has enjoined us by the fathers
authority, that same do I take as enjoined of the father himself, by whom we
are also bounden unto him for our salvation: as well in that we are redeemed by
his death from eternal destruction, as also in that we are by his mighty help
delivered from the rageyng tempests of afliccions. From the which albeit our
chance be not to be set at liberty for a time, yet there is no cause why we
should doubt of our safe preseruacion, having Christ to our protectoure,
whom the father has appointed to be both the example and autour of our
most certainly assured hope. For like as he when he was whypped and nailed to
the cross suffered corporal death, howbeit he rose anon again to life that
never shall dye: even so when we have been oppressed with present sorrows of
this world, he shall one day restore us alive again to the same
immortality. For this respects sake, Paul being streynghtened through his
authority To his natural son.
and mayntenaunce, and an invincible Apostle writes unto Tymothe, his true
natural son: who^ I have not chosen (quod he) out of an other man's flock,
but I begat him my self out of these bowels of mine, through ye gospel wha^ he
was yet a strau^gier from Christ: and he for his part is so like, and so
expressly resembles this father of his, in stedfastnes and sincerity of
faith and pure teaching of the gospel, that it appears by evident matier in
deed, that he is no such as may be doubted whether he be mine or not, but
that he is my natural very own undoubted bogotten son, and therefore a great
deal more dearly beloved unto me, tha^ if I had gotten him of my bodily
substance after the commune manner as men do. The bodily substance begets
children that shall live but a while, but by the gospel are we borne to live
always and never dye. If parents have a more peculiar and a nerer hattie
love, to such of their children as be most like favored unto them than to
other, and thereby do as it were know them suerly to be their very own: how^
much more just cause have I to love this son, whom I begat unto Christ
through the faith of the gospel, and In the faith.
in whom I behold the synceritie of my faith borne new again as it were?
Let the Jews make boaste at their pleasure, for geating one companion or other
as a child gotten by adopcion to their Moses: I boaste that I have gotten
such a son as this to the faith of the gospel and unto Christ. For it is
expedient that the Jews synagoge should from hence forth give over bearing of
children. And it is time, that the Gospel spread forth his frutefulnes of
faith abroad in to the whole universal world. Now than, like as I have
manyfolde causes to boaste of such a son, inasmuche as I may safely
commit unto him the office of gospel preachinge: even so I think there is
no cause why he should repent the having either of such an Apostle, or of
such a father. I have committed a part of mine own office unto him, howbeit
god has give me authority thus to do, so as he can stand in no doubt
touching the charge of the congregacions appointed by me, onles peradventure he
dysturst the authority of god. Now what should I being a most loving father
wyshe unto so entierly a dear beloved son? what things else, than the
same, that the supreme governor of our life would have us to be rich and
plentuous of, and in the which he would feign have us to grow strong dailye
more and more, until we be grown unto such a state as Christ may voutchesafe
to know us for his own lawful brethren? Therefore I wyshe Grace Grace mercy
and peace.
unto him, that he may perfytely understand, that all faithful beleuers are
saved by the free benefit of Christ without help of Moses law. And not only
grace, but mercy also to be always ready with present help to succoure him
in his travail among so many dangerous mutacions of things. For I am not
all ignorant, what combrous storms the life of such as be preachers is
endaungered withal. Finally, as it is the propretye of our profession, I wyshe
him peace and concord: and that he look not to receive these benefits of the
world, whose succors are but vain: nether of Moses, because it is a
pernicious matier to have any trust in his shadows, sense the true light of
the gospel shoone clearly forth: ne yet of any other mortal man, but of god
the father, who forsakes not those that faithfully trust in him: and of his
son Jesus Christ our lord, who, like as he has all things commune with the
father, eue^ so he fails not to help those, that have ones wholly committed
them selves unto his fidelity, as faithful servants that depend all
together of such a master as none is to be compared unto him either in
goodness or power. Thou know, natural dear son, what hurly burly we
had, and what As I besought the.
daungyer of our lyfes we were in, to win some congregation unto Christ: and
it is not unknown unto the, how dilygentlye the false apostles watch in
every place, and go about to draw unto Moses, those lately entered yonglinges
whom we have gathered together unto the gospel: and for none other purpose, but
to get a flock of dysciples to them selves, and to be had in estimacion among
the commune people. And as for me, my study is to enlarge the deminions of the
gospelles possession to the vttermoost of my power: so that nevertheless we may
maynteyne that, that is all ready gotten. To be short, forasmuch as we can
not be personally present in all places, we must needs accomplish that, which
is behind, partly with sendynge of Epistles, partly by the ministry of
fellow officers. In consyderacion whereof, at such time as I went again into
Macedonia about the necessary affairs of the gospel, because the Ephesia^s
should not be utterly destitute of me, I left the there eue^ as my self, to
have the authority as a notable vicegerent in so excellent and so paynefull an
office. Thou see the general sort of men wonderfullye enclyned both to
supersticion and unto curious arts: notwithstanding the glory of the gospel
is so much the more highly advanced. And again, there be adversaries so many
and so cruel, that we had need to set both fete fast to the ground (as they
say) That thou command some.
that we stand stronglye against them. Wherefore, the thing that when I went
thence I required the to do, the same being now absent I eftsoon beseech and
pray the to do: that is, that thou warn some corrupt apostles there, whose
names I pass over aduysedly at this time (lest being thereby provoked they wax
more shameless) that they defyle not ne subvert the pure doctrine of the gospel
that we taught to the Ephesians, with their new doctrine. And on the other
part, warn the faithful flock before hand, that they give not light ear
nor intendaunce to such false apostles to their own peril, for they teach
not those things that avail to eternal salvation, and are worthy the gospel
of Christ, but cloute in a sort of unfruitful Iewyshe fables, touching the
supersticious constitucions of men, which avail not a rote to true godliness:
and of a perplexe order of pedigree rehearsed from grandefathers, great
grandefathers, and great great grandefathers, as though the gift of salvation
taught in the gospel, were derived unto us by corporal lynage descending from
a sort of degrees of sundry auncetours: and not rather by heavenly goodness
powered once vntuersally upon all them, that embrace the faith of the gospel.
And this gear they preach not to the glory of Christ, but partly that they
them selves may be had in price among you to be commended for noble doctors:
partly to the intent, forasmuch as the gospelles doctrine is plain and
simple, either to be taken for so much the greater learned men, because they
can cloute in a meignye of doubtefull dyfficulties that never can be made
plain, and a sort of riedles that have no exposicion: as though those
things were not most best that are most plain. The gospel brings
salvation to the beleuer in a small towme: But this kind of men's doctrine
brings in question upon question, and not only is nothing auayleable unto
heavenly godlynes, that God gives us through faith, but also it turns up
side down the chyefe point of the gospelles religion. Whosoever believes
purely, passes not upon questions. And he that knytteth and vnknitteth the
knottes of questions, what other thing does he teach men but to stand in
doubt? Curiosity of questionyng is an aduersarye to fayeth. If they believe
God, what a do have they to quarrel with his promysses? If the faith and love
of the gospel give salvation without much a do, to what purpose are men's
fantasies myngled with all, as cuttynge of the foreskynne, washing of hands,
choice of meats and obseruacion of days? They make vaunt unto you, that the
law was given of god: and yet those that teach it, teach it more grievously
than learnedly, and understand not the sum nor the end of the law. Whereto
should a man labor for salvation by means of so many wiery obseruacions,
seeing he may let them alone and fly straight way to the prycke it self?
That man is conynglye learned enough in Moses law, that has atteyned the
effects of the law. To be brief, the thing that comprehe^deth and
accomplisheth all the whole efficacy of Moses law in a short sum, is love,
in case it proceed from a pure heart The end of the law is love.
and an upright conscience and an unfeigned faith without holownes. A perfect
sincere love tells a great deal ryghtelyer, what is to be done, than any
constitucions, how many soever they be. In case this love be present, what
need the prescriptes of the law? if it be not present, what avails the
obseruacion of the law? An humayne love, because it is many times blotted with
affeccio^s, stands many times with a corrupt conversation, and somtymes
comprehends not a full entier trust in god. But the Evangelical love is of
this property, that it never deceaueth, never wauereth, and can never cease
from doing godly. For it gives respect to none other purpose but to the
glory of Christ, and commodity of his neighbor: ne depends of any other
but only of Christ. Of this prick forasmuch as some mysse, therefore in
stedde of the sure doctrine of Christ, they straw abroad vain smokes and
mystes of Iewishe questions, to the intent they might seem gaye doctors of the
law and set out them selves with vain bablyng, when they understand not for
all that the specialties of those things that they speak of, nor whereof they
affirm. For all the whole law of Moses, although it be otherwise diverse and
dyffuse, is collected into Christ alone. Than seeing the law self applies
unto Christ, it is shame for a man to profess him self a doctoure of the
law, that interprets the law contrary to Christ's mind. Howbeit we speak
not thus, as though we condemned ye law of Moses.

The text.
We know, that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully: knowing this, how
that the law is not given unto a ryghteous man, but unto the unrighteous and
dysobedient, to the ungodly and to sinners, to unholy and unclean, to
murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, to mans^ears, to whormongers,
to them that defyle themselves which mankind, to menstealers, to liars, to
perjured, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to the wholesome
doctrine according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God, which
gospel is committed unto me. And I thancke Christ Jesus our Lord, with has
made me strong: for he counted me true, and put me in office where as before I
was a blasphemer, and a persecuter, and a syraunt. But I obtained mercy,
because I did it ignorauntlye through unbelief. Nevertheless, the grace of our
Lord was exceadynge aboundaunt with faith and love which is by Christ Jesus.
We do both know and acknowledge, that the law is good onles it be unlawfully
used. And he is an abusour of the law, that expounds it otherwise than it
means it self. The chiefest purpose of the law was, to lead us unto Christ.
So that he turns the law, which is good, into his own destruccio^, that by
the law draws folks away from Christ. And he that dyscerneth and espieth
in what behalf the law (that was given but for a time) must give The law is
good.
place to the gospel, and in what part it ought to continue in his
perpetual strenght: he that understands after what sort to apply the
gross lettre of the law unto the spiritual doctrine of the gospel: and he
that perceaueth, how they whom Christ has redeemed with his blood from the
tyranny of sin, and do more upon their own accord at the mocion of love,
than Moses law appoints, have no need of the fear nor admonicion of the
law, either to be restrained from naughtines or stiered to their duetye doing:
to him in deed the law is good. For he understands that the law belongs
not to him, that has learned by the gospel, not only to hurt no body, but
also to do good unto his enemies. Whereto should an horse need bridle or
spur that runs freely and well as he should do? They that are led and
ordered by the spirit of Christ, run uncompelled, and do more than all the
whole law requires: and having once freely atteyned ryghteousnes, abhorte from
all unrighteous. Therefore the law, that by fear restrayneth from evil
doings, is not The law is not given unto a righteous man.
given in any wise unto them, that do wyllynglye and gladly that which the
law requires, although they have not the words of the law. For whom tha^ is
the law ordained? Veraylye unto them that turn the deaf ear toward the
law of nature, and being without love and readyly enclyned to al myscheafe,
are guyded by their own lusts, onles they be holden back with the bar of
the law: And in case the law suffer them to sin unpunished, tha^ they
return by and by to their own dysposicion, and become the same openly that
they were inwardelye: that is to say, unjust, rebels, wicked and ungodly,
dysobedie^t, impure, kyllers of fathers and mothers, horemongers, defylers, of
themselves with mankind, man robbyng thieves, liars and perjured persons. The
threatenings of the law were iustlye objected against the Jews because they
were prone to these myschiefes, to restrain their slauyshe vile natures from
these wicked dooinges before rehearsed for fear of punyshement, and all other
manner of naughtines that is against the excellent law of the gospel, which
Moses gave us not, but the blessed god him self delivered us by his only
son Jesus. The Jews make boaste, that their law is glorious: the law that
we have is much more glorious. They brag of their author Moses, and we with
a great deal iuster cause boaste of our author god and Christ. They preach the
law of Moses, y^ restrayneth a certain sort of great notable crimes through
punyshement, and I preach the law of the gospel, which dyspatcheth all
lusts at once, that are contrary to true godlynes. And who is their autour of
preaching Moses law, leat them look to that them selves: But in deed I am put
in trust to preach this honorable mighty puyssaunte gospel, that needs
none aid of the law, and it was not committed unto me by men, but by god him
self: not that I think me worthy in any condition to have so weightye a
matter committed unto me. It was not of my deseruynge but of the goodness of
god, unto whom I render thanks for giving strenght unto such a wretched
body as I am, and so far unmeet for this office, to glorifye Jesus Christ
our Lord: whose busynes I do faithfully, like a faithful servant: and yet I
challenge none other commendacion to my self, but that like as he has thought
me a faithful minister to preach the gospel, even so do I syncerelye and
vnfeynedlye labor in the office that he has put me in trust withal, without
any following of their example that preach Moses law to Christ's reproach,
only seruyng their own gain and the glory of them selves, and not of Jesus
Christ. I confess that in times past I was led in the same blyndenes that
they are, as long as I continued in the zeal of the law of the fathers, I was
a blasphemer against the name of Christ, I was so cruel a persecutour, that I
could never lynne doing of vyolence. For I persecuted the springing glory of
y^ gospel, not only with braulinges, but also eue^ unto enprisonynge and
murtherynge. Yet hitherto I am behind these men in nothing: peradventure in
this case I am to be preferred before them, inasmuche as I did these things by
the only simple stickyng to the law, through error and ignorance:
inasmuche as I was not yet called to the feloweshyp of the gospel: But they
have once professed Christ, and yet being enemies of his glory, and to much
desirous of their own, do of a malicious obstinacy cloute in the
unprofitable burden of Moses law. And for this cause sake, seeing I did thus
only of ignorance, God had mercy upon me, where as they are blinded every
day more and more. The more feruentlye that I fought than for the law against
Christ, the more hartylye do I now defend the doctrine of Christ against the
affirmours of the law. For instead of that earnest vehement study of the law,
which is to be put away, grace has succeeded haboundauntly: And in stedde of
the trustyng of the law, the faithful trustyng in Christ is commen in place.
Instead of the malicious hatred of the Jews, charity toward all men is
entered, which we have obtained both by the example and gift of Christ.

The text.
This is a true saying (and by all means worthy to be received of us) that
Christ Jesus came into the world, to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
Notwithstanding, for this cause obtained I mercy, that Jesus Christ should
first she we on me all long patience, to declare an ensample unto them which
should believe on him unto eternal life. So then unto God, king everlasting,
immortal, inuysyble, wise, only be vonoure and praise for ever and ever.
Amen. This commandment commit I unto thee, son Tymotheus, according to the
prophecyes, which in time past were prophesied of the, that thou in them
should fight a good fight, having faith and good conscience: which some have
put away from them* and as concerning faith have made shypwracke. Of whose
nombre is Hymeneus and Alexander, whom I have delivered unto Satan, that they
may learn not to blaspheme. The Jews have nothing to say against me,
although I said that I am by the goodness of god without the help of the law
becommen of a wicked and a myscheuous man, now that, that I am. But the thing
that seems unto them incredible, is by most evident arguments undoubtedly
true: and the thing that they renounce, is withal studious endeavor to be
embraced (as they say) with meting arms: that Jesus Christ seeing the law to
be ineffectual unto perfect salvation, was made man and came in his own
person into the world, to the intent that through his death he might give us
perfyte health, and in suffering the peynes of our unrighteousness he might give
unto us his own ryghteousnes. Finally, albeit I was an earnest mayntenoure of
the law of the fathers, yet I do not only not except my self out of the
nombre of sinners, but also I knowledge me to be even the chiefest among them.
I will not deny mine uncleanness, for it redoundeth unto the glory of
Christ. The less that I deserve mercy, the more excellent is his clemencye.
I was worthy punyshement. And how comes it to pass than, that Christ would
not only pardon mine offenses and declare his exceeding gentilnes toward me,
but also enriche me with so many great free gifts? For what other purpose, but
through this notable example, to provoke all men to hope after like
forgiveness, how fylthily soever they have lived before, so that they put no
trust in the aid of Moses law, and set all their whole faith in Christ's
goodness, that continues with us still unto everlasting life. The promysses
are great, but the promise maker is trustye and sure. And no man shall put any
mystrust in the promyses, that considers Christ to be the promise maker. And
in case any man could contemn him as a man having suffered upon the cross,
yet let him consydre that the most high everlasting king God the father
immortal, invisible, and only wise is the chief author of this business, who
by his son gives us all things. Therefore nothing ought to seem incredible,
that almyghtye God promyseth. And as for men, they can challenge to themselves
no part of ability to give this so singular a treasure, forasmuch as he
ought to have all honor and glory, not for a certain of years, as the
glory of Moses law was, but in all ages for evermore. For it besemeth the
immortal God to have immortal honor. That, that I have said, is true, and
as the matter is in deed. Than like as I do faithfully behave my self in the
busynes appointed unto me, even so do I give the this in commandment, my
loving son Timothye, that thou follow thy fathers example, in accomplyshyng
the office, that thou haste taken upon the, thoroughly in all poynctes. It is
gods busynes that thou take in hand, whereunto thou wast not called by any
promocion of man, but by the appoinctement and commandment of god. Under his
baners thou art a soldier, and of him thou shalt receive the rewards of
victory. Thou see what a band of men thou have committed to thy credence,
thou see with what manner of adversaries thou haste a do, there is none
opportunity for the to be neglygent or to sleep thy matters. And it were the
greatest shame in the world and a very wicked part for the to shrynke from
him, We have the like adversaries but not the like dilligent preachers.
whose words thou art sworn unto, and whose name thou have once professed.
His judgment was that thou would prove a valeaunt and a faithful guide, for
so the spirit of Christ by his inspiracion showed unto us, at suc he time as
we committed authority of priesthood unto the by layeng on of hands. See
therefore that thou constauntlye answer as well the judgment that God gave Paul
made a priest by layeng on of hands without anoputynge.
before of the, as the faithful trust that we have in the: so as god may
both praise the for a noble guide, and I may reknowledge the to be mine own
son. It is an excellent war, that thou art occupied in, see that thou
apply it manfully. And that shall be, in case thou keep a sincere perfect faith,
and unto faith join a good conscience: that thou put no doubt in gods
promysses and frame thy self in vprightenesse of life according to the
synceritie of thy judgment. The pureness of life ought to be of such
efficacy, that it may be not only allowed with other men, but also that the
conscience may be upright before God. The things that decay the strength of
faith are humayne questions, Faith and conscience.
and the appetites of me^ are the things that defile the conscience: whereas
those y^ pretend to go about Christ's affairs, have respect to other
purposes The cause of the decay of faith and good conscience.
than unto Christ. Fynallye these two clcaue so fast one to the other, that if
the one be decayed, the other is in ieoperdie. For he that has not a sincere
conscience can not possibly have a sincere faith. For how can the thing be
called sincere that is dead? Or how can the thing endure that wants life and
spirit. For it comes to pass that those which have a naughty conscience
in all things, at length fall clean away from beleuynge those things that
the gospel teaches concerning the rewards either of an innocent life or of
a naughtye life. An example of this matter we have lately seen to much true
(alas therefore) in Alexander and Himeneus, who inasmuch as in the preaching of
the gospel they hold not fast the helm of an upright conscience, are fallen
into the rocks of Infidelity, and being once fallen from the wholesome
profession of Christ, they are so carried away with the waves of naughtye
lusts, that they rayled with open spiteful words against the doctrine of the
gospel, so that they can not be possybly amended with gentle monicions. And
therefore I have (with mine own sentence giving) cut them of from the rest of
Christ's body, as rotten members: to the intent that being so corrected they
may learn through shame and reproach, to cease from their wicked spyghtful
railynges, and to be less hurtefull to other, though they can not be good to
themselves. Those are to be pulled under with rigorous handlyng, that are
grown into so high wickedness, that there can be no good done upon them with
gentle remedies. Therefore, not only the judgment of god touching thy
synceritie, not only mine example, not only thine own profession, and in y^
thou art a soldier of Christ, but also such men's abominable example ought
to kyndle thy heart to do thine office thoroughly as thou should do.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
I exhort therefore, that above all things prayers, supplicacions,
intercessions, and geuyng of thanks be had for all men: for kings, and for
all that are in auctorite, that we may live a quiet and a peaceable life,
with all godlynes au^ honesty. For that is good and accepted in the sight of
god our savior, which will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the
knowledge of the truth. For there is one God, and one mediatoure between God
and man, even the man Christ Jesus, which gave him self a ransom for all
men, that it should be testified at his time, whenunto I am ordained a
preacher and an Apostle. I tell the truth in Christ, and lie not: being the
teacher of the Gentyls wi^^ faith and verity. IT is not enough for the to be
without fault thy self, but it is the part of a bishop to prescri^e also unto
other what is necessary for them to do. And those ought to be such things,
as may appear worthy an Euangelical conscience. To be brief, it stands
them in hand that profess Christ, to be most far of ^^om desire of
reuengement, from desire of hurt doing, and from all kind of dyspleasure.
Therefore see thou exhort those that thine are to begin the first thing they
do in the morning, to use godlynes and to worship Christ. And first of al let
them pray to god, to put away all things that trouble and disquiet the state
of Religion, and of the commune wealth. Than let them ask of him those
things, that are auayleable to godly doing, and to the tranquillity of the
commune wealth. This done, let them beseache Christ nothing else against
such as persecute his flock, but his aid and succoure. Last of all, let
thanks be rendered unto him for those things, that by gods goodness have
happened, and earnest supplicacions made for the things that have not yet
happened. And let these be done not only for the Christians but for all manner
of men also, lest Christian love should appear to be but a strait laced
love, as though it favored none but of his own sort: but set it be extended
abroad in most large manner, after thexample of god, both to the good and to
the badde: like as he being parfitely good, and beneficial to all as much as
in him is, bestows his son to shine unto the just and also to the unjust.

And in as much as god gives us public quietness by means of Ethnike
rulers: it is reason that thanks be rend^ed also for them* And it is
uncertain to us, whether that ruler being a wicked image worshypper, shall in
short space receive the gospel. For that cause, Christian love wyssheth the
salvation of al. The Jew loves the Jew, the newly entered into a sect loves
his like, the Greek loves the greek, the borther loves the brother, the
kynsman loves the kynsman. This is not a Gospellyke love, but that is a
gospellyke love, that loves the godly for Christ, and loves the wicked that
they may once re pente and turn unto Christ. They do sacrifice unto deuylles
and curse y ou bytterlye. And you contrary wise, cleave hard to the
fotesteppes of Christ, who, when he was exalted upon ye cross, and was
reviled with such spyght full rebukes as were more grievous than the punyshemente
of the cross self, he gave none evil words again, he cursed not bytterly
again, but with an exceeding great cry besought the father to forgive them.
And prayer is to be made not only for y^ whole general sort of me^, but also
especially for kings, yea though they be Ethnikes and straungiers from the
profession of Christ, and for all them, that after the public order of the
world are set in any authority. And let not this move you, that of them we be
afflicted, we be beaten, we be cast in prison, we be put to death. Rather
their blyndenes is to be pitied, and not malice requitte with malice. Or else
they shall be never the better, and we shall cease The chief policy that
brings me^ to Christ, is christian charity.
also to be Christians. This way pleased Christ as a way of most special
efficacy, wherewith he would have all driven to him self. And though there
be some, upon whom our love is lost, yet we will not give over to be like our
selves for all that. This world has his order, which it is not expedyent that
we should dysquyet: seeing it is our duetye to procure peace in every place.
Their power and authority in some purpose does service unto the justice of
God, in that they hold under the evil doers with punishementes, in that they
kept the naughtye ones in their duty doing, in that they put away robberyes,
in that with their martial powers they defend the public peace, in that
they govern the commune wealth with their laws. These things albeit they
do not for the love of Christ, yet in a generaltye it is not expedient that
the state of the commune wealth should be dysturbed by means of us, lest the
doctrine of the gospel should seem a sedicious doctrine, and than we should
begin to run in a hatered, not because we profess Christ, but because we
hinder the public peace. And in case they abuse their power upon us at any
time, it is a Christian man's part to forget the evil turns and remember the
good turn. In this we are bounden to their authority, in this we are bounde^
to their defense and marciall powers, yea we are rather bounden to God by them
in this, that we may be safe from sedicions, safe from robbynge, safe from
battayles, and lead a quiet life without trouble. It would do well to have
in remembrance, what a great sea of myschiefes the hurly burly of war
brings in with it, and what commodities peace has in it. Many are the
myschiefes that beggarly need of necessary things procures. Peace brings
plenty. In peace there is opportunity to use godliness, and war teaches
all manner of wyckednes. Our profession loves chaste behavior, and in war
who can be safely chaste as he should be? And though men for the most part
abuse the benefyte of peace to wicked sensual purposes, yet for all that let
us use the public peace to the serving of god and integrity of honest
manners, obeying princes in the mean season in all things, that they either
command us rightely according to their office, or else do nothing unto us
but make us punyshed persons, and not wicked persons. They take away our
substance, but yet no part of our honestye is dyminished. They lade us with
fetters, but they draw us not away from Christ. They slay the body, and send
us over to the haven of immortality. But than they might hurt us in deed, if
they could make us covetous, if they could make us afraid of death, if they
could make us desirous of life, if they could make us ambicious, if they could
make us desirous of reuengement, if they could make us to distrust Christ.
Therefore Princes are neither unhonestly to be slattered, nor sediciously
repugned. And in case it be godly requisite at any time in the ghospelles
behalf, ^o contemn their commandments, yet it must be done with such a
temperau^ce that they may perceive us to do it not for the displeasure of them
but for a good will unto godlynes.

Notwithstanding* I give not monicion hereof for this purpose, that where we
are far unable to match them in worldly powers, we should provoke their
puyssaunce upon us to our own harm, but that in this kind of lenity we
should resemble Christ our prince, who, when he could alone have done more
than all the Princes and rulers of this world, yet had leauer win the world
to himself in sufferyng of evil, than in repellyng or requityng of evil: he
had leauer win the conquest with gentle dealing, than with reuengyng: he had
leauer heal than destroy* he had leauer entice than oppress. By this way
won he the victory, of this fashion it was the fathers pleasure that the
son should bear the bell away* His example it behooves us to follow, in
case we will have our prayers, in case we will have our sacrifices, welcome
and acceptable unto him. He would rather be a savior unto us, than a
vengeance taker: with grea^e gentilnes he suffered our impiety till we came to
repentance. And the thing that is come to pass in us, the same, like as he
is of a passing great goodness, he would also have come to pass in all men,
if it were possible. He is the savior of all, he excludes none from
salvation, he brings the light of the gospel unto all. And he that
refuses it, he that wythdraweth himself, leat him blame himself for his own
blyndnes: and he that perishes, perishes through his own fault. For what
can the Phisician do, if the sick do refuse wholesome medicines? Verilye it is
not long of him, that men atteyne not salvation, and suppressyng the blyndnesse
of the life paste, come to the light of the euangelycall truth. Christ is the
truth, and he that confesses him* shall be safe, from what kind of life soever
he come to him. Salvation is all one thing and comes all of one, and by one
alone it is offered unto all. There is no thing in this behalf that the Jew
may challenge to himself as his own.

There is but one God, not peculya^ to this or that sort of people, but the
commen God indifferently of all. There is but one that reconsyleth mankind
unto God, God and man Christ Jesus. For it was convenient, that he which
should make the arbitreu^ente of concord between God and men, should have
some thing commen with both the parties, so as being God he might make
intercessyon to God, and being man might reduce men again into favor. Why
than does any man challenge him properly to him self? If the commune father of
all sent him to save al, and if he gave him self for the redemption of all, it
is mete for us to endeavor by all means, that his death may be indifferently
auayleable unto all.

In case he died even for the Ethnikes, why should it yrke us to offer
sacrifices of prayers to God for their salvation? And if it have been doubted
of at any time, that Christ came for the universal salvation of the Gentiles,
now it is certainly manifest, and proved matier in deed, that Christ's death
belongs as well to the gentiles as to the Jews. In times paste the Jews
parti^^cie was somewhat borne withal, because they should not find fault that
they were contemned or cast of: but anon gods will was to have it most
plainly protested that there is no difference at al of nation, of supersticion
or condition of them that flee to the doctrine of the gospel. Of this matier
gods pleasure was to have me chiefly a preacher. In this behalf he would
have me be a messagier, where as the rest of the Apostles before, slowlye with
leisure and with much a do admytted the gentyles unto the grace of the
gospel. And at this day there be not all wantynge, that say there is no
entrance unto the gospel but by the law of Moses. Notwithstanding Christ
has appointed the office both of a preacher and of an Apostle unto me, that
I should preach unto all men eternal salvation without aid of the law, and
that we are all bounden to thank him for the same and none but him. I do not
take this authority falslye to my self: for Christ commanded me to it. And
it is no vain gear that I preach, but the things that I speak are true,
and I preach like the doctor of the gentiles. I use not arrogauntly to set
out myself with vanyties of great high titles, as the false Apostles are
wont to do, for I have tried my self unfeignedly the apostle of y^ Gentiles,
which have not trust in Moses constitucions among them, as they do, but the
faith of the gospel: nor casting before their eyes mystes of vain
questions, but plain simple pure verity, teaching those things only that
make auayleably unto true godlynes rather than unto private lucre or vain
ostentacion.

The text.
I will therefore that the men pray every where liftyng up pure hands without
wrath* or doubtyng. Likwyse also y^ women, that they array themselfes in cumly
apparel with shamefas^nesse and discrea^e behavior, not with broyded hear,
either gold or pearls, or rostlye array: but as becomes women, that profess
godliness through good works. Let the women learn in silence with all
subjection. I suffer not a woman to teach neither to usurp aurthoryte over
the man, but to be in silence. For Adam was first fourmed, and then Eve* Adam
also was not deaceaued, but the woman was deceived* ^ was subdued to the
transgressyon* Notwithstanding through bearyng of children, she shall be saved,
if they continue in faith and love, and holiness with discrecyon. Now to
the intent we may return^ to the purpose that we communed of before, I would
have men to pray not only in the congregation, but also wheresoever occasion
requires. The Ie^es pray to god in no place but at Jerusalem. The
Samaritanes pray on mountains and in groaues. But unto the Christians al
places are pure and holy to offer up sacrifices of prayers. They esteem every
place to be an holy temple to God, and when they offer as it were a sacrifice,
they lift up pure hands every where to heaven. They have no need to wish for
y^ mercy seat or most holy place called sanctu^ sanctoru^, of y^ temple, for
God will graciouslye hear them in every place wheresoever they be that pray
unto him. They need not to pass upon Iewyshe sin offrynges, either ceremonies
or sacrifice. For to offer the sacrifices of Christians every man may be a
sacrificer. God respects not the offryng up of beasts or perfumynge of sweet
odours, for a pure earnest supplication procedyng from a pure heart, is a
sacrifice most acceptable unto God. Leate the Jews wash them selves as
clean as they can, yet their oblacions are unclean. God allows the hands
for clean, though they be not washen, so that the conscience be quiet, in case
he mind no wrong, if he wyshe well to all men, in case he be soyled with no
spots of filthy lust, covetousness, nor ambicion. This is the purity and
cleanes that makes a Christian man's sacrifice acceptable in the syghte of
God: with this kind of sacrifice he delights to be offered unto.

Now let the women also pray after thexample of the men. If there be any
effemynate affection in their stomakes, let them cast it out first of all, and
bring in innocence of honest maniers in stedde of Iewyshe cleansynges: to this
sacrifice doing let them deck the soul cleanly and not the body, nor entice
men's eyes to phantisie them with the nakedness of their persons, but leat
them be covered with a vesture, and that such a vesture, as represents
sobrenes, bashfulnes, and womanlines. God forbydde that Christian women should
come forth among the holy congregation in such manner of apparaill, as the
commen sort of unfaithful women are wont to go forth unto weddynges and may
games, trymmyng them selves first with a great a do by a glass, with fynely
rolled hear or enbrodryng of gold: either with precyouse stones hangyng at
their ears or necks, or otherwise in sylkes or purple, as well to set out
their beauty unto such as look upon them to play the naughtye packes, as
also in showing their Iewelles and substance, to vpbrayde such as be poorer
than they of their poverty.

But rather leat the apparaill of Christian women be such, as may be
answerably like to their living, and as may worthyly besemethose women that
profess true godliness, and the true wourshyppe of God, not in gorgyous
showing of haboundaunce of riches, but in good works: which riches God has
most syngulare delyght in: In whose sight that thing is unclean, that
appears unto the world to be excellent and gaye. And for as much as the
kind of women is naturally given to the vice of much babbling, and there is
nothing, wherein their womanlynesse is more honestely garnyshed than with
silence, it is convenient for them to accomplish in deed, the thing that they
profess in apparayl: to be learners in the open company of men, and not
teachers: to be folowers, and not foregoers: and to show no manner of
authority toward their husbands, unto whom they ought to be vnde^
subieccion: lest if they once cast of the bridle of shamefastenes and begin
to make them a do in the open congregation, your assemblye, that ought to be
used in most sobre sort, be disordred with a busye hurlye burlye. It is the
men's office to speak in the congregacyon, namely if they have any thing to
teach auayleable unto godlynes. To conclude, what liberty every man gives
his wife, let him see to y^ himself. But I allow not y^ any woman shall take
upon her to preach in ye common asse^blie of people, yea although she have
ability to teach, lest if such a wiket were once opened* y^ weak sex would
wax to bold, nor I admit, that they shall usurp any kind of authority
upon their husbands, who^ they are bounden so to love, that they stand in awe
to the^ nevertheless. Therefore leat them keep silence, and seat them give
reuerente head to that, that their husbands say. Leat them acknowledge the
order of nature: that like as it is the office of the mind to command, and
the body to obey, even so is the wife bounden to depend of her husbands
commandment. For why do we turn Gods order up side down? Adam was made
first, and than by and by was Eve made for his sake. Than, why is that
shamelessye made the later, that Gods will was to have the farther? Than as
concerning the fall, Eve was the first deceived, in that she gave credence to
the serpent, and being enticed with the fayrenes of the apple, neglected the
commandment of God. For the man could neither be deceived with the serpents
promises, nor enticement of the apple: but the only love of his wife drew him
perniciouslye to do after her. Now how stands it together, that she which
was once her husbands maistres in committyng sin, should now take the
superiortie upon her in teaching of godliness? But let her rather advisedly
know the old imbecillitie of that sex, the leauynges whereof are not all
together done away, although the sin be perdoned through baptism. And let
her also consider the dignity and power of a man's heart, and think it
enough for her, that where before time she was his leader unto wickedness, now
to be his follower unto godlynes. And where in times past she went before him
unto destruction, now let her follow him unto salvation. Nevertheless we do
not thus babyshe w^mankynde, as though we would exclude them from the
fellowship of salvation. For the woman also has her proper office: wherein if
she use her self uprightly, she shall be companion of salvation. In the
congregation there is none office for her to do, but at home she has to do,
and so to do, as she may atteyne the reward of salvation. For that, that she
offended before time in deceauyng the husband, she must amend in bearyng and
godly brynging up of children. And that shall be done, in case she apply to the
uttermost of her power to bear again unto Christ through faith, those that
she has borne ones already to her husband: and if she inform them in their
tender age, so as they may seem worthy of Christ, through charity, holiness,
shamefastenes and other virtues. It is a great matier, that a woman shall do,
in case she be a good circumspecte housewife. That, which I have said, ought
to be regarded undoubtedly to be matier in deed.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
This is a true saying: If a man desire the office of a Bishop, he desires
an honest work. A Bishop therefore must be blameless, the husband of
one wife dylygente, sober, discrete, a keeper of hospitality, apt to teach,
not given to over much wine, no fyghter, not gredy of fylthy lucre: but gentle,
abhorrynge fighting, abhorrynge coueteousnes, one that rules well his own
house, one that has children in subjection with all reverence. For if a man
can not rule his own house, how shall be care for the congregation of God? He
may not be a young scholar, lest he swell and fall into the judgment of the
evil speaker. He must also have a good report of them which are without,
lest he fall into rebuke, and snare of the evil speaker. THese be almost the
whole things that thou shalt appoynte unto all sorts of people without
difference. But yet there are matiers of more weyghtye importance, to be looked
for in those that thou shalt think mete to be put in autoritye over the
multitude. For it is conueniente, that he which precelleth in honor, should
also precelle in virtues. Perchance there be many that are desirous of
dignity, but for all that they weighe not with them selves, what carke and
care dignity has annexed unto it. He that desires thoffice of a Bishop
for none other end, but for ambicion, or for advantage, or to be a tyranne,
desires to himself a pernicious matier, and is not well advised what this word
( Bishop) means. For this word ( Bishop) is not only y^ name of dignity,
but also y^ name of occupacio^, of office, and of carefulnes. For it sou^deth
by interpretacio^ a superintendent and one that cares for y^ commodities and
behoufes of others. So that whosoever understands this, and desires the office
of a Bishop, respectyng nothing else but to do good for many, in deed his
desire is honest, in that he coueteth occasion to exercise virtue, and not for
honor. And yet thou shall not commit that office to any man, except thou
perceive him thoroughly garnyshed with gifts worthy a Bishop. And to the intent
thou ma^yst the more certainly descerne those gifts, lo, I shall paint the out
in few words the image of a right Bishop. First it behooves him to be of
such uprightness of life, that no fauite at all can be laid to his charge.
For it is not convenient, that he which professes him self to be a teacher
and a requirour of innocence in other, should not show in his own
conversation and manners the same that he teaches. And that he, which
(according to the office that he has taken in hand) ought boldly and freely
reprove them that do amysse, should commytte the thing, wherein he may be
blamed him self. For who gives credence to the teacher, whose life is
contrary to his doctrine? who will suffer to be checked of him, in whom he
sees either the same or else more grievous offenses? But that all should be
upright and innocent, it is more easyly possible to be wyshed for, than hoped
for. Yet truly it is much requisite for the one man, of whose doctrine the
people depends, to be clean without fault. Than in as much as chastity is
much to be commended in a Bishop, in case he have not the gift altogether to
abstain, this is to be specially observed, that he have been or be the
husband of one wife. The first marriage may be thought to be ordained for the
procreation of children. But to marye again is not without suspicion of an
incontinent mind even among the Ethnikes. As for the rest, I let them nor
from maryeng oftener than once, if they can not absteyne. For it is a harder
matter, than I dare exact of the whole multitude. But it becomes a Bishop
to be so far quite from all manner of fault, that he should be void also
of all suspicion of fault. Besides these, that one man that has charge over
many, ought to be sobre and vigilaunte he is the watch man, and ieoperdie is
present on every side. He may not be a sluggerd, but he must circu^spectly look
about him on every part, lest he y^ lies in wait, wha^ the captain is a
sleep, co^uey away some out of Christ's tents. Moreover he must be grave and
sad in his behavior, in all things that he goes about, and be void of all
lyghtenesse and folishe toying manners, that decay and hinder the teachers
reverence and authority. And it is not enough, that he show him self gentle
and courteous toward his own folks, but he must apply him self, that
strangers also may have experience of his gentleness and lyberalitie, so as
the report of his honest name may be the more largely spredde abroad. And
also like as he has these virtues commenly with the most part of men, even so
this is peculyarly to be required in a Bishop, that he be apt and redye to
teach, not Iewishe fables and high statelye swellyng Philosophy of this
woorlde, but those things that may make us truly godly ones, and right
Christians. And y^ chiefest office of a good teacher, is, to know what things
are the best to teach. Next this, to teach gladly, to teach ge^tilly, to
teach diligently, to teach louyngly, to teach without statelynes, to teach
seasonably. For the doctrine of the gospel is of such sort, that it
ouercometh with softnes, and not with clamourus loud speaking. And albeit for
a time it be provoked with the naughtynesse of them that naught are, and be
enforced to speak somthyng somewhat severely, yet it never forgets
Christian charity. But God forbid, that a teacher of the gospel should
(after the example of such as be mad wynedronken tailers) rage to
intemperauntly against them that do amysse, or with a scoldyng toungue run
through the hearts of them whom his duty were rather to heal with
fatherlye gentylenesse: but in all things leat him remember Christian
sobriety and temperaunce, that is a great deal more auayleable to bring men
to amendment, than outrageous cruelty is. Let him abhor also from strife
and contencion, that he seem not to do of malice, and not of love, that, that
he does. Charity amendeth, contencion provoke. And leate him abhor
covetousness, that he seem not to countrefaite godlynes for gaynes sake.

Finally, will thou know, how he ought to behave himself in the open
public affairs? Mark how he does his own private business at home. In
case he show him self there a vigilaunt houskeper, if he keep all thing in
order, if he have obedyent and diligent children, if they be so taught that in
sobre stylnes and comely manners they may appear to be brought up under a
godly parent, it is a good hope, that he is well hable to take the public
charge of all, that in the administration of his own howseholde busynes gives
so good a presidence of himself. For an householde is no thing else but a
small common wealth, and the master of an householde, is nothing else, but
the gouernoure of a small city. And even so the wisdom of the world judges
them mete to have the weyghtier affairs of a commen wealth committed unto
them, that govern things of less importance with commendacion. To conclude,
how may a man hope, that he shall well govern the cure of the whole
congregation, that can not well tell how to govern his own pryuate house?
how shall he take charge of so many houses, that is not hable enough to take
charge of one? By what means shall he care for so great a multitude, that
knows not how to provide for so few? Shall be faithfully cure those that be
strangers, which has his own negligentlye mysordered? And shall he be a
profitable man over Gods congregation, that can not be profitable to a
humayne congregation? Now this is also to be marked in the chosyng of a
Bishop, not only how entierly vpryghte he has behaved himself in his
own pryuate affairs, but also how long it is sense he came to the
professyon of Christ. Baptysme in deed engraffeth a man to the body of
Christ, but perfect godlynes chances not so sodaynlye to a man. Baptysme
opens the entrance in to the congregation, but in this case it remains
that every man for him self must strive and preace to the mark of holiness.
Through baptysme we are borne a new: but for all that, it remains, that in
great process of time we must gather streyngth and bygnesse, and wax
strong with daily increases of godlynes in to full grown age. Therefore
diligent head must be taken, that no new scholar, that is to say, none that
is lately called in to the felowshyppe of faith, be put in authority over so
weyghtye a business. He is a good graffe, but yet tender, and unmeet
peradventure to bear a great heavy burden. And it is Ieoperdye, lest if a
man, that is but raw and not yet suffycientlye confirmed in religion, be
advanced to honor that he had not before, be puffed up with pride, and
begin perniciously to stand in his own conceipte, as though he were chosen
in to the company of religion, for this intent, that he might have preeminence
over relygion: and by that means it come to pass, that being cralled in the
deuilles snares (which he lays manyfoldely but none more disceatfully than he
does the snares of ambicion) and behauyng him self to much statelye in the
honor committed unto him, he escape not the mysreportes of evil speakers:
which will thus entreprete, that he covered the Christian religion upon this
purpose, that where he was but of low estate among his own sect* he might
be in authority and honor among the Christians. He forsook us in a good hour,
(will they say) he changed his religion for his more advantage: he had
leauer be a Christian Bishop, than to live like a pryuate person among us.
From this manner of suspicion, that man shall be quite, that a long season has
expressed special tokens of true godlynes and sobrenes in him self. I will
not hear this obieccion, if a man would say: what matter makes it to me,
though the Ethnikes do mysreporte me? it is enough for me, to be well taken
among mine own. But unto me this is not enough to be respected in a Bishop,
for his fame ought to be so clean and unspotted from all suspicion of fault,
that it should be but a small matter to be well reported of among his own,
unto whom he is more nerely and familiarly known, onles he be well allowed
also by the testimonye of them that be without, which can not see his true
godlynes so perfytely as it is, yea and take occasyon to raise slander of
every thing that do nothing but only appear outwardlye to be evil. Wherefore
head must be warely taken, by all means, that none occasion o^slaunder be
given to them that are strangers from the professyon that we be of: nor (as I
may so speak it) that they may be hable probablye to obiecte not only any
naughtye fault but also any false feyned vpbrayed. For, that they also should
have a good opinion of us, not only this fruit comes of it, that it makes
to the glory of Christ, but also they shall the more easyly turn to
amendment from their wickedness, in case they have good opinion of our
godlynes.

The text.
Likewise must the ministers be honest, not double tounged, not given unto much
wine, nether gredy of fylthy lucre: but holdyng y^ mystery of the faith with a
pure conscience. And let them first be proved, and then let them minister, so
that no man be hable to reprove them. Even so must their wives be hourst,
not evil speakers: but sobet and faithful in all things. Let the deacons be
the husbands of one wife, and such as rule their children well, and their own
housholdes. For they that minister well, get them selves a good degree and
great lyberaltie in the faith, which is in Christ Jesus. Now, for as much as
the faults of the ministers redounde unto the infamye of the autouts, it shall
not be enough to take circumspecte head, what a manner man he must be, that
thou call to the office of a Bishop, but also what manner of persoues his
houscholde folks and ministers be, that are as members of the Bishops. For
they ought necessarylye to be answeablye like unto their prelate in all
things: in all the behauyour of their living, grave and manerly: and void of
those faults that the commen sort of servants is commenly wont to be given
to. They must not be double tounged, not given to much wine, nor gapyng after
fylthy lucres. Those that are entered in the mysteries of faith, which comes
by preaching the gospel, after such sort, that they evidently show in
their conversation, that they are Christians not for the pleasures of their
masters, but purely and of a good conscience. For the vpryghtnes of
co^uersatio^ is the token of a sincere professyon. Nevertheless my meaning is
not, that they should have the admynistracion of holy things by and by
committed unto them, but after thou shall have tried them a great while, and
after they have led an innocent life long after their baptism, and have
behaved them selves so, as no fault at all can be laid to their charge, than
let them at length be admytted to the holy administration. Moreover I require
semblablye the like sobrenes and integrity of life in the Bishops and
Deacons wives, because they also have somewhat to do in the ministry, and
such manners as they have, the like must be rekoned that their husbands or
those that they minister unto, have. Therefore they ought to be far from the
faults of the commen forte of wives, that they be not light or folyshe, ne
back bytyng raylers, nor intemperate, but sobre women* not bablexs, or women of
slyppie credence, but faithful and constaunt in all things. To be short: the
chastity of the Deacons ought in this behalf to be so aunswetably like unto
the Bishops trade of life, that they must also be the husbands of one wife,
lest often marriage should cause any suspicion of intemperaunce: and they must
show their own demenour so in the honest bringyng up of their children and
diligent ordryng of their own household, as they would prove to be in the holy
ministry. For albeit the Deacons office is infeciour than the Bishops and
Apostles office, yet who so ever behaueth him self in that degree comelye and
vprightlye, prefers him self no litell unto higher offices, as well in that,
being acquaynted with the practice of godlynes in him self he has the better
trust in his own constauncie, as also in that, other men conceive a greater
confidence in him, because of his vpryght behavior in his office, that when he
is promoted to higher degrees of Evangelical religion, he will even excede him
self in vpryghtenes and paynfull diligence. For even Jesus Christ's connnen
wealth, in governance has degrees of officers and certain ordres, whereof
the first, is of the Deacons the second, is of the Elders or Bishops, the
highest of all, is of the Apostles. And like as in a seculer commen wealth he
is called to be a Mayor, that before used himself stowtely in the wardenshyp:
and again he is promoted from being Mayor to be Judge, or the Alderman, because
he behaved him self well in his Mayoraltye: even so the office of the Deacou
declares who is worthy the rowme of a superintendent or an Apostle.

The text.
These thynes write I unto the, trustyng to come shortly unto the: but and if
I taty long, that then thou may yet have knowledge how thou ought to
behave thy self in the house of God, which is the congregation of the living
God, the pillar and ground of truth. And without doubt great is that
mystery of godlynes: God was showed in the flesh, was justified in the
spirit, was seen among the angels, was preached unto the Gentiles* was
believed on in earth, and received up in glory. These things write I unto the,
derely beloved son, not as though I thought I should not come unto you again,
but my trust is that I shall shortly come again to see your congregation.
Nevertheless in case any thing chance that I be enforced to be longer ere I
come, than I trust I shall, mine entente was to admonyshe thee in the mean
season by my letters, that thou should not be ignorant, how to behave thy
self, not in the Jews temple, but in the house of God. For why should not I
thus call the Christian congregation which is consecrated and dedicared unto
the living God, and shall never be destroyed with any storms of errors and
persecutions, inasmuche as it is the pyller and sure post of the truth. The
temple of Jerusalem had in times past his manner of veneration, it had his
priests, it had his rites and sacrifices. But this is a temple much more holy
than it, that keapeth not mysteries in couerte with shadows and figures: but
for the Cherubin, for the Pome granates, for the Belles, for the Arc, and for
such like fygures, it shows us plainly the whole sum and perfect truth
of the gospel. Therefore maruayle not, though thou hear nothing prescribed
herein, what manner things Moses appointed with great diligence unto the
levites and priests. For there is no cause why we should pass upon those
shadows, in as much as God has made the thing plainly open unto us, for
whose sake all that mystical furniture was ordained for a time. And there is
no cause why the Jews should have in admiration or brag of the Arc or of
any thing that had the most holy things called sancta sanctorum locked in
it, if they be compared with the mysteries that we have. And whether their
hid secrets deserve any special pretogatyue of worship, or not, leat them
see them selves. Certes this mystery of the ghospelles godlynes, is out of all
controversy, which makes us once free from all manner of supersticion: and in
this temple is the greatest thing of all other that is openly declared through
the whole universal world. In deed there is no showing of the table or of
the Arc or of sacrificed beasts, but Christ himself is showed and preached,
which being before time unknown and not passed upon, is now become so
manyfestly open, that he is plainly seen to be a man after the flesh, and
handled of men, and after the spirit has received so great power, that having
done away the sins of all men, has through only faith given and does
give the righteousness, that the law was not hable to give. And this mystery
of ours is so openly manifested, that it was wonderful even in the eyes of
Aungelles, that song glory to God on high, and peace upon earth, and unto men
a good will. All other mysteries cease to be of any worship if they be
publyshed* but as for this mysterye it is preached openly not only to the
Jews but also to the Gentyles.

And the preaching thereof was not unfruitful: For the thing that seemed to all
men against the order of nature, that no philosophy or man's eloquence was
hable to persuade, the same did the simple plain preaching of the gospel
persuade to all the whole world, with myraculous wondres witnessynge the same.
Finally after his death upon the cross, he rose again to life by his own
power, and being openly accompanied with Angels he ascended into the heavens,
and showed us undoubtedly whether all our hope ought to be addressed. What is
more holy than this mystery? What is more excellent? what is more certain or
evident? This thing if we truly believe, this thing if we worthyly live, for
what purpose should we respect from henceforth unto Iewyshe constitucions? We
have the mystery of true godlynes, why do we than slyppe back unto those
things that have more supersticion than godliness? In case we be laden with
syknes, here is the most assured remyssyon of sins. If we require learning,
here is the rule of true godlynes that we ought to follow, if we look for
reward, here is immortality, whereunto we may be exalted. Therefore leat us be
contented (my Tymothee) with this religyon, and take our leave of the Jews
vain prescripcions.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
The spirit speaks euydently, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, and shall give head unto spirits of error, and deuylishe
doctrines of them which speak faise through ipocrisy, and have their
consicences marked with au^ho^eyren, forbiddynge to mary, and commanding to
abstain from meats which god has created to be received with geuyng thanks,
of them which believe, and know the truth. For all the creatures of god are good
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with tha^kesgeuyng. For it is
sanctified by the word of god and prayer. It thou put the brethren in y^
remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good minyster of Jesus Christ,
which have ben norished up in the words of the faith and of good doctrine,
which thou have contynually followed. But cast away vngestly and old wives
fables. THese things do I beat in with so much the more studyous diligence
as I more dread peril, which is not now gathered by doubtful conjectures,
seeing the spirit himself foreknowyng things to come does clearly and
certaynlye sygnyfye by them whom he has enspired, that in the later times some
shall spring up, which shall depart from the synceritie of faith that the
gospel teaches and styde back unto a certain Ieweship, and repose the
chief principle of godlynes in those things, that do not only nothing anayle
unto godlynes at all, but also do many times hurt: and being rebels against
the spirit of Christ, shall rather take heed to deceauyng spirits, and
being turned away from the doctrine of the true God, shall give their ears
and minds to the doctrine of deuylls, that in outward she we of feyned
godlynes, shall speak those things, that are clean contrary to the truth of
the gospel, and shall set out the^ selves in the sight of the simple people
in outward apperaunce of holiness, where as in the syghte of God they have an
unclean conscience, defiled and marked and prynted with many marks of
worldely lusts. Those manner of men, where as they swymme inwardly in malicious
rancor, hatred, covetousness, ambicion and other diseases, that are clean
contraryly repugnaunt unto true godlynes, yet for that to the intent they may
with a certain newfangled wondrefull doctrine bring them selves in opinion of
godlynes, they shall (after the Essenes example) forbydde lauful marriage, as
though wedlock being chastlye kept were not honorable before god and the
bed undefiled: and they shall require to be esteemed for gods because they
live single, unmarried, being nevertheless infected with innumerable pestilent
vices: and are not so free from filthy lust as from wives. They shall also
goo about to draw men back again to make difference of meats, after the
manner of the Jews, as though meat it self had some impuritie in it, where
as God has ordained all kinds of meats to this end, that we should use
them temperately to the necessary relief of our body, and to keep up the
sttength with all, thankinge him for his gentilues, as many of us as have
embraced the faith of y^ Gospel in stedde of Moses law, and having wypped away
the mystes of Iewyshe supersticions are brought to the light of the truth,
knowing that whatsoever is created of almyghtye God, is of it own nature
good, if a man use it as it ought to be, and to that end that it was created
for.

There is no kind of meat to be abhorred or refused, that is received as
Gods bounteous gift with thanks giving. This is a Iewyshe manner of saying
and not a Christian: Eat not this meat, touch not this body, wear not this
garment, to day do not this thing nor that thing. There is no creature impure
or unclean, if the conscience of him that uses it be pure and clean. And
albeit there were any impuritie in the meat, yet with hunnes wherewith the
larges of god is praised before meat and with holy words and prayers it
should be made holy and pure, that before was unclean. Those manner of vain
smokes are blown unto the people by such as occupye Christ's business
unfaithfully, yea rather go about their own gain. But see that thou avoid
such manner of tryfles, and teach the brethren those things, that thou have
learned of me, and play the good and vpryght ministre of Christ, disposing
entierly and faithfully his doctrine, that is far dyfferent from these men's
prescribed appoyntementes. And thus it stands the in hand to do so much
the rather because thou art called to be a teacher of the ghospel being not yet
of full grown age, which is not wont easylye to swerue in to new fangles,
but thou have ben brought up (as it were) even from thy youth in the faith of
the gospel and in good learning, so as thy contynuaunce ought to make the
more practiced and strong: and thou can not chose but be like thy self in
that thing that thou have hitherto constauntly followed. Therefore see thou
teach this doctrine worthy the gospel unto those that thine are. But as for
other men's fables and vain old wives tales (which as impertinent to the
mysteries of the Euaungelicall faith I might ryghtly call lewd tales) reiecte
them, and rather apply thy self to y^ exercise of true godliness, than to
contend in words with the most bablyng and most froward kind of men that
is.

The text.
Exercise thy self rather unto godlynes. For bodily exercise profyteth little:
but godlynes is profitable unto al things, as a thing which has promyses of
y^ life that is now, and of the life to come. This is a sure saying, and by
all means worthy to be allowed. For therefore we labor and suffer rebuke,
because we believe in y^ living God, which is the savior of all men, specially
of those that believe. Such things command and teach. Let no man despise thy
youth, but be unto them that believe, an ensample in word, in conuersacyon, in
love, in spyrit, in faith, in pureness. True godlynes, that is placed inwardly
in the mind, can not possibl^e be diffyned nor sufficiently preseribed with
externe gross matters. For fasting or choice of meats and such other like,
albeit they seem sometime to be somewhat profitable for the time and place, in
that they prepare the body to the deeds of godliness, yet that profitablenes is
nether perpetual nor of so weighty avail, if it be compared to the inward
godlynes of the soul: but rather of such manner of observations springs
almost the poison of true and tyghte godlynes. Fasting is profitable in place,
and contrariwyse the same otherwise is pestiferous. To some man watchyng is
holseme, and to some it is deadly and hurtful. Some time it is good to pass
over the Sabbath day with test from labor. And on the coutrary sort a thing
may be, wherein it were wickedly done to be idle, when a man's neighbors
need requires the deed of charity. But the godlynes that the gospel
teaches, which is grounded upon a sincere faith and a true charity, is
profitable in every time and in every part of a man's life, and it declares in
a brief sum, what so ever thing is to be desired either in the life
present, or to be hoped for in the life to come* so much that it is not
necessary for us to seek for any succor by any other means. The thing that
I say is true and undoubted, and plain, worthy to be received of all men. We
teach out of all peraduentures that we both feel it, and that it is no fable
which we speak of. Or else what thing could petswade us willyngly and
gladly to suffer the sorrows of this life, to bear with a hearty stomach
punishementes done unto us by the wicked, enprisonmentes and deaths, onles
that we hope after the heavenly succor in this world, and after this life
immortality. And this hope we have fexed not in Moses or any other man that
might fail our hope, but in the living God, which can help even the^ that
are dead, and of who^ salvation proceeds unto all the universal kind of men,
but especyallye unto such as have embraced the faith of the gospel. These
things command and teach constauntlye and boldelye* so as thou may show
in thy self the authority of a Bishop, being assured that this doctrine
proceeded from Christ him self. There is no cause why thou should be afraid
in that thou art but a young man, although in a matter of so weighty
importau^ce: or why thou should give place to the frowardnes of them that
teach contrary doctrine. Let humanity be showed in other matters, but in
this case where peril of salvation is in daungier, authority must be used. It
is not to be respected, how many years thou have lived, but what office thou
bear. He is an old man, whosoever he be that leads an entier vpryght
life, and who so ever he be that shows a gravity of manners. The^e is no
peril, that any man will contemn the because thou art but a young man, in
case thy life and doctrine be such that those which profess Christ. may see
therein the example of ghospellike godliness. In case they shall perceive in all
thy communication the image of an holy conscience, in case they shall epsy in
the common trade of thy life modesty and pureness, in case in thy deutie doing
they perceive a charity worthy a bishop, if in thy suffering of sorrows they
see thy mind steadfastly to trust in God? finally if they shall see the in all
points void from humayne lusts, they shall soon reverence the as though
thou had been an old man long ago.

The text.
Till I come, give attendaunce to reading, to exhortacion, to doctrine.
Despise not the gift that is in the, which was given the through prophecye, with
the layng on of hands by the auctoryte of presthode. These things exercise,
and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen, how thou profytest in all
things. Take heed unto thy self, and unto learning, and continue therein. For
if thou shall so do, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear the. I
trust in short space to see thee, and to help the not, only with my
counsels but also with my deeds. In the mean time when I am absente give
dyligent attendaunce to thine office, so much the more that thou may
supplye my part as well as if I were there. In stedde of my saying see thou
vle readinge of the holy scripture, and according to it teach if any thing be
amysse: after it exhort thou, if thou see any not well occupied. These are the
principal points of a bysshoppes office. It behooves thee to be answerable
unto the office that thou have taken in hand, which was not committed unto
the without aduysement, after the manner as some make them selves Apostles and
Elders. It was not ambicion nor the favor of men, but the spirit of god
sygnifieng gods will by the mouths of the prophets, that appoineted the to
that office: and than the authority of the Elders incontinently with layeng on
of hands upon the, committed the rowme of a Bishop unto the. To be brief, it
is gods gift, that thou art instruct with these excellent gifts, which
declare thee worthy of this honor. Therefore, two manner of charges thou art
charged withal: both that thou should be answerable to the goodness of god,
and to the authority committed unto thee. To profess Christ, is not an idle
nor a delycate finefyngred matter: it requires watching, attendaunce, and
dilygent co^tinuaunce. Wherefore look that thou forecaste these things, in
these things continue, these things apply continually, that both by thy
lyuinge and teachinge, every man may see the people wax bettre and bettre.
First of all, be thou thy self as it bchoueth the to be, and than thy godly
life shall advance thy godly doctrine, specially if thou do it constauntly and
continually without shrynkyng. For truth endures for ever: countrefaicting
lasts but for a time. In case thou acco^plyshe these things, thou shall
receive double fruit, first thou shalt save thy self for vprightlye vsyng the
office committed unto the: than thou shall save them also, that take heed unto
thy teaching. Those that teach rightly and live wickedly, like as they may be
profitable unto others, so undoubtedly they are hurtful unto them selves. But
he, whose life and doctrine both, is corrupt, is hurtful two manner of ways:
he purchaceth unto him self damnacion, and ledeth other in to destruction.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
Rebuke not an elder: rigorously but exhort him as a father: y^ younger me^, as
brethren y^ elder women, as mothers: the younger as systers, with all pureness.
Honor wyddowes which are true wyddowes. If any widdowe have children or
neuews, let them learn first to rule their own houses godly, and to
recompense their elders. For that is good and acceptable before god. She that
is a true wyddowe and frendelesse, puts her trust in god, and continues in
supplicacions and prayers night and day. But she that lives in pleasure, is
dead, even yet alive. And these things command, that they may be without
rebuke. But if any provide not for her own (and specially for them of her
household) the same has denied the faith, and is worse then an infydell.
ALbeit a man must never shrink from ye upright sincerity of doctrine yet to
heal the things that are amysse in a man, it is not a little auayleable for a
teacher or an admonysher to use a soft temperaunce. For the authority of a
bishop must be holden up so, as nevertheless he may be quyte without all
apperaunce of tyranny, and that he may appear in every condition, that he
does the thing that he does, to thentent to do good and not of dyspleasure.
Therefore as many as thou can bring to amendment with lenity and
gentilnes, it is not expedient to enforce them with rigorous sharpenes. For a
man does easylye after him that admonysheth him, if he perceive him self to
be loved of him that monysheth him. And such is almoost the dysposicio^ of
man's wit, that he had leauer be led by fair means than constrained
parforce: and many times things are obtained by fair speech, that a man
cannot bring to pass with cruelty. So that the electuarie of reprehendynge
must be tempred according to the age and state of every one. And forasmuch
as it is allowed not only among all well manered nations but also even in the
congregacions, ye for sage wysdoms sake and for the use of things and also for
restrainyng the wantonness of youth, authority should be committed unto y^
auncientes: in case an elder chance to offend, in any thing, thunder not at
him with cruel words upon any suspicion or informacion, lest too quick
admonicion exclude y^ fruit required in admonicio^. For it wylbe a double
grief, if the admonicio^ be both checking and proceed from a young man. But
rather observe ye reverence of his age, and exhort him so, as you would
admonyshe thy father if he did amysse. The yongmen also (because thou thy self
art a young man) monyshe as brethren: and toward them correccion ought to be
more frelye practiced, but yet none otherwise than may stand with charity.
Admonish the old women with more reverence and gentler words even as mothers,
and bear with their age. The young women correct louinglye as systers: and
behave thy self so with all men, as thou run into no smi^tre suspicio^
either of covetousness or of vnchastenes, either of flattery or of cruelty.
Now y^ wydowes must also have their honor, but namely those, that are wydowes
not in title but very widows in deed: that is to say, those that being left
comfortles without husband and children live after such sort, as they may
for their deserts worthylye be refresshed of the congregacions help: the
relyefe whereof ought to be bestowed not to mayntene delycatenes but to refreshe
miserable necessities. But in case any be so left without an husband that she
has children or childrens children, there is no cause why she should (as
though she were succourles) run to be found of the congregation: Inasmuche
as she has them at home to find her a lyuinge as well as she had an
husband, and such as she owes duty unto. Let her not therefore dedycate
her self to serve the congregation, before that she have showed a special
token of godliness toward her own famylye. For it must needs be out of
order, that the duty of godlynes in the pretense of the congregation should
refuse to do the bounden duty of nature. For nature commands us to
requite mutual good turues to our parents, being now destitute and decayed for
age, seeing we had our beginning of life of them.

And in case death have taken them away from us, it shall be convenient for us
to transpose that duty upon our children and childrens children: and them it
is our duty to inform after such forte, as they may learn also with their
duty again to releue such as did them good. This thing not only the sense
of nature does allow, but also it is so great and acceptable before the sight
of god, that those wydowes are double sinners, that are not only rebels unto
God, but also are deaf when they should hear the commune judgment of
nature, with the which even those, that have no knowledge of God, are moved.
But a man will say, who is a true wydowe tha^ ^ if this wydowe be not?
Doubtless she that being destitutely left without comfort of husband* of
children, of childrens children, of all the worlds solac^ both^ reposed all
her whole hope in god, and now looks no more to be married* ^e hunteth after
any voluptuous pleasures, but has dedycated her self wholly to god, after the
example of the wydowe Anna, geuyng her self to prayers night and day. She it
is, that is worthy to be comforted and refreshed of the congregation which
has now nothing a do with the world. For a wydowe, that so absteyneth
from being married again, that she may more frelye ^a^^pre her self in
deliciousnes lives not in deed. For she lives so to voluptuousnes, that she
is dead unto Christ; unto whom none lives onles he lives a godly life. Se
thou command them thetforc, that ^f they love wydowheade, they do so behave
them selves in it, so as they give none occasion unto any man to suspecte evil,
as though they be loathe to marye again not for love of chastity, but to line
more at lybertye being free from the subjection of a husband, and to take
their ease at their own pleasure. But upon what purpose every wydowe choseth
to continue in her wydowhead, or after what sort she ledeth her life at home,
leave that to ye judgment of her own conscience. To be brief, if any woman
in pretense of wydowhead, run to the congregation in such wise that she
gives over the care of her children, or childrens children or such as
otherwise belong unto her famylie, her I think all together not only
unworthy the bysshoppes favor, but also I judge her rather to be accounted
among those, that denied y^ faith of the gospel, and be worse than y^
Ethnikes, by so much, as it is more heinous to forsake the profession that a
man has taken upon him, than not to have professed it. Has not she denied
the faith, that abuses the pretense of the faith, to do the things that
are repugnaunt to the doctrine of the gospel? Truly in her deeds she openly
denies it. And in this behalf she is doubtless to be accounted among y^
heathen women, that they, where as they be straungiers from Christ, do by the
only governance of nature bear ye charge of their families: And this manner
of wydowe, that was bounden according to the charity of the gospel to be good
to every body to the uttermost of her power, withdraws her bounden duty
even from them of her own householde, and is not allured by the godlynes of
the gospel, to do y^ thing, that the profane and ungodly women do through
the affection of nature. What soever seeds of virtue, nature has engraffed,
the gospelles doctrine takes them not away, but sets them forewarde and
makes them perfect.

The text.
Let no wyddowe be chosen under threscore yer^ old, and such a one as was y^
wife of one man, and well reported of in good works: if she have brought up
children, if she have lodged stranngers, if she have washed the saints fete,
if she have ministered unto them which were in aduersytie, if she have been
continually given unto al manner of good works. The younger wydowes refuse. For
when they have beg^n to wexe wanton against Christ, they will mary* having
da^pnacion, because they have cast away their first faith. And also they
learn to go from house to house idle: yet not idle only, but also triflyuge
and besybodyes, speaking things which are not comely. I will therefore that
the younger women mary, to bear children, to gyde the house, and give none
occasion to the aduersarye to speak evil. For many of them are already
turned back, and are gone after Satan. And if any man or woman that believes
have wyddowes; let them ministre unto the^ and let not the congregation be
charged: that there may be sufficient for them that are wyddowes in deed. This
is a thing that utterly besemeth the gentylnes of the Christian relygion, to
chearyshe and louynglye to sustain those women that are comfortlesly left
destitute: howbeit I would not that should be done rashely and without
aduysement, lest there en^^^e a double incommoditie, as well in that the
congregation is durthened above their ability* and the entreteynement
bestowed upon them yt are not worthy. To be brief, in chosyng of wydowes, two
things are chiefly to be respected, the age, and the former spent life, lest
when they be ones entreteyned into the finding of the congregation, they
return afterward again unto marriage with a great deal of shame. And as for
the age it is an easy mattier to decerne it. Let none therefore be chosen to
be a wydo^^ under three score years old: Forasmuch as that age ought not in
the cle^gye to be suspecte of incontinene^^, and shows good hope, that they
will not last to be married again. Nevertheless that age is not all together
throughlye to be trusted, onles it be approved by former conversation of life
before. So that and is to be marked, whether she have been co^ent with one
husband. (For some even in their old age are not all together boyde of
incontinencie). And whether she have with her good deeds gotten her self an
honest estimacion with all folks: whether she have behaved her self
vprightlye and godly in bringing up her children: whether she have to her
small power ben herberous to the saints, lodged them and washen their fere.
(For these manner of offices, even such as be but of small ability, are habit
to do.) And whether she have releued with her substance those that were
afflicted and pressed with extreme pouertye. To be brief, whether she have
left no good deed undone for lack of her dilygence. For it is reason that the
congregation should receive into their keeping a woman that has so deserved,
which before time has with her well doings thus gone about, that she might be
allowed perpetuallye to be a mynistre unto the congregation. Fynallye, see thou
receive not the younger wydowes, nor those that be of a suspecte age. It is
bettre not to take the profession of wydowhead, than to give it over wha^ it is
taken. The vow of continency is not to be committed unto frail flypperye
age, namely in that kind. In case chastity like them, let them try at home
what they can do. And if they can not away withal there, they may lawfully
without reproach flee to the remedy of wedlock. But we have learned by plain
experience that wha^ the younger wydowes upon a certain love of chastity for a
time, following either ydlenes parchaunce or y^ honor of y^ title, have
addicte them selves unto y^ congregation and forsaking y^ liberty of marieng
again, have consecrated them selves unto Christ to be their spouse, by and by
wha^ their old lust pricketh them, they wax wild and wanto^ to y^ reproach
of Christ, whose yoke they are desirous to cast of, and take again y^ yoke of
marriage. And in their so doing, they draw upon their own selves this blotte
of infamye, because they have made frustrate the faith that they seem to
covenant unto Christ, and so they are to blame two manner of ways: both in
that they took the profession of chastity unadvisedly, not having
sufficientlye tried their strenghtes, and in that they lept back from it when
they had taken it. And albeit it fortune not them openly to marye again, yet
verilye they live syngle after such sort that they are a slander to the
congregation. And better it were for them to be holden under at the
commandment of a husband, and to be occupied in charge of householde, than
under pretense of wydowhead to sin more licenciouslye. For this they are
taught of idleness, y^ inasmuch as they have naught to do at home, they straye
about to other folks houses, where as it is shame for a wydowe to walk idle
abroad openly, or to other men's houses. Now they are not only idle, but also
babbling tale tellers and curious herkeners. For babbling and curiosytie are
accustu^med to company together. For in pretense of widowhead and setting out
of y^ profession, it is an easy matter for them to crepe in to other men's
houses, and there seek out secrets which they afterward clattre out to
other, shamefully chattring of marriage, of contencion, of the naughtynes and
abominacion done in other men's householdes. For these causes sake, I hold it
surely better, that the younger wydowes be rather married to husbands, by
authority whereof both the weaker sex and the weaker age may be governed, and
that they apply them selves to bring forth children, and take charge of
householde rather tha^ in doing nothing encombre other men's householdes. For
even as to stand in awe to the husband restrayneth the licenciousnes of the
sex and the age, even so the charges of householde give them not free leisure
to meddle of those things that they have naught to do withal. To conclude
let them order their conversation by all means so, as there be none occasion
of falling into manifest reproach, and so as none occasion be given to Satan to
bewraye and slander our life by, unto the enemies of Christ's profession. I
say not nay, but I might seem to cast over much doubt in this behalf, but
that the myschiefe it self teaches us thus to beware. For we would not be so
narowlye afraid, lest any such thing should chance, except we had al
ready seen them chance oftener than once. The examples of some women fraye
us, who, when they are once chosen into the succoure of the congregation, are
ouercommen with lusts, and serving Satan are slypped back and married again.
And albeit lack of ioynter be the let, that a wydowe (whose age requires to
be married) can not find an husband, it needs not at all, that for pouerties
sake, she should take the profession of chastity. For such widows wantes
ought to be releued of her kynsfolkes gentle lyberalitie, in case she have
any, either men or women that profess them selves christianes. For it is no
reason, that a Christen man or a christian woman, whose godlynes ought to
succoure even them that are foryners, should suffer his own kynswoman widow
to be left succourles, and put her to be kept of the congregacions cost,
which if it be burdened with every wydowe, it shall come to pass, that when
the stock is spent up, there shall not be enough to keep those that are true
wydowes in deed, who are the owners of this relyfe and have none other succoure
to live upon.

The text.
The elders that rule well are worthy of double honor, most specially they
which labor in y^ word and teaching. For y^ scripture says: thou shall not
mousel y^ mouth of y^ o^e that treads out the corn. And the labourer is
worthy of his reward. Against an elder receive none accusacion, but under two
or three witnesses. Them that sin, rebuke openly, that other also may fear.
But like as the widows that have thus deserved ought to be honored according
to their portion, even so the Elders are much more plentuouslye to be
mayntened, which with the grauiti^e of their manners, which with their ancient
wisdom, which with their vprightenes of life, which with thautoritie of
their age, govern well the multitude, that is to say, play the right Elders
in deed, who as well for their age as godly demenour deserve worthylye to be
Elders, as we in our commen speech use to call them, Aldermen.
kept from nedynes. For so shall they more quietlye govern the people. and
having whereof to live clean upon, their authority shall not be contemned.
Nevertheless these manner of releues ought most specially to be bestowed upon
them, that are lanternes unto the people, not only in vprightenes of life, but
also labor in dyspensing the word of the gospel, and holy doctrine,
inasmuche as that is the chiefest office and above all other most wholesome
unto the Christian flock. In deed they look for an higher reward, but yet it
is some part of comfort in the mean season, if some fruit come presentlye
again unto them in those their labors, not to be rich withal but to live
upon. And it is against right to requyte nothing of transytorye things and
things of small worth unto him that gives a thing of far greater price.
The labourour ought of duetye to have his living, in somuche that Moses law
forbyddeth the ox mouth to be mous^ed, as long as he is occupied in
treading out the corn. And doubtless it is more besides humanity to suffer
him that trauailleth in the gospel preachinge to hungre or thirst. He hunteth
not after his hyre, but the workman is so much the more worthy his hyre. It
is to the commendacion of his godlynes if he labor without hyre but for all
that the people are in great fault if they grudge to releue the necessity of
him that deserves good, and may be succored with a li^ell. Moreover thou
shalt give this prerogatyue to the authority of the Elders, that thou receive
not lightly enformacion against them, of those whom it becomes to stand in
awe to them, lest a wyndowe be opened also unto them, rashelye to deprave the
life of the Elders, against whom there ought no light sinistre suspicio^ to be
received, whereby their authority might be dyminisshed. He ought not to be herd
that makes the informacion onles he prove his objection with two or three
witnesses. But in case it be to apparent and to much plain, that it can not
be cloked, but they have offended, their correccion must be so moderated, that
thou nether give place to the accusours cruelty, ne yet that their escaping
without punishment ministre a pernicious example to the commen multitude. But
reprove thou them with thine own mouth openly, that the rest may be more in
dread of a bysshoppes check, if they perceive thereby, that even the elders be
not pardoned, in case they do any thing worthy correccion.

The text.
I testifye before god and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that
thou observe these things without hastynesse of judgment, and do nothing
parcially. La ye hands suddenly on no man, nether be partaker of other men's
sins: keep thy self pure. Drink no longer water, but use a little wine for
thy stomachs sake and thine often dyseases. Some men's sins are open before
hand, and go before unto judgment: and some men's sins follow after.
Likewise also, good works are manifest before hand, and they that are
otherwise, cannot be hyd. Profane Judges are bounde^ by their profane laws
in relygion, that they be not corrupt with affeccions and so give wrong
judgment. How much more vprightenes besemeth a Bishop either in judgments,
or in puttinge magistrates in office? They are monyshed of their oath, when
they shall sytte on gementes, and are afraid with the religion of false
gods: But I charge the Tymothie by God the father (who being witness and
autour, this matter is practiced) and by Jesus Christ, whose ministres we are,
and by the elect angels arbitrours and lokers on of those things that we
go about, that in practisynge of judgments thou observe those things that
I prescribe unto the, so as thou may come to the hearing of causes
vpryghtlye and vncorruptelye, not bringing the sentence with the, that favor
or malice or dyspleasure or any other affeccion has secretlye sowked into
thee, but of the thing self in deed known, taking matter to give right
sentence of, declynynge nether to this part nor that part. This vprightenes
it is necessary to express, not only in hearing of causes, but also in
choosing those men that thou co^mittest ecclesiastical administracion unto.
For an high special myschiefe springs unto Christian people of none other
fountain, than when unprofitable or else pestilent hurtful men be put in
office. Therefore lay not hands upon any man without delyberate aduisement. It
stands the in hand to try and search that man much and long, whom thou
must commit thautoritie of a bishop unto, who if he use the honor
committed to hun otherwise than he ought to do, it shall be imputed unto thee,
whatsoever he does amysse. For thou shalt seem to have favored his
naughtines seeing thou knew him when thou committedest such a travail unto
him. But and if he have deceaned the, yet thou shalt not be hable to escape
the blameworthines of negligence, by cause thou committedest so ieoperdous a
matter unto one whom thou hadest not tried. For it ought not to be enough in
chosing of a bishop, though he be not evil reported of, but it behooves him
to be excellently commended many ways for his well doings. It is not enough
also for a bishop to set forth his own innocence, but his duty is also to
make good the integrity of them whom he ordeyneth. In these things therefore
see thou keep thy self chaste and pure unto the Religion, whereof thou have
charge. Thy temperate diet is more notably perceived unto me, than I need to
warn the from delicatenes. Howbeit this thou art to be warned of, that
abstinence ought so to be mesured, as the feebleness of the body be not such,
that it be not hable to go about the offices of godlynes. Like as a fat and
unreasonable lustye body does many times hold down the soul from minding
heavenly things: even so sycklines of body oftentimes hyndreth the strength
of the soul, that it can not express nor set forth it self freely by works
of charity. I think it therefore enough for the to have kept abstinence to
this time hitherto. From henceforthe drink not water but use rather moderate
wine. Concerning thine abstynence from wine unto this time, let that be
practiced because of the heat of thy fresh youth: but now thy health must
be looked unto, that thou may be hable to accomplish and do all the parts
of a bishop. The stomach is refreshed with moderate drinkyng of wine, and with
drinking of water it is chiefly decayed. To thentent therefore thou may
both help thy stomach, and fail seldomer in to sycklynes, than thou art
wont to do, use wine in stedde of medycine, lest afterward when thy strenght
is gone, thou be enforced to seek help of phisicians. But to return to the
purpose that I now began, because thou should not think that all the
sins of those that thine are, should be imputed to the, some men's sins are
so manifest, that they tarry not the last judgment of god, but run before the
judgment of their own swing being damned by themselves before they be
brought in to that judgment. For both the life and doctrine of such men
dyffereth manifestlye from the doctrine of Christ. For in stead of gospellyke
godlynes they teach Iewyshe supersticion, and as for their life, it is infecte
with ambicion, hastyng hand making, and other myscheuous desires. As for these
manner of men, like as thou may lawfully judge of them, so must thou render
account of them. Moreover some folks naughtines is so closely hydden, that it
can not be deprehended by man's judgment, but is reserved to the judgment of
god, wherein all things shall be made naked, for those men's fault thou shall not
be in daungier before god. In like case, some folks good works are so
manifest, that they need no commendacion of man. To such therefore shall every
man accompany himself safely, like as he ought to absteyne from the company
of them that are openly wicked. Furthermore, those that order their life with
such subtiltye, and in outward show of godlynes dyssemble the malice of their
heart after such sort that they deceive the judgment of man, those we will
leave to the judgment of god. For christian godlynes is not over much
suspicious.

The vi. Chapter.
The text.
Let as many servants as are under the yoke, count their masters worthy of
all honor, that the name of god and his doctrine be not evil spoken of. Se
that they which have beleuyng masters, despyfe them not because they are
brethren: but rather do service, for as much as they are beleuinge and beloved,
and partakers of the benefyte. FVrthermore, it is not our part to rebuke the
life of them, that are straungiers from the profession of Christ, it is rather
requisite for us to provoke them unto a better mind with our good turns, than
to kyndle them with taunting checkes. Religion ought so to be ordered, that it
seem not to be occasion or sowyng of sedicion. In such affairs as we have
necessarilye to do with the Ethnikes, let the^ perceive by us that we are
become the more diligente to do good, because of religion, and not more
unprofitable nor more ouerthwarte. For by that means they shall be more easylie
allured into our fellowship of religion. Therefore as many as being bond
servants have obtained Baptism, let them remember that they are set at
lybertye by manumission from the lordeshyp of sin and not made free from
their masters right of authority. And therefore it is not semely that upon trust
of their profession they should bristle against their masters, as wicked
persons and unworthy that a Christian should do service unto them. But let
them only consydre that they are their masters, and therefore let them esteem
them worthy all honor, that the name of god and the gospelles doctrine come
not into an evil report and hate, in case they shall perceive men become
through it the more sturdy and more intractable. But let them rather be more
diligent in service doing than they were before, and more glade to obey as
doing service with a good will, that their masters being provoked with those
things, may the more easily receive the gospel preaching. Than much less
ought those servants, that have Christian masters, to set less by them
because, for y^ profession of the commune says, in stedde of masters they are
become brethren. But in as much as they withdraw not their bounden duty from
Ethnike masters it behooves them to obey their Christian masters for two
manner of co^sideracions. First in that they are their masters, than in that
they are fellows in relygion, for stout statelynes, taking love: and for awful
masters, beginning to be beloved: and for threatenyng masters* become good
masters. For more is to be done for y^ deseruour than for ye exactour* more
for the loving master than imperious co^maundyng master. For yt is not
properly a bondage but to do one good turn for an other.

The text.
These things reach and echorte. If any man follow other doctrine, and
enclyne not unto the wholesome words of our Lord. Jesus Christ, and to the
doctrine which is according to godlynes, he is puffed up, and knows nothing:
but wastes his brains aboure quetions and strife of words, whereof spring
envy; strife, raylynges, evil surmy synges, vain dysputacions of men that
h^^e corrupt minds, and that are robbed of the truth: which think, that
lucre is godliness. From them y^ are soche separate thy self. Godliness is
great richesse: if a man be conten^ with that he has: For we brought nothing
into the world, nether may we carry any thing out. But when we have fode and
ruyment we must therewith be content. They that with rich, fall into
temptacion and snares o^ the devil, and into many folysshe and noysom lusts,
which drown men into perdicion and destruction. For courteousnes of money is
the rote of all evil: which while some lasted after, they erred from the
faith, and tangled them selves with many sorrows. But thou man of God, fly
such things. Follow ryghtewesnes, godlynes, faith, love* patience, meaknes.
Fight the good fight of faith. Lay hand on eternal life, whereunto thou art
also called, and have professed a good profession before many witnesses. These
things teach with authority: unto these things exhort them that be slack.
This doctrine is a true gospellyke doctrine, that makes unto godlynes of life,
and makes us both accepted of god and beloved of men. If any man bring in a
contrary doctrine unto this, and gives not himself unto the most true
words of the Lord Jesus Christ, nor obeys unto this doctrine which being
agreeable unto the gospel calls not men unto supersticious questions but unto
offices of godlynes: such one the less true knowledge he has, the more he
takes upon him. For like as knowledge is a modest thing, even so there is
nothing more high minded or stubburne than folyshe ignorance. And he y^ is
taken with that disease, and is turned away from the synceritie of the
gospel, outrageth about trifling questions, without consideracion of the
life, braullyng with words, which are so little auayleable unto true godlynes,
y^ they rather engendre a mischief of Christian godlynes, because that of
such manner brablyng strifes arryseth envy, while by dimynisshynge of other
men's authority we seek authority unto our selves: There arise also co^tencions,
whilst by reason of hoot chiding words none will give place unto an other:
there arise also scoldinges as often as the mattre grows in to outrage: there
arise also wicked suspicions against god, wha^ those things, that ought to be
believed without questionyng, are called by humayne reasonynges in to question
as doubtefull things. And many there be that as it were with a contagiousnes
are infected with the rubbyng of this scabbe of men, whose minds are infecte
with naughtye covetous lusts, and being blinded therewith they see not the
truth of the gospel, nor confer their doctrine to this end, but rather they
measure godlynes and religion by their own gain, and would have the thing to
seem most holy, not that makes other men more acceptable to God, but that
can bring them selves to be best set by, and get them most advantage. But
thou may not in any wise think, y^ those men can be ouercommen with any
dysputacio^s. For lack knowledge is a stubburne matter. And albeit they
perceive the truth never so well, yet they acknowledge it not, because it is
not for their profit in comparison of the thing that they go about for their
own purpose. Sttyue not therefore with them both out of fassion and in vain
to. But withdraw thy self from their company. Let them hunt after their
pelf, let them make matchaundice of the gospelles doctrine. Unto us it is a
plentuous great gaynes, if we may wax rich in godlynes, if we may wax
rich in true goods of soul, and be content with those things that suffice
unto y^ necessity of the life present, inasmuche as our spedye iournaye is to
the life that never shall dye. It is a great matter to heap up those riches yt
will never leave us. But to what purpose is it to carke and care to heap riches
together; y^ another are ours, and we are by and by enforced to leave them to
others. For like as we brought none of them into y^ world with us wha^ we were
borne, so shall we carye nothing away with us when we dye. To spend riches
wastefully upon pleasures it is a myschiefe, and to hoorde them up it is a
fond folyshenes. As for us, we measure the use of such things by the bonds
of nature, and when we have competent wherewith to be clothed and fed, we
require no further. And a competent diet and clothing is easylie had every
where. For they are not to be had for excess but for necessity. A small thing
eases necessity, but the gredynes of riotous excess is insaciable. It is a
great winnyng, with ye loss of money to augment y^ treasure of godlynes. And
it is a great loss, for a little sorry lucre to lose the riches of immortality.
The care for riches and care for godlynes accord not together in one. For
whose hertes are once throughlye occupied with desire to be rich, are enticed
to many filthy matters, and fall in to snare and many covetous desires, not
only folyshe but also noisome. For this couctous lustyng comes not without
company, but brings a great rowte of myschiefes with her, pride, dysdaine,
ambicion, violence, dysceate, injury, riot, voluptuousnes and such manner of
other pestilences, which by little and little burden a man, and drown him
down in to destruction and marrynge, so as now he shall not only be to him
self but also unto other (that he has rule over) a destroyour and a marrer.
The greater the honor is that he bears, so much the more far it behooves
him to be from the spiece of this myschiefe. The highest authority requires
the highest integrity. But nothing is thoroughly vprightlye done, nothing is
without corrupcion done of him, whosoever he be, that has avarice of his
counsel, which is so far dystaunte from honestye, that it is even the
root and sede of all manner myschiefes, ye a although riches seem to bear a
certain wondrefull show of felycitie. Some men being cralled in this bayte,
while they are griedie after riches, have been corrupt with covetous desires, and
have wandered astraye from the synceritie of faith that the gospel teaches,
setting before their eyes an other mark to shote at than Christ, and where as
they seek to live pleasauntlye, they have wrapped them selves in many sorrows,
scrapyng that with much pains y^ they must keep with much care, and that,
which if it should fortune to be taken from them, should greuouslye wound a
covetous heart. These belong to such as have dedycated themselves to the god
Ma^mon. But thou which art consecrated unto god, slay from these things y^
are unworthy thy profession and follow true riches, as righteousness, godlynes,
faith, charity, patience, mekenes. Ryghteousnes, to keep y^ safe withal from
all manner of vices: godlynes, to love god withal and thy neighbor for gods
sake: Faith, wherewith (having the help of god) thou shall not be turmoyled
with care of such things: charity, to do good unto all me^ withal:
patience, whereby through hope of the immortality to come thou may continue
steadfast in adversities and in storms of persecucions: And mekenes, to bear
gentlye the weakness of other. These things can not the man possiblye keep
safe, that thinks he must do all things for riches sake. As for the, thou
have taken upon the an other manner of course. Thou art entered an excellent
great fight, not the fight of covetousness but of faith. And it is no small
reward that is laid up for it. For this mattre is not taken in hand by thee
to be rich of momentanye and false feyned goods here in this world, but to
atteyne life everlasting. To this prick, to this mark, preace thou withal
dylygent endeavor. To this mark, god (the true rewarder of thy travail) has
called the, which of his own judgment has chosen thee to be a Bishop over
the people to the glory of Christ. This, at the taking of the office of an
Elder. thou dyddest profess and that before many witnesses. Thy profession is
of high excellency, but to frame thy self answerablye like unto it, thou
have need much dyligentlye to watch about the. Albeit thou pass not much
upon so high a reward, yet pass upon god the loker on, let the expectacion
of so many lokers on beside move thee, let the reverence of so high an office
that thou have taken in hand move thee.

The text.
I give the charge in the sight of god, which quickens all things, and
before Jesus Christ (which under Poncius Pilare witnessed a good witnessyng)
that thou keep the commandment, and be without spot and unrebukable, until
the apperyng of our Lord Jesus Christ, which apperyng (in his time) he shall
show, y^ is blessed and mighty only, king of kings, and lord of lords,
which only has immortality, and dwells in the lyghe that no man can
attain, whom no man has seen nether can se, unto whom be honor and rule
everlasting. Amen. This I eftesones command, and beseech the by god the
father, which is the author of life unto all men, and shall raise the dead to
the life that never shall dye by his son Jesus Christ, which under the judge
Ponce Pilate shronke not from the office that he had received of the father,
even unto the cross, that thou so behave thy self in the travail committed
unto thee, that thou give occasyon to thy self of no blotte nor blame
worthynes: and that see thou do constauntly not only unto man's sight but
much rather lokynge for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he
shall show again unto the world in his times, even that blessed one and
only mighty king of kings, and lord of lords, which only has
immortality of himself, which only dwells in the light that cannot be
atteyned unto, whom no man has yet seen, nor is hable to see. To him be
honor and power world without end. Amen. Such excellent autors of thine
office you have, y^ thou should despair nothing of thine authority: Such
parfyte lokers on and judges thou haste, that thou should do nothing
otherwise than thou ought to do: Such valeaunte protectours thou haste,
that thou should not dread the storms of men's persecucions: Such
lyberall rewardours thou haste, that thou should nothing doubt of ye
promised rewards. And unto them all the glory of ye gospel is to be referred,
that man should not thereof challenge to himself any praise.

The text.
Charge them which are rich in this world, that they be not hyemynded, nor
trust in uncertain riches: but in the living God, (which gives us abound
auntlye all things to enjoy them) that they do good: that they be rich in
good works: that they be ready to give and gladlye to dystribute, laynge up
in store for themselves a good foundation as against the time to come, that they
may obtain eternal life. O Timothe, save that which is given the to keep, and
a void vngostly vanities of voices and opposicions of science, falsely so
called, which science while some professed, they erred as concerning the
faith. Grace be with the. Amen. I have declared, how parilous noisome a matter
it is for them that profess Christ, to set their study upon riches. And if
there be among our sort any, that have chanced upon those rich substaunces,
for the which this present world reco^neth men rich and fortunate, and
reuerenceth and honors them as half gods: command them, that they be
not (as the commune sort is) high minded in trustyng upon their riches, nor
that they repose their chief helping felicity in things, that are first
vain, than so uncertain that if casualtie take them not away, yet at lest
death despatcheth us from them. But let them rather trust surely in the living
god, that never forsook me^ either quick or dead, inasmuche as he is
unchangeable, of whose lyberalitie comes whatsoever this world yeldeth unto
us plenteouslye of yearly revenues, for our present use, and not to hoorde up
riches. And let them rather convert their study to this end, that they may
exercise them selves unto good works, whereby they may be made truly rich,
and let them be wealthye rather in good deeds tha^ in lordely possessions: and
that, that they have, let them so possede, as though it were commune, and not
their own, and let them therewith be glad to give unto the nedye, and not
dysoayne the rest that are but of small substance, and let them show them
selves gentle and friendly in the company and familiarity of the commune sort
of life. For wealth has commonly these companyons with her, dysdeyne and
statelynes. Let them not put their trust in their gorgious great buyldinges:
for nothing in this world is long durable. But rather with true virtues let
them lay for them selves a strong and a good foundation again y^ world to
come yt they may atteyne to the true life, that is to say, the life that ever
lasts. For what other thing is this life, than a race unto death? we must
lay all carefulnes of transitory things aside, and make spedye haste unto it
with all dilygent study. O Tymothie, I eftesones desire and beseech the
again, keep faithfully this doctrine, as it is committed unto thee, and suffer
it not to be defiled with humayne learnynges. And that thou can not possyblye
do onles (as I watned the before) thou reiecte the chattring vain byblebable
of those me^ that go about to bring them selves in a false estimacion of
knowledge, by reason of humayne questions and sophistical quiddities:
inasmuche as man's knowledge consistyng of opinions contrarylye repugnaunt
among them selves, is not worthy to be called knowledge. We know nothing more
certainlye than that, which the doctrine and belefe of the gospel has
persuaded unto us. Furthermore some men, whyleft they go about to seem
learned and wise, through humayne reasons, through sophistical wragglinges,
through new learnynges which they themselves have devised, have wandered
astraye from the spnceritie of y^ faith of the gospel, whose property is, to
believe and not to dyspute, nor is carried away with men's decrees from the
prescripte commandments of god. And to the intent thou may perceive that
this Epistle is not countrefaicte, I will subscribe these words with mine own
hand that thou well know: Grace be with the.

Amen.
Thus ends the paraphrase upon the first Epistle to Tymothie.
The Argument upon the latter Epistle unto Tymothee / by Erasmus of Roterodame
Forasmuch as in the former Epistle, Paul put Tymothee being at Ephesus, in
hope of his coming again unto him, and could not perform it because he was
holde^ in bonds at Rome, he coufirmeth him with lettres, that he be not
discouraged with storms of persecutions, but after his example to prepare his
mind unto martirdo^: For there are perilous times at hand (quam he) by reason
of some, that under pretense of godlynes, turn true godlynes up side down,
and so prate boastynglye of them selves, as though the Christian Religion
consisted in words, and not rather in pureness of heart. Than tellyng that
the day of his death draws nere, and that the most part have now forsaken
him, he byddeth Timothee and Marcus to come to Rome spedely unto him. This
Epistle he wrote at Rome, when he was eftesones arraigned at Neros bar.

Thus ends thargument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the second Epistle of S. Paul to Timothee.
The first Chapter*
The text.
Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, according to the
prompyse of life which is in Christ Jesus. To Timothee his beloved son. Grace,
mercy and peace. from God the father, and from Jesus Christ our Lord. I thank
god, whom I setue from mine elders with pure conscience, that without any
ceasynge I make mention of the in my prayers night and day, desyryng to se the,
myndefull of thy reares: so that I am filled of joy, when I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy
graundemother Loys, and in thy mother Eunica: and I am assured that it dwells
in the also. Paul an Ambassador of Jesus Christ, called thereunto by the will
of God the father, to declare how great the felicity of the life to come is,
which he promises unto us by his son Jesus Christ, that we should not care
much for the loss of this life: To Tymothee my dearebeloued son, grace,
mercy, and peace from God the father and from Jesus Christ our Lord. I
thank God, whose servant I begone not of a late time to be, but kept his
relygion after the tradicions of mine elders continually with an upright and a
pure conscience, and do keep still: For I serve all one God now being a
christian, ye I lately served a Jew, though after an other sort, through
whose goodness we chanced upon such a man as thou art, in that thou folowest
the example of me in sincere preaching of the ghospelles doctrine, so as for
thine own deserte I can no less hartelye love thee than mine own very son:
in so much that I can not forget thee even when thou art absent. For in my
prayers night and day wherewith I am accustomed to call upon God, and to
commend unto him such as I tenderlye love, thou come always in my mind,
and I am very much desirous to see thee, especially as often as I remember thy
tears, that thou sheddest at my departing, as most plentuous witnesses of
thine affection and mutual love toward me. By reason whereof I am filled all
together full of joy, when it comes to my mind, how paynlye thou
resemblest me in the sincerity of faith, as a natural son his father. And
like as ye integrity of religion was in me (as it were) by enheritau^ce, even
so this sincerity of faith seems to be given to the by the hands of thine
elders. For it dwelt steadfastly first in thy Gra^demother Lois, tha^ after by
and by in thy mother Eunica: and I doubt not but you wilt become accordigly like
a neuew to so right a religious gra^dmother and a son to so right a good
mother, seeing you have ben more desirous to be like to the^, tha^ to thy kyndred
of thy fathers side.

The text.
Wherefore I warn the, that thou stiere up the gift of god which is in the, by
the puttyng on of my hands. For god has not given to us the spirit of fear:
but of power, and of love, and of sobrenes. Be not thou therefore ashamed of the
testimony of our lord, nether be ashamed of me, which am his prisoner: but
suffer thou adversity with the gospel, according to the power of god, which
saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our deeds, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us through Christ Jesus
(before the world began) but i^ now declared openly by y^ appearyng of our
savior Jesus Christ, which has put away death, and has brought lift and
immortality unto light through the gospel, whereunto I am appointed a preacher
and Apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles: for the which cause I also suffer
these things. Nevertheless, I am not ashamed* For I know, and am sure, that
he (in whom I have put my trust) is able to keep that which I have committed to
his keeping, against y^ day. These things I remember the of, so as thou may
be of y^ better courage both by the example of us and of thine elders, to
stiere up by thine industrye and diligence the gift of God (which thou
receyuedst by the laying on of mine hands when thou waste ordained a Bishop)
and boldly and without shrynkynge to accomplish the office committed unto
thee, and fear not any men's barkinges nor the rageing cruelty of
persecutours. It is the property of Jews, to be afraid of those things,
that this present life occasioneth, but unto us which through believing of the
gospel are made the children of God, he has given a far other manner
spirit, not to make us afraid and discouraged for fear and distrust, but
through an assured trust of innoce^cie and hope of y^ promised immortality to
be bold and lusty, and through love to be free and full of courage, eue^ as
love both trusts altogether upon gods succor and shrinketh not for his
neighbors sake to abide daungier. Finally a spirit y^ suffers not us to be
disturbed ^^ our mind, but causes us always to persevere to the end with a
whole and a pre^^^ ready heart. Forasmuch tha^ as y^ have received this spirit,
set forth his power and declare stoutely the thing ye thou have. Be not ashamed
of thy profession, whereby you preachest the cross and death of our lord Jesus
Christ, nor be ashamed to be a disciple of his Apostle, though I am lade^ with
these bonds. There is nothing more glorious tha^ the cross of Christ, y^ gave
salvation to y^ world, y^ brake the deuiles tirannye y^ has obtained us
immortality. Christ's cross is our glory. These cheanes, ye I willingly
suffer for ye ghospelles business sake, are not to my slander but to my glory
rather. Therefore refuse not to suffer those things that Christ suffered, and
that I suffer for his sake.

But be thou ready also to come into the felowshyppe of afflyctions, that are
laid upon us for the gospel of Christ. What so ever chances, there is no
cause why we should be afraid, for the matier is not done by our strengthes,
but by the succor of God. We are feeble in deed, but he is mighty, which,
when we were lost, saved us by the death of his son, having done away the
trespasses of our former conversation: and has called us unto holiness not
for any merits of ours, but being enforced by his own will, and free goodness
that he bestowed upon us, not upon any late aduisemente, but from
everlasting, and before all time, before the making of this world, it was
decreed of him to give these things unto us by his son Jesus Christ. The
matter is no news to him, but that thing that was always in the secret of his
mind, he has lately declared to the world, by the coming of our savior
Jesus Christ, who having received a body subject to death, has dispatched
away death by the cross: and by his resurreccion has opened life and
immortality through the preaching of the gospel, which promyseth like
rewards unto them that follow the exaumple of Christ's cross. This gospel
preaching is committed unto me as the Apostle and teacher of the Gentiles, to
the intent they may learn by me, that not only the Jews are called to this
gift of God, but also all mankind universally. Forasmuch than as I am tied
in cheynes for the ghospelles sake, I am not only nothing ashamed of this
affliccion, but also I esteem it for a pure great glory unto me. To suffer
for naughtye deeds doing it is a reproach, but to be afflicted for the glory
of Christ it is excellent. This stormye time does fear me nothing at all.
For although I am weak, yet I know and am assured, that he, whom I have put
my faithful trust in, is hable enough to keep unto the uttermost day, the
thing that I have committed to his fidelity. Through his aid both the
gospelles business and my salvation, and also the prosperity of the christian
flock is in sauegarde. And albeit any thing here in this world seem to
perish for a time, yet when that day shall come, in the which he shall
express his myghtie power unto the world, he shall restore it with great
gain. I have laid my life and my health in his hands, and he has put me
in trust to dispense the doctrine of the gospel. In case I shall be a trustye
faith keeper, he will not fail my trust.

The text*
Se that thou have the ensample of the wholesome words, which thou have heard of
me with faith and love that is in Christ Jesus. That good thing, which was
committed to thy keeping, ^old fast through the holy ghost, which dwells in us.
This thou know, how that all they which are in Asia, be turned from me. Of
which sort are Phigelus and Hermogenes. The Lord give mercy unto the household
of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: but
when he was at Rome, he sought me out very diligently, and found me. The lord
grant unto him, that he may find mercy with the Lord at that day. And in
how many things he ministered unto me at Ephesus: thou know very well. The
thing that I received of Christ, I have likewise committed unto thy
fydelitie, therefore seeing thou haste the form and example of dispensynge the
gospel and of sincere doctrine, which thou learned of me not being
grounded of tryflynge and doubtefull questions, but of faith and charity
which Christ Jesus has both taught and exhibited unto us: look diligently
thou keep that, which is committed unto thee.

The thing that I committed unto thee is sincere and pure, see that it be not
defiled through thy negligence, I know that many go about and shall go
about to corrupt the doctrine of the gospel, but look that thou stowtely
and constauntlye maynteyne that, which thou haste taken in hand, through the
help of the ghospellike spirit that dwells in us: By whose aid we shall be
hable easylie to contemn and also to put to flight what so ever daungiers
shall fall. And those that want that spirit are frayed with the storm of
displeasures and give over the gospels business. For I suppose it is not
unknown unto thee, that all the others, that cleaued unto me in Asia,
afterward forsook me, and inasmuche as they were with me but with faint holowe
hearts, by and by through occasion their countrefaicte gospellinge began to
appear, and they began also at Rome to give me over. And among other there
was Phigellus and Hermogenes, I will not utter all their names. But as for them
both their names even by the sound of the words declare them inconstaunt. The
forther has his name of his rennynge away, and the other of subtle
Mercury. It is not my part to wish them that they have deserved. But this it
stands me in hand to pray for, that God the rewarder of well done deeds,
whose pleasure is to reckon it done to him self, what so ever is bestowed
upon his servants, bless Onesiphorus household. For he has oftentimes
other ways both comforted and refreshed me in these hoote affliccions, and
even at that time was not ashamed of my bonds, perceauinge that it is a
glorious thing to be afflicted for Christ's sake, nor was any thing afraid to
be in the same peril with me, by reason of the ghospelles promysses: but when
he was at Rome, he did not only not refuse to speak with me when I was in
prison, but also with great diligence sought me and would not rest till he
had found me. In deed he found matier to exercise mercy: the Lord Jesus
grant him, that he may likewise find mercy with him in that day, wherein
every one shall be rewarded according to their deeds, and that he may find God
benefyciall to him, that was diligent to be beneficial to me in mine
affliccion. For I will not here make rehersall, in how many things he did for
me at Ephesus, seeing thou know it better than I. And like as he showed
himself there, the same was he toward me also at Rome. For true charity is
not frayed with any storms of affliccions.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
Thou therefore my son, be strong in the grace (that is through Christ Jesus)
and in y^ things that thou have heard of me by many witnesses. The same commit
thou to faithful men, which shall be apt to teach other also. Thou therefore
suffer afflyctions as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth,
entangleth him self with worldly business, and that because he may please him,
which has chosen him to be a soldier. And though a man strive for a mastery,
yet is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman that
labors, must first receive of the fruits. Consider what I say. The lord
give the understanding in all things* Therefore acccordyng to Onesiphorus
example and mine, take thou a strong stomach unto thee, laying hold upon the
goodness of God, which we have by Christ Jesus: and being prepared and armed
against all periles, that sincere doctrine of the ghopell, which I delivered
unto thee not in hucker mucker but openly before many witnesses, see that
thou, dearelye beloved son, deliver likewise by hands unto others to be
published abroad: not to every body at adventure, but to those that thou shall
think will be faithful ministres, and that shall appear apt, not only to
follow that thing them selves that they have received, but also to power it
purely abroad unto others. Thou see, that such as be appoyntedto the
ministeries of war, set all matters aparte and leave nothing unwrought or
undone, that they may use their feats with commendacions. And Christ has
even his manner of war also. And he it is in to whose book thy name is
written, and to serve him thou haste taken thine oath, and he has made the
Captain of his armies. Se therefore, that as it becomes a valiant captain
against al sorrows that fortune, thou show thy self hearty and worthy thine
Emperor Jesus Christ, which continued steadfastly in the office committed unto
him even unto the cross. Be not careful for ye pelf that man lives by in
this world. Cast y^ care al together upon ye emperor, be you altogether in this
mind, yt what he has commanded the, go hertely about it. It behooves not us
to appear more slack in the warefare of Christ, tha^ we see y^ common sort of
soldiers be in y^ seculat wars. For which of the^ is it, y^ when he has
once appointed himself to the king or Emperors wars, is careful for clothe
or meat? The provision of these matters, the Emperor takes upon himself. A
soldier, has nothing to ^are for, but to make his trauil acceptable to the
Emperor, of whom he was chosen as a valiant and a faithful soldier unto
this busynes: For he knows his reward is ready in thempoerurs hands, in
case he deserve it. Also among such as have given them selves to wrestle for
Mastries, it is not enough for every one that wrastleth, to wrestle it makes
no matter how so that he wrestle, but he stryueth to win the victory, being
assured that there is a crown readily prepared: yea, but for him that behaueth
him self hartilye and stowtelye in wrastlyng. After the same sort a diligent
husbandeman, when he breaks up his ground, when he donggeth it, when he
sows it, when he w^^deth it, he is all together in his work, and thinks no
labor paynefull to him in hope of the fruit, that he knows the good ground
will yield in his season. How much more behooves it us to do the same,
which are occupied in the ghospelles affairs, that being provoked with the
reward of immortality, we should suffer all things willynglye in this
world, specially forasmuch as we have an Emperor that another will nor can
deceive us? Considre what I mean by these similitudes. The lord give thee
understanding, not only in these but also in all other things. Hereof comes
no loss at all, but rather when affliccyons encreace, the gain of salvation
which is preached by the ghospel encreaceth also. For so is it Gods pleasure
to declare his mighty power. We have seen in the head what we may trust upon
in our selves.

The text.
Remember that Jesus Christ of the sede of David, tose a gain from death
according to my gospel, wherein I suffte trouble as an evil doa^, even unto
bands. But the word of god was not bound. Therefore I suffer all things, for
the electes sakes, that they might also obtain that salvation, which is in
Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. It is a true saying, for if we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him. If we be pacient we shall also reign with
him. If we d any him, be al so shall deny us. If we believe not, yet abyderh he
faithful. He cannot deny himself. Of these things put them in remembrance:
and testifye before the Lord, that they follow no contencious words, which
are to no profit: but to the perverting of the hearers. It is requisite to
have in remembrance, as thou know, that Christ Jesus being made mortal
man of the sede of David, has enhaunced the glory of the gospel through
suffrynge of rebukes, and after the punishemente of the cross was exalted to
the reward of immortality. This is the gospel, that I preach yet hitherto
without shrynkynge, being neither afraid of the Jews malice nor of the
Gentyles fear. And for the ghospelles sake I am afflicted with many
displeasures of them both yea even unto prison and bonds as though I were an
evil dooer. And for all that I do not so give over the preaching of the
gospel. My body is bounden yetto, but ^^ toungue that preaches Christ could
not be bounden. And being a prisoner, as much as does possyblie lie in me, I
allure as many as I can unto Christ of what sort so ever they be. It makes no
matier to me what I suffer, so that I may increase some gaynes to the gospel
of Christ. For this cause sake, I suffer all things wyllynglye, being assured
of mine own salvation, and that they also through preaching of the gospel
shall atteyne salvation, who^ God has appointed to this felicity, which
salvation is offered to all men, not through Moses law, but through Jesus
Christ, who like as he has suffered for us, so likewise it becomes us to
suffer for his gospelles sake and for the salvation of our brethren: and like
as he through sundry afflictions and spyghtefull entreatyng was exalted to the
glory of heaven, even so must we preace to the same end by the same way.
This matier unto many seems hard and incredible, but unto us it ought to be
undoubted. For if we bethrough baptism dead together with Christ unto the
lusts of this world: or also if we persevere in the professyon of baptism, and
so it chance us to be turmoyled with the sorrows of this world, it shall come
to pass, yt we shall also live with Christ, y^ is to wete, we shall be companions
of immortality with him, which were co^panyons of death with him: And if we
suffer with him and for his glory, we shall undoubtedly reign with him also.
For god is of most perfect equity, and will not suffer those to be shut out
from the fellowship of reygnyng, whom he would have to be fellows of sorrows
suffryng. If we profess him boldly in this world before men, he shall
acknowledge us also in his Majesty. But and if we shall deny him (for he
denies him that refuses his cross) it shall come to pass, that in the last
day we shall hear that terrible voice: I know you not. It we put our trust
in him, we do for our own wealth, but if we distrust him, he shall have no
loss. For concerning our opinion of him, there comes neither wynnyng nor
losyng to him thereof. He of his own nature is true, and can not chose but be
like himself. Whether we believe or believe not, that shall come to pass that
he has promised, to the godly, life that never shall dye: and to the ungodly,
death that shall never have end. This is the foundation of the ghospelles
doetrine. Of this see thou warn all men, without disputyng and wrangglyng
with humayne arguments, but charge them by the Lord Jesus the author of this
doctrine, and the witness of thy monicion, yea and the reue^get of ungodliness,
except they will repent being warned. By this manner of sad earnest charge
geuyng, thou shall do more good, than with disputing. Mind not in any wise to
strive with words after the manner of Sophisters, nor covet with humayne
reasones to affirm the thing that ought to be perceived by faith. For that
matter does not only avail nothing to the furtheraunce of godlynes, but also
it weakeneth the strength of faith, and at length subuerteth the minds of the
hearers, that every thing is called in to question, and with philosophical
reasones the thing now set up now thrown ^^^ne, whereof it is not lawful to
doubt, and so arises question upon question, that there is nether end nor
measure of questionyng.

The text*
Study to show thy self laudable unto god, a workman that neadeth not to be
ashamed, destributyng the word of truth justly. As for vngostly vanites of
voices pass thou over them, for they wylencreace unto greater ungodliness, and
their words shall frete even is both the disease of a Cancre: of whose number
is Dimeneus and Philetus (which as ^^^^nyng the truth) have erred, saying: that
the resurteccion is past already, and do ^^^roy the faith of some. But the
sure ground of god stands still and has this sca^e: the Lord knows them
that are his. And let every man that calls on the name of christ depart from
iniquity. Notwithstanding in a great house are not only vessels of gold and
of s^^uer: but also of wood and of yerth: some for honor, and some for
dishonor. If a man therefore purge him self from such men he shall be a vessel
sanctified unto honouer, mete for the uses of the Lord, and prepared unto all
good works. See that thou rather let such manner of wranglynges pass, and
study to show thy self a ghospellyke workman, not a disputour, but a
woorkeman, laudable not unto men but unto God, and behave thy self so in the
ghopels affairs, as he that has chosen thee, need not to be ashamed of thee.
And that shalt thou do, in case thou will thwyte of vain fond
disputacions, and teach faith to be the sum total of the ghospels doctrine:
and if thou brushe away the brambles of doubtefull questions, and deuyde and
dystribute the word of God with vprighte judgment, propoundyng only those
things, that properlye belong to the matier of salvation and of Godlynes.
Moreover reiecte boldly vayue brablyng of words, which if they be once
received, venom appears by little and little, and they shall grow always to
wickedness more and more, and at length the matter shall come to that end, that
man's opinions and dysputacions being come in ure, the strength of the ghospels
doctrine is overwhelmed, obscured and grown out of use. For the talk of such
men, in case it once occupy the ears and minds of the simple, it will
always crepe further and further, none otherwise than a Canker in a body
ceasseth not to occupy the nere parts by little and little, till it have
marred all. So that a myschiefe is much more to be looked to incontinent at the
beginning, and to be cut of rather than chearished, before it take root.
Suppose that I am afraid of these matters with out cause, except that we
have all ready seen in Hymeneus and Philetus the thing that I am afraid of.
For they, while they treat of the matter of faith with humaiue disputacions,
have ^^ted so far wide from the truth of the gospel, that they have denied
the chief point and foundation of the gospel, saying, that the resurrection
is already fynished in Christ, and none other resurreccion to be looked for on
our behalfes, than that whereby we are in a manner borne a new and live again
in our children representyng us. They consider not in the mean season that
take away the resurrection, yt the fear, and hope of rewards is taken away
also, why che abide after sundry sorts for the godly and ungodly. This
myschiefe were the more tolerable, but that they being subverted them
selues-subuerted the faith of some other with their doctrine. But there is no
peril, lefte-theyr peruersitie should clean turn the truth of the gospel
vpside down: though men's opinions waver up and down, yet truly the
foundation of faith being through the help of Christ cast and defenced,
stands firm and can not be shronken with any resistences of heretics. For
unto it is this sentence eng^auen as it were a stone and can never be scraped
out: The Lord knows who be his own and: leate every one depart from
iniquity, that professeth^ the name of Christ. It is no maruayle, though they
depart from Christ, that were never syncerely joined unto Christ. But from
these men's doctrine ought every one to absteyne, that have once believed the
gospel with a pure faith. In deed it is to be wyshed with all desires, that
no such pestilence spryng up in the congregation. Howbeit it can not possiblye
be, but in such a multitude of men, we must suffer some naughty packes
myngled among the good. Yea and their naughtines is turned into good of the
godly, in that being vered of such they express the constauncie of their
faith more largelye. So in a rich man's great house, there be not only
vessels of gold and silver, but also of wood and of earth, whereof some be
appointed to honest use and some to dishonest. This only difference there is,
that such as be naturally of claye or of wood, can not be turned in to gold
or silver: But in this case forasmuch as it is a matier of the will, and not
of nature, he that through his own vice has made himself a vessel of
shame, may (by the help of God) begin again to be a vessel of honor. And
contrarywyse, that follower of godlynes that has been a golden vessel in the
house of God, in case throught his fault he slide again unto ungodliness,
shall be a vessel of shame. Unbelief, desire of aduauncemente, cruelty, lust
andsuche like deseases of mind, make a man to be a vessel of shame. From the
which who so shall utterly purge him self, and return unto innocence and
godlynes, no doubt he shall be a vessel of honor and a pure vessel fytte for
excellent good uses, and always ready for his lord as often as need shall
require.

The text.
Lusts of youth avoid, but follow righteousness, faith, love and peace, with
them that call on the Lord with a pure heart. Falyshe and unlearned questiones
put from the, knowing that they do but gendre strife. The servant of the Lord
must not strive: but be gentile to all men, apt to teach, and one that can
suffer the evil with mekenes, ^ can inform the^ that resist the truth, if
that God at any time will give the^ repentance, for to know y^ truth, and that
they may come to the^ selves again out of the snare of the devil, which
are holden captive of him at his will. I know that youth is provoked with
sondrye lusts that may draw a man to uncleanness. But thou that exercisest
the office of an Elder, avoid all lusts of youth, rather follow the things
that worthyly beseme thee: righteousenes, faith charity and peace with them
that profess Christ with a pure heart. With such as Hymeneus is, have thou
nothing to do. Innocence synneth not, faith disputes not charity is not
statelye, peace stryueth not. T^ be short, receive no folyshe and unlearned
questions, that have more ostentacion than wisdom, knowing that of such
nothing else spryngeth, but chyding and braulyng, whylest the heat of
disputacion breaks out always more and more, the matter at last grows
unto rageyng madness, and so that none will give place to other but had rather
most stubburnely defend the part that he knows to be false, than to be
taken for the less learned. With this kind of men therefore thou shalt not
meddle, when it is not possible to overcome them. Christ persuaded not the
world by this way. He overcame with sobrenesse and gentilnes, and his voice
was not heard in the streets.

And so it becomes the servant to follow his masters footsteps, and not
to be abrauler, but peaceable and gentle toward all men: for that man does
persuade with more ease that is praised for his charity and sobrenes, being
ready rather to teach than to chyde: patient in suffryng evil, and not a
prouoker, and such a one as corrects more saddely than sharply, those that
be resistoures, expressyng himself to mean nothing else in all his much a
do, but to bring them to amendment. For no man ought to be despaired of
rashely. For it may be, that through sobre and frendelye correccion, God may
give them repentance of their former errors, and when the darkness of mind
is wyped away, they may acknowledge and embrace the truth which before they
impugned, and at last being repentaunte and (as it were) awakyng from the
heavy sleep of ignorance, they may rushe out of the deuilles snare, which
undoubtedly are naughtye lusts, wherein being catched before, they were
carried about at his pleasure, yea even unto persecutyng the truth of the
gospel.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
This know, that in the last days shall come perelous times. For men shall be
lovers of their own selves, covetous, bosters, proud, curssed speakers,
disobedient to fathers and mothers, unthankful, ungodly, unkind,
trucebreakers, false accusers, riotous, searce, despisers of the^ which are
good, tray tours, heady, hye myuded, gredy upon volupreousnes more then the
lovers of God, having a silmilitude of godlynes, but have denied the power
thereof: and such abhor. For of this sort are they which enter into houses,
and bring into bondage women laden with sin, which women are led with diverse
lusts, ever learning and never able to come unto the knowledge of the truth.
Therefore it is requisite that we arm us, not only against the persecucions
of the Jews and the Ethnikes, but also against the malice of these manner of
men. For we must not dissemble but overcome that, which can not be avoided.
This take for a certayntie, that the spirit says before hand, it shall come
to pass, that in the last days shall come most heinous times, when pure
godlynes shall grow out of kind, and the charity of the ghospel wexe cold:
men shall be lovers only of them selves, given to covetousness of money,
disdaynefull, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to fathers and mothers,
unthankful, wicked, lacking good will toward those that be their own and
of their nere kynted, promise breakers, false accusours, ryotours, ungentle,
haters of goodness, traitors of their fellows and friends, rash, swellyng,
more loving of voluptuousnesses, than of God. Through title, appareli,
ceremonies, and hypocrisye, making an outward show of godlynes, when they
deny the chief point of true godlynes, being so much the more pestilent, in
that under an outward apperaunce of relygion, they are both of most fylthy
spotted conuersacyon, and also defyle the syncertitie of the ghospelles
doctrine with Iewishe fables and men's inventions. Perchance it is to see at
this present day that some tend to these abominable sorts of behauiours.
See therefore that thou also avoid such persons. And to the intent thou may
the more certainly do so, I shall partly paynte out their manners unto the.
Of this sort in deed be those, that with setting out of feigned religion, in
sluttishe clothes, with a cou^trefaicte gravity of countenance, with a
craftye pale color they conueye them selves in to other men's houses, and there
the first thing they do, they go about to inueagle the folishe women, so as
they may by means of the^ the more easylye begyle the husbands, even as the
serpent by means of Eve deceived Adam. For first, the weaker sex is the more
apt to be deceived. Than they entangle not the sad and the true godly
matrones, but the light women, which so profess Christ, that they be for all
that laden with sin, and forasmuch as they do not substauntially endeavor
them selves unto perfect godliness, they waver and are carried about with
diverse lusts, not being content to have learned once of us that which is
sufficient unto true godlynes, but are often times gredye to learn newfangles,
and for that cause they provide them doctors mete for their own lusts, that
teach them to know nothing, and never bring them to the knowledge of the
truth: But rather under the pretense of teaching the gospel, they cloak
their most fylthy life, and though they profess Christ openly, yet they
teach such geares secretlye as be clean contrary repugnaunte with the
doctrine of Christ.

The text.
As Iannes and Iambres with stood Moses, eue^ so do these also resist the
truth: men they are of corrupt minds, and leude as concerning the faith, but
they shall preuayil ^^ longer. For their madness shall be uttered unto all me^
even as theirs was. But thou have seen the experience of my doctrine, fashion
of living, purpose, faith, long suffryng, love, patience, persecutions and
afflictions, which happened unto me at Antioche at I comum, and at Listra,
which persecutions I suffered patiently. And from them al, y^ lord delivered
me. Yea, and all they that will live gooly in Christ. Jesus shall suffer
persecution. But the evil men and discei^ers shall wax wourse and wourse,
while they disceyue and are disceyued them selves. It ought to seem no
maruayle, if there arise some even now, whose naughtynes is enemy to the
gospel. It is an old example. For like as in times paste in Egipte Iannes
and Iambres with their enchauntementes went about to put those myraculous
wonders out of credence that Moses by the power of God did: even so these men
also under a certain false pretense of godlynes, resist the truth of the
gospel, being desperate men that are not only infecte with most shameful
lusts of mind, but also deprave the syncertitie of the ghospelles doctrine
and of faith unto their own purposes. And unto this time they have in deed
deceived some, but from henceforthe they shall not so much prevail with their
sleyghtes. For it shall come to pass, that their madness shall be openly vttred
unto all men, even as those learned enchauntours craftye conueyaunce being
detected caused them to be contemned and laughed to scorn. For whose manners
and conscience are unclean, their doctrine is not possible to be clean. And
to be short, countrefaicte wares endure not always. The thing that
countrefaicting has for a while covered in secret, time does bring forth into
open light. But thou which art far unlike unto their conditions, see that the
doctrine of the gospel, which I delivered purely unto thee, thou distribute
also purely and constauntlye unto other. Such as my doctrine was, such was
also my life, whereof thou can best be witness, which have been a great
while conue^^aunt with me, and have by experience seen in me, synceritie of
doctrine and demeanor of my life agreeable to the same, hertye forewardenes of
stomach, that sterted back at nothing, strength of faith that could not be
moved with any sorrows, lenity toward such as were of wrong judgment,
charity whereby I was desirous to do good even for mine enemies and patience
in persecucions and affliccio^s, which thou know chanced unto me at
Antroche, Icomum and Listra. Thou knowwest what grievous storms of persecucions
I have sustained above man's strength. And yet the Lord has delivered me
from them all, by whose aid I continued without shrynkyng. Nevertheless these
fortuned not unto me either by mine own peculy at destenye, neither yet for
any evil that I did: but for the pureness both of my gospel preaching and
also of my living I was turmoyled with so many sorrows. Yea and whosoever will
(after mine example and Christ's) follow true godlynes, must necessarylye
(after his example and mine) prepare them selves to suffer affliccions. For the
world shall never be without such, as for the mayntenaunce of their feyned
religion, shall trouble and go about to oppress them that be folowers of
true godlynes: Howbeit this trouble shall be for our advantage, even as unto
those wicked ones and deceauours, their prosperity shall be unto their more
grievous damnacion, for they shall suffer pains for two special causes, as well
in that they them selves swarued from the truth, as also because they snared
others in their errors. But as for the^, in case they repent not, leave them to
their own pain.

The text*
But continue thou in ^he things which thou have learned, which also were
committed unto the, knowing of whom thou have learned the^, and for as much
also as of a child thou have known the holy scriptures, which are able to
make the learned unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. All
scripture given by inspiration of God, is profitable to teach, to improve, to
amend and to instruct in right wisues, that the man of god may be perfect
and prepared unto all good works. But see that thou continue in those things,
which thou have learned of me, and be upright in the office committed unto
the, in as much as thou know the doctrine and ordinance that thou have, to
be undoubted, in case thou reme^brest, both of what author it proceeded, and of
what teacher thou learned it, and if thou have not forgotten the holy
scriptures, which thou learned long a go of thine elders in the tender years
of thy first childehode, which scriptures being rightly understood, even
without our authority are hable to make the learned, as far as belongs to
the obteynyng of salvation, which the gospel promyseth us, not through the
obseruacion of Moses law, but through the assured faith, whereby we believe in
Christ Jesus* That, which the gospel partly teaches to be al ready done, the
same the old testament tells and expresses before hand shall come. And yet
it teaches none other thing than the gospel does, howbeit after an other
sort if it have a godly and a learned reader. There is no reason why we
should esteem the books of the Prophets or Moses to be of none effect after
the gospel is published, if through a spiritual understanding they be applied
unto Christ and unto godlynes.

But all the whole scripture, that is set forth unto us not by man's wit but by
inspiration of the holy ghost, has great profit, either to teach the things
which are not unknown but with peril of salvation, or to reprove them whithe
are against the verity, or to correct and call again them in to the way,
that err of ygnoraunce, or else to order and inform not in Iewishnes or
humayne Philosophy, but in true innocence and vprightenes of life: and is so
much auaylable for all things that make to the offices of godlynes, that the
man dedicated to God, can be behind in nothing, but to be perfect and fullye
furnyshed to all the works of a Christian life.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
I testify therefore before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which
shall judge the quick and dead at his apperyng in his kingdom, preach thou
the word, be fervent, in season and out of season. Improve, rebuke* exhort
with all long suffryng and doctrine. For the time will come, when they shall not
suffer wholesome doctrine: but after their own lusts shall they (whose ear
itch) get the^ an heap of teachers* and shall wtdraw their ears from the
truth, and shall be turned unto fables. But watch thou in all things, suffer
afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, fulfill thyue office unto the
utmost. Be sobre. Moreover I beseech the eftesones by God the father, and by
Jesus Christ which shall judge the quick and ye dead, whose sentence no man
shall escape: and by his coming where in he shall come to judgment, not in a
low estate, but myghtie and terrible, which suffered him self here to be
judged: and by his kingdom which no power shall be hable to resist: preach
the word of the ghospel stronglye, nether being frayed with adversity nor
lustles in prosperity. Be fervent and earnest in season and out of season. For
there shall be no time but it shall seem in season to the, wherein thou may
have any hope to do good in the ghospelles business. Reprove the offender,
exhort the sluggarde, check him that still contynueth in error, so as he may
be amended with severity which was not amended with courteous admonicion:
howbeit check him so, as with the sharpenes of chydyng thou myngle both all
lenity and doctrine, lest thou seem either to hate him in case thou tho^dre at
him with nothing but checkes, or else to chide him without aduisement, if thou
do nothing but check him and teach him not withal. For with more ease he is
obedient that is persuaded, and with a better will a man does after him that
loves him, than him that loves him not. This is rather to be had in ure, that
we confyrme the consciences of them that ours be, forsomuche as herafter shall be
(as I said before) a heinous and a perilous time, wherein some shall depart
from the profession of the gospel, and not suffer the true and wholesome
doctrine of Christ, that is contrary to the lusts of this world: but like
as they are of most fylthie corrupt affeccions, and that of sundry sorts,
even so shall they get lurkyng to themselves sundry new doctors, not to teach
godliness but that with Iewishe fables and man's inventions shall ^icle their
ears that shall itche with a folishe desire rather to hear newfangles and
subtle fine reasons than matter of profit. Unto their fables they shall
convert themselves, and shall turn their ears from the truth of the gospel:
But endeavor thou thyself so much y^ more unto y^ clean contrary manner,
watch, and bear every thing for y^ ghospelles sake, and show thy self a
right gospel preacher in deed. For those that teach their own fantasies,
though they are named gospel preachers, yet verily they are none.

The text.
For I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departing, is at hand.
I have ^^ught a good fight, I have fulfilled my course, I have kept the faith.
From hence forth there ^s laid up for me a crown of rightwysnes which the
lord (that is a ryghteous judge) shall give me at that day: not to me only,
but unto all them also that love his coming. Do thy diligence, that thou
may come shortly unto me. In the ministry that thou exercisest in my
rowme, see thou behave thy self so, that thou may fullye persuade those
matters that thou teach, and fasten them thoroughly in their consciences that
they be not lyghtlye shaken out by them that shall go about to teach
contrary things. Which thing stands thee in hand so much the more
diligently to look to, in that I shall not help you in your trauaylles any
longer. For I, as a sacrifice appointed to Christ, begin even now to be
offered up, and the day afmy death is not long to. And I am willing and glad to
be offered up, both having a good conscience of my former spent life, and
being assured of my reward. I have fough^^^ a ioylye fight, I have fynished a
gospellike course, I have done that, that was appointed to the most thoroughly
and faithfully. I have already played my parts, now for that that is behind,
I know it is in sauegarde. I know that the crown due to innocence is laid
up in store for me, which the Lord ^^all yield unto me, even the Emperor,
whose soldier I have been. But he shall not yield ^^ ^o the in this life,
wherein is the time of fighting, but in that day wherein he even that
ryghteous judge shall render unto every one reward according to their
deserts. For it is not for me only that this crown of immortality is
prepared, but for all them also that lay hold upon his promysses, and keep
them selves vpryght and undefiled, waiting gladlye for ^^s coming: among whom
I trust thou art one of the chief. Do thy diligence to come to me as
shortly as thou can. The prison hyndreth me that I can not walk hither and
thither to go about the ghospelles business, and I am for saken al most of
every body. And to be short, there are some things, that I am desirous to
commend unto the by mine own mouth ^ore my departing.

The text.
For Demas has forsaken me, and loves this preseat world, and is departed
unto ^hessalonic^* Crescens is gone to Galacia* ^itus unto Dalmacia. Only Lucas
is with me. ^ake ^arke, and bring him with the, for he is profitable unto me
for the ministra^yon* and Tichicus have I sent to Ephesus. The cloak that I
left at Troada with Catpus* (^^e^ ^h^^ com^est) bring with the, and the books,
but specially the parchement. Alexander the coppersmyth did me much evil: the
Lord reward him according to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also. For he
has greatly withstand our words. Demas has forsaken me, having leauer to
possess this worlds pleasures, than in hope of immortal reward to be
companion of mine affliccions. Upon this purpose he went to Thessalonica:
Crescens is gone hence into Galacia, for business that he has there. Titus in
to Dalmatia: Luke only is with me for he never gives over, following me what
fortune so ever falls. When thou come, bring Mark with thee, for I have
need of his service. For I have sent Tichicus about certain business unto
Ephesus. And when thou come, bring the cloak with thee that I left behind me
at Troada with Carpus, that I may wear it both in winter and in prison, and
also the re^naunt of books that I left behynd me there, especially those that
are written in percheme^t. Alexander y^ copper smyth has not only forsaken me
in these storms, but has also done me much sorrow. It is not my part to
revenge it, but y^ lord reward him as he has deserved, of who^ also be thou
ware. For he did not only not assiste me, but he did also vehemently
withstand our sayings.

The text.
At my first answeringe, no man assysted me, but al forfoke me. I pray god,
that it may not be laid to their charges. Not withstanding the Lord
assysted me and strenghted me, that by me the preaching should be fulfilled to
the vtmoste, and that all the Gentiles should hear. And I was delivered out
of the mouth of the Lion. And the Lord shall deliver me from all evil doing,
and shall keep me unto his heavenly kingdom. To whom be praise for ever and
ever. Amen. At the first time that I was put to make answer at the Emperors
bar, no man assysted me, all were afraid and forsook me. There fell upon them
a certain humayne toye, I would not wyshe it to be imputed unto them. For
albeit I was destitute of man's help, the lord forsook me not but assisted me,
and gave me strength, that ye preaching of the gospelles faith, should be
persuaded to the utmost by me, and that the fame of it should be spread
abroad unto the ears of all the gentyles. For upon this consyderacion, I
suppose, his will was to have me tossed about through diverse countries, and
at length to be brought unto Rome, so as yt gospelles doctrine should be spread
y^ more farther abroad. By the help of him that is mightier than any tyranne,
I was delivered from the most rageing lions cheawes. And mine assured trust is
moreover, that the same lord will deliver me also hereafter, from all the
wickedness of y^ ^^ked, that I shall not shrynke by any occasion from the
syncerite of the gospel. And if I shall suffer death here, yet he will
preserve his servant and soldier unto his heavenly kingdom, unto whom be
glory for evermore.

Amen.
The text.
Salute Prisca and Aquila and y^ household of Onesiphorus. Erastus abode at
Co^thum. Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick. Do thy diligence, that thou
may c^^^ before winter. Eubolus greteth the, and so do the Pudence, and
Lynus, Claudya, and ^^^ the brethren. The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy
spirit, Grace be with you. Amen. Salute Prisilla and Aquila mine hospte and
mine hospetes; and On^^phorus househoulde, unto whom I am very much bounden.
Erastus tarried still at Corinthum. To conclude, I left Tromphimus behind me at
Myletus very evil at ease. Do what thou can to come hither before winter
ma^^ the way, to make it latte iournayeng. Eubelus greteth the well, and
Pude^^ and Claudia, and all the rest of the brethren. The lord Jesus Christ
which has always assisted me, be also with thy spirit. Grace be with you:
Amen. This have I subscribed with mine own hand, that the Epistle may be the
more surely credited.

Thus ends the Paraphrase upon the later Epistle of the Apostle Paul to
Tymothie.
To the right worshipful master John Hales / his servant Leonarde Coxe
wysheth long and prosperouse welfare.
AFter that the Kings Majesty had by the advise and consent of his most
dear and prudente uncle my lord protectoure, and other of his most
honorable counsel, upon certain just consideracions put all the preachours
within his graces dominions to silence for a space, I, howbeit of all the
unworthiest, yet nevertheless one of y^ nombre that is by his Majesty licenced
to declare the word of god to his people, thought it not mete for my part to
let this time of silence to pass over only in mine own pryuate studyes, but
in the mean time to write some thing that might be no less fruitful to the
readers, the^ was my tongue before to the hearers. For this purpose I chose unto
me an autour of venerable antiquity, named Mark the heremite, who in the
Greek tongue had written two right virtuous and godly treatyses, the one of
the law of the spirit, and the other of them that think to be justified by
their works. But while I was on hand with this translacion, Master John Old
a man of right good learning and my very friend, brought unto me the
paraphrase of Erasmus of Roterdame upon saint Paul's, Epistle to Titus, the
which I had certaineyeares gone translated into english, requiryng that I
would peruse it again, and amend such faults as were therein either by the
printers negligence or mine ouersyght. And so to place the text with the
paraphrase, that it might easyly be perceived what part of the paraphrase to
what part of the Epistle is corresponde^t. And he showed me also that as the
first tome or volume of the same paraphrase upon y^ gospelles and acts of the
Apostles was all ready printed, so was the printer now about to go on hand
with the second tome, that is to wit the paraphrase upon the Epistles of
saint Paul and the other Apostles. Wherefore willing to help to the
furtheraunce of so godly an entente, and to bring in, at the l^^ste, my
farthinge into the treasorye of the lord, I have looked over again my said
translacion, and have amended the places that were faulty. And beside* I have so
annexed the paraphrase to the text, that the readers shall (I trust) easyly
atteyne thereby to the true understanding of saint Paul's mind. Which my
labor I do dedycate unto your mastershyp, whom I know to love gods word
synceretly, and unto whom I knowledge my self to be most hyghlye bound of
all men, as unto the chief and only socourer of mine old age: humbly
beseching you to accept this little gift as a token of my faithful heart: and
I trust with gods help or it be long to send unto you other monimentes of
mine industrye, which I trust shall be no less pleasynge unto you and no less
profitable to the readers.

The Argument upon the Epistle of S. Paul unto Cy^us. By Erasmus of Roterodame.
THe apostle Paul had made his dysciple Titus ouersear of the christian
congregation in the noble I Will of Crete now named Candye, whom for the
excellent gifts that were in him, Paul loved as tenderly as if he had been his
own natural son. And at his departinge out of that country, he made him the
head ouersear of the faithful that were there. Afterward he wrote this
Epistle or lettre unto him from a city of Epirus called Nicople, lyinge on the
sea coaste in a clyffe named of the old Cosmographers Leucate or the clyffe of
A^t^um* at which time all things as it seems were quiet with the christians,
for here is no mention made of any persecucion. In this Epistle he puts
T^tus in remembrance to fynishe and perfyte tho things which he himself had
begone among the same men of Crete, and that in every city of the Ne which as
writers do testifye were an hundred, he sho^lde ordeyne ouersears, which we
now call bishops and here they are of the Apostle named elders. And for this
cause Paul prescribes unto him the true form of a Bishop or Shepherd of
Christ's flock. Furthermore because false apostles were come also into that
parts, which went about to put their Iewyshe ceremonies into men's heddes
Paul here gives him a courage, strongly to confute and reiecte them. After
these things he shows what is the duty of every person and age like as he
did to Tymothie: addyng this that no man ought to resist princes and
magistrates, executynge their office and power, yea though they were infidels,
but rather to tolerate them patiently, that they may the sooner by such our
modestye be called to y^ following of the gospel. Last of all he wylleth Tytus
to come to him at Nicopli but not before y^ he had sent Artemas or Tychicus
which were his dysciples, into Crete to him: least paraduenture the Cretians
would else think them selfs destitute of the conforte of an head or chief
ouersear, whom we call an Archebysshope.

The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle of S. Paul to Titus.
The first Chapter.
The text.
Paul the servant of God and apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith
of gods elect, and according to the knowledge of the truth which is after
godlynes in the hope of eternal life, which god (that cannot lie) promised
before the world began: but has opened his word at the time appointed,
through preaching, which is committed unto me according to the commandment
of god our saueour, to Titus his natural son after the continue faith,
Grace, mercy, and peace from god the father and from the lord I esu Christ our
saueoure. I Paul my self ye addict servant and obeyer, not of Moses law as
I was once, but of God y^ father, and ambassador of his son Jesus Christ: of
the which my message ye whole sum is, yt such as god has elect to attain
to everlasting salvation through the gospel, them I should exhort, not to the
obseruacio^ of ye law, or to put their confidence in works, but unto faith,
which only opens to al me^ y^ entryng into everlasting salvation through y^
fre beneficence of Jesus Christ. And my commission is to call them, not to
faith only, but also to y^ knowledge of truth which among y^ Ethnikes was
over heaped with the inuencions of man's wysedom, and among ye Jews it was
hid and wrapped up in ye shadows of mystical figures and ceremonies. I am
charged I say to call me^ to ye knowledge of ye truth, not y^ which the
philosophers of this world do teach, disputinge on ye causes of natural
things, but to the knowledge of that truth which co^pendyously shows in
what things a right christian life consists, y^ end and reward whereof is
life everlasting to follow after this short life that we lead here in the
world: which everlasting life, men ought with the more trust to hope for,
how great troubles soever they endure while they be here. First because he that
promised this everlasting life, was not a mortal man, that might both be
deceived him self, and also deceive other, but it is god that does it. Who,
as it cannot be chosen but he must neades abide always god, so can nothing
surely proceed from him but only ye mere truth. And again because this y^ he
promised, he did not promise it by a chance, or but now of late, but before ye
the world was made, it was fully determined by ye divine and unchangeable
decree of his mind to do y^ which he now does. There is no new thing that
has altered his purpose, but y^ thing which for secret causes only known to
his godheed he would have to be covered and hyd hitherto, y^ would he have to
be opened to al ye world at this time, ye which he had before by his eternal
wisdom appointed to y^ reuelyng thereof. Neither would he yt there should be
only showed to ye Jews a shadow darkened with the mystes of figures, but his
will is that y^ clear truth should by ye preaching of y^ gospel be declared to
al me^, without any dyffere^ce of nation or language. This is y^ whole effect
of y^ doctrine of y^ gospel, y^ preaching whereof I have not taken upon me of
mine own head, but it was committed to me, and not committed by men, but by out
saueour god: who did not only call me to the occupieng of an apostles office,
but beside that he enjoined it to me, and so charged me therewith, that it was
not lawful for me to refuse that which he so earnestly commanded me to do.
These words have I spoken, that no man should think mine authority, or else
the authority of him whom I have put in my stead, to be but of light
estimacion.

I therefore the same Paul being being in such autorite, do write this Epistle
or lettre to Titus my very natural ^on, not by bodyly generation, but by y^
sead of faith, which I have so shed into him, and in the which he so well
resembles me, that I seame to be renewed in him like as a father is in his
own natural child. To him I wyshe grace and peace from him, from whom all
true goodness does come, that is to wit from god the father and his son
Jesus Christ the only autoure of our salvation. For in such riches as grace
and peace are, my desire is to have my children made rich.

The text.
For this cause I left the in Crete that thou should reform the things
that are imperfect, and should ordain elders in every city, as I had
appointed the. But to speak now to the my son Titus: Since I did know right
well the nature of this ylande, and again I did not doubt but that they had
neade of a faythefull and dilygente curate or ouersear, I have for that cause
left the in Crete, as one representyng mine own person, because that the
busynes of the gospel calls me to other places, that such things as have
been there begone to be ^orrected, thou as my deputye may fynishe them. And
because thou alone art not able to over look so many cities as this I Will is
replenysshed with, thou shalt ordain in every city an ouersear or bishop, as
I did bydde the when I went from thence. But beware that thou admytte no man to
so hygh^ an office without great dyscression: for he must be a very proved man
to wh^m thou shalt betake this charge, and not all only of a known and
testified honesty, but also he must be clear from all suspicion of any manner
of fault what soever it be. Such a bishop or ouersear, to the entente that
thou may the better and surelyar chose out, I will set him forth by certain
signs, yea and in a manner paynte him to the.

The text.
If any be blameles the husband of one wife, having faithful children,
which a^^ not slaundred of riot, ne^her are dysobedyent. If thou know any man
of that manners and upright lyuinge, that no fault can proueably be laid to
him, if he be content with one wife geuynge no token of unchaste living, if
he have children so instruct and brought up, that they show them selfs to be
christians, not only with their mouth, but also in their deades and
innocence of living, that is to say, they have none evil name of ryotous and
dysfolute manners, as the commune sort of young me^ have, nether are they
dysobedyent to their parents: such a man shall be meet to have this charge
committed to him: For he that shall be counted worthy to occupye the rowme of a
bishop, must be so fer wide both from all vice and all suspicion of vice, that
he may be at all times ready to make answer not only for his own self but
also for the honest conversation of all his whole familye. For the faults of
the children are wont communely to be reproched to the fathers and mothers.
Now whatsoever hurts the good name of a bishop, it turns to the slander
of the gospel of Christ.

The text.
For a bishop must be blameless, as y^ steward of god: not stubborn, not
angrye, not give to much wine, no fighter, not given to fylthie lucte, but a
keeper of hospitalie, one y^ loves Goodness, prudente, sobre, righteous, godly,
temperate and such as cleueth unto the true word of doctrine, that he may be
able also to exhort by wholesome learning, and to improve them that say against
it. It is necessary therefore that he which in a manner stands in gods
stead and to whom the treasour of evangelical doctrine is committed, not to
be hurded up, but to be faithfully bestowed abroad, be in all points without
blame, and far from the vices of them that most communely bear offices: that
such as be under him, may be under him wyllynglye, and withal their hearts.
He must look upon nothing but the soul health of the flock that he has
charge of. He must study to help them and redres that is amysse in them, and
not to oppress them, to teach them and not to compel them, to lead them and
not violently to pull them, he must rather persuade then extorte, he must
overcome more by benefytes and gentylnes, tha^ by lordelynes or emperiouse
commandment. He that sets his mind to these things, must not be wilful
nor of hye look, nor full of hasty language, which will cause men sooner to
withdraw their hearts from his doctrine, than to come to any amendment. He
must also by all means avoid the crime of avarice and gapyng after lucre, for
that thing is vile and pestilente even in a lay officer, and much more to be
abhorred in a bishop which is a spiritual officer. For he that is infecte
with couetyse, does nothing uprightly and as ought of equite to be done, but
rather a bishop must be such a one as will lyberallye bestow his goods in
refresshyng of the neady, and in especial strangers. Beside it besemeth a
bishop to be more in love with virtue and goodmen than with money. He must also
be sobre, just, and of an innocent and pure life, godly in the obseruacion of
the christian faith, subject to no evil affeccions, but far above all such
desires wherewith the commune sort of men are led up and down. But chefely he
must be a fast holder of the words of the gospel, wherein he is bound to be
well instruct, that he may be able to teach them that be ignorant, what
appartayneth to the salvation of their souls, and that he may with wholesome
doctrine exhort and call forewarde such as be slow, and finally reprove them
that speak against the truethe.

The text.
For there are many vnrewlye and talkers of vanity, and dysceauers of minds,
specially they that are of the circumsicion, whose mouths must be stopped,
which pe^ue^ie whole houses, teachinge things which they ought not because
of filthy lucre. I do not warn the of these things without a cause, for
there be many waywarde parsones, brablers and deceyuers of men's minds. These
not giving an ear to the teaching of the gospel, bring in, in stead of it,
vain and unprofitable fables of the Jews, whereby they may get them a name of
learning among the people, and also gaynes. By these fables they begyle the
minds of some simple folk, and under the color of the gospel, they crepe
into y^ hearts of their hearers: insomuche that many times they corrupt not
one or two, but they ouerturne whole householdes and kynreddes, teaching
shameful things and far square from the verity of the gospel. Yet do they
nevertheless abuse the title of the gospel to the lucre which they do
vilaynousely daily hunt after. Wherefore see that thou rebuke them sharply
and stop their mouths. Yea and there be some of the gentiles that be combred
with this enormite, but chiefly thou shall find them to be of this malyciouse
sect which be Jews converted to Christ, but not syncerely. For they so
profess the gospel that they mengle Moses law therewith and will not clean
forsake their Iewyshe supersticion.

The text.
One of them selves (even a prophet of their own) said: the Cretyans are
always ^lyats, evil beasts, s^owe belyes. This witness is true: Wherefore
rebuke thou them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, not taking
head to Jews fables and commandments of men that turn away the truth.
Unto y^ pure, are all things pure: but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure, but even the mind and conscience of them is
defiled. Nether is it any marvel to have such men found in Crete, that
feade their belyes with vain words and naughtye ways, sythen many years
agone a poet called Epimenedes which was a Cretian him self did speak these
words of his own countrymen. Men of Crete be always ^^ars, evil beasts,
and slow belyes. This witness is so true, that it might be taken for a word
of gods own mouth. Be not they naturaly liars which fear not to darken the
most clear light of the truth of the gospel with their fables? Be not they
noyfull beasts which is every place blow their venom on simple persons
that be not ware of them? Be not they slow belyes which had leauer by false
doctrine live in ydlenes and rankly, then for the defense of the gospel, to
suffer hungre and be many times shrewdely handled as I am? Wherefore rebuke such
naughtypackes earnestly, that they may ones wax good, and leuyng the trust
that they have in the ceremonies of the old law, they may give them selfs
wholly to y^ truethe of ye gospel: and that they give not them selfs to such
lewd tales of the Jews through the which the commandments of Christ be
let go, and constitucions of men brought in, in the stead of them. As the
obsetuacions of new Mones, the kepinges of the sabbothe, circumsicion,
wasshynges, choice of meats dyuersyte of clothing, to beware that they touch
not certain things, and of the house to be seven days unclean, with many
other like to these. Which god for a time commanded to be kept of the Jews,
partly that that nation being rebellious and vnweyldy to be ordered, might be
holden and kept under by the multitude of precepts: partly that those
things should be as shadows of true things to come. But they are now of
none effect at al, insomuche that if any man will contynewe to keep them still
after the manner of the Jews, nothing can turn him more away from the verity
of the gospel. For there is no nation that more stubbornely does rebel
against the gospel than the Jews do, which can in no wise leave these vain
things. This meat say they is unclean, eat it not. This body is unclean,
touch it not. Thus speak they, but away with these dyffere^ces, either of
meats or clothinges, among them that be true Christians, to who^ being clean
all things be clean. Neither ought they to think any thing that god has
made to the use of man to be holyar or vnholyar one than an other, whether it
be meat, clothinge, or any such like thing. And as to them y^ be pure
christians nothing is unclean, so to the Jews whose minds are filthy
nothing is pure and clean not so much as those that the law permytteth to
them for clean. For seeing they have not trust in him who after the openyng of
the gospel would not have these things to be observed after the fleshly and
lyterall sense, but to be referred to the works of the soul, what thing can
be pure to them, whose minds are infected with mysbeleue, and their life
defiled with inordinate waste, ambicion, couetyse and other vices?

The text.
They confess that they know god, but with the deades they deny him seeing
that they are abominable and dysobedient and unapt to every good work. They
uphold the law with to the and nail, and yet they wot not what the law
means. They have their prep^ce circumcysed, but the mind within is
vncircumcysed. They go into y^ temple with hands and fete washed, but the
soul and conscience is vnwassed. They keep their Sabbothe holy from bodyly
works, but in ye mean time they have their breaste unquieted with hatered
anger, and other infections of the soul. They fear to be contaminate if they
eat either porke or pigge, but they think themselves clean when they with
gredy ears ^ea^e foul communication, and back biting of other. They think
them selfs defiled, if they touch caren, but yet they abhor not to touch
an hoore, or a thing that is stolen. They think it a foul sin, if they use
any garment of lynen and wole^ mengled together, but they stand not amysse in
their own conceit when they have their breast ouercouered with so many foul
vices. It is a great shame therefore to them to boaste them selves that they
alone know god, seeing that they deny him in their deeds more tha^ any other.
Do they not deny him when they are so spotted with the fylthynes of the soul,
that unto most men they are abominable, yea and for their unbelief
intractable? And finally when in all the deades of true faith whereby we should
cause god to be merciful to us, they be far worse than all other men be.

The second Chapter.
The text.
But speak thou the things which become wholesome learning. That the elder
men be sobrr, sage, dyserete, sound in the faith, in love, in pacieuce. BBut
let them go with their fables, let the naughtynes of these men move the nothing
at all, but that thou remember thy duty, and that thou speak those things
that be in very dead mete for the iernynge of the gospel, that is to say, y^
which may make us commendable before god for our pure minds and manners, and
declare that we be y^ disciples of Christ. Here you wilt ask me what thiges
thei^e y^ I would have theeso to speak and to instruct other in them. Thou
shall warn the elders of the people y^ they be sobre, watchful, and dilygent
to all godly works. And that they overcome the vnlustynes of their age, with
y^ couragiousnes of faith. Beside yt they be grave, not playing the fools like
young men in their old age, but that they use sage manners that the youth may
have them in renerence and awe. Teach them to moderate them selfs that they
be not way ward and soon angry as the commune sort of old men is, but
greatly commended not only for the integrite of their faith, but beside for
their charitable deades, and patience in suffrynge of all adversities, in
especial such as happen to them for the gospel of Christ.

The text.
The elder women like wise, that they be in such raymente as becomes holiness,
not being false accusats, not given to much wine, but that they teach honest
things to make the young women sobre minded, to love their husbands, to love
their children, to be dyscret, chaste, housewyfely, good, obedyente to their
husbands, that the word of god be not euyil spoken of. Young men likewise
exhort that they be sobre minded. On the same manner thou shall warn old
women that they go apparayled after such manner as becomes them that wylbe
named christian persons, they must not find fautes with the living of other,
which fault is peculiare to this sex and age. They must not be given to
ouermuche drinking of wine. How be it the use of wine must not be denied to
age, so y^ it be moderate. They must teach maidens and young women such
things as be honest, no nycenes neither evil fasshions, and so instruete them
that they be wise and love their husbands and children, that they be sobre and
chaste, and kepars of their house and play the good housewyfes. For this is
the highest praise y^ can be in women, to be known to be subject and obedyent
to their husbands, that the name of God whose religion they profess, be not
flaundered through their lewd manners. For sithen we see the wives of heathen
men to behave them selfs ^yghte womanly in such points belongyng to
womanhed, what shall the unfaithful say when they see our christen women worse
in this behalf the^ their women are, seeing it becomes them in all good manners
to excel other. Now what thing old women must by thine instruccion teach
young maidens and young wyfes, that same shalt thou thy self teach young men
exhorting them to be sobre and of moderate affeccions, that the heat of
youth overthrow them not hedlonge into vice.

The text.
In all things show thy self an ensample of good worckes in thy doctrine
with honestye, gravity, and with y^ wholesome word which cannot be rebuked:
that he which withstandeth may be a shamed having no evil thing to say of
you. And that thou may the more effectuousely persuade these things, first
of all be thou thy self an example unto them of honest doings, in all that is
the duty of a true christian man to do. For no man does sooner persuade men to
follow his doctrine, then he that does the same that he byddeth other men to
do. Thou shalt therefore so teach the youth, that together with thy doctrine
thou show* thy self a lively example of a pure and upright life, corrupt
with no manner of vice at al. And that thou keep such gravity that they have
their teacher in reverence, and be afeared to offend him. Se therefore that
thou moderate all thy life and also thy words, that there may nothing be
found in the that may be contemned, that not only they which be under thy
lore may obey the, but also they which before were against the gospel, may
be ashamed of their evil saying, when they shall se all things in the so
without blame, that even they that lie in wait for the and seek all the
means they can to get some occasion to lay somewhat against the, can find
nothing at all to bring their intent to pass, neither in the nor in thine.

The text.
Exhort servants to be obedyent unto their own masters, and to please them
in all things, not answering again, neither to be pyckers, but y^ they show
all good faithfulness, that they may do worship to the doctrine of god our
saueour in all things. Exhort servants that they be obediente to their
masters and serviceable in all things: lest they may seame through the
profession of y^ christian faith, to be made worse than they were before, and
so by them, the naughtines of evil parsons shall be reproched to y^ gospel. Let
them not therefore be full of answers against their masters and evil wylled to
do their commandments, neither must they be pyekers, as the commune sort of
unthrifty servants be: that as they profess the faith of Christ, likewise
they declare them selfs in all service to be done to their masters to be
dyligent and true, yea though their masters do but little deserve it of them.
So that through their honest behauoure, they commend and set forth the
doctrine of our saueoure god, and that by them mo men may be drawn to the
following thereof, when theyse such as knowledge themselfes to be christians to
be more gentle and amyable then other, in all their conversation.

The text.
For the grace of god that brings salvation unto all men has appeared and
teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and wordlye lusts, and that we
should live sobrely, and righteously, and godly in this present world,
lokynge for that blessed hope and appearing of the glory of the great god and
of our saueour Jesus Christ, which gave him self for us to redeem us from
all unrighteousness, and to purge us a peculyar people unto him self, fervently
given unto good works. For in this through the gospel, has shyned the
bountefulnes and exceading great mercy of god our saueour, which was before
unknown. And it has not shyned only to the Jews, but egallye to all men,
not that now being delivered from the burden of Moses law, we should live
after our own will, but we be taught, that after that by baptism the faults
of our life before passed be forgeuen us, and that we swerynge to abide in
Christ's doctrine, have ones renounced and given up wyeked relygion and
worshypping of images, and al worldly desires, we should so live hereafter in
this world, that it may appear manifestly that we be truly newborn again in
Christ and made altogether other me^ than we were before. And where as we
tofore were the servants of wickedness, sin an^ filthy concupiscence, we
must from hence forth keep such moderacion that we be in no wise oppressed
with the desires of worldly things. Let us so observe the justice of living,
that we do good to every man as much as lies in us, and that we hurt no man,
that we may now with a pure conscience give that honor and worship to god
that we gave before to deuyls. And though paraduent are we be punished with
poverty, infamy, reuilynges, enprisonement, torments and diverse other
euyls* yet let us not think y^ our faith and godly living is baraine and
unfruitful, nether let us hunte after rewards of this world, which in
comparison of things to come, be neither great nor of any contynua^ce but let
us ^oke for that greater reward of everlasting ly^e which shall then chance,
when after the end of this world, in the which the members of Christ be
vexed with many afflictions and ignomies, god the father shall open his glory
and magnificence, in them that be his true worshyppers, all their miseries
being clean expussed. At the which time he shall not appear humble but
gloriouse, and terrible to the wicked. And together with y^ father shall appear
in the same glory, our lord and saueouer Jesus Christ, geuyng unto his members
y^ glory of immortality, in y^ which he now shyneth. He because no man should
mistruste his promise, for this entente wittyngly and willingly came down to
bye among us, and gave him self wholly unto us, and being himself without
any spote of sin he redeemed us with the price of his blood from the tyranny
of the devil, to whom we were through our synfulnes made bond, and so
abolishing our old iniquites, he would make unto him a new peculyar people,
which after his own example should contemn y^ euyls of this world, and tread
down y^ entysemetes and gifts of it under their fete, and through the worckes
of faith get them the enheritaunce of everlasting glory, which the same our
redemer does promise to all that do sincerly keep his most holy word.

The text.
These things speak and exhort, and rebuke with all feruentes of
commaundynge. ^e that no man despise the. These things, my Titus, which be a
great deal wide from the fables of the Jews, speak them openly. Exhort men
to the following of them, and such as declyne and fall again a side, reprove
them with most great authority, that whom doctrine does not persuade, whom
fair exhortacion does not move, them a sharp and earnest reprehension may
keep in. For there be some faults that must be healed by seuerite. Here
therefore show forth the gravity and autorite of a Bishop, and so behave thy
self, that no man may have a just cause to despise the. Dysdayne and hye
countenance must not be in the, but yet as often as neade requires, thou must
show thy self to be of autorite.

The third chapter.
The text.
Warn them that they submit the^ selves to rule and power, that they obey
the officers: that they be ready to every good work, that they speak evil of
no man, that they be no fighters but gentle, showing all mekenes unto all men.
AS I would y^ al servants should be to their Masters yea though they be
unfaithful: even such I would have christian men to be by thy monicio^ to their
princes, and unto them, ye are magistrates under them, though such rulars
under who^ they be, are the^ selfs unchristened. For this must in any wise be
taken head unto, ye no man may by our manners take occasion to alyenate him
self fro the gospel. But it would so come to pass, if they which be head
rulars should perceive y^ we by reason of y^ profession y^ we have taken, were
ye more sediciouse and fierce, and les obedye^t to their commandments. For
they would by and by lay y^ thing to ye fault of ye gospel, and so more
withdraw their minds from y^ profession thereof* Warn them therefore y^ believe
in Christ, y^ they be never y^ more for all y^ fre from the laws of princes and
other magistrates, but they must y^ rather* because they be christians, be
obedient, and gladly do as they be commanded. And to be ready and prompt to
every good work, y^ me^ may se them do y^ which is honest wyllingly, and not
constrained for fear of punyshement. If y^ governors do command y^ which
is rightful, it is great iniquity, ^^ very evil ensample to disobey him y^ is
the ^^^ over al ye other. But if they command and rule otherwise then right
is if they oppress their subjects over hardly, if they call to sore upon them,
yet softenes and sufferau^ce is more comely for no man, the^ it is for them
that be the folowers of Christ. Whatsoever they command y^ is not against y^
very true religion of god, we must therein gladly obey. They will peradventure
take away our goods* what then? for them grows ^s a greater treasour of
virtuous living. The will banyshe us out of y^ controy. It makes no matter, for
Christ is every where ready to comfort him servants. Here peradventure some
man will say, what if our princes be heathen me^ and worshippers of ydolles,
co^taminate with open vices* enemies to Christ's faith? They y^ be such, be such
to their own harm, and ieopardye. It is not our part to condemn them. But,
if we can, to amend them. And better they may be induced to ame^deme^t, by
obedience, sufferau^ce and exaumples of good living, tha^ by rebellion and
opprobrious words. Let us leave the^ to the^^ judge, and let us remember what
is semely for us. Christ did pray for them y^ reuyled him, so far wide was it
y^ he would give check for check. How is it th^n convenient y^ his dysciples
(for all christians be y^ dysciples of Christ) should be contumeliouse against
any man, as lovers of strife and debate? Nay, they ought rather after y^
example of him (whose name they profess) to be gentle, showing all myldenes,
not only unto honest men and such as do well deserve it, but also unto every
man. To good me^ because they deserve it, to evil me^ that they may amend
again y^ they have not thorough our impacience a worse opinion of our belefe*
and when we give them just occasion to be moved with us. Christian charity
suffers all things, and in all things it has good hope.

The text.
For we our selfs also were sometime folishe dysebedie^t, deceived, seruyng
diverse lusts and voluptuosnes, living in maliciousnes and envy, full of
hate, hating one another. And wha^ we se any such yt be out of y^ way, we
must more pity them, tha^ abhorte them. Which we shall y^ sooner do if we call
to remembrance y^ we were sometime such as they be now. Let us not refuse the^
because they be evil lyuers and wicked me^, but let us help y^ best y^ we can,
y^ they cease to be as they be, and begin to be like us. Who called us from our
blyndenes? was it not y^ fre cleme^cie and great mercifulnes of god? The same
may also change them, when it shall be his pleasure. And howbeit y^ we which of
Jews enbrased y^ gospel and became christians, were no worshippers of idolles,
yet were we before our co^uersio^ subject to other greuouse vices, being fools,
inobedie^t, erring from y^ truth, given to diverse appetites and lusts, full
of envy, full of malice, grudging one at an other, hating on another. To those
so great euyls we were subject even under Moses law.

The text.
But after that the kyndnes and love of our savior god to manwarde appeared,
not by the deades of righteousness which we wrought, but according to his mercy
he saved us by the fountain of the new brythe, and renewing of the holy ghost
which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our savior, that we
justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal
life. But that now for foles and dulleheddes, we be made sobre and wise, that
for rebels we are meke and tractable, that for men erryng outt of the way, we
are made knowars of the truth, that for the servants of iustes and
voluptuousnes we be made glad kepers of ryghtuousnes, that for maliciouse we be
made simple and courteouse, that for enuiouse men, we be made glad to do good
to all men, that for haters we be made well wyllers even to the^ that hate us,
this have we neither by Moses law, nor yet by our own merits, but by the
free goodness of God, by the which we coueite that all men, if it be possible,
rejoice with us in one commune salvation, and that the verite of the gospel may
shine and give light to all men as it has given light to us. For before, we
wandered like blind men in darkness, as the unbelievers do still. But now
after that it is made open through the gospel, how great the goodness and
charity of God the father (which is author of our salvation) is to al men, now
after that the darkness of our former life is put away, we have obtained true
life and salvation: not by the observation of the law, which had a certain
righteousness in it, but yet of small efficacy to give everlasting life, but we
have obtained it through the mere mercy of the Godhed. For by the holy font
of baptism, we benewe borne again and graffed into Christ the son of the
everlasting father, and being renewed by his spirit, we have ceased to be
carnal and have begone to be spiritual. Therefore what so ever we be, we are
altogether bound to God for it, which into us nothing deserving it has shed
aboundantlye his spirit, which the law could not give. And he has shed
this his holy spirit into us by Jesus Christ, by whom it has pleased him
most liberally to give us all things, that we being purged by his benefit
from our old sins, should endeavor our selfs by good works to be made
apt to receive the inheritance of the life that endures for ever, of the
which the doctrine of the gospel does put us in a sure hope. Sense that we
therefore were once miserable, and being now through the only mercy of the
Lord delivered from sin we hope for the crown of everlasting life with
Christ, we must have pity upon other, and go about by all means, yt God may
also have mercy on the^.

The text.
This is a true saying. Of these things I will that thou certify, that they
which believe in God, might be diligent to go forward in good works. For
these things are good and profitable unto men. Let a christian Bishop in the
stead of Iewishe fables tell these things to the people, for they are certain
and not to be doubted of. There remains nothing more for us to do, but that
in all our conversation from hence forth we show our selfs not vnmyndful of
the great benefit yt we have received of God but that we live in all things
according to his godly pleasure, or else the profession of christiandome and of
the gospel will nothing aduaile us. Wherefore I will that thou assure al me^ of
these things, which greatly perteyne unto our purpose, and confirm the^
therein also, y^ they which have once believed in God, y^ by his free
mercifulnes they have been redeemed from their sins, and that he will give the
crown of immortality to all them which by virtuous and godly living do
study to follow Jesus Christ as nere as they are able, may lead such a
life, as may seem not unworthy of so great profession and so her promises.
Now they shall declare them selves to be true christians, if they curse not
the Ethnikes and the Jews, nor say evil by them, but if they be beneficial to
al men, and by the affection that they have to piety they rejoice to help all
men. For these things shall not only ornate and commend the professyon of
the gospel, as things of them selfs honest, but beside that very profitable
to draw other to Christ, and to help other which be oppressed with any
calamity. The chief point of christiantie is to do good to all men, and by
benefits even the very wild beasts are overcome and made tame. Thou shalt
therefore on such wise speak and preach of these things, and not as one that
is in any dowte of them, as some be which mouyng many questions seem to have
but a faynte believe. But teach thou with great confydence of countenance and
with great stedfastnes of words, that every man may right well perceive,
that thou art throwlye persuaded in that which thou do labor to persuade
to other. Out of these things commethe no small fruit of true religion.

The text.
Folyshe questyons, and genealogies, and braulyng, through s^tyuinges about the
law, avoid: for they are unprofitable and superfluous. But folyshe and
uncunning questions, and entangled genealogies, and contenciouse disputacions
or rather war upon Moses law, which some following the trade of the Jews do
stir up to get them a name thereby and vantage, cast them away as
superfluous and vuprofytable to the life that is after the gospel. For what
death it hurt good living, if I know not why Moses grave can no where be
found? And whether it be as the Jews do say lest he should be raised up
again by enchaunters? Or if I know not how many years Matusalem lived? Or
of what age Solomon was, when he begat Roboam? Why Moses did forbid to eat
the flesh of swine? Why the Jews do suppose, that the blood of a Wesell must
with so great diligence be purged? And many other more folyshe than these. In
the exposicion whereof, what profits him to tarry that hastes to the reward
of a true christian life? These things must rather ^e cut away than
declared, and they which profess them as excellent things, ought more to be
reproved and sharplye rebuked than to be overcome with disputacion.

The text.
A man that is an auctor of sects, after the first and the second admonicion
avoid* knowing, that he (that is such) is peruetted and synneth even damned by
him self. If they which mayntaine such supersticions as have tofore been
mentioned, err by symplenes, when they be warned thereof they will amend. But
if they do it of a purposed malice, either to get them a name, or for lucre, or
for some other fylthy cause, than will they be ready to defend even those
things which they know to be false. These men when thou have once or twies
rebuked them, if they amend not, then avoid them as sedicious and incurable
persons, lest they do more harm when they be provoked, than they would do
if they were let alone as men not regarded. Yea and lest it may turn to a
worse inconvenience that they which cannot be brought into a better mind,
draw him that goes about to instruct them into the same error that they be
in. For what avails it to give any oftenar to them the medicine of cortectio^
if there be no hope of remedy. An error coming only of the fraylenes of
man, is remedied by one or two warnynges, but peruersitie is incurable and made
worse by puttyng to of remedies. Therefore he that being once or twyes rebuked,
abides nevertheless styffe in his opinion, let him alone in his froward mind,
as a man quite ouerturned and paste all remedy.

Neither have thou any neade to labor in the condemnynge of him, sythen he is
condemned by his own judgment. If he peryshe, he is lost and cast away by
his own fault. For he cannot lay this excuse for him: I was deceived and
went out of the way through ignorance, no man warned me of mine ^^^oure.
This excuse it but vain. For what shall one do to a sick man that will take no
medicine? peradventure if he were contemned and not passed on, he would wexe
wyser. If he will not, yet the fewer resort unto him, the fewer shall the
contagion of his madness infecte.

The text.
When I shall send Artemas unto the, or Tithycus, be diligente to come to me
unto Nic^^opolis: For I have determined there to winter. Bring zenas the
lawear, and Apollos en their journey diligently, that nothing be lackyng unto
them. And let ours also learn to ^^cell in good works, as farforth as need
requires, that they be not unfruitful. All that are with me, salu^e the. Great
them that love us in the faith. Grace be with you all. Amen. I would feign
have the with me a few days, but I would not it should be to the damage of
the christian congregacions in Crete which have been but late converted to the
faith: and therefore they have the more need of a diligente ouerseat; which
may build upon the foundation now all ready laid. Se therefore that thou
mete with me at Nicopole. But come not before I send Artemas or Tichicus to
thee, to be there for thee in my stead, lest thy departing should leave Crete
destitute, and as it were an Orpheline. Thou shalt not neade to fear that I
will in the mean time go any where else, and so thou to lose thy labor. For I
am purposed all this next winter to be at Nicopole which is a city of Trace.
When Zenas sometime a doctor of Moses law, but now a noble preacher of the
gospel, and Apollos which is a man greatly approved in the doctrine of
Christ, will depart from the, bring them forthward with all the humanite that
may be, and see that they lack nothing that shall be necessary for their
iornaye. If these offices of humanity be exhibited of the Ethnikes, that they
do for good manners sake bring their friend onwarde on his journey, and give
him at his departing sufficiently both of vytayles and otherthynges necessary
for him in his way: I think it very right that our men also which profelse
Christ, do learn to use such gentyle fashions, and to give due thanks to
them that do deserve it. Not that they should make them rich with great
gifts, but to give them such things as be necessary for their living, when
need shall require. For seeing that they which do not know Christ, be yet
taught of nature, to give them thanks which have done for them, truly it is
very unseemly, that christian men should be barayne and unfruitful to them, of
whom they have received any good turn. As many as be here with me commend
them unto the. Do thou again commend me to as many there as love me, not with
worldely affeccion, but with Evangelical and christian love, which the
commune profession of faith does engendre in us. The free beneficence of
Gods mercy be with you all for ever.

Amen.
Thus ends the paraphrase upon the Epistle of S. Paul to Titus.
The Argument upon the Epistle of S. Paul to Philemon: by Erasmus of
Roterodame*
THis Philemon (after the Greeks writing) was a Phrigi^ borne, which nation of
people is intractable and ^^anyshe, as the Greeks own proverb makes often
mention: Stripes make the Phrigian to amend. And yet Paul reconned this
Philemon one of his special friends, because of his godlynes and diligence
done to y^ saints. And a servant of his one Onesimus had run away from him
to Rome, and had theuishlye stolen somewhat from him, as servants are for the
most part used to do. There when he had heard Paul, who at that time was
in bonds, he received the doctrine of the gospel, and served Paul in prison.
But lest the master should be vexed in his mind for his servants runnynge
away, he sends him home again and with a wonderful diligence and
civility, he reconsileth unto the Master his servant that had been both a
runneagate and a piker, and offreth him self to be suertie to make good what
soever he had piked at his runnyng away. This Epistle he wrote from the prison
by the said Onesimus whom he also calls his son.

Thus ends the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle of S. Paul to Philemon.
The.i. Chapter.
The text.
Paul the prisoner of Christ and brother Timothee. Unto Philemon the beloved,
and out helper, and to the beloved Appia, and to Archippus our fellow
soldier, and to the congregation that is of thy house. Grace be unto you and
peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ. Paul before this
time an Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ and now his prisoner also: for
why should not I be glad to be his prisoner, for whose ghospelles sake I wear
these bonds? not for the punyshement of any euyil that I have done, but as a
notable badge of a free and valeaunt preacher: and also my fellow
ghospellpreacher, brother Timothee, unto Philemon in the profession of the
commune faith a brother, singulerly worthy to be beloved: and not a brother
only but also my companion in very many affairs and partaker in the office of
the gospel: and to his wife Appia, my most well-beloved sister as concerning the
kynred of faith: and to Archippus our fellow soldier and to the rest of the
congregation which is at his house: Grace be unto you and peace from God our
common father and from his son the lord Jesus Christ.

The text.
I thank my god, making mencio^ always of the in my prayers, when I hear of
thy love and faith, which thou haste toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all
saints, so that the fellowshyppe of thy faith is fruteful in the knowledge of
every good (work) which is in you toward Jesus Christ. For we have great
joy and consolacion in thy love because that by thee (brother) the saints
hertes are comforted. In my prayers wherewith I am accustomed to sacrifice
daily unto God, I undre thanks unto him always on thy behalf. For I ascribe
it thankefully unto him, that I hear spoken openly of all men, that is to say,
both the pureness, and thy right gospelling charity which you bear toward
the lord Jesus: and not toward him only, but also toward al saints, y^ is
to were, his me^bres unto who^ what so ever is bestowed, his will is to recke^
it done to him self. And this I also beseech him, to augment his mercifulnes
upon thee, and that this thy faith, which is not idle in the, may express his
power daily more and more, and to enforce the with ple^teousnes to releue mo
and mo, so y^ there be no office of christian charity but that thou may be
both acquaynted and tried in it. The things that thou have hitherto done
already, occasion us to conceive a more sure confidence in thee, that we dare
be bold to reckon upon the in matters of greater weyghte. For when I do
consider that all that Christians have are com^^ne, I am not a little joyous,
and even in these affliccions it was no small comfort to me, that thou (o my
brother) waste so ready to deserve well of al men, by ^^^nes of thy love,
wherewith thou haste refreshed the saints hearts that are ^^liicted with the
sorrows of this world. For in this thy doing thou declarest ^y self to be a
right brother.

The text.
Wherefore, though I might be bold in Christ to commuande thee, that which
was ^y duty to do: yet for loves sake I rather beseech the, though I be as I
am, even old Paul, and now a prisoner of Jesus Christ. I beseech the for my
son Onesimus whom I (...) begotten in my bonds (which in time passed was to
the unprofitable but now, profitable both to the and to me) whom I have sent
home again. Thou therefore re^^ue him, that is to say, mine own bowels, whom
I would feign have retained with me, that in thy stead be might have ministered
unto me in the bonds of the gospel. Nevertheless, without thy mind would I
do nothing, that the good which thou do should not be as it were of
necessity, but wyllyngly. Wherefore having the experience of these so many
matters, whereby thou declarest thy self to be a true follower of Christ, I
trusted excedynglye, that I might obtain of the what I will, albeit I
commanded the only, as the father his son, and as an Apostle his disciple,
namely in a matter of it self indifferent and agreeable to the gospelles
doctrine, that thou professest: which commands, that we by experience
feeling the mercy of the Lord in forgeuyng our debte, should likewise
forgive other, yet I had rather to obtain this at thine hands by charity,
than by mine authority: and I would rather desire the, as one brother
desires another, than command the as a master his scholar. And thou shall
not disdain such a desyrour. For in what thing can thou say me nay that I
desire the? yea even I, first Paul (when I speak of Paul, I mean matters
unto the that are not small) than an old man. And much is wont to be
granted to a man for his age sake. But this gear is no novelties to thee. And
now also a prisoner. And in making of desires even the misery of the besecher
has no small weight. Last of al, I am the prisoner of Christ Jesus. And to
such a prisoner all ought to bear their favor that profess the doctrine of
Christ. To a man that desires by so many ways thou could not say nay,
although he should entreat the for any man. But now I entreat thee for my
son, whom I love so much the more renderly, that I begat him not unto
Moses, but unto Christ, not to the world but to the gospel: yea and I begat
him in my bonds now when I shall shortly go out of this world. For
parents are wont to love their children more inwardely, whom they begat in
their extreme old age. This is even Onesimus, that in times past when he had
robbed his master tun a way from him, litell agreably to his own name,
that is to wete, profitable and trusty, now is clean changed into an other
sort, and shall not only be trusly for thy profit herafter, but also he was
profitable to me with his service in prison. Therefore I send him to the home
again, for now he is become an other man. And if thou be the man, that I
trust thou art: and if old Paul the prisoners commendacion stands of any
effect with the, thou shall receive Onesimus, not now as a runneagate
servant, but as the things that I s^^ most stoore by, and my syngularly
well-beloved son. It is against my will that I send him home again. For I had
rather keep him still with me, if it were but for this cause, that he should
represent thee unto me in these bonds. For I doubt not, but inasmuche as thou
show so much charity toward all others for the ghospelles sake, thou
would in case thou were here, minis^^^ also to me in these bonds, where with
I am tied for the gospelles sake. But now he is found unsought for, by whom
thou may ministre unto me being absent thy self. Howbeit I would do
nothing without thine advise, ^^^ if in vsyng mine authority I should do it
upon mine own head, although thou would have taken my deed in good part,
yet thy well doing should have the less commendacion, if it seemed to be
joined with any necessity. Not I sent him home again, so as it may be in thy
choice either to keep hym^^^^ with the, or to send him to me again. If thou
send him again, thy doing shall have so much the more praise, in that it is
not enforced but freely do^^ and of thine own mind.

The text.
For happly he therefore departed for a season, that thou should receive him
for ever, not now as a servant: but above a seruasit, even a brother beloved,
specially to me: but how much more unto the, both in y^ flesh, and also in y^
lord? If y^ count me therefore a fellow, receive him as my self. If he have
done the any hurt, or owes the ought, y^ lay to my charge, (I Paul have
written it with mine own hand) I will teco^pence it. So y^ I do not say to the,
how y^ thou owe unto me even th^ne own self also. Eue^ so (brother) let me
enjoy the in y^ lord. Comfort my bowels in the lord. Trusting in thyn
obedience, I wrote unto the, knowing y^ thou wylt also do more the^ I say.
Moreover, prepare me lodging: for I trust y^ through the help of your praye^s,
I shall be given unto you. There salute the, Epaphras my fellow prisoner in Christ
Jesus, Marcus, Atistarcus, Demas, Lucas, my helpers. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with your spirit. Amen. Do not think upon his runnyng away. He
has recompensed the fault of his s^eing with his well doing, he has washed it
away by baptism, he has done it away with tears. And how wootest you whether it
come so to passeby ye dispensacion of Gods providence, y^ his fault might turn
to good both to us and to him? The judgments of god be secret. Perchance he
was for this purpose taken away from thee for a season, yt for a servant being
but for a season (for bond service endurethe no longer than for term of life)
thou might receive him for ever. It is for ever whatsoever the gospel
brings forth, and that you should receive him again now not as a bond
servant but as a most dear brother. Truly unto me that am an Apostle, he is
both a brother and most derely beloved brother, for the commune faithes sake,
which makes us elike in Christ: for the commune enheritaunce sake, whereunto we
are called indifferently elike: for the commune fathers sake, for the commune
redemers sake, in which all there is no difference between the lord and the
servant, between the master and the scholar. And if he for these causes be
unto me most dearly beloved, with whom I have nothing commune saving the kynred
of the spirit, how much more ought he to be most dearly beloved unto the, unto
whom besides the bo^des of the spirit, he is also joined after y^ flesh? Thou
would love a strau^gier, if thou see him become such a one as Onesimus
is. But now thou shalt love him for this respect that where he is of thine
own householde, he is proved such a one as he is. And if thou vouchesafe to
have me to be thy companion in the ghospels affairs, thou must take him again
as it were I my self. For I love him as my most dear son, as my highly
beloved brother, and as partaker of my bonds and of the gospel. Other thou
must cast of both or hertyly love both. What he has been before time, it
besemeth not to rehearse after he is baptized. Suppose him to be a new man
newly borne again unto the. But if the loss of any thing grieve the, whereof
thou would have ame^des, before thou forgive him take me suertye for him.
Require it of me, whatsoever he has either hurt thee or owes thee. I bind my
fidelity unto the by this my hand writynge. Lo thou haste this Epistle
written with my very own hand. If thou think me a trustye suertie, leate
Onesimus alone, go to law with me, I shall pay the again in his behalf,
whatsoever he owes the. Thus much I could obtain (I think) if I had to do
with any other man. I am not disposed to rehearse at this preset, what I might
justly require of the by mine own authority. For I will not make rehersall
here, that inasmuch as thou art become a christian man by my doctrine, thou
owe me not only that that thine is, but also thine own self. Much less
wrong thou ought, to reckon it, if I would require the to forgive me, what
soever loss it be that Onesimus owes thee, howbeit I desire not that, onles
thou will wyllyngly and of thine own mind forgive it, not so much to set my
promise at liberty, as that thou should declare thy charity. Well go to:
my brother Onesimus has his name of fruition, who, like as I love him derely,
and as I would with all mine heart have him praised unto the, so let it be my
chance to have y^ fruicion of thee, not after the manner as among the commune
people, a friend is glad of his friend, but so as an Apostle is joyous of his
disciple that expresses the doctrine of Christ. Thou see how heartily I love
Onesimus, and he has well deserved that I should love him. Therefore receive
him, and make my heart merry. Herein I trouble the with to much a do, not that
I put any distrust in thy charity, but I do it vpona certain abundaunce of
love that I bear unto my son. For in deed, I know thine obedience so
throughlye* well by thine old diligent doings, that I doubt not but thou
will do more in this behalf than I require of the. And in the mean while
receive Onesimus gently eue^ as my pledge, and also prepare me lodgyng against
I come which shall not be long after. For I trust that God through your
prayers will once restore me again unto you. And than I shall presently thank
the for thy gentill receyuyng of Onesimus. Epaphras thy countreyman saluteth
thee, which is my fellow in prison and in bonds, for Christ Jesus sake.
Moreover Marcus Aristarchus, Demas, and Lucas my fellows in office. And imagine
that they all beseech the for Onesimus as I do. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be always with your spirit:

Amen.
Thus ends the Paraphrase upon the Epistle to Philemon.
The argument of the Epistleto the Hebrews, gathered by Des. Erasmus of
Roterodame.
NO nation resisted the gospel of Christ with more obstinate minds, then the
Jews, which bare also a special malice against Paul, partly for that, that
he openly professed himself to be an Apostle of ye heathen, whom the Jews
aborred as vnreligious, and godles: and partly because he seemed to abolishe
Moses law, which they con^pted most holy, and desired the same to be published
thorough all the world in the stead of the gospel. Insomuche that there were
some even among them that had received Christ's doctrine, which thought that
the obseruacon of the law ought in any wise to be joined and coupled with the
gospel. Wherefore the faithful at Jerusalem, were sondrie ways vexed and
injured by such as resisted the gospel. For the adversaries being commen
officers, and having the public authority in their hands, the sincere
professors of the gospel were cast into prison, were scourged, and suffered
spoil and loss of their goods. Paul therefore comforts these good men by y^
example of the old saints, which for the most part were exercised with such
like, or greuouser calamities that their virtue thereby might be tried, and made
more excellent. But chefely he conforteth them with the example of Christ, and
hope of the heavenly reward. After this he declares that now that Christ's
gospel has showed forth her shyning light, the shadows of Moses law have
vanished away, and continue no longer. And in this place he repeteth many
things out of the old testament, and applies them, unto Christ. He teaches
further, that we ought not to hope for salvation by keeping of the law, which
was given but for a time, and was imperfect, but by faith, by which those old
notable holy men, whose remembrance the Jews had in great veneracion,
chiefly pleased God. In the end he teaches certain rules pertaining to
christian manners.

The end of the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the Epistle of the Apostle saint Paul to the
Hebrews.
The first Chapter.
The text.
God (in time past) diversely and many ways spoke unto the fathers by
Prophets: but in these last days he has spoken unto us by his own soune,
whom he has made he^^e of all things: by whom also he made the world.
Which son (being the bryghtenes of his glory, and the very image of his
substance, rulynge all things with the word of his power) has by his own
person pourged ou^e sins, and sytteth on the right hand of the majesty on
bye: being so much more excellent then the Angels, as he has by in heritaunce
obtained a more excellent name then they. WHere as in times past almyghtie God,
desirous, for the tender love he bare toward us, to provide for the health
and salvation of mankind spoke ofterymes diversely, and many ways by his
Prophets, unto whom he appeared and showed him self sometimes in a cloud,
somtymes in fire, otherwhiles in a soft whistling wind, now under one
likeness, and now under an other, somewhiles by Angels, somewhiles by secret
inspiracion of mind: at the length in these last days, because he would more
manyfestly declare his charity toward us, and put us in more assurance, he
dayned to speak unto us, not by Angel, nor yet by a man Prphete, but by his
only son Jesus Christ, whom he has by his eternal appoyntmente and
determinacion made heir and Lord, not alonely of the Iewyshe nation, but of
the whole world, as him that is his true and only son, who is the Lord of
all things that are made in heaven and in earth, according as the father
promised before in y^ psalme^s. Neither is it any merueyle if he would have the
seignory of the whole world commen between his son and him, sith that by him
he made the same. By word he made the world, and the son is the eternal
word of the everlasting father: neither made he the world by his son, as by
an instrument, or servant, but all things were so wrought in the creacion
thereof, that there was one, and the self same power of the father creating it,
and the some. For Jesus Christ is not so the son of God, as godly men are
oftetymes called the children of God, because they obey gods commandments,
but because he was begotten God of God the father, and so begotten, that he is
of the same nature with the father. And where as he was the everlasting
bryghtnesse of the fathers glory, as light procedyng from light, and the very
image and resemblaunce of his substance like in all points and equal unto
him of whom he was be gotten: and where he is not alonely the maker of all
creatures, but also governs and turns about all things that are made and
created with his beck and almighty commandment together with almighty God
the father: yet mark whitherto he abased him self for our cause.

He took upon him man's nature subject to all the injuries of our wretched state
and condition: and dying, offered up him self a sacryfice for our sins in the
altar of the cross: and whereas before the priest of Moses law was woonte to
pourge sins by the offryng of a beasts blood, he purged the offenses of all
mankind by shedyng of his own holy blood, and by this abasyng and humblyng of
himself gate so great glory, that after he was reliued, and returned into
heaven, he sat on the right side of the majesty of God the father, wherein he
was always egall unto him as touching his divine nature. But his majesty more
plainly appeared unto the world through his humility, in somuche that he, who
seemed before more low and abiecte then the loweste, is now greater, and so
taken, not only then the prophets, but also then the Angels selfs: and so
much the greater, as the name of a son has in it more dignity then the name
of a servant. For this word angel is a vocable or word signifying a
ministre, and is a name agreyng to an inferio^re. Undoubtedly high and great is
the dignity of angels, for that they always assyste the father, and behold
his visage. And among them there are some that excel the rest in dignytie.

The text.
For unto which of the Angels said he at any time? Thou art my son, this
day have I begotten the. And agayne^* I will be his father, and he shall be my
son. And again, when he brings in the first begotten son into the world,
he says: And ^era^ the Angels of God worship him. And unto the Angels he
says: He makes his angels spyrites, and his mynisters a flame of fire. But
unto the son he says: Thy seat (O God) shall be for ever and ever. The
scepter of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Thou have loved ryghtewesnes, and
hated iniquytie. Wherefore God even thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. But unto what Angel did God ever give so great
honor, that he vouchesafed to call him by the name of his son? whereas he
speaks unto Christ in the mystical psalm in this wise: thou art my son,
I have begotten thee to day. And again: I will be his father, he shall be my
son. For he made angels of naught, but his son he begat of his own proper
substance, like in every thing and egall unto himself. Again when in the
mistycall psalm he brings his son into the world, having upon him the
habit of man's body, he speaks in this manor: And let all the angels of God
worship him. True it is that servants are honored, but the son (who is
egall with the father) is adored and worshypped. But where holy scripture
expresses the dignity of angels, what says it* who makes (says the
scripture) his angels, spyrites, and his ministers a flame of fire. That angels
were created, that have they commen with other things which were likewise
created of almighty God. That they were made spirits and minds free from the
mortalytie and corrupcion of man's body, and that they always burning with
godly charity assiste their maker, as quick and nimble ministers of his godly
will, and commandment, therein undoubtedly they excel us. But how much
greater are the words that he speaks unto the son? Thy seat, o God,
shalde for ever and ever, the scep^re of thy kingdom is a right scepter. Ye
hear how the name of God is given unto the son: ye hear how the sear of a
kingdom, is given him: of a kingdom, I say, that never shall have end.

It follows in the same Psalm. Thou have loved ryghtuousnesse, and hated
iniquity, wherefore God, even thy God, has enoynted the with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. Ye hear that he was specially enoi^ted of God the
father above all his fellows, either men, or angels.

The text.
And thou Lord in the beginning haste laid the foundation of the earth, and
the heavens are the works of thy hands. They shall perish, but thou endurest.
But they all shall wexe old also as does a garment, and as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed. But thou art even the same and
thy ye^es shall not fail. Unto which of the angels said he at any time? sit
on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy fore stole. Are they not all
ministryng spyrites that are sent to minister for their sakes which shall be
heirs of salvation? And again mark how much autoryt^e is given the son
in an other Psalm: and thou Lord (says the Prophet) in the beginning haste
laid the foundacions of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy
hands. They shall peryshe, but thou endureste, and they all shall wax old as
does a garmente, and as a vesture shall thou wind them about, and they shall
suddenly be changed, but thou art even the same, and thy years shall not
fail. To what angel were these words ever spoken, or else this that is read
in an other Psalm? Sytte on my right hand till I make thine enmies thy
footestole. Therefore neither authority to create, neither the majesty of a
kindome, is given unto angels, but they all (how great so ever they be) are
spirits appointed to serve, the which are often times sent into the world,
to assiste such as shall be thenheritours of everlasting salvation. Such
undoubtedly are the disciples and folowers of Christ.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
Wherefore we ought to give the more erneste he^e to the things that are spoken
unto us, lest at any time we peryshe. For if the word which was spoken by
angels was steadfast: And every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward: how shall we escape, if we despise so great salvation,
which at the first began to be preached of the Lord him self, and was
confirmed unto us ward, by them that heard i^? God beating witness thereto,
both with signs and wondres also, and with diverse miracles, and gifts of the
holy ghost, according to his own will. For unto the angels has he not
subdued the world to come, whereof we speak: but one in a certain place
witnesses, saing: What is man that thou art mind full of him? Or the son of
man that thou visitest him? Thou made him a litell lower then the angels:
thou haste crowned him with houour and glory, and haste set him above the
works of thy hands. Thou haste put all things in subieccion under his
feet. In that he put all things under him, he left nothing that is not put
under him. Nevertheless, we se not yet al things subdued unto him, but him that
was made less then the angels, we se that it was Jesus, which is crowned with
glory and honor for the suffering of death, that he by the grace of God,
should taste of death for all men. MOreuer that I have so largely declared the
dignytie of our savior, is for this intent, that the greater he is whom the
father has sent into the world for our salvation, the more dilygent head we
may give to such things as he has spoken unto us lest at any time we
forgette those things which the father has taught and showed us by him.
Highest is he that sent him, and a greates ambassadoure could he not send.

His pleasure was that this should be the last ambassade or legacion: neither
is there any hope of salvation if we despise this and set it at naught, as
our elders and forefathers despised Moses and the prophets. The greater that
the ambassador is: the greater that the cle^encye and gentleness of God is
toward us: the greuouser shall the fault of our dysobedience, or else
negligence be, except we do after his words and teaching. For if all that God
has hither to commanded unto our elders by his Prophets or angels (who
showed unto Moses gods commandments be of weight and autorytie: And if
those were worthily punyshed that dysobeyed such things as were by them
commanded (because he seems to despise God, who so despyseth his messengers)
how shall we then escape punishmente if we despise and set at naught, not
Moses commandments, but so ready salvation, so notable, so euydeut, and
such as is freely brought us, not by Moses, nor yet by angels or Prophets
(against whom there may be some suspicion of vanity or lying by one means or
other ymagyned) but by the son of God him self, who spakenot unto us a far
of out of a cloud, either in a dream, or by any other way wherein there might
be any suspicion of deceyte or legerdemayne, but was openly heard, seen,
handeled, and conuersaunte alonge time among men, declaryng by very many and
most euydente arguments and proofs, that he was the very son of God, and
offering perfect salvation unto all the whole world through faith of the
gospel. And where as the belefe of this so great a thing began first to be
taught and preached unto the world by our Lord Jesus Christ him self, who was
not alonely the preacher of everlasting salvation, but also y^ autoure thereof:
afterward the same was confirmed of them that were witnesses of all things
that he said and did whiles he was conuersaunte with them: and lest their
preaching should have been of small autorytie and little regarded, God him self
confirmed their words with diverse signs of miracles and wonders, and other
merueylous gifts, the which that heavenly spirit diversely dystributed unto
his, as he thought expediente for man's salvation: by all which things it
appeared very manyfestly, that all this that was done was nothing partayning to
man's power, but to the virtue and power of God, and that he who first him
self, and afterward by his disciples showed these things, was not a man
only, but God covered with the habit of man's body: And also that he was not
an aungel the mistical Psalm plainly declares, witnessyng of Christ on this
wise: what is manne that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man that
thou careste for him? Thou haste humbled him a little while lower then angels.
And straight ways it follows: Thou haste crouned him with glory and honor,
and set him above the works of thy hands. Thou haste put all things in
subieccion under his feet. etc. Or ever y^ God created the e^rth, it was then
decreed by his godly determynacion, that whatsoever should be ^^erin, the same
should be under the obeysaunce and subieccion of Jesus Christ. It is not read
that God gave the seignory or Lordshippe of all the world (in the which
angels are also contained) to any of the angels. For he that said: All
things are to be put under him, excepted nothing that is not to be put in
subieccion.

And the prophecy of this Psalm is partly fulfilled, and partly to be
accomplished in the world to come For as yet we see not all things under his
subieccion. As yet the wicked do rebel, and there is a great con^^ycte
between the church and the world. But this we see now fulfilled, that. Jesus
who when he was here afflycted with diverse formentes, and in conclusion
suffered the punishment of the cross, and for man's cause ^asted that which by
man's judgment is most bitter and dyspleasau^t, but tasted it in such wise
y^ he was not overcome therwyth, seemed here: by to be made lower then angels,
who are neither subject to death, nor any grief or pain: we see (I say)
that Jesus is now crowned with so great glory and honor, that y^ world
perceives how he being a fau^elesse parsonne, and free from all sin, suffered
punishment of death according to the will of God, wylling by this means to
pronyde for man's safety. For his death was not a punishment for any offense
by him committed, but was the mere favor of God toward mankind, whom he
would of his free beneficence and great lyberalytie, have to be redeemed by y^
death of his most innocent son Jesus Christ. And as he could not promote us
to the fellowship of immortalytie o^lesse he were God: so was it not mere that
he, who created all things, and by whose moderation all things were governed,
should suffer y^ wholly to perish, which he created and made. Where were the
sons kyndome if he were alone with the father?

The text.
For it became him, for whom are at things, and by whom are all things
(after that he had brought many sons unto glory) that he should make the Lord
of their salvation perfect through affliccions. For both he that sanctifyeth,
and they which are sanctified, are all of one. For which causes sake, he is
not ashamed to call them brethren, sayng: I will declare thy name unto my
brethren, in the mids of the congregation will I praise the. And again. I
will put my ^^ust in him. And again, behold, here am I, and the children
whom God has given me. Therefore it was thought mete and convenient unto
almighty God the father, that the son being the autoure and chief causer of
all men's salvation, should, after he were tr^ed and proved by many
affliccions, not only purchase himself thenheritaunce of everlasting glory,
but also bring with him many other children, reconciled unto the father by his
death. And therefore he took upon him manne^s body, because that being manne, he
might puryfie and pourge manne of his offenses. For the priest Christ which
puryfieth, and men that are cleansed and puryfied, as touching y^ nature of
man, do issue of the same first parent, like as they have one comen father in
heaven. Wherefore the son of God is not ashamed in the Psalms to call godly
folk his brethren, when he speaks thus as follows: I will declare thy name
unto my brethren, and in the mids of y^ congregation will I praise thee. Does
not he here openly call his disciples brethren* and again in a certain other
place: I will put my trust in him. Now it is the part of a proved child, to
trust his father with all his heart. Certes sytly the father promissed that he
would put all things under his sons fecte, there is no doubt but he will
save those also, with whom the son reygneth. Again in an other place in the
Prophet Esaye, the Lord calls his disciples his children when he says: I
and my children whom god has given me. You hear the vocables or names of
kynred.

The text.
For as much then as the children are partakers of ^^she and blood, be also
himself likewise took part with them that (through death) he might expel him
that had lordshyppe over death, that is to say the devil, and that he might
deliver them, which through fear of death, were all their life time subdu^d
unto bondage For he in no place takes on him the angels: but the seed of
^braham takes he on him. Wherefore, in all things it became him to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be merciful and a faithful hye
priest in things concerning God, for to pourge the peoples sins. For in
that it fortuned himself to be tempted, he is hable to sucker them also that
are tempted. Because therefore these brethren and children whom he speaks
of, be men which consiste and have their being of flesh and blood, he that
of his own nature was heavenly, would take man's flesh and body upon him,
and therein be made like unto those whom he would call unto the fellowship of
the eternal kynred, that he might expel him who had the rule and
lordeshyppe over death, that is to say the devil, and set those at
liberty, who were always subject unto the servitude and bondage of Satan,
which through death reigned over all mankind. For whosoever is in bondage and
subieccio^ of sin, the same is subject unto death. Now Christ never gave any
angel this honor, that he would take his nature upon him, and become his
brother, or his kinseman. But according unto gods promise, he took on him the
sede of Abraham. He was borne a Jew of Jews, a man of man, subject unto
all the incommodities and euilles of our nature, to thirst, hunger, heat,
cold, werines, pain, and death, because this likeness should testify the true
kynred of nature, and put us in a sure belief, that he would not forsake
those for whom he had suffered so great euilles, and displeasures, and whom he
had joined unto him with so streighte a bond of alyaunce or consang^^^itie.
Wherefore it was convenient that he should in all points be made like unto
those, whom he would have to be his brethren, that he might thereby put them in
more assurance to obtain pardon, in as much as he, who took upon him tho^yce
of an hye priest or bishop to make intercession unto god to purge all the
peoples sins, and to reconcile mankind unto the father, should seem by this
reason, how he would ^ee merciful and faithful to his, not only for that
he was of the self same nature, but also because it chaunsed him to be tried
and proved with innumerable affliccions of this world, to the intent he
should appear the readyer to succoure those, which should be bexed with the
evils and adversities of the same.

The.iii. Chapter.
Therefore holy brethren, partakers of the celestial calling* consider the
ambassador and ^ye priest of our profession Christ Jesus, how that he is
faithful unto him that put him in the office, even was Moses in all his house.
For look how much honor he (that has builded a house) has more then the
house it self: So much honor is he counted worthy of more then Moses. For
every house is builded of some man. But he that orde^ned all things is God.
And Moses verelye was faithful in all his house, as a minister, to bear
witness of those things, which were to be spoken afterward. But Christ (as
a son) has rule over the house, whose house are we, if we hold fast the
confidence and the reioysyng of that hope, unto the end. Wherefore brethren,
now that ye be purified by the blood of the son, and by the free goodness of
God called to come to be partakers of the life celestial, to thentente you
may be the more answerable unto his benefits, consider howexcellent in
dignity is Jesus Christ, the ambassador and bishop of your profession, that
is to say, of evangelical faith, and how purely and virtuously the same
behaved himself to godwarde, of whom he was ordained in the whole
congregation, likewise as Moses was commended for that he acquitted himself as
a faithful minister, in all his sinagogue, which is the house and family of
god. But Christ deserved so much the more honor and dignity, as the maker of
the house ought more to be honored then the house it self. For every house
is builded of some man. But he that has ordained and made all things is god.
Therefore Moses was so conuersaunt in the house of god, that he was a part or
member, and not the author and original causer thereof. And verily this virtuous
and godly man Moses, is worthy to be of great authority among us, because he
behaved himself faithfully in the same house, but yet as a minister or
steward and not as a son: he was in an other man's house, and the other,
that is to say Christ, in his own. And Moses brought only figures and
shadows of those things which Christ should afterward dysclose and open.
But Christ as the maker and son guided his own house, whereof we all are
members which through faith of the gospel, be assembled together unto his
church or congregation: so that we persevere in that we began, that is to
wit, if we do still abide in the concord and agreaunce of the house, and
hold fast and stedfastely unto the end the faith which the spirit of
Christ has given us, and also that glorious hope, by the which as the true
natural sons of god, and brethren of Christ, we look for the enheritaunce of
heaven. For it shall nothing avail us to have heard the doctrine of the
gospel, except we continually live thereafter: Yea, the greatter he is who
dayned to speak unto us, the grieuouser shall our punishment be.

The text.
Wherefore (as the holy ghost says) to day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as in the prouokyng, in the day of temptacion in the
wilderness, where your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my works
fourtye year. Wherefore I was grieved with that generation, and said: They do
always err in their hearts, they verily have not known my ways, so that I
swear in my wrath: they shall not enter into my rest. Take head brethren,
lest at any time there be in any of you a froward herye subject unto
unbelief, that he should depart from the living god: but exhort ye one
another daily, while it is called to day: lest any of you wexe hard hearted
through the deceitfulnes of sin. Wherefore ye must call unto your
remembrance, what the holy ghost speaks in the mistical psalm exhorting the
people to obey the voice or words of god, lest he being provoked do
grieuouslye punyshe them, and se^lude them from the rest and quietness promised.
Today (says he) if ye will heat^ his voice, harden not your hearts, as ye did
when with your murmo^^ing and rebellion ye provoked God, what time he proved
your patience in wilderness: where (says he) your fathers tempted me, as men
that would prove whether I were he that were hable to punish trespacers of
the law and offenders, and they felt my wrath, and such as would not believe
my words, saw my works, and that the space of forty years. For so long
were they led about in wilderness what time they flying out of Egipte, went
unto the land where I promised them quyetenes. Wherefore I was not contented
with that nation and said with my self: They do always err in their hearts
following their own lusts, neither have they known my ways. And for this
their dysobedience I swear in my wrath it should never be, that they should
enter into the land, wherein I promised them rest from the trauayls of their
iourneys. Ye have heard, brethren, God threatenyng our fathers that they should
not come to the land promised them, unless they would continually obey his
commandments. And we that through baptism are delivered from our former
sins and offenses, are undoubtedly departed out of Egypt, but yet we shall
never come unto the immortality promissed us in heaven, except we still
continue in the obseruaunce of faith and christian charity. If we look back
unto Egypt forsaken, that is, if we fall again to the lusts of our old
life, we shall be excluded from the fellowship and participacion of the heavenly
life. Se therefore that there be not in any of you a froward heart, and
rebelling against the commandments of the gospel, or subject unto
vnbelyefe, in such wise that the same returnyng again unto the vices once
forsaken, and the prince of death the devil, depart away from thy living
god. But rather with daily exhortacions make ye one an other strong to suffer
continually the pains and trauayles of this life, whereby God tries our pure
and true faith so long as the time is called to day, that is to say, so
long as we bear this mortal body, and as yet do trauayll, as pilgrymes and
strangers in the wilderness of this world, always in ieopardye lest any of
us weryed with the euilles of this life, be led aside through the
alluremente of sin from the iourneye begone, like as in times paste the
Hebrews our forefathers being weary of their long travailing longed after the
^auoure of the pottes which they left behind them in Egypt.

The text.
We are made partakers of Christ, if we keep sure (unto the cude) the beginuing
of the substance, so long as it is far de: to day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts as in the provoking, for some when they herd did
provoke: howbeit not all that came out of Egypt by Moses. But with whom was he
displeased forty years? Was he not dyspleased with them that had sinned,
whose carkases were overthrown in the deserte? To whom swa^e he that they
should not enter into his rest, but unto them that were not obedient? And we
see that they could not enter in, because of vnbelie^e. Certeynly we are
graffed in Christ by baptism and the profession of faith, but in such wise,
that we may through our own defaut fall from him again: neither shall we
otherwise come unto the enheritaunce of mortality promised us, except we keep
sure, and constauntely unto the end the beginning and foundation of that
felicity, which was laid in us by the gospel, still going forewarde in that
was begoonne, monyshed thereto by this saying which is continually spoken unto
us: To day if ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts, as in the
prouokyng. For some when they heard the Lords voice, did then by dysobeying
the same move him, prouokyng his wrath; and indignacion against them. Howbeit
al did not so which came out of Egypt under y^ conducte of Moses. And unto
these that were not disobediente it was given to come unto the land flowing
with milk and honey: With whom was he dyspleased forty years? Was it not
with them that had offended? howbeit these entered not into rest, but their
carkases were overthrown in wilderness: with whom else was he so much
dyspleased that he swear they should never enter into the rest promised them,
but with those which obeyed not the voice of god? we see then that god was on
both sides true, who both performed to the obedyent what he promissed the^,
and to the disobedient that he manaced them with all. The obediente came
thereunto by their patience: the other could not enter in because of their
vnbelyfe and incredulity.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
Let us fear therefore, lest any of you (for^a^yng the promise of eu^eyng into
his ^est) should seem at any time to have been disapointed. For unto us is it
declared, as well as unto them. But it profited not them, that they heard the
word, because they which heard it, coupled it not with faith. For we which
have believed, do enter into his rest, as he said: Even as I have sworn in my
wrath, they shall not enter into my ^este. And that spoke he verily long after
y^ the works were made, and the foundation of thy world laid. For he spoke in
a certain place of the seventh day on this wise: and god did rest the seventh
date from al his works. And in this place again: They shall not enter into my
rest. THat Moses was unto our forefathers and elders, the same is Christ now
unto us. And it was a worldely rest whereunto they hastened. We go unto the
rest celestial. Let us therefore fear to despise the voice of God who
daily speaks unto us by the gospel, lest like as many of them were
through their own defaulte disapointed of the hope and expectacion of the rest
promised, so may it chance that some of us also seem to have been
disappointed, and not to have attained the end of his journey. For unto us is
showed a much more blisful rest, and that by a more certain and faithful
ambassador, then unto them. But it auayled them nothing that they received the
promise of rest, and hitherto heard the voice of the lord, because they believed
not the same after they had heard it. For we which have given credence unto the
lords voice, do enter into the true rest that shall be free from the unquiet
business and troubles of worldly evils, as on the contrary part, he denies
that they shall enter in, who have not believed, saying: As I have sworn in my
wrath, they shall not enter into my rest, whereas nevertheless the first rest of
god had already been many years before, even then, when at the creacion of the
world, his works were perfitely finished: and in a memorial hereof, the
Jews do celebrate their resting day. For scripture speaking of the first
rest which chanced on the seventh day after the creacion of the world,
says: And the lord rested on the seventh day from al his works. And again
in this place that I alleged out of the psalm, he made mention of the second
rest which refreshed the Hebrews with the harborow of the land of Palestine,
after they were weried with long trauail and iourneying, saying: they shall not
enter into my rest.

The text.
Seeing therefore it folo^weth, that shine must enter therinto, and they (to
whom it was first preached) entered not therein for vnbeliefes sake, he
appoints a certain day after so long a time, saying in David: (as it is
rehearsed) this day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. For if
Iosue had given them rest, then would be not afterward have spoken of an
other day. There remains therefore yet a rest* to the people of God. For he
that is entered into his ^est, has ceased also from his own works, as God
did from his. Since therefore it follows of these authorities, that God first
entered in to his rest after he had made the world, and few entered into the
second rest for their vnbelefes sake: and considering also that the promise
shall yet be as void except some enter therein, forasmuch as our forefathers
are excluded therefro, unto whom rest was promised by figures and shadows of
the law, the which rest the same yet, unto whom it was promised, never intred
into: there is again in the mistical psalm an other day appointed by the
mouth of David, after so many years that the land of Palestine was possessed,
the which day the said prophet calls not the seventh day, butthis day, as
it has been now oftentimes rehearsed before. This day if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. For if that Jesus the son of Naue, (who being
captain certain of them entered into Palestine) had given true rest unto
the Israelites, God would not afterward have made mention of an other day by
the mouth of David, else might they have said: what new rest speak thou
of unto us, fence we already enjoy the rest promised reyguyng in the land of
Iewrye? Therefore there remains a certain other restyng day unto the people
of God: there remains an other rest, not in Palestine, but in the country
celestial, whitherto we hasten Jesus Christ being our captain: but yet it
shall never chance us to attain the same, except we have kept here purely
without violacion, the resting day of the gospel, abstayning from all the
works of this world. For whosoever has entered into this true rest of God,
has now likewise rested from his works, as God rested from his, after he
had created and made the world. For he is brought into that life, where there
is no unquietness, neither of labors, nor of griefs or pains.

The text.
Let us study therefore to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the
same ensample of unbelief. For the word of God is quyeke and mighty in
operacion, and sharper then any two edged sword: and enters through, even
unto the dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints,
and the marie. And is a discerner o^ the thoughts and of the intentes of the
heart: neither is there any creature that is not manifest in the fight of him.
But all things are naked and open unto the iyes of him, of whom we speak.
Therefore whiles we as yet trauail as strangers in the wilderness of this life,
let us not stand still, let us not look back, but with continual endeuoyre,
and fervent desire, hasten to that true rest, whereunto our Captain Jesus
calls us, and let it not be long of us that any of us fall by the way as our
forefathers did. For we shall have no less punyshemente then they had, if we
do likewise offend. Neither is that punishment little to be regarded or
passed on, that Christ Jesus the word of god, threarneth with. For he is
quick and strong in operacion, and sharper then any two edged sword, not
only cuttyng the members of the body, but also the most inward affeccions
of the mind: insomuch that he cutteth a soondre the soul from the spirit,
and disseuereth the joints, and the marye, being a discerner of the secret
thoughts and ententes of our heart: and so true is it that no part of man's
thought is unknown unto him, that there is no creature at all neither in
heaven, nor under the earth, which is not manifest unto his sight, but al
things are naked and open to the iyes of him, unto who^ we must give an
accomptes of our life. As in times paste the mourmuryng of the Hebrews was not
unknown unto god, and as there neded no sword to destroy them, but his
only commandment: so shall not that man be unknown unto Christ, who after
he has once professed a christian life, privily loves worldly things, and
does not with pure mind and affeccion hasten unto the rest promised.

The text.
Seeing then, that we have a great hye priest which is entered into heaven (even
Jesus the son of god) let us hold the profession of our hope. For we have
not an hie priest which cannot have compassion on our infirmities, but was in
all points* tempted, like as we are: but yet without sin. Let us therefore
go boldly unto the seat of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need. Seeing then we have an hye priest who is verily
great, Jesus Christ the son of god, which after the sacrifice made for our
reconciliacion entered not into the most secret part of the temple made with
hands, but into heaven, to make the father merciful unto us: Let us abide
still in our profession following the way that he has showed us, and hastening
to those things which he has promised. Let not his greatenesse fear us, but
his mercy rather encourage us. Truth it is that he dwells in heaven, but he
was before a man conuersaunt in earth. Let us not therefore ymagyne that we
have an hye priest which cannot take compassion on our infirmity. He was
tempted withal kind of evils the which our life is combred with all, howbeit
he returned again into heaven a conqueror, to thentent y^ we trustyng on his
aid, should not be weried or overcome with affliccions, but courageously go
through unto the rest of everlasting felicity the which he came unto. For he
was for no other cause afflicted, beaten, spytte upon, and crucified as an
harmfull person, where he was innocent and gyltlesse, but only to pourge us
(who are in very deed hurtful caytifes, and inners) from al our sins and
iniquities. He has not tha^^ged his affeccion toward us, so that we turn
him not away from us by our own vicyous behauioure and frowardness.
Therefore trustyng on his mercy, let us go unto his seat, not his terrible,
but appesable seat, which is ready to help, and not to destroy us: let us
come boldly putting no doubts to obtain mercy at his hands, whereby dure
sins may be pardoned, and grace also given, that may furnyshe us with
heavenly gifts, and help us so often as need shall require. For we must
desire no aids but of him only, of whom we trust to have ou^ rewards.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
For every hye pres^e that is taken from among men is ordained for men, in
things pertaining to God, to offer gifts and sacrifrces for sin: which can
have compassion on the igno^a^^te, and on them that er^e out of the way,
^o^asmuch as he him self also is compassed with infyrmitie. And for the same
infyrmities sake, he is bound to offer for sins, as well for him self, as
for the people. And no man takes honor unto him self: but he that is called
of God, as was Aaron. FVrthermore it is an usage among the Jews that every
hye priest chosen from among men, be ordained for this purpose, y^ in such
businesses as chance between God and man, he as a mediatoure between both,
may make intercession for men, in such wise that if God be any thing
dyspleased with men's offenses, he may appease his wrath by gifts and
sacrifices duly offered: the which hie priest for the dignities sake of hye
priesthood, can in such wise do much with God, that he is not yet free
from man's infirmity, to the^tent he may be the readyer to take compassion
on them, who have sinned through error and ignorance, in as much as he him
self is subject unto the same infirmity, in that he is of the self same
nature that they he of. For such are sooner sorry for other men's evils and
dyspleasures, as have them selves learned mercy and compassion by the tastyng
of like evils and adversities: and he is gladder to reamedy other men's
errors and offenses, which falls oftentimes him self, or at the leastwyse
is in ieopardie to fall: And for this cause Moses priest ought as well to offer
sacrifice for his own sins, as he offreth for the peoples offenses.

Now Christ had so a tommune nature with us subject unto pains and death,
that he was notwithstanding with out all manor of sin. He had experience of
pain who never knew any sin. Furthermore, according to the ordinances of
Moses law, no man takes upon him and usurps the honorable ministracion of
hye priest hod of his own accord, but he only takes it in hand that is
called thereunto by gods commandment, likewise as Aaron was called. For he
seems un worth^ of honor, whosoever by reason of ignorance ambiciously desires
digintie: and that man is not meet for a rowme or ministracion, which
intrudeth him self into the same

The text:
Even so Christ also glorified not him self, to be made the hye priest: but
he that safed unto him, thou art my son, this day have I be^otten the,
gloryfyed him. As he says also in another place: thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchisedech. Wh^che in the days of his flesh, when he had
offered up prayers and suppsicacions* with strong criyng and tears (unto him
that was able to save ^i^ from death) and was heard because of his reverence,
though he were ehe son of God, yet learned he obedience* by those things,
which he suffered an^ he being perfect, was the cause of eternal salvation
unto al them that obeyed him: and is called of God an hye priest, after the
order of Melchisedech. And herein also Christ gave us an ensample of a lawful
bishop. For he took not upon him of his own accord, the glorious dignity of
an hie priest, but was allowed of his father, who first acknowledged Jesus to
be his true son, when he said: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten
the. And also he orde^neth hunanon after a true and lawful hie priest when he
says: Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Ye have
heard how he was ordey^ed. Now harken how he was tempted, and proved. When
as yet he had a mortal body in earth, he offered prayers and supplicacions unto
god the father, who could have preserved him from the punishment of the cross,
except he had been more desirous to provide for man's safety by the death of
his son. He offered them with seruent affeccion, great crying, and plentiful
tears, and was heard by reason of his charytie and soueraygne dignity with
the father. He obtained his desire. For his will and desire was not to escape
the punishment of the cross, but to procure us soul health by his death. He
felt great fear, he felt the torment and anguyshe of death, but the love
that he bare toward mankind prevailed. He was the son, and could have
obtained any thing of the father if he had desired it: but thus was it thought
to be more conuenyent for our health, that he being afflicted with all manor
of evils and adversities, should give unto his a rule of perfect obedience even
to the punyshement of the cross. Do ye ask what auayled this patience of our
priest? He was so proved and tried every way, that nothing should be lackyng
in him: he saved not only himself, but was the cause of salvation to all that
follow this ensample of obedyence. For he obtained of the father that all those
which would de his fellows in suffryng affliccions, should also be partakers
with him of his kingdom.

And for this sacrifyce duly made, he was called of the father an hye priest
after the order of Melchisedech.

The text.
Wherefore we would speak many things, but they are hard to be uttered:
seeing ye are dull of hearing. For when as concerning the time, ye ought to be
reachers, yet have ye neade again that we teach you the first princyples of
the word of God: and are become such as have neade of milk: and not of
strong meat for every man that is fed with milk, is ^^expert in the word of
ryghtewesnes, for he is but* a babe. But strong meat belongs to them that
are parfecte even those, which (by reason of use) have their wits exercysed
to discerue both good and evil. Now who was this Melchisedech, and how
conveniently he figured the son of God, I would largely entreat, but it
shall be very hard for me to declare all things unto you, because your ears
are not receyuable of this matter, but to weak to away with a sermon of such
length and difficulty. And herein I am constrained to require in you more
diligence and fervent desire to go forward, who, notwithstanding you have so
many years professed Christ, that for the quantity and space of time ye
should be teachers of other men, yet have you need to be taught of me again
the first principles, and as a man would say, the. A. B. C. of holy scripture,
the which is wont to be taught unto those, as unto children, who through
baptism are borne again unto the gospel: and you, whom it behooved now to
be strong and stablished in evangelical Philosophy, have need as yet like
tender babes to be fed with the milk of lowest doctrine: rather then be meet
to receive the strong meat of higher learning. As yet you continewe still, and
as one would say, crepe in the historye of holy scripture, and rise not up to
the more hid and mystical understanding thereof. Now he that is such a one
that he has need as yet to be nourished with milk, is ignorant, and not
strong enough to hear the righteousness of the gospel, which is not found
in thistorye, but in allegories. And therefore he is not receyuable of that
preaching, whereby we are taught perfitte righteousness, because he is as yet a
babe in Christ, lately graffed in his body, in such wise that he may by little
and little aspire to greater things. Furthermore the strong meat of more
profounde and mystical understanding, pertayneth to those which are grown,
and become perfitte, even to those, who by long and continual practice have
their wits exercised to discern both good and evil. He that is a child and
nouryshed with milk, lives verily, but yet he has not gotten himself that
strength by eustome and age, whereby he is able to choose out for himself of
every thing the best, and looks not to have an other to put milk, or chyldes
meat chawed before into his mouth.

The.vi. Chapter.
The text
Therefore lea^uing the doctrine that pertayneth to the beginning of christen
men, let us go fourth unto perfeccion, not laying again the foundation of
repentance from dead works and of faith toward God, of baptisyng, of
doctrine, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection from death; and of
eternal judgment. And so will we do, if God permytte. For it cannot be that
they which were once lyghted, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were
become partakers of the holy ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God,
and of the power of the world to come, if they fall away (and as concerning
them selves crucifye the son of God a fresh, and make a monk of him) that
they ^^ou^d be renewed again by repentance Wherefore let us, who ought now to
have ceased to be any longer children in christian Philosophy, omytting the
process wherewith the ignorant are wont to be taught their first prynciples,
go forth unto perfeccion, and not ever to stand still about the often laying
of the foundation of repentance. For the first degree unto christendom is, to
be repentau^te for our former life, and to forsake sin. Next of all it is
required, that we be taught that true innocence a soul health is to be hoped
for of God: then forthwyth that we be pourged by holy baptism from the
filthynesse of our sins, and restored again unto the state of innocence:
then that we receive the holy ghost by laying on of hands, and believe the
resurreccion of the dead to come, and also that last judgment, which shall
awarde some to eternal felicity, and other some to everlasting pains, and
damnacion. It is endughe for us to have once learned, once professed, and once
believed these things. It should be a thing dysagreable to all reason, if that
after we have been taught these forsaide principles, we so behave our selfs
hereafter, that it be needful to have the same often times repeted and taught
us again, the which are taught for this purpose, that they should be the
foundation of the edifice which is to be builded there on. But after we have
learned such principles, it shall be our parts to do our dilygente endeuoyre
that we may by daily increase of virtue and godliness, become great and
perfect, and that the noble building of gold, silver, and precious stones, of
virtues and godly works may rise, and be rered up from the foundation once
laid even to the highest top. It is our duty to employe our diligence to
this end, that we may fynishe the thing we go about, if God be favorable
unto our attemptes, without whose aid man's endeueyre is able to bring,
nothing to^ effect. After that we have once begun this course or trade of
life, we ought not to turn our backs, not to make resistance, not to return
unto the things once forsaken, but still to go foy ward to greater things
and of higher perfeccion. It were the greatest folly that might be, for a man
to have recourse unto that thing, which neither ought, ne can be repeted and
ministered again.

For it is not possible for them which have once forsaken the darckenesse of
their former life, lyghtned by the doctrine of the gospel, and now having
their sins forgeuen through baptysme have felt the free beneficence and
great liberality of God, and the gift of heaven, whereby he releaseth at once
all our sins, and gives us grace to live well: and afterward by laying on
of the priests hand have been made partakers of the holy ghost, by whom they
have begone to believe the blessed promises of everlasting life, and now (as it
were) to take a say and foretaste of the power of y^ world to come: it is not
possible, I say, for them, if they fall again through negligence into there
former abominable life, to be renewed by repentance, the which thing has once
been done already in baptism, where as the old manne is once cast away with
his deeds, and a new creature comes out of the bathe or water. For such as
require to be renewed again through repentance, after they have often times
fallen again unto their former sinful living, what go they else about, but,
as concerning them selfs, to crucyfie the son of God a fresh, and make, as
it were, a iestyng stock or mock of him? He has once died for us, and we
have once dyed with him in baptism. He has once risen again, and will never
dye any more. In semblable wise must we so rise again with him in a new
life, that we fall not eftsoon into the dead life once forsaken, and by that
means provoke God so much the more unto wrath and indignacio^, as he has the
more bo^ntuously showed his lyberalitie upon us. Our industry and diligence
ought to be answerable unto his liberalytie, and bo^^teous goodness toward us.
He has put in us certain seeds of virtue and goodness, and therefore we also
must do our diligence, that the same may grow and come to good.

The text.
For the earth which drinks in the rain that comes often upon it, and
bry^geth forth herbs meet for them that dress it, receaueth blessyng of God.
But that ground which deareth thorns and briers, is reproved, and is nigh unto
cursing: whose end is to be burned. Nevertheless (dear friends) we trust to se
better of you, and things which accompany salvation, though we thus speak.
For God is not unrighteous that he should forget your work and labor that
proceeds of love: which love ye show in his name, which have ministered unto
the saynetes, and yet mynyster. Yea, and we de^re that every one of you show
the same dylygence to the full stablishyng of hope, even unto the end: that ye
faynte not, but be folowers of them which through faith and patience receive
the enheritaunce of the promise. For the earth which has dronken in the rain
that falls often upon it, and has brought forth herbs profitable to them that
till it, is praised of God for that it is not barayne, nor keeps down and
strangleth the sede, which is therein sowed, without any fruit or profit. But
that ground which after good seed received has brought forth thorns and
thystles, is yuell, and ^ye unto gods cursyng, whose end is not to be mowed
down, but to be ^u^ned. And these things speak I (dearly beloved) only to
exhort you, and not because the words I have spoken of a baren earth may
well be applied to you. Nay rather I have conceived a better opinion of you
then so, whereby I am ascertayned, that by gods help you shall attain
salvation, rather then be damned, albeit this similitude used I because to
styre up in you the desire of godly and chrystian living, lost you waxing
fainte again, come by little and little to utter confusion. God will help you
if you do your endeuoyre to attain better things. For he is not unkind, nor
unrighteous in such wise that he will forget your good deeds, and the labor
ye have sustained, not for renownte, or vauntage sake, but for the love of his
name, the which love ye have showed by dedeselfe, who both hertofore have
ministered of your goods and benefits unto the saints (by whom Christ's name
is preached) and yet do ministre at this present. Furthermore I have spok^
these words because I am desirous that ye all (among whom there are many the
which are fainter then I would they should be) persevere in your doings, and
not only that, but also daily profit more and more till ye come to
perfeccion, that where as I have now a good hope of you, I may have a sure
confidence and belefe, perceiving you still to go forward, and to be nothing
nigh the danger that such are in, as through a slowthful faintness fall again
by little and little to their oldelyfe, but rather to follow the steps of
those, who believing Christ's promyses, and having sure hope of heavenly
rewards attain the enheritaunce of the life immortal, which God has
promised unto his in y^ kingdom of heaven. Such as dystrusting gods
promyses looked back unto Egypt forsaken, never came unto the land of behest,
but Abraham, who against all natural reason constantly believed gods
promises, obtained that he tarried for.

The text.
For when God made promise to Abraham, because he had noue greater to swear
by, he swear by himself, saying: Surely, I will bless the, and multiply thee
in deed. And so afterthat he had tarried patiently, he enjoyed the promise. For
men verily swear by him that is greater then them selves, and an oath to
confyrme the thing, is to them an end of all strife. So God wylling very
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the stablenesse of his
council added an other that by two immutable things (in which it was
impossible that God should lie) we might have a strong consslacion, which
h^ther to have fled, for to hold fast the hope that is set before us, which
hope we hold as an auere of the soul both sure and steadfast, which hope also
cutreth in into those things which are with in the veil, where the forerunner
is for us entered, even Jesus that is made an hye priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedech. For God, to thentent his promise should be the better
believed, swear an oath the which among men is wont to be compted the surest
gage that can be. He swear by himself, because he had none greater then
himself to swear by: He swear in this wise: I swear by my self, because thou
dyddest this thing, and sparedst not thy only begotten son (Isaac)
formysake, I will bless the, and multyplie thy seed as the stars of heaven,
and the sand that is in the sea shore. Therefore after he had perceived the
constancy of this old manne, who sticked not to sley, even his own son i^
whom seemed to be all the hope of his of spryng and posterity, he confirmed
that thing by an oath which he promised before. For he having to do with man,
condescended to the fasshions and manours of man. Men to aggrauate their oath
doswere by him that is greater. And if they have any doubt or controversy
among the^ selfs, the same is discussed and ended by the confi^macion of an
oath. And for this cause when God would notably declare the stablenesse of his
counsel, unto the heirs of promise, he added an oath, lest any man might
suppose that he wouldelye, who had bound himself with two bands, first by
promise, and then by an oath: and to thentent also that we being stablished in
a sure belefe might have a strong consolacion in the adversities of this
world: we, I say, that have not set our felicity in the pleasures of this
present life, but have fled hitherto to obtain the hope that is set before
us in the world to come, the which hope we hold fast in the mean time in
the storms of this world as a steadfast and sure ancre of the soul, not
fasteued in transitorye things, but in heaven, for that it stretches it self
even to those things that are within the veil whereas no mutacion is, but all
things are stable and everlasting. This is that in ward part of the temple,
into the which Jesus Christ, runnyng thither before us, and showing us the
way, has entered, to make intercession for us unto the father: who is made an
hye priest for ever after the order, as I said in the beginning, of
Melchisedech.

The vii. Chapter.
The text.
This Melchisedech king of Salem (which being priest of the most hye God,
met Abraham, as he returned again from the slaughter of the kings and blessed
him: to who^ also Abraham gave tithes of al things) first is called by
interpritacion king of righteousness: after that, king of Salem (that is to say
king of peace) without father, without mother, without kynne, and has
neither beginning of days, ueyther yet end of life: but is likened unto the
son of God, and contynueth a priest for ever. Now sens the process of our
words has brought us again to the mention of Melchisedech, let us
consider what a man he was, and by what reason he bare the figure of our
priest. For we read that this Melchisedech king of the City called Salem,
was au hye pryest of the most hye God, the which Melchisedech met Abraham in
his return from the slaughter of the three kings, and blessed him for his
valiaunte act, unto whom Abraham also gave tithes of all his goods. First
Melchisedech by very interpretacion of name, is called the king of
righteousness: then by the title of his kingdom, he is called king of Salem,
that is to say, king of peace: who, as it is said, had neither father, nor
mother, nor pedigrew, nor beginning of days, nor end of life. But of him it is
spoken (which verelye agrees with the son of god) that he contineweth a
priest for ever. And so farfoorth eueryethyng agrees derye well with our hye
pryeste Christ, who ordained the kingdom of ryghtuousnesse, who is the prince
of peace, who, as touching his deitye had neither father in earth, nor mother,
whose pedigrew no man is hable to declare, who had neither beginning, nor
shall have ending, whose priesthood continues for ever, and purifyeth all
that believe in him unto the worlds end. Now let us consider the dignity of
the same Melchisedech and ho we far he excelled the pristes of Moses law
Abraham so great a patriarch did not onley vouchesafe to receive blessyng of
him after he had sleyne the kings, but also gave him tithes of the syoyles.

The text.
Consider what a man this was, unto whom also the patriarch Abraham gave
tithes of the spoils. And verelye those children of Leui, which receive
thoffice of the priests, have a commandment to take (according to the law)
tithes of the people, that is to say, of their brethren, yea though they
sprung out of the loins of Abraham. But he whose kindred is not counted among
them, received tithes of Abraham, and blessed him that had the promises. And no
man denies, but that he which is less receives blessyng of him which is
greater. And here men that dye, receive tithes. But there he receives tithes,
of whom it is witnessed, that he lives. And to say the truth, Leuy himself
also, which uses to receive tithes, paid tithes in Abraham. For he was yet in
the loins of his father, when Melchisedech met Abraham. And the law of
Moses commanded this, that they which came of the lineage of Leui, should
succeed in the ministracion of priesthood, and receive tithes, but of their
brethren alonely, that is to say, of the posterity of Abraham: neither does
the authority and dignity of the Levites stretch any further: but
Melchisedech where he was an alyaunt from the Iewishe nation, received tithes
of Abraham, the very auctour of the whole nation and blessed him, of whom
according unto Gods promise, the nation of the Jews should issue. It is out
of contouersie that the less receives blessing of the greater. For whose
blesses, does as it were, allow by his authority that which is done. Now
thauctoritie to allow is wont to remain in the superior, and not in him that
is eguall or inferioure. And in the tribe of Leui they received tithes, who
were also mortal men themselves, and by whose death the same authority came
unto other. But it is said of Melchisedech that he lives and continues for
ever in the preeminence of perpetual priesthood. To conclude, whereas
thauctoritie to demand tithes came from leuy the chief priest unto other
priests, yet in that that Abraham paid tithes to Melchisedech, it seems that
Leuye also himself was made bond to pay tithes, notwythstandyng that he was
wont to receive the same of other. Therefore as they are counted of less
authority that pay tithes unto Leuy: so was Leuy inferioure unto Melchisedech
unto whom he gave tithes. Some man will here say: how gave he tithes who was
not yet borne at what time Melchisedech met Abraham? But forasmuch as the
posterity is in manoure counted to be in the auctoure of the nation, therefore
I said after this intelleccion, that Leuy, who came of Abraham, gave tithes
unto Melchisedech.

The text.
If now therefore perfeccion came by the priesthood of the levites (for under
that priesthood, the people received the law) what neded it furthermore, that
another priest should ryle to be called after the order of Melchisedech, and
not after the order of Aaron? For if the priesthood be translated, then of
necessity must the law be translated also. For he of whom these things are
spoken, pertains unto an other tribe, of whom never man served at the
aultare. For it is euidente that our Lord sprung of the tribe of Iud a, of
which tribe spoke Moses nothing concerning priesthod. And it is yet a mere
evident thing, it after the similitude of Melchisedech, there arise an other
priest, which is not made after the law of the carnal commandment, but
after the power of the endeles life. (For after this manner does he testify:
thou art a priest forever, after the order of Melchisedeche.) Then the
commandment that went before, is dissanulled, because of weakness and
unprofitableness. If so be that perfyte religion and holiness did depend
upon the L^^iticall priesthood, as it seems unto the Jews, because the law
was give under Aaron who was of the trybe of Leuy, what needed then again
another priest to rise, who, as it is written in y^ mystical psalm, should be
said to be instituted not after the order of Aaron, but after the order of
Melchisedech? For seeing the authority and form of the law is joined with
the form of priesthood, it is needful if priesthood be translated into an
other form, that the form of the law be like wise translated and
changed. Certes the changing of the tribe sufficiently declares, that the
manor or form of priesthood must needs be changed. For he whom the
prophecy of the psalm speaks of, was none of the tribe of Leut, but of
that^^^be whereof never man as yet served at the altar, because it is euydent
that our lord Jesus sprung of the trybe of Judah. But when Moses did institute
the rite, and authority of priesthood, he made no mention of this priesthood
which should be of the same kynred with the tribe of Judah. Furthermore that
the priesthood whereof the psalm speaks is not the same manoure of
priesthood that Moses priesthood is of, it does appear more manifestly in
that the prophecy plainly adds these words following: After the order of
Melchisedech: signifying thereby a priest vnly ^e unto Aaron, and like to
Melchisedech, to thentente we should understand, that there is no less
difference between the one person and the other, then is between the rite or
ceremonte, and efficacy of priesthood. What means this? after the order of
Melchisedech: nothing else, but which does not sacrifice beasts prescrybed ^y
the gross and carnal law, but can by heavenly grace bring us to life
everlasting. For the law did purify the flesh by washinges, and diverse
purgacions: but grace purifieth our souls with a sacrifice of more strength
and efficacy. For as Aaron contineweth not for ever, so his priesthood was not
everlasting and as it is said of Melchisedech, that he continues for ever, so
his priesthood shall have no end. And that these things verelye agrees with
Christ, the mistical psalm declares, saying: Thou art a priest for ever after
the order of Melchisedech. The priesthood that contineweth but for a season
gives place to the everlasting priesthood, and the mortal hye priest gives
place unto the immortal. Certes as the v^^perfiter priesthood gives place
unto the perfiter: even so the imperfect law gives place to the perfiter law
of the gospel, whereby the constitucions and laws of Moses contained in the
old testament be (as it were,) dyssanulled, for that they were not of strength
sufficient, nor so profitable as they should have been.

The text.
For the law brought nothing to perfeccion, but was an introduccion to a
better hope, by the which we draw uye unto god. And therefore is it a better
hope, because the thyuge was not done without an oath. For those priests were
made without an oath, but this priest with an oath, by him that said unto him.
The Lord swear, and will not repent. Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melthisedech. And for that cause was Jesus a stabli^her of a better
testamente. For god would us to be made perfect, but that law brought
nothing to perfeccion: neither was it given for that purpose, yet was it not
given in vain: Truly it was given for a season, to thentente it should be a
certain griece or stayre to bring us at the length to a better hope. For it
promised a fruitful land wherein they should live a quietlyfe, who had kept
the commandments of Moses law.

The law was gross, and so was the reward, but thus god provided for the
gross capacities of men, that by sensible things they should by little and
little fall in vrewith things spiritual. It was commanded that they should not
s^ey, that they should not steal, that they should pourge the handeling of
carayne with certain ceremonies: A land was promised them wherein they should
live quietly a few years: but unto us heaven is promised, where we may live in
everlasting joy and felicity, and in the mean while we are commanded to
love even our very enemies. Their priest when he was most devoutly occupied
about sacrifice to make intercession unto God for the people, went into the
inward parts of the veil: But our priest entered even into the very heavens,
there to plead our cause before god the father, whom we are made nigh unto by
our ambassador Christ Jesus, who is the head of the church. For it is not
possible that the body be away where the head is present: And by reason of
such an hye priest, we have a surer hope then the Jews had by means of
their hye priests, because their priests were ordained without an oath, and
ours with an oath: the which god would have made, to thentente we should have a
more sure confidence in his promises, if the priest by whose mediacion we hope
after the immortal felicity promised us, were by an oath approved an
everlasting hye priest and that of god, which elsewise can not lie. For thus
speaks he in the prophetical psalm: The lord swear and will not repent,
thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedech. Therefore look how
much difference there is between heaven and earth, between things that
lasts for a time, and things eternal, between those that are mortal, and
such as are immortal, between worldly things and heavenly: of so much a
better testamente was our hye pryeste Jesus made promiser, and so much the
certayner promyser, as the promise among men confyrmed with an oath, is of more
certaintye, then a simple promise.

The text.
And among them many were made priests, because they were not suffered to
endure by the reason of death. But this man (because he endures ever) has an
everlasting priesthode. Wherefore, he is able also ever to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for us. For such an hye Priest it became us to have, which is holy, haemiesse,
undefiled, separate from sinners, made hier then heaven. Which needs not daily
(as yo^der hye priests) to offer up sacryfyce. First for his own sins, and
then for the peoples sins. For that did he once, when he offered up himself.
For the law makes men priests, which have infirmity: but the word of
the oath that came since the law, makes the son priest, which is perfect
for evermore. Moreover under the law of Moses it was needful to have many
priests instituted, either because they should execute the priests office by
tournes appointed, either because that death would not suffer them always to
continue in their ministracion, and by that means, the promiser oftentimes
changed was very uncertain of his promise. But this our priest is one for
all, and needs not any successoure, but by reason he endures for ever, he
has a continual priesthood.

Wherefore he is hable to bring those unto salvation, whom he has begun to
save, because they have him always a ready priest, by whose means they may
come unto god. For Christ lives ever to thinte^te that whenever need
requires, he may make intercession for his unto god. For he has not so
offered a sacrifice that it should profit a few a short while, but that it
should be auaylable to all men, and at al times hable to pacifye gods wrath.
Therefore sens the law was heavenly and perfect, it was meet that our hye
priest should also be such a one, that is to say, godly, without deceyte,
undefiled, far separate from the coumpanye of sinners, lyfted up above all
the heavens, who needs not daily to offer oppe sacrifice as Moses priests
did; first for his own sins, and then for the peoples sins. For what manor
of atonemakers were they, who themselfes had need to be made at one with god,
unto whom they made intercession for other men's offenses? what manor a
sacrifice was that, which for sundry sins was of necessity often times to be
made again? Our hye priest, who had no sin of his own, took unto him the
sins of the whole world, and once offered up a sacrifice for all men, not
a beast, but his own proper person. For Moses law, as it was weak and
imperfect, so did it ordain such hye priests as were subject to infirmity.
But ye word of the oath that I spoke of right now, which declares that a
better law shall succeed instead of the old ordeineth not every man
indifferently, but the very son of god a priest for ever more, ready at all
times and mete to make intercession for us, for that neither death can take him
away, neither any infirmity let him, to be a conueniente and perfect besecher
for us.

The.viii. Chapter.
The text.
Of the things which we have spoken, this is the pith: that we have such an
hye priest as sits on the right hand of the seat of majesty in heaven,
and is a mynister of holy things, and of the true tabernacle, which God
pyght, and not manne. For every hye priest is ordained to offer gifts and
sacrifices: wherefore it is of necessity, that this man have somewhat also to
offer. For he were not a priest, if he were on the earth where are priests
that according to the law offer gifts which serve unto thensaumple, and
shadow of heavenly things: even as the answer of God was given unto Moses,
when he was about to finishe the tabernacle. Take heed (said he) that thou made
al things according to the patron which is showed to thee in the mount. OF
the things which we have so largelye entreated of before, the chief point
and effect is, that hereafter we have not in admiracion Moses hye priest,
since we have one so excellent in all points that he sytteth on the right
side of the royal seat of god in heaven, to the entente he may duly make,
not those figurative sacrifices prescribed by Moses, but the true and heavenly
sacrifices, and be within the tabernacle, I mean not that figuratyue
tabernacle pytched of man, but in the secret places of the true tabernacle
pitched by almighty God, disseuering heavenly things from earthly.
Furthermore sens that every hye priest is wont to be ordained for this
intent, that he may offer gifts and sacrifices to God, how were it possible
for him to be a lawful hie priest which has nothing to offer? Now if it so
be that an earthly priesthood were given to Christ after like manor as unto
other, then were he no priest, for that he never offered, ne offers any of
those sacrifices which are accustoinably offered of other priests, according
to the prescripcion of the law, the which sacrifices are nothing else but
shadows, and certain figures of the heavenly temple and celestial
sacrifyces. For whatsoever Christ did, even in earth, because it was not done
after the flesh but after the spirit, and came from heaven and thither
re^deth, the same compared unto the grossenes of Moses priesthood, is woorthely
called heavenly. And this god seems to have signified when prescrybyng unto
Moses a form to build a temple, he speaks in this wise: Se thou make all
things according to the patron which was showed thee in the mount. For Moses
saw with his spiritual iyes, an other holyer manor of temple: an other manor
of sacrifyces and priesthood, after the patron whereof, ^edrew out in the mean
season a certain gross figure of things, till the time should come that god
would have shadows give place unto true things. Now is the same time
already present.

The text.
But now has he obtained a priesthode so much the more e^cellente, as he is
the mediator of a better testamente, which was confirmed in better promises.
For if that first testamente had been such, that no fault could have b^^e
found in it, then should no place have b^ne sought for the second. For in
rebukyng them, he says unto them. Behold the days come (says the Lord) and
I will finishe upon the house of Israel, and upon the house of Judah, a new
testamente: not like the testament that I made with they: fathers in that day,
when I took them by the hands, to lead them out of the land of Egypt. For
they continued not in my testamente, and I regarded them not says the Lord.
For this is the testament that I will make with the house of Israel. After
those days (says the lord) I will put my laws in their minds, and in their
hertes I will write them, and I will be there God, and they shall be my people.
And they shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying* know the lord: For they shall know me, from the least to the most
of them. For I will be merciful over their unrighteousness, and their sins and
their iniquities will I think upon no more. In that he says a now testamente,
he has worn out the old. For that which is worn out and we^ed old, is
ready to vanishe away. We have an heavenly hye priest, and a priesthood
worthy and conueniente for him, so much more excellent then this other
priesthood, as the new testamente of the gospel excels the old of Moses,
and as the promises of the new be more magnifice^te and greater then the
promises of the old. There the bodies were cleansed with the blood of
beasts: here souls are purified with the blood of Christ. There a land is
promised: here are promised heavenly rewards. And in this testament our
heavenly hye priest is a mediatoure between god and manne, after an heavenly
manoure: If that first testamente had been such a one that nothing had
lacked therein, as the Jews do suppose, then should there no place have
been sought for the second. For it was but superfluous to add anything
where al things were perfect.

Now God complayneth that that first testamente was unprofitable, and
promyseth a better, and of more efficacy speaking in the Prophet Ieremye on
this wise: Behold the days come, lays the Lord, I will fynishe upon the
house of Israel, and upon the house of Judah a new testamente, not like the
testamente which I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the
hands to lead them out of the land of Egipte: because they continued not in
my testament, I again for my part regarded them not, says the Lord.

For this is the couenaunte that I will make with the house of Israel, says
the Lord, when I will not grave my laws in stones, or books, as has been
proved in vain, but will put them into their minds, and write them in their
hearts. And I will be verily their God, and again they shall be vetely my
people. Neither shall they give my doctrine by hand one to an other, in such
wise that every man shall be compelled to enstructe his neighbor, and every
one his brother saying (know the Lord:) because that not only then a few
Jews, but all the people of the world shall know me from the least unto the
greatest, that I will be made merciful by thyntercessyon of my son, and
forgive their sins and trespasses, neither will I any more think upon their
wicked deeds. Ye have heard his words who promises a new testament, because
the old was unprofitable. Now that which is called new, that is to say,
spiritual, signifies that the old, that is to wit, the carnal, must be
taken away, and dysanulled. Else could not this testamente be called new,
except that which was before, were worn out and waxen old. Now that that
is worn out, and waxen old, is nigh gone, forasmuch as it draws by little
and little to an end.

The.ix. Chapter.
The text.
The old testament then had ver^^y ordinances, and seruynges of God, and
worldly holiness. For there was a foretabernacle made, wherein was the light, and
the table, and the show bread which is called holy. But within the second
veil was there a tabernacle, which is called holiest of all, which had the
golden seuser, and the Arc of the testament; ouerlayde round about with
gold, wherein was the golden pot with Ma^na, and Aarons rod, that sprung, and
y^ tables of the Testament. Over the Arc were the Cherubins of glory,
shadowyng the scate of grace. Of which things we can not now particularly
speak. SOme man will here say: what, was the religion of the old temple a
vain religion? Nay not so. In times past that old temple also, whose religion
is now at an end and gonne by the succession of evangelical verity, had
certain approved customs, and prescribed ceremonies the which made an
vtwarde show of just and perfyte living. It had also a certain holiness, but
the same was a worldly holiness for that it stood in vtwarde things and
visible. Of the which kind of holiness there seemed also a great deal to be
among the Paynyms and Gentiles. But the building of the temple was such, that
one part thereof was counted more holy then an other till a man came unto that
part which seemed holiest of all. For in the first place there was made a
tabernacle wherein were kept with much reverence the light the table, and the
seven holy lonues, which they called the show bread, by reason they were
wont to be set out for a show on the holy table. And this part of the temple
they called only holy because it was so severed from unholy things, that it
was yet very far from those things which were accounted most holy. But
within the second veil which parted this part of the temple from other,
there was an other tabernacle that for the excellencye of holiness was called
holiest of all, and in this were contained certain of the holyer sort of
relyques, as the golden Censer, and the Arcke called the Arcke of the
testamente, covered townde about with plates of gold, having in it the golden
pot, (wherein Manna was reserved a monument of an aunciente miracle wrought
what time: the Hebrews being very hongry, there rayned a new kind of meat
down from heaven) and Aatons todde the which by a wonderful miracle never
hard of before bare leaves after it was cut from the stem, and budded out
into flowers, whereof afterward came Almons.

There were in it also the tables called the tables of the testamente, because
in them were the commandments graven with Gods fyngre. Over this were
images with wings called Cherubynes representing the Majesty and glory of
God which ouershadowed the mercy seat with their wings, all the which
things had a certain signification of holier things afterward dysclosed by
the gospel. But it were to long to speak of every of the premysses
particularly, and to show what was meante and sygnified by the same.

It shall be sufficient for us to compare theffecte or pythe of the whole matter
to the priesthode of Christ.

The text.
When these things were thus ordained, the priests went always into the
fir^^ tabernacle, which executed the service of the bolie things. But into the
second went the bye pryest alone once every year. Not without blood which he
offered for himself, and for the ignorances of the people. Wherewith the holy
ghost this signified, that the way of holy things was not yet opened, while
as yet the first tabernacle was standing. Which was a simily tude for the
time then present, in which were offered gifts and sacrifices, that could not
make the minyster perfect, as pertaynyng to the conscience, with only meats
and drinks, and diverse washinges and iustifyenges of y^ flesh, which men
ordained until the time of reformacion. Now when the temple was thus divided,
and the holy relics bestowed in their places, all priests indifferently
which executed the cetemouies belonging unto the sacrifices entered daily into
that first tabernacle. But into that second, which was very holy, went the
hie priest (who was chief in dignity among the priests) alone once every
year and no oftener, and that not without the blood of a beast, which he
there offered first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people
edmmytted by error and ignorance. By the which things, as it were by
certain dark fygures, the holy ghost sygnified that at that time there was
as yet no open way or entrance unto those places which are in very deed
holy, and have no manor of earthly infeccion. For while the hie bishop
entered into the most secret part of the temple, and as yet that first
tabernacle was standing, which had a symylytude of those times in the
which the people were by certain gross ceremonis kept (how so ever it
were) in the Iewyshe religion, lest they should have fallen to greater
enormities, there were certain gross and vulgar ceremonies done by the
commen sort of priests in the said tabernacle. Gifts were offered, beasts
were killed and offered up in sacrifice, the which things had so a certain
similitude of purificacion, that they could not yet make those perfitly clean
(as touching the conscience and soul whereby God estemeth us) who used them,
although, as concerning the body and estymation of the world, they seemed to
give some cleanesse and purity. For whatso ever was there done, perteyned
chiefly unto the body, for that it stood in choice of meats and drink,
whereas in very deed, meat neither purifieth nor defiles the soul: and stood
also in diverse washynges and pourgations of the flesh, which were not
instituted for this intent that they should give manne perfyte ryghtuousnesse,
but because the people should by these rudimentes and first principles, fall
in ure by little and little with true religion, and by shadows be brought to
verity, and made receyuable of bettre things, which should be opened by the
doctrine of the gospel, when time should come, Here have ye heard the
effect of all the religion, by reason whereof the Jews do stand so much in
their own conceiptes. Now let us compare the dignity of our hie priest with
these foresaid things.

The text.
But Christ being an hye priest of good things to come, came by a greater
and a more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands: that is to say, not of
this buildyng, nether by y^ blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he
enteed in once into the holiplace, and found eternal redemption. For if the
blood of oxen and of goats, and the ashes of a ^^ng cow, when it was
sprinkled, purifieth the unclean, as touching the purifing of the flesh: how
much more shall the blood of Christ (which through the eternal spirit, offered
himself wythou ^spot to god) pourge your conscience from dead works, for to
serve the lyuinge god? For Christ being an hie priest, a promiser, and auctour,
not of corporal purificacion, neither of the good things of this world which
have an end, but of everlasting and heavenly good things, entered, not by the
veil wrought with men's hands, but by an other tabernacle not made with
hands, that is to say, not of this building, the which as men do set
it up, so can they pull it down again, but by very heaven, entered (I say)
into the places which are verily holy, and verily far from al infeccion of
mortality not brynginge with him the blood of goats and calves therewith to
pacify Gods wrath, but his own precious blood which he shed for us in the
altar of the cross, wherewyth he redeemed not one nationalonelye, but all
mankind from all sins, and that not one year, but for ever until the
worlds end, so that they tournynge from their former myflyuynge, know Christ,
and as much as in them lyethe follow him in their life and conversation.

For what comparison is it to compare a domme beast unto Christ both God and
man? If so be that the blood of Oxen and Goats, or the brent ashes of a
young Cow sprynkeled upon unclean persons cleanses them, as touching a
certain carnal and figurative purity and holiness: How much more then
shall the blood of Christ, who not by corporal fire, but through the
eternal spirit desirous of man's salvation offered, not a brute beast, but
him self a pure and undefiled sacryfyce unto almyghtye God the father,
puryfie, not your bodies, but your conscience from these works which in
very deed bring death unto the soul? His death delyuereth us from endless
death, and his most pure spirit purifieth our spirit which was before
unclean. In both purifications is blood, but yet is there a great
difference. In both is death, but an unequal death. In both is a spirit,
but the one is far unlike the other. For what thing soever was there done by
shadows and certain fygures, the same Christ accomplished in deed.

The text.
And for this cause is he the mediator of y^ new testament, that through death
which chanced for the redemption of those transgressyo^s that were under the
first testamente they which are called, might receive y^ promise of eternal
inheritance. For where as is, a testament, there must also (of necessytie) be
the death of him that makes the testament. For the testament takes aucthorite
when men are dead: for it is yet of no value, as long as he that makes the
testament is alive, for which cause also, nether the first testament was or
dayned without blood. Because that he who in the old testament made
intercession and was a mediator between God and men brought not the people to
the perfyte state of innocence, therefore Christ succeeded in his rowme, and
became a new mediatoure of a new testament, to thentent that all sins taken
away through his death (the which by that first testament could not be
abolyshed and taken away, but remained, in such wise that they brought us
out of the favor of almyghtie God) not only the Jews, but also all tho
whosoever have been called to Christ's fellowship, may now through the
doctrine of the gospel receive the promise and hope of theternall
enheritaunce. For wheresoever this word testament is heard, there must needs
be the death of him that makes the testamente, else should it be no
testamente, or if it were, it were of none authority. For the death of the
testatoure makethe the same of authority which has not as yet sure
strength nor is ratifyed so long as the said testatour is alive. Because it
lies in his power to altre it if he will: Wherefore forasmuch as that old
testament had also the name of a testament, it was not ordained without
blood and death, but of a beast, and such a beast as elswise should have
perished.

The text.
For when Moses had declared all the commandment to all the people according
to the law, he took the blood of calves and of goats with water and purple
woolle, and ysope, and sprynkeled both the book and all the people saying:
this is the blood of the testamente, which God has appointed unto you.
Moreover, he sprinkeled the tabernacle, with blood also, and all the
ministeryng vesselies. And almost all things are by the law purged with
blood, and without shedynge of blood is no remyssyon. For as it is read in
the book of Exodus, when Moses had read all the law of God unto the people,
and declared unto them what reward they should look after for keeping the same,
and what punishment they should dread if they did not regard it accordingly,
to thentent the covenant made between God and the people should be confirmed,
he took a cup, and therein myngled the blood of Calves and Goats with
water, and purple w^ll, and sprynkled both the book out of the which he read
the Lords commandments, and likewise all the people with ^sope, saying:
This is the wytnessyng blood, and confirmer of that testament which God has
commanded you to keep: And was not only contented thus to do, but sprynkeled
also with blood the tabernacle, and all the holy vessels therein which they
used in sacrifices. Likewise in all other rites and approved customs what
things so ever were purified according unto the prescription of Moses law,
were purified with blood. Neither was there any remyssion of sins but by
sheddyng of blood.

The text.
It is need then, that the simily tudes of heavenly things be purified with
such things: but that the heavenly things themselfes, be purified with better
sacrifices then are those. For Christ is not entered into the holy places that
are made with hands (which ^e similitudes of true things) but is entered into
very heaven for to appear now in the sight of god for us: not to offer himself
often as the hye priest enters into the holy place every year with strange
blood, for the^ must he have often suffered sense the world began. But now in
the end of the world, has he apeted once to put sin to slyght by the
offering up of himself. And as it is appointed unto all men that they shall
once dye, and than comes the judgment: even so Christ was once offered to
take away the sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear
again, without syune unto ^^luation. And truly it was convenient that such
things as in earth represented the similitude and shadow of heavenly things,
should be done with such manor of gross and carnal purifications. But when
verity was once come to light, then was it mete that the heavenly sacrifices
them selfs should be made with better oblacions, and cause a trewer purity.
For, as I have said, even all that Christ did in earth is heavenly. For
trewely he entered not in to the holy places made with hands, which are
rather supposed holy then be holy in deed, and may be turned unto a profane
use, and were nothing else but certain shadows and fygures of things that
were verelye holy, but entered into very heaven where as dwellethe God
immortal with his holy angels, before whom he as a leful Bishop makes
intercessyon for all men's sins, purchasyng himself favorable audience
with his own blood, which of his mere and free charity he shed for us:
and that did he with so effectual a sacrifice, that it shall not be needful
for him every year to do the same again, as the hye pryest of the old
testamente entered in to the most secret part of the temple yearly. Nether
is it any marueyll that the sacryfice made by the hye priest of Moses was
not of like efficacye, sense he was both subject unto sins, and offered up a
beasts blood, and not his own.

If Christ had been such an hye priest, then sithe there has so many
ages and years begone again sense the creation of the world, he should of
necessytye often times have offered up a sactifyce like as the priests of the
old testament did. Now was he such a one, that it was sufficieute for him
once to offer up himself, and once with the sprinkeling of his own blood, to
take away the sins of all ages until the worlds end. And that was done,
not from the beginning of the woorlde, but nigh the end of the same, when it
was openly known to every man, that all the world was defiled with sin, and
that there was no remeady but of God only, because it should manyfestly
appear how effectual a pryest, and of what great virtue and power he was,
who with one sacrifice pourged so great an heap of sins, and left behind
him a ready and an easy remedy, which was, that the same sacrifice should be
sufficient for all men, time once of measure, that would not make them selfs
un worthy thereof. For he took upon him, not only their sins who many years
before put hope of saluatyon in him, but also theyrs who would many years
after believe his ghospel.

Wherefore there is not why the world should look after an other priest, or
an other sacrifice to pourge sins, but as it is appointed to al men that they
shall once dye without hope to return again into this life wherein we
ofttymes fall, and ofttymes are pourged again: and as there is nothing looked
for after every man's death but that extreme judgment whereby endelesse
rewards shall be adjudged both to good and badde: so like wise Christ (who
dyeng once was offered up for all the world, taking upon him, as much as in him
lay, all men's sins, because he would be punyshed for all) would have
nothing remain after this life but that last judgment wherein he shall appear
again unto the world, not as before like a sacrifice appointed to be slain,
or like a worker of myschiefe, and one worthy of punishment, but as a glorious
person and one that knows no manner of sin: he shall, I say appear to
their bliss and salvation, who being now purified through his death, persevere
in good and virtuous living till he come again, not to be offered up, but a
judge desired of the good, and dreadefull to the wicked.

The.x. Chapter.
The text
For the law (hauyg^ the shadow of good things to come, and not the very
fashion of the things themselfes) can never with those sacrifices which they
offer, year by year, comynually make the comers thereunto perfect. For would
then not those sacryfices ^^^^eased to have been offered, because that the
offerers once purged should have had no more conscience of sins? Nevertheless
in those sacrifyces, is there no mention made of sins every year. For the
blood of oxen and of goats cannot take a way sins. FVrthermore the cause why
the hye priest of the old testament could not do the like, was by reason that
that law forasmuch as it had not the lively and true fashion, but only a
certain shadow of good things, which rather sygnyfyed somewhat, then
brought anything to effect, could never with her usual sacrifice of beasts
(all though they were by those priests contynually offered year by year) make
such perfect as came to pacify God with ineffectual oblacions by the
mediacion of weak priests.

For if perfeccyon might have been attained thereby* should not the same
sacrifices once offreo, have ceased tobe offered any more? Now in these
sacrifices when so ever they be offered again, there is mention made a fresh
of the former sins, which thing plainly declares that they have no
confydence in one sacrifyce. Else for what purpose did they every year offer
again new sacrifices, if one had so pourged from all sin, that no
conscience thereof had remained in those which had once offered and been
pourged? For seeing that sin is the malady of the soul, and not of the
body, a gross and bodily sacrifice, as is the blood of Oxen and Goats, can
in no wise take away the disease of the mind. The only spiritual and
heavenly sacrifyce of Christ is able to do this thing sufficiently the
which through faith and Baptism so takes away at once all the sins of our
former lyte, be they never so many, never so heinous, that there remains no
feate, or re^^orse in conscience, so that we will only beware that we fall not
again into out old enormyties, and detestable deeds. For so far wide is it
from the, truth that God was made merciful by reason that such sactifices
were oftentimes oftred, that being rather offended therewith he required some
one effectual sacrifice which should contynew for ever.

The text*
Wherefore, when he comes into the world he says: Sacrifice and offering
thou would not have: but a body haste thou ordained me. But^t offerynges
also for sin have thou not allowed. Then said ^:lo, I am here. In the
beginning of the book it is written of me that I should do thy will, O God.
Above, when he says: sacryfice and offering, and burnt sacryfices and sin
offerynges thou would not have, ne^^e^ haste you allowed them (which yet are
offered by the law) then said he: Lo, I am here, to do thy will O god: He
takes a way the first to estably she the latter* by which will we are made
holy even by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. For the
Son as it were about to come into the world to make God the father merciful
unto the same with the sacrifice of his own most precious body, speaks
unto him in the mystycall Psalm on this wise: Sacrifice and offering thou
would not have, but a body haste thou ordained me: Burnt sacrifices, and
other sacrifices accusfomablye offered to pourge the peoples sins, thou haste
not allowed. Than said I: Lo* sithe that in the beginning of the book I am
sygnified to be a sacrifyce, I am here to do thy will, O God. When therefore he
says in these words? Sacrifyce and offering, and burnt sacrifices, and
sacrifices for sin thou would not have, neither allowedest thou any of
these sacrifices which were wont to be offered according unto the prescription
of the old law: And immediatlye adds: Lo I am here to obey they will O
God, and to offer a sacrifice pleasant and acceptable unto thy mind: in
these words, I say, he takes away that first priesthode as dyspleasaunte
unto God, to thentent he may stablyshe the later there with to satisfye Gods
will and pleasure.

What was this will of God, who thus lotheth the lawefull sacrifices of the
old testament, and greatly desires a new kind of sacrifice? For sooth it
was this, because it so lyked his free goodness toward us, that his heavenly
son (that is to say Christ) should take upon him man's body, and dyeng
for the sins of the whole world, purify all men by one sacrifice duly
made, of their sins, in such wise that there needs nothereafter any other
blodie sacrifices.

The text.
And every pryest is ready daily ministering and offering often times one manner
of oblacion wyche can never take away sin. But this man after he has offered
one sacrifice for sins, is set down for ever on the right hand of god, and
from hencefurth tarieth till his foes be made his footstool. For with one
offering has he made perfect for ever them that are sancrified. The holy
ghost himself also bears us record, even when he told before: this is the
Testamente that I will make unto them: After those days (says the Lord) I
will put my laws in their hearts and in their minds wll I write them, and
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And where remission of
these things is there is, no more offering for sin. Whosoever is a priest of
the old testament, is constrained daily to ministre, and oftentimes to offer
the same sacrifices again, which how often so ever they be offered can never
clean take away sins, so that it is an endless business to both parts,
that is to say, both to the offerer, and to the priest by whom the oblacion is
made. But Christ thonely sacrifice once offered for the sins of al them
which have, do, or will believe his promyses, sytteth now on the right hand of
God the father, tarryeng for nothing else but that which only remains, that
is to say, to have all the members of his body assembled together and until
at the length it come to pass, according as it is promised in the Psalm, that
his enemies (who are rebels against the ghospel) be made his foot stool.
But in the mean season he needs not to offer him self again for us, because
that with one oblation he has sufficiently perfited all those for ever, which
have deserved to be sanctified thoro we faith, in such wise that none of our
old sins can be laid unto our charge. That I say now, even the holy
ghost him self witnesses speaking by the mouth of the Prophet, and showing
long before that the same thing should be, which we see already come to
pass. His words are these: This is the testament that I will make unto them
after those days (says the lord) when I shall put my laws in their
hearts, and write them in their minds, and their sins and iniquities will I
remember no more, much less then will I take vengeance for the same.
Furthermore after that al sins be once pardoned for ever, what need is there
of the Iewishe sacrifices, which were made to pourge and take away sins.

The text.
Seeing therefore brethren, that by the means of the blood of Jesus we have
liberty to enter into the holy place, by the new and living way which he has
prepared forvs, through the veil (that is to say, by his flesh:) And seeing
also that we have au hie pryest which is ruler over the house of God, let us
draw nygh with a true heart in a sure faith, sprynkeled in our hertes and the
evil conscince put away and washed in out bodies with pure water: Let us keep
the profession of our hope, without wavering (for he is faithful that
promised) and let us consider one another, to the intent that we may provoke
unto love, and unto good works, not for saking the fellowship that we have
among our selfs, as the manet of some is; but let us exhort one another, and
that so much the more because ye se that the day draws nygh. Seeing
therefore, brethren, that the conscience of sins is taken away which feared
us to make intercession to almyghtie God, and that we have an assurance given
us to enter into the holy place, let us trustyng upon the most sacred blood of
Jesus, which he shed for our reconciliacion, and thereby opened us away and
entrance far diverse from the old way, that is to say, a fresh, new,
living, and euetlastynge way, which after it is once opened can never be
shut again, the which way he began unto us entryng in first of all
through the veil, that is to say, by his flesh where with his Godhed was
covered for a time in this world* and after the same flesh was assumpted and
taken up into heaven, heavenly things were opened: And sithe we have a great
pryest promised of God after the order of Melehisedeche, whom God has made
ruler over all his house that is to say, over the Church chatholyke, the
which church he governs not as a ministre, but as thautour and Lord
thereof, let us also in the mean time go whither Christ has opened us the
way: let us go, I say, not with bodily feet into a temple made of stones,
but with a pure heart, and a very sure belefe to obtain our peticion enter
into the heavenly temple, but first sprinkled, not touching the body with the
blood of a beast, but touching the mind and spirit with the blood of Jesus
Christ, and thereby purified from the conscience of our old sins, and
furthermore washed in our bodies too with the pure water of Baptysme that
scoureth and washes away all the fylthe of the soul: Then remains it that
we persevere in the things we have once begone, and keep steadfastly and
without any wauerynge, the hope of immortal life which we have professed in
Baptism, trustyng in this one thing that God who promised is faithful and
sure of his promise, and cannot deceive if he would so that we continue still
in faith.

Furthermore bycanse we are made the members of one body let us cleave
together by mutual charitee and agreement considering with out selves how much
each of us has profited in the profession of the gospel, not because to
envy him who has ouergone us, or to despise him that is ouergone or left
behind, but to provoke to charity and good works by good example and
exhortactions gyuyng one to an other. The which thing shall come to pass, if
the going forewarde of our brother do make us more desyrouse to live well and
vertuouslye, and also if we, perceiving any to be slack in going forewarde,
do then with a brotherly carefulnes prycke him forth to better things,
always reioysynge at them which goo before, and making much of those that
do their diligence, not suffering any one to perish from our flock by reason
he is forsaken, as some (occasion serving thereunto) are wont to leave of from
their good begynnynges: But let one of us by all manoure of ways and means
possible styre and encourage an other to go forth to the end in that we first
began. And this thing ought ye so much the more earnestly to do, because
ye see that the day of the Lord is at hand, which will give every man
rewards according unto his deserts, and leave no place or opportunity to
amend what has been done amiss, but whatsoever hath-bene done shall be then
examyned with exact judgment. And such trespases as are committed by error
or frayltie of man shall easlye be pardoned.

The text.
For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins but a fearful lokinge for
judgment, and vyolent fire, which shall devour the adversaries. Be that
despyseth ^oses law, dies without mercy under two or three witnesses: how
much soret (suppose ye) shall he b^ punished which treads under ^ote the
son of gods and co^^^eth the blood of the testamente, where with he was
sancrified as an unholy thing and does dishonor the spirit of grace? For we
know him that has said: it belongs unto me to take vengeance, I will
recompense says the Lord. And again: the lord shall judge his people. It is
a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living god. But after we have
once known the truth by the ghospel being taught, what we must hope after,
and what we ought to eschew, and what rewards good men shall have, and what
yuell, if we then wyllyngly fall again into deadly sins, which Christ has
once washed away with his pre^^^^s blou^ in that he dyed once alonely, and
never will dye again, there remains the^ no Hooste or sacrifice for us
which have so eftesones fallen to our old ly^^ and sinful living, whereby
our sins may be freely released again through baptism. What then remains?
Forsooth a certain dreadful loking for of the last judgment; and forthwith a
cruel and tourmentyng fire which in reue^gement of the goodness of God
despised* shall devour the adversaries. Thynk^ you that he shall escape
unpunished that has despised the law of the gospel? The more merciful and
beneficial that God is, the more punyshemente shall he have, who wyllingly and
wyttyngly has mocked therewith. He mockethe with the gospel, which after he
has been once called to the n^bre of the children of God, wylfullye puts
himself into the number of the Deuels servants. If there were so great
punishment among the Jews, that whosoever obeyed not the pryest teaching the
commandments of Moises law, that is to wit, if he that was commanded to
absteyne from swynes flesh did notwithstanding of a self will or dysobedient
frowardenes eat the same, and afterward, being first convicted by two or
three witnesses, was done to death without mercy: How much greater
punishment then deserves he to have, who treads vnderfo^e not any one
priest of low estimacion, but Jesus Christ the son of God? Creuly he
treads him underfoot, whosoever despifeth his so great benefit: whosoever counts,
I say, not the blood of a beast, but his holy blood wherewith the new
testament was sanctified, as an unholy thing, specially the same blood
wherewith he was once pourged and made clean from all his old sins: fynallye
whosoever dyshonoureth the spirit by whom he has obtained the grace of the
gospel, because that spirit once put away through his vycyousnesse, he
trayterouslye gyuethe up the temple of God unto the Dyuell. Do we therefore
assure our selfs that we shall escape unpunished because men do not by and by
take punishment on such as do swa^ue from the purity of an evangelical and
christian life? We know him that has said: It belongs to me to take
vengeance: I will recompense faith the Lord. And again in an other place:
The Lord shall judge the people. Let not any sinner flatter him self, and
think that he is out of danger if he escape the hands of a man revenger. No
man can escape the hands of God. But it is a dreadful thing to fall into the
hands of the living god. Now the more that ye were to be praised when ye
first began to profess the gospel, the more shame and rebuke shall it be
for you to fall again into your former life.

The text.
Call to remembrance the days that are passed, in the which after ye had
received light, ye endured a great fight of adversities, partly while all men
wondered and gased at you for the shame and tribulacion that was doe^ unto you:
partly while ye became co^paignions of them which so passes their time. For ye
became partakers also of the affliccions which happened through my bonds, and
took in worth the spoiling of your goods, and that with gladness, knowing in
your selfs, how that ye have in heaven a better and an enduringe substance.
Cast not away therefore your confydence, which has a greater recompense of
reward. And lest that come to pass, call unto your remembrance the times
passed, in the which after ye had received light by the doctrine of the
gospel, and faith, ye couragyouslye endured diverse fyghtes of adversities
in hope of the life to come: partly whiles all such as hate Christ's doctrine
wondered and gased at you for the shames and dyspleasures which were done unto
you: partly whiles through the instigation of christian charity, ye of your
own accord became partakers both of the shames and afflictions that were done
unto other christians, or else Apostles, who (the world utterly contemned) lived
after the rule of the ghospel. For ye were wyllyngly partakers of the
afflictions and shame which among the wicked people seemed to happen by reason
of my bonds and emprisonment, and were sorye for an other man's sorrow, and
counted an other man's injury yours. Neither did you so far forth only
declare your selfs true christians, but also gladly suffered the spoylyng of
your goods, declaryng undoubtedly by deed self that you know and believe
how there are better riches laid up for you in heaven which neither the
pryuie thief, nor the violent robber can bereave you of: yea rather those
riches increase by the loss of worldly gooddes which we suffer for the name
of Christ. These deeds did with good cause put you in assurance and fyrme
belefe to obtain Christ's promises. For very great rewards are owing to so
strong a faith, and undoubtedly God, who is both rightuous and bountefull,
will trewly pay them, but in time convenient. Now is the time to fight,
hereafter the crowns shall be given. In the mean season ye have need of
patience to thentent that after ye have constauntlye obeyed the will of God, ye
may receive the crown of everlasting glory promised you.

The text*
For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of god, ye
might receive the promise. For yet a very little while, and he that shall come,
will come, and will not ta^y. But the just shall live by faith. And if he
wythdrawe himself, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. It is not we that
wythdrawe our selfs unto dampnacion, but ^e pattayn unto faith, to the wynuyng
of the soul. As yet the day is not come when that after battle taken away
and ended the rewards shall be given: Howbeit it is not far of: And our
Emperor, who when he ascended up into heaven promised that he would return
unto us again, will come, and not long tarry. In the mean while the
ryghtuous shall live by his faith, be he never so much afflicted, never so much
lawghed to skorne, never so much dead, yet by hoping for the promyses shall
he uphold his constaunt mind. Howbeit if he abide not still in faith, but
through extreme desperation withdraw himself from the profession of the
gospel, in him my soul shall have no pleasure. But God forbydde that by
reason of our mystruste, we withdraw our selves from good begynnynges unto
damnation. Yea rather we have professed faith, and therein will we contynew, to
thentent we may win the life and salvation of our soul, according unto the
counsel of Esaye, saying: The ryghtuous shall live by faith.

The.xi. Chapter.
The text*
Faith is a sure confydence of things which are hoped for, and a certasute of
things which are not seen. For by it the elders obtained a good report.
Through faith we understand that the world was ordained by the word of god,
and that things which are seen, were made of things which were not seen. By
faith Abell offered unto God a more ple^teous sacrifice then Cain, by which he
obtained witness that he was righteous, god testifiyng of his gifts: by which
also he being dead, yet speaks. THere is nothing that so greatly brings
good men into favor of God, as faith and sure belefe on God. For it is an
argument of a mind which has conceived the best opinion y^ may be of God, to
doubt nothing of his words, though the same appear no where to the senses of
man, neither can be proved by man's reason. The common sort of men judge those
things vain, and most like unto dreams which where they be nowhere in
deed, are only conceived of the mind by hope, and thinks it an extreme folly
to believe that such things are true as can in no wise be showed unto the
eyes. Certes this faith whereby the ryghtuouse man lives when other do
perish, is not a certain common light belefe, but a substaunciall and sure
foundation of those things which can not be perceived neither by the senses,
nor argumentacions of man: nevertheless sure hope so represents the same
unto the mind and soul, as though they were manifestly seen, and holden with
the hands, and persuadeth those things which of themselfes are invisible, to
be most certain and sure* not by man's reasons, but by a su^e belefe
toward God the author thereof. The Jews put confydence in their works, but
this is the only thing which makes us allowed and well beloved of God, and not
us alonely, but furthermore if a man will make rehersall from the creacion of
the world, he shall find that all our forefathers and elders, who are much
remembered for their laudable virtue and godlynes, deserved that they atteined
to by reason of their commendable faith.

First of all, are we not bounden unto faith that we have sure perceueraunce
that all this whole world with all things therein couteyned was created with
the word of God, and the only commandment of the maker? For who is able
otherwise to persuade, that of invisible things were created and made things
visible: or else that things which are, were made of things which are not? The
philosophers reasonynge as men, supposed y^ the world was never made, neither
had any beginning more then had the workman and creator him self. But this
which could neither be seen, ne can be proved by argumentacion of man's wit,
we do as firmly believe as though we saw it, ascertayned by holy scripture,
which declares that the world was made by the commandment of God, who (as we
know right well) is able to do all things, and can not lie. Abell first of all
men deserved to have the name of a rightuous manne, and was therefore the more
to be praised, because not being provoked by the^aumple of any other, he was
innocente and faithful to godward. But what thing was it that made him more
dearly beloved of God the^ his brother Cayn* Forsooth faith, whereby he wholly
hanged of him, whereas Cayn like a man faithless, and not contented with those
things which the earth brought forth of her own accord for the fode of
innocence, filled the ground. They both offered sacrifices unto God of their
own propre goods, but God only accepted the sacrifice of Abell, because the
innocent man trusted to his goodness with a true heart, and gaped not after
the commodities and profits of this world, but hoped for a reward of his
vertuousnes in heaven. Therefore he deserved not by his sacrifice, but through
faith, that almyghtie God imbracyng his gifts, did by fire sent down from
heaven testify that he was rightuous, and by reason of this most goodly
testimonye, he is now after so many thousand years so much renowined and
spoken of, of all men, that being dead he seems even to live and speak. He
was slain to his brotherwarde what time he was murdered fautelesse, but he
was not sleyne to God, unto whom his blood as yet cried vengeance from the
earth.

The text.
By faith was Enoch translated, that he should not se death, neither was he
found: For God had taken him away. For a fore he was taken away he obtained a
good report, that he pleased God. But without faith it can not be that any man
should please him. For he that comes to God, must believe that God is, and
that he is a rewarder of the^ that seek him. Neither was it any whit
prejudicial unto godly Enoch that he was begotten of a wicked father. For
holy scripture witnesses of him that he was conuersaunt and familiar with god,
even when he lived in earth, because he pursued by faith, not those things
which are seen, but such things as are not seen yt is to wit, eternal
things and heuenlye: and for this cause he was taken up alive to those things
that he loved, and delivered from death. For he lived after such a sort before
he was taken from the felowshyppe of men, that he seemed rather to live in
heaven then in earth, and seemed also unworthy to dye for that he had
committed nothing death worthy, to thentent men should first learn by his
example, that the open way to immortality is by faith and innocent living.
Therefore he was taken away because he pleased God. But he pleased him chiefly
by faith, without the which no man pleases him, have he else never so many
good deeds. For whosoever desires to be brought in favor with almyghtye God,
must first of all believe that God is, who can do all things, and wylleth what
is best. Then must he also believe that God cares for the world, and that by
him neither the godly, which setting at naught the visible good things of
this world search after God invisible, are defeated of their rewards, be
they never so much afflicted and persecuted in this life: nether the wicked
persons shall lack their punishementes, although they seem here to live in
prosperity and have the world at will. Therefore Enoch may thank his faith
for this (I wot nere whether I may call it glory or felicity) that he is
taken away from the felowshyppe of men, and lives with God.

The text.
By faith Noe, being warned of God, eschued the things which were as yet not
seen, and prepared the arcke to the ^auyng of his household, through the which
arcke he condemned the world, and became hei^e of the righteousness which is
according to faith. Howbeit Noe showed a more notable example of faith toward
God, even then this, who when he was forewarned by the mouth of God, how it
should come to pass that all kinds of living creatures in earth should be
destroyed through inundation of waters, and saw no apparent arguments or
reasons whereby the saying of God might be proved, because the element was
fair and clear, and the people that were feastyng and making brydeales
without any care lawghed to hear these manassyng words of the prophecy: Yet
surely believing that it would so come to pass as God had said before it
should happen, ordained an Arc, whereby he both preserved his own household, and
condemned other me^ which so mistrusted y^ words of god, y^ they lawghed him
to ^korne as a mad man when he was a framynge the said Arc against the
coming of the floude. Neither was he alonely preserved from the flould, but
also succeeded in the praise of Abell and Enoch his elders, who are much
renowned for that righteousness which through faith makes a man commendable
before God.

The text.
By faith Abraham when he was called, obtained to go out into a place, which he
should afterward receive to inherytaunce: and he went out not knowing whether
he should go. By faith he removed into the land of promise, as into a
strangcou^trey, when he had dwelt in tabernacles: and so did Isaac and Jacob
heirs with him of the same promise. For he looked for a city having a
foundation, whose builder and maker is god. Now how often did Abraham give an
example of a notable faith toward God? First where as there is nothing more
pleasant to man then his natyfe country, yet when almighty God commanded him
to forsake the same with his affeccions, and flyt into an unknown land, he
made no tarieng, but obeyed straight ways the voice of God, and that provoked
by no other man's example, nor put in hope and comfort by any probable reasons,
how it should so come to pass, that after he had forsaken such lands and
patrimony as he was borne unto, he should possess by enheritaunce, I wot
nere what land, whereof as yet he neither knew the name, nor situation. So
sure a trust and belefe had he, that all should come to pass what so ever God
had promised. It proceeded of the same faith that when he came into the land
promised of God, and the matier went not forewarde to his mind neither with
him, nor his son Isaac, nor his nephew Jacob (where as yet thenheritaunce of
this land was not promised to him alone, but also to his offspring and
posteritye) because he was constrained oftetymes to fight with his enemies, and
Isaac had much busynes and trouble with the Philistians, and Jacob was driven
thence by Esau his brother into the country of Mesopotamia, from whence after
he was at the length returned again, he was feign to bye a little piece of
ground to pytche his pauillion in: yet all these things moved not Abraham a
whyt to have any mystrust in God, who promised the land: neither complained he
that he was a bannyshed man, and not an enheritour, neither regarded he those
things which are seen in earth, but heavenly things which are not seen
otherwise then with the eyes of faith. For he perceived that this was not the
land that God meante of when he made the promise, the which land he set so
little store by, that he thought it not necessary therein to buyld neither house
or town but keep himself and his, in tabernacles, as a stranger which anon
should remove to an other place. What did he then look for when he saw that
these promyses were not performed? Forsoothe he looked for an other city
which was stable and perpetual, from whence he should never be driven out
again, far unlike these cities which men do build and destroy, the maker
and buylder whereof was God himself.

The text.
Through faith Sara also received strength to conceive and be with child, and
was delivered of child when she was past age, because she judged him faithful
which had promised. And therefore sprang there of one (even of one which was as
good as dead) so many in multitude, as are stars of the sky, and as the
sand the which is by the sea shore innumerable. Moreover his wife Sara when she
had both an old man to her husband, and her self was so stricken with age,
that her matrice lacked natural strength to draw man's sede unto it, and
retain the same, did nevertheless co^ceyue, and was delivered of Isaac,
mistrusting the strength of nature, but yet giving credence unto God, who by an
angel promised her a man child the next year. She gave no ear to nature
reclaming and barking to the contrary, but only had a sure belefe that God
could not lie. God promised Abraham a posterity equal in nombre to the
stars, and the sand of the sea shore, and yet by the course of nature was
there no hope of issue at all. That notwithstanding, he had no mystrust. And
therefore of this one old man being barayne by reason of age, there issued a
posterity so many in number, as are the stars of the s^ye, and the sand in
the sea shore. For he looked for sons and nephews, not after the kynred of
blood, but after the imitacion of faith, whereby al we are the offspring and
posterity of Abraham, which do believe the promises of the gospel. Therefore
not only Abraham, but also all his true posterity were of such constaunt
faith, that very death bereaved not them thereof.

The text.
These all died according to faith when they had not received the promises: but
saw the^ a far of, and believed them, and saluted them, and confessed that they
were strangers and pilgremes on the earth. For they that say such things,
declare that they seek a country. Also if they had been myndeful of the
country, from whence they came out, they had leisure to have returned again:
but now they desire a better (that is to say) an heavenly. Wherefore God
himself is not a shamed to be called their God, for he has prepared for them
a city. For all these dyed when they as yet had not the promysses performed,
but law them a far of by faith, and believed them: and for great desire
saluted them, puttyng so little trust in this land, wherein no man may live
any long space, that they confessed them selfs strangers and pilgrims, not
only in Palestyne, but in the whole world. For oftetymes they call this life
a pilgrimage and strange dwelling. And David in the mystical! Psalm
confesses himself to be a pilgrim on the land as all his forefathers and
elders were, and yet reigned he in Palestine, and builded there a city. And
verily this country y was compassed about with very narrow lymites, and a
great part thereof came not to the possession of the Hebrews the ofspryng and
successors of Abraham, because they could not drive out the old
possessioners: neither did Moses enter into the same, but beheld and saluted
if a far of from a mountain, when he was about to pass out of the world,
and yet had he no mistrust of the promyses. Therefore sense they confess
themselves to be pilgrims, they sufficiently declare that they desire and long
for a country. What country seek they after unto whom all this world is an
exile and banishement? They forsook their country of Chaldey, the which, if
they had so sore longed for it, was not so far of, but that they might have
had conueniente recourse thider at pleasure. Therefore they longed not for that,
but for an other country better then it, wherein they might live for ever,
quite exempte and deliured from all grievous sorrows and pains of this wretched
world. This was that heavenly country, into the which God called them out
from their own, for the love whereof he wylled them so to live in this world,
as though they were not therein. And for this cause almyghtie God, where he is
the maker and sovereign Lord of all men, calls himself specially the God
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

For he is properly the God of those that have put their whole trust, and all
aids of felicity in him. And unto such has he prepared, not an earthly, but
a celestial city in the which they reygne always in bliss with him, for
whose sake they contemned all things.

The text.
By faith Abraham offered by Isaac when he was proved, and offered him being
his only begotten son, in whom he had received the promises. And to him it
was said: ^^ Isaac shall thy sede be called: for he considered that God was
hable to raise him up again from death. Therefore received he him also for an
ensample of the resurreccy on. By faith did Isaac bless Jacob and Esau,
concerning things to come. Was not this also a notable exaumple of faith in
Abraham? that when God tryeng how unfeignedly he trusted him, commanded him to
offer up in sacrifice his son Isaac, where as he was his only son, and he
in whose name the posterity was promised (for these were the words of the
promyser: Thy sede shall be called in Isaac) yet he without further delay did
as he was commanded to do, not reasonyng here with himself on this wise: Of
whom shall I have posterity if I sley him in whom only rests all the hope of
my posterity? But he considered this in his mind, that God who made the
promise could not lie, and that he was able if it pleased him, to reyse his
dead son the multiplier of his stock even from death: And because he
believed the resurrection of the dead, it was therefore given him to bring home
his son again with him being as it were, restored to life, notwithstanding
he was as much as in the father lay, dead, who even then represented by a
certain figure the resurrection of Jesus Christ to come. This was also a
manifest example of a mind having a great confidence in God, that when Isaac
say on his death bed, and had not as yet received the felicity promised of
God, yet was he bold to promise the same to Jacob and Esau his sons, when he
blessed the^ both, foreseyng both their lives, and the contrary reward that
each of them should have. So quycke of sight is faith, that she sees even
those things as present which are far distant from the bodily senses.

The text.
By faith Jacob, when he was in dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph, and
bo^^^ himself toward the top of his scepter. By faith Joseph when he dyed,
remembered the departing of the children of Israel, and gave commandment of
his bones. It came of like faith that Jacob at the hour of his death, blessed
all the sons of Joseph, not ignorant what was to come, who crossynge his
arms laid his right hand upon Ephraim being on his left side, and his left
hand upon Manasse standing on his right side, nothing doubting but that
would come to pass, which the holy ghost told him before should happen. But
this faithful old man saw a great deal farther, what time he kyssinge the
top of the scepter of his son Joseph, worshypped Christ in him, who should
have sovereign authority and rule over all men, of who^ the said Joseph
falsely accused and betrayed of his brethren bare the figure. Neither did
Joseph grow out of kind, and become unlike his ancestors in faith. For when
he should depart this world in the land of Egypt, he foresawe how it should
come to pass by gods help (the which thing as then seemed nothing lykely)
that the Israel ites should remove out of Egypt to come unto the land
promised of God: and so true is it that he doubted not hereof, that he gave then
a commandment of the translating of his bones to the same place.

The text.
By faith Moses when he was borne, was hyd three months of his father and
mother because they saw he was a proper child, nether feared they the kings
commau^demente. Moreover Moses, when he was newly comen into the world was
preserved by the faith, of his parents. For when the king had commanded that
all the men children borne of the Hebrews should straight ways be done to
death, his father and mother after they had vewed the child (who seemed anon as
he was borne to be marked to do some great and notable feate, even by the
very towardnes and lykelyhod that appeared in his countenance) supposyng it
to be an acceptable pleasure unto God that it were preserved for the common
weal of the people, contemned the kings commandment, and hyd the said
child three months in their house: that done, they put it in a little cofer,
and laid it out upon a ryuers bank, nothing doubtyng but God would preserve
the yonglyng whom he had endued with so great grace: to conclude, they feared
more to displease God then the King, because they perceived that such as live
well and vertuouflye, can not, how soever the world go with them, lack their
reward.

The text.
By faith Moses when he was great, refused to be called the son of Pharaos
daughter, and chose rather to suffer aduersite with the people of god then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and esteemed the rebuke of Christ
greater riches then y^ treasures of Egypt. For he had respect unto the
reward. Howebeit the parents of Moses deserved to have the praise hereof,
like as this was his own propre commendation, that after he was shot up
toward man's state, and chosen of Pharaos dawghter to be her son, he
refused the honorable kynred of the blood Royal, having lever to confess him
self to be an Hebrew borne, and so to suffer common persecution with the
people of God, then by wicked disimulation to enjoy the commodities and
pleasures of this world, reckenynge it to be much happier riches then all the
Egiptians treasures, at that time to suffer the rebukes of adversities for the
preservation of the people, thereby to figure Christ, who in time to come should
suffer greater euels for the sauetie of his nation. Fynallye he contemned that
he might have had, and was sure of, and with the eyes of faith regarded those
things only which are far from the senses, puttyng his affyaunce in God,
who suffers not the virtue and goodness of man, to be disapointed of worthy
rewards.

The text.
By faith he forsook Egypt, and feared not the fearcenes of the king. For he
endured, even as though he had seen him which is invisible. Through faith he
ordained the passover and the effusion of blood, left he that destroyed the
first borne, should touch them. The same Moses puttyng his trust in the aid
of God, boldlye attempted things of much greater enterprise then these. For
he sticked not to fly out of the land of Egypt, and thence to convey with
him the people of God, nothing fearyng the wrath of the fierce tyrante. He
contemned the king whom he saw with his eyes. He regarded not the threatenings
of so mighty a Prince, whom he saw in arms pursuynge his nation the
Israelites at the heles, and ready to sleye them. Neither did he with less
boldness and courage of mind trust upon the invisible socours of the
invisible God, then if he had openly seen him with his eyes. Moreover of the
same faith came it, that when he understood how it would come to pass, y^ the
reuengyng Aungel would raunge through the whole land of Egypt, and sley all
the fyrstborne, he was nothing afraid of his people the Hebrews, unto whom in
those days about the time of the same destruction, he ordained the annual
use or ceremony to eat the Paschall Lamb, with whose blood they sprynkeled
the thrasholde and haunse of the door, with both the posts of the house, and
trustyng upon this sign feared not them selves in the mids of the slaughter
of the Egipcians.

The text.
By faith they passed through the red see as by dry land, which when the
Egipcians had assaied to do, they were drouned. Anon after when the reed sea
let the Hebrews in their flyeng, by virtue of like faith it divided asonder
at the stroke of Moses rod, and left such a way in the mids, that they
passed thereby as well as by dry land. And by this means all the people
putting their trust in God, fled a way safe and without any harm. But when
the Egyptians being rash and over hasty through wrath, were entered therein,
by and by the waters closed together, and they all were drowned.

The text.
By faith the walls of Ierico fell down after they were compassed about seven
days. What thing made in times paste the walls of Iericbo, after they were
seven times compassed about, on the seventh day sodaynely to fall without any
violence of engyns at the sound of the priests trompettes, and the cry or
shoune of the people, in such wise that all the Hebrews who enuyroned the
town, had entrance made themeuery man in the place where he stood? was it not
the faith of the captain Joshua and the people? he was thoroughly persuaded with
him self that god was able to do all things, and that the thing would
undoubtedly come to pass which he had promised to do.

The text.
By faith the hatlotte Raab peryshed not with them that were disobed ie^t, when
she had received the spies to lodgyng peaceably. Furthermore, it was also a
notable example of faith that the harlotte Raab, which had before received the
spies to lodgyng that were sent unto the City by the Hebrews, after she
perceived how that people was dearly beloved and in the favor of God, she
was better willing to provide for them with the danger of her own life, then
to get thank of the wicked Citizens, and therefore had she this reward for her
faith, that she and her family only were preserved from death, because they
should not perish with the^, which trustyng to their own strength believed not
that god would destroy their City at his pleasute.

The text.
And what shall I more say? For the time will be to short for me to tell of
Sed^^^, of Barache, and of Samson, and of Iephthae, of Dauyd also and Samuel,
and of the ^^^ phetes: which through faith subdued kingdoms: wrought
tyghteousues: obtained the promyses: stopped the mouths of lions: quenched the
violence of fire: escaped the edge of y^ swearde, out of y^ wekenes, were made
strong, wared valyant in fight, turned to flyghte the armies of the alyentes,
the women received their dead raised to life again. But seeing that among so
many wonderful acts of our forefathers and elders there was none at all
notably achiued with out the aid of faith, for what purpose should I stand in
the particular rehersall of them all? I should sooner lack time, then examples
if I would go forth with the stories of the Captain Gedeon, who trusting upon
the aids of God feared not with three hundred men to set upon the hooste of
the Madianites excedyngly well fournished with men, armoure, and all other
habilimentes of war: And in conclusion dyscomfited and put to flight a great
multitude of them, with the sownd of trompettes, noise of pytchers, and
merueylous and sudden appearing of candels, in such wise that the Hebrews
never drawyng their swerdes, one of them slew an other.

Of Barache, who trusting upon the propheceie of the woman Debora, set upon the
excedyngly well appointed hooste of the Captain Selara, and slew the same not
leaving one man alive, and finally put king Iabin to flight, who anon after was
slain of a woman.

Of Sampson, who being aided with the help of God achiued many wonderful
enterprises against the Philistians, for the defense of his country, the
which could not be done of a great many together, nor yet by any puissaunce
and strength of man's body.

Of Iephthae, who albeit he was a vile basterd, and of base fortune in his
country, yet trustyng upon Gods help had a merueylous goodly victory over
the Immonites enymyes to his people.

Of David, who besides so many victories by Gods help gotten, besides so many
ieoperdies as he escaped by the preservation of almighty God, feared not being
but a young striplyng, and without armoure, to encountre with Goliath well
weaponed and armed at all pieces, whom he ouerthre we with the ^^oke of a slyng,
because God should have the whole glory and praise of this victory and not man.

Of Samuel, who without any guard of men to defend his personage, governed
many years the people of Israel, freely executynge the office of a Judge and
chief ruler among them, being well assured that God would reward, if any man
did any thing aryght in his ministracion. Time (I say) would fail me if I
would proceed in recityng of al such examples. I will here ouerhyp so many
noble Prophets, as putting their trust in God set naught by the threatenings
of tyrants: so many men of renowned holiness as not by worldly goods and
riches, but by the aid of god in who^ they put their whole affyau^ce did
wonderful deeds, and by their worthy acts left behind the^ a memorial of the^
selves unto posterity. For, to make a brief and su^marie rehearsal of stories
omittyng the names of thauctours, it is to be ascribed unto their faith yt they
being as touching all other things unable, did by the help of God subdue most
wealthye and rich kingdoms, and could not by any manner of fear be brought
from the keeping of the law that was given them, lokyng for their reward of
almyghtie God. And because no delayeng of the promises minished their faith, at
length they attained those things which God promised unto their elders. They
obtained of him by faithful prayers that which could in no wise be done by
the course of nature. They were by his preservation delivered from excedyng
great dangers. The lions which against other are of fierceness invincible,
they either vanquished, or proved harmles, as though their mouths being
stopped, or else their claws fast bownden, they had had no power to hurt those
whom God would have preserved without any anoyaunce. When they were cast into
the mids of the fire, they so endured without hurt, as though they had
quenched the natural violence and heat thereof with their bodies. Again, by
the protection of God they escaped away safe from their enemies swerdes that
were drawn against them. Furthermore God recomfortyng them, they received
after viter desperation, exceeding great strength and courage of mind,
insomuche that being not long before taken for dead me^, they suddenly
acquitted them selves manfully in battayll, and valiauntly put to flight their
enemies, of whom they were invaded. Moreover the faith also of the women
deserved that the mothers saw their dead children raised from death to life
again.

The text.
Other were tacked, and would not be delivered, that they might inherit a
better resurreccion. Again other were tried with mockinges and scourgynges,
moreover, with bonds and prysonemente, were stoned, were hewn asunder, were
tempted, were slain with sweard, walked up and down in sheep skynnes, and
goats skynnes, being destitute, troubled audvered, which men the world was
not worthy of: They wandered in wildernesses and in mountains, and in dens,
and caves of the earth. Other being racked, and sore handled with diverse
kinds of tourmentes, were better wyllyng to dye in such pains, then to be
delivered with condition to obey the wicked commandments of Princes:
yeldynge with great faith their lives to almyghtye God, which they knew right
well they should receive again with vauntage in the resuttection of the dead,
supposing i^ much better to bye immortality with the loss of this short
and transitory life, then for a little gain of small time to loose the life
eternal. Again by reason of a constaunt desire they had to maintain the
truth and righteousness, they were jesting stocks to all the world, laughed
to skorne of every body, and slaundered for mad men, and workers of
myschief, and not only put to shame for their faith toward God, but also had
their virtue and goodness tried with scourgynges, and moreover with bonds and
emprisonment. Furthermore they were stoned, hewn a sonder, and torn in pieces
with horrible punishemente of body. To make an end, with what kind of euyls
were they not tried with all? They dyed with dynt of sword, being fully
persuaded that good men could not by very death be severed from God.

Again such of them as chanced not to make an end of their tourmentes by
death, wanne nothing else by prolongyng of their lives, but that they were
tourmented with long martyrdom. They were banished from their houses, and
being driven out of towns wandered up and down in wilderness like wild
beasts, covered, as well as it would be, with sheep skynnes, and Goat
skynnes, having scarcity of all necessaries, vexed with the cruelnesse of
persecutours ready to assail them on every side, and troubled with the sondrye
discomodites and miseries of this life, being so unworthy to suffer such euels
and adversities, that the world was rather not worthy to have in it so
virtuous and holy men: in such wise, that God moughte seem even for this
purpose to have taken them away from the company of men, lest they being men of
pure and chaste conversation, should have led their lives among defiled
persons and sinners. Therefore they wandered about in wild mountains, having
no certain habitacion or dwelling place to resort unto, vsyng Dens and
Caves of the earth in the stead of houses.

The text.
And these al through faith obtained good report and, received not the promise,
bicau^^ god had provided a better thing for us that they without us, should not
be made perf^^^^. And all these before named albeit they have not yet obtained
the reward promised them for their godly living, which reward shall be given
them ^^ the general resurreccion of the bodies: Yet have they deserved
perpetual praise for the constantnesse of their faith. Some man will here
say: Why has not every man his reward by and by given him after death? For
soothe it has so pleased almyghtye God, that all the whole body of Christ
shall receive the glory of immortality together. For we are all members of the
same body: and such as have gone before us do gladly tarry for us, to the end
that they may wholly and jointly with their bodies, and all the felowshyppe of
their brethren, enter into thenheritaunce of eternal glory, and be conjoined
unto their head.

The.xii. Chapter.
The text.
Wherefore, let us also (seyuge that we are compassed with so great a mult
ytude of witnesses) lay a way all that presses down, and the sin that
hangs so fast on, let us run with patience unto the battaill that is set
before us, loking unto Jesus y^ aucr^or and finisher of our faith, which (for
the joy that was set before him) abode the erosse and despised the shame, and
is set down on the right hand of the throne of God. Consider therefore, how
that he endured such speaking against him of sinners, lest ye should be
werted, and faint in your minds. For ye have not yet resisted unto blood,
striving against sin: And have forgotten the exhortacyon, which speaks unto
you as unto children: My soune, despise not thou the chastenyug of the Lord,
nether faiute, when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loves him he
chasteueth: yea, he sourgeth every son that he receives* Seeing then we are
compassed with so great a company, and as it were with a cloud of those, who,
even in the old testamente, witnessed by sufferyng of such euels as are
before rehearsed that they believed the promyses of God with all their heart,
let us also encouraged by their examples see that we cast from us the burden
or fardell of corporal things and bodily lusts, which lets the mind
laden with cares to desire things celestial, and put away sin that held
us fast on every side: and finally being incensed and set a fire with the hope
of heavenly things, run manfully in this ^^ase that is set before us, and by
no afflyccions, nor any withdrawynge of the mind be stayed and holden back
from runnyng the course that we have begone, never castyng our eyes aside from
Jesus Christ, who as he is the very cause that we have conceived this belefe
on God, so will he fynyshe what he has begone in us. Let us considre what
way he entered in, and whitherto he came, who whereas he might by reason he was
innocent and gyltlesse have escaped death, and been as much without all pain
and passion, as he was without all sin, yet he despysynge the joys of this
world suffered death, and to thentent his death should be the greuouser having
reproach joined therewith, he suffered the death of the cross. For men make not
so much a do to suffer a glorious death. Ye see which way he entered in.
Now whitherto came he? By despisyng of this life, he attained immortality: By
despisyng and setting naught by worldly reproach, he attained everlasting
glory in heaven, where he now sytteth on the right hand of the royal throne
of God the father.

When ye withal haste auaunce your selfs to come to be partakers of this
glory through reproach and diverse paynful afflictions, then, lest you
dyscouraged in your minds should at any time by thenforcemente of weariness
ceaseto run in the raase that is set before you, considre with your selfs
how that your capytayne, who never knew any manoure of sin, did never
thelesse, to show us an example of true patience, endure so great rebukes, so
much shame and vylanye, such mysreportes and false accusacions, that he let
the wicked Jews compel him to suffer the very punyshement of the cross. Be
not ye therefore dysmayed, who being not clean without sin? do suffer less
dyspleasures and persecution. Better it were for a man to dye a thousand
times, then to fall again into his former sinful life. Howbeit you, who have
hitherto suffered small persecution and adversity, have not as yet resisted
sin unto sheadyng of blood, the which sin fierslye assaulteth you,
stryuynge against it, and yet you do by and by suppose that God has forsaken
you, and remember not what the merciful father speakethe unto you, as unto his
children, in the mystical proverbs, comfortynge you, and with sweet and
gentle words exhortyng you to great and valiaunte courage of mind: My son
(says he) despise not thou the chastenyng of the Lord: neither despair thou
when soever he rebukes thee. For whom the Lord loves, him he chasteneth with
the euels and adversities of this life, and scourges every son that he
receyneth.

The text.
If ye endure chastenyng, god offers himself unto you as unto sons. What
son is he whom the father chasteneth not? If ye be not under correccyon,
whereof al are partakers, then are ye bastardes and not sons. Therefore seeing
we have had fathers of our flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence: shall we now not much rather be in subjection unto the father of
spirits, and live? And they verily for a feawe days nuttered us, after their
own pleasure, but he nurtereth us for our profit, to the intent that he may
minister of his holiness unto us. No manner chastening for the present time
seems to be ioious, but grievous: nevertheless afterward, it brings the
quiet fruit of righteousness, unto them which are exercised thereby. If ye
patiently endure such chastenyng, God acknowledges his sons, and offreth him
self to you again as a merciful and loving father, and does not exclude you
from thenheritaunce of the life celestial. Think you that you are therefore
hated, and nothing regarded of God, because ye are afflicted with the euels of
this world? Nay, rather this ought to be an argument that ye are appointed to
be the heirs of the fathers enheritaunce. For what father is he that does not
some whiles chasten his son whom he acknowledges for his own? Furthermore,
sith that all virtuous men and good lyuers, whom God either does, or has
dearly loved, have been by temporal afflictions taught true virtue, and godly
living, if you be free from such fatherlye correction, verily it is a manifest
proof that ye are bastardes, and not true natural sons. If we have not
only suffered, but also given reverence to our parents, of whom we are
begotten as touching the flesh only, whiles they did with checkes and lashes
teach us the common behavior of this life, not striuinge against their
authority, but so interpretyng their doings, as though howsoever they dalte
with us, they did all of a frendelye mind, and good zeal toward us: shall
not we then much more submytte and yield our selfs to the heavenly father,
who is not only the auctour of bodies, but of spirits, fullye persuaded with
our selfs herein, that what euyls and adversities so ever he suffers us to be
afflicted with all, he does nevertheless with a fatherly mind provide for our
soul health and salvation? As the corporal father is not so cruel against
his son as to sley him, but to preserve him, and make him better: so God
chasteneth us in this world to thentente we may live for ever in the world
to come. And those parents enstructed us as they would them selfs, oftentimes
abusyng their authority, and enstructed us for a short time in things
transitory, and such things as will soon perish, as in those which
perteyne to the getting and mayntenaunce of worldly substance, yea and many
times having an eye to their own profit, they enstructed us to this end,
because they would be helped with our obsequious and ready deligence. But this
father who has no need of us, always regards our commodities, and that our
singular profits and commodities.

For he goes not about to have us enryched with earthlye goods, neither to
have us succeed in the lyuelod of a few acres of land, but to give us his
heavenly gifts, that is to wit, holiness in this world, and in the world
to come everlasting bliss and felicity. Whosoever will earnestly consydre with
him self this so great and excellent profit shall easily away with the
temporal grief of this present life. For when other parents do correct their
children, yt manner of chastysyng has in it no pleasure, but pain and grief
for the time present, yet after the children be come to man's state, and
begin once to perceive how much good that pain did them, then do they
greatly rejoice that ever they were beaten and chydde, and with lawghynge
countenance render them thanks whom they suffered before with weeping eyes.
Even so the calamytie and miserye of this world is in the mean time whiles it
hangs over our heads, and vexes these mortal bodies, grievous to our
senses. But this pain, this vexation and trouble, wherewith our souls also by
reason of the society they have with the body are dysquieted, brings forth
the quiet and sweet fruit of righteousness in due season. Affliction teaches
godliness, godliness brings the joys of a good mind or clear conscience, a
good mind brings forth immortality. Therefore let no man's heart fail him
in this most godly raase. The sweat and labor is great, but the rewards are
high and excellent, but the reward gyuer is faithful.

The text.
Stretche furthe therefore the hands which were let down, and the weak knees
and so that ye have straight steps unto your fete lest any halting turn you
out of the way: yea, let it rather be healed. Follow peace with all men and
holiness: without the which no man shall se the Lord. And look that no man be
destitute of the grace of God lest any rote of bytternesse spring up and
trouble, and thereby many be defiled: that there be no fornica^^^r, or unclean
person, as Esau which for one mess of meat sold his birthright. For ye know
how that afterward when be would by inheritance have obtained blessing, he
was put by. For he found no place of repentance, though he sought it with
tears. Follow you stout wrastelers, and lustye runners: bestyre your werye
hands, pluck up your weak and foltryng knees, and run streygth to the
mark that is set before you. Let not the foot tournynge hither and thither
wander out of the straight way: Yea rather if you have wandered any whit at
all, if ye have been heretofore slack in runnyng, see ye make amends with a
new lusty courage and cherefulnesse. Neither is it enough for you that every
man run for his own behofe taking no care for other: yea rather be you so
conjoined in peace and concord, that by a common diligence one of you be
careful for an other, and take heed lest any runnynge in this common course
fall from the grace of God: lest any lackyng that holiness which becomes
the members of Christ to have, and without which no man shall see God, be
one^ous unto the body, and unworthy to have the chief game or reward which is
set before us given him: And finally lest any root of bytternesse spring up,
and trouble the godly endeavors of other which hasten unto heavenly things:
and being suffered to spread abroad defyle a great many with his infection.
Let there be no fornicatour among you, or any person that is otherwise
unclean, and given unto the bealy. For such lusts and beastly desires do let
you to run, and cause you to turn out of the right way, and thus comes
it to pass, that whiles you regard such colored and apparent good things,
ye loose that chief game and everlasting reward. So for a suretye chanced it
unto Esau, who being hongrey sold his byrthryght for the pleasure of one mease
of meat, purchasing himself perpetual repentance for a small pleasure,
that endured but a while. For this must you remember to thentent it may be an
exaumple for you, how that afterward when he went about to have his
byrthryghte restored unto him again by his fathers blessyng, he was put by,
and was never ye better for his late repentance, although he testified by
great abundaunce of tears that he was sorye for his deeds. That byttrenesse
which springs of hatered, envy, and arrogaunce, breaks brotherly
concord: pleasure of the body, superfluytie, and other desires of fylthy
things do defyle pure and holy living. Now these two things, that is to
wit concord and pure living, must not decay among you: Neither can the one
of them be without the other. For among unclean persons and sinners, there
is no concord wherewith God is pleased: neither can there be any good and
vpryght living where as discord and debate rayneth. Therefore we ought also to
take good head lest we most folyshely exchange thenherytaunce of the kingdom
of heaven, with the pleasures of this world. The things whereunto we hasten
are heavenly, wherefore we must come pure and clean: we must continually walk
in the light of the gospel. Our holy living must agree with so holy a
profession. You must needs be answerable unto your hye priest and his law in
your conversation.

The text.
For ye are not come unto the mount that is touched, and unto burning fire,
nor unto storm and darkness, and tempests of wether, and sound of a trompe,
and the voice of words, which voice they (that heard it) wished away, that
the communicacion should not be spoken to them. For they could not abide that
which was commanded. If a beast touch the mountaygne it shall be stoned, or
thruste through with a darte: so terryble was the sight which appeared, Moses
said: I fear and quake. But ye are come unto the mount Syon, and to the cyrie
of the living god, the celestial Dierusalem: and to an innumerable sight of
angeles: and to the congregation of the first borne sons, which are written
in heaven, and to god the judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect
men, and to Jesus the mediator of the new testament, and to the sprinkeling of
the blood that speaks better then the blood of Abell. For ye are not come
unto the mount of Syna, which may be touched with body, as your forefathers
came once, what time Moses publyshed the law: and unto a burning fire which
is felt and perceived with man's senses, nor unto a storm and darkness,
and unto tempests of weddre, and sound of a trompe, all the which things
are perceived with the cares, and eyes: nor to the voice of words, which
although they might have been heard with men's cares by reason they were
pronounced with breath, and did little or nothing represent the true voice of
God, yet had they such a Majesty in them, that the people hearing the
terrible noise of the same, were greatly afeard, and desired almyghtie God that
he would not him self speak any more unto them, but that Moses would with
his voice publyshe such things as God had commanded. Else should that voice
of God have been more terryble then the weakness of man's ears had been
able to away with all. Such a reverend fear and dread had those things
which were done only to figure the law of the gospel, that the people was
kept a lofe, and not suffered to touch the mount, and also a proclamation
made by commandment, that what beast soever touched the same should be
stoned, or thrust through with a darte. For so terrible was the sight of the
things which were showed unto the corporal senses, yt Moses himself was
abashed, and quaked for fear thereof. Howbeit you are not come to such a
sensible sight, which was a shadow and figure of far better things, but
to things yt have in the^ more verity then is contained herin, forasmuch as
they are perceived with ye mind or soul, and not with bodily senses: Ye are
come, I say, to the spiritual mount of Syon which is touched with the
spirit, and not with hands: to heavenly Jerusalem the City of the living God
where is peace everlasting: to an innumerable sight of angels the head pears
and inhabitauntes thereof: to the congregation of the children of god who have
not lost their byrthright with Csau, but by cleauynge unto Christ have
deserved to be regestred in heaven where they are made citizens: to God the
judge of all, who is the sovereign personage of that common wealth: to the
spirits and souls of rightuous men, who for their perfect godlynes and good
living are joined to the company and fellowship of heaven, and associat with
the judge: to Jesus the hye priest of the new testament who does not destroy
us, but restore us unto favor: and to his blood by whose sprynklyng souls
are pourged ye which speaks bettre then the blood of Abel. For y^ blood
desired vengeance: but this obteyneth pardon.

The text.
Se that ye despise not him, that speaks. For if they escaped not, which
refused him that spoke on yerth, much more shall we not escape, if we turn
away from him, that speaks from heaven, whose voice then shoke the yerth,
and now has declared, saying: yet once more will I shake, not the earth
only, but also heaven. Where as he says: yet once more, it signifies the
remouinge away of those things which are shaken, as of things which have
ended their course: that the things, which are not shaken moye remain.
Wherefore, if we receive the kingdom which can not be moved, we have grace
whereby we may so serve God and that we may please him with reverence and godly
fear* For our God is a consumyng fire. The more mercifully and lovingly his
blood speaks for us, the more ought we to beware lest we despise him who
speaks so for us. For if they escaped not punishment for despysyng of the
word, who refused Moses a man speaking on earth, then shall we suffer much
greuouser punishment if we turn away from Christ speaking unto us from
heaven, whose voice then shoke the earth, to fear them by sensible fear from
synnyng. But what threateneth he now to do from heaven by the prophet Aggeus?
yet once more, says he, will I shake, not the earth only, but also heaven, to
the intent you not only earthly men, but also heavenly things may quake and
fear. Now where he says: yet once more: it signifies the remouyng away of
those things which are shaken, of such things, I say, as are made with men's
hands, as the temple, and city of Jerusalem, to the end that those things
which are not made with men's hands, and therefore inasmuche as they are
eternal can not be shaken, may continue. The Jews do glory and take pride in
their temple, they glory in their holy city, but the time shall come when
these things shall not be. They look after a kingdom, but we see it translated
and removed to an other place. Let us therefore who through the benifite and
grace of the holy ghost have begone to endeavor our selfs to attain the
kingdom of heaven (the which can in nowyse be shaken) persevere in the
benifite of almyghtie God.

Let us continue in this heavenly temple, and serve God with such reverence
and fear, that we may with purity of mind and conscience please him, who
requires not from hence forth any other kind of sacrifice. If our forefathers
were afearde to do any thing whiles they were making of their sacrifices where
with they should offend the eyes of men: how much more head the^ ought we to
take in these spiritual sacrifices lest we do any thing which may offend
the eyes of almyghtie God. If in times past he were in danger who came unto
the holy places without due observation of certain ceremonies: how much
greater peril then shall we be in if we presume to come with unclean minds
unto God, who is not a bodily fire (the which as it is kyndled, so may it be
quenched again) but a fire full of strength and efficacy, and also such a
one as brings to naught and destruction what thing soever it lusts.

The.xiii. Chapter.
The text.
Let brotherly love continue. Be not forgetful to lodge strangers. For thereby
have diverse men lodged angels vnwates. Remember them that are in bonds, even
as though ye were bound with them your selves. Be myndefull of them which are
in adversity, as ye which are yet in the body. Wedlock is to be had in honor
among all men, and the bed undefiled. As for whorekepers and aduouterers God
shall judge them. Let your conversation be without couetcousnes, and be content
with such things as ye haut already. For he has said: I will not fail the
nether forsake the: so that we may boldly say: the Lord is my helper, and I
will not fear what man may do unto me. Remember them which have the
oversight of you, which have spoken unto you the word of God. Whose faith se
that ye follow, and consider the end of their conversation. LEt brotherly love
continue among you, sens that ye are members of the same body. Love ye not
such only as are daily conuersaunt with you, but also those which resort
as strangers unto you. For hospitality is highlye commended before God, in so
much that hereby Abraham deserved to receive unawares Angels to lodgyng when he
thought he had done that good turn and pleasure unto men. Furthermore
Christen charity requires also this, that the calamity of such as are in
prison and bonds for the professyng of Christ move you no less then if your
selfs were in like case: and that their tourment and pain (who are elswise
afflicted with diverse euels and adversities) so styre you to pity and
compassion, that it may hereby appear that you have a body subject to the
self same evils, and are not compassionlesse for th^se pains and sorrows
which the members of the same body do suffer. Let wedlock, the which being
kept as it ought to be had due honor, even among the heathen people, be
likewise had in honor and reverence among you: and let not the bed of
matrimonye be defiled with any kind of aduoutry. As for whorekepers and
aduoutrers God shall judge the^. Let your conversation be without covetousness,
in such wise that you may content your selfs with such things as you
already possess, as men living without provision and care for any thing to
come. For god made such a promise unto Iosue and in Iosue to all that put their
co^fydence and trust in him: I will not fail the, says he, neither forsake
the: so that trusting on him, we may boldly say as the prophet says in the
mystical psalm: The lord is my helper, I will not fear what man may do unto
me. Regard you those y^ have the oversight of you, of whom you have received,
not man's doctrine, but the word of God, and see that they lack nothing
necessary for them, unto whose words like as at the beginning you gave
credence, so look upon their living as on a mark, and follow their faith,
consyderyng how constauntly they abide in the profession of the gospel unto
their lives end. The gospel once taught a right, is always most steadfastly
to be holden and observed.

The text.
Jesus Christ yester day, and to day, and the same continues for ever. Be
not carried about with diverse and strange learning. For it is a good thing
that the heart be stablyshed with grace, not with meats, which have not
profyted them that have had their pastyme in them. We have an altar whereof
they may not eat which serve in the tabernacle. For the bodies of those
beasts whose blood, is brought into the holy place by the high pryeste to
pourge sin, are burnt without the tents. Therefore Jesus also to sanctify
the people with his own blood suffered without the gate. Let us go futthe
therefore unto by mout of the tents, and suffer rebuke with him. For here have
we no continuyng city: but we seek one to come. For as Jesus Christ was
yesterdaye, and is to day, and evermore shall be time without end, and never
shall be changed: so shall his doctrine continue for ever. Therefore abide you
stable and stedefast herein, and be not as men, leanyng upon no sure
foundation, carried about with new and diverse learning. The law of Moses
taught no other thing then the gospel now teaches, but after an other
fashion. It is a point of folly to stick still unto shadows, after that
verity is come to light. And yet are there some which renew again the old
iewyshe religion now abrogate and dysanulled, holdyng opinyon that bettue and
godly living stands in meats and corporal fode, the which things such
as have supersticiously observed, have nothing profited thereby to thattaynyng
of ryghtuousnesse. Whosoever desires to attain perfyte and true godliness, which
has not an only shadow of ryghtuousnes, but stablysheth the mind with a
clear conscience before God: let him cantinew in grace and faith, and lean
upon this foundation which Christ has laid, and then shall he not waver
with Iewyshe superstions. Let the Jews count it a holy thing to absteyne
from certain meats, even from such as are offered up in sacrifice. We also
have a much holyer altar, whereof it is not lawful for them to eat, who
being given as yet unto the ceremonies of the law, know not the grace of the
gospel, where by is given true soul health and salvation. For, according unto
the prescription of the law, the carkases of those beasts whose blood is
accustomably offered for sin by the hie priest in the tabernacles called holy,
are by commandment burned without the tents, as though the blood had in it
some holy thing, notwithstanding the bodies, as things unclean and defiled,
are carried out to be burned in unholy places, and therefore they abstain
from them, as from unclean meats. These folks have the shadow, but we
embrace that which the shadow has signified. They were never the holier in
mind after they were sprynkled with blood, neither were they any whit the
cleaner because they absteined from eating of y^ bodies, sens their souls were
wholly dysteyned with sin and viciousnes. We embrace Jesus our sacrifice and hie
priest, who, as it were alludyng to the figure of the law, would be crucified
without the gate of the city of Jerusalem, there to pourge his people with his
most precious blood, whose example we must not supersticiously, but deuoutely
follow. And this shall we do, if we also take up our cross, and follow him
going out from the co^painye of men, as from a knot or fellowship of mischeuous
persons. Let us likewise go out, and depart from meadlyng with this world, and
take more pleasure to suffer reproach for Christ's sake, the^ to take y^
fruition of worldly glory. Let us bid this earthly cityfare well, who have not
here a contynuyng city, but look after one to come, which is celestial and
everlasting.

Verily he goes out of the city, who so puts away and subdueth
thaffections and lusts of the flesh, and wholye gives himself to heavenly
contemplation.

The text.
By him therefore do we offer sacrifice of laud always to God, that is to
saye^ the fruit of those lips, which confess his name. To do good and to
destribute forget not, for with such sacrifices God is pleased. Obey them
that have the ouersyght of you, and submit your selfs unto them, for they
watch for your souls, even as they that must give acco^ptes: that they may do
it with joy, and not with grief. For that is an unprofitable thing for you.
We offer not up our sacrifyce within the walls, but go in like manoure out of
the city with our hye priest Christ, and contynuallye offer a certain
sacrifice pleasant and acceptable unto God through him, not any beast, not
corn of the fildes, but the fruit of lyppes, of lyppes, I say, not alonelye
of the body, but also of the soul, by the which we acknowlage the benefytes
of God toward us, and having Christ's cross in remembrance, tender thanks
for the remyssion of our sins, and so many gifts as we are endued with
all. Of this altar the Jews are not partakers, who abide still with in the
walls, and love nothing but that which is carnal. Now learn you also an
other kind of sacrifice, worthy to by a sacrifice of the gospel, which we
must continally make to please almyghtie God with all. Our neighbor is to
be helped with our benefits, and if the same be in necessity, then ought we
to succor him with ^haide of our goods and substance. For by such
sacrifices gods favor is sooner obtained, then by the triflyng obseruaunces
and constitucions of the Jews, without regard of our christian brother. Obey
you those which have the ouersyghte of you, submyttynge your selfs unto
them, although they be evil persons, so long as they go not about to enforce
you to ungodliness. For when they do according to their office and vocation,
they watch for your souls inasmuche as they provide for your soul health
and salvation, and that with their own peril, because they shall give an
accomptes of their ministration unto almyghtie God, from whom all power
comes. You shall greatly ease them of their burden, if you show your
selfs obsequious and obedyent unto them, to thentente that what so ever they
do, they may do it with right good will and gladly, rather then with evil
will and grudgyng. For that is both grievous unto them, and also unto you
unprofitable. It greueth them that they have taken so much pain without any
profit. On the other side, it is not expedient for you to provoke gods wrath
against you, through your dysobedience.

The text.
Pray for us. For we ^eust we have a good conscience among all men, and desire
to live honestly. But I desire you the more, that ye so do, that I may be
restored to you the f^^er. The God of peace that brought again from death our
Lord Jesus the great shepherd of the sheep through the blood of the
everlasting testament, make you perfect in all good works, to do his will and
bring to pass, that the thing which ye do, may be pleas^^ in his sight
through Jesus Christ. To whom be praise for ever while y^ world endures Amen.
Pray ye unto God for my brethren and me. For (as it seems) I ought to be
nombred among your good pastors and bishops. Whether I be allowed of all men
or no, I cannot tell, yet I trust I have demeaned my self as honestye and good
conscience would among all those which are desirous to live after the rule
of the gospel. And this do I the more earnestly desire you to do, to thentent
I may the sooner be restored unto you again. In the mean season I likewise
pray for you, that it may please God thauctour of peace which has raised
again from death that chief shepeherd and pastor of his sheep our Lord
Jesus Christ, who when he was relyued entered into heaven through his blood,
there to make intercession for us, unto the father, with the which blood he
has hallowed the new and everlasting testament: I pray for you (I say) that
it may please him to make you perfect in all good works, to thentente you
may satisfy and accomplish his will, and that it may further please him to
bring to pass that the thing which ye do may be pleasant and acceptable in
his sight, and that through his son Jesus Christ, who is always present and
sets forth our sacrifices: unto whom all glory is due, not only in this
present life, but also for evermore. Amen. There is nothing that we can
challenge and ascribe unto our selfs for our well doings. It is his gift, and
comes of him what so ever we do wherewith God is pleased.

The text.
I beseech you brethren, suffer the word of exortacion: for we have written
unto you in few words. Ye know our brother Timothe, that he is at liberty:
with whom (if become shortly) I will se you. Salute them that have the
ouersyght of you, and all the saints. They of Italy salute you. Grace be with
you all. Amen. These things have I written for your exhortacion, desyryng you
to take in good part that I have done of a good mind and purpose. I have
written unto you in few words, as he who purposes shortly to see you. You
shall understand that Timothe is not with me at this present. For I have sent
him to an other place. If he return shortly I will come with him and se you.
Have me commended to all such as have the ouersyght^ of you, and furthermore
to the whole company of saynctes or good christians. The Italians salute you.
The grace and favor of god be with you all.

Amen.
Thus ends the Paraphrase upon the Epistle to the Hebrews.
To the right Excellent and most virtuous Lady Anne, Duchess of Somerset, her
graces most humble Orator John old wishes true felicity and continuance of
health in Christ Jesus our only saueour.
COnsyderyng (most virtuous and excellent Lady) that the holy ghost playnlie
commending by the mouths of the most worthy kings of famous memory Dauyd
and Solomon, the mighty effectuous working virtue, and necessary holsomnes, of
the fear of God, which is the right foundation and groundworke of godly
wisdom, says among other specyal^yes of sundry mentioned states of
persons, in a vehement admi^acy on of praise: that the woman which fears
the Lord, shall be so much commendacion worthy, and be esteemed for so
excellent a treasour and Jewel, that her price is far beyond the vttermoste
coasts: because that having that sure ground work of wisdom, she like a
dyligent skillful house wife, employeth the stock and whole substance of her
qualities and travail in those necessatie* dooinges from time to time, which
make to the furniture of true religion and the glory of God, suppressing of
vice, advancement of christian virtue, and to the relief of the nedy,
especially those of the householde of faith: so that in her labors and
ordrely forcaste of well dooinges, procedinge from virtue to virtue, as
thoccasion and necessity of matter persuades, the pillars and tur^ettes of
heavenly wisdom shynynge and glistringe in the eyes of the beholders, declare
her worthy praises and price to be of most notable estymacyon and value
before God and man: And forasmuch as the experience of your graces godly fruits
of virtuous life and dooinges, has and does vndenyablye report the
unfeigned fear and love of God to be in your heart, as well in your graces most
christian studies and travails in the faithful furtheraunce and advancement
of the sincere word of God, as in liberal reliuing, helping and with most
hearty diligence succouring the poor, as the commune patroness and helper of
all nedie and succourles settours forth of the Gospel of Christ: where in the
later end of this last year I took in hand at the request* of your graces
humble servant* my special good friend Edward whitchurch Printour, to
translate the Paraphrases of Erasmus upon certain of Paul's epistles, which
were left untranslated for lack of pain takers in that matter, for somuche
as the learned men appointed to this purpose of translacion, had finished
their limited taskes before: and now at the like request I have made the like
enterprise to translate the Canonycall Epistles of. S. Peter, Jude, James and
John: Being encouraged by your graces much proved clemency toward all
men in general, I am presently bold to dedicate these simple doings of my
rude trauslacion unto your most noble and excellent name, not as a thing
(being of it self a translacion of basse kind of thenglishe phrase,
according to the rude commune English speech of the country where I was
borne) worthy your graces commendacion, but as a moniment and reknowlaginge
of my most bounden duty of humble thanks geuinge unto your grace, for
causinge me to be called of late to a competent vicatage called Cob^^gton in
warwike shire, at the humble suit of the reverend ministre of Gods word, my
singular friend Doctor hugh Latymer: and as a constaunt memorial and token of
my duty to considre, upon what respect he bestowed his sure, and your grace
your gracious helping forewardenes toward me: that I should dispense and
employe my contynuall study, labors, residence, travails and industries to
the earnest performacion and faithful discharge of that ecclesiastical charge,
vocacion and office committed unto me, and to content my self as
indifferentlye with that competent small lyuinge, as though it were of much
more revenues and value: Besechynge your grace to take this my most humble
present in good and benig^^ part, considering that for want of riches of
eloquence and learning to cast in to the commune treasoury among the
abundaunt rich dooinges of famous learned men, I am readyly glad, as an
obscure unlearned person, with the poor widow to cast in my two mytes.

Now touching this notable learned Paraphrast D. Erasmus, if his doings upon
the Gospelles and Acts of thapostles be so necessary and holsom plain
declaracions of Christ's mind and the Evangelists, as the opinion of many
learned, is they be: his Paraphrases also upon the pistles, are no less
fruitful ne less profitable to give light and ready instruccion unto men's
consciences, as well to pluck away er^onyous opynyons, if he be red with
advised judgment, and to teach Christ aright, as to banysh pride, dronkenes,
^reason, tumultes, sedicion, vproares, incontinencie, riot, idleness,
ruffianynge vagabuncie, malice, slander, vncommely talking, light tales
^nuentynge and carrying, devouring of neighbors, and covetousness, the rote of
al wickedness: which horrible vices are now a days so licentiously used and
practiced on all hands for the most part, hat Gospel like truth and liberty
is almost utterly changed in to hellishe iniquity: such is the deuilles
diligent preaching prelacie, not only endeuouryng to bring to pass thereby to
plant and establish his Romysh Antichristianitie with disobedience and other
his branches and states of wickedness again, partly under pretense of a
Christen liberty, and partly under color of a commune wealth, but also to
cause the Gospel of Christ the rebuke^ of disobedience and all other kinds of
vice, to bear the blame of false opinions, disobedience, and naughty living,
as though it were thoccasyon or bolsterour of vice.

To the redress hereof, Erasmus in these epistles is a ready strong
interpretour in many necessary places: in all I am not hable to affirm,
knowing that he in his life time, was a man subject to infirmity and
imperfeccion according to the natural condycion of man: as he himself
speaks of the great Doctor. S. Hierome: Homo^rat, et falli po^^rat et
fallere. A man he was, and might both be deceived and deceive.

And as for my labor in this rude English translacion, I took it in hand for
none other end, but only to do at my hearty friends undeniable request, a
litell part, which learned men having done certain several parts of the
other paraphrases, had by occasyon let untranslated: and that the unlearned
might through diligent reading of these englished paraphrases, taste, according
to the measure of their faith, the swetenes of Christ, and the virtue of true
obedyence and christen living, and avoid the deuilles subtle Iuggling,
eschew disobedience and sedicious assembling, repent of light ruffia^yng and
blasphemous carnal Gospelling, contemn the world with all his painted
flatering, and abhorte the to much wickedly used brutish living. The Lord
Jesus Christ the only author of salvation and health, continue and encreace
his most gracyous gifts in your grace to the end, and Joyfully preserve
your long prosperous health in him.

Amen.
The xv. of Iulie. M. D. xlix.
The Canonical Epistles.
The.i. Epistle of saynct Peter. The.ii. Epistle of. S. Peter. The Epistle of.
S. Jude. The Epistle of. S. James. The.i. Epistle of. S. John. The.ii. Epistle
of. S. John. The.iii. Epistle of. S. John.
The Argument of D. Erasmus of Roterodame upon the first Epistle of S. Peter.
PEter writes to the Jews that dwelt here and there in the coasts of the
Gentiles (as James did) an Epistle (no doubt) worthy the chief of the
Apostles, which is full of apostolic authority and majesty, and is comprysed
in few words, but full of sentences. He exhorts meune patiently to bear
the evils, that they suffered for malice of the gospel, in hope of reward.
Moreover he admonishes them, that according to the Prophets mentioned
saynges, being freely called to so high dignity, they express a life worthy
of their profession. For he says, christianity consists not in title or
baptism only, but in innocence of manners: for in that they are otherwise
afflicted with sorrows, it makes nothing to the glory of Christ: if they
appear manifestly to suffer for naughty deeds doing. Furthermore he
admonishes such as come in to christianity, that they refuse not to obey
magistrates, though they ^ee heathens, lest being provoked they can neither be
converted to Christ, but become more fearce and cruel. Also that servants
deny not their duty to their masters, though they be heathens. For the
office of christian goodness is, to suffer al things. Furthermore he
admonishes the christian women that they contemn not their husbands though
they be heathens, but study by their own manners to provoke them unto better.
He warns the husbands to bear with their wives, and to absteyne somtymes
from having to do with them, so as they may the more apply them selves to
prayer. Than he provoke men alter the example of Christ, to suffer
displeasures, and not to ymagine how to requyte wrong with wrong, but to
devise how to overcome their evil doers with softenes and well doings. And
these matters he treats of in the three first Chaptres and in the beginning of
the fourth. After these he exhorts men unto newenesse of life and dissuadeth
from the heathens vices. He allureth men unto sobrenesse, unto watching, to
continual prayers, and above other unto mutual charytie unto hospitality and
to do good turns one for an other. Again he enticeth men patiently to suffer
persecucions, laid upon them for Christ's name sake. Than he informs
bishops, and in them the people under their charge. In the end he reports
that he wrote an other epistle unto them by Siluanus, which was lost. This
epistle it appears he wrote from Babilo^, for in the name of that churhe he
saluteth them, if any man allow not the understanding of Rome by Babylon.

The paraphrase of D. Erasmus of Roterodame upon the first Epistle of S. Peter.
Peter an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them that dwell here and there as
strangers through out Pontus, Galacia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithinia, elect
according to the ^oreknowledge of God the father through the sanctifying of the
spirit unto obedience, and spri^e^lyng of the ^loude of Jesus Christ. Grace
be with you and peace be multiplied. PEter sometime a disciple and a contynuall
g^^st, but now an Ambassador and Apostle of Jesus Christ, to all them that
dwell here and therein the coasts of litell Asia, at Pontus, Galacia,
Cappadocia, and in that part that is properly named Asia, which the Ephesians
have, and Bithi^^a, whom either the stormy tempests of wars have in times
paste scatred abroad some to on place some to an other, or else whom the
rageing cruelly of them, which hated the name of Christ, has giltelessy
driven out of the places where their fathers dwelt before them: and ^re by that
means now comfortles among stra^nge nations, as it were danyshed men, being
in deed for fear of men, thrust out of their natyue country, but yet not
excluded ne banyshed, neither depryued from the office of Gospel preathing,
which God the prince of al men bestowed chiefly unto the land and nation of
Jews, after such a sort, that he would for all that have it commune to all
them, whom soever he has chosen. For like as those are never the better for
being borne and leading their life at Jerusalem, which fet naught by the
doctrine of Jesus Christ: even so shall it def^a^de no man, in that he dwells
among the uncircumcised and profane Gentiles, so that instead of Moses law
he embrace the grace of the gospel. For it is not the obseruacion of the
law, wh^t with the Jews are commonely puffed up, that brings true
salvation, neither kynredde or place, but the free eleccion of God. He is a
right Jew in deed, wihche what country soeue^ he dwell in, or what kynred
soever he is borne of, acknowledges Jesus Christ to be the a^tour of true
salvation, which dyed not for one nation of people alone, but for the whole
universal world. But in y^ we so acknowledge him, we are not endebted to the
me^tte of observing the law, but unto the free goodness of God, which
choseth out of al manner of nations, and calls unto the lyberal fredome of the
gospel, whom soever it stands with his pleasure to ^all vntoit. For it
neither came of late suddenly in to his mind, to save al manner of mortal men
by this mean, ne yet enforced with our well doings, helayth this up as a
reward for us, as though we had so merited, but this was de^reed of god the
father by his eternal cou^saill, that he would open the port of salvation, not
to the Jews only, but to al nations universally: not by circumcision, not by
keeping y^ custom of the sabbath, neither by choice of meats, ne yet by other
ceremonies of Moses law, which are corporal matters, and nothing but certain
shadows of spiritual things that were given for a time: but by true
sanctificacion of the spirit, which the spiritual law of y^ gospel gives
unto us, by y^ which we are truly purged in deed from all our sins, not for
because we have observed the prescriptes of the old law, but because we
plainly and readily put our trust in the promises of the gospel: not by
sprinkling of the blood of a calfe, as it has been hitherto wont to be done
according to the custom of the law, but by the sprinking of the precious blood
of the undefiled and most acceptable sacrifice to God, Jesus Christ: whose
undeserved death wypeth clean away from us, all the transgressions of our
former conversation once for all, and after we be borne a new, as it were, into
him through baptism, it restores us unto a new life. And forasmuch as
baptism has exempted us from this world, and engraffed us into the
participacion of heavenly rewards, I will not pray for those goods (in
getting and heaping together whereof the toylers of the world think themselves
fortunate) but those goods rather, which purge us clean from erthly
contagious infeccions, and make us worthy the prince of heaven Christ: that is
to say, Grace, that in distrusting your own merits, and in putting no
confidence in the ceremonies of the law, you may look for true salvation of
the fre^ bounteous liberality of God, and in purtyng unfeigned trust in the
gospel: And besides this I wish Peace, that being freely reconsiled to God by
the blood of Christ, you may have concord both among your selfs and with all
other, not only hurting no body, but also perdonyng other men's fanites, and
requityng good turns for evil: the chance of which goods like as you have
freely received of God, even so it stands you in hand to apply your selfs
unto godly studies, that you may wax rich in the increasing usury of good
works more and more, not only persisting steadfast in that you have begone,
but also going forward daily better and better, until the day come wherein the
reward of immortality shall be openly given, whereof you have now conceived a
certain assured hope out of the gospel of Christ, that we should thereby
challenge no praise unto our selves.

The text.
Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy begatte us again unto a lively hope (by that that Jesus
Christ's rose again from death) to an iuheritaunce immortal and undefiled, and
that perishes not, refer^ed in heaven for you, which are kept by the power of
God through faith, unto salvation, which is prepared already to be showed in
the last time, in the which ye rejoice, though now for a season (if need
require) ye are in ^eu^nes, through manyfold temptacions, that ^he trial of
your faith being much more precious then gold that perysheth (though it be
tried with fire) might be found unto laud, glory and honor, at the appering
of Jesus Christ, whom ye have not seen, and yet love him: in whom even now,
though ye see him not, yet do you believe, and rejoice with say unspeakable,
and glorious receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your
souls. For this so passing a great benefit, his liberality is to be praised,
of whom by Christ comes unto us, whatsoever it be that makes us truly
blessed. And that is not Moses, but God himself, and the same the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which (when we were little fortunately borne of Adam,
that is to say borne to sin, borne to death) has begotten us new again into
innocence, and has begotten us unto life that never shall dye, being provoked
by no merits of ours, but stiered freely of his own mercy wherein he most
chiefly exceadeth: and this has he done not by y^ aid of Moses law, but by
the costeous gift of his own son Jesus Christ, whom he would have to suffer
death, to the intent, where we were else desperate wretches, he might diliuer us
from the tyranny of sin and death: And him he called anon from death to life,
that we being in this world dead to worldly lusts, and having remembrance as
it were before our ties of the resurrection, after his example in vprightnes of
conversation, might have an assured and a ready hope, that we also shall once be
exempt out of these sorrows and atteine with Christ unto y^ everlasting
enheritaunce, which like as he being our head has already atteyned, so shall
al we also follow as many as be engraffed to y^ me^bres of Christ, and are made
worthy by following of his cra^ple, to be called his brethren, and the children
of y^ self same father that he is: that like as we suffer commune affliccions
with him, so should we have reward also together with him. As long as we were the
sons of the synful Adam, an unfortunate enheritau^re abode us. But as soon as
we were made y^ sons of God, we make spedy haste to y^ enheritau^ce of
heaven. For it besemeth, y^ seeing we are borne from heaven, we should behold
heavenly things, and seeing we are borne of God, we should folo we nothing but
godliness. They y^ serve the world go about to have rewards y^ are transitory
and wage that is slyppery: but for us there remains y^ happy^ enheritaunce
after these temperal affliccio^s, which can neither be corrupted with death, ne
defited with wearines or heaviness, ne yet fade a way by age or sluttishnes.
There is no cause for us to be afraid of, lest any man should in the mean
while take this so plenteous an heritage out of our hands. We have an assured
faith full promise maker: And in his hands it is safely kept and laid, up in
stoare for us in heaven: howbeit after such sort, that for all that there must
an assured hope, and as it were a certain pledge remain in the mean time
with men upon earth, not with all manner of men, but with you and such like as you
are, buto whom the spirit of Christ is given instead of a gage: and which,
albeit ye are for y^ time tossed on every side with condry storms of sorrows, y^
the frailty of ma^is utterly unable of himself to bear out, yet by the
succor of God, which is mighty in all things, you are preserved, not through
your own merits, but by faith and unfeigned trust: whereby you dout not, but
from the last time, after y^ which there shall be no more of this confusion of
humayne matters, but the evil me^ being appointed to their tormeutes shall be
hable to do no body harm, and the good being safe from al invasions of sorrows
shall have the fruicio^ of everlasting rest. For now y^ rewards lie hidden, and
many times after the common peoples estimacio^, they are in wurse condition y^
be of y^ better, and those seem to perish which are most specially in
sanegarde, and they seem to flourish which most chiefly go to naught. In this
world there is time to exercise godliness, and the reward has his time
prescribed unto it, which it behooves not to prevent. In y^ mean season let it
be enough for us, y^ everlasting felicity is kept in safegarde for us, which
neither manor devil can be hable to take away from us before hand, so y^ we
shrink not from y^ faith, whereby we ought to condemn mortal men's matters, and
depend wholly of heaven. Let there be in y^ mean season fearce folks, which
being rebels to god, trust to the aids of y^ world, let the^ for y^ time
stamp and stare over you as though you were ouercome^ and left succoutles. But
when y^ day shall come, and the discourse of thiges turned up side down, they
shall be tormented, and you shall rejoice like co^querours, yea you ought to
rejoice eue^ now also through y^ undoubted loki^g for of so passig a great
felicity. For it ought not to seem unto you a great or a grievous matter,
though by affliccions and griefs that are but short and shall soon have an
end, you come to the blissed that never shall decay. And perchance these
persecucions also shall once have an end, which notwithstanding as often as
they come in ure are to be borne with a mighty stout stomach, and without
dismaying for the glory of God, in hope of the life to come. For after such
wise does the wysedom of God in providing for your commodities permit, that
the sincerity and stedfastnes of your faith may be tried through sundry
assaults of sorrows. For if gold (which else were a thing both lost and
would go to naught) be tried out not only by the touch stone, but also is
assayed by the fire, to thintente it may thenceforth be had in so much the
more price as it is the more exactely fined: much more will God have your faith,
whereunto so high honor of duty belongs, to be tried with sundry
experimentes, to the intent that when it shall glister out of these flames of
sorrows and affliccions, and being far more pure and more glittering than any
gold though it be never so fine, it may be precious in the sight of God, and
that all the matter at length may grow in to clean contrary condition: that is
to were that the thing which seemed to be laid upon you in this world unto
reproach, may chance unto praise: and that which seemed unto vilany, may be
turned unto glory: that which seemed to be laid upon you to put you to
dishonestie, may be turned in to habu^daunce of honor in that day, when Jesus
Chrst, whose power works now in you by secret means, shall she we forth him
self openly unto all men, and render unto every man reward according to his
desartes. For what is a more glorious thing, than to be praised of Christ's
own mouth? when you shall hear: Come you blessed of my father: what thing is
more honorable than to be received of God the father into the fellowship of
the kingdom of heaven together with the son? But this glory, although it
shall be the comen glory of all godly folks, yet it shall chance more
haboundauntly unto them, that have suffered greater things upon earth for
Christ's sake. Which rewards in case they were nome presently apparent, the
strength of faith should be no maruclous matter. But now the special chief
praise of good folks consists in this point, that where you never saw
Christ with your bodyly eyes, yet with the eyes of faith you see him and love
him: and where as the violence of sorrows does openly and presently grate upon
you, but the rewards, which are kept till a day, do not now appear, yet
puttyng assured confidence in his promises, you suffer these things with none
other stomach, than if the glory were presently furnyshed before your iyes,
neither do you suffer only with boldness, but also in the mydle of
affliccions you rejoice with an unspeakable joy, being full of glory before God,
that is to say, of a well hoping conscience, and full of a certain unfeigned
confidence, that where you suffer such things undeservedly, you shall, by the
will of God, haboundauntly receive a great fruit of your faith, that is to
wete, the eternal salvation of your souls. For it is a great vauntage, when
through the loosyng of the mortal body, the immortal soul is preserved. Thus
it was decreed by the eternal counsel of God, that men should atteyne
salvation by these means, whereby even Christ himself came to everlasting
blessedness.

The text.
Of which salvation have the Prophets enquired and searched, which proheryed
of the grace that should come unto you, searchyng when or at what time the
spyryte of Christ (which was in them) should signify, which spyrite testified
before, the passions that should happen unto Christ, and the glory that should
follow aftet: unto which Prophets it was also declared, that not unto them
selves, but unto us, they should minister the thyuges which are now showed
unto you of them, which (by the holy ghost sent down from heaven) have in the
gospel preached unto you the things, which the Angels desire to behold. For
these matters are not by chance brought to pass at all auentures, but the
self same thing that we have already seen, the old Prophets (which
prophesied before hand that you should be saved through faith and the grace of
the gospel without the aid of Moses law) have diligently sought and searched
out, not being contenteo to see as it were through a myste what should be to
come: but they have also with a godly curiosity searched out of the spirit of
Christ, which than presently signified unto the by secret inspiracion, what
Christ should suffer, and unto what excellent glory he should byanby be
advanced unto, than what or what manner of time that should come to pass:
forsomuche as their minds were vehemently desirous of his saving health. And
unto them it was also manifested, that these things, which they prophesied
beforehand should come to pass, should not be exhibited in their times, but in
yours: and the things that they opened in their prophecies, they opened unto
you and not to them felues. In deed they would have wisshed to see, that you
have chanced to see: but their prophecies were spoken before to the intent that
we Apostles should be more certainly credited, which declare now unto you the
things already done, that they had spoken beforehande should come to pass.
And that you should also not stand in doubt, the same spirit of Christ in
times paste taught them with secret still inspiracions, what he had determined
to do, which lately cu^myng down from heaven in fyrietongues instructed us,
to the intent we should be preachers in all the whole world of the things that
are come to pass. For we preach Christ that became man foral our salvation
sake, was conuersaunt on earth, was afflicted with reproaches and torments,
finally was nailed on the cross, suffered death for our sakes, and anon
ratsed again to life, was exalted unto heaven, where now he glistreth in
majesty and glory with the father (which before seemed upon earth to be but a
vile rascal and an abiecte) and thither also will he exalte those that his be.
These mattersinasmuch as they were done by the unspeakable counsel of God, it
is no marvel though the prophets desired to see them, seeing it is so
excellently pleasant and acceptable a sight even to the angels them selves to
look upon, with the beholding where of they cannot be fulfilled. The greater the
benefit is which is offered unto you, the more gredyly you ought to embrace it,
that it be not through your own fault that you atteyne it not. The reward is
certain, but it shall be your duties for all that, to behave your selves so,
that you seem not unworthy the promises. The day that is looked for, will come,
which shall openly bring forth the rewards both of the godly and of the
ungodly. It will come once, whansoeuer it shall be, and it shall come pleasant and
happy to such as it shall find readyly prepared: on the contrary part, it
shall come fearfully to them that it shall find unfaithful sluggardes and
carelessly minded.

The text.
Wherefore gyrde up the loins of your minds, be sobet, and trust pefectly on
the grace that is brought unto you (by the declaryng of Jesus Christ) as
obedient chyldrcu, that ye give not your selves over unto your old lusts; by
which ye were led whau as yet ye were ignoraunte of Christ: but as he which
called you is holy, even so be yeholy also in all manner of conversation,
because it is written* Be ye holy, for I am holy. And if so be that ye call on
the father, which without respect of person judges according to every man's
work, se that ye pass the time of your pylgremage in fear. And forasmuch as
Christ would have that day to be uncertain unto us, it behooves you not to be
in a security at any time, but always having the loins of your minds
girded, as men readyly furnished to mete their Lords coming, watchyng and
sober, being always stiered up and put in mind with the certain and sure
loking for of the everlasting felicity, which now is offered unto all men that
obey the Gospel: but yet it shall be possessed at length, at such time, as our
Lord Jesus Christ shall openly show his majesty unto al men and unto
angels and deuiles, howbeit they shall not come to that immortality, but
only those that in a manner forecast the same in this world, and according to
the example of Jesus, being dead to the lusts of this world, live again
again with him unto innocence, and continue steadfastly in it, like laufull
and right true sons that trust in the promises of god the father, and do
after his prescribed commandments, and never slide again into their old
conversation, which than through the ignorance of the Gospelles doctrine, was
endaungered with worldly concupiscences. For it is convenient that you diffre
from them in affectes and manners, from whom you dissent in profession. The
world is naught and from it you are already exempted and engraffed unto
Christ, which is righteous, holy and Innocent, and to this end are you chosen
and called of the father, the fountain of al holiness, that like as you are in
your profession, so should you in all your life and doings, be pure, upright,
and unblameable. For the father will not acknowledge any to be his sons, but
those that be like manered unto him. For in deed this same thing he meant when
he spoke to our, auncetours. Leuitici the xix. Chapter. Be you holy, for I the
lord your God am holy. The purity of Moses law could not have been enough for
you: to abstain from touching of dead bodies, to have your fete washen, to
abstain from the act of matrimony: God will have all our conversation and
all our whole heart to be fre from al spots of sins. For in deed these are
the things, that make us plainly impure in the sight of god. And although you
call upon God by the name of a father, crieng for his help in all things, yet
if you live in a filthy conversation, you may not trust that he will be merciful
unto you, or acknowledge you for his children, seeing he estemeth noman either
for his kynred or for his estates sake, but only after the merits of his
conversation. For nether shall the Jew be pure, if his conscience be defiled,
ne yet shall the uncircumcised be vnpure, if he lead a godly and an innocent
life.

The text.
For as much as ye know how that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, (as silver and gold) from your vain conversation, which ye
receauch by the tradicion of the fathers: but with the precious blood of
Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without spotte, which was ordained before
hand even before the woorlde was made: but was declared in the last times for
your sakes, which by his means do believe on god, that raised him up from
death, and glorified him, that ye might have faith and hope toward God, even
ye which have purifyed your souls through the spirit, in obeyng the truth,
with brotherly love vufayned, se that ye love one another with a pure heart
fervently, for ye are borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by
the word of god, which lives and lasts for ever. For all flesh is grass, and
all the glory of man is as the flower of grass. The grass wyddereth, and the
flower falls away, but the word of the Lord endures ever. And this is the
word, which by the gospel was preached unto you. Therefore it remains that
you which are desirous to have this father merciful unto you, have his
unavoidable judgment always before your eyes, while you live in this exile,
and so order your co^uersacio^, that there be nothing wherefore the father may
be offended, and justly shut you out of the inheritance of the celestial
country, as unnatural and disobedyent children. The greater the price is,
wherewith Christ has freely redeemed you, so much the greater head ought you to
take, lest for your wilfulnes and unthankfulness, you be turned again into your
former bond thraldom. There is none more miserable a bondage, than to be the
slave of sin. Those that for a little money are made fre from their masters
bondage, and become of bondme^ fre men, watch about them by all means, lest for
their unthankfulness they may be drawn again into the bondage that they were
in before: and will you than commit that offense to fall again into y^ old
tyranny, to be willingly the bond slaves of Moses law, and had rather serve
vain obseruaunces, that your elders delivered from one to an other unto you,
than to obey the gospel of God, seeing you know that you were delivered once
from them, not with a commune tryfling price, as gold or silver, but with an
offering much more holy than Moses law knows of? For you are not made clean
with the blood of a calfe sprinkled, but with the precious blood of Jesus
Christ who like a la^be clean without any spotte, pure and undefiled from all
filthiness of sin, was offered for our sins on the aultare of the cross.
Nether yet was that done by chance at all auentures, but the son of God was
appointed to make this sacrifice from everlasting and before the making of the
world, that he might through his death reconcile the father unto us: howbeit
the secret device and decre of Gods purposed mind, which was many long
years unknown to the world, is now at length in these later times openly
manifested, and a new matter is set forth before men's eyes to look upon
which in the purposed mind of God was not new. And it was given for your
salvation sake, unto whom Christ that was made man, dyed, and is preached,
bestows thus much, that where as you had a vain trust upon the ceremonies
of the law, now distrusting your selves, you must put your whole trust in God
the father: who like as he would have Christ to dye to wype away your sins,
even so has he raised him up from death, and for the paynfull travails of
this life which he suffered, he gave him the glory of immortality: to thentente
that as you have believed that which he has done, in following his example, you
might also trust surely to have the same reward to be bestowed on you, in that
you put your whole affiau^ce in God, which what he has already performed in
his son, the same also will he undoubtedly perform in all them, which live
after such sort, that they may be worthyly accounted among the members of
Christ, in to whose body you are engraffed, since that you were regenerate
through baptism in to him. Before that time you did after your own lusts,
that is to say, embraceing carnal shadows of things instead of true right
things: but now since you have cleansed your souls, not with the obseruacion
of Moses purgeing sacrifices, but in that you have through faith obeyed the
truth of the gospel, which by the spyryte of Christ has purged your
consciences, you must endeavor your selves both to be correspondente unto the
head Christ in vprightnes of life, and be answerably like unto the concord of
the body by an excedyng and a plain brotherly and an unfeigned love among your
selves: that like as Christ loved you not after a commen sort, nor after a
carnal manner of love, even so should you love every one other, with a
spiritual love. New kynred requires new affeccion. Before this time you Jews
loved Jews after a carnal affeccionate love, but now being by a far other
manner regenerate (not of a mortal and an earthly seed after the body, but of
an immortal and a heavenly sede by the word of God which lives and endures
for ever whose gospel you have believed) you shall love the brethren with a
heavenly love. Moses law was given for a time. But the word of God has
brought forth the law of the gospel unto us, which never shall perish. The
thing that proceeds from men is but for a season, but the thing that comes
from heaven, is everlasting, as Esaias said before: Al flesh is as grass, and
all the glory of man as the flower of the field. The grass is wythered, and
his ^loure fallen away, but the word of the Lord endures for ever. This is
the eternal word of the eternal father, whom the shadows of the former law
in times past painted out unto us, but now he is openly declared by the
preachers of the gospel, and not only unto you, but unto all them that
receive Christ with a sincere upright faith.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
Wherefore lay a side all malicioushes and all gile, and fay^ednesse, and envy,
and all backbytyng: and as new borne babes, desire ye that milk (not of the
body, but of the soul) which is without disceite: that ye may grow there by
(unto salvation) if so be that ye have tasted, how gracyous the Lord is, to
whom ye come, as unto a living stone, disa^^wed of men, but chosen of God and
precious: and ye as ^^ing stones, are made a spiritual house an holy
priesthood, for to offer up spiritual sacrifyces, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. Forasmuch as you are lately borne again by an heavenly generation
through the doctrine of the gospel, cast all the vices of your former
conversation quyte away from you, if there were any malice, if there were any
deceit, if there were any holowe heartedness, if there were any envy, if
there were any backebytyng or cursed speaking, and from henceforthe as babes
new borne, gredely couete that milk, not of the body, but of the soul, the
milk that knows no deceyte, and is fit for your age which is more
harmless than strong, even the milk of the ghospels ordinance. For the
ghospels doctrine has his principles, it has his infancye, it has his diet
mete for weak tender age: it has also his farther growinges, finally it has
his perfect growe^ age. Those first things are not to be supped lothesomly,
but gredily, yea and thrustily: neither yet must you lyngre continually in
them, but to proceed from them still unto things of more perfeccion. For in
deed it were even a strange thing if a man borne of his mother should be
always a babe and covet nothing else but milk. And it behooves you also to
ware big, till you grow unto perfect salvation, and not always to stick
still in making the foundacions, but to rise by little and little unto the
perfect buyldyng of the house. For in case (according to the psalm writers
counsel) you have tasted that the Lord Jesus is sweet, it is requisite for
you to be provoked with that taste to set your appetites upon greater
things. In humayne buyldynges, the stones neither change their place ne grow
any bigger: But in this buyldyng (which stands upon living stones) the chief
principal stone whereof, and the stone that conteyneth all things, is the
living and eternal Jesus Christ, which of late (after the psalm writers
prophesying) was cast away of men, that is to were of the phariseis, who
holding of their temple that should go to naught, had no knowledge of this
heavenly building, howbeit he was chosen by the judgment of God, and had in
much price, there is nothing to hinder, but that it may proceed forward to the
perfect finishyng of the buildyng. Therefore you must necessarily go, through
forewarde increase of virtues, unto Christ the living stone, the chosen stone,
the stone preciously set by in the sight of God, that you also being grounded
upon such a foundation may be builded upon by little and little, until you be
made spiritual temples much more holy than the temple that the Jews brag of,
and in the which temples much more wholly priesthood is exercised than was used
in that temple. For in it the levites and priests offered up beasts, but in
these spiritual temples you your selves offer up spiritual sacrifices most
acceptable to God, who, as he is a spirit and not a body, so does he delight
in spiritual sacrifices, that you should nothing mind the rites of Moses now
being worn out through the preaching of the Gospel: in stedde of sundry
kinds of brute beasts, you slay worldly and br^tish affectes, lecherous
lusts, pride, wrath, envy, desire of reuengement, riot, and covetousness and
in stedde of, incense, you offer pure prayers flying out of the altar of a
pure heart into heaven. These are the sacrifices that are offered at al seasons
in the spiritual temple, and are at al times acceptably welcome unto God. For
those sacrifices of Moses are now all ready grown in to a lothesomenes, as the
prophet Esaye bears record. But these manner of sacrifices are contynually
allowed through Jesus Christ, by whose commendacion the diligent service
doings of the Chrystians are acceptable unto the father.

The text.
Wherefore it is contained also in the scripture: behold I put in Sion a stone
to be laid in the chief corner, elect and precious, and he that believes on
him shell not he confounded. Unto you therefore which believe he is precious:
but unto them which believe not, the stone which the buylders refused, the
same is begun to be the head of the corner, and a stone that men stomble at,
and a rock whereat they be offended, which stomble at the word, and believe
not that, whereon they were set. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthod, an holy nacio^, a people which are won: that ye should show the
virtues of him that called you out of darkness, into his marvelous sight, which
in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God, which some time
had not obtained mercy, but no we have votayned mercy. There is no cause why
you should be in any mystrust, as long as ye cleave fast unto the head Christ,
as long as you stand hard upon the noble and ^nmoueable ston Christ, of whom
god spoke in times past by the mouth of Esaye: Behold I put in Sion a ston to
be placed in the chief corner, tried, chosen* and precious* And he that shall
put his trust in him, shall not be ashamed And that which he spoke of before
hand, we se now al ready performed. For the self same one stone was precious
and ^olsome unto some, and to some hurtful and noisome, unto you he is justly
precious, because you are grounded surely upon him, because you put your whole
trust in him, and are preserved by his aid against al storms of tempests.
But unto them that had rather stick still unto Moses than unto him, and have
rejected him, not willing to have him put in the buylding that they purposed to
build, he is contrary wise a reproach and a very destruction. For him that
they disdeyned to have in their buylding, god would have to be head stone of the
corner, by whom he might knyt together and conteyne as it were the wall on
eithersyde, that is to say, both the sorts of people, of the Gentiles and of
the Jews: by whose strong defense the buylding should be safely preserved
against all assaults, and him should, who so ever were adversaries unto this
new buylding, stumble at and ^^ne against. And they stumble whosoever be
offended at the word of the Gospel, and believe it not, seeing Moses law made
them ready before hand to this end, that they should believe the gospel, as soon as the thing was truly performed in deed, that the law signified in
shadow. Therefore those that have disallowed Christ god has also disallowed
them again. But as for you, whom they reiecte with Christ, he has made that
chosen kynred, whereof Moses spoke in times past, that holy nation, and peculiar
people, whom god has take to him self with an excellent price: that like as the
people of the Hebrews being delivered in times paste by Moses leading from the
tyranye of Egypt, and conveyed through so many dangerous matters into the
land that they had long hoped upon, preached unto the world the goodness of
god showed to them, ward: even so you having in remembrance his fre
liberality toward you also, should glorify among al men the wonderful
power of god, which by a new mean having conquered the enemies of your
salvation, has delivered you out of the darkness of ignorance and vicious
living, into his wonderful light of the gospels truth, by the which all the
errors of the gentiles and shadows of the Jews are clean wyped away. Unto
you therefore has chanced this honor, that they which persecuted Christ,
surely reckoned upon to them selves, and yet clean contrary, the matters being
turned vpside down, the thing chanced that Osee said before should come. The
people which before were the most abiectes, that is to say, far of from god, is
now a peculiar people unto god. And the people whom god had rejected as
unworthy of his mercy, has felt by experience the mercy of god without help
of circ^cision of the law, and is received through the only gospel like faith
into the fellowship of the son of god.

The text.
Dearlye beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pylgrems, abstayue* from
fleshly Iustes, which fight agay^ste the soul, and se that ye have honest
conuersacyon among the Gentyles, that where as they backbyte you as ouyll
doc^s, they may se your good works, and praise God, in the day of
disitacyon. Submytte your selves therefore unto all manner ordinance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it ^ee unto the King, as unto the ^he^e heed:
other unto rulars, as unto them that are sent of him, for, the punishment of
euel dowars: but for the laud of them, that do well. For so is the will of God,
that with well doing ye may stop the mouths of foulyshe and ignoraunte men*
as fre, and not as having the liberty for a cloak of malicyousnes, but even as
the servants of God. Honor all men. Love brotherly felowshipe. Feate God,
honor the king. Servants, obey your masters with fear, not only if they
be good and courteous: but also though they be froward. For this is thank
worthy: if a man for conseyence toward God endure grefe, and suffer wrong
undeserved. For what praise is it, if whell ye be buffe^ed for your fautes, ye
take it patiently? But and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong and take it
patiently, then is there thank with God. Than sense ye acknowledge the singular
liberality of god toward you, whom he has redeemed with the price of
blood, whom he has reconsyled unto himself by the death of his son, whom
his will was to have to be the members of his only begotten, and the living
stones of the heavenly buylding, whom he has chosen into the right of
children, and called into the enheritaunce of immortality: I beseech you
(deately beloved) to frame your selves in holiness of life like unto your own
dignity, like unto the gentil goodness of god, and unto so high a reward. You
are regenerate unto heaven, being in this woorlde as foryners and strangers:
make speed thither where your country is, and where the enheritaunce of heaven
is laid up in stoare for you: that you be not called away from this desire by
earthlye and gross appetites which with all manner of engynes make war and
^atail against the spirit which is gredyly desirous of heavenly things. Let
your conversation accord with your profession, that your manners may allure
unto Christ other folks also that are paganes, among whom you live: unto
whom it is so much requisite for you to give no manner of occasion, that they
may rightfully judge evil of the ghospelles doctrine (if they should perceive
you in the commune custom of life to be no whit better than other be,) that
the entier vprightenes of your manners and well doing toward all men, may
stop their backbyting reports wherewith they speak evil of you, for malice
that they bear to Christ, and for the hate of religion, which they suppose to
be wicked supersticion: which things evidently perceived, they shall repent
also, and acknowledge their own error, being inspired with the mercy of god,
when it shall please him, which has chosen you, to draw them to him also: and
that they may than by your godly works glorify him, whom before they
abhorred, because they knew him not. This world has also an order of his
own, which by occasion of religion ought not to be disturbed, as much as may
be saving the glory of christ. Even so Christ would have you to be free from
sins, that you should nevertheless suffer every thing willingly for the
gospelles busynes sake, obeying and submytting your selves not only unto
Christian magistrates, but unto the heathen magistrates also: whether he be a
king, you must obey him as most excellent in the public authority: whether
they be rulers, you must obey them, as by whom being sent to trauail abroad,
the king administreth the matters of the common wealth. Nether let it move you,
that they be heathens, that they be Idolatours, but acknowledge their office
that is necessary unto the common wealth, which consists of sundry kinds
of men and religions. For they bear rule with authority to restrain offenders
and wicked persons by fear of punyshement, and to allure those that be good
with rewards to do their duty. You have not need of their fearing, inasmuch
as you do of your own accord more than man's laws require. They have no need
of man's commendacion, whom the reward of heaven makes fervent: and yet it
is requisite also to acknowledge them with the other. For this is the will of
the most high God your Prince, that you give none occasion unto their
inconsiderate ignorance, whereby they might proueably call the gospelles
profession to blame, if they perceived you to set naught by their authority.
That which other do for fear of the laws, do you willyngly of your own
accord, yea more habundauntlye than other do, that you may declare your
selves to be right free men in deed. For he is free that of his own mind and
willyngly does as he should do rightly. God forbydde that you should abuse
the pretense of the gospelles verity to sin more licenciously. You owe not
bond service unto men but inasmuche as you are the servants of God, you
shall submit your selves, for his glories sake, unto all men gladlre and
willynglye. If any duty therefore, if any honor be duly belongyng even to
them that be heathens, either for the public office sake that they bear, or
for affinity sake, do that thoroughly unto all men, lest they being any whit
offended, be brought more farther of from the profession of the gospel: yet
for all that, it is reason that you love them specially, whom the commune
profession has made brethren unto you. Fear God, whose eyes no man can
begile: And concerning the king, there is no cause why you should be afraid of
him, seeing he is dreadful to none but to evil doers, but yet acknowledge his
authority in those things, that he exacieth of you without hynderaunce of
godlynes. He demands custom, pay it him: he exacteth tribute, give it him.
That which those that be free ought to do to the Magistrates, though they be
heathens, bond servants ought to do unto their masters: from serving of
who^ baptism makes them not free. But they ought rather with greater
reverence to acknowledge them, not only if they be good and sobre men, but
also if they be sore men and hard sharp men, lest peradventure being offended
with your froward manners doing otherwise than you ought to do, they lay the
fauite unto the profession, and be driven the more farther of from it,
whereunto they ought rather to be encensed and allured by your honest
behavior. Some will say: It is a sore matter to bear the tyranny of Princes,
it is a sore matter to abide the cruelty of masters: For Princes spoil,
exact, and punyshe: and masters with whyppes and buffe^tes all to tear them
that are faultles. These matters would ryghtly seem not worthy to be borne, if
it were ascribed unto them and not rather unto God. Their wickedness deserves
not thus much, that these things should be suffered at their hands, but so is
the will of God, that your goodness should turn their maliciousnes in to the
glory of Christ. For after such sort is your patience acceptable to God,
when being afflicted undeservedly, you suffer nevertheless contentedly, not for
fear of men, but for the glory of God. Communely there is no despyght more
impaciently taken, than when men are not faultye.

But among Christians it is far otherwise, for among them like as every one
is the best, even so does he covet to be most acceptable unto God. And the
more inwa^^^ly he loves God, so much the more chearfullye he suffers
whatsoever ^pperteyneth to the glory of God. But what garmercye were it, if
you suffer when you are buffetted for naughtye doings? The conscience of the
fault teaches this, that every man can abide his deserved peynes and hold
his peace. But when you suffer patiently the sorrows that are done unto you for
weldoinges, you come in favor with god, for whose cause sake you suffer
wyllynglye.

The text.
For hereunto verily were ye called: for Christ also suffered for us, leuinge
us an ensample, that ye should follow his steps, which did no sin, nether
was there gyle found in his mouth* which when he was reviled, reviled not
again: when he suffered, he thretened not: but committed the vengeance to him
that judges righteouslye which his own self bare our sins in his body ^n
the tree, that we being delyueted from sin, should live unto righteousness.
By whose stripes, ye were healed. For ye were as sheep going astray: but are
now turned unto the shepherd and bishop of your solles. Your innocence might
disdaynfully grudge at this, but that Christ being innocent suffered greater
heinous peines for your sake. This is your profession, upon this condition are
you called into his body, that you might follow the example of suffryng which
he has left unto you, and entering in by the same fotesteppes you might thrust
in unto everlasting glory by the same way that he atteyned unto it. What sorrow
was it that he suffered not, which was crucified with thieves? And what is more
innocent than he which not only committed no fault at all, but also there was
no manner of gyle at any time found in his tongue? wha^ they bitterly reviled
him, he gave none evil words again, but rather besought the father to forgive
them.

When he was bounden, when he was beaten, when he was nailed on the cross, he
threatened no vengeance but referred all vengeance unto the father, which
judges not of affeccion, but according to justice, Christ in the mean time
playng the intercessour and not the on settour. As for us albeit we now follow
innocence, yet with our naughtye synfulnes we had before time justly deserved
the vengeance of God. But Christ, forasmuch as he was indaungered with no
sin, yet he carried the burden of our sins upon his own body that he
might ease us of our burden, and was offered on the tree of the cross as a
brent offering for our sins, and by his undeserved death he put away the
death that was due unto us, that we should in the mean time follow the
example of his death and resurreccion, and that being dead unto our old sins
and lusts, whereunto we were addicte and did service, we should live from
henceforth unto innocence, unto the which he being the fountain of all
innocence has consecrated us, which has taken ou^e wickedness him self,
that he might give his righteousness unto us. We had offended, and he was
beaten: The fault was ours, and the punyshement light cruelly upon him. So y^
according to Esayes prophecy, we were made whole by his stripes. Him therefore
you are bounden to thank for your innocence: and in that God imputes not
the sins of your former life, you are bound to thank his bonds, his
scourgeinges, his wounds, his cross and his death. For ye were scatred before
time like sheep without a keeper, strayenge some one way some an other, as
every man's phantasye led him, thynkyng you might lawfullye do whatsoever
lyked your self, but you are now converted from your old error unto
Christ Jesus the shepehearde and Curate of your souls. If you follow him in
sufferynge afflyecyons of sorrows without deseruynge, you shall through his
leadynge come unto the glory of immortality.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
Likewise ye wives be in subjection to your husbands, that even they which
obey not the word, may with out the word be won by the conversation of the
wives, while they behold your chaste conversation coupled with fear. Whose
apparel shall not be outward with broyded hear, and hanginge on of gold,
either in puttinge on of gorgeous apparel: but let the hid man which is in the
heart, be without all corruption, so that the spirit be at rest and quiet,
which spirit is before God a thing much set by. For after this manner in the
old time did the holy women, which trusted in God, tier them selves, and were
obedyente to their husbands, even as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called him
Lord: whose daughters ye are, as long as ye do well and are not afraid for any
terror. Now like as free men ought to allure y^ princes and publyke
magistrates, and even so ought bond servants to allure their masters unto
the fauouryng of the gospel, by their obedient diligence (which purchaceth
friendship in every place) or in deed not to provoke them by occasion, if
perauenture they be incurable: even so ought the wives also show themselves
obedyent unto their husbands, not only if they be Christians, but to them
also, that have not yet embraced the doctrine of the gospel. For in deed it
may possibly come to pass, that such as our preaching does not stiere,
the entier vpryghtnes, godlynes, womanlynes, sobrenes, chastity, and
sufferaunce of the wife, may overcome and mollyfie them, and in conclusion
win them unto Christ. For when they shall perceive their wives manners
changed through baptism, when they shall see the examplar of true virtue in
them, they shall peradventure be enflamed, the affeccion of wedlock not a
little forewardyng to the same purpose, that as they be fellows of one bed,
so they would mind to be fellows of one profession. For sincere good demeanor
has very sharp pryckes, which, if a man do mark it nerely, brings to
pass many times, that carnal love is turned into a spiritual love. That
manner of love is occasioned by welfauourednes of beawtie, and behavior of
apparel, helpyng the favor of beawtie forewarde. And behavior is occasioned
by the fair goodlynes of an entier good heart, shynyng in her manners.
Therefore it behooves not wives, which have professed Christ, to devise how
they may set forth themselves pleasau^tly in their husbands eyes, after the
common custom, with their hear craftyly broyded, or with puttinge on of
precious stones, or gold, and purple raiment, and with other trymmyng of the
body, which is showed outwardly. For what other thing should come of this
gayre, but that they should love their wives body for the use of fleshely lust?
And what a portion of man is the body? This rather they ought to study for,
that their husbands may be enticed by their goodly garnyshed manners, and so to
love the secret hidden mind and heart, if they shall perceive her to be pure,
and spotted with ^^ knacke of viciousnes: and if they shall see, contrary to the
commune manner of women, no light affeccion in that woman, which women communly
have: no intemperaunce, no wrath, no envy, no seking of preeminence, no
arroganncie, ^o overthwart bibble babble, but a soft, mylde, tractable and
gentle spirit. This is an excellent and a gorgeous apparel in the e^es of
God. By this manner of decking they must chiefly deserve to have their
husbands hearts.

By this kind of wooing, even certain holy women in times past (which fixed
their whole hope, not in slyppery and transitorye things, but in God) set
forth themselves to please their husbands, not with gold or precious stones,
or purple, but with sobrenes and obedient diligence, whereby the fearcenes of an
husbands disposition is most easyly aswaged. So Sara obeyed Abraham, calling
him Lord, where as she was his wife, and not his drudgeing hand maid, but
submitted her self under his subieccion for sobrenes sake. For although it be
not fit for a man to use a lordlynes toward his wife, yet there is an
authority, which if he in somthynges abuse, yet it stands with the woman's
modesty to obey in place. To be brief, like as they are Abraham's true and
very right sons, that follow thexample of his faith: even so are you Saraes
daughters, which resemble y^ excellent good woman's manners and manly
substau^tialnes of mind, trymmyng up your selves with good works, and
reposing all your trust in God: and having the fruicion of his aid, there is
no cause at al, why you should be afraid of woman's frailty.

The text.
Like wise ye men dwell with them according to knowledge: giving honor unto the
wife, as unto the weker vessel, and as unto them that are heirs also of the
grace of life, that your prayers be not hindered. And as it is the office of
matrones, with chaste obedience, and holy manners, and with mylde softenes to
overcome their husbands: even so is it your part, O you men, in no wise to
abuse your authority toward your wives, as me^ playng the tyrannes, in that
they submit themselves unto you, but be rather so much the less lordely
toward them, in y^ they make them selfs your handemaides. They are
companions of all your estates and things, what so ever befalls. Let them
perceive you to be handsome men to live withal, and let your wisdom succor
the frailty of their womankynde. And the more stronger you are tha^ they in
the strength of heart and body, so much more it behooves you to releue women's
infirmity, that by your instruction and by your governance, they may be
made better, and as it were setting aparte that kind, they may wax manlye in
gospellike godlynes. For they are not Christian husbands, that have wives only
to the use of copulacion: but they ought rather to endeavor, that their wives
may be their companions in fasting, almosededes doing, of watching, and of
prayeng: so that those women, which are called to the common reward of
eternal life, as well as their husbands, may earnestly set their minds to
do these things also communely with their husbands. In christian marriage,
there is nothing, or in deed very little, to be given unto voluptuousnes, and
very much unto Godlynes. Wherein if both parties will consent, and thereup^^
you refrain from bodyly d^ale, your prayers shall not be interrupted. And
prayer is a sacrifice wherewith god must be sacrificed unto, every day.

The text.
In conclusion, be ye al of one mind, and of one heart love as brethren, be
piteful, be courte^^^ (meke) not rendering evil for evil, or rebuke for
rebuke: but contrariwise bless: know^^^ that ye are thereunto called, even y^
ye should be heirs of y^ blessing. For he that does l^^^ after life, and
loves to se good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his ^^^pes
that they speak no guyle. Let him eschew evil and do good: let him seek
peace, ^^^ ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are over the ryghteous, and his
ears (are open) ^^^^ their prayers. Again, the face of the Lord is over them
that do evil. Therefore like as men have some one kind of peculiar offices, some
ha^^ other, even so this becomes every one the rather to remember him self,
that he which has professed Christ, ought to excel others in those things,
that be matters of tried honesty. Howbeit this is the common office of all
men, y^ like as al have one self same profession, and like as through baptism
you are engraffed in to one self same body: even so let al be through concord,
of one self same mind. Let not age, estate, co^dicio^ or so^dry being in
diverse cou^tres disseuer you a sondre, which things among others do many
times ministre occasion of hate and contencion. But as for you, it behooves you
to be most fast joined together, seeing all one baptism has regenerated you
unto God: seeing you have all one father in heaven: inasmuche as dependyng of
one head Christ, you are me^bres of all one body: and forasmuch as the
profession of the gospel has made you brethren indifferently, and for that
cause sake the father of heaven has called all me^ unto all one reward of
immortality without difference, whether they be poor, whether they be rich,
whether they bond servants, whether they be masters, whether they be
husbands, whether they be wives, whether they be Jews or gentyles. In this
behalf there is no difference at all, and therefore there ought to be no
dissension nor high stately lokyng.

For a great deal more shall Christian charity, that humbles it self,
win, than authority that exacteth. For there is no concord among men
that be arrogaunt, fearce, and lovers of them selves. If the me^bres in a
beasts body do succor every one other, and in case any thing chance to any
one of them whether it be good or badde, every one of them reconeth it as
their own: and if those whom nere kynred of blood knytteth together, are both
glad and sorye for the commodities and discommodities of their kynsfolkes: how
much more convenient is it, y^ you being knytte together by so many ways,
should express this consent to be touched with other men's wealth and sorrows,
no less than with your own. So shall you expressly show a right brotherly
charity, if those that be of the more wealthy estate, disdeine not them y^
have not the worlds wealth, but be sorry for their evils, and to their powers
succor the^: if they that be in high power and authority, press not nor
despise those that are of y^ lower sort, but with familiar gentylnes and good
words apply them selves familiarly unto their inferiors: y^ there may be an
indifferent equality, and that christian charity may join together those,
y^ the state of the world has disseuered. God forbid, that you should be
desirous of reuengement, seeing it is your part to nourishe concord, not only
with the brethren and such as be godly, but also, if it be possible, with all
men. With those that good are, it behooves to strive who may do most good: and
with the^ that naught are, to strive in pacient suffryng, or in doing the^ good
also, by which means like as the very wild beasts are overcome, eue^ so it
somtymes mollifieth the malice of men, wherein was no hope of amendeme^t. Be not
you willing therefore, to requite wrong for wrong, or scoldyng for scoldyng. For
so shall it come to pass, that you shall be euel also, in that you follow
thexa^ple of them ye be evil: but rather recompense you a good turn for wrong,
and good words for bad, ye through your invincible goodness, you may overcome
and overthrow their malice. For god has not called you to this end, to have
y^ upper hand with naughty deeds doing, and naughty words speaking, but y^
through your weldoyng unto all men, and well speaking unto all, men you may
worthyly hear y^ joyful word: Come ye blessed of my father possess the
kingdom. To do evil unto good me^, it is more tha^ y^ propretie of mad
beasts: and to speak evil against them y^ speak well, it excedeth y^
propretie of vile tongued ruffio^s. To deserve well of them that deserve evil,
and to speak well of them that be evil speakers and backebytours, is thoffice
of Christian virtue. If any man think this an hard matter, let him hear the
Psalm wryttour enspired with the spirit of God, that commands the very
same: whosoever is desirous (quod he) to love life, and to se good days, let him
refrain his tongue from evil: let him restrain his lyppes, that they
speak no deceate: let him eschew euel, and do good: let him seek for peace,
and follow it: For the eyes of the Lord are upon the ryghteous, and his ears
are attentive unto their prayers. Contrarywyse, the countenance of the Lord
is upon them that do evil. Therefore if we will have God to be liberally good
unto us, let us be good unto all men: if we will escape his vengeance, let us
hurt no body at all.

I will not hear the reason, that man's affeccion will perchance murmuryngly
repyne in this behalf: If I do not revenge iniurye, the unpunished liberty
will provoke many mo to do hurt. But there is nothing, that shall keep you more
safe from injury, than if you either patiently suffer it, or else do good for
wrong. There is none end of harm doing, as often as with wretched encou^tryng
one with an other, reuiling is made double through reuiling again, and injury
is made double injury, by injury doing again. If no man resist, naughtiness
shall cease, or at least wax faint.

The text.
Moreover, who is it that will harm you if ye follow that which is good? Yea,
happy are ye, if any trouble happen unto you for ryghteousnes sake. Be not ye
afraid for any terror of them, neither be ye troubled, but sanctify the
Lord God in your hearts. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, and that with mekenes and
fear, having a good conscience that where as they backbyte you as evil doers,
they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conuersacyon in Christ. Who
would covet to do harm, if you study to do good for all men, and to hurt no
man? But if there be any found so utterly blind, that for malice they bear to
virtue or through ignorance do persecute you, I pray you, in what thing can
they hurt you? They will take away your money, which if they were not, you
must shortly leave behynd you: they will torment the body, and will slay you,
which should shortly dye, if they were not. All these things, forasmuch as
they are done unto you for Godlynes sake, shall not only bring no damage unto
you at all, but also greatly encreace your vauntage. By these evil turns
doing, they augment your reward of everlasting felicity. He that loses a
good meaning heart, he is hurted in deed: but when that is safe, all is gain,
whatsoever the world thinks is loss: and it is blessedness, whatsoever they
think is sorowfulnesse. Therefore it is in you to bring to pass, that no
violence of sorrows can do you harm by any way. Whatsoever the naughtynesse
of men shall take away from you, the free larges of God shall restore it
again with excedyng great vauntage. So that if you have the fruicion of God,
you have no cause to be afraid of men's threatenings, or to be disquieted with
the violence of sorrows, neither be you troubled in your mind, in the mids
of the storms of affliccions, as though you were destitute of Gods help.
Neither speak you cursedly unto men that punyshe you through ignorance, but
rather glorify you the lord God in your hearts, which to his servants
turns all things in to the best, whethersoeuer chaunseth joy or adversity.
Therefore he is ever worthy to be praised, albeit a man can not always with
word of mouth, yet with affeccion of the heart he may every where, and at
all times. His enemies are not to be provoked with scoldynges, but wheresoever
any hope shall offer it self, that they may be drawn unto Christ, be you
prompte and ready to answer whosoever desires to know, with what confidence,
and through what hope, you set naught by the commodities of this life, and
suffer the incommodities so patiently. And that do you not disdeignefully, nor
tauntynglye, as though you were offended at them, but with all mildenes and
reverence, that is to say, using a good conscience of your own, although you
can not be hable to persuade them. For it is not enough for Christians, to
speak things that are true and worthy of Christ: but also to speak after
such sort, that the very reason of your talk may declare, that you are not
in hand with your own business, but that you respect the glory of Christ,
and the salvation of them, which you speak unto. This shall be the surest
argument to make them ashamed, which slaundre your conversation, that you lead
according to Christ's doctrine, as though it were a countrefaict and a naughty
conversation. For countrefaicte virtue, although it otherwise begile men with
his iuggling, yet when it comes once to suffering of punishementes, it
breaks out and bewrays it self. There is nothing but a good conscience, and
a conscience that depends wholly of God, that is hable chearefully to bear
all things, and to be so far from intendyng reuengement, that he goes about
also to do good to them, of whom he is punished.

The text.
For it is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing,
then for evil doing. For as much as Christ has once suffered for sins, the
just for the unjust, to bring us unto God, and was killed, as pertaining to the
flesh: but was quickened in the spirit. In which spirit he also went and
preached unto the spirits that were in prison, which sometime had been
disobedient, when the long suffering of God was once looked for in the days of
Noe, while the Arc was a preparing: wherein a few, y^ is to say, viii. solles,
were saved by the water, like as baptism also now saves us, not the putting
away of the fylth of the flesh: but in that a good conscience consents to
God, by the resurreccion of Jesus Christ, which is on the right hand of God:
and is gone into heaven, Aungelles, powers, and might, subdued unto him. Let it
not move you, that you harmeles folks suffer sorrows at their hands, which
be harmedoers: but rather it is in that behalf the more easily to be borne,
whatsoever is done unto you. For it is better for you, if it be the will of
God, that you suffer these things that you suffer, for well doing, than for
evil doing. For he that is punysshed for his evil deeds, suffers that he has
deserved: but the punyshementes that you suffer, turn to the glory of Christ,
and to the heaped encreace of your felicity. It is a gloriouse thing for you
to follow thexample of your prince. Thus he advanced the glory of God the
father, he being all together without sin, was taken, bounden, beaten, spytte
upon, crucified, and dyed for our sins, where as he had no sin at all. The
ryghtuous, for the unrighteous, the faults for the faultye, suffered pains,
gladly obeyng the fathers will, that he might present us, that were sinners,
clean and without spotte unto the father: that we also following his example,
should live harmeles among harmedoers, and that we being made, good should
suffer for the wealth of them that naught are. He dyed only once for all and
for temporal affliccion was endowed with life everlasting, that we being once
redeemed from sins, should not slide back again to the same. It is Christ
than that has made us clean, being delivered to death for the weakness of the
human body which he had received, but he was raised to life again by the
power of the spirit, which could not be overcome with any affliccions. For
the same time that his dead body was closed in the grave, he being alive in
spirit pierced unto the helles: and like as unto men endued with mortal
body, he preached the doctrine of the gospel in his bodylye presence, which
those that believed, attained salvation, and those that refused to believe,
purchaced to them selves the heap of eternal damnacion: even so his body being
laid aparte, his spirit went unto them, which being delivered of their
bodies, lived in the helles, and preached unto them, that now is the time
present wherein they should receive the reward of their godliness, for y^ in
times past they ^earing the justice of god, nether revenged them selves of
euilles, and lived faultles among the faultye: and declared, that they suffered
condyng punyshementes, which in the days of Noe, when the Arc was furnisshed,
and the floude was looked for, that God being provoked by mortal men's
wickedness would send upon them, believed not, but abused the gentilnes of God,
when they saw the thing, that he threatened, put of for a certain of years.
Therefore when the floude came, it destroyed all, except a very few, that is to
say, no more but only eight persons, which according to Noes counsel, went
into the arc, and were not drowned in the flood. And therefore even in those
times faith wanted not h^^ reward. For God suffered not those to perish, that
trusted in him with all their whole her^. Neither can the unbelievers escape y^
vengeance of God, although you be no reuengers. For it is enough for you, that
you obey God, but as for the punyshement of the rest, refe^re that to him.

Now^ that, which N^es A^ke was unto them, is baptism unto you: that same
thing that the flood was unto them, is the eternal punishment unto the wicked,
and preached unto them, that obey not the gospel. It was enough for Noe to have
told them of the flood that was to come: It was enough to have showed, by what
means they might escape the daungier, if through repentance they would have
aswaged y^ wrath of god, which they had provoked upon themselves by their own
wickedness. And so let your vpryghtenes be enough unto you: let it be enough
for you to have declared unto other, what reward i^ prepared for them that
believe the gospel, and what pain abides the unbelievers. If there be but a
few saved by faith, it shall not be laid to your charge. If a great part of
men perish through unbelief, they perish through their own fault. After
this sort it was the will of God to utter the difference between the good and
the badde. Baptism received as it ought to be, preserves against destruction,
and wassheth away the fylthynes, not of bodies but of souls. But baptism
being broken promise withal, destroys for ever, and wyndeth into so much
the more heinous rageing streams of wickedness^.

Therefore the thing that is salvation to some having faith, does bring
destruction to the unbelievers and such as are rebellions against faith.
Notwithstanding it is not enough for you, that through the floude of baptism
your sins are perished, and that wicked lusts of the former conversation are
lost, onles there be present a good conscience also in all the life after
correspondent to the benefit of God. Christ died, howbeit but only once: he is
risen again never to dye: and unto us the synfulnesses of our former old life
are in ly^^ sort slain by the death of Christ, that we should afterward live
again to innocence, and never slide back again in to sins, as much as
lies in us. That shall come to pass, if we shall, as it were setting
inortalytie apart, desi^ou sly aspire unto y^ country of heaven with al our
whole hertes, the enheritau^ce wh^rof abides them that obey the gospel. For so
Jesus Christ rose again, tha^ he would not make long taringe after that upon
earth, but conveyed him self out of mortal men's company up into heaven:
and there having the fruicion of the glory of immortality, sits on the
fathers right hand, not without a body, but such a body as death has now no
title to it at all: And while death goes about the swalowe up the innocente,
it is utterly swalowed up it self: and while death surely reconeth to have
gotten a great pray, it became a pray it self. Finally Christ's victory, is
our victory: and the glory that went before in him, is showed unto us, in case
we continue still in the thing that we have begone, and stick hard in his
fotesteppes. Against him the torments of the wicked prevailed nothing at all:
but in his pacient suffryng of them he gate the victory, he trihumpheth and
reigns alofte, sittyng in heaven above all aungelles, or whatsoever virtue
and power there is besides. Unto you he has opened the way into heaven, that
by the same way that he entered in, you may also thrust in thycke and treefolde
into the same place. The enheritaunce is ready and certain, the possession
whereof he has also entered for your sakes, so that you express your selves
worthy of it: that is to say, if you set your studies upon the innocence
(which he has freely given) to do good unto all men, yea even to the evil and
those that punyshe you, as much as unto you perteyneth.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
For as much then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm ye your
selves likewise with the same mind: for he which suffers in the flesh
cease from sin, that he hence forward should live (as much time as he
remains in the flesh) not after the lusts of men, but after the will of God.
For it is suffycient for us that we have spent the time that is past of the
life, after the will of the Gentiles walkyng in wantones, lusts, in excess of
wines, in excess of eating, in excess of drinking (in dronkennes) and in
abominable idolatry. And it seems to them an inconvenient thing, that ye
run not also with them unto the same excess of riot, and therefore, speak
they evil of you, which shall give accomces to him, that is ready to judge
quick and dead. For unto this purpose verelie was the Gospel preached also
unto the dead, that they should be judged like other men in y^ ^^she, but
should live before God in the spirit. The end of al things is at hand* FOr as
much than as Christ your Prince and head followed not the pleasures of this
life, but through suffrynge of afflyceions for a time came unto the glory of
heaven, and seeing that he has conquered the adversaries with the weapons of
paciente sufferaunce: it is reason that you, which profess your selves to be
his disciples, should arm your selves with the like purpose of mind.
Innocence of life, is the most surest armor: and christian patience is the
fortress that can not be beaten down. He that is gyrded with patience, is
sure that no man can be hable to hurt him. Whosoever is dead together with
Christ after the flesh, has so given over the synfulnes of his former
conversation, that he is plainly dead to humayne desires, so that now he is
not tickled with gredynes of renown, he is not provoked with desire of
reuengemente, but all the rest of his time, that is given him in this sely
carkas, lives all together whole to the will of God, whom only his ^esyre is
to please, of whom also he lokethe for the reward of a good conscience, and
unto him he refers the vengeance taking of the wicked. Whosoe^er is readily
prepared to suffer martyrdom, is not touched with the pleasure ^ of this
world. For this he thinks with him self: God forbydde, that I being once
done upon the cross with my Christ, should go down to the vices that I have
forsaken: and that I being once appointed unto everlasting felicity, should
be tombled back again to this worlds delices, which are not only short,
but also folyshe: It is even large enough that I being a stranger from
Christ, have spent the time past in folyshe lusts, which the profane
Heathens do filthiely serve, being addicte and given to wantones, to fleshly
lusts, to dronkenes, to excessyue bankettynges, and to abomynable image
worshyppynges. These prankes we are glad we have left behind us, by the
goodness of Christ: and as often as we look back at them, we shrugge for fear
to remember such fylthynes of life and so great blind darkness of ignorance.
Now in stedde of outrageous lust, chastity is pleasant: for ^iote,
temperate fare: for wynnebybbyng, sobriety: for supersticious worshypping of
images, true godlynes and devout worshyppyng of the living God, unto who^ the
most acceptable sacrifice that may be, is a mind pure and unspotted from
all uncleanness of sin. Those that have their blind darkness yet still, have
marvel at this so great a chaungeing of minds and life in you, and think
scorn that their riotousnes is condemned by your temperate fa^e, and that
their life (which flows over with all kinds of intemperaunce) is blamed by
your honest vprightnes. They would love the companions of their fylthynes:
but now they rail upon you, because your life is not such as theirs is: but
yet there is no cause why ye should be moved at their raylynlynges, neither
are they to be rayled at again. Let it be enough for you, that you have a good
conscience before God. If you can by any possible way convert them unto
better, you ought to do your diligence: howbeit after such sort, that you go
not back from your own sincere vprightnes. If they do repent, it is to be
ioyed at: if their hertes be hardened, they rail and scolde even against them
that wyshe them well: refer you the vengeance to God, whose judgment no
mortal man is hable to escape. For he in time shall judge all men, not only
the quycke, but also the dead: the quycke, whom Christ at his coming shall
find lyuinge in the body: the dead, which before Christ's coming are
departed out of this life. Notwithstanding none lives in deed, but he that
lives unto godlynes. Those that serve vices, and filthy lusts, are dead unto
God. And unto him at his judgment, those that be dead in deed, shall render
account, if they will not repent from their vices. For he (that most equal
indyfferent judge) shall punyshe them for your sakes, and pay you the full
rewards of your pacient suffraunce. In deed he is desirous that all men revive
unto gospellike godlynes, and for that cause sake, he would have the grace of
the gospel p^^ached, not only unto the Jews, that lived devoutly after
Moses law, not only unto the Gentiles that lived honestlye after the law of
nature, but also unto the dead and utterly buried in all kinds of naughtines.
And unto their darkness, he would have the light of the gospel to be laid:
them he would have taught with all myldenes and patience, that they also
awaking at length, might contemn those things wherein being now blind they
repose their felicity, and be reputed as dead in body with men, in that they
are not entangled with any affeccio^s of the body, but with God they might live
in spirit. For none is alive in deed, in Gods judgment, but he that is
after this sort dead. There is nothing of long continuance in this world,
and the end of all things shall shoretly come. And their voluptuous pleasures
shall sone forsake them, and your paynefull punishment shall sone have an
end. And also everlasting joy abides for you, and everlasting cormentes
abide for them.

The text.
Be ye therefore sobre and watch unto prayer. But above all things have
feruente love among your selves. For love shall cover the the multitude of
sins. Be ye her berous one to another without gr^d gynge. As every man has
received the gift even so minister the same one to another, as good ministers
of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him talk as the words
of God. If any man minister, let him do it as of the habilytie, which God
ministers unto him. That God in all things may bec glorified through Jesus
Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and ever. Amen. Therefore it
stondeth you in hand by all means, that that day find you not slugishly
napping, nor carelessly snourting by riot and slouthfulnes. But rather prepare
your selves always ready against that day, and be sobre and watching in
continual prayers. For it shall come unlooked for (so it is the will of Christ)
but if it shall find thee in them, it can not chose but come happyly. Sobriety
is an acceptable thing to God, it is a sure matter to watch, for God does
gladlye hear the prayers that are set forth by temperaunce and watchyng. But
this is a thing a great deal most acceptable of all, that you embrace every
one other with continual and vehement love, releuing every one other with
mutual good turns. So as he that is the more watchefull, may raise up the
drowsye snourtour: he that is the better learned, may instruct the less
learned: he that is y^ more diligente, may warn the sluggarde: he that is the
more feruente, may prycke up the cold one: and he that is the more perfect,
may forgive him that does amysse through infirmity. For this brynnynge
charity toward the neighbor, covers the multitude of sins, wherewith we
are endaungered to God. That which we offend against him, is very well
washen away by doing good turns unto our neighbors. Like as every one has
the fortune of ability, so let him study to be good unto his brother. Let
him that has substance to do withal, show himself herberous, and bestow
unto them that have need, not grudgingly, nether with murmuryng, but gladly and
chearefully, estemyng himself to receive a good turn, when he gives, and
that such manner of loss of substance is a great gain with God, which shall
repaye al with vpheaped mesure. And think this moreover, that whatsoever you
spend to the helping of your neighbor, is the good gift of God, given to
this end, that as it were having that chance of ^iches committed to your
credence, you should wax rich in the vsurye of godly works. Unto some God
has distributed some sundry gifts: unto some, other gifts. Let no man take
upon him to have that, which he has, of him self: let him think it to be
Gods gift, which he would have distributed by you upon other, that of doing
good turns one for an other, mutual love may be glewed together among your
selves more and more, and that there might encreace by occasion unto every one
the reward of godlynes. Let no man be disco^tent with him self, in that he is
not endued with this or that gift. Let no man also stand in his own conceit,
in that he has mo qualities given unto him than other have. For so it was the
will of the rich and lyberall gentill God, to bestow his gifts after sundry
sorts. No man is Lord of that which he has received: he is nothing but the
dispoler: For the thing that he disposes, is the lords. And if he do that
faithfully, chearefully and desirouslye, let him not look for reward of man,
inasmuche as he shall receive it of God. If wholesome doctrine chance unto a
man, if any man have the gift of a fine learned tongue, let him not abuse it
unto gain, unto pompous statelynes and vain glory, but unto the commodity
of his neighbor, and to the glory of Christ. Let the hearers perceive his
words to be the words of God, and not of men: and that he which speaks is
nothing else, but the instrument of the voice of God. If any man be more hable
to have ministracion of office than of Doctrine, let him administre his gift,
so, as he challenge not thautoritie unto him self, but ascribe it unto God,
that gives him power and strength to go about the thing effectually that he
takes in hand. And that shall be done, to the intent that of gifts diversely
distributed, and of offices diversely gone about, God may be glorified on every
part, of whom as of the welspring we have al things flowynge unto us, not by
Moses, but by Jesus Christ, by whom whatsoever the father gives, he gives it
unto us, as his only son. Unto God therefore shall he ascribe the deed, that
is helped by his brothers good turn: unto God shall he render the thanks,
which is glad that his brother is helped by his ministry. So that y^ total
sum of al glory redoundeth on every part unto God the father and the son,
unto whom is continual glory and dominion for ever world without end. Amen.
We ought not in this behalf to seek after glory, but it behooves us to
remember our duty, wherewith we may please God. Concerning the reward let him
alone with all that we put our trust in. For he shall turn the persecutours
malice into your good, be shall change your paynful sorrows into gladness, and
your reproach into glory.

The text.
Derely beloved, marvel not that ye are proved by fire, which thing is to
try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you: but rejoice, in
as much as ye are partakers of Christ's passion: that when his glory appears
ye may be merry and glad. If ye be rayled upon for the name of Christ, happy
are ye. For the glory and the spirit of God rests upon you. On their part
he is evil spoken of, but on your part he is glorified Se that none of you be
punyshed as a murderer, or as a thief, or an evil doer* or as a busy body in
other men's matters. If any man suffer as a Christian man, let him not be a
shamed: but let him glorify God on his behalf. For the time is come that
judgment must begin at the house of god. If it first begin at us what shall the
end be of them which believe not the gospel of God? And if the righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear: Wherefore let
them that are troubled according to the will of God, commyt their souls to him
with well doing, as unto a faithful creator. Therefore, dearly beloved, be not
disquieted in y^ mean season as it were a new matter, though you which shall be
the fellows to gether of the kyngedom heaven, be tried with afliccions in this
world, as gold is with fire. That thing ought to seem no new matter unto you,
which went long a go before in the triedly proved prophets, and lately in
Christ. It ought to be the more easylye borne, in as much as you see it happen
commonly unto you with all the tried people of god. And seeing y^ in this
behalf you being disciples resemble your master, and being members resemble
your head Jesus Christ, ought to be glad and rejoice, y^ like as now he does
vouchesaue to have you companions of his affliccions, even so afterward, wha^
he shall open his majesty unto al men, and having made them ashamed and
astonished, y^ afflicted him and you for malice of him, you shall rejoice with
unspeakable wirthe, which may be felt, but not expressed with words. In the
mean season, if men reuyle you, how sore soever you are afflicted in body,
not for your own naughtye deeds, but for the profession of Christ, yet in this
behalf you are blessed, that even in y^ mids of your torments, and in the
mids of your dispightfull handlinge, the glorious spirit of god is kyndled
again in you for your harmeles heart and good conscience sake. It is a sweet
thing to suffer with Christ, and it is a glorious thing to suffer for Christ. For
as much as in them lies, they revile eue^ Christ himself, howbeit your
innocence, and your pacient suffraunce causes it to chance unto his glory.
But God forbydde, y^ any of you should be punished for manslaughter, or theft,
either for naughty words speaking, or for curious meddlynge of those things
that perteine nothing to you. For it is y^ cause and not the tormenting y^
makes a Marter. And whosoever suffers for none other cause, but y^ he is
called a Christian, he needs not to be ashamed of his punishment. It is a
shame to be called a thief: but it is a glorious thing to be called a
Christian. Blessed are they, which (though it be after that painful sort) may
escape the torments of hell fire: and that through affliccions y^ shall endure
but as it were y^ space of a moment, have passage given them unto joys that
shall never have end. Whereunto God admits none, but him that is notably
proved and tried by much suffering of sorrows. Ones he shall practice dreadful
judgment, wha^ the time of mercy is past, whereat every one shall be rewarded
according to his deseartes. In y^ mean while, y^ judgment is more easy,
inasmuche as being purely tried by temporal torments we are made worthy of y^
fellowship of Christ, which will allow nothing but the thing that is most pure
and most perfitely scowred from dross. Now is the time, that this judgment
be exercised, to the intent it may more evidently appear, who do truly put
their trust in God, and who do truly love Christ in deed. Things being
in prosperous and quiet estate are not arguments of true godliness. As for
Moses ceremonies, even a very hipocrite may keep them, but as for loss of
goods, reuilinges, enprisonmentes, stripes, and death, no man takes
patiently, but he y^ has an invincible faith joined with a gospellyke charity.
And unto these, let the^ readily prepare them selves, that will in time coming
reign with Christ. This judgment shall begin at y^ house of god, which is the
congregation. Than if it be needful for us to be so cleansed, which believe the
gospel, and live vprightely: what end, what judgment, what pain abides
them, that have no constaunt belefe in the gospel, and continue still in their
own wickednesses? If they be so tried, which with single plains obey the
gospel, and having forsaken all the pleasures of this world, have given over
them selves to the study of godlynes: what shall become of them whom the
preachinge of the gospel has made worse? And if they which live justly,
knowinge themselves guilty in none evil, atchieue not (without peril and
much a do) the port of eternal salvation: In what hope shall the wicked and
mischeuous doers show their face in so straight and so dreadefull a judgment?
Therefore they may in no wise hope to get any salvation there, to the intent that
they also which are tormented in this world, not for evil doings but for
the will of God, must not trust to them selves, but to their possible powers
exercisinge y^ works of godlynes, they should after this sort put their
souls in the hands of God their maker, who of his goodness will not suffer
it to peryshe that he has made, if they continue in well doing to death, and
if they will have none affiaunce in their own merits, but look for reward of
his bounteous lyberalitie.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
The elders which are among you, I exhort, which am also an elder, and a
witness of the affliccio^s of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that
shall be opened. Feed ye Christ's flock, as much as lies in you, taking the
ouersyght of them, not as compelled thereto, but wyllyngly: after a godly sort,
not for y^ desire of tylthy lucre: but of a good mind, not as though ye were
lords over the parisshes: but that ye be an ensample to the flock and that
with good will. And when the chief sheperde shall appear, ye shall receive a^
incorruptible crown of glory. Likewise ye younger, submyt your selves unto the
elder. Submit your selves every man one to another, knet your selves together
in lowlynes of mind. For God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble. Endeavor your dilygence unto this, brethren, both every one severally
by your selves, and all together in commune, that following the fotestepes of
Christ, you may atteyne unto his fellowship. Howbeit it is reason, y^ those,
which excede other in authority of age, should excede also in the study of
godlynes. Of their example, of their manner of teaching, and of their authority
depends the resydue of the multitude. And it is not inoughe for them, to live
vpryghtly themselves, except they be careful for the multitude also. For unto
them, their graye head augmenteth authority, use of things augmenteth
wisdom, and long proved and tried vprightenes of life augementeth their
credence. You therefore I speak to, you elders, the kepets of the people,
being an elder also my self, which have performed in matter and in deeds, the
thing y^ I teach, that is to say, in suffering enprisonmentes and stripes for
the name of Christ sake, being ready also even unto y^ cross, wha^ the will of
God so shall be, and in like manner having this very good hope, y^ whom he has
vouchesafe to have suffer for his sake, he will admit also the same unto y^
fellowship of the glory of heaven, as soon as y^ day shall come, wherein he shall
openly declare his Majesty unto the world, and y^ wrastlinges of y^ world
being at an end, y^ rewards shall be brought furthe. I beseech you for y^
torments sakes y^ Christ suffered for you, and for mine affliccions sakes,
wherein I follow my lord to mine uttermost power, show your selves right feders
of y^ multitude in deed, as it is chanced to every man's lotte, watch, walk
about, look on every side, and take heed, y^ nothing want unto the flock, for
whom Christ died, nether holy consolacion, nether wholesome doctrine, ne example
of gospellyke life. You are called Superint endentes: accomplish in deed y^
thing y^ you are called. Feed, cure, govern, keep, y^ nothing perish, y^
nothing run out of y^ way. And see y^ you do y^, not grudgingly, as me^
constrained through fear, either shame, or necessity of office: but with
dilligent readiness, gladly, and with a good will, respecti^g nothing else, but
what may be acceptable to god. It is his busynes that you take in hand, and of
him you shall receive everlasting reward. Look not for reward in this life.
It is a shame, to take charge of christian people for vauntage sake: which
charge no man is praised for taking, but he that does it of his own accord
and freely without any thing. That man is fallen out of the reward of heaven,
that hunteth after the hyre of his office at men's hands here in this world.
Next unto this it is, if any man, though he set naught by lucre, yet seeks
ambiciously after honor and dignity, being desirous to be a commander, being
desirous to be reverenced: that man shall have no reward also with God. He
has received his reward: The office of a right bishop is far of from
lordinge. It is not a tirannye, but an administracion. A bishop is put in
authority for this end, not to scrape to him self the more gain thereby, not
to reign a lofte, and to use his pleasure the more freely, but to do the more
good. Therefore you elders, remember your office, behave your selves so in all
things, that your life may be an example unto the people of a gospellyke
conversation. Let them learn of your behavior to set naught by lucre, let
them learn to defye dysdeignous statelynes, let them learn to hope for the
hyre of their duties doing at Christ's hands, and to have respect to none
other thing in this world, but because so it is honest, so is it acceptable to
God. In the mean season play the good shepherdes freely without any thing.
Nevertheless in deed it shall not be done for nothing: but when the prince of
shepherdes Jesus Christ shall in thappointed day openly show forth him self,
which gave him self wholly for his sheep, the keeping whereof he has committed
unto your credence, than instead of a vile and mortal triflyng reward you
shall receive the glorious crown of your duetye doing, which shall never
fade. Therefore in no wise take the thing upon your selves, that you ought to
look for at your princes hands: prevent not the day, which he would have to
be uncertain unto us. And like as it is the part of such as be Elders, to
show them selves as fathers unto the younger, even so the younger ought on the
other part to show them selves manerly and obedient unto the elders: and like
as the Elders submit them selves through gospellyke charity unto all men,
to the intent they may do the more good, even so the young ought not to abuse
the gentilnes and facility of the Elders, but it is rather convenient for them
to obey them with so much the more ready diligence, as they abuse the less
their authority. Where true charity is, there authority is nether dysdeinfull
nor the youth is outragiouslye fearce. He y^ is set in dignity, goes about
nothing but this, that he may do good for other: and he y^ is a subject,
does more of his own free accord, than he requires him. Let all men
therefore have gentle sobrenes fyxed utterly in their hearts: and that shall be
occasion, that nether the Elders shall be weary of their charge, nor y^ younger
grieved at their authority. God hates fearce flowtenes of stomach in men: his
delyght is in low minded hearts, and such is deiecte them selves: he
bestows his gifts unto them that take nothing upon them selves: he repelleth
and forsakes y^ proud persons, as unworthy his benefits. Such as humble
them selves, them he aduaunceth: and such as exalte them selves, them he
throws down: such as trust to their own strengthes, them he does not
vouchesafe to help: and those that dystruste their own powers and depend
wholye at his beck, them he chearyssheth and maynteyneth.

The text.
Submit your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exaite
you, when the time is come. Last all your care upon him: for he ever cares
for you. Be sober and watch, for your aduersatye the devil as a roarynge
lion walks about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resyst steadfast in the
faith, knowing that the same affliccions are appointed unto your brerbren,
that are in y^ world. But the God of all grace which has called us unto his
eternal glory by Christ Jesus shall his own self (after that ye have
suffered a little affliccio^) make you perfect: settle, strength and stablyshe
you. To him be glory and dominto^ for ever and ever. Amen. By Siluanus a
faithful brother unto you (as I suppose) have I written breffely, exhortinge
and testifying how that this is the true grace of God, wherein ye stand. The
congregation of them which at Babylon are companions of your eleccion,
saluteth you, and so does Marcus my son. Great ye one another with the kiss
of love. Peace be with you al which are in Christ Jesus. Amen. Submit your
selves therefore, not for dread of men, but because you trust in the mighty
hand of God. There is no peril, lest you should be trodden under foot
perpetually for ever: for he shall advance and exalce you a lofte, when the day
of rewards comes. Look not waueringly about you, have no distrust, be not
aftayed, lest you be tossed in ye sourges of sorrows, as though you were
undefended and set naught by: for he, that is hable in all things, and sees
all things, has charche of you, and will not suffer any thing of you to
peryshe. It is ye common custoume of youth to be bent unto pleasures, unto
riot, and unto wantonness. But be you sobre, watch you in your minds, being
always readily All prelates may learn diligence at this most dilligent
preachinge prelate, the devil.
atte^tiue and always circu^specte. For y^ adversary of your salvation, y^
thursteth after man's destruccio^, sleapeth not, but walks about like an
hungrye roaringlion, sekeyng in every place whom he may snatche up to devour:
and assaieng by all means entrance unto you, sometime layeng wait for you by
voluptuous pleasures, sometime openly oppugnyng you by persecucions. Give not
place unto him, but resist him with vnshrinkinge strong hearts. You will say:
where have we power against him that is so mighty? He that has charge of
you, is mightier than he. Put all the whole trust of your hearts upon him, and
your adversaries power shall be nothing. Against the faithles, he is strong: but
against the faithful he is feeble. If he should assault this man or that man,
parchaunce it might rightly be taken for a sore grievous affliccio^, but now
does he impugn all the whole flock of the godly with like malicious hatred. He
persecuteth Christ in you, he enuieth all men's salvation, so that the common
affliccio^ of all shall be the more easily hable to be borne, and to stand with
agreeable minds against the common enemy. These matters shall shortly have an
end. Nether will God, from whom proceadeth all goodness, leave you succourles
in the mean season, but will thoroughly perform the thing that he has
begone in you. He has given you such stomachs, that for his sake you should
not be afraid to suffer torments, whereby he has called you unto his glory
that never shall have end. He will not suffer you to mysse of the victory: if
you wrestle manfully, he will help you in your wrestlynge, and will garnysshe,
strengthen and establyshe you, that being tormented for a short season, you
may atteine the crown of immortality. By his aid we get the victory, and
of his free gift we shall receive the reward. For there is nothing wherein we
may challenge any praise to our selves: unto God alone is al glory due, not
only in this world, but also into al ages for ever: Ame^. At this present I
will write no further unto you: For of this self same matter, I suppose, I
wrote unto you of late, although in few words, by Siluanus a faithful
brother, and I doubt not but he delivered the Epistle well and faithfully. In
it I desired and heartily besought you, to persevere still in that which you have
begone: that nothing alter your mind. The way that you have entered, is the
very right true way unto salvation. Thus far you have proceeded forewarde by
the goodness of God. Continue still steadfastly through his helping aid, till
you attain unto the victorious reward of life that never shall dye. The
congregation of the christianes commend them unto you, even the congregation
whom God has chosen out to himself together with you in Babylon, which in
the mids of wicked ydolatrours follow the godlynes of the gospel, and in
mids of most sylthye corrupt lyuers embrace the pureness of clean
conversation. You are not alone by your selves, God has his elect in every
place: In deed those are but a very few, howbeit they are a fynely tried sede
to encreace the congregation in time coming more latgely. Mark saluteth you,
which is to me as it were my son. Salute you every one other with a kiss,
not after the sort that is given more custumely than heartily, but with an
holy, pure, and true christian mind, which is not done against the heart,
but is the sign of a chaste and a pure upright lover, and not a lyeng
countrefaicte token. And (to make an end of mine Epistle in like sort as I
began it) Grace and peace be always present with you al, which being
engraffed unto the body of Jesus Christ, live by his spirit, that grace may
couple you unto God, and peace may glewe you together with mutual concord:
which thing God (that is best and most mighty) bring to pass.

Amen.
Thus ends the paraphrase upon the first Epistle of S. Peter thapostle.
The argument upon the later Epistle of S. Peter thapostle / by D. Erasmus of
Roterodame.
THis Epistle / as it appears / Peter wrote / when he was greatly growe^ in
age, and almost at the pittes brinke, for in deed he makes mention of his
death. He writes generallye to all sorts of christianes, exhortinge them to
pureness of life, and by ancient examples and with the terror of the last
judgment frayeng them from fylthines: and he does vehemently blame them,
which corrupt the minds of the simple with perverse doctrine, in denyeng the
coming of Christ.

Thus ends the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the later Epistle of S. Peter thapostle.
The first Chapter.
The text.
Simon Peter, a servant and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, to them which have
obtained like precious faith with us through the rightewesnes of our God and
savior Jesus Christ. Grace be unto you, and peace be multiplied through the
knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord. According as his godly power has
given unto us al things that pertayne unto life and godliness, through the
knowledge of him that has called us by glory and virtue, by the which are
given unto us, excellent and most great promyses, that by the means thereof ye
might be partetakers of the godly nature, if ye fly the corrupcion of worldly
lust. I Simon Peter / in times paste a diligent follower of Moses law, and now
a servant and Ambassador of Jesus Christ, whose gospel (eue^ as y^ day light)
wipeth and drives away all the shadows of the old testament, write unto all
manner of men without parciall excepcion either of people, or religion, either
of kind, or state, or yet condition. For we esteem all people to be kynsfolkes
and most nerely joined unto us, whosoever have deserved to be made like unto us
in the profession of the faith of the gospel, by the which, we have atteyned
true righteousness, not by circumcision, or by sacrifices of the law, but by
the goodness of our God, and by the death of our savior Jesus Christ, who has
freely pardoned us our old sins, to thente^t we should hence forth follow
gospellyke righteousness, which does not consiste in ceremonies, but in true
godliness of mind: and has a certain far greater perfeccio^ than the Jews
righteousness, which is nothing but a shadow of true righteousness. And I
pray, y^ like as you have yet hitherto gone aboundantlye forward in the grace
of y^ gospel, always somewhat augmentyng in thencreaces of godlynes, and
drawinge nerer brotherly concord among your selves daily more and more: so
the liberal goodness of God would vouchesafe to make perfect his gifts in
you: which Iewelles increase so much y^ more largely in you, as you grow
forewarde into y^ knowledge of God y^ father, and of his son our Lord Jesus
Christ, the acknowledginge of whom is eternal life. For it is the chief
point of salvation, to acknowledge the author of salvation, that we challenge no
part thereof to our own deserts and strengthes, or to the prescripcions of
Moses law, inasmuche as whatsoever is perteyninge to true life, and whatsoever
belongs unto true godlynes, his divine power has bestowed it unto us,
without help of circumcision, only by faith, whereby we acknowlage God the
father, from whom proceed all things, and Jesus Christ, by whom only we
have al things given unto us. These things are not given through our
merits, but by his free bounteouse gift, which of his own accord has
called us unto the benefit of salvation: and to them that were void of glory
and virtue, he has bestowed both his own glory and virtue: to the intent that
whereas being addicte unto our own vicious naughtines, like filthy vile slaves
we scrued ydoles, we should be engraffed unto Christ, and be made both pure
and glorious, having y^ wickedness taken out of the way, wherein we were
fylthily soyled. He has translated our vile naughtines upon himself, that he
might choose us of his own free pleasure into ye fellowship of his glory: Our
trespasses he has taken upon himself, that we might enjoy his innocencye.
Now these same are very great matters, but those are far greater of and
much more excellency, that are promissed us in time to come, not by the law
of Moses, as we have often said before, but by thacknowlageing of Jesus Christ.
But what is it, that is promised? Forsoothe that albeit you perteyne not to the
kynredde of the Jews, yet you may be made with them companions of the divine
nature being chosen into the number of y^ children of god, to possess
thenheritaunce, of immortal life, so that you set your study upon a certain
immortality by incorrupt conversation in the mean season here in this
world, and flee from al corrupcion of vices and naughty lusts wherewith a
mind that is infected, te^deth to everlasting death.

The text.
And herunto give all diligence: in your faith minister virtue: in virtue
knowledge: in knowledge temperaunce, in temperaunce patience: in patience
godliness: in godliness brotherly kyndnesse: in brotherly kyndnesse love. For
if these things be among you, and be plenteous, they will make you that ye
nether shall be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
But he that lacks these things, is blind and gropeth for the way with his
hand, and has forgotten y^ he was pourged from his old sins* God has
once given innocencye freely, and it is not inoughe to maintain it, but
applyeng withal studious diligence, endeavor your selves to be made rich in
well doings, that your faith be not idle, but that it be accompanied with
good behavior, that nothing be done or said, but that which is virtuous.
Than let good behavior entreteyne knowlage, that you may not only follow the
things that be upright, but also discern, what thing, in what place, among
whom, after what sort, and by what means ought worthilye to be done. Let
knowledge be accompanied with temperaunce, that the mind being immovably
strong against all the wanton enticementes of the world, may constantlye
without shrinkynge follow the thing, that it has judged to be best. Unto
temperaunce let patience be joined, that when you do well, you may chearefully
suffer sorrows. For those men, whom the flateringe pleasures of the world do
not bring in to a fine fingred nicenes, are somtymes broken with impacient
suffering of sorrows, with patience let godlynes be present, that what soever
you do or suffer, you refer it to the glory of God. Let godlynes be
accompanied with brotherly charity, that like as you love God for himself,
even so for his sake you may love all them that profess God. And let
brotherly charity be augmented and vpheaped with love, to study to do good
for all men, not only them that are godly and Christian folks, but also for
them that are wicked. These are the fruits of an evangelical faith, which if
you have them aboundauntlye, shall bring to pass that where you have
acknowledged our lord Jesus Christ through faith, it should not be
unprofitable and unfruitful unto you, although you have nothing to do with
circumcision. For in these things consists the whole sum of Christen
godlynes: and if any man want the^, he has professed Christ in vain,
forasmuch as he slydeth back from the light of the Gospel in to his old
former darkness, even as it were a blind man that groapeth the way with his
hand, and is carried about hereawaye and therawaye through the mases of
worldly lusts: neither sees he the way to come to the fellowship of Christ,
being unthankful also for the benefit of Christ, of whom where he is once
freely cleansed from his old transgressions, yet as a man forgetful of this so
exceadynge a mercy, he slydeth back in to the same again.

The text.
Wherefore brethren, give the more diligence for to make your calling and
eleccion sure by good works. For if ye do such things, ye shall never fall.
Yea, and by this means an entringe in, shall be ministre^ unto you abundantly
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Wherefore,
I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of such things,
though ye know them your selves, and he stablished in the present truth.
Notwithstanding I think it mete (as long as I am in this tabernacle) to
stere you up by putting you in remembrance, for as much as I am sure, that
shortly I must put of this my tabernacle* even as our Lord Jesus Christ showed
me. I will ever also give my diligence, that ye may have wherewith to stere up
the remembrance of these things after my departinge. And therefore, brethren,
let it not make you to live in a security and to be careless, in that the
goodness of God, has (when you deserved nothing) called you unto the
profession of the gospel, having once pardoned all the sins of your former
life: but endeavor your selves so much the more, that the goodness of God,
wherewith he has called you, wherewith he has chosen you, be not turned to your
destruction and heap of damnacion, in case being forgetful of his bounteous
gentilues, you be tombled back in to y^ same state, from whence he raunsomed
you with his own death. But procure rather with well doings, that God seine
not to have called and chosen you in vain. And some part of this matter lies
even in you. For if you consider, from whence God has called you, to what
things he has called you, and what rewards he has set forth for you, and
if you will preace thereunto by these means, which I have declared a little
before, you shall never slyppe out of the right course of godlynes. For if you
preace this way, Gods assistinge help shall be plenteouslye present with you,
and shall succor, you with his rich relyefe, that at length being conquerours
of this world, you may atteyne to the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ, to possess with him the treasures of heaven for whose
sake you have set naught by the treasures of y^ earth. The reward is
exceadynge great, but it must be procured with exceadynge great diligence.
Wherefore I will never cease to give you warning of these matters, although I
suppose it not necessary, seeing you both do and remember, what you ought to
do: and are also confirmed now by long process of godlynes in the
acquainted knowledge of the truth a great while, which having embraced, you
constantlye follow yet hitherto: notwithstanding to the intent you may more and
more watch still in that you have begone, I reckon it my part, that
remembringe my lords precepte* which commanded me, y^ being converted my
self, I should confirm my brethren, as long as I live among you (being a
stranger upon earth) in y^ tabernacle of this sely body. I should stere up
and prick forewarde the study of godlynes in you, and in deed so much the
more, because I know, I shall shortly be stripped out of the dwelling of this
sely body, and change this exile of the earth for y^ fraunchised free city
of heaven. For our Lord Jesus Christ signified so unto me, whom I serve yet
hitherto as a soldier in this tabernacle. Now therefore I shall give
dilygence, that these matters may in the mean space be so surely fixed in
your hearts with often admonicion, that you may remember them after my
death, when I can not warn you by word of mouth. For seeing the thing is
most certain, that you have received of us, it behooves you not to swerve from
it.

The text.
For we have not followed deccatfull fables, when we opened unto you the power
and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: but with our eyes we saw his majesty:
even then verily when he received of God the father honor and glory, and when
there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory. This is my dear
beloved son, in whom I have delight. This voice we heard come from heaven,
when we were with him in the holy mount. We have also a right sure word of
prophecy, whereunto (if ye take heed) as unto a light that shyneth in a darcke
place* ye do well until the day dawne, and the day star arise in your
hearts. So that ye first know this: that no prophecye in the scripture has
any priuace enterpretacion. For the scripture came never by the will of man:
but holy men of God speak, as they were moved by the holy ghost. For our
doctrine was not such gayre, as the philosophers teach, whose drifte is to
persuade by crafulye conveyed fables, and humayne subtilties, the thing that
they them selves understand not, and dysagree also among them selves. But we
have in no wise followed these ways, in opening unto you the power and
coming of our lord Jesus Christ, and in preachinge unto you his majesty,
which we have seen with these iyes. For he vouchedsafe to exhibit unto
certain of his own before his death some special token, with what mighty
power and with what glory he shall once come, to judge the quick and the
dead, and what wonderful felicity he shall give unto them, that love him
stedfastlye. For where God the father endued him all wholly with glory and
honor, insomuche that his countenance shoone as bright as the sun, and his
clothes were more white than the snow, so far, that man's iyes could not
abide to behold the heavenly sight, and there came also an exceadynge most
honorable testimony of the fathers voice, which was brought down from high
unto him from the glorious majesty of y^ father. And it was after this sort:
This is my well-beloved son, which has delyghted my mind, hear him. There
could have been no witness given, either more fully or more excellent. And it
was pronounced, not of any prophet, but of the fathers own majesty. These
things we have seen with our iyes, these have we heard with our ears, when
we were present with him in the holy mount Thabor. If so be that the prophets
plain oracles be in a great weighty estimacion among you, which prophesied by
figuratyue dark shadows of Christ: of much more gravity ought so evident a
declaracion by the father himself of his son be. The prophets agree with
the fathers voice, if a man do rightly interpret them. They with their
promises prepare as it were men's minds to the truth of his gospel, in
that they shadow and as it were covertly point out, the thing that the gospel
does openly preach. Therefore I do not disallowe, that the Jews being
vehementlye given to the prophets prophecienges, seek there for the coming
of Messiah. For it is a step somewhat unto the faith of the gospel, to
believe that Christ should come. For a man shall the more sooner believe that
Christ is come, if he be parswaded that he should come. Therefore there is
good hope of him, that being not yet lightened with the light of the Gospel,
is attentive unto the prophets, as to a candell appearinge in a darcke place.
For it is better to have some light than no light, till the sun come, and the
day dawne, to drive away all darkness, and to obscure even that candell, and
that the day sterre of gospel preachinge may shine bright in your hearts,
which declares that the son is at hand. The sayings of the prophets are
to this use profitable, if they that read them, consider that y^ scripture of
prophecyinge before hand is darkly hydden under couerte of figures, and can
not be understood without interpretacio^. And yt is not every man's
interpretaccion, nor after every man's arbitrament. For the prophets, which
spoke of things before hand, did not speak after their own brain nor after
the deuyse of their own mind, but where they were holy men and pure from al
human lusts, y^ holy ghost inspired their hearts, and using them as his
instruments, he signified his mind unto us by the^ accordingly. The thing y^
men set forth by man's deuyse, may be perceived by man's wit. But y^ thing
ye is set forth by the inspiracion of the holy ghost, requires an
interpretoure inspired with the like spirit. They that apply the thing,
which is spoken of Christ, unto any worldly king: they that draw the thing
that is spoken of the life of heaven, unto the felicity of this world: they
that interpret the thing that is spoken of the treasures of the mind, of the
commodities of this world: do very far swerue from the mystical meaning of
the prophecy. Nether are they easily persuaded that Christ is come, in that by
false interpretacion of the prophecy, they imagine to them selves a certain
earthlye Messiah, such a one as he showed not him self to be. And for that
cause they acknowledge him not, not that he varieth from the spiritual image
of the prophecye, but that he differs from the ymagined ydole of faslye
feyned interpretacion.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
There were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
teachers among you, which preuely shall bring in damnable sects (even
denyinge the Lord that has bought them) and bring upon them selves swyfte
damnacion, and many shall follow their damnable ways, by whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of, and through covetousness shall they with fained
words make marchaundyse of you, whose judgment is now not far of, and their
damnacion slepeth not. Whosoever he be, that prophecieth after thaffeccion of
his own mind, is falsely named a prophet. Whosoever he be, that interprets
the prophets saying, unto his own covetous appetites, is a false
interpretoure. There were in times past false prophets even among the Jews,
which either to pyke a thank at y^ princes hand, or else for vauntage sake,
or for hatred of other, prophesied the thing, which the spirit of God spoke
not, but that they had in their assemblyes imagined them selves. They
countrefaicting their behavior as though they had been true prophets,
deceived folyshe people, and repyned against the true prophets with their
lyinges. And so after my deccasse also there shall arise such, as shall
falsely boaste them selves to be teachers of the gospel, where as they shall
be nothing else but masters of falseheade. They shall swerve from the
doctrine of the gospel, and bring in men's gloses: instead of the truth
that brings salvation, they shall cloute in pernicious sects, for their own
gain, that partaine rather to their own glory and their own tyranny, than
unto Christ's afaires: and they shall go on still into so great madness, that
they shall not be afraid vnkyndlye to deny even their Lord Jesus, by whose
blood they were redeemed, and whose name they once professed, and shall be more
wicked than the very heathens, which never professed Christ. By the which
their dooinges they shall provoke the vengeance of God upon them selves, and
it shall not only nothing avail them, that they once professed Christ, but
they shall also pull upon them selves spedy destruction, God taking vengeance
upon them. Howbeit it were but a small matter, if none were lost, but only
they, which are already lost, but they shall also draw many with them into
destruction. For false doctrine teachers shall find disciples of their own,
and bearinge them selves boldly upon the^, they shall not be afraid to rail
upon the gospelles truth which you have received of us: nether shall they
purely handle the word of the gospel, because they see it makes nothing
auayleably to their gredynes, but being bent unto their own private lucre they
shall begyle your simple playnesse with feyned communicacion, not going about
to win you unto Christ, but to pluck to them selves the greatest gain they
can from you. For they see that the gospels doctrine is smally pleasant unto
them, which are cralled with the delyces of this world, they see it is no
nyce delycate matter, to do as we do, defend the synceritie of the
gospelles doctrine constauntly against the wicked, through all deaths.
Therefore shall they defyle the true doctrine of Christ: and instead of it,
they shall teach those things, that are pleasant to the gross hearers
rather than wholesome: and those things that purchase them substance and
renoume in the world and not with God. For they shall covet rather for glory
and pleasure that shall last but a while, to purchase everlasting destruction
both to them selves and to others, than through short torments of the body
to thrust out unto felicity that never shall die. Beware you follow not those
guides, except that you will go straight way into destruction. Nether let it
deceive you, in that they are alofte in high estate in this world, in that
they are rich, in that they live at their own ease. They shall not long have
the fruicion of this continuance of false felicity. For like as the godly
shall in a while atteyne their rewards, which God has already decreed long
ago, even so these men's pain makes spedy have unto them, nether does
their destruction sleep that shall sodainlye oppress those that be careless and
live in a security. They may deceive men's judgments, but they can not
beguyle God. Howsoever men, over whom they have authority, do forgive them,
God, which is afraid of no man's might will not forgive them.

The text.
For if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down into hell,
and delivered them into chains of darcknes, to be punished, to be kept unto
judgment: nether spared the old world, but saved Noe the eight preacher of
rightewysnes, and brought in the floude upon the world of the ungodly, and
turned the cities of zodom and Gomor into ashes: overthrew them, damned them,
and made on them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly. And
just Lot vexed with the uncleanly conversation of the wicked, delivered he. For
he being righteous, and dwelling among them in seeing and hearing, vexed his
righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. The Lord knows
how to deliver the godly out of temptacion, and to reserve the unjust unto
the day of judgment for to be punyshed: but che^^y them that walk after the
flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise authority. Presumpteous are
they, and stubborn, which fear not to speak evil of them that excel in
worship. When the angels which are greater both in power and might, receive
not of the Lord taylynge judgment against them selves. But these as brute
beasts, naturally brought forth to be taken and destroyed, speak evil of
the things that they understand not, and shall pearisshe in their own
destruction, and receive the reward of vnrightewysnes. For why should he
spare them now, seeing that in times past he spared non the very angels, which
had offended, but threw them down headlong out of heaven, bound them with the
cheines of theuerlastynge dark night, and cast them in to the prison of hell,
to be reserved to this end, that having sentence of damnacion in the last
judgment, they may be committed to eternal torments for evermore? will he
suffer pride to be unpunished in men, which suffered it not in the angels?
Shall the thing be unpunished in them, that they do after the light of the
gospel manifestlye opened unto them, and after so many bounteous benefits
freely given unto them by him, which spared not the old world (being tude
without knowledge) but being grieved at men's viciousnes, when the world was
universally spotted with wicked manners, he brought the floude upon it, and
dispatched al mankind, saving Noe, who^ being the eight parson his will was
to have saved out of so mightte a great multitude of mortal men, because the
residue having contemned the gentle suffraunce of God, he only in making the
Arc testified, that he drad the vengeance of the almightye. And will not he
punyshe the people of these days, which with powryng down a shower of
brimstone, brought so many cities, and so florisshinge a country of Sodom and
Somore into ashes, and marred them so utterly, that there remains nothing,
but an horrible and a pestilent stinkynge ma^rice, for a testimonye what pain
abides them, which with like wickedness provoke y^ wrath of God upon them
selves? And like as unto them their own wickedness was their own destruction,
even so the innocence of Lot turned to his salvation: unto whom when the
abominable fellows intended violence, and would with their abominable rageing
lusts oppress the chaste godly man, God pulled him out of the company of the
wicked, among whom it was the most grievous pain for him to live. For in
as much as he was pure and chaste both in eyes and ears, it was a grievous
torment for a godly disposed mind, to hea^e daily, and see daily, the things
that he abhorred withal his whole heart. By these it is sufficiently
declared, that God never suffers, any man to lose the reward of his
innocence, neither any man's wickedness to be unpunished: although he gentlye
bear with some for a season, y^ they might once repent: yea and though he suffer
his own sometime to be tempted for a while, yet wha^ time is, he can dlyuer
the godly out of sorrows: and contrary wise he can reserve y^ ungodly against
the day of the last judgment to be punished with eternal torments for
evermore. No kind of unrighteousness shall be suffered unpunished. But those shall
specially suffer pains, which as it were distrustinge the promises of the
gospel, follow in this world, that which is delectable to the body, serving
fylthy outrageous lusts, wherewith they defyle their whole life on every side.
And that they may be the more wicked, they double their wickedness with
violence, and contemn those that be set in publyke authority, being knacke
hardye, and shameless, and are not ashamed to tail upon such as are men of
dignity. And these things are wretched men, hardye to do, where as the
angels being far more excellent in power and strength, although otherwise
wicked yet they proceeded not into so much shameless hardynes as to abide to
speak evil of God: and where as they in other matters neglected the will of
God, yet in this point they were afraid to offend him, and yielded unto
thautoritie of god. But these men being more vngracions than the wicked
spirits, like brute beasts borne to this end, that they may be catched and
destroyed, forasmuch as they are not afraid to backbyte and mysteporte their
superiors: not knowing this in the mean while, for whose sake they speak
evil of them. Like as they through their corrupt condicious procure
destruction to them selves, even so shall they peryshe like beasts, and
receive a worthy reward of their wicked life: ^orsomuche as they reken it a
sweet and ioyly gaye life, if they cast all shame quite away, and give them
selves in the open daylyght unto myrthe, riot, and filthye voluptuous lusts.
For yet they have some shame remaynyng with them that do these things in the
night.

The text.
They count it pleasure to live delyeyousty for a season. Spots they are and
fylthynesse, which live at pleasure in their own deceyuable ways, feastyng and
scornyng you: having eyes full of aduoutry, and that cannot cease from sin,
begylyng unstable souls. Deattes they have exercised with robbery. They are
cursed children which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astraye
following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, which loved the reward of
vnryghtewesnesse: but was rebuked of his iniquitye. The ^ame and dumme beast,
speaking with man's voice forbad the madness of the prophet. Who would believe
that these were men? They are rather filthe and spots, who in their filthy
glotonous bankettinges (wherein being wretchedly deceived they repose the hole
Su^me of felicity) vaunt against you, as though you were mad men, because
you have not the fruicion of the commodities of this present life. And in the
mean time riot provoke outrageous lust, and when they are once wine
dronken, they have beastly lusting eyes, nether have they mind of any thing
else, than upon whoremonging, and other kinds of wikednes. For they can not,
when they have once cast away reason, when they have been once dronken with
wine, cease from naughty doing, but they skyppe from wikednes to wikednes, so
much that it is not enough for them to live ungraciously them selves, except
they entangle and allure other men's minds (not yet confirmed in virtue) unto
their filthynes. Now perchance it were more tolerable, if they offended in
nothing but in riot and lecherous lust: But there is no kind of vice but they
have it. Like as they filthyly make away that they have, even so filthyly do
they provide to make prodigally away, having a mind and a wit practiced
unto covetousness, unto deceate and unto taume, doing every thing what so ever
it be, for advantage sake: and for lucte curse the good and the godly, and
being corrupt with money swa^ue from the right way: and in that point
resemble their father Balaam the son of Bosor, who, when he knew what was
best, yet being corrupt with wicked see, he went about to curse them, whom God
was merciful unto: and covetousness brought him into so great a blyndnes, y^ he
was rebuked of his ass, and where as he being a mad doting man had cast of
his man's mind, y^ brute beast speaking in a man's voice restrained the
prophets madness, seeing more with het bodyly eyes than he saw with y^ eyes of his
mind, because he was strik^ blind through coueiousnes of money.

The text.
These are wells without water: clouds that are carried with a tempest, to
whom the mist of darckenes is reserved for ever. For when they have spoken the
great swellynge words of vanyty, they entyse through lusts in the
volupteousnes of the flesh them that were clean escaped: even them that now
live in error: while they promise them liberty, where as they themselves are
the bond servants of corrupcion. For of whom a man is overcome, unto y^ same
is he brought in bondage. For if they (after they have escaped from y^
fylthines of the world through y^ knowledge of y^ Lord and the savior Jesus
Christ) are yet tangled again therein, and overcome, then is y^ latter end
worsse with them the^ y^ beginning. For it had been better for the^, not to have
known y^ way of rightewesnes, then after they have known it, to turn from
the holy commandment that was given unto them. But the same is hapened unto
them y^ is used to be spoken by the true pro^erbe. The dog is turned to his
domet again, and y^ ^ow y^ was washed is turned again to her waloing in y^
mier. These are they that promise a certain wonderful and news doctrine, where
as they bring nothing worthy the profession of the Gospel, being like wells
that lack water, whereunto if a man come athurst, he can find nothing but
mudde and claye: and like unto mysly clouds, that are driven hither and
th^ther with the storm of wyndes, and seem as they would give rain unto the
thrustye ground, where as for all that, not so much as one drop of wholesome
doctrine falls from them. They promise the light of the Gospelles doctrine,
and wrappe those folks in darkness of errors, whom everlasting darkness
abides for in hell. For when with their lyeng words they speak of certain
great high matters, and with that hope entice and snare them which begin to
amend their conditions, they deceive them and wrappe them in the delites of
the flesh, and the voluptuous pleasures of this life, promysing that they will
deliver other from error, wha^ they them selves are occupied in the greatest
errors of al, and promysing other men deliverance from sins, when they them
selves are the very bond slaves of filthynes. For of whosoever a man is
overcome, and at whose appoyntement he lives his bond servant he is called
by right. For it avails the^ nothing at all to have been once freely delivered
from the bondage of sins, if they fall to the same state again by their own
accord: but the bondage is so much the more vile, and so much the more
wretched, because it is procured without co^straynt, after the tasting of
liberty. That which was done amysse before the Gospel preached, is a great
part long of error, and long of Ignorance. But they which having once
acknowlaged by the preaching of the Gospel, our lord and savior Jesus
Christ, have through Baptism renounced the filthynes of this world, and
professed a pure and an heavenly life: if they be overcome again with lusts,
and wrapped in their old uncleanness, their baptism does not only nothing
help the^ at al, but also they are in worse state, than they were before they
knew Christ. For his offense is the less, that synneth through ignorance.
And they shall be the more grievously damned, which have enlarged the crime of
wikednes with the vice of unthankfulness. Therefore it had been better for them
to have not known the Gospelles doctrine at al, which teaches Innocencye and
pureness, than after they knew and received it, to swerve from the holy
commandment that was once delivered unto them. For what other thing is
befallen them, than that which is truly used to be spoken by a commune
proverb? The dog ^losseth up again that he has once cast up, and the
washen sow turns again to walowe her self in the mire. It is but a lost
labor for the dog to have purged his stomach with vomit, if he take again
that he cast up. And the sow has washed away her foul stynking mire in
clean water in vain, if she, by and by after she is washen, return to the
soylinges that she had gone from.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
This is the second epistle that I now write unto you beately beloved,
wherewith I stete up your sincere mind, by puttyng you in remembrance, that ye
may be myndfull of the words (which were told before of the holy prophets)
and also the commaudement of us which be Apostles of the Lord and savior.
This first understand, that were shall come in the last days mockers (in
dysceatefulnes) which will walk after their own iustes, and say: Where is
the promise of his coming? For sense the fathers ^yed, all things continue in
the same estate wherein they were at the beginning. For this they know not (and
that wylfully) how that the heavens and great while ago were, and the earth
our of the water appeared up through the water, by the word of God: by the
which things the world that then was, peryshed, being over run with water.
But the heavens and earth which are now, be kept by his word in store, and
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and perdicyon of ungodly men.
Dearly beloved, these matters I beat in with many words unto you, and even
now in these mine other letters I warn you of the self same thing, not that I
doubt of the uprightness of your mind, but that you may have in remembrance
more and more the thing that you know and hold, and do that you do with the
more hearty chearefulnes and constaunt stedfastnes. You shall ^e in the less
peril of hurting by their ungracious doctrine, if you remember, that it was
spoken of by the holy prophets in times paste, which gave warnyng to beware
of this kind of men. And if you do remember that we gave the same precept,
which are the Apostles of the lord and savior Jesus Christ, who forhad that
nomanne should give ear to such as instead of the Gospelles truth, bring in
pernicious doctrine. This therefore know you first of all, that there shall
come hereafter, not preachers but mockers, being connyngly furnyshed with
sleightes and subtle deceates, to beguyle the ignorant withal: which shall
not follow those things that Christ taught us, but like as their life shall
be after the lusts of their own heart, so shall they teach after their own
appetite, those things that shall be fit for such a manner of life. For
inasmuche as their life is filthy, they shall not be desirous of the lords
coming: And for that cause sake shall they persuade both to them selves and
others, that he shall not come again, and say: where is the promised
resurreccion? where is the judgment? where are the sondrye sorts of rewards
according to the deserts of living? when comes he that is looked for day by
day in vain? For they shall think surely that he shall never come, because his
coming is put of for a time. What token (say they) is there of the
resurreccion? Our fathers are dead one after an other, and never one has
risen again to life yet hitherto. And like as sense the creacion of the world,
all things are engendered by the enterchaungable courses of the dyeng and of
the living, even so unto this time remains the same course of nature, where
as by mutacion of the world that has been before, we may gather that there
shall be a newnes hereafter. And like as the mutacion chanced, what time they
looked not for it that lived after their own fylthy lusts, even so shall the
nouacion happen, whether we believe it, or not believe it. For this thing they
are not ware of, or (as I suppose rather) they dissemble to know, that the
heavens were created long a go, and also the earth, which the waters,
wherewith it was covered, made bare, a great power of waters also hanging
alofte. And when mankind was almost altogether defiled with vices, God being
offended, sent the flood and destroyed the world of that time, reserving only
eight persons, which had followed Innocency. This universal judgment God
exercised at that time, in pourgeing and renewing the earth through water. Than
the heavens continue yet still as they were created, and they are reserved to
fire, by the which they shall also be purged in the day of judgment, when
the wicked shall be destroyed by fire, like as in times paste they perished by
water. Forasmuch than as it is a thing most certain that that day shall
come, it makes no matter, whether it come later or sooner: This only stands
us in hand to provide for, that when so ever it comes, it find not us
unready. We in out conceytes think some things leng, and some things short:
but unto God there is nothing, neither short nor long. In his promises he
follows not the appetites of us, but his own eternal and unchangeable
decreed counsel, unto whom nothing is ^^^^er paste nor to come, but al
things are present. But unto us what so ever he h^^h promised, he exhibeteth
in the tune that he has appointed before hand to him self. For else, with him
al is one whether there be one day past or a thousand years. With the same
faithful assurednes does he perform the thing which he performs the later,
that he does the thing he does more spedilyer. For as concerning him self,
he has performed even now the thing, that he has purposed to perform. For
he does not change his purpose and after the manner of delayers prorogue and
put of his promise as some falsely judge of him, measuring God after their own
conditions: but he prescribes the space to be longer somtymes for your sake,
because upon his tender mercy and gentilnes he would have none to perysh, but
is desitous to have all men once to repent, that those which peryshe, have no
cause to find fault that they wanted space to change their life in to better.
And that day shall come unlooked for, and shall come creping upon men, none
otherwise, than a thief in the night comes upon them that are a sleep. In
that day there shall be so great violence of fire, that the heavens shall
pass with a mighty great force in to an other kind: But the elements,
whereupon this lower world consists, shall be dissolved with heat: and finally
the earth, and the things therein contained, shall be butned with fire, and all
the whole nature of things shall be clean purged. And if it be of necessity,
that all things shall be so pure, that these things shall also be dissolved,
which offend not: how much stands it us in hand diligently to endeavor,
that that day may find us thoroughly purged and upright in all holiness of
life, and in all studious affairs of godlynes. In the mean season this must
be with much spedynes forecaste, that you be always in a readynes, when so
ever that day shall come, whose straight judgment no man shall be hable to
escape: which shall suffer no thing to be impure, so much, that the heavens
must be dissolved with fire, and the elements constrained to melt with heat.
And after this, we look, according to his promise, for new heavens and a new
earth, that have no corrupcion, no fault: that we, in whom shall be no corrupt
mind, may have the fruicion of them being vncorrupt.

The text.
Dearly beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, how that one day is with
the Lord, as a thousand year, and a thousand year as one day. The Lord
y^ has promised is not slack, as some men count slacknes: but is pacient to
us ward: for as much as he would have no man lost: but will receive all men to
repentance. Nevertheless the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the
night, in the which day the heavens shall pass away in manner of a tempeste,
and the elements shall melte with heat, the carthe also and the worckes that
are therein shall burn. Seeing then that all these things shall perysshe, what
manner persons ought ye to be in holy conversation and godlynes: lokyng for and
vasting unto the coming of the day of God, by whom the heavens shall
perisshe with fire, and the elements shall melt with hear. Nevertheless, we
(according to his promise) look for a new heaven and a new earth, wherein
dwells rightewesnes. Wherefore dearly beloved, seeing that ye look for such
things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in peace, without spotte and
undefiled. And suppose that the long sufferynge of the Lord is faluacion,
even as our dearly beloved brother Paul also (according to the wisdom
given unto him) has written unto you, yea, almoost in every epistle, speaking
of such things: among which are many things hard to be understand,
which they that are vniearned, and unstable, pervert, as they do also the
other scriptures unto their own destruction. Ye therefore beloved (seeing ye be
warned before hand) beware, lost ye (with other men) be also plucked away
through the error of the wicked, and fall from your own stedfastnes. But
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. To
whom be glory both now and for ever. Amen. Wherefore most dearly beloved
brethren, have this so fearful a judgment always before your eyes, and give
dilygence, that when the lord comes, he may find you pure and unblameable,
not only before men, whose judgments are many times deceived, but also
before hi. For he is pure in deed, that is pure in the judgment of God. And
although paraduenture it be long ere that day come, construe it not so, as
though he would not come at all, but consydre that this tender sufferaunce of
the lord, wherewith he gives all men space to repent, does care for men's
salvation: of which matters our most dear brother and follow in office,
Paul wrote unto you, so much the more habundantly, as God gave him the more
plenteous gift of wisdom: and in almost all his epistles exhorts you to
look for this day, sometime speakinge after such a sort, as though the day
of the lord were already now at hand: that he might the rather prycke you
forward to the study of godlynes, where as that day (because it is
uncertain) ought to be looked for, so as though he would come this day, but
yet after such wise, that no man prescribe a time certain. These and some
other matters Paul according to his high wisdom, myngled in his Epistles. And
whereas he spoke them most rightly that could be, yet the ignorant and
inconstaunt persons wrest them with a perverse interpretacion, as they do the
other scriptures, to their own destruction, that the thing which is health
unto the good, may be turned, through their own fault, in to venom unto
them. Therefore brethren, sense you are so many ways warned before hand both
of me and of Paul, take heed, that you be not deceived, as other are, with the
fraud of abominable men, and fall away from your substaunciall stedfastnes,
which you have expressed yet hitherto: but rather give diligence, that you
may continually increase and go forewarde in the gifts and knowledge of our
lord and savior Jesus Christ, unto whom be glory both now in this life,
and for ever world without end.

Amen.
Thus ends the Paraphrase upon the second Epistle of thapostle S. Peter.
THE LIFE OF SAINT IVDE after Saint Hierome.
IVdas the brother of James left behind him a litell epistle, which is of
the seven catholic epistles. And because be takes witness in it out of the
book of Enoch which is Apocryphe that is to say, without authority, it is
reiecte of many: howbeit it has been taken worthy authority both for the
aunciencie and use of it, and is accounted among the holy scriptures.

THE ARGUMENT UPON the Epistle of Jude / by D. Erasmus of Roterodame.
HE is vehemently displeased with many words against them, that being blinded
in their own covetous appetites were adversaries to the Gospel: which thing
notwithstanding ought to seem no new matter, inasmuch as they were
predestinate to this end, and it was spoken of before by the Apostles, that
that kind of men shall lutkingly crepe among the flock of Christyanes.
Against these sort, he so armeth them, that they may forecast both to
restrain them either with blamyng, or save them by warnyng geuyng. Which thing
if they possiblye can not do, yet they prepare them selves readyly against the
coming of Christ.

Thus ends the Argument.
THE PARAPHRASE OF Erasmus upon the Epistle of Saint Jude thapostle.
The text.
Judas the servant of Jesus Christ the brother of James. To them which are
called and sanctified in God the father, and preserved in Jesus Christ: Mercy
unto you and peace and love be multiplied. Beloved, when I gave all diligence
to write unto you of the commen salvation, it was needful for me to write unto
you, to exhort you that ye should continually labor in the faith, which was
once given unto the saynetes. For there are certain ungodly men craftily crept
in, of which it was written before time unto such judgment. They turn the
grace of our God unto wantonues, and deuye God (which is the only Lord) and
our Lord Jesus Christ. My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance, for
as much as ye once know this, how that the Lord (after that he had deiyuered
the people out of Egypt) destroyed them which afterward believed nor. The
angels also which kept not their first estate, but left toeyr own
habitacion, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darckenes unto the
judgment of the great day: even as Sodom and Gomor, and the cities about
them (which in like manner defiled them selves with fornycacion, and followed
strange sleshe) are set forth for an ensample, and suffer the pain of
eternal fire. Likewise, these being disceaues by dreams defyle the flesh,
despise rulars, and speak evil of them that are in auctorytie. Yet Michael
the archangell when he strove against the devil, and disputed abou^e the body
of Moses, burst not give raylynge sentence, but said: the Lord rebuke the.
But these speak evil of those things which they know not: and what things
they know naturally (as beasts which are without reason) in those things
they corrupt them selves. Woe be unto them, for they have followed the way of
Cayn, and are utterly given to the error of Balam for lukers sake, and
perisshe in the treason of Chore. These are spots which of your kyndnes
feast together, without fear, fedynge them selves. Clouds they are without
water, carried about of wyndes, trees without fruit at gatherynge time, twyse
deed, and plucked up by the rotes. They are the ragynge waves of the sea,
fomynge out their own shame. They are wandering stertes, to whom is reserved
the mist of darckenes for ever. Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied before
of such, saying: Behold, the Lord shall come with thousands of saynctes, to
give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all that are ungodly among
them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of
all their cruel speakynges, which ungodly sinners have spoken agaynct him.
These are mutmuters, complayners, walking after their own lusts, whose
mouths speak proud things. They have men in great teuerence because of
advantage. But ye beloved, remember the words which were spoken before of the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, how that they told you that there should
be begylers in the last time, which should walk after their ungodly lusts.
These are makers of sects, fleshly, having no spirit. But ye dearly
beloved, editie your selves in your most holy faith, prayinge in the holy
ghost, and keep your selves in the love of God, lokynge for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. And have compassion of some seperatyng
them: and other save with fear, pullyng them out of the fire (and have
compassion on the other) and hare the fylthy vesture of the slesh. Unto him
that is able to keep you fte from sin, and to present you fautles before the
presence of his glory with joy (at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,) to
God our savior, (through Jesus Christ our Lord) which only is wise, be
glory, majesty, domynion, and power (before all worlds) now and ever. Amen.
I Judas Thadeus the servant of Jesus Christ, the brother of James, write this
Epistle not to the Jews only nor to other newly converted, but to all men in
commune, whom the render mercy of God the father has of his own free will
sanctified, and has also without the help of the law, made godly of
ungodly, and of Idolatours obedient folowers of true religion, whom also the
bounteous goodness of God had preserved in Jesus Christ to this end, that they
should not auaunt with other into the dongeon of everlasting damnacion, whom
in like manner his free liberal goodness has now called unto the salvation
of the Gospel. There is nothing that I can wish unto you more fortunate, than
that the goodness of God would always multiply in you his gifts, mercy,
peace, and charity: Mercy, that you may absent your selves daily more and
more from the vices of your former old life: Peace, that you may through
godlynes of life nourish the concord, which you have with God: and Charity,
that you may through mutual concord be all of one mind, and The charity of
the Gospel makes one to be as glad of an others good, and to be as sorry for an
others hurt as though it were to him self, and not al worldly su^
each one bounteously good to other. Dearly beloved, forasmuch as the love of
the Gospel makes all things commune, whether it be good, that chance or
whether it be badde, namely in those, matters that perteyne to eternal
salvation: I had so great a defier to write unto you concerning your salvation,
whereof I am no less careful, than if it were mine own, for so much as
brotherly love pricketh me forward thereunto, so as I could not forbear, but I
must exhort you in this Epistle, to stand hard against the false Aposties,
for the defense of the sincere faith, which was once delivered of the holy
Apostles. And not only to labor in this, that you continue steadfast in your
faith, but also to lay your helping hands unto other, that they be not
begyled of the deceauours. For it is not possible to think what a Jewel the
treasour of faith is, and it stands us in hand to watch so much the more
warely about staunce to be thinune, as the ^hant as^icall Anabaptists do
wikedly dream.
us, that it be not turned away from us. For where as we delivered the
Gospelles docttyne unto you purely and syncerely, even as we received it of
Christ, yet there have a sort of wiked ones thruste in them selves among in
the mean season, under pretense of religion, and like woolues have crepte into
the lords shepefold, setting them selves out in a show of godlynes, where in
deed they are very enemies of true godliness. And that this gayre should not
disturb your minds as though it were a new matter: it was thus decreed long
a go by the secret counsel of God, thus was it spoken before, that there
should rise men which with their wiked myschieuousnes should both exercise
your godlynes, and pull condemnacion upon them selves: they turn the free
liberal gift of our God (wherewith he has once freely pardoned us our
sins, and set us at free liberty from the sharpenes of the law,) in to an
occa^io^ of wantones, where as they ought rather to be provoked through his
beneficyall goodness, both to maynteyne and furnyshe the Innocence freely given
them, with godly studious endeavors: and being enflamed with the charity of
the Gospel, to do with a good will the works of ryghteousnes more plentiously
and more exactely, than Moses law had appointed before. But now these men
abuse the liberty that is given them, unto filthynes and licenciousnes to
sin, and fall of their own accord back again in to their old bond
servitude, from the which Jesus Christ had redeemed the^ with his own blood:
and deny God, whom they once professed, where as he is the only lord and
master of all things that are in heaven and in earth: and deny also our
lord Jesus Christ, which has made us free to him self with the price of his
own sacred blood. It avails us nothing to be redeemed, onles we continue
steadfast to the end in those things, whereunto we are called. I think it not
necessary, that I should teach you, seeing you forgette nothing, but I only put
you in remembrance lest the thing that you know should slyppe out of mind.
It auailed the Hebrews in times past nothing at all, whom (being the figure of
the times that now are) Jesus trained out of the hard and miserable bondage of
the Egipcians, through the read sea in to liberty: but even the same, whom
he mercifully presetued when they cried unto him, he destroyed again after a
worse sort, when they distrusted and murmured against God in the deserte.
That, which the bondage of Egipte was unto them, the bondage of sins was unto
us: that which Pharao that straight and intolerable lord was unto them, the
devil was the same unto us, under whose tyranny for our own sins sake we were
entangled. They puttyng their trust in God, escaped safely through the mids
of the waters in to liberty: and we in believing the Gospel, have through
Baptism escaped Satan's enterest. But like as some of them made not speed with
all one faith in to the land of promise: and unto them the goodness of God was
not only vnauaylable, but also it turned in to the heap of their damnacion:
even so unto us it avails nothing to have once set aparte our sins, onles
we also grow forward with constaunt minds in to better, and better, and
preace to the enheritaunce of the life of heaven. Moreover I would have you to
remember this also, that it profited not even the aungelles them selves to be
so created, that they were companions of the Godhead, but as soon as they had
changed that most fortunate nature through their own wickedness, and
persisted not still in the condition they were in, he threw them down
headlong out of heaven, and having depryued them of the light of heaven, he
damned them in everlasting darkness in hell. And there they are reserved in
cheynes that can not be loced, unto the day of the last judgment, wherein being
condemned they shall be commanded to everlasting pains. Now Sodom and
Gomorre and the residue of the cities thereunto adioynyng (where as they
flourished in all pleynteous wealth of things) because they abused the
liberal bounteousnes of God unto riot and outrageous lust, defilyng them
selves with wiked and abominable sorts of filthiness, are dispatched by the
wrath of God, being consumed with fire from heaven, to thintente they might be
an example unto other that abuse the benefits of Christ unto the filthynes of
life. For they shall not escape the like pain, that sin after like sort.
Do not they sin after like sort, which being deluded with slouening dreams
of false pleasures, do not only defile their own bodies, but also set naught
by their rulers and those that are in autorytie: and are not afraid to rail
against them, unto who^ for thautoryties sake they are in, they ought to do
reverence? But Michael tharchangel, when he had disputacio^ with the devil
concerning the body of Moses, was yet afraid openly to speak raylingly to the
devil though he were the most filthye feende. But where he could not abide
his wicked talkyng, he moderately tempred his curse, after this wise: The lord
(quod he) rebuke thee. Than if Michael were afraid to speak cursedly to the
devil* how much more intolerable a thing do they, that are not afraid to
curse or speak evil of men that are set in authority and dignity over them?
But these men's peruersitie is so great, that where they have no cause, yet
they speak evil to the and nail against those things that they understand
not. On that other part they are so sore cortupte with riot and lecherous
lust, that in those things, wherein brute beasts being quite without reason,
live well and temperately, as in meat, drink, and in carnal copulacion, in
these matters they behave them selves most vnthriftyly. But woo be unto them
that shall have the commune reward to happen upon them with those, whose
wikednes they follow the example of. For they set not Jesus Christ before their
eyes to take example at, but Cayn that killed his own brother, unto whom the
myschieuous sore of envy persuaded first of al to do murder: and Balaam, who
being corrupt with lucre, went about to curse the people, who^ God had blessed:
and also Chore, who having stered a conspiracy, rose against Moses, and with
his sworn conspirours was by an horrible example quyte dispatched. These are
they, which where you live purely and chastely and embrace Gospelike charity,
are as spots disgraceing your company: and where you fast, they give them
selves to ryotous bankettinges one with an other. Nether are they restrained
for reverence or fear of any man from lycencious filthynes but without
respect rashly follow that thing, that pleases their own appetites. And yet
in these deeds doing, they profess them selves to be teachers of the gospel,
and guydes to true virtue. But they are like unto clouds, which hang a loft,
and where as they would appear to be disposed to rain upon the thyrsty
ground, yet they are dry, and have no water to succor the ground withal,
but are rashlye carried about here away and there away with their own vain
lusts: being like unto trees, which in the later end of corn hatuest be
fair blossomed, and make a lyeng hope of fruit, when they must wyther by and
by, not only being all together unfruitful, but also twyes dead, in that they
neither have life them selves unto Gospellyke godlynes, and draw other with
them into destruction: nether is there any more hope of life in the, than trees
plucked up by the rotes, wherein is no hope that they shall spryng again: who
inasmuche as they are unquiet and given to sects, they always with some manner
of new vproare dysturbe the quietness of the congregacyon, being like unto the
outrageous waves of the sea, that rushe them up on hye, and for all that they
do nothing, but cast abroad their own rebukes and shames at other as much
as in them lies: and are like unto stars, which when they pretend with
show of light to be guydes of the way, yet inasmuch as there are raungers
about, and follow not constauntly that which is streighte, but are led away by
their own affectes now hither now thither, they carye those that be simple
and incircumspecte into shipwrake. These manner startes that set out them selves
with a false feyned light in this world before men, shall not escape the
judgment of God, although he do not now presently punysh them, but reserueth
them to the eternal darkness of hell. These men, albeit they are risen up in
our times, yet lest you should think that some new thing were chanced unto
you, Enoch, which was the seventh from Adam, prophesied of them long ago, and
of their torments which they must in time coming suffer. For he speaks on
this wise: Behold the lord comes with an innumerable multitude of his
saynctes, to practice judgment against all, and to reprove all those that are
wiked, of all their deeds which they have wikedly done, and of all things
that they have stubbernely and fearcely spoken against him: not only those that
are naughty sinful lyuers, but also the wiked and contumelious persons
against God. For in deed they, seeing they measure y^ felicity of this life by
the pleasure of the body, bear impaciently, if they fortune to have affliccion
or discommoditie, nether are they afraid to murmr against God in their
querilinges, that he made manne after such sort, that he should be but of
short life, that he should be endaungered to diseases, wishing this life to be
most exceadingly long, and out of daungier of displeasures, because they have
no trust of the life to come. And yet where they can perceive these so filthye
and so vile matters in their minds, yet their mouth boasts of certain great
high matters, and professes a certain wonderful learned love of wisdom,
where as they not only serve voluptuousnes most vilest that may be, but also
handmaking of gaynes, which thing does most princip^lly defile the
doctrine of Christ. For they speak not those things that the truth of the
Gospel teaches, but the things that are pleasant and acceptable to them,
whom they hope to get any vauntage by. Against the poor they are tyrannes, but
toward the rich they are very clawbackes. The malice of these men shall the
less encombre you (dearly beloved) if ye remember, that it was told before
hand in times paste of the other of the Apostles of our lord Jesus Christ,
namely of Paul and Peter. For they told us, that in the later times there
should rise up mockers, that should defyle the most pure doctrine of Christ
with their wiked gredynes, not living after the rule of the Gospel, but after
their own wiked and abominable affectes. And them a man may know by this
mark. Whereas other that live after the spirit of Christ, and having
contemned earthy things set their study upon heavenly things, agree in one
quiet concord, these stiere up dissencions, because they be worldelinges, and
geuyng them selves in to the service of worldly affectes, and void of the
spirit, they hunt after voluptuous pleasures, seek to reign aloft, and scrape
after lucre. And those that set their minds upon these matters, are not fit
for Christen concord. For they had rather disturb the tranquillity of the
flock, than to be brought in to order. But as for you, dear brethren, that
are spiritual, see you give diligence, that you may be more and more, as
living stones, heaped together in to the buylding of God, cleaving fast to the
sure foundation of your most holy sacred faith. Once you were persuaded, that
the godly should not want their rewards, how sore so ever they are afflycted
here in this life, require not reward therefore in this world: and the wiked
should not fail of their deserved torments, covet not to revenge your selves.
And therefore make earnest cry^ng for the help of God continually with pure and
spiritual prayers, and preserve you every one other with mutual concord, and
mutual charity. For God hears none but those that be of one heart. Nether
put you any distrust, if you be turmoyled sundry ways in this world for
Christ's sake* but look for the mercy of God to be exhibited not in this life,
but in the life that never shall end. In the mean season having consideracion
of the persons, give you diligence, to save al men, some gently and frendely
in calling them again unto better purpose, and the other save with fear, as if
you catched them out of the fire: and hate not y^ me^, but this carcas defiled
with yearthy affectes, wherewith man's mind is burdened and defiled, as it were
a cote soyled in filthe. And it is convenient to amend other men's faults so
much the more gently, in that no man being conuersaunt in this sely body can
chose but be unclean. For that is not in the power of man lest any manne
should boastingly challenge praise to him self, but all glory, might, empire
and power be only unto God our savior, through Jesus Christ our lord, not
only in this world, but before all worlds and in all ages to come for ever
and ever. For in deed there is none but god alone that is hable to give this
unto those that labor for it, that although being environed with the sely
frail body, the world calls you on every side away from the purpose of
godlynes, yet you keep your selves Innocent still to the end, and that not
only me^ can find nothing in your manners, to find fault at, but also that
you are ordained such in the sight of Gods Majesty, that he is displeased
with nothing in you, which sees the most inward passages of your minds.
And when that shall come to pass, you shall rejoice and be glad in the coming
of our lord Jesus Christ, when other shall make heavy cheer, which seem in
the mean space to live swetly. And that this may so be, prayer ought to be
made with all earnest desires.

Thus ends the Paraphrase upon Jude.
The Argument of Erasmus upon the Epistle of Saint James thapostle.
James, forasmuch as he was the bishop of Jerusalem, writes also to the
residue of the Jews, that were scattred abroad and dwelt throughout al
nations, enformyng and instructing them with sundry precepts, how to order
their lives.

The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the canonical Epistle of. S. James.
The first Chapter.
The text.
James the servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, sends gretinge to
the xii. trybes which are scatered abroad. My brethren, count yt for an
exceadynge ^oye, when ye fall into diverse remptacions: knowing this, that the
trying of your faith gendreth patience: and let patience have her parfecte
work, that ye may be parfect and sound lacking nothing. If any of you
lack wysoome, let him ask of him that gives it: even God, which gives to
all men indifferently, and casts no man in the teeth: and it shall be given
him. But let him ask in faith, and waver not. For he that douteth, is like a
wave of the sea, which is tossed of the wyndes, and carried with vyolence. Nether
let that manne think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A
wauerynge minded man, is unstable in all his ways. Let the brother which is
of low degree rejoice when he is eralted. Again, let him that is rich rejoice
when he is made low. For even as the flower of the grass, shall he pass away.
For as the sun ryseth with heat, and the grass widdereth, and his flower
falls away, and the beaw^y of the fassion of it perysheth: even so shall the
rich manne peryshe in his ways. Happy is the manne that eudureth temptacion:
for when he is tried, he shall receive the crown of life, which the Lord
has promised to them that love him. James that in times paste was a
worshipper of Moses law, and now the worshipper and servant of God the father
(who after the Gospel is set forth, requires to be worshipped in spirit)
and of his son Jesus Christ out lord, writes this Epistle both to all them
that are reconed to be of Christ's profession, and namely to those, who^e the
storm of persecucion, which was raised after the death of Stephane, scattred
abroad some one way some another, of all the kynreddes of the people of the
Jews: which were driven away out of their auncetours possessions, but not
driven down from the feloweship of the Gospel: which were cast out of their
own houses, but not cast out of the congregation of Christ: wishing unto them
true health, not this health of the body only, which the world wishes for,
but that health, which Christ gives unto those that his are, even in the
myddle of destruccions and deaths. Forasmuch as the commune profession of the
Gospel, forasmuch as all one baptism, makes us very brethren, and seeing
that among those that be brethren in deed there ought to be a feloweship
both in matters of gladness and of sadness, this sorrowful calamity which you
abide, would grieve my mind exceadingly sore, if I had not an assured
confidence of your godlynes. For I am not ignorant, that unto the^, whtch
measure their felicity by the pleasures of this life, banyshment is more
paynfully grievous than death: and that it serves to be the wretchedest thing
that may be, for a man to be plucked from his most dear friends: and being
driven out of their old ancient possessions, to be strangers in foreign
countries. But as for you, which have reposed wholly all blessedness in only
Christ, and look for your felicity not in this world but in the world to
come, it behooves you to be most far of from their judgment. For God
sends not these things upon displeasure, but upon his exceading most pity:
for this purpose doubtless, that through temporal affliccions, which you
suffer undeservedly, your patience might both become the more notable, and
your reward the more abundaunte: to thyntent that as often as you are tossed
on every side with sundry storms of sorrows, you should not only understand,
that you ought not to cast down your hearts, as though God had forsaken you,
but rather that you ought with all your heart to rejoice, that by this evident
token God loves you and cateth for you, in that he tries your patience:
which if it continue steadfast, and give not place to any assaults of sorrows,
it shall doubtless evidently appear to be a sure grounded foundation of a
Gospellike faith. For except you were utterly persuaded, that the reward of
Immortality is ordained for them, that here in this world are afflicted for
the glory of Christ's sake, you would not willingly and with merry cheerful
stomakes suffer so much sorrows. Than seeing that God would have our salvation
to be most chiefly ascribed unto faith, this apperteyneth to the glory of the
Gospel, that men may thoroughly perceive by sure arguments, that your
faithful trust is no commune tryflyng, nether wavering faith, but a strong
steadfast and an inumctble faith. For the thing that is counterfaicte, or
vain, or feeble, is moved out of place, when the storm of sorrows comes
blustreing in. But that must needs be true and of a sure ground, that is
nether overcome nor beaten away with banyshmente nor with poverty, ne with
despitefull entreating, ne with pri^oninges, ne with whippes, nether yet with
death it self. It is counpted a wouderful constancye of ^uynde, if a man
patiently suffer unlucky fortune with an unbroken stomach, but when they shall
plainly perceive, that you suffer things of them selves both grievous and
bitter, with cheerful and merry re^oycing hearts: to ^^ken shameful
entreating done unto you for the profession of Christ's sake to be the highest
glory: to count loss of goods, for the richeste winning: to esteem the
grievous torments of body, for the pledge of everlasting pleasure: to judge
death which is a thing most hortible of al, to be nothing else, but the
threshold and entry of y^ immortality to come: they shall undoubtedly
perceive, y^ your hope, where with being furnished you conte^ne those matters: is
not a common hope, nether proceeding only of man's perswatio^, but to be
confirmed by y^ inspi^acio^ of the power of God. Notwithstanding, like as faith
is not yet thoroughly allowed, onles it express it self by godliness oflife and
good turns toward the neighbors, eue^ so patience shall not have his
thoroughly perfect praise, onles y^ like as it is strong and cheareful in
suffering of sorrows, even so it be co^staunt of it self in practicing of good
works. It is a great matter, to suffer sorrows with a good will, but for the only
glory of Christ: but it is a thoroughly perfect matter, wha^ a man is evil done
to hi^ self, to do good for all me^: nor to the^ only which deserve it, but to
the^ also which do hi^ yt evil. For so it shall come to pass, y^ you beig
me^bres shall be co^formably like unto y^ head, disciples to y^ scholemaister,
children unto the father, in case you be perfect and upright in every point,
and nothing wanting in you, that perteyneth to the perfect absolute furniture
of the godlynes of the Gospel. This, I confess, the law of Moses demanded
not, and this also seems folyshnes to the wise of this world: but it is a new
kind of Philosophy that has taught us this new wisdom, which Christ the
heavenly doctor has brought in to the world. In this philosophy if a man be
not yet sufficiently confirmed, it is not for him to run unto y^ Philosophers
of this world, for their doctrine is over much tempred with myngle mangle,
than can suffice to accomplish so great a weighty matter. It is above the
powers of mortal men, that is prescribed. It has need of the celestial
help, and therefore there is an heavenly reward ordained. They that measure all
their matters after the pleasures and displeasures of this world, if they be
at any time oppreste with sorrows, they ask counsel of men, they ask help
of men: But you must ask of God the help of heavenly wisdom. For he gives
unto al, not only to the Jews, but also to the gentiles, and he gives
according to his own lyberall bounteousnes plentifully, and casts none in
the teeth with his good turn. He requires no gramercye of us, nether needs
he any man's helpyng hand. It is the Pharisees word to say: lord do that
I ask, for I fast twyse in the weke. But the right godly man prays thus: I
am unworthy of thy bounteous goodness, I am worthy of wrath, but yet for all
that look upon thy servant, for thou by nature art good and merciful.
Therefore if a man be minded to obtain of him that he asks, let him ask
without destrusting, without doubt or wavering. Let him not considre the weight
of the affliccio^s, let him not mark his own power, let him only consider y^
God is the most best and most mighty, of whom he depends. He that puts
his whole trust in the help of God, is sure and steadfast. But whosoever
doubts wavering* lie and looks on each side, dependyng so of God, that he
looks withal for me^nes succors, nether believes with his whole heart in the
promises of God, but as it were partly having a distruste, reasons with him
self with human arguments to and fro, concerning dyuine matters, he is not
stable: but as the waves of the sea are tossed and turned now hither now
thither, as the wind and tide caryeth them, even so he is carried about wi^h
humayne reasons and diverse sorts of opinions, and is become out of equality
and unlike to him self. Therefore he that is such a one is deceived, if he
think that he shall obteyn any thing of god when he thinks evil of him, of
who^ he asks help, distrusting him, as though he either would little good unto
me^, and could do little, or else were litel true in his promises. The sure
christian faith is single, and wauereth no way, but always beholds only
him, which forsakes none that trusts in him, whether it chance to live or
to dye. But the manne, whose mind is diuyded two ways, geuynge respect to
God on this part, and to the world on that part, he is out of even ground
and inconstaunt not only in his prayers, but in all things also that he goes
about, having one thing in his mouth, an other thing in his heart: and as time
serves, affected now after this sort now after that sort. It behooves a man
not to turn his mind as fortune blows to and fro, as the commune sort of
men does. But rather le^ the christian of low degree, and he that is pressed
with sundry lumpes of sorrows, stretch v^ his heart, and rejoice in this
behalf, y^ being despised of y^ world he is not despised with God, who being
nothing offended at the bassenes of state or fortune, has made him worthy of
the feloweship of saynctes, nether excludes he him out of the enheruaunce of
the kingdom of heaven. On the other part let the rich man rejoice to him
self in this behalf, that where as he was much set by among worldlinges for
the false goods of this world, now for the professing of Christ he is
despised and contemned: and where as pride made him high stomaked before by
reason of his vain goods, now being cast down with men and trodden under
fete, he is rich in true goods with God. By this means it shall come to
pass, that nether the poor man's low degree shall cast him down, nor the
rich man's prosperity make him insolent, especially if they on either of
their parts consider, that both the euilles, wherewith the pore are pressed,
and the goods, wherein the rich set their pleasure, are not of long
continuance, but hastily vanyshe away, none otherwise than the flowers of
herbs, which like as by the calm south weste wind they thruste forth them
selves suddenly at the dew of the spryng time, even so by and by at the
blustrynge of the north wind and heat of the sun, they wyther away and
dye, in somuche that the flower, that sprang at the sun rysinge and delited
men's eyes with his most pleasant color, is seen dye at the sun setting.
The trees, inasmuch as they are fast set upon deep rotes, and furnished with
sure grounded strength, are long grene, and some are also evermore grene, and
leave not their tayre greenesse, neither for unreasonable wyndes nor rugged
winter: But the herb, because it is not furnyshed with the same things, anon
as the hot sun is broken out, is destitute of his juice, wherewith it
nourished that fayrenes of the flower for the time. And so wha^ it faynteth in
the stalks it does nether nourishe ne sustain his flower, but withers,
ageth, dies, falls away, where as a litell before it delited men's eyes with
so great a favor. Because therefore no christyan should glory in those
things that are nether of sure ground nor long enduring, let him rather
respect the things that are eternal, and that are delectable in the sight of
God: let him rather study to be a branch always grene, than a herb that
with a light hurt will by and by dye. Do thou see now the flower that is
sprongen, how fair, how goodly, how pleasant of color and how sweet it is?
what a gorgiousnes of grene leaves, what a glistring, what a juice, what youth
has it? And anon at a blaste of the southe wind, and with the heat of the
sun, what fading, what ageing, what dieng has it? The flower is seen to
spring, to come forewarde, to be at the best, to age and to dye all in one
day. And like unto it is rich men's felicity. He that now ruffleth in
purple, shyneth in gold, glistereth in precious stones, has a great train
waiting on him, is carried in a charet, and is honored as it were a certain
God among men: if fortune blow backewarde, he shall either be wyped besides al
his goods and be banished to go on begging, or lie crieng in prison, or be
trussed up with a tyburne typper and feed ravens, or if none of these things
happen unto him, yet death shall come unthought upon, and suddenly dispatche al
his galaunt array. It is the part of the heathens to measure felicitye by
these manner of goods, which (over that chei depend upon fortunes chance, over
that they, as nothing else does, forsake us when we depart hence) if they
be not set naught by, bring destruction. It is the office of Christians to
follow those things, whereby eternal goods are gotten, upon which nether
fortune, nether age, nether death has any enterest.

For no man is blessed because he is rich, but he shall be surely blessed if
for the profession of the Gospelles sake, he have been spoiled of those things
that he had in possession, if he have defied the pleasures of this life, which
he had abundaunce of, and suffer torments and emprisonmentes for Christ's
sake, if he endure for his sake in all sorrows even unto death with an
vnshrinkyng heart, interpreting on this wise, that the more he is pressed with
the sorrows of this world, so much the more he is loved of God, which tries
the patience of his obedient servant to his own glory, that he may both
be an example unto other to de fie this world, and after he has valeauntly
behaved him self in the conflicte, and has showed a lesson of true virtue
and of faith, he may wear the Palm and crown, not of oken bows and of
laurel, for they do wither also (after such sort as they receive, which
hunt after reward and praise of men) but the crown of immortal life,
which is promised not of a man that can deceive, but of God him self. But
he has promised it, not to them that have muckred up the greatest substance
of riches, not to them that have excelled other in bodyly strength, not to them
that have shed most blood, but to them that for his sake have defied the
goods of this world, and have valeauntly suffered the displeasures of this
world.

The text.
Let no man say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God. For as God
cannot be tempted to evil, so neither he him self tempts any man. But every
man is tempted, when he is drawn a way and entysed of his own concupiscence.
Then when lust has conceived, she brings forth sin: and sin when it is
fynyshed, brings forth death. Do not err, my dear brethren. Every good
gift, and every parfecte gift, is from above, and comes down from the
father of lyghtes, with whom is no variableness, nether is he changed unto
darkness. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we
should be the first trutes of his creatures. Wherefore (dear brethren) let
every man be swyfte to bear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. For the wrath
of man works not that which is ryghteous before God. Wherefore, lay aparte
al fylthynes and superfluytie of malicyousnes, and receive with mekenes, the
word that is graffed in you, which is able to save your souls. Whether a man
love God purely, the pleasures of this world do try, but much more does
the hurly burly of affliccions. And it is in us, that being furnyshed with the
helping aid of God, we may nether become tender nycelynges through vain
pleasures, ne moved with terrible turmoylinges. But if a man be moved with
the delices of the world from the right state of mind, or if a man be led by
ye sorrow of affliccio^s out of true godliness, he has nothing to lay unto
Gods charge. He y^ gets the victory, gets the victory by the help of
God: and he that is ouercomme, is overcome through his own fault. For God
does not give men occasyon to sin, but the thing that he gives according
to his own goodness for the nouryshment and encreace of godliness, our minds
being corrupt, and as it were cralled with affeccions, turns to thoccasyon
of their own destruction. For God does somtymes give us the use of
habundaunce of goods, and the commodities of life, to the intent that being
provoked by his liberal goodness we should tender thanks unto him. Again, he
suffers us somtymes to be afflicted with adversities, that he may both make
our godliness more notably seen, and encreace our reward. And if the matter
turn to the contrary part, it is our fault and not his. For like as he being
by nature good, can not be provoked with any euilles, even so does he entice
noman unto evil. The thing is of us, that turns the goodness of God unto our
evil. He gives pleintie of meats, he gives the liquor of wine, that being
moderately refreshed, we should give praises to the maker. And shall he that
is dronken with wine call God unto the law? no in no wise: let him accuse his
own mind, whose vicious gredynes entised and drew him to dronkenes. There is
a certain readynes unto vice graffed in our hearts of our first parents
vice, and that is as it were a sede of sin. And if it be received in to the
heart and receive nourishment, than the mind has as it were all ready
conceived sin. And onles the vicious desire be driven out of mind, the
stynking smell of it grows and waxes strong by litell and litell, till
deadly sin be committed. Which, when it is in his nombres consu^mately done,
begins to bring forth fruit it self again. And the fruit that it brings
forth is the naughtiest fruit of all, even death everlasting: And this is the
most heavy fruit of that pleasure that is delectable in outward appearau^ce,
and promysing sweet gear, I wot not what, while it hydeth under the bayte of
pleasure, the very angling hoke of death. Like therefore as this lower world
has nothing pure and perfect in every part, but the good things are corrupt
with the badde, and the things that are of gladness are enterchaungeably
myngled with sadness, corrupcion enfecteth the air, disease and age decays
the strength of body, darkness hyndreth the favor of light: even so in our
minds, as long as they are entangled with these bodies, there is scarcely any
thing in all parts blessed and pure, but it is corrupt with some spotte of
human desires or with the darkness of error and ignorance. But what so ever
naughtynes is in us, we ought to impute it unto our selves and not to God. For
if we were of pure affeccions, if we put our trust with our whole heart in
God, if we breathed with all our inward powers unto the things that are
everlasting and heavenly, what so ever should be laid against us in this
life, whether it were merry or sorry, it would turn to the increace of
Godlynes. Therefore dear brethren, do not you as the commune sort of folish
men does, who to the intent they may excuse their sins, plead with the maker
of nature at law, as though he were the author of sin. Far be this error
from you, which have learned the Gospells philosophy. Like as God of his own
nature is purely and most chiefly good, even so does there nothing proceed
from him but that which is good. If any naughtynes therefore be in us, let us
not ascribe it unto God but unto our own selves: and if any good thing, if
any true light, if any undefiled wisdom be in us, let us ascribe it wholly
unto God the author. If this gross world have any light, it has it of the
heavenly bodies, and especially of the sun. What true knowlage so ever is in
us, what pure and sincere affeccion so ever be in us, it arises not of us (for
we are nothing else but sinners and ignorant persons,) but it proceeds from
above: what so ever is truly good, it comes from the author of all goodness:
what so ever lawful and perfect thing there be, and such thing as makes you
acceptable unto God, it comes from the fountain of all perfeccion: what so
ever is truly light, the father and prince of all true light sends it unto us
from him self. These things he bestows not upon our deserts, but he gives
them unto us freely, as he is liberal of nature. They are gifts rather than
rewards, it is a liberal larges rather than a hire. It is not right therefore
that we challenge any thing thereof unto us, but for our naughtynes let us call
upon the mercy of God: for goodness because it is not ours, let us give thanks
unto his liberality. Like as he of his own nature is the best, even so he
cannot give but the things that are best: like as he is unchangeable, and
always like himself, so there is nothing with him, that is obscured with any
course of darkness. This our day is taken away of the night following, and
cast about with clouds going between, humayne wisdom is darkened with
errors of opinions, man's vprighteousnes is infected with naughty desires. With
him there is no mixture of euylles, no courses of darkness. It behooves us
therefore also to conform our selves to the uttermost of our powers according
to his simplicity, that giving our selves unto godly studyes, and being apt
more and more to receive his gifts, we may be as it were transformed in to
him. For it is convenient, that children resemble the nature of their parent.
We have vnthirftyly resembled Adam the prince of this gross and corrupt
birthe. He being obscured with the darkness of sins has begotten us that are
entangled with darkness. In that we loathe heavenly things, in that we are
gredy of earthy things, we resemble the disposicion of him. In that we are
blind, in that we do at al auentures as y^ blind man casts his staff, and
in that we fall, it is of our carthy parent. But the father of heaven has
more happyly begotten us again, that being as it were created new again, we
might conform our selves like unto our new b^^the in Innocence of life, and
knowlage of everlasting truth. That earthy father being seduced with the false
deceatefull promises of the serpent, begat us. unto darkness. And this
heavenly father begat us again, not of the corrupt sede of our earthye
father, but of the most pure sede of the eternal and truth speaking word.
The serpents word was a lyeng word, and casie down manne from the state of
Innocence. But the word of the Gospelles doctrine is tr^^, whereby we are
chosen into the enheritaunce of Immortality, and called in to the fellow
ship of Jesus Christ the son of God. He was the true light preceding of the
most high light, whose doctrine has made bright men's minds and set them
free from the doctrine of this world. And the heavenly word is of such
efficacy, that it does not only change us, but transformeth us as it were
utterly in to other men, abhorryng now the things that we loved much before,
and love that we before abhorred. And this is the honor that the heavenly
father worthyed us withal not provoked by our merits, but of his own free
goodness, whereby he so determined from everlasting, that he would, by such
means as has not ben heard tell of, make a new creature in the earth, and
would that we should be as it were the first fruits of this new estate, in
that we are called among the first unto the doctrine of the Gospel.
Forasmuch than as God has endued us with this honor freely, it remains,
that we conform our selves like unto his hounteous goodness to the uttermost
of our power again: we are freely admitted unto this felicity, but we might
fall from it again for all that through our own fault, onles we study to
keep through godly forcastes, that which is freely given. It were of non effect
for us to be chosen through baptism, and professing of the Gospelles doctrine
in to the fellowship of the son of God, except we frame our selves through
chaste and clean manners like unto our profession. That like as everlasting
light has given us light by the son of God, so must all our life bear
witness, that we belong to the fellowship of light. We once cast of the old
manne with his errors, with his affectes, with his vices, now it is reason
that we ensue the clean contrary things. Heretofore you had rather seem
masters than disciples, for so ambicion persuaded you, that the commune people
would recon him the better learned, that was most full of bablyng: you had
rather have been angrye with him that counseled you aright, than to acknowlage
your fault: you had rather have followed wicked outrageous lust, than ensue
those things that bring salvation: Now my dear brethren, who so will be
coumpted a new man, let him be slow to speak, swyft to hear, and ready to
learn of any manne. Howbeit let no man rashly nor over hastyly take upon him
to be a teacher. And like as he is not void of peril to fall, that is hastye
to speak, even so is that manne inclined to do injury, which is lightly
moved in his mind. For it is requisite that godly men be far of, not only
from all reuengement, but also from all evil speaking. For he shall be the more
safe from chyding, that makes no answer: and he shall do no man wrong, that
when he is provoked, is not angrye. Among men peradventure he shall seem a
just man, that requiteth one evil word with an other, one evil deed for an
other, but yet he shall be a great deal wide from the justice of God, who by
his son has taught us, to speak well of them that backbyte us, to wish
well to them that wish evil to us, to do good for them that do evil unto us.
These things he does not, that lets his tongue run at large, which is
a warbling membre and a slyppery, nor he that has wrath secretly. These
manner of lusts, like as they overthrow and cheoke the sede of Gods word,
that when it comes up it bring forth no fruit in you, even so do they let
that it can not be sown in to the field of the mind. It takes no rote in
a briery place, ne in marice, nether in the sand that fleeteth away, but it
requires a pure, a trymme and a substaunciall ground. Therefore if ye will,
that the sede of the word of the Gospel, that is once cast; bring fruit in
you, fruit (I say) not for a season, or a commune fruit wherewith the bodies may
be refreshed, but the eternal salvation of your souls: make clean the field
of your heart not only from the tumulte of evil speaking and of wrath, but
also from al gredy lusts, wherewith man's mind is defiled: from the thorns of
coueteousnes from the gravel of rashenes, from the slyme of outrageous lust,
from the stones of pride and wilfulnes. For in deed the mind that is burdened
with this gear, is not hable to receive the word of the Gospel, which
knocks in vain at the tympane of the ears, onles it light deep in to the
inward parts of the heart. And if it once settle in to your minds, it shall
not be baren, but shote forth and show it self with godly works.

The text.
And se that ye be doars of the word and not hearers only, deceauing your
own selves. For if any man hear the word, and declares not the same by his
works, he is like unto a man beholdynge his bodily face in a glass. For
as soon as he has toked on him self, he goes his way, and forgets
immediately what his fasshyon was. But who so looked in the parfayr law of
liberty, and continues therein (if he be nor a forgetful hearer, but a doar
of the work) the same shall be happy in his deed. If any in an among you seem
to be devout and refrayneth not his tongue, but deceaueth his own heart, this
man's devotion is in vain. Pure deuocio^ and undefiled before God the father,
is this: to visit the fatherles and widoowes in their aduersytie, and to keep
him self unspotted of the world. The Jews have their law by heart without
book, and yet they express it not in their life. The philosophers do learn
perfitely the lessons how to live well, and think that to be enough, far
deceauyng them selves: where as the felicity of man is not in the speaking
but in the living. But unto you it ought not to be enough, that being newely
instructed, you have heard the Gospelles doctrine: that being baptized, you are
admitted unto the harder hidden mysteries of the Gospelles doctrine: that you
have learned over and over all the whole philosophy of Christ and all his
life: ne that you have received the promysse of Immortal life. That which
Christ taught, must be expressed in outward manners: That which he did,
must be followed of us to the vttermoste of our possible powers. It behooves
us to dye unto the desires of this world, and be buried with him, to rise
again with him unto Innocencye, to be carried with him in to heaven: and
finally we ought so to live upon earth, as we appear not unworthy the
rewards of heaven.

Will you hear, how that he yeldeth no fruit at all, which hears the word
of the Gospel, but lightly and vnconfiderately? He is most like unto a man
that beholds his face in a glass. He beholds, but he does nothing else but
behold only. For he can not change his natural face, nether goes he any
other manner away from the glass than he came to it. Yea inasmuch as he went
only for this purpose, to see what favor his face was of, he thinks not of
the amending of the faults of his favor, but as soon as he goes away from
the glass, he remembers nothing which a one he saw him self to be. But the
glass of the Gospelles doctrine shows not the blemyshes and outbreakinges of
the body, but it lays all the diseases of thy soul before thine eyes: nether
does it only show them, but also healethe them. Moses law did rather utter
the sores of the soul than healed them. For the law, as concerning the
lettre, was imperfecte, and frayed men from evil by fear, rather than
caused men willingly to follow the things that were good. But the law of
the Gospel, obteyneth more of the wyllyng, and those that be at liberty
through love, than the law of Moses gat perforce. And the law of the Gospel
makes perfect that it begins, where the other brings nothing to
perfectyon. Whosoever therefore will diligently behold both his mind and his
life at this glass (and that should he do continually) never moving his eyes
from the example and doctrine of Christ, that is to say, whosoever hears the
holy word, not after such light sort, that turnyng him self back by and by
to the cares of this world he seem to forget that he heard, but frames all
his life after the rule of it, expressing by godly works, that which he
sticked fast in the marye of the soul, he shall surely be blessed: not because
he heard the word, but because he did after it in his affeccions and manners.
Thou hear Christ say, that the tormente of hell fire abides for him, that
says unto his brother: thou fool. And yet forgetting by and by what thou
heardest, thou art ready for a light checking word to fight with him. Thou
hear, that those riches are to be set naught by, which are in danger of
mothes and thieves, and that true riches ought to be laid up in stoare in
heaven: but as soon as thy back is turned from the preacher, thou ru^nest on
with all thy forcasting studies, to muckre up riches, (thou carest not how) by
hoke or by croke, as though thou beleuedest, that godlynes should not be
rewarded after this life. And if any among you think him self wondrous
devout, if he keep his hands from stealing, and from fighting and other
vices, and yet for all that refrain not his tongue from backbyting,
mysreportes, from scoldinges, from filthy talkinges, nether his heart from
unclean thinkinges: his devotion is unprofitable and unfruitful. Perchance
he is not punished by man's laws, that only talks of whoredom though he do
it not, yet he is become an whoremonger before God, that in his mind has
committed whoredo^e. He suffers no punishment of men, that coueteth an other
man's good, if he may escape unpunished: but he is guilty of theft before God,
y^ has conceived theft in his mind. We are esteemed after y^ manifest deeds
before men, for they see not the mind. But God looks upon the inward
affeccions of the mind, and estemeth us after them. A corrupt mind is used
for the most part to hurst out in to the tongue. Among Christen people a
reuiling word is a kind of manslaughter, but this is plain, that true
godlynes can in no wise agree with racklenes of tongue. Nether yet is it
sufficience unto Christian religion, to have absteyned from synnyng: it
behooves also to abound in good works. For in deed bond servants absteyne
from doing evil, yea, for fear of punishment, but those that are right
children, it becomes to have love, which is no idle loytring matter, but
effectually working, and puts forth it self freely without compulsion to
do every good work. But some would say, what deeds than are those that
make us right religious in deed? Those that smell of the Jews sect set furthe
the praise of religion, in Palles and wide robes, in choice of meats, in
washinges, in long prayers, and other ceremomes, which are sometimes not
altogether to be contemned, if by them as by signs we be warned of those
things, which are the propre own matters of godliness: but they are pernicious
ware, if a man think that he is made religious by mean of the^ where as of
them selves without exposicion, they make a man rather an hipocrite. Howbeit
the observing of the^ seems a religious devout matter among men, that
wickedly repose godliness in visible things: which perchance are signs of
godlynes, but not the cause of godlynes, seeing that of them selves they are
nether good nor evil, onles they seem to be such, either through custom or
in the opinion of men, where as true godlynes is in the inward minds, and
expresses it self by far more certain sure signs than by ceremonies. Will
you therefore hear, what is true religion with God the father, which estemeth
you not after the judgment of man? Doubtless, this is the pure and undefiled
religyon: that like as we have by experience proved both the mercy and
liberal goodness of God toward us, even so must we again be both
merciful and frendely liberal toward our neighbor, and that not upon any
hope of mutual good turn to be requited to us again, but of a mere and a
pure upright love, loking for the reward of our well doing at the hands of
none other but of God, which is content to have it reconed to be done to him
self, what so ever we bestow for his sake upon our brother.

He is a godly and a pure man among the Jews, that touches not caryon, that
is washed with quycke rennyng water: but with God he is godly and pure, that
succoureth the fatherles children and wydowes in their trouble, that releueth
his oppreste brother, and helps the nedye with money. Among the Jews he is
unclean, that eats swynes flesh: But with God he is unclean, whose mind
is infected and defieled with the gredye lusts of this world. But a man
will say, what be those lusts? In the judgment of the world, he is counted
vile that is poor: And he the more honestly set by, that has most
possession of riches, and for that cause their special carke and care is to
get to them selves the most substance of money. He is reconed a lowete and a
henneharted rascal, that makes no querell when wrong is done unto him. He is
counted a fool, that does a good turn for a badde. He is esteemed a Ioly
ruffler, that gives him self to excessyue riot: and he is counted a flyncher
that follows sobriety. He is taken for a gaye fellow, that swells in
haultynes, and looks an height over men of lower estimacion. He is counted
happy, that has his matter to succeed in this world after his own purpose,
that flows in delicacies and voluptuous pleasures, and serves his paunche
and glotonie. These are the things, that in deed make a man's soul wicked
and unclean: and he that absteyneth from them, is a religious manne,
(whosoever is, whosoever is not) in the sight of God the father, who has
exempted us from earthy things, and called us to heavenly things, and from
the things that shall perish and are casual, unto the things that are
eternal: and has taught us to esteem the worthynes of man by the things
that are good in deed, and in all that we have to do, to give respect to none
other purpose, but to his glory, at whose only hands the requital of well
doings is to be trusted for. And he does not requite the offices of true
godlynes with transitorye and sone peryshing rewards, as this world is wont
to do, but he gives blessedness that never shall dye. It is a homely person,
it is a poor body, whom thou bestowest thy good turn upon, he is not hable to
requite the, but yet for all that, it is far better to bestow it upon him,
than upon an other, how rich or of how great power so ever he be, which can
requite no profit again, but a slender, one and that but for a small season:
where as for the reliuing of thy pore brother, Christ lays up in stoare life
everlasting.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
My brethren, esteem not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ the Lord of glory,
with respect of persons. For if there come into your company a man wearing a
golden ryng, clothed in goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor manne
in vile raiment, and ye have a respect to him that wears the gaye clothing,
and say unto him: Sit thou here in a good place: and say unto the poor:
stand thou there, or sit here under my footstool: are ye not parciall in
your selves, and have judged after evil thoughts? Harken my dear beloved
brethren. Has not God chosen the pore of this world, soch as are rych in
faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to them that love him?
But ye have despised the pore. Do not rich men execute tyranny upon you, and
draw you before the judgment seats? Do not they speak evil of that good
name which is called upon over you? HE that loves his neighbor for Gods
sake, and he that loves God in his neighbor, does not in this case respect
him, because he is a man of great power, or of riches or of nobility, but in
that he is abundauntlie full of divine goods. But to this manner of Judgment,
a king or a rich man is not better of one Jot than any manne, how basse or
poor so ever he be. Christ died for all indifferently, and all are
indifferentlye called to thenherytaunce of Immortality. Therefore my brethren,
if you do truly put your trust in the promises of our Lord Jesus Christ, make
no difference of persons after the estimacion of worldly things. For Christ
him self, as touching the world, was basse and poor. But yet it was the
fathers will, that he should be prince of all glory. He promised the kingdom
of heaven not to the wealthy but unto the pore. Now if there come in to your
company a Ioly fellow with a gold ring, or ruffling in gaye apparaill, and
there come in withal a pore manne, nether wearing ring on his fyngers, and
clothed in pore homely array, and by and by you cast your eyes upon the rich
man, for none other respect but that he obseureth the pore manne with his
gorgrous raiment, and give him the more honorable place, saying: Sytte thou
here Well: And again you say unto the pore manne as though you lothed him,
and for no cause else but for his over homely apparaill: Stand thou there, or
sit thou there, under my footstool: would not your heart by and by grudge
and secretly condemn your doing, in that through flattery you attribute unto
gold and galaunte array, the honor that is due unto virtue, contemnyng him for
lack of chose things, which is much more acceptable to God for the true
riches of the soul, than that rich manne? The rich man's finger glisteryng
with the ring and precious stone, and his body decked in silk, makes you to
regard him* and do not you regard the poor man for his synceritie of fay
the, modesty of mind, sobrenes, chastity and other gifts of virtue, which
make a man great and gorgious in deed? Why does your judgment disagree from
the judgment of God? Hear me indifferently, my well-beloved brethren, the thing
that evidently appears matter in deed to be certainly true. How much s^
ever the world sets by the rich, God him self has preferred the poor,
the poor (I mean) after the world, which nether have nor seek after
autor^^^e nor kingdoms in this world. God has let alone the rich with their
statelynes, and chosen these, which are but sely pore folks for lack of
present substance, but yet rich and mighty in the lokynge for the kingdom
of heaven, and theuerlastynge enherytaunce, in that they put their trust in
him that promised them* which nether can deceive if he would, and is hable to
perform what he will. But unto whom has he promised this wonderful
^^licitie* ^^ kings and wealthy folks? no in deed, but to them which love
him trouly, who soever they be whether they be bond servants, or free men,
whether they be rich or poor. And you having desired the rich manne to the
highest se^te, and appoynting the poor man to the low fotestoles, have
preferred him whom God sets the less by, and contemned him that in the
sight of God is both rich and honorable. He has honor done unto him, that
perchance having gotten his riches by fraud or rauine, auaunceth himself:
and this is contemned, which had rather be poor, than with loss of godlynes
to be rich: and having spent up his riches to the releuing of the pore, is
become poor of his own accord, that he might be rich in godlynes. In deed
every one is not ungodly that is rich, not withstanding the rich of this
world are not very rash in agreeing with the godlynes of the Gospel, but
they be of that kind of men most chiefly, that repugne the Gospel of
Christ. For who are they that practice tyranny against you for malice of
godlynes? are they not the rich men? who are they that accuse you and draw
you before Judgment seats? are they not the rich for the most part? Who
are they that speak evil and curse the holy name of our lord Jesus Christ,
by Inuocacion whereof you have atteyned salvation, and in whom you rejoice? Are
they not the rich? Yea they hate your profession so much, chat the name,
which gives salvation and is honorable unto you, is even death and
abominable unto them. But the profession of this name is begone to be
healthesome unto you, so as for all that, you may through your own fault,
fall from the salvation that is promised.

The text.
If ye fulfill the royal law, according to the scripture. Thou shall love
thine neighbor as thy self, ye do well. But if ye regard one person more then
another, ye commit sin, and are rebuked of the law, as transgressors. Who
soever shall keep the whole law, and yet fail in one point, he is guilty of
all. For be that said: Thou shall not commes adulterye, say de also: thou
shall not kyl. Though thou do no adultery, yet if thou ^^, thou arts become, a
traunsgressour of the law. So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged
by the law of liberty. For he shall have judgment with our mercy. that
shows no mercy: and merc^^ rejoices against judgment. A king promises
reward, yc^, but to him that in his deeds accomplysheth the law royal:
whereof no man can be ignoraunte, seeing it was expreste in writing long agooe,
and it is on this manner: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Does he
love his neighbor after this rule, that prefers the wicked rych manne before
the godly poor man? The law of the Gospel is the law of love: and what
soever is done contracy to it although it be not forbidden by special name,
yet it is sin: and that law does secretly reprove you, which has
coinmau^ded almen, and in all things, that thou ought to love thy neighbor
as thy self. Who soever swarueth from this rule, is a conuicte transgressour
of the law. Nether yet let any manne ^urry fauell with him self after this
wise: The faule is but light, the law is broken in nothing but in this part.
But the law of the Gospel is such a law, that except it be kept in every
part wholly, it seems to be broken all together on every part. For inasmuche
as the total Sunnue of all the whole law is coutcyned in the love of God and
of the neighbor, who soever he be, that swarueth from charitee, which is the
rote of all the whole law, he has doubtless broken the whole law, and
offended the author of the law: unto whom he is become guilty of all, in that
he, which has e^^ed from the right mark of the whole law, appears as
much as in him is, that he will ^^^e, as often as occasion is offered. As a man
that walks in the dark* cares not whether he goo ^ute of the way on the
right hand or on the left, so is he disposed to all manner of error, that
has once swarued out of the light Therefore he y^ has through ^^at^erie
preferred the undeserving rich man before the deserving poor man, forasmuch as
he has in this behalf broken the la^e of love: he is cosen ge^^ayn to all
naughtynes, that is commonly done against the love of the neyghbor. Nether
does he lightly offend God, that is so hardy to defile his law in any part.
He that ones commanded charity, did with like diligence ones* forbydde* what
so ever is repugnaunte against the love of the neighbor. For the self same
that gave this law, Comm^^^ono Where ^^ne: ordained this, Do no murder. And
if thou absteyne from whoredom, and yet committeste murder: haste thou not
than broken all the whole law, in that thou have broken it in one part? The
self same one God forbad both, and forebad them for all one cause, that is to
say, because they are against the love of the neighbor. But he has not only
forbidden those things, which are punnyshed by laws, as theft, murder, and
whoredom, but all manner of things utterly, that are contrary to the love of
the Gospel. The law of Moses would not punnyshe him, that esteemed less the
soft sprited pore manne, than the proud stately rich manne, or him that would
wish evil to his neighbor: But yet the law of the Gospel punnysheth him.
Therefore according to the rule of it, frame not only your deeds but also alyour
co^municacion and the thoughts of your heart, that there be nothing at any
time, that varieth from the love of the neighbor. Love is the law of
liberty, not that it is lawful to sin by means of it, but in that the
euangelical love causes the wyllyng to do of their own accord, the thing
that man's laws constrayne the unwilling to do perforce, for fear of
peynes. According to this law therefore frame all your life, for somuche as
you shall receive most high reward if you accomplish that which is
prescribed unto you: and contrary wyle you shall suffer most grievous sore
punishments, in case you ones fall from him, of whom all the whole law
depends. You are freely pardoned of the transgressions of your former life.
The gift of the heavenly spyrite is freely given you, by whom you are not
only reconsiled unto God, but also glued together in mutual charity. The
more it is given unto you, and is freely given without your deserumges, so much
the more sharply shall they be punnyshed which having experyence in them
selves of so exceadynge great mercy of God, do not show them selves again
gentil and merciful toward their neighbor. With what countenance shall he
ask mercy of God the judge, which being a servant shows him self
unmerciful toward his fellow servant? with what mouth shall he desire to
beloved of God, which does not love his neighbor? if thou will obtain
judgment myngled with mercy, look thou show thy self merciful toward thy
neighbor, whether he be a trespasser or be in necessity. And in deed it is
better to decline in to this part, to lean unto mercy than unto judgment.
For inasmuch as it is almost altogether of the mercy of God that we have,
rather than of his righteousness, we ought to endeavor, that we may rather
find God merciful than severely strayte. He has saved us by his mercy: it
is reason also that we be more ready to mercy toward our neighbor, than
unto straytenes: For there are many moo won by softenes, gentylnes, and
lyberall goodness, than with strayte straungenes: that mercy aduaunceing it
self above judgment, may triumph in this behalf, that those which having
the experience of judgment, should have peryshed, are saved through the
benefit of mercy. There is none of us but he falls daily, and shall find
God such a one in condemnyng his faults, as he expresses him self toward
his brother.

What avails it my brethren, though a man say he has faith, if he have
no deeds? Can faith save him: If a brother or a sister be naked and destitute
of daily fode, and one of you say unto them: depart in peace, God send you
warmnes and fode, notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are
needful to the body, what shall it help? Even so, faith (if it have no
deeds) is dead in it self. But some manne will say: thou have faith, and I
have deeds, show my thy faith by thy deeds: and I will show the my faith by
my deeds. Beleuest thou that there is one God? Thou do well. The deuyls also
believe, and tremble. But will thou understand (O thou vain manne) that faith
without deeds is dead? Was not Abraham our father justified through works,
when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Thou see how that faith
wrought with his deeds, and through the deeds was the faith made perfect: and
the scripture was fulfylied, which says: Abraham believed God, and it was
reputed unto him for tighte wesnes: and he was called the friend of God. Ye se
then how that of deeds a man is justified, and not of faith only. Likewise
also was not Kaab the harlot iustyfyed through works, when she had received the
messagers, and had seut them out another way? For as the body without the
spirit is dead, even so faith without works is dead also. Is it to be
thought, that the only profession of faith, is enough of it self to obtain
salvation? what is faith without charytye? Charity is a lively thing, it
ceasseth not, it is not idle, it expresses it self with good deeds doing,
whersoeuer it is present. And if they want, my brethren, shall the vain name
of faith (I pray you) save a man. The faith is fruteles, that works not
by charity, yea it is no faith but in title only. That which I have said,
shall more cierely appear by conference of an example. If a man give fair
words to a brother or a sister, that wants clothing or daily sustenaunce,
and say: Go your way in peace, get you heat, and get your belly full of
meat, and for all his so saying, gives none of those things that the body
has need of is not this man's fair speaking unprofitable to the pore nedye
folks? They shall starve for cold, or be an hyngred for all his fair tale
that releueth not their necessity. He releueth the in his word of mouth, but
with his deed he does nothing at al. Of like sort doubtless shall the
profession of faith, which consists only in word and works nothing in
deed, vee vnauayleable, but lies slugging like as it were dead, neither is it
to be called faith any more, than a dead corpse of a man is worthy to be
called a man. The thing that the soul is unto the body, the same is
charity unto faith: so that if charity be taken aware, the word of faith
is but a dead matter and ineffectual. Nether shall it do the any more good
before God to profess an idle faith with thy mouth, than fair words do
unto the poor neighbor, where he ought to be helped with deed. They think
they are mocked, when a man says unto them: get you heat, get your belly
full of meat, when they have nether clothe nor meat given them. Even so he
seems to mock God, that rehearses every day: I believe in God, I believe in
God, when he she weth no tokens of faithful belefe. Like as he has an
unprofitable charity, that loves but from the lips forewarde, even so has
he a vain faith, that believes not but in word only. Now perchance some
one starteth out, that gooeth about to disseuer the things, that by nature are
most fast joined together, and of whom nether can be disseuered from the
other, and says: Thou haste faith, I have deeds, let us both be contented
with his own portion. Let thy faith suffice the, it is enough for me to have
good deeds. And yet nothers portion shall be sufficient for him. Thou boasteste
of faith, and if thou have true tyght faith, it is requisite that thou
declare it with thy deeds: if thou have a dead faith, thou art never the
better for it. Thou crackest of thy deeds, and yet they are not sufficient to
get the crown of immortality, onles they proceed of charity, which is an
inseparable companyon of faith, that brings salvation. The thing that flowers
and boughs are in a tree, the same are the offices of charity in us: which
if they break forth in their time, they declare that the tree rote is quycke,
by whose sap they are noryshed.

Therefore this is the whole profit of good deeds, if they be not done upon
vayneglory, not for thank at man's hands, not for fear or shame, and not
upon hope of lucre, but of a lively faith, which has persuaded us, that,
that is given unto God, what so ever is given for his sake unto our neighbor,
and that the reward is to be hoped after at none other hand but of him. Thou
please thy self, in that thou art persuaded, that there is but one God,
where as the error of the painymes believes there be innumerable Gods. Thou
do right, for in this behalf thou excellest them. Howbeit it does the no
good at all to believe there is God, and that there is but one God, onles thou
so believe, that thou shall of him obtain salvation. But that shall thou not
do, except thou couple charytie unto faith, and testifye by thy godly
works that thou both beleuest him, and that thou loueste him. If thou believe
there is God, believe also that he is the author of salvation, believe his
promyses: and live after such sort, that thou may appear to be worthy of
his promyses. He has promised mercy, yea, but unto them that in this world
exercise mercy toward their neighbor. He has promised eternal life, yea
but to them that despise the pleasures of this world. This shall thou not only
believe, there is but one god, but thou shall also repose al thy whole trust in
him only: or else what fruit shall thou have of thy beleuynge? The deuilles do
also believe, that God is, they believe that Jesus is the son of God, and
believe it so much, that they tremble and quake. But forasmuch as they believe
only, and love him not, they are afraid of punnyshment at his hand, and
hope not after reward: and where they feel him to be ryghteous, they are not
woorthye to feel mercy seeing they are cruel against others. But and if thou
be so very a fool, that thou yet stand in thine own conceate having but a
vain faith: gooe to, I shall bring the forth a more famylyar and a more
known example, to teach the, that the faith, which woorketh not through
love, is unprofitable and dead. Abraham, of whom as our head auncetour, we
most chyeflye make vaunte, deserved the first and pryncypall commendacyon of
faith with God, of whom the reputacyon of ryghteousnes was attrybuted unto
him: but in him faith was not vnfrutefully baren. For he did not only
profess with his mouth that he trusted in Gods promysses, but also he
doubted not to lay his only son Isaac upon thaultar and slay him at Gods
commandment, whereas after the order of nature, there could no posterytie
be trusted upon to him by any other: but he laying hold on the promises of
God whom he knew could raise even the dead again to life at his pleasure,
sticked not to do that he was commanded. So that of his deeds he deserved the
co^mendacion of righteousness, yea but of those deeds that proceeded of faith.
For there are also works of Moses law, whereunto they trust in vain, that are
without the faith of the gospel. What is it, that that noble patriarch would
not have done, seeing he went readily and cheerfully to the sleaynge of his only
son Isaac, whom he loved so much the more tenderlye, because he was borne
in his extreme old age, and because that lucky posteryty was promised in his
name? He was pronounced righteous, even before he did the sacryfyce, yea, but
of God that knew the old man's lively workynge faith would refuie
nothing, if occasyon were oftred. Therefore both the matters did help either
other. Faith encouraged him, not to fear to offer up his son, whom he
doubted not should by the commandment of Gods power, by and by live
again: but the notable deed set upon, as it were, the fynall furnyture of the
matter, declarynge unto men also, that Abraham's steadfast faith was neither
a dead nor a commune faith. For he another fayneth, nor doubts, which
stackreth not to adventure in his only son whom he loved so syngularly.
Would it grieve him to set naught by money for Christ's sake, that is ready to
lead his son, whom the father loved dearlier than he did him self, unto
death? So than of this so notable a document of faith it manifestly appears
to be perfect, that the scripture said: Abraham believed God, and it was
reckoned unto him for righteousness, and was called the friend of God. And if
Abraham should have lost the fruit of faith and the commendacion of
righteousness, if he had gtudged at Gods commandment to offer up his son:
shall his faith aua^le him, that at Gods commandment grudgeth to give a
cote to his neighbor that starueth for cold, and that grudgeth to give meat
to the hungrye, and drink to the thurstye, as though God would suffer him to
perish for cold or hungre, that gives somewhat of his substance to releue his
brothers necessity? And if the commendacion of righteousness chanced not to
them of the old time, but to such as tried their faith by their deeds: much
less is it to be trusted upon unto them, that profess the law of perfect
charity. But mercy and liberality to the neighbor is so much auayleable
with God, that a woman, that an harlot, that a stranger was commended for
keeping of hospitality, and deserved to be nombred in the regestre of Godly
people, in the regestre of citezens, and in the regestre of the most tryedlye
proved Patriarchs. Rhahab was not a Jew, she was maystres of a house of
baldrye, and gate her living with no very honest gaynes of occupung: and yet in
Gods book she has a worthy commendacion of righteousness: not of faith
only, in that she was persuaded that no man's good deeds should be lost, God
being the rewarder namely that is bestowed upon good folks or at least in the
respect of God: but of that, that she not regarding the danger of her life,
provided to save the life of the spies, in that she sent out the messangers,
whom the guide of y^ Jews had sent to spy, by stealth an other way, lest
they should perish. She might have come in no small favor with her own country
folks, if she had (as it was in her hand to have done) betrayed the spies.
But she had rather serve the will of God, than her own gain: nether dystrusted
she, but that she should be repayed a more pleynteous reward of him, than of
men.

Likewise than as Abraham had the worthy praise of righteousness, not of naked
faith but of faith tried by deeds, even so Rhahab had believed in vain that
the God of the Jews is the true very God, except, when occasion served, she
had declared by her deeds, that she had believed with her whole heart: otherwise
faith (as I said) that is cold of charity, and vttreth not it self, when
matter requires, it is verily no faith at all, but only a vain name of
faith. For like as the body being destitue of the soul is dead and
unprofitable, even so faith, if it want working charity, is dead and
ineffectual.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
My brethren, be not every man a master, knowing how that we shall receive
the greater damnacion: for in many things we sin all. If a man synue not
in word, the same is a perfect man, and able also to came all the body.
Behold, we put byttes into the horses mouths, that they may obey us, and we
turn about all the body of them. Behold also, the ships which though they
be so great, and are driven of fearce winds, yer are they turned about with a
very small helm whyther soever the violente of the governor will. Even so the
tongue is a little membre also, and boasts great things. Great is the
profitablenes of a man's tongue, if a man teach those things that pertain
to true godlynes, but it is a peril^ous piece of work to take thoffice of a
teacher in hand: and first it requires that a man be excellently learned
in the things that concern the doctrine of the gospel, and than to be of
most pure affeccions: it is not enough for every man to teach uprightly, but
for him that respects nothing else but to the glory of God. Such a teacher
like as he may do very much good, if he love that he teaches even so whose
doctrine is corrupt, or whose mind is corrupt with wicked desires, with
hatred, ire, desire of reuengeme^t, covetousness, ambicion, or lecherous lusts,
he occupies the room of a teacher to the great marring of the people.
Therefore my brethren, covet not every where to be masters. It is more sure to
harken than to speak. And a few teachers are ynow to instruct many. Therefore
he that takes upon him the rowme of a bishop, and of a teacher, must often
and many times examyne him self, whether he be mete to take that charge in
hand: and let him think this specially with him self, that he takes a
travail in hand endaungered with myghtie peril, and shall render a most
straight reconyng to the most high Judge* if he teach otherwise than
becomes him. For his doctrine throws abroad his venom, so much the more
wyder and perilouslier, in that it is set forth by autoritye of a speaker. And
there is nothing of more difficulty, than in every point so to tempre the
tongue, that it never speak amysse. For in as much as the infirmytie of man's
nature is such, that there is no man but he daily does amysse in many
things, if any manne can avoid all escapes of the tongue, he may be
thought a perfect and a mete manne to govern the whole body, as it were with
the brydie of reason, after that he has beue hable to restrain that most
slyppery membre, that it offend not.

From this danger he is farther of, that had rather bear the rowme of a
scholar than of a teacher. It is somewhat to rule the belly, it is not nothing
to tempre the eyes and the ears, it is somewhat to refrain the hands: but of
all other it is the most hard matter, to govern the tongue perfitely. The
tongue is a small membre: yea but yet the whole body does almost all
together depend of it. The speech of a man is a certain effectuous and an
excellent thing of importance, either to the profit or to the destroying of
many. It pearceth into the minds of the hearers, it engraffeth or brings
forth noisome opinions, it stereth up or aswageth displeasures, it moves unto
bataille, it draws unto peace, and it strayneth the hearer to this way or
that way. So we do put brydles in horses mouths, that they may obey us, and
with a small bytte we turn about ye horses whole body at our own pleasure.
The thing that the brydled mouth is to the sitter, the same is the tameo
tongue unto the manne. You see what houge weyghtie substance the ships be
of: they, where as when the sails are spredde abroad, are carried on the
waters with a wondrous violence of wyndes, yet are they turned about with a
very litell stearne whither so ever the ship masters mind that governs
the rother will set it. He dryueth the stearne by a sleyght, and that so great
a weyghtie substance, is governed of the least part of it. Therefore the
temperate governance of the tongue is not to be contemned. It is a small
membre, yea, but it is a swellinge membre and full of bragges, and entermyngleth
destruction wide and broad, and stereth up mighty tumultes: onles it be
restrained by the bridle of the mind, it sets all people and all kingdoms
together by the ears one with an other.

The text.
Behold, how great a thing a little fire kyndleth, and the tongue is fire,
even a world of wickedness. So is the tongue set among our members, that it
defyleth the whole body, and sets a fire all that we have of nature, and is
it self set a fire even of hell. All the natures of beasts, and of birds,
and of serpents, and things of the sea art meked and tamed of the nature of
man. But the tongue can no man came. It is an vntutly evil, full of deadly
poison. Therewith bless we God the father, and therewith curse we men, which
are made after the (image and) simylitude of God. Out of one mouth proceadeth
blessyng and cursyng. My brethren, these things ought not so to be. Does a
fountain send forth at one place sweet water and bitter also? Can the
fyggetre (my brethren,) bear olyue beryes: either a vine beat figs? So can
no fountain give both salt water and fresh also. If any man be wise and
endued with knowledge among you, let him show his works out of good
conuersacyon with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying and
strife in your heart, rejoice not: nether be liars against the truth. For such
wisdom descends not from above: but is earthy, natural, and deuelyshe. For
where envying and strife is, there is unstableness, and all maker of evil
works. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaccable,
gentil, and easy to be cut^eated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
iudgeing, without symulacion: yea, and the fruit of ryghtewesnes is sown in
peace, of them that maynteyne peace. Will ye mark a very like example. Behold
how litell fire kyndleth a mighty great violence of matter. Whereof comes
that horrible and broad flasshing flame of fire? It sprung of one litel
spark. And at the beginning it might have been holden down with a very litel a
do, but when it is negligently let alone, it gathers strength on every
part, and grows so far at length, that it can be suppressed by no force.
And like as the use of fire is great and profitable sundry ways, if it be
rightly occupied, and a principal destruction, if it be suffered to spread
whither it will: even so out of a man's tongue is very great profit, and out
of the same is extreme destruction of man's life. Do you not see that he,
which wrought nature, meant the same by sygnificacion, in that he would have
man's tongue to be both of the manner and color of fire, and to be warblinge
and turnynge as the flame of fire is? And yet there is not in this membre a
single plain evil, as is almost in the other members. It is a world and a
heap of all vices. For like as a very litell spark is, as i^ were, the
breeder of all the whole flame: even so what evil so ever is in this life, it
proceeds out of an evil tongue as out of a world. And like as a litel fire is
mingled with a great rooke of fuel, so that by little and litell it sets
all the whole rooke on fire: even so the tongue is so mixed with the other
members of the body, that, if it be not restrained, it infecteth and defiles
with his poison all the whole body, and enflameth all the life of man with all
manner flames of vices, from his cradle eue^ still to his last age. Yet the
violence of this mischeyf was not given unto the tongue by nature: which has
given monicion by the empaled compass of the teethe and lips, that the use
of the tongue ought circumspectely to be looked to and moderated: but it is set
on fire of the fire of hell, whereof the mind is first infected by wicked
spirits, and the poison of the mind, through the instrument of the tongue,
breaks out more and more, and makes a man of naught to be stark naught, and
the poison does also corrupt other with his contagiousnes, so as that
miserable myschief can not possibly be restrained by no force, nor by no
reason. What thing is there in the world so incurable, that man's diligence
can not make ^ame by some manner of mean? There is no wild beast so wild, no
foul so combrous, no serpente so noisome, no living thing of the sea so
untruly, but it may be made gentle by man's wit and cherishing. Lions are
made tame, Tigres and dragons are made gentle, Elephantes also are made to do
service, Crocodiles are made tame, serpents are made meke, eagles and gripes
are made familiare, delphines also are allured to be loving. And yet was there
never any mean, nor craft found of mortal manne, that could tame an
intemperate tongue, whereas there has been both in times past tamed and is
tamed every day, al kind of things that bears life: as many as are upon
earth, as many as are in the sea, as many as be in the air: and this
myschieuous membre, the tongue, is so far outragiously wild, and violent:
nether is it vntuly only, but also drenched with deadly poison. Lions do their
hurt with their claws and teethe, but yet they have no venom. Adders are
armed with venom, but yet they have another claws ne horns. The only tongue
is noisome two manner of ways, both in untameable mad wildenes, and deadly
venom, in that it styngeth afar of whom it will, where the scorpions hurt
none but those whom they strike with the end of their tail, and the adders
hurt none but with thrusting in their small piped toothe.

And yet this poison were less dreadful, if it were syngle and noisome but
one only way. But now the myschief is after sondrye sorts, and turns it
self in to all manner of kind, that it may the more sore and the more easyly
do harm, and does oftentimes the more harm, when it makes an outward
show of goodness. There is nothing better, nothing of more regard with all men
than godlynes. In pretense thereof it does harm the most specially, when it
myngleth those things, which can not agree in one together. For he can not
be godly toward god, that is cruel and a cursed speaker against his
neighbor. And yet notwithstanding with the same instrument we praise God,
calling him father, and with the same we check and mysreporte our neighbor,
which was made after the likeness of God. With the tongue we sing to God the
author of all goodness, when with the same we vex, through extreme sorrows, man
as though his reproach perteyned not to God that made him.

God is another made more honest with our praises, ne hurt wit our evil
speakynges. Man may be unto man either noisome or holsom. And what we dode to
man, God reconeth the same to belong unto him. Therefore let no man believe,
that God does accept his praises, which he speaks with his tongue and not
with his heart, when he spueth out with the same tongue the poison of cursed
speaking against his neighbor. For what is more contrary repugnaunt, than
praise and disprayse? and yet matters of so great diversity proceed all out of
one mouth: and in deed they are used among the ungodly. Among you that have
professed the plain singlenes of the Gospel, it behooves not that these things
be after the same manner done, for it is shame for you to sound otherwise with
the tongue, than the heart thinks: seeing you have learned to love God in your
neighbor, and your neighbor in God: and seeing you have ^^arned that no man
ought to be hurt with the raungeing nicenes of the tongue, so much that you are
bydden after thexample of Christ, to speak well of them, which speak
shamefully of you. Truly he is the less hurtful, that is plainly and without
conterfaicte dissembling naught. But cursed speaking set out in the Image of
godlynes, what is it else than the poison of humlocke myxed with wine? so that
the venom is the more presently strong in that it is ^uyngled with a most
wholesome matter. They have in their mouth, Lord have mercy* when they them
selves cruelly rage against their brother. They have in their mouth Our
father, when they continually with the s^ing of their tongue wound their
neighbor, for whose saluacions sake Christ was wounded. They speak much of
the goodness of God, that by his own clemency saved man, whereas they go
hastyly about to dispatch a man with the vell^^ of the^r tongue. They talk
fast of the goodness of Christ to mannekynde ward; when they contrary to
thexample of Christ, sharpen their tongues against their own even
Christened. They advance and praise the sof^^^^s of Christ, in that he gently
answered those that reviled him, when they with their lies assault him that
does them good. They profess them selves the messag^ers and preachers of
Christ, when they are very instruments of the devil. They promise the sede
of heavenly doctrine, when they sow the mere poison of the herb Ach^nite. And
these things being of so sundry a diversity, they not only do with all one
tongue, but many times also out of all one pulpit, beginning with praysyng of
God, they burst out in to the slau^deryng of their neighbor, and infect the
minds of the multitude so much the more perniciously, that through a feyned
show of relygion, they cover and dissemble the deadly poison, which they
thruste out of an infected heart by the instrument of the tongue. I pray you
brethren, does not this seem like condicioned to a monstre? There are wells
that flow with wholesome waters, there are wells, whom to taste upon, it were
deadly poison: there are that power sweet water and good to drink of: again
there are that give bitter water and salt. Nether may it seem maruayle, seeing
that the moisture runnyng through diverse veins, sauoureth of the lyme, alome,
brymstone, or other metal, or of the sweet ground. But how chances it, that
seeing the communicacion proceeds out of all one harie, seeing it flows
through all one tongue, it can be so far unlike it self, where among so many
differences of welspringes, there is none found, that can bring forth both
sweet and sour water at once all at one mouth? Does one self same tree
bring forth fruit of so^dry tastes? Mark my brethren, does the figtree (being
sweet by nature) bring forth bitter yuyo beryes? Does the vine tree bring
forth fygges? No: but every fruit is like unto his own tree, and has the
verdour of the Juice of his own rote. Does it not therefore seem to be like
a monstre, that all one manne should power out of all one mouth and through
all one tongue, both godlynes and wickedness, truth and lyeng, salvation and
destruction? Therefore seeing there is nothing more hurtful than a wicked
tongue, and nothing more healthful than a good and a learned tongue, and seeing
the manne is seldom found, that can youerne this membre in all points, that
manne ought with all diligent endeavor to be chosen out of many, that must
take in hand the trauaille of a teacher. Him it behooves to have both a mind
quiet from all tumulte of gredye lusts, and a conversation dyuorced from all
uncleanness, that he may not only teach those things, that concern true
godlynes, but also to teach them with all gentilnes. For that doctrine that is
contencious and wrangling, engenders nothing else, but faccions and falling
out. And among the wise of this world, he bears the bell, that disputes
with most stiffenes in opinions, and that is so busye tongued, that he gives
place to no body. Nether is this done, that the heater may be the better when
he goes away, but that he that gets the maistry may be the prowder, and he
that is ouercomen may be the more lowted. And in the mean season the commune
sort is at disagreyng among them selves, some after this mind some after
that, so as neither the speaker can have any sure grounded fruit, ne yet the
hearer. But among you that profess the philosophy of the Gospel, who so ever
is truly wise, and endued with true wisdom, let him not declare him self wise
in high stately and contencious manner of reasonyng, but let him testify by
goldy and entier upright manners, what he is, rather than in words. For like as
faith is unprofitable, like as charity is unprofitable, that is done but only
in words, even so is wisdom, which does not first try it self by
gentilnes of manners. For this is the chief token, whereby a man may know the
humayne philosophy from the Euangelical. The professors of humayne philosophye
are curious, stiff in opinion, and fearce. But the philosophy of the Gospel,
the more sincere it is, the more excellent it is, so much less high
statelynes it has. And the chief power of it consists, not in subtle
reasonynges of syllogismes, or tricked fine terms of eloquence, but in
synceritie of life, in softenes of manners, that gives place to contencious
persons, and allureth such as are apt to be taught, nether respects it any
thing else than the health of the hearers. It is an heavenly wisdom, and he
that teaches it, must necessaryly have a mind clean scowred from all
earthlye lusts, for it must needs be drawn for the of a sincere clean
vessel. But if you have minds defiled with bitter envying among your selves,
if you have an heart corrupt with contencious, and with stubburne ymagynyng to
have the upper hand and with envy, lay away rather the office of teaching,
than in serving your own glory and contencious manner, to lie against the
Gospelles verity, which no man can set forth syncerely, onles his mind
be free from all humayne affeccions. Therefore, who so ever takes this
profession in hand, if he feel his mind infecte with humayne love or hate, if
with malicious cruelty, desire of renown, gredy covering of money or with
love of uoluptuous pleasures: let him first diligently purge the inward parts
of his mind, that he may go pure unto the teaching of that most pure
doctrine. Or else they that slyppe over those things that make rightly unto
godlynes, and obiecte mystie smokes of doubtful questions: they that speak to
come in to the favor of Princes: they that say for their own advantage:
they that wrest the doctrine of the Gospel unto their own belly business: they
that hunte after the vain praises of men: they that lay an heavy burden
upon other men's shoulders, and will not once touch it with their own fyngre:
those that instead of Gods commandments, teach the ceremonies and
constitucions of men: they that instead of the Gospelles philosophy, set
forth a new Ieweship: finally they that preach them selves rather than Christ:
those men's wisdom is not that wisdom, which the father sent down unto
us by his son from above, to call us from the study of earthely things, and
to exalte us up to heaven: but it is a gross fleshye wisdom and an earthye,
and therefore it sauoureth of the earth: yea it is a sensual wisdom, and
therefore it respects more those things that are auayleable unto this life,
than unto the life everlasting: yea it is a deuelyshe wisdom, for it is not
of thynspyracyon of the spyryte of God, but of the instygacyon of deuylles,
which suggeste those things, that may estraunge us from the syncerytie of the
Gospel. Among the professors of worldly wisdom, you see, how great envy,
what braullynges, what falling out, what forcasting to have the upper hand,
what great inconstauncye of opynyons and manners, and in the mean season all
the whole life, how it is defiled with all kind of vicious naughtines. But
contrary wise, our wisdom, which proceeds from above of the spirit of
Christ, is first chaste and pure, defiled with no wicked affeccions: Than it is
peaceable, and abhors from all study of contencion. Moreover it is modeste,
and not overtwharte: besides this it is tractable and courteous, not grudging to
give place unto him that teaches better: it is full of compassion and
merciful toward them that are fallen and deceived, and them it studieth
rather to save than spil, gently bearyng with them, and assaying every way to
bring them to amendeme^t: it is full of good fruits, in that it never ceasseth
doing good for all men, co^uerting the ungodly to godlynes, calling again them
that go astraye, teaching the untaught, releuing them that are fallen,
pricking forewarde the ^^outhfull, and conforting the sorowfully afflicted.
Nether in the mean while does it damn any body, for it is more forcasting
to heal than to da^^e, having no manner of counterfaict ne simulacion, but of
an upright sincere mind wishing well to all. After this sort they that sow the
pure and quiet doctrine of the Gospel, do both reap unto them selves the
fruit of everlasting life, and bring other to the study of the heavenly life,
whom with their striuinges and cruelty they should have cast away.

The worldely wisdom has also a fruit of his own, but it is either a vain
fruit or a death bryngyng fruit. But the fruit of ryghteousnes, that gives
both innocence in this world, and afterward immortality, is not sowed by
contencion, but in concord and peace, unto them that embrace peace. For it is
not the part of a good ^^^cher, maliciously to skirmish with them that seem
more obstinate, than that they will obey the doctrine of the Gospel. Those it
is better for him to leave unto their own stubburnes, in case there be no
hope that they will comme to amendment.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
From whence comes war, and fightyng among you? come they not here hence?
even of your lusts, that fight in your members? ye lust, and have not, ye
envy and have indignacyon, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, ye have not
because ye ask not, ye ask and receive not, because ye ask a mysse: even to
consume it upon your lusts. Ye aduouterars, and women that break matrimony:
know ye not how that the frendshyppe of the world is enemy^^c with God?
Whosoever therefore wylbe a friend of the world, is made the enemy of God.
Either do ye think that the scripture says in vain. The spirit that
dwells to us, lusts even contrary to envy: but gives more grace, (wherefore
he says: God resists the proud but gives grace unto the lowely.) IT
stands you in hand by all means to endeavor your selves, that you live in one
concord of minds. But that can not be possiblye done, except you drive
worldly gredye lusts (the poison of concord and occasion of debate) utterly
out of your minds. Will you say, that you are not endaungered with such
manner of lusts? whereof than comes war? whereof comes fighting and stryuyng
among you? whereof come tumultes of contencions and debate? Christ has
taught you peace and concord, and whereof comes discord, but of that, that
you serve the lust of humane gredynes, more than the love of the Gospel? For
if those gredy lusts did not keep war and were captains in your members,
your tongue should nether tear your neighbor, ne your hand beguyle your
brother. Yet hitherto the relics of your old life are deprehended in you,
you have not yet all together cast of the old manne: one manne coueteth for
glory, an other gapeth for gain, this manne ymagyneth how he may reygne
alofte, that manne hunteth after voluptuous pleasures. And whiles you atteine
not the thing that every one vehemently coueteth for, you thrust out him that
makes sure for that that you do: you envy him that has obtained, and strive
with him that seems like to obtain. You are vexed in your mind, and are
toyled with sondrye tumultes of cares, while you can not obtain the thing,
that you gredily seek for. And so nether is any man at peace with him self nor
with other. Gredy desires ^omble in the heart, the tongue, the hand, and the
other members fight and keep war out wardlye with their neighbor. And yet in
the mean while nether are your insacyable desires satisfied, and you your
selves fall from the things that are truly good. You ought to ask of God, if
you have need of any thing, or if any thing did apperteyne unto true felicity.
You ask of the world, that which ought to be asked of God: and of him either
you ask not at all, or if ye do ask, you ask not that you ought to do, nor
after such wise as you ought to do. For in deed you either ask hurtful
things instead of wholesome things, or you ask in a wavering distrust, or
else you ask unto a wicked use, that is to say, the thing that should
liberally be bestowed to the relief of necessity of life, that you may spend
to the satisfieng of your own voluptuous pleasures. And seeing you do thus, by
what name shall I call you? Christianes? your deeds say nay. I hear the title of
Christians, but I see the deeds of whoremongers and whores. You were ones
addicte unto the spouse Christ, ones you were sworn in to his words, he it
is, that redeemed you from the tyranny of sins: he has made you clean with
his own holy sacred blood, to make unto him self a spowse unspotted. And how is
it, that you forget your profession, forget the benefit of your bridegroom,
forget your wedlock trouthplight, and slide back again into the whorysh
loves of this world? Do you not know, that God is a Ielous lover?

He will be wholly loved, he wylbee loved alone, he may not abide the wowynge
world to be loved, from the love whereof he has delivered you with so
great a price: he alone is sufficient to accomplish all things. What is the
cause than, that you ask of the world part of your blessedness? Do you not
know that God hates them that halte on both sides? He can not abide a
servant, that is not content to serve one only master. What married manne
is so pacient, that can suffer his enemy going about to wowe his wife, to
come in her company? And have you thought it possible for you to please both
the world and God at ones? Do you not understand, that like as a wife, if
she couple her self to an whoremonger, falls quite away from the love of
her husband, even so a Christian, if ^e assaye to have frendshyp again with
the world, does utterly receive vnfrendshyp with God, who has no concord
with the world? This therefore take for a certayntye, whosoever studyeth to be
loved of this world, in the same his so doing, he makes him self an enemy
unto God. There is no concord between light and darkness, nor between God and
Belial. A married husband can not abide his wife to be playing with an
whoremonger, he can not suffer the loves of wedlock to be divided in parts,
though he have married a woman of great possessyon, though he have married a
gentilwoman borne, though he have married a woman of never so great wealth in
all things. And will Christ suffer his spouse, whom he has saved from
destruction, whom he has set at liberty from bondage, whom he has washen
from the fylthynes of sin, whom, when she was naked, he has clothed:
whom, when she was poor, he has richely endowed with so many free gifts,
to have a do with the aduouterer the devil? Think you it is written in the
holy scriptures for naught: that the spirit which dwells in you, lusts
unto envy? In the law of Moses, somewhat was given to man's affeccyons, they
might without punyshmente hate their enemy, it was lawful for them to set
their forcastes upon muckryng up of riches, he was taken for no unjust manne,
that requitte violence with violence, and one despightfull word with an other.
But the spirit of the Gospel, which now dwells in you, is full of gelosie,
and (as I may so speak) envious: he requires more, for he will be vehemently
loved again, so that for his sake he will have wife, chyldern, yea and even
life contemned. He can not abide to have his resting house defiled with
worldly lusts: he requires pure clean things, he requires heavenly
things, he leapeth back, he runs away, he is offended, if a man bring
the sluttish filthynes of this world in to his temple. Howbeit like as he
requires of us a certain exceadynge great love, and a great deal purer
love, than Moses law does, even so it gives a more plenteous grace. It is a
very hard matter to accomplysh that it requires, but it gives strength to
this end, that we may easylye do it. There is nothing hard to the loving
willer. This same is his gift, that we should love him, or rather love him
again. He drew us with his love first, and when we were turned from him, he
reconciled us again unto him. He will increase his gifts in us, in case we
give our selves all together and wholly unto him, if we depend of him only and
of none but him, if we have nothing a do with this world, nor with the devil
the prince of the world. When I speak of the world, I mean nothing else,
but wicked gredy lusts of vysyble things, wherein this world promyseth a
certain false feyned felicity. They are great matters that are required, but
they be greater matters that are promised. He that is hable lyberally to give
mighty great things, the same is hable also to give increase of strength: he
that will largely give excellent things to them that deserve naught, the same
will vouchesafe also to give increase of strength to them that be weak. Only
let us distruste our own helps and the helps of this world, and repose all
our whole hope and assured confidence in him. He forsakes them, that
arrogauntly trust in their own substance: and he succoureth them, that
ascribe nothing to them selves, but trust wholly to the goodness of God.

In deed this is the thing, that the lord spoke in times paste by Solomon.
God resists the stately high minded and stout, but he Bestows his favor
Unto the meke and poor castaVVayes.

The text.
Submyt your selves therefore to God: but resyste the devil, and he will fly
from you. Draw ^ye to God, and he will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands
ye sinners, and pourge your hertes ye with ^ueryng minded. Suffer afflyccions,
and mou^^e, and weep. Let pour laughter be turned to mourning: and your
joy to heaviness. Dumble your selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall
lift you up. Backbyte not one another, brethren. He that backbyteth his
brother, and he that judges his brother, backbyteth the law, and judges the
law. But and it thou judge the law, thou art not an obseruer of the law,
but a judge. There is one law geuer (and judge) which is able to save and to
destroy. What art thou that iudgest another? Go to now ye that say: to date
and to mo^owe let us gooe into such a city, and continue there a year, and
bye and sell, and win: and yet cannot ye tell, what shall happen on the
morrow. For what thing is your life* It is even a vapor, that apeareth for a
little time, and then vanishes a way? For that ye ought to say: if the Lord
will, and if we live, let us do this or that. But now ye rejoice in your
boastinges. All such rejoicing is evil. Therefore to him that knows how to
do good, and does it not, to him it is sin. God would have you to be most
fast joined to him: show your selves obedient, as the wife obeys her
husband. And if the devil gooe about to divorce you from the love of him,
drive away the aduouterer devil with his iuggling knackes, and he shall give
over greuing you. He shall be afraied of you, if he see you steadfast and
constaunt in the love of your brydgrome (Christ). Therefore disseuer your
selves from him, whether he fear you or speak you fair: and in godly studies
and in holy and chaste purposes apply your selves to God, and he shall apply
him self to you again. Which way so ever the lusts of mind do lean,
thider you go. If affeccions carry you unto honesty and unto heauenlynes, you
goo unto God: but and if they draw you to the enticementes of the flesh, you
ride post to the devil. You ought evermore to make haste to all one self same
way, and not to waver now hither now thider. If you do acknowlage Christ to
be your brydesgrome, it is requysite that you be clean. Therefore you that yet
hitherto are soyled in the filthy puddle of sins, make clean your hands,
and absteyne from all kind of evil dooinges: cleanse your hearts, that no
manner of ungodly lusts keep residence there: you that are now of a double
mind, partly loving the things that are of God, partly y^ things that are
of y^ world, dedicate your whole heart to Christ alone. Why do you seek for the
felicity in this world, which is promised in heaven? Why are you sincared with
the vain pleasures of this world, and set naught by the joys that never shall
have end? if you would be truly happy in deed, suffer sorrow in this world: if
you will have joy everlastingly, mourn here in this world: if you will be
merry for ever world endless, weep here in this world.

Let this folish and pernicious laughing be turned into wholesome mourning, Let
outrageous ioyousnes be changed in to holso^e sadness: let this high statelines
be turned into low mekenes. Let no man exalt him self alofte, but rather
cast down your selves in the sight of God, and when you are so dejected he
shall set you up, and make you of a true high estate. The less you shall
arrogauntly challenge unto your selves, so much the greater things shall he
freely give unto you. Arrogaunce has envy to her companyon, and of envy
springs backbytinge. And the most wicked kind of pride is, to backbyte thy
brothers name, that thou may appear the more honest: as though a man
would cast mire in an other man's face, that he him self might seem the
fayrer: and arraye an other man's garment with fylthynes, that he him self
might seem the more trym. And what is a more fylthy thing, than the brother to
backbyte the brother, between whom all things ought to be common? Is it not
even as if the right hand should mayme the left, as though it should be more
happy, if his fellow membre were in the worse case. And yet they that avoid
aduouterie, they that avoid theft, and they that avoid perjury, abhor not
backbyting: as though it were a light fault, where as it is so much the more
hurtefull, as it covers it self with the cloak of relygyon. For he, that
rayleth against an other man's faults, appears first of all to abhor from
those vices, which he mis^iketh in others: and than he fayneth him self not
to be moved of envy nor of malice but of love that he bears to honesty. And
even this venom* has his fair spoken flattery. Backbytynge one of an
other, makes other folk to think the worse of them both, nether is there any
more present a poison unto christian concord. Now he that backbiteth his
brother, or condemns his neighbor, does wrong not only to him, whom he
backbiteth, but also unto the law, whom he appears to backbite and condemn.
If thy brother be faultles, if it be not forbidden by the law, that he does:
with what face dooest thou damn the thing that the law of the Gospel
damneth not? but and if he be faultye, why do thou bewray with thy
backbytynge tongue, him that ought to be punnyshed by the law? The law of the
Gospel byddeth, that we judge not one an other, that we condemn not one an
other: and under pretense of the law we do after our own affeccions. He
that is the offendour, shall have a judge of his own, why dooest thou than
take his office upon thee before the time? For thou go not about to have
him amended but to be wondered upon. Therefore who so ever backbiteth his
neighbor, he either condemns the law, in that it corrects not filthynes,
or backbiteth it as though it were to much myngle mangled, and walowyshe, the
office whereof the backbytour takes upon him. The world has here public
laws to punnyshe faults. But it is the part of christian softenes, to
endeavor the amendment of all men, rather than to judge them. There is but
one law maker, which is hable both to save and to spill. And think thou,
that it is kept secret from him that every manne does offend? perchance he
suffers the offendour, that he may ones repent, and he suffers him that he
may in his time punnyshe him the more greuouslye.

Why dooest thou, being but a rascal paisgent, take upon thee the judges
office? Why dooest thou give sentence before the time? It is a brotherly part
to mony^h, it is charity to desire, it is ye part of a well wil^er to blame,
but to backbyte it is a pestilent thing, and a very pride to judge. If thou
obey the law, why do thou arrogauntly take upon thee the office of the law?
If thou go before the law, thou art not a keeper of the law but a judge of y^
law. He that goes before the law, goes before God the maker of the law. God
will not suffer any thing to be unrevenged, and he knows what ought to be
punnyshed and how to be punnyshed, and he is out of danger of al sin, and
none but he. Who art thou that iudgest an other? Thou condemnest thy brother,
where thou thy self art more faulty than he. For thou go about to spill
him that thou art not hable to save. Finally thou chalengeste to thy self
aucorytie upon an other man's servant, and not without reproach of the
commune master of all. Leave him to his own master, which only judges
according to right. Thou perswadest to thy self, that to be right, which
ambicion, hate, wrath, and malice bears the in hand, and art many times
offended at the moate in thy brothers eye, when thou haste a beam in thine
own. There is no man that more poysonly backbiteth an other man's name, than he
that is most far of from true praise worthynes. And no man bears more
easyly with an other man's weakness, than he that goes most forward in the
study of true godlynes. Now they that with so great study forcast those
things, that are of the world, having neclected heavenly goods, ought at
lest to be monyshed, by the incertayntie and shortenes of this life, that it is
a folly to set a man's joy in those manner of goods, which, how so ever they
chance, yet they are sometime sodaynely taken away by fortune, or if fortune
snatche not away those goods from the owner, death snatcheth away the owner
from the goods. And where they learn by daily examples, that thus it is, yet
as clean forgetting all this gayre, they dream upon long life, and as though
they should always live, they heap up to them selves riches for many years
to live upon: when this is a thing most incertayn, how long they shall live,
and a thing most certain that they shall not live long: and they do not
prepare for them selves vitayle rather for that life, that never shall have
end. God to your fools, with what face than say you: to day or to morrow we
will gooe forth in to this city or that, and pass the time there one year,
and get much gain, to serve us* for many years, when you are incertayn, what
shall happen the next day after? where as life is of it self most short,
so many casualties, so many dyseases make it also most incertayne: and you as
though you were at a compacte with death, whiske about by sea and by land, to
get pelf for your old age, that peradventure shall never come, when no man
can promise him self to live so much as to morrow. Whereto put you your
confidence so in this life, as though it were a steadfast and a substaunciall
matter? And what a thing is this life of yours, for the which you set your only
care, for the which ye labor and forcast, and for nothing else? Truly it is
a smoke appearing for a short time and quyckly vanyshing away. Far be
therefore this manner of communicacion from Christian folks mouths: we will go,
we will pass of a year, we will buy and sell, we will get winning, as though
it were in your own hands to know the chance to come. Rather live you for
the time, dependyng of Gods will, and say: if the lord will, and if he
lend us life, we will do this or that.

These things ought lightly to be cared for, that make for the short and
incertayn life of the body: but all care ought to be set upon those things,
that make for the life that never shall dye. And yet where this life has
naught, to trust surely unto, seeing it is subject to so many chances, and so
many diseases: ^^ig it is endaungered with so many casualties: saying it is so
slyppery and so fugitive, yet you enhaunce your stomachs, and are puffed up
with trusting upon youth and ^i^hes, as though you should never dye. It is
right, to be strong and hearty in the trust of Gods help: it is godly, to
be cheerful in the loking for heavenly goods: but all this bragging cheer,
that you stand in your own conceate withal of goods, being first false
goods, and than goods that must shortly be taken from you, is not only
wicked, but also folishe. Peradventure this were more tolerable, in those that
were persuaded of their elders, that there is nothing remaining of man after he
is lapped in his wynding she^e: and were more excusable in them that gredely
use this life, and look for none other. As for you, the Gospelles philosophye
has taught you, that this life is to be contemned, and that you ought, with
all studyous dilygence, to make speed to that heavenly life, which is not
prepared by riches, but with godly doings. To conclude, he is the more grievous
sinner, which when he knows by the Gospelles doctrine what ought to be
done, yet being corrupt with evil affections, follows after* those things,
which those men follow that know not Christ.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
Go to now ye rich men. Weep, and howl on your wretchedness that shall come
upon you: your riches is corrupt, your garments are mothea^en, your gold
and silver is ^ank^ed, and the ruste of them shall be a witness unto you, and
shall eat your flesh as it were fire, ye have heaped treasure together (even
wrath to your selves) in your last days. Behold the hyer of the laborers
which have reaped down your feldes (which hyre is of you kept back by
fraud) ^^yeth: and the cries of them which have reaped, are entered into the
ears of the Lord Sabbath. Ye have lived in pleasure on the earth, and been
wanton: ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter: ye have
condemned and killed the just, and he has no^ resisted you. Go to now you
rich men, that occupye the felycitie and pleasures of life, which you ought
to look for eternal in heaven, post haste here in this world: away with
your synging, lay away your voluptuousnes, and mad pleasures. If you have
any wit, weep and howl, and think upon those everlasting miseries, that
shortly hang over you. Imagine that the time is now presently come, that shall
shortly come a^ h^nde, when (those riches wherein now you most folishly put your
confidence, being twitched away) you shall be wise to late, and acknowlage that
those gaye possessions do not now help you: but for a counterfaict felicity,
a right true and everlasting sorrow is come. Where be now your riches that you
have gotten by hoke and by croke, you cared not how? Your riches are rotten,
your clothes are endaungered with mothes. Your gold and your silver is ma^^ed
with rust in the custody of a nygarde and slouening heir. And y^ rusting shall
bear record of your wickedness, which had rather have it be lost with mowling,
tha^ to lay it out to ye use of ye poor nedy. With y^ expense of these things
you might have bought everlasting life. now shall the rest of the money, that
you have scraped out of the hard earth, g^awe out the guts of your souls,
even as it were fire. It shall be to late and in vain for you to frette your
selves with repentance of your naughtyly kept money. It shall double your
sorrow, that you have naughtly kept that you have naughtyly gotten. Instead of
the mercy of God, which you might with loss of substance have bought, you
have heaped up for your selves the wrath and vengeance of God.

You were not only not liberal toward your nedy brother, but you have also
defrauded the simple body of his due wages. Behold the ^eaper that swette with
reapyng down your corn, being defrauded of his wages, cries unto God, and
asks vengeance, yea and he cries so, that their voice pearceth through in
to the ears of the lord Sabbath, which ought also to be dreadde of you. They
were not hable to revenge them of them that are bigger tha^ they, they were not
heard of any manne that was a judge, which for the most part favors them
that are most wealthy, and they them selves held their peace, but the
wickedness it selfs cries out unto the judge God, which is nether afraid of
the wealthy, and also reckons the wrong of the poor oppressed to belong
unto him. But you for all that are not moved with the sorrowful grief of the
hungrye and thurstye poor. Other men's swette hatched up you. Other men's
hunger and thirst made you fat. Their teeth hacked in their head, they were
staruen for cold, they were killed with hungre and thurst: And you in the
mean while passed your life swetely and in pleasures upon earth, you lived
wantonly, and fed your souls with all kinds of voluptuous pleasures, keeping
daily feasts, as gorgeously, as other are wont to do in a solemn, holy day,
when meat offering is slain. Nether thought you it enough to have defrauded
the poor manne, but you have condemned and killed the Innocente that made no
resystence. You thought you should have done that without punnyshement
always, which you might do without punnyshment of men. It is a kind of
manslaughter to defraude the simple of their living. And yet for all that,
this cruelty did not suffice your unreasonable outragiousnes. You thyrsted
after their blood, and when the faultles people were shamefully handled, it was
meat and drink to your stomakes. But the matters being turned ersye versye,
they have the fruicion of those pleasures that never shall decay: and you
bewail your short and folyshe fine fyngred pleasures in everlasting
torments.

The text.
Be pacient therefore brethren, unto the coming of the Lord. Behold, the
husband manne wayteth for the precious fruit of the earth, and has long
patience there upon until he receive the early and latter ^ayne. Be ye also
pacye^t therefore, and settle your hearts, for the coming of the Lord
draws ^ye. Grudge not one against another brethren, l^ste ye be damned.
Behold, the judge stands before the door. Take (my brethren) the Prophets
for an ensample of suffering adversity, and of pacyence, which spoke in the
name of the Lord. Behold, we count them happy which endure, ye have heard
of the patience of ^ob, and have known what end the Lord made. For the Lord
is very pytiefull and merciful. But above all things my brethren swear not,
nether by heaven, nether by earth, nether any other oath. Let your ye be ye,
and your nay nay: lest ye fall into ypocrisy. If any of you be ve^ed, let him
pray. If any of you be merry, let him sing^ Psalms: if any be dysea^ed among
you let him call for the elders of the congregation, and let them pray over
him, and anoint him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the praye^ of faith
shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up: and if he have committed
sins* they shall be forgeuen him. Therefore brethren, cast not down your
hearts, be not sorry for your chance, have no envy at the rich folks, which
seem to have things as they would have, devise no reuengement against them,
but pacientely suffer them unto the coming of the lord.

Now is the time of sowinge, than shall be the time of reaping. The rewards of
your godlynes do not yet appear, but yet they are in sauetie to be delivered
in their time. Behold, he that is a tyllour of ground, what labor takes he,
to his own cost, and all in hope that the ground shall in his time yield the
thing that it received with advantage. And yet the profit of the grounds is
not in every place certain. If it be not favorable wether, and seasonable
rain in time to moysten the ground that is tilled, and at the latter end to
keep the corn when it waxes big, from the heat, the husband loses his
labor. And where he takes long labors here, upon good hope of fruit in
time, and requires not that it should by and by appear up which he has
sowed: how much more is it reason, that you should patiently suffer the
displeasures of this life for the fruit of Immortalyties sake, namely saying
your reward is in sauetie, so that you in the mean while make a good sedenes?
And therefore after the example of the husband, confirm you and pluck up your
stomachs strongly upon good and sure hope, being nether desirous of
reuengement, nether wearye of well doing. The lord will comme, both to take
vengeance upon the wicked, and to reward you with immortalytie for your
temporal affliccyons. Nether is that day long to, it shall come sooner than
it is looked for. Therefore my brethren, let no man think him self the more
unfortunate, in that he is ^^^moiled with many sorrows, nether let any manne
en^y hi^ that lives more at hearts ease. For nether is he, that suffers the
greater grief, forsaken of God, but is exercised unto greater rewards: nether
is this manne therefore the more beloved of God, because he lives in more
quietness: but he will have some, whose godlynes should ease other men's
miseries. Let not therefore that ungodly mourning ^^e token of malice and
infydelitie) be among you that you be not condemned. For such kind of
sorrowful mournynges are the fore tokens of a mind that wryeth down unto
desperacyon: let the shortenes of the time comfort you. Behold the judge
stands at the door, the rewards are in a readynes for every one according
to the deserts of his life paste. In the mean time garnyshe your minds with
the examples of holy fathers: if these things should have happened to none but
you, there had been matter perchance for you to marvel at. The prophets
suffered more grievous matters, which opened the true sayings of God unto ye
wicked. And like as the wicked rich men at that time* could not abide the
prophets sayings, even so they can not abide the Gospelles doctrine now,
because it is contrary and repugnaunt against their studyes. Yet no man
bewayleth the prophets chance, no man thinks them unhappy, in that they
suffered emprisonmentes and fetters, nor in that they were slain with sondrye
kinds of torments: but we judge them happy, in that they were slain for
righteousness sake. You have heard tell of the noble example of patience of
Job. What a sort of sorrows suffered he, by the cruel assaults of Satan? you
have marked his wrestlyng, and you have marked him also getting the victory
through the lords help: by whose goodness for every thing that was taken from
him by the malice of Satan, he received again twice as much. The lord
forsook not his stowte champion, but in laying upon him so many sorrows, he
would have his patience recorded and seen: yea and that merciful lord, and
of his own nature ready unto clemencye, turns unto us an other man's malice
into the heap and vauntage of felycitie. Let your mind be pure and plain,
and let your heart and your mouth gooe both together. Let no man with
feyned words deceive his neighbor, but especyally my brethren, swear not:
lest by little and litell you accustume your selves to forswear you. Among
Jews and heathens for fidelyties sake there is an oath put between. But among
Christians, which ought nether to distrust any manne, nether be in will to
deceive, it is a vain thing to swear. Who so ever is accustumed to swear, is
cousyn garmayne to the peril of forswearyng. Be you afraid not only to
swear by God in humayne affairs and in light matters, but also absteyne from
al kind of swearing, that you swear nether by heaven, nether by earth or any
other thing that the commune people esteem for holy and religious. Who so ever
dare be bold to lie without swearinge, he dare do the same also when he
swears, if he lust. To be brief, he that is a good manne will believe a man
without swearyng, and he that naught is, will not trust a man though he
swear. But among you that are furnyshed with Gospellike playnesse, there is
nether place of dystrustinge, ne to ymagin deceate. But let your plain
communicacion be regarded for no less true and steadfast, than any manner of
oath of the Jews or Paganes, how holy so ever it be. As often as you confirm
any thing, confirm it with all your heart: and perform in deed the thing
that you speak. As often as you deny any thing, deny it with your whole
heart: nether let any thing else be in your heart, than your mouth
speaks: that there be no counterfaictynge in you, seeing you are disciples of
the truth. And if there be any manne sore afflicted among you, let him not
flee to the remedies of this world, to rings, to inchauntmentes, to baynes,
and other easementes of sorrow, but let him turn him to prayer and lift up
his mind to God with most assured faithful trust, and he shall f^^de present
relea^se of his mournyng. Again if a man be well content in prosperity, let
him not enhaunce him self folishely nor behave him self madlye, but let him
praise the liberal goodness of God in holy songs of thanks giving. Now if
any manne be punnyshed with syckenes, let him not flee to the remedies of
witchecrafte: let him not spend a great sight of money upon phisicions, whose
curing is many times of such sort, that it were better patiently to depart
out of the world: but let him call unto him the elders of the christian
congregation. Let them make their prayers to God for the dyseased, and annoynte
him with oil, not having any prayers of wytchecrafte, as the heathen are wont
to do, but calling upon the name of our lord Jesus Christ, then the which
there is no kind of enchauntmente, more effectual. And let the prayers be
done in a trusty faith, and God shall hear and preserve the diseased. And
there shall not only health of body be restored unto him, if it be expedient
for the diseased, but also if he be endaungered with sins (as diseases of
body spryng for the most part of the sorrows of the mind) they shall be
forgeuen him at the elders supplicacions, so that the faith of them be
commendable that do pray and of him for whom they do pray.

The text.
Knowledge your fautes one to another: and pray one for another, y^ ye may be
healed. For the fervent prayer of a ryghteous manne avails much. Helyas was
a man mortal even as we are, and he prayed in his prayer that it might not
rain: and it rayned not on the earth by the space of tore years and s^^e
months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave ra^^^, and the earth
brought forth her fruit. Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth and
another conue^^e him; let the same know that he which conuerteth the sinner
from go^ng astraye out of his way, shall save a soul from death, and shall by
de the multitude of sins. And forasmuch as the life of man consists not
without light and daily offenses, it shall be conuenyent^ to use a daily remedy,
that you may both releue every one other with your mutual prayers, and
acknowlage every one his fault to other. And so shall the remedy be
auayleable* if thou acknowlage thy disease and desire help. Supersticious
folks suppose a secret hydden efficacy to be in their enchauntmentes and
prayers, but in very deed the prayer of a righteous manne is much worth,
which through faith obteyneth what so ever it desires of God. Upon this
condicyon Christ made covenant with us, that what so ever we shall ask in a
faithful trusty confidence, we should obtain it, onles it be such a thing,
as were best not to be obtained. Would you feign have a doctrine of this
matter? Helyas was a pure manne, he was a mortal manne as we are, and yet at
his prayers it rayned not upon the earth three years and six months. He
prayed again, that it might rain, and anon the heavens, as having heard
his prayers, gave rain, and the earth brought forth his fruit. Incase the
heaven be obedient to the prayers of one godly manne, as though it were
bewytched: is it any maruayle, if God being most ready to forgive, be
pleased at the prayers of many? Now weight this, brethren, if it be godly, if
it be the parts of christyan love, to ease the sickness of an other man's
body through commune prayers: how much more indifferent reason is it, that we
should succor them that be diseased in mind? For it is no great matter to
obtain this by prayer, that it may be somewhat longer before death happen to
this man or that man, howbeit it must needs comme ones: but it is a great
matter to have aboyded the disease of mind. Therefore if there be any among
you, that err from the Gospelles verity, either to much cleauyng to the law
of Moses, or be a stubburne follower of heathen relygion delivered of the
elders, let no man think that he should be driven away with scoldyng, but it
behooves rather to endeavor with all* studies to this end, that he may turn
and re^ent from his error. For who so ever does thus, shall do God a great
sacrifice, who wishes not the death of a sinner but rather that he may turn
and live. For that man does a great feate, that preserves the soul from
death, delyuerynge his brother from sins, whereby he was holden in subieccyon
of death. Nether in the mean ^yme shall he want his reward: for Christ
shall forgive him his sins again, how many so ever they be, that shall keep
his brother from destruc^yon.

Thus ends the epistle of. S. James the apostle.
The argument upon the first Epistle of thapostle. S. John / by Erasmus of
Roterodam.
THat this is Saint John thapostles epistle, which wrote the Gospel, the
very style of the words self is a plain argument. He makes much a do in
the rehersall of light and darckenes, life and death, hare and love, in often
repetinge the words, as though they were taken out of the saying next
before. Of the which sort (to open my saying more plainly by example) this is
one: Love not the Vuorlde, nether those things that are in the World. If any
manne love the World, the love of the father is not in him for all that is in
the World etc. And anon after: He is not of the father, but of the World:
and the Vuorlde passes aVuaye. How often here is the world rehearsed? Finally
in all his saying there is less compendyous shortenes, and more open
plainness than in the writynge of the rest of thapostles. And as for
thepistle, it is more evidently plain, than needs any argument, like as the
two Epistles folowinge are, which are ascribed to one John a certain senior,
and not to John the apostle.

Thus ends the Argument.
The paraphrase of Erasmus upon the first Epistle of Saint John.
The first Chapter.
The text.
That which was from the beginning, which we have herd, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the word
of the life. And ^he life appeared, and we have seen and bear witness, and
show unto you that eternal life, which was with the father, and appeared
unto us. That whithe we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye also
may have fellowship with us, and that our fellowship may be with the father
and his son Jesus Christ. And this write we unto you, that (ye may rejoice,
and that) your joy may be full. WE write not unto you, dearly beloved
brethren, of stender or mean things, or of things unknown, but of a new
matter: howbeit so new unto us, that with God it was from everlasting. This is
the word of God, even Jesus Christ both God and manne: which where he was
always the son of God, would of late be the son of a maiden: and which
after his divine nature was invisible to man's eyes, vouchesafed to take upon
him an humayne body: and did vouchesafe to be famyliarly conuersaunte among
men, that he might ^arye us up from the darkness of our ignorance to the light
of Gospelli^^ knowlage: and that we might begin to behold him with the eyes
of our mind, whom we have presentlye f^ne with the eyes of our body. In deed
the unbelief of man's heart required, that the truth should be credited by
gross outward experimentes: but yet the godlynes of them is more preferred by
his own word, which where they neither had seen him with their eyes, n^
handled him with their hands, yet were most certainly persuaded, and believed
that he is the son of God, and thonly author of man's salvation. It is our
part therefore, to declare that, which we have most certainly proved by our
bodyly senses, unto those that chanced not to see it, and yet it is expedient
to believe, that none ought to trust to have life, nor everlasting salvation,
but he that believes the Gospelles doctrine, whereof we are both witnesses and
preachers. It is not the word of man, nether of light importance, but it is
the word of God, and of heaven, that gives everlasting life to them, which
give obedient hearing unto it: and deliue^ing from the death of sins, from
what so ever relygyon, from what so ever kind of life they shall turn them
selves unto it. Of this matter yt we speak of we speak of most assured
credence, y^ is to wete, even the thing which we y^ were continual waitours
heard with our ears saw with our eyes, nether saw we afar, of, or passinge
by, but we looked presently on to the full. And to cause a thing to be
credited, these are two princypall chief senses, and if that also be but a
small matter, we did not only hear him teaching, prayinge, commaundyng wyndes
and deuilles, and the father sundry times bearing witness unto the son, and we
saw him not only work miracles, suffer death and rise again: but also we
have handled with these hands of ours. For when he was risen again from
death, to thyntente to make us believe steofastlye that he was no vain
fantasy, but even the lame manne alive again, whom we had seen before dead,
he caused us to handle him with our hands, and laying to our fingres he showed
us the places of his wounds. Mannekynde was dead, because it was in thraldom
of vices and sins: and he suffered death for our wickedness, that through his
goodness we might live unto Innocence. We were in doubt also our selves, when
we saw him dead, when we saw him buried, but when he rose again from death,
he gave us sure hope of life. Mankind had had no manner of hope of eternal
life, except he had caused us to see him with our cies, and if he had not
plucked away all doubtefulnes from us, by most manifestly apparent
experimentes. He being manne suffered pains for our sins, and the same being
God does freely gene immortal life to them that put their faithful trust in
him. He lived always with the father, and this life was always determinately
purposed for us by the son, howbeit this counsel was not yet publyshed unto
the world, albeit the nation of the Jews (and yet none but they) looked for it
by the prophets oracles, as it were in a dream. In the mean while death
reigned, life lay hydden. Some tixed their hope in Moses, some in worldly
wisdom, but the salvation and life of all people was Jesus Christ, the word
of God the father, the teacher of Innocencye, and the geuer of Immortality.
For none lives, but he that lives godly, nether does any escape death* but
he that atreyneth Immortalytie. At leyngth this (Jesus christ) manifested him
self unto the world by him self, showing him self plainly to all the senses
of man, and so thrusting him self in to the consciences of men. And therefore
he would have us to be lokers on and witnesses of all things, that he did on
earth* to the intent they might be faithfully published by our preachinge
throughout all the whole universal world: that like as we by Jesus have
obtained life and salvation, in case we persevere still in the Gospelles
doctrine, even so should you also come with us in to the fellowship and
company of this salvation, in case you give credence to our witness bearing*
concerning the thing that you neither heard nor saw of him, but learn it by
our preachinge. We are nether vain witnesses ne yet uncommanded. He had us to
be faithful witnesses, and we record unto all men with the great danger of
our head, none other thing than we have most euydent experience of, with all
the senses of the body. We are happy, in that our ears and eyes have made us
believe: and yet you are nevertheless happy, if you give credence unto his
witness bearers. Our faith has glued us unto Christ, and made us the
children of God and members of Christ: And your faith also shall engraffe you
unto the same body, that being joined with us in the feloweshippe of faith,
you might make one body. And so shall it come to pass, that we shall not only
be all of one mind among our selves, as the members of one body, but we
shall also have peace and league with Jesus Christ; and by him with God his
father, from whom we were before far different: that like as the son is at
most perfect consent and communion of al things with the father, even so we
also by perfect agreement of the profession of the Gospel, should be heaped
together in to one body of Christ, to be made partakers of all the goods of
our head. I know you are joyous of so happy a feloweship, but yet I put you
in remembrance again of these things in writing, to the intent you might
rejoice more fully, if every manne be not all together joyous of his own
salvation, but all men's felicity make every one glad. For this does christen
charity cause, that every manne must be as glad of other men's commodities,
as of his own. The more that this felicity is commune unto, the more abundaunt
shall every ones joy be. Among us there shall no being of one mind stand
together substauncially, except we be fast glued together with mutual
charity. We can not possibly have peace with God, except we be answerably
like unto our head Jesus Christ: what so ever he has, he ascribes it unto
the father: and what so ever we have, it behooves us to ascribe it unto
Christ. Christ is the true light that proceeds from the father of all light.
We can not be the members of Christ, except we be bright: nether can we
have light, onles we be transformed into him, and continue steadfastly unto the
end in his feloweship. Truth and Innocencye is the light of the mind, and
sins and wicked lusts are the darkness: where light is, there is life: where
darkness are, there death is.

The text.
And this is the tydinges which we have heard of him and declare unto you,
that God is light, and in him is no darckenes at all. If we say, that we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darckenes, we lie, and do not the truth. But
and if we walk in light even as he is in light, then have we fellowship with
him, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
If we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all vnrightewesnes. If we say, we have not sinned, we
make him a liar, and his word is not in us. What is the matter than, which we
show unto you, that you might the more fully rejoice? In deed it is that,
which we have heard even of him, and having heard it we make it common unto
you: that God, forasmuch as he is altogether and of his own nature good, all
wise, al pure, and al light and life, nether is there any darkness in him. In us
the matter stands not after such sort, but we have much darkness even of
our selves: in case we have any light, we are endebted in that all to gether
unto him, by whose free liberality we are delivered from our old sins, and
being delivered from the darkness of our former ignorance we have learned by
the Gospelles doctrine to live godly after Christ our heads example. If any
manne boast, that he is through baptism engraffed to the body of Christ, and
has thereby fellowship with God the father: where as in the mean while he
lives yet in errors and vices of his former life, does plainly lie. For
seeing (as I said before) God is far from all manner fellowship of darkness:
how can he possibly have any thing a do with him, that lives yet still all
together in error and old vices? For he is clean out of the way, that
thinks he can atteyne Innocence by any other means than by Christ: again
he is deceived, that thinks it enough for him to be washen in baptism,
except he be answerably like unto his profession through Innocence of life? he
that thinks thus, is deceived, and he lies that says it. For Christ is
the truth, which has nothing a do with liars. The first step unto
light, is for a man to acknowlage his darkness: and the first stepping forth
of a man unto Innocence, is to acknowlage his sins. Will ye hear
therefore, by what token we may know, that we have true feloweshippe with God?
Doubtless even by thie: if like as he is light, and void of all darkness, even
so shall we absteyne after his example from the darkness of all errors and
vices, framyng all our conversation after the light of the Gospel: and if like
as the son has most high concord with the father: even so should we also
live Innocently and be all of one mind among our selves. The father will not
lay the traunsgressions of our old life unto our charge, which are ones
done away all the sort of them by the precious blood of his son Jesus
Christ, so that we from henceforthe absteyne from all sin, as much as in us
lyethe. The blood of Christ has washed away all fylthynes, and has washen
it away from all folks: yea but he has washen none but those that acknowlage
their faults. If we say that we are not endaungered with sin, we deceive
our selves, we live in error, we wandre in darkness: and Christ, which is
light, which is truth is not in us. For if he were truly in us in deed, he
would dispatche away this darkness of arrogaunt ignorance. And if it shall
chance us after receiving of baptism, to slide back again through man's
weakness in to any sin, and as it were a myste obscure our light: we must
beware, that arrogauncie withdraw us not farther and farther of, and lead us
again from light in to our old darkness. Yea we must give dilygence, that
through discrete sobrenes we may be admoued unto the light that shall
dispatche away all darkness. If the brother perchance do trespass against
the brother, let either forgive other his trespass, that God may forgive them
also the trespasses that are done against him. For in deed God has upon this
condition promised to forgive us, what so ever we have offended against him,
if we forgive our brothers fault: and exacteth his debte (even to the
vttermoste farthinge) of him, which having his lord merciful unto him,
showed him self smally merciful toward his fellow servant: that is to
say, he judges him unworthy the mercy of God saying he ones freely forgave
him all his trespasses, that will not pardone a small offense unto him, against
whom he either trespasseth every day, or else may trespace. That man will
easyly forgive him that trespasseth against him, which will remember how
many ways he offends both against God and against his neighbor: And as it
is a very hard matter for a man to do so as he offend in nothing, even so is
it a very easy matter to amend such offenses with forgeuing one an other.
Forgive thou thy neighbor, and thy neighbor shall forgive thee again: and
God shall, even as it were of very covenant, forgive you both. I speak of
those faults, that chance even among them that are good, yea but among men:
and those faults, that obscure the light of the Gospelles verity, rather than
extinguyshe it. For God forbydde, that manslaughter, or whoredom, or sacrilege
should chance upon their life, that are ones chosen among the children of
God. There is nothing that allureth more the mercy of God, and swageth his
wrath, than if a man acknowlage his fault to God. If he that is a fearce cruel
man forgive him that acknowlageth his fault, how much more shall God do so,
which is more merciful than any man? He is by nature readyly bent unto mercy,
and has promised us forgeuenes upon this condition: forgive, and it shall be
forgeuen unto you. If he would not forgive, in that he is good: yet he should
forgive because he is just and of faithful credence. See that thou accomplish
the prescribed condition, and he shall not forget his covenant. If we with our
whole heart forgive our neighbor that offends us, God shall also forgive us,
not only one sin or an other, but all sins: so that we to our powers give
diligence, that we may be once void of all vices. And if we be not able fully
to attain unto that for the frayltie of man's body, yet he of his liberal
free goodness shall make good, that is wantynge in our strengthes, and shall
cleanse us from all our offenses, who perchance suffers some tokens of our
old former life to remain still in us, for this purpose, that we should
acknowlage our weakness. For in deed he is better content* with a sinner that
misliketh him self, than with a righteous that man stands in his own
conceit. He would that y^ salvation of men should be ascribed unto his mercy,
and not to our merytes. And now has he testified, that there is no mortal
manne on earth, but he offends in some thing. And if we will say, that we
have no sin in us, we make wod a liar, and say against him: and he that
gaynesayeth him must needs lie.

The.ii. Chapter.
The text.
My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not. And if
any manne sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous: and he it is that obteyneth grace for our sins: not for our sins
only, but also for the sins of all the world. And hereby we are sure that
we know him, if we keep his commandments. He that says, I know him, and
keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the verytie is not in him. But
whose keeps his word, in him is the love of God parfecte in deed: hereby we
know that we are in him. He that says, he abides in him, ought to walk as
he walked. THese things do I write, my little children, not that sin should
be committed the more licenciouslye upon trust of the mercy that is ordained,
but that no man should sin at all, as much as in us lies. After that
Christ has once forgeuen us all our transgressions, it is requisite for us to
apply al our studious endeavors to this end, that we may keep innoce^cie
undefiled. And yet if it chance us to slide back again into any sin, there
is no cause why we should despair of forgeuenes, we have God e^treteable, and
with him we have a loving patron and a trusty, who being the son, obteyneth
whatsoever he will of the father, and wishes hartylye well unto us: which gave
himself to save us, so that we do utterly and from the botome of our hearts
mislike our selves, and give our diligence again to better. He alone has
nothing to be pardoned of, and he it is that makes intercession for the sins
of his members, and reconcfleth the father (which is offended) unto us, and
causes him to be merciful unto us: and not unto us only, which have now
embraced hs doctrine, but also unto all mankind universally, if they with a
sincere heart confess themselves to be sinners, and purpose to lead an
innocente life, and so purposed go on forward, and keep it substauncially. For
baptism does not make us free from the obseruacion of Moses law for that
purpose, that we should sin afterward licencious^y without punishment, but
that we should more fi^mely stycke to the love of the Gospel, which causes
more to be done of the willing, than so many laws of Moses get perforce of
the constrained. He commanded many things in a small rowme, that commanded
men to love their neighbors, even as he did us. He drives not us to love him
again, but he enticeth us, he provoke us, he kindles us. Whosoever knows
God aryght, cannot chose but love him beheme^tly. For every one that professes
God with his mouth, knows not God: but he that is kyndled with the flame of
gospellyke charity, and does wyllynglye and gladly, that which he did
perfitely before, that we do good even unto our enemies, and that for the
salvation of our neighbor we will not stycke to stand in danger of our life,
he declares himself to know god. But and if a man make his boaste, that he
knows god, in that, that he being taught his principles has learned the
mysteries of the faith, in that being baptized he has professed his name,
neither for all that follows the example of his charity, he is a liar, neither
has he yet fully learned to know God, in as much as god is not known,
except faith be garnyshed with charity. And whosoever is a liar, Christ
which is the very truth self, dwells not in him: and whosoever has not
Christ dwelling in him, is not a lively membre of his body. Faith without love
is a vain matter and a dead. To be short, love is not idle, it omitteth none
of those things, that it knows be acceptable unto him who^ it loves. Christ
said he would not acknowlage him to be his disciple, that would not take up
his cross and follow him, walkyng in y^ foresteppes of perfect charity.
Therefore he that observes his saying, declares in deed that he holds fast
the perfi^e and right euangelical charity. By trial hereof we shall know, that
we are in his body, and that we have received his spirit. Whereto do y^ make
thy vaunt, as a member of Christ, in that thou art through baptism received
into the flock of christians? It is not an idle profession, it is a not fine
fingred profession. It is not the profession that makes a true membre of
Christ, but the imitacion. He that professes with his mouth that he is
regenerate in Christ, must walk in his fotesteppes. He lived not to him self,
he died not for himself: He gave himself wholly for us, he did good to all
folks, he gave no reuilynge word again to any man, but when he was nailed on
the cross, he prayed to the father for them that spoke reuilyngly against
him. This is the gospellike and perfect charity, which they ought to follow
in their deeds, that profess them selves to be Christ's disciples.

The text.
Brethren, I write no new commandment unto you: but that old commandment,
which ye have had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word,
which ye have heard from the beginning. Again, a new commandment I write
unto you, that is true in him, and the same is true also in you: for the
darkness is past and the true light now shyneth. He that says how that he
is in the light, and yet hates his brother, is in darkness even until this
time. He that loves his brother, abides in the light, and there is none
occasion of evil in him. He that hates his brother, is in darkness, and
walks in darkness: and can not tell whither he goes, because that darkness
has blinded his eyes. Dearly beloved, this commandment of charity, that I
write unto you, is no new commandment, but even Moses law declared it long
ago, or rather Christ by it, which renewed his commandment in the gospel:
and so renewed it, that he made it peculiarly his own. This (quod he) is my
commandment, that you should love one another, as I have loved you. Therefore
it is neither any new commandment, neither my commandment, that I give now
unto you, ne yet such a one as you have not heard of hitherto, but it is the
self same commandment, that we gave unto you by and by in the beginning by
thautorytie of Christ. And yet again the same is new that I write now unto
you. It was an old commandment, but it is brought out of use through the
manners of the people. The Jews learned by heart: Thou shalt love the Lord
thy God, thou shalt love thy neighbor, but yet every one served his own
gain. Christ renewed this unto us, yea and loved us more than himself, and ^e
loved not his neighbors, but he loved his enemies, yea those that turned way
wardly from him and that were worthy of evil. This albeit I know you have
heard of, long ago, yet it ought to be renewed from time to time with often
rehersall, that it may stick the more depely in your mind, seeing it is the
chief matter of the gospelles profession. This was a true commandment in
Christ, which performed in deed the thing that he taught: but it was not true
in you, as long as you hated your neighbor, as long as you recompensed evil
word for evil word, and wrong for wrong. But now it is true in you also,
since the true sprung up light of the gospelles doctrine has dispatched away
y^ darkness of your former life, and has taught that none is acceptable, but
he that would love the good for Christ's sake, and love the^ also that are bad
to this end, that they should be converted unto Christ. Those that follow this
doctrine, walk in light, and offend not in the darkness of evil lusts. The
hate of the neighbor powers darkness into the mind. Therefore he that is so
washe^ and so has professed Christ, that he gives not over to hate his
brother, he is deceived in beleuynge that he walks in light, where he is yet
in darkness. For God remitteth not him, ye forgeueth not his brother. For it is
not enough to have given over theft, whoredom and murdre, in baptism, except
al holowhartednes be also plucked quite out of y^ mind, and instead of hate,
charity come in place.

He that contynueth still in the love of his neighbor, abides in light,
which is Christ Jesus, and stombleth not as walking in darkness: For true
charity is so far of from hurtyng any body, that it suffers all things,
and turns all things into good. Contrarywyse he that hates his brother,
although he have given over to offer unto images, although he have given over
to be an vsurour or a church robber, yet he is still in darkness, and serving
his own blind lusts he walks in darkness: neither sees he the straight
way unto salvation, although the gospel shine clearly upon him. And all is
long of the darkness of the hate of his brother, that has so blinded his eyes.
Where hate reigns, there is the judgment blind.

The text.
Babes, I write unto you how that your sins are forgeuen you for his names
sake. I write unto you fathers, how that you have known him that is from the
beginning. I write unto you yongmen, how that ye have overcome that wicked. I
write unto you little children, how that ye have known the father. I have
written unto you fathers, how that ye have known him that is from the
beginning. I have written unto you young men, how that ye are strong, and the
word of god abides in you, and ye have overcome that wicked. Se that ye love
not the world, nether the things that are in the world. If any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. For all that is in the world (as
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes and the pride of life) is not
of the father, but of the world. And the world passes away, and the lust
thereof: but he that fulfylleth the will of God, abides for ever. I love you
even as a mother loves her children, and write for that purpose, partly
reioycynge at your felicity, partly exhortyng you to go foreward better and
better. I rejoice at you, as my most dear children, whom I have begotten
again by the sede of the gospels doctrine unto Christ, in that the sins of
your former life are pardoned you, and freely pardoned you, for none other
cause, but because you have professed the name of the lord Jesus Christ, that
you should also remember after his example frelye to forgive every one his
neighbor. I write unto you, whom not so much the process of age as the
gravity of manners and godly carfulness toward them that be younger, does
make worthy the name of fathers: reioyceing in you, that you are not only
endued with a commune manner of wisdom, whereby old men are commended almost
because of the experyence of things, and give the better counsel to the
ignoraunte young folks, but in that you have reknowledged Jesus Christ the
author of salvation: which not only is of a great old age, but also has
been always with the father. You being of great age know him that is eternal:
and the more fully you know him, so much the more diligently you preach him
to them that be of slenderer age. Old folks do remember and keep in mind
many old ancient things, and you keep him in mind that was before al age. I
write unto you yongment which through the strength of faith have overcome that
wicked and unruly Satan. The common sort of yongmen thinks themselves
happy in that they give lightly place to no man because of their bodyly
strength. But you are more happy, that by reason of your strength of mind,
you could be overcome, neither with enticementes of voluptuous pleasures, ne with
any terrors of ye world. Other men's actiuitie florisheth in battle, but your
actiuitie has flourished more nobly against the assaults of devils, the
flesh, and the world. I write unto you children, which although for tenderness
of your years, you are not skilled as yet in y^ knowlage of worldly matters,
yet you have already atteined the thing, y^ gets you everlasting felicity.
In other children it is y^ first special toke^ of wit, if they acknowledge
their father, but you know your heavenly father, by whom you are regenerate
unto heaven. Let every one maynteyne that he has, and increase in that he
has. For this cause sake, I both rejoice in every one, and also warn all
and every orders and states of you, that acknowledgeyng your felicity, you
give thanks to God your autour, and having in remembrance, whither you must
go, preace always forewarde unto more perfeccio^. I will rehearse it unto you
therefore, that ye can not forget it. I have written unto you fathers, for you
know him which has another beginning nor endyng, that the desire of this life
should in no wise stiere you, seeing you make haste to the life that never shall
have end. I have written unto you yongmen, because you have overcome the
ruflynge nycenesse of youth through the valiant strength of mind, and
because you have with a constaunte heart kept the word of the Gospel, and
have by the help of Christ, overcome the Devil the continual enemy of
mankind. Continue you still in victory, contemn still that which you have
hitherto contemned, and love more and more that you have begone to love. The
world enticeth by false imaginacions of transitorye goods, and frayeth with a
vain and false show of euilles. As for you, let those things fraye you
which are evil in deed, and never have end. And let these things catch you
that are good in deed and know none end. Follow the light of the gospel and
love heavenly things, which the heavenly father promyseth, unto whom you are
regenerate by Christ. Flee the darkness of naughty lusts, whereby this world
lays bayte with countrefaict goods. It can not possibly be, that you can
love both at ones, nor serve both at ones. There is none agreement between God
and the world, there is no concord between light and darkness: whosoever
loves the world, swarueth from the love of God the father. I speak not of
this world, which god made, wherein we live, will we nil we. The wiked gredy
desires of vain things (wherein the common sort of men repose their
felicity, forgetting the things that are truly good in deed) I call the
world. It is not the place, how far of so ever it be, not the raymente, not
the meat, not the title, that exemteth you from the world, but a mind that is
pure from those desires y^ I spoke of. And what has this world, that is not
noisomly hurtful? There are three things, y^ it most chefely deceineth folishe
and uncircumspect folks withal: the voluptuous pleasure of the flesh,
enticementes of the eyes, and high statelynes and proud galauntnes of life.
For it obiecteth certain iugglinges of vain pleasures to clawe the senses of
the body withal for a time, that the mind may in the mean while be called
away from the study of heavenly good things. For the desire of such manner
of good things, the heavenly spirit suggesteth, whom God the father gives
unto his children that are truly regenerate by Christ. The devil has also a
spirit of his own, by whom he suggesteth a pernicious love of things neither
true nor durable, unto them that have bent themselves thoroughly unto this
world. He suggesteth the naughtye sportes of lechery, to title the me^bres of
the body withal through a folishe and a filthy itching delight. He suggesteth
the delight of fine meats and drink to please y^ paunche and the mouth wall. He
suggesteth the swetnes of idleness and sleep, that the mind may wax the more
sluggishe through custume, He suggesteth wanton songs and shameless fables, to
anoint the ears withal. He suggesteth the wanton enticementes of beawties and
sundry kinds of things to behold, to delight the eyes withal. He suggesteth
the pompes and ioylitie of riches, the occasions of ambicion. Finally he
allureth men's minds on every part away from the true and everlasting good
things unto the vain imaginacions of good things. Let him that is entangled
with the desire of these things, know that he is not moved by the spirit of
the heavenly father, but by the spirit of the world. The world, like as it
consists upon elements that endure but for a time, even so gives it nothing
but that which shall shortly perish. God, like as he is eternal, even so
gives he freely everlasting rewards. Therefore he that depends upon the
succors of the world, follows a certain felicity that is both vain and
shall shortly be taken away, which, even casualtie that comes unthought
upon, plucketh away in this world, or at lest age dispatcheth it. Truly death
that shall come un to every man, plucketh quite away all the dream of false
pleasures. When the matter is taken away, the pleasure perishes, and sorrows
come in place. When the man is taken away, al is gone to naught, and
everlasting torment comes in place. But he that ^beieth unto the father that
calls him unto the love of an heavenly life, his felicity shall never have
end. For he that gives it, knows none end. The unhurtful commodities of
this world are to be used for the time, yea but smallye, but moderately, to
the necessity of nature, not to the voluptuouse fulfylling of pleasure. But
the chief study of mind ought to be turned to the things that be eternal,
whereunto the use of all other things ought also to be referred.

The text.
Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have heard how that
Antichrist shall come, even now are theremany begone to be Antichrists
already: whereby we know, that it is the last time. They went out from us, but
they were not of us. For if they had been of us they would no doubt have
continued with us. But that it might appear, that they werenot of us.
Nevertheless, ye have an ointment of him that is holy, and ye know all things.
I have not written unto you, as though ye knew not the truth: but as though
ye knew it, and know also, that no lie comes of truth. Who is a liar, but
he that denies that Jesus is Christ? the same is Antichriste, that denies
the father and the son. Whosoever denies the son, the same has not the
father, he that knowledgeth the son, has the father also. Let therefore
abide in you that same which ye heard from the beginning. The felicity of
godly men does not yet appear, but it shall be manyfestly opened in the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ. The wicked seem to live in the mean time swetely
here in this world, but everlasting sorrow he^geth ouerthem and that shortly.
For the last time seems to be present, wherein (the course of things being
turned vpsyde down,) those shall rain with Christ, that are formented now
for Christ's sake: and they shall be brought to naught, which be now rebels
against Christ. You have heard that Antichrist shall come, who being armed
with all the mayntenaunce and iugglinges of this world, should keep war
against Christ, and by and by when Antichriste is ouercomme again, the body
of Christ shall be delivered from all evils, and the members of the devil shall
be laden with the burdens of all euilles. Therefore the coming of this
Antichrist, (of whom the Apostles told you before) seems not to be far of.
For this world has so much prevailed against the doctrine of the Gospel,
that there are begone even now all ready to be a great sort, that deserve
the name of Antichrist, whose life and doctrine and all their hole study is
against Christ. For what appear they to be else, than Antichrists gentilmen
husshers, and the last tokens of the plage to come? For they do less hurt unto
Christ's people that be utterly strangers from Christ, than those that being
ones conuersaunt in his castelles, and by and by become runneagates, assault
Christ with Christ's own garrisons and armor. For they countrefaite even
those things, which declare in christians, the virtue, the holiness, the
doctrine, the authority, the miracles of Christ. And in deed they went out of
us, howbeit there is no matter, why they should much trouble you, they were
conuersaunt among us, but they were none of ours. They were enemies of Christ,
even when they were dwelling in his castelles. But and if they had truly been
on our side, they would have continued still to the end with us. They professed
Christ in title and behavior, but in their mind they loved the world
vehemently. And therefore when it is come to the storms of persecucions, when
it is come to the flame of affliccio^s, they have showed themselves, what they
were before. Now they are out from us, they extolle us, as a body ouerlayed
with evil humors, and now being open enemies they shall less hurt, than
holowe hearted companions. Thus it was Christ's will, that it may evidently
appear, that all belong not to the body of Christ, that are washen in his
name, that profess his name, and are partakers of the sacraments of the
Church. A true and steadfast dispising of the world shows a man to be a
Christian. A mind that is unbroken and unconquered against al wanton
enticeme^tes, against all injuries, shows a man to be a Christian. He that
upon occasion shrinketh from the doctrine of Christ, did countrefaicte a
christianne, but he was no christian. In deed it is expedient that they be
openly separated from us, lest in outward appearaunce seming to be good, they
should do the more harm to them that are not ware. Although they were not
unknown unto you, yea before they withdrewe themselves openly. For the vnccion
of Christ, whereof you are also named, that is to say the inspiracion of the
spirit of Christ, shows plainly enough who are true christians, and who are
not. For he that is a spiritual man, judges althynges. They were not
unknown, but they were borne with all, if perchance they would repent. It is
true that I say: neither do I write these things unto you, as though you
were ignorant of the truth, seeing you have the spirit of Christ to your
teacher, which suffers you not to be ignorant of any thing: but I put you in
remembrance of the thing that you know, to the intent you might y^ more surely
stick unto the truth, and not to be disquieted when sorrows do happen. You
are the fewer, but you are the sounder, you are the more purely cleansed, you
are the quieter. Nothing is taken away of the body, though the botche be
launced, though the corrupt matter be run out. You know that Christ is the
truth, and all kind of lyeng is clean contrary to him. Whosoever is an
holowharted dissembler, with him Christ has nothing ado, how fast so ever
he profess him with his mouth. There are many facions of lyenges. He that is
a liar, by what manner way soever it be, denies Christ, which is the truth,
and receives no mixture of any kind of lie. He that is against the truth, is
against Christ: he that is against Christ is Antichrist. And there is none
more wicked a kind of lyeng, than to deny that Jesus is Christ: and that do
many false prophets of the Jews, which deny him to be he, whom Moses and
the prophets oracles did long ago promise unto the world to be the revenger,
and author of salvation: and promise an other Antichrist I wot not whom, instead of Christ. Doubtless who so ever is such a one, is plain Antichrist.
Again there are, that although they profess with their mouth, that Jesus is
Christ, yet they live after such sort, as though his doctrine were vain, as
though the rewards that he has promised were vain. He taught, that the
pore in spirit are blessed, because the kingdom of heaven abides for them.
And an other man which applies al his whole forcast to this end, to enlarge
his lands, to build royal houses, to enhau^ce his rentes, to stuff his
coafers with money gotten by hoke and by crook, to be aloft in authority, to
oppress the poor, and to exercise tyranny: does he not clean contrary unto
Christ, whose doctrine he makes a liar, as much as in him lies? Christ
taught, that they are blessed, which hungre and thirst after ryghteousnes: and
an other reposeth his felicity in riot, in the pleasures of the paunche and
belly cheer: does he not deny Christ? He teaches, that the meke are blessed,
because they shall possess that heavenly land, from whence they can not be
cast down. And an other man thinks him happy, if he can with oppressing of
the pore establishe his own wealth. He teaches that they are blessed, which
mourn in this world, because everlasting comfort is due unto them. And an
other man that in all things follows the delicate pleasures of this world:
does he not deny Christ? He teaches, that they are blessed, which are
merciful toward their neighbors. And this man pleases him self, because
of his own accord he does him sorrow that is better than himself. Christ
teaches that they are blessed, which are vexed with reuylyng words and
affliccions for the righteousness of the Gospelles sake. And this man forcasteth
with all manner of dissembling and wyles to please the world. Christ
acknowledges him for his disciple, that takes up his cross on his shoulders,
and follows him. And an other man thinks himself nevertheless christen man,
if he escape all grief.

Christ says unto his: In the World you shall have oppression, but in me
you shall have peace: and yet unto these men Christ is heavy, and the world
sweet. He commands to do good even unto a man's enemy, and an other does
wrong to a man without deserte. Does not he, that lives after such sort,
resistingly deny Christ? his mouth says not against him, but his life does.
When the son taught against these manners, the father said, Hear him. But
what says this manne? No, hear not him, it is hard gear that he teaches,
hear the world. Therefore like as he resists the son, even so doethe he
repugne against the father, and seeing he is of the facion of the world, he
disseuereth himself from the flock of them, whom Christ has chosen out of
this world. Christ has nothing a do with this world, and he that glueth
himself unto it, repugneth against Christ. and plays Antichrist, and denies
both the father and the son. For the father and the son are of an
inseparable society. Here the Jew will cry with open mouth against me: I
acknowlage the father, but the son I acknowlage not. But what soever thou
trespacest against the son, thou trespacest the same against the father. The
son never did nor taught any thing, but by the authority of the father. He
that takes from the son, takes from the father. Therefore he that
estraungeth him self from the fellowship of the son, he neither pertains to
the body of Christ, which is the catholic church, nor has fellowship with
God the father, which agrees in all things with the son. You see with what
great Ieoperdie foles disseuer themselves from the son. Therefore continue
you still in the gospelles truth, which you received first of the surely tried
Apostles. Let not the lyeng tales of the false Apostles draw you away.

The text.
If that which ye heard from the begynnyngest all remain in you, ye also
shall contynewe in the son, and in the father. And this is the promise that he
has promised us, even eternal life. These things have I written unto you,
concerning them that disceaue you. And the anoyntyng which ye have received of
him, dwells in you. And ye need not, that any manne teach you: but as the
anointing teaches you of all things, and is true, and no lie, and as it has
taught you, even so bide therein. And now babes abide in him: that when he shall
appear we may be bold, and not be made ashamed of him at his coming: if ye
know that he is righteous, know also that every one which does rightewisenes,
is borne of him. If you continue steadfast in that thing which we delivered
first unto you, you shall abide in the fellowship of God the father and of his
son Jesus. If any man think it an hard matter to persevere in the
professynge of the Gospel, because of the affliccions of the wicked, think
upon the reward. God requires an hard matter, but the reward is great that
he promises. For he promises nether riches, nor kingdom, nether the pleasure
of this world, but life everlasting. He that byeth that, byeth it good chepe,
although he lose his life for it. These things do I beat upon, and put you
in remembrance of with so many words, being careful, lest the wicked, that
are gone from Christ, should chance to beguyle any with their iugglynges.
Albeit without our warning, I think the spirit of Christ him self teaches
you sufficiently, whom you have a continual remembrauncer and teacher in your
hearts. As long as he continues still in you, it is no need, that any man
teach you, what you ought to avoid. He is a secret teacher, but he is the
most sure teacher of all other. He being once received of you, teaches you of
all things, like as the son has also promised. For the spirit is true by
nature, and can not lie. Therefore persevere in that, which he has ones
taught you. You hold the right doctrine, you remember it, there lacks
nothing, but that you persist still in it unto the coming of Christ, which I
suppose, is not far to. I beseech you eftesones and again, little children,
persist in the doctrine of the spirit, that when our prince and judge shall
appear, the conscience of a good conversation may give us a sure trust in
him, and that we may come forth so, as he be not ashamed to acknowledge us
for his dysciples, nor we ashamed to come in to his syghte. For with what
mouth shall we call him master and Lord, if we have neither taken heed to
his teaching, nor obeyed his commandment? with what mouth shall we call God
father, if we be out of kind in all our life long from his ordinances? It is
not simple baptism, but the observed righteousness, that makes us the children
of God. For what shall they hear, that cast out deuilles in the name of Jesus,
that told things before hand, that excelled in miracles? I Know you no^.
He takes the^ for strangers, in who^ he sees not the righteousness of the
gospel. And if you be persuaded, y^ God is the author of this righteousness,
know this also, that whosoever not with words, but with endeavors, doings and
manners accomplysheth the ryghteousnes of the Gospel, he is borne of God, unto
whom he may with a good conscience preace with that boldenes, that obedient
children are wont to preace to a merciful father withal. He will acknowlage
them that are like him, but those that are not like him, he will not acknowlage.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text
Behold, what love the father has showed on us, that we should be called
(and be in deed) the sons of God. For this cause the world knows you not,
because it knows not him. Dearly beloved, now are we the sons of God, and
yet it does not appear, what we shawe. But we know, that when it shall
appear, we shall be like him. For we shall see him as he is. And every man that
has this hope in him, pourgeth him self, even as he also is pure. Whosoever
commits sin, commits unrighteous also, and sin is unrighteousness.
And ye know that he appeared, to take away our sins, and in him is no
sin. As many as bide in him sin not: whosoever sins, has not seen him,
neither known him. WHere sincere love is, there is a trusty confidence, and
fear is away. See therefore what a notable love he has given unto us, which
having contemned the world with his entisementes and terrors, persevere still
in the gospelles doctrine, that we should be named and be, not only faithful
servants, not only friends, but the children of God. For so Christ taught,
that we should call upon the heavenly father, if we have need of any thing. It
is a most high honor to be called the children of God, and a most high
felicity to be the children of God. And forasmuch as we cleave unto him with
a constaunt godlynes, and are acknowlaged of him, the world acknowlegeth us
not, but abhors and curses us as sedicious persons. It is no marvel
though the world acknowlage not y^ children of God, seeing it acknowlageth not
God himself, in that it denies his son Jesus: let it nothing trouble your
minds, dearly beloved, that the world estemeth you as rascalles and abiecte
persons. For with God we have even now this excellent dignity, that we are
the sons of God, and are glad at our hearts, feling in our selves the
spirit, not of bondage but of children, upon assured confidence whereof we
cry, Abba, father. The dignity is present, but the dignity has not yet
appeared. As yet it is the time of battle, the day of triumph is not yet
come. That day shall declare unto all men, how great a dignity they have,
how great a felicity they have, that constauntly show themselves the
children of God. It is not yet come to light, what we shall be in the coming of
Christ, howbeit we hold this upon a sure hope, that as soon as he shall
appear, to render unto every one rewards according to his deeds, we that
were in this world companions of affliccions, shall also be companions of the
joys: and we that were like him in the contempt of the world, shall be like
him also in the majesty of glory. We saw him here in this world afflicted,
and of low estate: then shall we see him as he is, and ever was, high and
excellent: and so seeing him we shall also be transformed unto his iykenes, not
only in minds, but also in bodies. And we see him now, howebeit, as it were
through a mist with the eyes of faith. But then we shall see him after such
manner as cannot be expressed. But that thing, which we shall be than perfitely,
we must forcast now i the mean time to the uttermost of our possible power.
To thinte^t we may be li^ke hi^ the^ in glory, let us be pure here from all
fylthynes. To the intent we may see him than, let us cleanse our eyes now,
lest when he shall appear glisterynge bright, he be unto us more dreadful
than amiable. For he is not fortunatelye seen, but of them that are like him.
Therefore whosoever has this confidence in Christ, that he shall than be a
companion of his glory, let him in the mean time pourge himself with godly
studyes clean from worldly affeccions, like as in him was no manner of
fylthynes of this world, but is all together pure and heavenly. Therefore it
stands us in hand with all our possible powers, to bend our endeavors to
this end, that nothing remain in us of yearthye dregs. And leite no man
flatter him self, saying: It is enough for me unto innocence, if I
tra^sgresse in none of those things that Moses law forbyddeth, nor in those
things that are punyshed by the kings laws, as felonye, sacrilege, adultrie,
murdre: but all manner of sin is utterly to be eschewed. For whosoever
offends by any mean, although he offend not against the prescriptes of
Moses, yet he synneth against the law of the gospel, which is a great deal
holyer than Moses law. And for this cause sake, Christ came once into the
world, to show the way, whereby his coming again should become wholesome and
luckye unto us. He came to take away once for all not one sin or two, but al
our sins, where he only was subject unto no manner of sin. He once purged
us freely from all sin, to make us like manered unto himself, which neither
any law nor any mortal man could be hable to do. Through baptism we are
engraffed into his holy sacred body. But it is our part for all that to
endeavor in the mean time, that we fall not from our head. We are engraffed
through his own free mercy, but we shall fall away, if we slide back again
into our old vices. He that abides in Christ, perseuereth in innocencye, and
is wondrous ware to shun from all sin, that he may daily more and more
grow in virtues, and be made more like his head. He that absteyneth not from
sins, although he be baptized, although he be called a christian, has not
yet seen fully, nor yet known him. For who is it, if he saw with the eyes of
faith, what great dignity it is to be chosen into the number of the sons of
God, and what a fylthy shame it is to be given to the father devil, that
would abide to be plucked away from such a body, to depart from such a
father, and to go out of kind unto so fylthy a tirannye, to slide of his own
accord away from so high rewards unto so great misery?

The text.
Babes, let no man deceive you, he that does righteousness, is righteous,
even as he is righteous. He that commits sin, is of the devil: for the
devil sins sense the beginning. For this purpose appeared the son of God,
to looce the works of the devil. Whosoever is borne of God, synneth not, for
his seed remains in him, and he can not sin, because he is borne of God. In
this are the children of God known, and the children of the devil. Whosoever
does not ryghteousnes, is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother.
Babes let no man deceive you, flatteryng you for your professyng the name of
christians, as though that were enough unto felicity. He is not just, that
speaks justice with his mouth, but he that in his life and manners does
justice in deed, is just, like as Christ also showed himself in his sayings
and doings an example of all justice. And he that truly and wholly cleaves
fast unto him, absteyneth as much as he possible may, from all uncleanness of
sins, and the pureness of manners self declares him to be the son of God,
which is good by nature, and knows no sin. But he that synneth although he
have received the sacraments of Christ, yet he is begotten of his father the
devil, which is the prince and author of all sin. Him whosoever follows, is
like his father, in that same thing that he synneth in, and declares himself
to be his son. God allows no felowshyppe with sins, for he sent his son
for this intent into this world, to vanquis^he the works of the devil, that
is to say, all things, that are contrary repugnaunt against the charity of
the gospel. Of Adam we are all borne endaungered with sins: of God we are
borne again by the sede of y^ gospelles doctrine. As long as the strength of
this seed abides in a man, he synneth not, neither can sin, that is to
wete, because the love of god byddeth him nay: which love rauisheth him to
the study of well doing, and calls him away from all desire of offendynge,
in that he is the very true son of God: resembling plainly the behavior and
disposicion of his father and head. It is not the title, it is not baptism, it
is not the sacraments that descerne the children of God from the children of
the devil, but the purity of life, and charity, expressyng and she wyng it
self in well doings. It is not idle if it be there. He that shows not that,
neither shows in his deed that he loves his brother, he is not borne of God.
If he were alyuely membre of Christ's body, he would have loved the other
members, for whom Christ died.

The text
For this is the tydinges, that ye beard from the beginning, that ye shoude
love one another, not as Cayn which was of that wicked, and slew his brother.
And wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his
brothers good. Marvel not my brethren though the world hate you. We know,
that we are translated from death unto life, because we love the brethren. De
that loves not his brother abides in death. Whosoever hates his brother, is
a man slear. And ^e know, that no man slear has eternal life abiding in him.
Hereby perceive we love* because he gave his life for us: and we ought to give
our lives for the brethren. But whosoever has this worlds good and sees his
brother have need: and shuts up his compassion from him: how dwells the
love of God in him? This is the sum of Christen justice: this is it, that
Christ gave first of all unto us: this is it which we set forth before al
things unto you, that you should with loving one an other declare your
selves to be the sons of God, and the disciples of Christ. For in deed the
hate of the neghbour is a step unto murder. And malice is clean contrary
repugnau^t with charity. Cain was not the son of god, but was borne of the
devil: why? because he went out of kind from his good maker, and became like
the devil, which being strycken with envy, was the first that slew man with
deadly stynge. Cayn resembled the disposicion of his father in sleaing Abell
his brother. But what was the cause of his hate? For so the, because their life
was not alyke, and therefore they were of a contrary kind, albeit after their
bodily kindred, they were natural borne brethren. They did both resemble their
father. Abel was an innocent man, and kyndled to the studious mind of well
dooinge. Cain contrariwyse having conceived an hate against his brother,
forcasted not how to amend himself, but how to slay his brother. Like as in
this case the wicked could not abide the godly, and the deuilles child
could not abide y^ child of god, even so you ought to take it for no
maruai^e, brethren, though men given to the world forsake you. They hate them
that are giltles. Let no man hate them again. They, forsomuche as they are
vowed unto death, and serve the author of death, imagine how to put other to
death. It is our part to pity them, and not to do them one harm for an
other. For in deed the charity of the gospel has led us away from the
study of harm dooinge, unto the ^^udie of well doing: and by this token we
know that we are predestinat unto everlasting life, and exempte from the
tyranny of death, in y^ we love the brethren. He that loves, both wishes
well and does well. The body lives by the breathe, the soul lives by the
spirit of Christ. Where brotherly love is not, there y^ spirit of Christ is
not. Whosoever therefore hates his neighbor, he is dead and lives not
inwardly. For although he have a faith, yet he has a dead faith, where
charity is not present. Do you make a fli^te at the hating of your brother,
as though it were a light fault? he that hates his brother is a man^lear. He
has not thurst his sword in him, he has not poisoned hi, he has not flowen
upon him, he has not cursed him, but only wished him evil* Man's law does
not damn him of man laughter, but in gods sight he is already damned of
manslaughter. He y^ has received hate ones in to his breast, as much as in him
is, he is a ma^s^ear. There are many kinds of manslaughter: He that slea^th
with sword, suffers punissheme^t even by temporal laws. He that kills
with poison, is punisshed even of them that are wicked. But he that sticks
his brother with the darte of a venomous tongue, although he be quitte by
man's laws from the crime of manslaughter, yet by the law of the gospel he
is guilty of manslaughter. He is as yet hitherto alive, that the hater wissheth
evil unto, and yet he him self is al ready dead: That man's life is safe, and
this has lost everlasting life, being his own murtherour. Will you see
brethren, how much we ought to be far from the desire of harm doing?
Turn your eyes to the example of Christ. He so loved us, when we deserved
nothing, yea when we deserved death, that he spent his life for us. How
much more ought we to put our life in danger for the salvation of our
brethren, if occasion so require? namely we that succeed into Christ our
shepherdes rowme. He committed not his sheep unto Peter's keeping, but when he
had thrice said he loved him, and by and by h^ shows him y^ kind of death,
that he might understand, that the salvation of the flock committed unto his
charge must be defended even with the loss of life. But will he spend his
life, that grudgeth to help with his money? does a man think it inoughe, if
he hurt not his brother, if he speak to him gently? Christ declared in his
deeds, how much he loved us. He y^ sees his brother want meat, clothe,
drink or lodging, and has substance to releue his need withal, and is not
moved with co^passio^, but as though it were no point of his charge, lets
him alone vnsuccoured: how ca^ it be believed, y^ the love of god is in him* The
heathen su^ coureth y^ heathen, and do not y^ being a Christian succor
thine eue^ christened* Thou haste professed brotherly love, and if thou have it
truly present with the, why does it cease in this case, when thy brother is
pyned with need? Thou call him brother, and show thou no token of
brotherly affeccio^?

The text
My babes, let us not love in word, neither in tongue: but in deed and in
verytie. Hereby we know that we are of the verytie, can quiet our hearts
before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and
knows all things. Dear^ly beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have
we trust to God ward: and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we
keep his commandments, and do those things which are pleasant in his sight.
And this is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his son Jesus
Christ, and love one another, as he gave commandment. And he that keeps his
commandments dwells in him, and he ^^ him, and hereby we know that he
abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given us. My babes let us not
love one another in words only. Let the love be in the heart, rather than in
the tongue: and let it express it self in deeds, rather than in speaking. Let
this word Brother be in our daily communicacion, yea but that we may be true,
let the deeds be answerably like to the communicacion: as often as occasion
serves, let us declare a true brotherly love to be in us in deed. Let not our
brother want any thing y^ we have, whether he desire coat, or meat, or
lodging, either comfort, teaching or admonicion. Thus if we do with ready
good wills, we shall know by this token, that we are the children of the
truth, and that we love not countrefaytlye, but purely. The truth is Christ
him self, unto whose eyes we shall prove our conscience, y^ we be allowed
both with God and men: and by our deeds men shall know, that there is no
dissembled love among us: god looks upon the purity of the heart. We shall
succor our brothers need, yea but so as we releue his necessity, not to
maintene his riotous prodigality: and we shall succor him willingly, without
hope of reward to return unto us therefore, nether for dayne glories sake.
Men see not the mind, but the mind knows it self, and is seen unto the
eyes of god. If men praise us, and a naughty conscience condemn us,
howsoever we deceive men, we can not escape the judgment of God. Man's heart
has secret passages to and fro, and doubtefull lurking holes, but there is
nothing so hidden, and so close, but god pearceth it. He knows all things
better than we: he knows our heart that made our heart. He has eyes in
every place, that is present in every place. Dearly beloved, if our heart
condemn us not unto god, if our mind be sincere and uprightly plain, if we
do of a mere and a pure love that we do: such as we show our selves
toward our neighbor, such a one shall god show him self to us. If we
gladly and with a good will forgive our brother his fault, God shall easyly
forgive ^s our sins also. If we readily give unto our nedy brother, as often
as he desires our help, we shall with a sure trusty boldenes ask also of god,
that which shall perteigne to salvation and necessity, nether shall he deny
our askinges. If we say unto him: Forgive us our trespasses, as We for give
them that trespass against us, and yet hate our brother inwardly: shall not our
own conscience by and by cry out against us? with what face* ask thou of
god, that which thou deniest thy neighbor? with what mouth ask thou the
covenant, when thou thy self performest not y^ condition? He promised to
forgive us our trespasses, yea but so that we do heartely forgive our brother
his trespases. If we say with the mouth, I forgive him, and yet keep evil
will still in our heart: our naughty conscience shall take away our
confidence of obteynynge, the thing that we ask of God. If we bydde our
brother gently, God speed, and help him nor when he has need of our help,
we may not hope that God will help, saying we helped not our brother. If we
turn the deaf ear toward at his commandment, he will turn the deaf ear
again toward our prayers. It is a shamelesnes, not a godlynes, to desire
favor of him, whose commandments a man does not pa^se upon. But and if we
observe his commandments, if we do whatsoever shall please him, and ^o do,
that we may be allowed in his eyes, which sees every thing: hereof shall we
conceive a sure confidence to obtain. Here will the Jew, the supersticious
law keeper, say unto me: I keep the sabbath days, I am washen, I fast, I
absteyne from forbidden meats, I do not steal, God shall hear me. But this
is not the commandment that I talk of: which than? Forsothe that we should
repose all the whole hope and confidence of our salvation in Jesus Christ the
son of God, by whom the fathers will was to give all things freely unto us.
Is this enough now? No forsothe: but we must love each one other according to
his example. So he commanded, but that which he commanded, he did first
perform himself in deed. He does not yet truly love Christ, that* hates
the membre of Christ: he does not yet love Christ, that wishes evil to the
man, for whom Christ died. Therefore he that keeps that one only
commandment of love, keeps all. With this g^ue shall we be fast joined to
Christ, so that he be in us, and we again in him. He by his spirit shall
dwell in our hearts, if charity be warm there: The spirit of Christ is not
the author of hate, but the free geuour of brotherly love. He by the layinge on
of thapostles hands is powered in to them that are baptized, but he leapeth
back and flies away, if charity happen to be quenched out. By this token
therefore we shall perceive that the gi^te of the spirit, which we took in
baptism, abides in us, if brotherly love continue with us still. Look how
much charity waxes cold, so much will the holy gooste withdraw him self
away.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text
Dearly beloved, believe not every spirit: but prove the spirits, whether
they are of god or not, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world.
Herby shall ye know the spirit of god. Every spirit that confesses that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of god. And every spirit, which
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of god. And
this is that spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have heard, how that he
should come: and even now already is he in the world. I Have given you a
token, dearly beloved, whereby you may perceive, whether the spirit of Christ
be in you or not. For there are sundry sorts of spirits in me^, yea but
dissembling spirits, and naughty spirits. Therefore do not vt erly believe
every spirit. There are many here and there, that boast them selves to have
the spirit of God, but try you whether they proceed of God or not. This
world has also a spirit of his own, and pretends as though it had the
spirit of God.

The spirit of God enspireth the prophets, but there are to many false
prophets now that are gone out in to the world, and falsely say that they
speak by the inspiracion of the spirit of God, when they are led with the
spirit of the world. Will you therefore have a more certain argument of the
spirit of God? Hear the speaker, and you shall understand. Every spirit
which confesses, that Jesus Christ the author of everlasting salvation
promised long a go unto the world, is now all ready come, having received a
very humayne body, like as he had promised by his prophets, he is of God, in
that he acknowlageth the son of God. Contrary wise he that denies this,
forasmuch as he is a liar, he is not of God. For no man does truly profess
the son, onles he be enspired of the father. But those do not only deny
him, which speak against him in words openly, but also they that live after
such a sort, as though Christ were not the example of godlynes unto men, or
as though he were not the author of perfect salvation: and so they feine some
other Messiah to be looked for, because Christ's doctrine is to much variable
from their gredye lusts. If he would have favored the voluptuous pleasures
of the flesh, if he would have promised great substance of riches, if he
would have given honors and empires of y^ world, they would have long a go
acknowlaged their Messiah. But now forasmuch as he does teach men to despise
these things, and enriceth them to take up their cross, and tells that all
felicity must be looked for in the world to come, they deny him to be the old
promised redemer of mankind, and bydde look for an other, that should promise
the commodities of the body, and the goods of this world. Nether is it
enough to confess Christ, onles we confess him all wholly and entierly. He
that dyuideth him, either taking away the divine nature, which he has all
one with the father: or the human nature, which he took of a woman his
mother, that spirit is not of God, but is the spirit of Antichrist, of the
which spirit ye have all ready heard, that he should come, yea he is now
come already, and has to do in them, which being addicte to worldly
delices, fight against the spirit of Christ.

The text
Little children, ye are of God, and have overcome them: for greater is he that
is in you, then he that is in the world. They are of the world therefore
speak they of the world, and the world hears them. We are of God. He that
knows God, hears us: he that is not of god, hears us not. Herby know we
the spirit of verity, and the spirit of error. Dearly beloved, let us
love one another: for love comes of god. And every one that loves, is borne
of God, and knows God. ^e that loves not, knows not god: for God is love:
In this appeared the love of god to us ward, because that God sent his only
begotten son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love,
not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his son to make
agreement for our sins. There is no cause why you should be afraid of these
sorts of men, litell children. Forasmuch as you are of god, and have his
spirit: you have by him overcome the Antichrists. In deed you of your selves
are but weak, but he that dwells in you, is greater and myghtier than he,
that dwells in the world. The devil fights against you by his members,
but God by his spirit defends you. They, forasmuch as they perteyne to the
fashion of the world, and have received the spirit of the world, are wisely
skilled in the world, and talk of worldely matters, and their doctrine is
acceptable gear unto them, which are also given them selves unto the world. No
man does lightly believe, that he is an enemy to those things, which he
behemently loves. They love earthie things, and their doctrine sauoureth of
the earth. We are of god, he that knows him (in deed he knows him that
loves him) herkeneth unto us, which teach heavenly things, and matters
worthy of god. He y^ is not of god, hears not us, but abhors from the
gospelles doctrine, which bids me^ give away their riches, defye voluptuous
pleasures, to rejoice in affliccions, to esteem even life it self of no value
for righteousness sake, to look for the reward of well done deeds in the
resurreccion, which they either believe shall not come at all, or would not have
it to happen: which doctrine commands also through sincere love to spend
even a man's life for his neighbors sake, where as the man of a worldely
spirit provides for his own commodity at al hands, yea even with wronging
of his brother. By these tokens therefore you may know the true spirit of god,
from the false spirit of the world. Therefore dearly beloved, forasmuch as
we are of god, and not of the world, let us love each one other, and let every
one serve his neighbors profits rather than his own, for love is of god. He
therefore that is garnisshed with this love, is borne of god, and does truly
know god. And he that is void of love, has not yet known god, because god
himself is love. He gives him self unto us, as often as he gives us his
love. He has declared his love to us ward, that we should also declare ours
toward our neighbor. But some man will say: we acknowlage the sons charity,
but whereby do we know the fathers love toward us? Forsothe by this: that he
sent his only son, (than the which he has nothing more dearer) in to this
world, and gave him unto death, that we by his death should atteyne
everlasting life. And this is also a greater and a more notable miracle of
love, that being provoked by no good turn of ours, he loved us so e notably.
He that loves his lover again, is nothing but thankeful: and should have no
humanity except he did it. We loved the world, and were turned from the love
of god: and yet God loved us first and of his own accord. And when he was
justly offended at our sins, neither was there any manne upon yearthe boyde
of sin, that could reconcile us unto him, (for it behooves him to be full of
grace, that must make intercession unto him that is offended, for such as be
malefactors) he sent his son down from heaven, to sacrifice himself unto
the father, and with this most pure oblacion to make him merciful unto us.
What can be Imagined more notable than this love? what can be thought more
fervent? what can be imagined more plenteous?

The text
Dearly beloved, if god so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No
man has seen god at any time. If we love one another, god dwells in us, and
his love is perfect in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in
us: because he has given us of his spirit. And we have seen, and do
testify, that the father sent the son to be Savior of the world:
Whosoever confesses, that Jesus is the son of god, in him dwells god, and
he in god. And we have known, and believe the love that God has to us. God
is love: and he that dwells in love, dwells in god, and god in him. Herein
is the love perfect in us, that we should have trust in the day of
judgment. For as he is, even so are we in this world. I here is no fear in
love, but perfect love casts out fear, for fear has paynfulnes. ^e that
fears, is not perfect in love. We love him, for he loved us first. If a man
say: I love god, and yet hate his brother, he is a liar. For how can he that
loves not his brother who^ he has seen, love god who^ he has not seen? And
this commandment have we of him: that he which loves god, should love his
brother also. Dearly beloved, if God, which has no need of us, of his own
accord and wyllyngly has so much loved us, we ought also after his example
to love each one other. The son of God showed him self visiblye unto us, but
no man has seen God the father at any time with his bodily eyes, and yet he is
perceived by the evident tokens of things. We feel him angrye, we feel him
merciful, we feel him to be absent, we feel him to be present. We are hable
to testify our mutual love toward God by none other argument, than if we
love every one other, like as he has loved us. He loved us freely without
cause, he loved us for this purpose, to save us. If we love each one other
after such wise: god, which is love, (as I said) abides in us. It is a
common love to bear good will to him y^ deserves well, to love him that is
hable to requite our love, and to testify our good will with one good turn
for an other: but y^ love of god is perfect toward us. He loved us of his own
accord, he loved us being strangers, he loved us, of whom no manner requital
could return to him again, he loved us eue^ to the loss of his only
begotten son. If we love our neighbor in a semblable wise, than the love of
God is perfect in us, declaryng also that God himself is in us. Like as all
one spirit knytteth the members of the body together, and makes them one
body: even so the spirit of god does in a manner glue together and knytte
both us with him, and every one to other, and as it were dryueth perforce all
into one. And if the spirit of god, which inspireth into our hearts y^ love
of our neighbor, be strong in us, doubtless we know by this token, both that
we abide in God, and God likewise in us. Therefore he is an enemy unto love,
that denies Jesus to be the son of God, which gave himself to redeem
mankind. But of this matter we were even lookers upon, we saw it with our
eyes, we heard it with our ears, we handled it with our hands, and of a
matter so many ways prouedly known, we bear witness to the whole world, that
god sent his son, to save the world with his death, in case it would repent
from his old errors, and order the life of it from henceforthe according to
the rule of the gospel. For he did not only send him to save the nation of
the Jews, but he gave him also to be a savior to all the whole world. He
therefore that confesses that Jesus is the son of god, whom the prophets had
prophesied before should come, he abides in God, and god in him. For he
knows the truth, and embraces love. He acknowlageth not the love of God
toward him, that does no express it in his neighbor. But as for us, we have
both known by experience, and believe with our heart, and confess with our
mouth, and express in our works the deeds that God has bestowed unto us.
It remains, that we should persevere in that which is begone, and not to
offend, so as God be not both plucked away from us, and we drawn away
from God. God (as I said before) is love. Therefore he that continues still in
love, continues still in God, and God likewise in him: because the mutual
knotte of the spirit of God abides. Will you also have an other token given
you, whereby you may try, whether the love of god be perfect in you? If we
know our own conscience to be good, and that we dread not the day of
judgment, wherein they shall be separated from Christ, that have not followed
Christ. They shall quake, when they shall hear that horrible voice. Depart
from me But we look for that day with a trusty boldenes, that is to were,
knowing to our selves, y^ like as he was conuersaunt in the world, even so are
we also in the world. He took no manner of spotte of the world, but cleansed
the world from it own fylthynes, and drew it, as much as in him was, into
his pureness. Even so we also to our powers are not only not mingled with y^
world, but also we rather drive it, with teaching of the gospel, and chaste
examples of life, unto Christ. The dread of gods judgment spryngethe out
of an evil conscience. Fear therefore agrees not with love. For love
increases assured confidence: which, if it be perfect, shall drive quite out of
mind al fear. But it is glad, as often as that day of judgment comes in
his mind: first having a very good opinion of the good God, and having it
self a good conscience. Love causes gladness, fear causes formentynge
sorowefulnes. Moreover he that is afraid, declares himself therein not yet to
be perfect in love. As much as wa^teth unto love, so much increases to fear.
For he is afraid, lest he shall not find God the judge merciful unto him,
seeing he showed himself intractable unto his neighbor. That day shall openly
declare, who has been a true lover in this world. We love God: and no
marvel, seeing he first loved us. For we could not be hable to love him,
except he drew us unto himself with his love. This same therefore, that we
love God, is his benefit. Finally, in that we love God, we testify it in
louinge our neighbor in whom he will be loved. If a man will say: I love
God, when he hates his brother, he is a liar. For when the wicked, of whom for
the most part they do not only not love God, but also they believe not that
God is: yet for all y^ they after a sort love their neighbor, either because he
is their kynsman or ailiaunce, or because he is acquaynted and familiar with
them, or at the least because man sees the other to be a man, like as the
very beasts love every one his own kind by the instincte of nature: how shall
he love God, whom he has not seen at any time, when he hates his neighbor,
whom he sees? Furthermore how standethe it together that he loves God, that
passes not upon the commandments of God? If a man would cry: I love the
king, and for all y^ sets naught by the kings proclamacions, would there any
man believe him? we have this special commandment of our Emperor, that he
which loves God, should also love his brother, whether he be good or badde.
If he be good, let him love Christ in him: if he be badde, let him love him to
this end, that he may be converted unto Christ.

The.v. Chapter.
The text
Whosoever believes that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God. And every one that
loves him which begat, loves him also which was begotten of him. By this we
know, that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his
commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments,
and his commandments are not grievous. For all that is borne of God,
overcomes the world. And this is the victory that overcomes the world,
even our faith. Who is it that overcomes the world: but he which believes,
that Jesus is the son of God? This Jesus Christ is he that came by water and
blood, not by water only: but by water and blood. And it is the spirit that
bears witness, because the spirit is truth. (For there are three which bear
record in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy ghost. And these three
are one.) And there are three which bear record in (earth) the spirit, and
water, and blood: and these three are one. If we receive the witness of men, the
witness of God is greater. For this is the witness of God (that is greater)
which* he testify of his son. He that believes on the son of God, has
the witness in himself. He that believes not god, has made him a liar, because
he believed not the record that god gave of his son. And this is the record,
how that God has given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son.
He that has the son has life: and he that has not the son of god, has
not life. WHo soever believes that Jesus is Christ, that is to say, him of whom
we must needs ask all the succoures of our salnacion, and believes that in his
heart: he is borne of god, and is called already into the nu^mbre of the sons
of God. In deed he can not chose but love, ye is a son. Tha^ whosoever loves
him heartely that is y^ father, loves him also ye was borne of him, that is to
wete, his brother, with whom he has all one commune father. By this toke^ we
prove, that we do truly love y^ children of God, if we first love God him
self heartely. For there is nothing truly loved, except it be loved for his
sake. Than that we love God, it shall evidently so appear, if we keep his
commandments, and keep them cheerfully and gladly: for his commandments
are none otherwise grievous. For what is grievous to the lover? what is grievous
to him that goes post haste to such manner rewards. The world obiecteth
terrible appearaunces of euilies, poverty, vanyshement, slander,
enprisonmentes, whippinges, deaths. It is a great fraye, but the victory is
made ready: For what soever is borne of God, overcomes the world. But with
what furnitures does he overcome y^ world? with riches? with garrisons of men?
with engines of war? with worldly learning? no, no: they overcome the world
(as cruelly rageing as it is) through a steadfast only faith, wherewith they
commit them selves wholly unto God their protector. Thy riches are snatched
away, yea but what says faith to that? Thou haste a treasure in heaven.
Thou art thrown out to be a vanished man, yea but the country of heaven
looks for his countreyman. Thy body is turmoyled with torments: yea, but with
them, are bought everlasting joys. Death is devised for the: yea but after it
shall follow life that never shall dye. Who is it than that ouercometh the
world? not a lord, not the rich man, not a philosopher, not a king, but he
who soever he be, that believes verily, that Jesus is the son of God. Believe
that which he has promised, and it shall nothing move thee, whatsouer the
world purposes against thee. He overcame the world first, and atteyned
immortality: he came into this world having taken our mortal body, to get the
victory for us, to show the mean of victory getting, to cause y^ rewards to
be certaynely reckoned upon. But with what furnitures came he armed withal? He
came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ: by water, that he might wash us
clean from our sins: by blood, that he might give us immortal life. His
own will was to be baptized, being clean void from all sin, that he might
frelye give unto us innocencye: his own will was to dye on the cross, that he
might open unto us the way unto immortality. He did not only testify by
these two tokens, that he was Christ and the savior of the world, in that he
received baptism, as a sinful man: in that he dyed as a malefactor, where he
one only and none among all but he, was Innocent from all sin: but the
spirit also appearing in the likeness of a dove, bare record of him, that it
was he, who^ the father had given to be the savior of the world. For the
spirit is also the truth, as the father and the son is: there is one truth
of all, like as there is one nature of all.

For there are three in heaven, that bear record unto Christ, the father, the
word, and the spirit: the father, which sending once and eftsoon a voice
down from heaven, testified openly, that he is his dearly beloved son, in
whom nothing could do amiss: the word, which having done so many miracles,
which in his death and resurreccion declared him self to be the true Christ,
both God and man, the peacemaker between God and men: the holy gooste, which
descended upon his head when he was baptized, and that after his resurreccion
fell upon his disciples. And of these three there is all one most perfect
agreement: the father is the author, the son the messanger, the holy ghost the
remembrauncer. There are three things also on earth, that bear record unto
Christ: his humayne spirit which he put from him one the cross: the water
and the blood, that ran out of his side when he was dead. And these three
witnesses do agree The other declared him to be God, these record that he was
man. John also bare witness. And if we receive witness of men, it is reason,
that the witness of God be of more importance with us. For the testimony of
God the father is manifest: This is my Well-beloved Son, in Whom I am
pleased, hear him. What thing can be spoken more plainly or more fully? he
that believes truly in gods son Jesus Christ, and has reposed all the
succors of his life in him, so that trusting in his promises he contemns
all things, that this world can make a show of, whether they be amiable or
dreadful, has a witness in him self, and bears witness unto the son
of God. For when (through thinspiracion of the spirit of Christ) he defieth
even deaths for his love, he bears no trifling witness unto me^, that they
are no vain things that Christ has taught and promised. He that trusts not
in god, but puts his trust in the world, he, as much as in him is, makes
god a liar, which has promised felicity unto them that would herke^ unto
his son Jesus Christ: where as he in his conuersacio^ teaches that felicity
is to be asked of the world, and cleaves so unto the commodities of this
life, as though nothing of a man remained after the death of the body. The
father cries: Hear him. And his life, that believes not, says: Hear the
world. For when the son prayed the father, that those which believed or
should believe in him, might have eternal life, the fathers voice was heard,
testifiyng as by the sound of a trompet, that his prayers should be allowed.
The father therefore has given us everlasting life, shewinge of whom it should
be asked, even of his son Jesus Christ. His doctrine who soever embraces,
his example whosoever follows, his promises whosoever trusts unto, he both
possedeth the son and has life: the pledge whereof he keeps in the mean
time, even the spirit of god, through the undoubted confidence whereof he is
bold to call God, father: He that is a stranger from the son, is estraunged
also from life.

The text.
These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the son of
god, that ye may know, how that ye have eternal life, and that ye may
believe on the name of the son of god. And this is the trust that we have in
him: that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we
know that he hear us whatsoever we ask, we know, that we have the
peticions, that we desire of him. If any man see his brother sin a sin not
unto death, let him ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not
unto death. There is a sin unto death, for which say I not that a man
should pray. All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not unto death.
We know, that whosoever is borne of god, synneth not: but he that is begotten
of god, keeps himself, and that wicked touches him not. We know, that we are
of god, and the world is all together set on wickedness. We know, that the
son of god is come, and has given us a mind to know him, which is true:
and we are in him that is true, through his son Jesus Christ. This same is
very god, and eternal life. Babes, keep your selves from images. Amen. These
things therefore do I repete and beat unto you with so many words, lest any
man should persuade unto you the contrary. But take it for a sure and an
undoubted certayntie, that it is true which you have believed: that
everlasting life is ordained for you through Jesus Christ, whose joined
fellow heirs you are. You have already the right claim and gage, and shall
have possession of the thing self in his time. Therefore you that believe in
the son of God, believe stedfastlye, and put your sure trust in him daily
more and more. He will not fail you in the promyses of everlasting life, that
fails you not now even in this life. For in deed the spirit of Christ
geuethe this confidence unto you, that whatsoever you shall ask in y^ name of
ye son, you should obtain it, if ye ask according to his will, that is, if
you be such when you come to pray as he would have you to come: that is to
say, pure from all manner hate of your brother. (For he obteyneth nothing at
gods hand, of whom his neighbor obteyneth not forgeuenes of his fault:) And
if you ask those things that are available to the life of heaven, and make
to the glory of Christ. Or else we for the most part know not what we
should ask of God, and many times for wholesome things we desire hurtful
things, if the spirit of Christ put us not in mind, what were expedient for
us to ask: but as often as we ask after this sort, we are sure that god
hears our prayers: we are sure that he will freely give us whatsoever we
shall ask. So has he promised us, and is hable to perform whatsoever he
promises, and will perform whatsoever is wholesome for us. Neither shall he
only increase his gifts in us, being provoked thereunto by our prayers, but
also he will pardon us our daily offenses, without whom the feebleness of man's
nature can scarcely be hable to endure long: and he shall not only pardon
every one his offenses, if he desire pardon, but he shall also hear the
brother praying for the brothers offenses, so that the sin be of such
sort, that it does not quench out brotherly love, although it do somewhat
obscure it. For there is a sin that cannot be imputed un to weakness, nor be
healed with light and easy remedies: as when a man upon a set malice
persecuteth the christen felowshyppe, where he himself has professed Christ,
and in pretense of religion goes about to subvert religion. The desperate
frowardnes of such a one deserves not the prayer of godly men: and yet
perfect charity prays also for such, wyshynge for those things that cannot
possiblye be done. There is no man that prays for the devil, because he
does wittynglye through malice oppugn them, whom God would well unto.
Perhaps no prayer should also be made for them, that are translated into his
affeccion: and are rather to be shunned, that they do no harm, than to be
releued with prayers, except they show an hope of their repentance. Such a
disease needs more strong remedies, and is greater, than can be taken away by
daily prayers, whereby lighter offenses are taken away, which are done of feeble
weakness, and not of purposed frowardenes. Whatsoever is committed beside
perfect righteousness, is sin: but there be many differences of sins. There is
some sin, which although it demynyshe and blotte innocencye, yet it
utterly quenches not out christian charytye: as when by occasion we ouershote
a word against our friend, which we are sorry for by and by that it over
shot us: when a sudden anger has russhed out at a word, that we would
wyshe by and by might be called back again: when through the swetenes of
meat or drink receyuyng, we take somewhat more then the necessity of nature
does require. And to pardon these offenses God is easy, if he be called upon
with mutual prayers. Such manner of faults of children, those that be gentle
parents do for the most part wynke at, which would not suffer greater
offenses. Albeit there is none so light a fault that ought to be neclected.
Whatsoever is done amysse, is evil and to be eschewed of godly folks, and
if it be neclected, it drawethe by little and little unto death. But like as
spedye remidy ought to be had for these lighter offenses, which men are
scarce hable to avoid: even so god forbydde, that he which has once
renounced the world, and dedicated himself unto god, should be tombled back
again into any great notable crime. By professing of ye gospel we are made
the children of God, and members of Christ. And it is not convenient, that the
children should diffre so greatly from the father, and the members from the
head. Therefore he that throughlye understands, that he is borne of god,
takes more head that he do no evil, than of death it self: and keeps
himself that he have nothing a do with that naughty lord ( devil) whom he
served before together with the world. Like as Christ being once dead rose
again to life, and rose again to life never to dye any more: even so he that
through baptism is once dead unto the world, and risen again to newnes of
life with Christ, it is not mete for him to do that thing again, for the
which Christ must dye again. Let them be affrayed of the world, which are
not truly borne again of god: which have not with all the pith of their whole
hearts received the seed of the gospelles doctrine. We know, that we are
truly of god, whom neither the evil things nor the good things of this
world can separate from Christ. The whole world is set all together on
naughtines. Which way soever a man turns him, there is occasion offered of
things to turn us away quite from the innocent vpryghtnes of life. But from
the worlds enchauntmentes the son of god has once delivered us: which
came into the world for this cause, to exempte us out of the contagious
infeccion of the world. He has driven away the darkness of our former
ignorance, and has given us an understanding that is lyghtened with the
light of the gospel: to the intent we should know the true god and the free
geuer of al righteousness: who only had nothing a do with the world: and we
are in him truly, in that we follow his doctrine and promyses with an vpryght
conscience, as long as we are in his son Jesus Christ, whom he sent into
the world for that intent. He is the true god, which only ought to be
honored: and the true life, which only ought to be desired. Little
children, if you do truly know the true God, beware of false gods, and
vain Images, which the world has in honor. He wurshyppeth an Idol, that
makes money his God. He wurshyppeth an Idol, that makes his belly his God.
He wurshyppeth an Idol, that for worldelye honors sake, despysethe the
commandments of GOD. There be many such kinds of Images. Beware you of
all, if you will abide in the wurshippe of the true God. Which humble prayer
of mine he vouchesafe to make good, by whose goodness we are delivered from
our erroures.

Amen.
Thus ends the Paraphrase upon the first epistle of Saint John.
The Paraphrase of Erasmus of Roterodame upon the Second Epistle of John.
The text.
The elder to the elect lady and her children, whom I love in the truth: and
not I only, but also all that have known the truth, for the truths sake
which dwells in us and shall be in us for ever. With us shall be grace,
mercy, and peace from god the father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ the
son of the father, in truth and love. I reioysed greatly, that I found of
thy children walking in truth, as we have received a commandment of the
father. And now beseech I thee lady, not as though I wrote a new
commandment unto the, but that same which we have had from the beginning,
that we should love one another. And this is the love, that we should walk
after his commandment. This commandment is (that as ye have heard from the
beginning) ye should walk init. For many deceauers are entered into the world,
which confess nor that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceauer
and an Antichrist. Look on your selves y^ we lose not that we have wrought, but
that we may have a full reward. Whosoever transgresses and bydeth not in the
doctrine of Christ, has not God. He that endures in the doctrine of Christ,
has both the father and the son. If there come any unto you, and bring not
this learning, him receive not to house: nether bid him god speed. For he that
byddeth him god speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. Behold, I have told you
before, y^ ye should not be ashamed in the day of the Lord. I had many things
to write unto you, nevertheless I would not write with paper and ynke: but I
trust to come unto you, and speak with you mouth to mouth, that our joy may
be full. The sons of thy elect sister great the. Amen. I John being an elder
write unto the elect lady, and to her sons also, whom I love syncerely,
nether do I thus alone, but all that are with me which have known the truth
of the Gospelle: nether do they love them for any other cause, but that they
understand the synceritie of the Gospelles profession, which we follow, to
remain in us, and shall remain in us for evermore. Grace, mercy, and peace
be always increased from God the father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, unto
you that persevere still in the truth of the Gospelles doctrine, and in mutual
love one to another. I was wonderfully glad, when I perceived that thy sons
following their mothers godlynes, continued still in the truth of the Gospelles
doctrine, and not gave herkenynge unto false doctors, that go about to turn
many away from it: where the father gave us this in commandment, that we
should give ear to the doctrine of his son, and that we should not go out
of his fotesteppes. Therefore it is no need now, lady, for me to instruct thy
godlynes with new commandments: only let us continue still in that, which
was delivered from the beginning, that we should love each one other with a
mutual and a true Christian love. But this benevolence, the consent and all one
facion of godly life among our selves must procure: that we may live in all
one purposed studies after the commandment of God, which enioined us nothing
so diligently, as mutual love among our selves. There is no true love among
the wiked, nor among them that be of unlike facions. Therefore I give no new
commandment, but I give you warninge diligently, to continue still in that,
which you have already received long a go, and not to suffer your selves by
any subtilties of the false prophets to be plucked away. For in deed there
are many deceauers in the world, which deny that Jesus is Christ, which
should come into the world according to the prophets prophecienges. He that
teaches thus, is a deceauer, and Antichriste him self, Christ's adversary.
Let every one take heed to him self, lest if he forsake that which he has
well begone, he lose all the fruit of those things, which he has hitherto
done well: but let us give diligence, that we may receive the full hyre, which
happens not, but to them that persevere still unto theende. Whosoever swarueth
from the truth, and abides not still in the doctrine of Christ, he is
estraunged also from God the father, in that he swarued from the son. But he
that constauntly follows his doctrine, is in his so doing, dearly beloved
both unto the father and to the son. The one can neither be had nor
forsaken, without the other. This is the true doctrine, which you have
received of true record bearours from the beginning. But if any man come unto
you, and brings a contrary doctrine to this, to carye you away from the
Gospelles verity, you ought not only to take no head unto him, but also he
ought not so much as be admitted in to your house if he desire lodging: nor to
be bidden, God speed, if he chance to mete you in the way. For it is danger
lest he infecte the household with his familiarity: and for his lodging,
requite an evil turn: and lest of bidding him God speed, there arise
communicacion. And in deed evil communicacio^ corrupts good manners. To be
short, he that saluteth and keeps company with such a manner deceauour, he
seems to be a companyon of his evil dooinges. For he gives a courage unto
the wicked, when he sees him self any whit regarded with them, whom he goes
about to subuerte: and gives an outward show of evil unto other, as though
he seemed to favor the naughtynes of him, whose familyaritie he does not
abhor. There were many other things, which I was desirous to write unto you
concerning these matters, howbeit I had rather open them to you presentlye,
than to put them in writing: For I trust shortly to come see you and talk
with you presently mouth to mouth, that the Joy, which I have conceived of
your constaunt synceritie, may be more pleynteous and full, when I shall
both presentlye see in you, that which now being absent I hear of you: and
you again shall see with your eyes the love that I bear toward you. Thy
nephews, thy sisters sons, which is a christian woman commend them unto the.

The End of the second epistle of John.
The Paraphrase of de. Erasmus of Roterodame upon the third Epistle of John.
The text.
The elder unto the beloved Bayus, whom I love in the truth. Beloved I wyshe
in all things, that thou prosperedst, and fatedst well, even as thy soul
prospers. For I reioysed greatly, when the brethren came, and testified of
the truth that is in the, how thou walk in the truth: I have no greater
joy, then for to hear how that my sons walk in verytye. Beloved, thou
do faithfully, whatsoever thou do to the brethren, and to strangers,
which bear witness of thy love before the congregation. Which brethren if thou
bring forwards of their journey (after a godly sort) thou shall do well,
because that for his names sake they went forth: and took nothing of the
Gentyls. We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be helpers to the
truth. I wrote unto the congregacyon: but Diotrephes, which loves to have
the preemynence among them, receives us not. Wherefore if I come, I will
declare his deeds which he does, jesting on us with malycious words, nether
is therewith content. Not only he himself receives not the brethren, but also
he forbids them that would, and thrusts them out of the congregation.
Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good. He that does
well, is of god: but he that does evil, sees not god. Demetrius has good
report of all men, and of the truth it self, yea, and we our selves also
bear record, and ye know, that our record is true. I had many things to
write: but I will not with ynke and pen write unto the. I trust I shall
shortly se the, and we shall speak mouth to mouth. Peace be unto the. The
lovers salute the. Great the lovers by name. THe elder unto the very loving
manne Gaius, whom I love syncerely. Dearly beloved, this do I wish for in my
prayers of Jesus Christ, that like as thy soul does prosperouslye well in
continuynge steadfastly in the Gospelles doctrine, even so it may also do
prosperously in all other matters, Christ being thy good speed. For I have
conceived no small pleasure of the saying of the brethren, which are come unto
us, and have made report of thy synceritie, they being as true witness
bearours, as thou truly folowest the truth of the Gospel, not only in
profession, but also in thy studies, and in all thy whole life. For there is no
matter that makes my heart more glad, than if I chance to hear, that my
children, which I begat by the Gospel unto Christ, do follow the truth that
we delivered them. Dearly beloved, in that thou art diligently good unto the
Christians, which are there, and come thider as strangers, thou dooest a deed
worthy him that truly puts his trust in the Gospel, and loves Christ. For
they have made report of thy synceritie before all the whole company of the
Christians. And thou should do well to, if thou would bring those, whom
thou receiuedest gently at their coming, forth with like gentilnes, thither as
they would go: like as they, which go about Gods business and not their own,
deserve to be entreated of the^ that love God heartily. For they went not forth
to a market to increase their own household pelf, but to preach the name of
the lord Jesus Christ, whose doctrine they distribute so unto y^ heathens, that
they take nothing of them for all that: to thintente they may bring the more
fruit unto Christ, for whom they labor: and if they so do, god defend them
from all suspicion of hastinge hand making. In deed it is besemynge for us to
receive such in to our house, and to provide, that they want nothing to the
necessity of their life, that we may on some behalf be partakers of those
things, which are done by them unto the glory of God. For so Christ has
promised, that he which receives a prophet as a prophet, should have the
reward of a prophet. I have written hertofore already unto the congregation,
that is there, to do the same, that I warn the of: howbeit Diotrephes
withstandeth and does not receive our monicions, having rather to be a ring
leader among his own, than of low degree, and a pure disciple of Christ: and
having rather to be autour of a new herisye, than to be a true follower of the
old enangelicall doctrine. Wherefore if I come unto you, I will warn him of
his doings, whereof he thinks peradventure that I am not ware, while he being
a naughty manne chattreth with malicious words against us, to the intent he
might take away our credence and authority from us among you, which do exhort
you to continue still in the doctrine of the Gospel. Nether being herewith
content, he does not only not receive the brethren, but also forbids them
that would receive them, and disturheth them in the congregation. The man's
frowardnes is such. My good louinge brother, follow not that which is evil,
but that which is good. It is our part to suffer them that nanght are, but not
to follow their example. All are not the children of god, which have received
baptism. He that declares his faith by godly deeds, is berne of God, for he
resembles the disposicion and doctrine of his father. He that doveth
wickedlye, although he profess God in his words, yet he does not (for all
that) see god truly: for he is seen with most purely scowred eyes of faith,
which are ^lurred with the darkness of vices. Therefore avoid the example of
Diotrephes, and set Demetrius before thy eyes to do after. For his godlynes is
reported of all men, which although they would say nothing, yet the thing it
self makes report of the man's veetue. Yea and we our selves having
experience of his synceritie, bear witness of him. And you know, that we
bear true witness of him. I had also very many other things, which I was
desirous that thou should know, but I thought it not expedient, to put them
in writing. I trust I shall come unto the shortly: than we shall presently
commune of all things more surely and more fully. Peace be unto the. Thy
friends that are here commend them unto the. And salute thou those friends
again, that are there, in their behalf dilygently, and by name.

Thus ends the third epistle of John.
A paraphrase or comentarie upon the Reuelacion of S. John / faythfullye
translated by Edmond Alen.
The first Chapter.
The text.
The reuelacion of Jesus Christ, which god gave unto him, for to show unto
his servants, things which must shortiye come to pass. And when he had
sent, he showed by his angel unto his servant John, which bare record of the
word of god, and of y^ restimonye of Jesus Christ and of all things that he
saw. Happy is he that reads and they that hear the words of the
prophesye, and keep those things which are written therein. For the time is at
hand. Unto our savior Jesus Christ / after his manhood, was given of god his
father, not only all sufficiency and fulness of grace, but also the knowledge
and reuelacion of all such secret mysteries, as should happen from time to
time in Christendom, until such time as he should come again unto the
lattre judgment: which secrets our savior Christ did reuele and open
through his angels unto his elect servants, and specially unto holy S.
John: I mean unto that John, which bare wytnes of the word of god, and of
Jesus Christ, and did record all such matters and doctrine, as he himself
had seen, and learned. Which doctrine shall be very profitable unto every one
that shall read and understand this prophecye, so far as he shall endeuer
himself to live thereafter, preparinge and appointynge himself through a true
faith and a christen conversation to please the lord in this life, which is
short and transitorye, and the end thereof, uncertain*

The text.
John, to the seven congregacions in Asia. Grace be unto you and peace, from
him which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven
spirits which are before his trone, and from Jesus Christ, which is a
faithful witness, and first begotten of the dead, and Lord over the Kings of
the earth. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and made us kings and prestes, unto god his father, be glory and
dominion for evermore. Amen. In little Asia were notable churches and
congregacions set up and institute of the holy apostles, and specially of S.
Paul unto which also S. Peter writes, and confirms them in the faith, and
unto the same does S. John write specially, in consyderacion that this
doctrine should concern all churches generally which were at that time
standing, or should afterward be institute through out the whole world. And
he wysheth unto them all as much good, as he can think or dyuyfe, from god
which is only the gyuer of all good things, and is and remains for ever
vnmutable and rules and governs all things, whereunto he uses the
ministracio^ and service of his angels, which are infynyte in nombre: which
thing the nombre of seven does sygnifye according unto the use of holy
scripture. And with this eternal father and holy spirit one god, reygneth our
lord Jesus Christ, which is appointed to be ye ruler of al things in heaven
and earth, and of al sensyble creatures, both gostly (as ye spirits are) and
bodily. He in his man's nature, for very love toward mankind was sent for ye
comfort and wealth of y^ whole world, and testified most faithfully unto al ye
world, ye will of his father in the gospel, according as it was before promised
in all the prophets, that he should be the founder and performer of the new
testament, and should be offered up and dye for the sins of the whole world,
and in the resurrection or vprisynge again of the body and soul, he should
go before all the resydue of the faithful, and be their guide unto
everlasting life: which life he only has meryted and purchaced through his
perfyte obedyence upon the erosse, unto death. And therefore is he exalted, as
concerning his manhood, above all creatures, and has received the most
worthiest and highest name and title, that can be named, either in this world,
or in the world to come. And he has purchaced and deserved for all the holy
elect children of god, the honor and glory of the everlasting kingdom, and
also grace, to rule, and govern our selves vertuouslye, and to offer up daily
and continually a pleasant sacryfyce of thanckes geuynge, in true faith in god,
through Jesus Christ. Unto him therefore alone parteyneth all honor and glory.

The text.
Behold, he comes with clouds, and al eyes shall see him, and they also
which pearsed him. And all kynreds of the earth shall wayle over him. Even so,
Amen. Even in despyte, and against the will and mind of all them that
crucified Christ, and would not take nor knowledge him for a king, yet he
comes in the highest majesty, which excels all glory and power of all
otherkynges that ever were, and now shows him self and appears through
faith, unto all his elect as the very messiah and savior of the world,
which was so long desyered and looked for. And when he shall come at the latter
day, to judge the quycke and the dead, than shall all the Jews and
unfaithful, which despised him at his first coming (when he came with such
humblenes,) crucyfyeng and putting him to death, and would not receive nor
knowledge him for a savior, and a messiah, they shall than see him with fear
and tremblyng and he shall appear dreadful unto them.

The text.
I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord
almighty, which is, and which was, and which is to come. I John your brother
and companion in tribulacion, and in the kingdom and patience in Jesus Christ,
was in the isle that is called Pathmos, for the word of god, and for the
witnessynge of Jesus Christ. This does Christ speak to declare his godly
majesty, and his eternal substance, and his almyghtye power without end or
beginning. And he speaks after the manner of the grecians, among the which
Alpha is the first letter and Omega the last. And after this, speaks S. John
the Evangelist again, of his own parson without any worldly boasting:
reioysyng (as it becomes a Christian man) not in any honor or riches of ye
world, nor yet in any holiness ye is in himself, but only in ye affliccions,
persecucio^s, patience, mysery, and partycypacion of ye righteousness in Christ,
whereof he is a witness, and a partener in sufferyng for Christ's sake: which
thing happened unto him for the gospel, by ye procurement and commandment of
Domicianus the Emperor which would have been honored for a God, where as John
taught, that the only living god and none else ought to be honored and called
upon. For y^ which cause, John was banyshed and sent into Pathmos, where god
did show this reuelacion unto him, and bad him write it: and so by that means
through his writing, to set forth and to further ye glory of Christ in his
banysheme^t, more tha^ ever he had been able to have done with his words or
preachinge only, if he had still remained among his friends in his country.

The text.
I was in the spirit on a sunday, and heard be hynde me a great voice as it
had been a trempe, saying: I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the sast. That
thou see: wryt in a book, and send it unto the seven congregacions which
are in Asia, unto Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamos, and unto
Thiatira, and unto Sardis, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicia. The lords
day is the sunday, which the holy Apostles, (thoroughe the holy ghost which
they received at whytsontyde) did institute to be sanctyfyed and kept holy of
the Christen church, in the stead of the Jews Sabbath day, not without very
necessary laudable and expediente consyderacions. Eusebius writes that S.
John did rule the church of Ephesus after S. Paul's death and like wise also,
the other churches in Asia, and therefore was commanded of Christ in this
place, to send this writing unto them, forasmuch as he know them best, so
that in process of time it might be common unto all churches for their
edefyeng and instruccion, as it came also to pass. And unto the^ also he wrote
his gospel (after that he was delivered out of Pathmos,) against y^ heretykes,
which began at that time to rise.

The text.
And I turned back to se the voice that spoke to me. And when I was turned, I
saw seven golden candelstyckes, and in the mids of the candelstyckes, one
like unto y^ son of man, clothed with a lynnen garment down to the fere, and
gyrde about the pappes with a golden gyrdle. His head and his hears were
white, as white woll, and as snow: and his eyes were as a flame of fire: and
his fere like unto brass, as though they brent in a forna^^, and his voice as
the sound of many warers. And he had in his right hand scue^st^rres. And out
of his mouth went a sharp two edged swearde. And his face shone even as the
sun in his strength. What is sygnifyed by the seven golden candelstyckes, and
by the vii. stars, that shall Christ himself hereafter declare: which being
very god, yet he was in every condition (sin except) like unto us all, after
his man's nature: And with his spirit, aid, and gouernynge he is present in
all churches, and shall so remain until the worlds end. He is clothed with
innocencye and holiness, by reason whereof he made oblacion, not for his own but
for our sins. He is also gyrded with heavenly might and power, always ready
and glad to help the faithful. He is the head, full of godly and heavenly
wisdom, which knows all things from everlasting. He looks with a
fearful face, and with a terryble and grim countenance, against al
unfaithful, but a pleasant and loving countenance she with he toward the
elect and faithful beleuers. He is ready with his hot flamynge and burning
fete to stamp in pieces and to destroy the wicked and ungodly. His voice is
the holy gospel, which neither all the gates of hell, all the power upon
earth and in hell, nor all his enemies can overcome, all though Paul at the
beginning being blind and ignorante, thought and hoped ye contrary: The wicked
Emperor Nero likewise, and diverse other. But they all withal such like,
were always stryken and ouercomme with the sword of the almyghtye word of
god. And unto the godly and faithful, the joyful and comfortable sight of him
is more pleasant and delectable than the bryghtnesse or clearnes of the son
can be unto any earthly creature.

The text.
And when I saw him, I fell at his fete, eue^ as dead. And he laid his right
hand upon me, saying: unto me fear not, I am the first and the last, and a^
alive, and was dead. And behold, I am alive for evermore, and have the keys
of hell and of death. Write therefore the things which thou have seen, and the
things which are, and the things which must be fulfilled her after: the
mysterye of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand, and the
seven golden candelstyckes. The seue^starres are the messengers of the seven
congregacions. And the seven candelstyckes which thousawest, are the seven
congregacions. If this holy Apostle and Euangelyst, a dysciple whom Christ
loved, were not able to suffer nor abide the presence of Christ's glorified
manhood: How will the wicked enemies of the truth and of all godlynes, abide
it, or what will they do? How Christ is the first and the last, god and
man, the very laluacion it self, and yet crucified as a sinner: and how he
rose up again from death, ascended into heaven and received power over al
creatures, it needs no further interpretacio^. And again the holy
congregacions or churches have their propre and peculiar angels to lead them,
to guide them, to wait upon them, to serve them and after gods ordinance to
defend and preserve them.

The second Chapter.
The text.
Unto the messenger of the congregation of Ephesus write: these things says
he, that holds the seven stars in his right hand, and that walks in the
mids of the se^t^ golden candelstyckes. I know thy worckes, and thy labor,
and thy patience, and how thou c^^nest not forbear them which are evil: and
have examined them, which say they are Apostles, and are not: and have found
them liars: and have suffered. And haste patience: and for my names sake have
labored, and have not faynted. WHat manner a church was at Ephesus, how Paul
behaved him self and wrought there, how Tymothye preached and taught there,
and what the false prophets did there enterprise, is to be seen in the Epistle
of S. Paul to the Ephesians, and sufficientlye descrybed of Erasmus in the
Paraphrases of that Epistle. And read more thereof in the christen and godly
story of Eusebius, in the. v. book and xxiiii. chapter. And by these words
may thou understand the high praise and commendacion of their faith,
whereof their good works bear sufficient wytnes and record. And this is also
to be noted by this place, that men should not lightly nor rashely believe all
manner of doctrine, but first try and prove whether it be of god or no, and to
overcome and convince al manner of errors and false doctrine only with the
word of god, which is not contrary unto it self (if one place be justly
compared with another) but it is profitable unto the true and perfyte
understanding and knowledge of god. In John's time, as S. Paul was come unto
Rome, there were certain heretykes at Ephesus, namely, Cherinthus, Hebyon, and
after them Marcio^ like as there were also in Paul's time, Himeneus, Alexander,
Philetus and Hermogenes. But al these were overcome with much ado and through
long patience, by y^ godly bishops, which were at Ephesus, one succedyng
another, as Eusebius makes mention.

The text.
Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left thy first
love. Remember therefore f^o^ whence y^ art fallen, and repent, and do y^ first
works. Or else I will co^^e unto the shortly, and will remove thy candelsticke
out of his place, except y^ repent. But this thou have, because thou hate y^
deeds of y^ Nicolaitans, which deeds I also hate. Let him that has ears hear
what the spirit says unto the congregacions. To him that overcomes, will I
give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the mids of y^ Parady ^e of
god. Out of y^ faintnes and coldness of faith, do spring want and lack of
right good works. Even so came it to pass at Ephesus by y^ means of y^ false
apostles, as Paul did before prophecye unto them at Myletus. For y^ which
cause y^ Lord requires and exhorts them to amend, and threatens them
before (after y^ manner of all the prophets) that he will else punyshe and
condemn them. As concerning the sect of the Nycholaites, read y^. xxix.
chapter of y^ third book of Eusebius Chronicle. Whosoever through true faith
and love shall overcome y^ te^ptacions and assaults of the enemy, the same
shall receive and enjoy the everlasting reward of bliss, y^ fruicion of god
y^ heavenly father, and the pleasant sight of ye countenance The tree of life.
of Jesus Christ in everlasting joy, which he names in this place, y^ tree
of life.

The text.
And unto the angel of the congregation of Smyrna write: These things says he
that is first and the last, which was dead and is alive, I know thy worckes
and tribulacion and pouer^ie, but thou art rich. And I know the blasphemy of
them, which call them selves Jews and are not: but are the congregation of
Satan. Fear none of those things, which thou shall suffer. Behold, the
devil shall cast some of you into prison, to tempte you, and ye shall have
tribulacion ten days. Be faithful unto the death, and I will give the a
crown of life. Let him that has ears, hear, what the spirit says to the
congregacions. He that overcomes, shall not be hurt of the second death.
The false apostles which were converted from the Jews unto the faith, were
also at Smirna, very busye and unquiet in maynteynyng the ci^cumcysion and
other Iewyshe ceremonies. Against the which, the true apostles and their
dysciples (as Paul and such other) were feign to fight and strive: by reason
whereof all the churches in the world were in perplexyte and dysquieted. In this
place, Christ speaks unto them of Smirna, and calls them poor in
affliccions and rich in faith and virtue. And thus he teaches here, that it
is the work of the devil, and not of man, whansoeuer thou art cast into
any perplexyte, vexacion, or prison for the faith and truths sake. And
therefore be the more pacient, seeing the heavenly father permytteth such power
unto Satan against the. Even so did it happen in this city, unto y^ good
bishop Polycarpus, one of John's dysciples, which was burnt of the unfaithful,
for the truth and the christen faythes sake. Of this, ye may read more in
the. xiiii. The second death.
and xv. Chapter of the. iiii. book of Eusebius chronicle. By the second
death, understand everlasting death and damnacion, as the first death, is
y^ death of the body and of sin, from the which we shall be delivered and
be raised The first death.
up again, through a true faith and confydence in the mercy of god joined
with a perfyght repentance.

The text.
And to the messenger of the congregation in Pergamos write: This says he,
which, has the sharp swearde with two edges. I know thy worckes, and where
thou dwell even where Satan's seat is, and thou kepest my name, and have not
deuyed my faith. And in my days Antipas was a faithful wytnes of mine, which
was ^^ayne among you, where Satan dwells. But I have a few things against
the: because thou have there, them that maynteyne the doctrine of Balam which
taught in Balake, to put occasyon of sin before the children of Israel, that
they should eat of meat dedycate unto ydoles and commyt fornicacion. Even so
have thou them that maynteyne the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, which thing I
hate. But be converted, or else I will come unto thee shortly, and will fight
against them with the swearde of my mouth. Let him that has ears hear, what
the spirit says unto the congregacions. To him that overcomes, will I give
to eat Manna y^ is bid, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new
name written, which no man knows, saving he that receaueth it. As
concerning this church, we read of no manner of accion or work of faith
thereof. But in all notable cities where right Christian me^ were, both y^
christened and unchristened Jews did styre up and cause much sedicion and
tumult, as their accustomed manner was: And they provoked also the lyuetenauntes
of Rome, always to hate and persecute y^ right and true christians: As it
happened in this city unto the dear and faithful servant of god Antippe,
which with out doubt, preached y^ gospel truly and syncerely, and therefore was
feign to suffer death. In such cities where gods word is condemned and al godly
men in continual perell and danger of their lives and goods, where me^ do both
bless and curse for money, as Balaam did, where abominable fylthines and
whoredo^ is maintained and suffered, and ydolatry set up: and where holy
matrimonye is had in no estimacio^, there without doubt dwells y^ devil. For
these are no small sins but very odious and hateful unto god. But they may
repent and amend, and so obtain mercy of god, and through the grace and aid
of god, they may withstand and overcome such damnable and outrageous
enormyties: which thing if they do not, let them look for nothing more sure,
than eternal damnacion. This ought to move the hearts of all men and to fear
and shrugge them, that they may repent and amend their lives. By Manna,
understand the word of god, and true hearty love. And to cleave Manna.
fast unto Christ with a strong and a steadfast faith, which thing is a
syngular pleasure and delyght unto the godly and faithful, and a very poison
unto the ungodly and unfaithful. By the white stone, is sygnified the eleccion
and appointment The white stone.
unto everlasting honor, before god, and all saints, both in this world
and in the world to come, with the testimonye of a good conscience that
fears god, and of a right hearty joy: And also the everlasting peace, rest,
and sure confydence in the grace and favor of god unto everlasting life.

The text.
And unto the messenger of the congregation of Thiatira write. This says the
son of god, which has eyes like unto a flamme of fire, and his fete are
like brass. I know thy worckes and thy love, service and faith, and thy
patience, and thy deeds which are moo at the last then at the first.
Notwithstanding, I have a feawe things against the, because thou suffer
that woman Iesabell, which called her self a prophetise, to teach and to
deceive my servants, to make them commyt fornicacyon, and to eat meats
offered up unto ydoles. And I gave her space to repent of her fornicacyon, and
she repented not. Behold, I will cast her in to a bed: and them that commit
fornicacyon with her into great aduersitye except they ^u^ue from their deeds.
And I will kill her children with death Here learn, that the son of god,
which has the two edged swearde, the first and the last, which is dead and
yet lives, which has the seven stars, and is the gouernoure of heaven and
earth, is all one thing: Namely y^ Messiah, which was before the beginning
of the world, the savior of all the faithful, our Lord Jesus Christ. Thiatira
is a Cathedral church, and one of the most notable cities in Lydia. This
church, does y^ spirit of Christ commend, and praise, as well for diverse
virtues, as also for waxing bygge and increasyng in them. But he rebukes the
sin of the heads, and ouerseets, which are so neglygent, that they do not
root out, nor reform certain wyckednes: As are the service and honoring of
ydols and falls gods, and other high blasphemies which do always accompany
and wait upon ydolatrye. Which thing Iesabel.
is sygnified by the wicked and supersticious woman Iesabell. Of this woman
read more in the first of the kings in the. xviii. and. xxii. Chapter and in
the. ii. of ye kings in the. ix. and. x. Chapter. How she and al her
posterity were so grievously punished of god. And again read the. xiiii.
Chapter of ye. v. book of Eusebyus, concerning Montanus and his heresies and
than shalt thou understand this place much better.

The text.
And all the co^gregacyons shall know, that I am he which searches y^ reins
and hertes. And ^ will give unto every one of you according unto his worckes.
Unto you I say, and unto other of them of Thyatira, as many as have not this
learning and which have not known the dep^nes of Satan (as they say) I will
put upon you none other burden, but that which ye have already. Hold fast
till I come, and whosoever overcomes and keeps my worckes unto the end, to
him will I give power over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron:
and as the vessels of a porter shall they be broken to sheuers. ^^uen as I
received of my father, so will I give him the morning star. Let him y^ has
ears hear, what the sprete says to the congregacions. This rightuous,
dreadful and severe judgment of god, shall the faithful knowledge and
praise. And shall keep them selves from such blasphemies, and prevent the wrath
and indignacio^ of god, and obey and follow his well, for as much as they hear
and parceaue that god is one, that knows the pryuities of all hearts, and all
the wicked fruits that spryng out of them, and that they shall with all justice
and equite be punyshed. But those which either at Thiatira, or else where, do
stycke and cleave steadfastly unto the word and will of god, forsakynge the
wicked find, and refusing to have any thing with him to do, those would I
not have ouerladen (says god) with outward ceremonies, and with Iewyshe
ordinances. For faith and love, according unto the doctrine of the gospel
and agreeable unto the same, shall be sufficient for them before me, both for
their salvation, and also for a christen and a godly life. For that is the
service, which pleases me, and which I will reward. Which service also, the
very heathen when they see it, shall confess and knowledge it to be good and
godly, and to be the very true and right gods service and being overcome in
their infidelyte and mysbelefe, they shall find in their hearts, to consent
unto it, and to receive it, and so shall be obedient unto the gospel,
forsakynge all their heathnysshe manners and al false gods service. Even as the
holy prophets have said long since, that it should come to pass, and that
the grace and mercy of god was also promised unto the heathen through Christ
that was to come. That they also at length, with one heart and mind, should
behold y^ morning star Christ, and his wholesome gospel, and should in this
life through faith, and after this life in the everlasting kingdom of
Christ, in the heavenly Jerusalem, receive the fruicion of everlasting and
eternal riches with god and al his elect. And in the end he gives them an
earnest exhortacion, to do good and to esche we evil that they may obtain
salvation and avoid damnacion, as he does likewise in other places.

The.iii. Chapter.
The text.
And write unto the messenger of the congregation that is at Sardis: this
says he that has the seven spirires of god, and the seven stars. I know
thy worckes: thou have a name that thou lyuest, and thou art dead. Be awake,
and strength the things which remain, that are ready to dye. For I have not
found thy worckes perfect before my god. Remember therefore, how thou have
received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. If thou shall not watch, I
will come on the as a the^e, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come
upon the. ALL this does Christ speak, which is full of al gifts of y^ holy
ghost, without measure, and dystributeth the same gifts through his spirit,
unto all churches, and to all faithful overseers of the christian congregation.
No hipocrisye nor outwardeshyne of godnes though it be never so full of pomp
or solemnity, is of any value before god. He will have faith and love, which
are the pythe and strength of life, as infydelitie is of death. But this faith
and love must no man use nor have for him self a lone, but he must also move
and further other men unto the same, through his instruccio^, good example of
life, and through prayer. But alas, there is great lack of true faith in the
church, which thing may well be perceived by the works and fruits which
are seen and appear. For there is but little earnest zeal and feruentnes seen
in furtherynge of true virtue and godlynes, and of the true honor of god, done
of a pure conscience, or in following and practisynge the doctrine of the
gospel received of the apostles: There is but little zeal, I say, in
professynge and following of this gospel, in word and life together. There
are but few, which when they spy any thing amysse in them selves, do
earnestlye study to reform and amend it, or enforce them selves with
dilygence, to live in all godlynes, and continuallye to be found waking in
virtuous exercyses, as it were necessary for all faithful to be, seeing the
glorious coming of Christ shall suddenly come upon them they can not tell how
soon.

The text.
Thou have a few names in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and
they shall walk with me in white: for they are worthy. He that ouercometh
shall be thus clothed in white array, and I will not put out his name out of the
book of life, and I will confess his name before my father and before his
angels. Let him that has ears hear, what the spirit says unto the
congregacions. There is but a small number among you, which do live
innocently and godly, studyeng dyligently to live after my will and pleasure.
But this small nombre is worthy of great honor, wherewith I shall also indewe
them, as with blessed immortality, and eternal salvation, of my mere grace
and mercy, above al deserts of theirs, which are all imperfect, if they
should be tried and examined The white array.
by the just judgment of god, although through grace, they shall be taken for
acceptable and worthy. The white array, does sygnifye an innocent life
without all manner of blemyshe: which neither can be obtained in this life, nor
yet is it in the virtue or power of any man. But the innocencye and pureness of
Christ, which has the ouerhande in them that be his, through gods spirit,
shall be dystrybuted unto the faithful, in such wise as they shall be partakers
thereof.

The text.
And write unto the angel of the congregation of Philadelphia: this says he
that is holy and true, which has the keye of David: which opens and no
man shuts: and shuts and no man opens. I know thy worckes. Behold, I
have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou have a
little strength, and have kept my sayings: and have not denied my name.
Behold, I make them of the congregation of Satan, which call them selves
Jews, and are not: but do lie. Behold, I will make them that they shall
come, and worshpype before thy fete: and shall know that I have loved the.
Because thou haste kept the words of my patience, therefore I will keep the
from the hour of temptacion, which will come upon all the world, to tempte
them that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I come shortly, Hold that which
thou haste, that no man take away thy crown. Him that overcomes, will I
make a pyllar in the temple of my god, and he shall go no more out. And I will
write upon him, the name of my god, and the name of the city of my god, new
Jerusalem: which comes down out of heaven from my god, and I wy^ ^^y^^ upon
him my new name. Let him that has ears, hear what y^ spirit says unto the
congregacions. For the more perfyght understanding of this book, we lack
diverse stories, which were either nothing at all, or else littell regarded in
the first beginning of the chrystendome. Else, should we have heard and read
much co^mendacion written of this church. Which, as it may here be well
perceived, did wonderful excellentlye handle it self in the faith and
doctrine of the gospel, and suffered much also therefore. But always it
overcame y^ assaults of the Jews, heretykes, and false teachers, which at
length it did confound, and so through the help of god proceeded and went
forward in godlynes. For the which it is thus commended of Christ in this
place. But Christ himself only has power, through his spirit, to assure,
and stablyshe the conscience of man in true doctrine and in the right faith,
and also in quietness of mind: And all other unto whom he has given the same
spirit, are to be taken as instruments and ministers only according unto
the same spirit and no another wise. For the which cause without the same
spirit, that only does search and judge the secrets of man's heart, no such
matter parteynynge unto the faith and relygion of god and quietness of man's
conscience, can well and rightly be determined. The open The open door.
door, whereof he speaks, is the word of god, and the holy gospel, by the
which the church may work and bring to pass, much profit and honor unto
our god and lord, by them which shall be converted thereby, unto y^ true
christen faith, as well out of the Jews, as also out of the heathen. And that
shall not all the enemies of god be able to hinder, withal their might and
power, how simple and weak soever the ministers of god, in that behalf, shall
seem and appear to be. For he that works in them, is strong, myghtie and can
not be overcome. And he, when he shall see his time, shall not only humble and
bring down the heathen, and turn them unto the true faith, but he shall also
dysmaye the Jews, when as they shall see their honor, their temple and their
gods service, utterly destroyed and overthrown, and the word and knowledge of
god, y^ only creator of all things to be sprede abroad thorowout al y^ world.
At that time shall they be compelled to confess not only those to be the
children of Abraham which are circumcised in their bodies, but those that in
true faith, in spirit and truth, do honor and invoke god that is creator
of heaven and earth, and the god of y^ Patriarchs, offeringe up unto him
euerywhere and at every season continually, that sacrifice that is only left
to be offered, namely the sacrifyce of thanks geuynge. But this faith being
garnyshed with the works of godlynes, shall appear, and be made manifest,
through the patience of the holy martirs, which in so many congregacions have
suffered, and daily are persecuted of the tyrannes for gods sake, and for
denyeng the false gods service, being greuouslye assaulted thorowout the whole
world, and not only at Philadelphya, which is mentioned and named only for
an example, unto all such as are like unto the same. Wherefore whosoever has
y^ grace to be constant and steadfast in faith, let him pray unto god for
perseueraunce, that he may obtain the croune, which god has promised unto
him. Such steadfast posts, that do not only stand fast and sure, but also
are able, and wyllyng to uphold the whole foundation and byldyng of the
church, they shall be set in the heavenly tabernacles of god, and shall be
garnyshed with names and tytles of honor, in everlasting bliss, which shall
be the new Jerusalem, the heavenly golden city, where all the blyssed and holy
citizyns shall dwell, in the kingdom of Christ.

The text.
And unto the messenger of the congregation which is in Laodicia write: This
says (Amen) the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creatures
of god. I know thy worckes, that thou art nether cold nor hot: I would thou
were cold or hot. So then because thou art between both, and nether cold
nor hot: I will spewe the out of my mouth, because thou say. I am rich
and increasyd with goods, and have neade of nothing, and know not, how
thou art wretched and miserable and poor, and blind, and naked. I council
the to bye of me gold tried in y^ fire, that thou may be rich: and white
raiment, that thou may be clothed, that thy fylthy nakedness do not
appear: and anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou may se. As many as
I love, I rebuke and chasten. Be fervent therefore, and repent. Behold, I
stand at the door and knock. If any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
will come into him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my seat, eue^ as ^ overcame, and
have sitten with my father in his seat. Let him that has ears, hear, what
the spirit says unto the congregacions. Our savior Christ has many sundry
names. Here he is called Amen, faithfulness and truth, the refuge and safegarde
of the faithful, of all creatures the beginning, without beginning, y^
everlasting wisdom of god. Here mark how hyghly god is dyspleased with such
as be indyfferent, neither who^ nor cold, which will, and will not, not
considering the earnest will and commandment of god: And will suffer nothing
for his sake, but are content with the only shine and shadow of godlynes and
with the only name of faith and obedyence to god. Where as Christ will have a
more fervent and earnest zeal, namely the gold of a steadfast and a constante
faith in all manner of affliccion and adversity, the white garments of
innocence and pureness of life, in their whole conversation before god and man,
y^ bright and clear iyes of Christen doctrine without any manner of error:
That a man being rich after this manner, may walk before god in his church,
with worship and honestye, and without all dread. When any mysfortune of this
world does happen unto the faithful, they ought to think upon these words,
and to be thankful unto god in true faith and charity, always studyeng to
amend their lives: This is the true repentance. The lord is much more ready
to give, than we are to desire or to receive. And he delyghteth in virtuous and
godly hearts, and gives them comfort, love and hope, and strengthens their
faith, that they may be able to continue and remain without dread in the
grace and favor of god. This is ye very right supper of y^ spirit of god,
withal faithful beleuers in this world. But in the bliss of heaven, there
shall be the very fruicion and possession of all goodness, and of the most
highest honor, with unspeakable joy in god withal the holy saints, which
ever have lived virtuously in the favor of god.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The text.
After this, I looked: and behold a door was open in heaven, and the first
voice which I heard, was as it were of a trompet talking with me, which
said: come up hither, and I will show the things, which must be fulfilled
herafter. And immediately I was in the spirit: and behold, a seat was set in
heaven, and one sat on the seat. And he that sat, was to look upon, like
unto a Iaspar stone, and a Sardyne stone. And there was a raynebowe about the
seat, in sight like to an Emeralde. And about the seat were four and twentye
seats. And upon the seats four and twenty elders syttyng clothed in white
raiment, and had on their heads crowns of gold. HEre does John look and see
in spirit, as all y^ prophets did. Behold the figure, which represents
unto thee, what heavenly mysteries of the kingdom of Christ, and of the
things that should happen afterward, John did see in the heaven being opened.
To be in the spirit, is as much as to be rapte of To be in the spirit. Gods
seat The precious stones. The raynebowe.
the spirit of god, into an heavenly trance above al man's wit power or
capacyte. Gods stool or seat in heaven sygnified the everlasting state and
continuance of the power, might, bliss and ryghtuousnes of god. The bryghtnes
of the precious stones sygnified y^ high majesty and glory of god, bewtyfyed
with the knowledge of al things. The raynebowe sygnifyeth his mercy and
pacient sufferynge, yet not without mete and condign reuengeaunce The.xxiiii.
seats and the.xxiiii. elders.
and justice. The.xxiiii. seats and the.xxiiii. elders, do sygnifye y^ most
highest justice, and unsearchable council and judgment of god, and that the
most special friends of god both of the old and new testament, are
incorporate into y^ kingdom of god, both Patryarkes, Kings, Prophets,
Apostles and bishops: All are subject unto the lord in all holiness, and ready
to honor him eternally. And al these do knowledge, that they received all
goodness and commendacion that they have, of the bountyfull grace of god.

The text.
And out of the seat proceeded lyghtnynges, and thondrynges, and voices, and
there were.vii. lamps of fire, burning before the seat, which are the.vii.
spirits of god. And before the seat there was a sea of glass, like unto
Cristall, and in the mids of the seat, and round about y^ seat were four
beasts full of eyes before and behind. And the first beast was like a lion,
and the second beast like a calfe, and the third beast had a face as a man,
and the fourth beast was like a flying Egle. And the.iiii. beasts had echone
of them sire wings about him, and they were full of eyes within. And they had
no rest day nether night, saying: Holy, holy, holy, Lord god almightye, which
was, and is, and is to come. The earnest judgment and commandment of god,
shall be opened and made manifest unto all the world through the gospel,
which shall be fearful and heavy unto the wicked, but joyful and welcome unto
the faithful and godly: For unto them it shall come with the gifts of the
plentiful spirit of God, The sea of glass.
which shall appear in their fruits. The sea of glass, may sygnifye unto
us, the aduersityes of this life, which serve both to y^ glory of god, and
also to the syngular profit of the faithful for the fruitful exercise of
their faith. The The four sundry beasts. The face of the man. The calfe.
iiii. sundry beasts, are interpreted by some of the old doctors (but not by
all) to sygnifye the.iiii. Euangelystes. They may betoken the.iiii. special
mysteries of the Christen faith: As the manhood of Christ may be sygnified by
the face of the man: And the passion and death of Christ, by the calfe
appointed to be slain and offered. And the resurrection from death by the
lion: And the ascencion into heaven by the Egle. All which mysteries of Christ
are plentuously set The lion. The Egle.
forth in the holy gospelles, and Christ and his kingdom is descrybed in them
unto all the world, as a necessary and a perfyght doctrine. The wings which
The wings.
are spoken of, do sygnifye here (like as they do in the.vi. Chapter of
Esaye) the obedience and reverence, which all creatures do owe of duty unto
y^ lord, which virtues the faithful both willyngly and dylygently do declare
withal redynes and swyftnes of their godly and devout hearts. The multitude
of the eyes, does sygnifye, the Christen doctrine and wisdom of god, whereof
is no The eyes.
want nor scarsenes in the church: And this doctrine must be learned and taken
out of the holy scripture given by god. For the which cause, al godly and
blessed minds as well of the angels as of men, shall never cease to praise and
exalt the almightye god, to be holy in all his works, only one in his godly
substance and yet a Trinite of persons, as it is wonderfully declared and
expressed both by all holy scriptures, and also by the heavenly wisdom of the
prophets, and other holy men, secretly inspired and lyghtned of god, eue^
certain of the heathen also, which through true faith do knowledge and
confess that there is but one only god, creator of all things, and ruler
and gouernoure forever and immutable.

The text.
And when those beasts gave glory and honor, and thanks to him that sat on
the seat (which lives for ever and ever) the four and twentye elders fell
down before him that sat on the trone and worshypped him that lives for
ever, and cast their crowns before the trone saying: thou art worthy (O
lord our god) to receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have created
all things, and for thy wylles sake they are, and were created. One creature
gives evermore occasion to another, to know and to honor by all means
possible, the unsearchable high, majesty, power, wysoome, and mercy of the
only creator and maker all the world: knowledgyng al goodness, that can be
found or seen in all manner of creatures, to come only of God, which is the
well spring of all goodness. And for that cause, he is only to be honored,
inuocated and feared with all reverence and submission, as much as ever is
possible for all creatures to perform, which have all that they have, what
soever it be, life, power, actiuite and altogether of god, and can ascribe
nothing that good is unto them selves.

The.v. Chapter.
The text.
And I saw in the right hand of him that sat in the trone, a book written
within and on the back side sealed with seven seals. And I saw a strong
angel which preached with a loud voice: Who is worthy to open the book, and
to lose the seals thereof? And no man in heaven nor in earth nether under y^
earth was able to open y^ book nether to look thereon And I wept much because
no man was found worthy to open and to read y^ book, nether to look thereon.
And one of the elders said unto me: weep not. Behold a lion of the trybe of
Judah, the rote of David, has optayned to open the book, and to loce the seven
seals thereof. THis book in the hand of god, is the holy scripture and
doctrine of god, inspired by the holy ghost, written through the prophets,
sealed up and unknown unto all men, which will enterprise to read and
interpret it after their natural reason, and after the capacyte of their own
suttyll wits only, whether it be after the spiritual sense, or after the
very letter. For y^ which cause few of the civil and polytique learned men,
given altogether unto worldly wysedom, did ever but little meddle with this
book, or bear any mind unto it. And therefore Ezechiel and Daniel were
commanded to set a lock upon it, notwithstanding that this book is the
truth, necessary and profitable for all the elect children of god, to believe.
But that man alone and none else, can open this book at all times, which has
the spirit of Christ, neither did any other ever open it from the beginning.
For like as Christ was always present with the Patriarchs and Prophets, in all
such things as concerned his honor, rulynge, and instructyng y^ faithful
church through faith: Even so was the spirit of god present in all the elect
plentyfullye, to direct them in all matters, concerning the necessity of their
salvation, although secretly and not manyfestly. Wherefore truly, this book is
shut up unto all worldly and natural reason, not only unto the heathen, but
also unto the fleshely Jews, with their stony hearts, as the most part of them
were, and unto all such as without the spirit of Christ do enterprise to
meddle with the wrytinges of holy scripture. And therefore John bewayleth the
ignorance and blyndnes of the Iewyshe people, and that not without a cause.
But yet this comfort has he, that it will amend and be better: at such time
as the spirit of Christ through the merytes of the death and passion of
Christ, shall take away the blyndnes of all manner of errors, both of the
heathen and of the Jews. And then through the spirit of god in the apostles,
shall be opened the mysteries of the holy gospel, which were hidden in tholde
testament, not only unto the good Jews, but also unto the heathen, whersoeuer
they dwell in y^ world. This has Jesus Christ y^ savior of y^ world, deserved
and brought to pass with his lyonyshe might, and with his shep^she symplicitie
and mekenes: with his patience, and wyllyng passion, eue^ according as the
prophets did tell, and signify long before: And specially Jacob in his
blessing over the trybe of Judah. For the which cause, Christ is called a Lion
of y^ tribe of Judah. And he is also named of Esaias and of other prophets, of
David's stock. As S. Matthew declares in the genealogy of the birth of Christ,
y^ he is not only the son of Abraham and Jacob, but also the son of David.

The text.
And I beheld, and lo, in the mids of the seat, and of the four beasts,
and in the mids of the elders, stood a lamb as though he had been killed,
having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of god, sent
in^o all the world. And he came, and to^e the book our of the right hand of him
that sat upon the seat. And when he had taken the book, y^ four beasts
and.xxiiii. elders fell down before the lamb, having (every one of them)
harpes and golden vyalles full of odoures, which are the prayers of saints,
and they song a new long, saying: thou art worthy to take the book, and to
open the seals thereof: for thou wast killed, and have redeemed us by thy
blood our of al kinredes, and tongues, and people, and nations, and have made
us unto our god, kings and priests, and we shall raygne on the earth. By
the declaracion of the words before, may this that follows well and evidently
be understand: Even as y^ four evangelists have described Christ to be the
lamb y^ was woryed and slain, and full of the gifts of y^ holy ghost,
according unto the number of y^ seven principal articles of our christen
faith, concerning Christ: namely of his manhood, his passion, his burial, his
resurrection, his ascensio^, the sendynge of the holy ghost, and his coming
at the latter day to judge the whole world. All which articles are spread a
broad, know unto the whole world, and once received, through the gospel and
preaching of the Apostles. And thus is the desire of all the holy patriarchs and
prophets fulfilled: which desired nothing more heartily, tha^ the
manifestacion of the honor of god, and the true knowledge, love and religion
of the very true and only one god. Which thing is come to pass, through the
spreadyng abroad of the gospel: and thus is the sweet smellyng oblacio^ of
thanckes geuynge, institute and begone in all the world, and all manner of old
stynekyng ydolatry is abolyshed: And through Christ and his holy Apostles the
true honor and religion of god is spread abroad, and preserved: And the sin
of all the world, is clean wyped away through the blood of Christ once offered
upon the cross: And the errors, and supersticion of al people with all false
service of god, is utterly suppressed: and the righteousness of the true faith
is restored, and the kingdom of Christ set forward through the infynite
mercy and grace of god, which bears rule in all the children of the
kingdom of Christ, and in all the elect both in this life and in the kingdom
of heaven. For the kingdom of heaven takes his beginning here in this world in
the congregation of the faithful, and it shall daily increase through the word of
god, until it be made perfyght in the everlasting kingdom of god with all the
elect in heaven.

The text.
And I beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels about the throne, and
about the beasts and the elders, and I heard thousand thousands, saying
with a loud voice: Worthy is y^ lamb that was killed to receive power and
riches, and wysdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing And all the creatures which are in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and
in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, blessyng, honor,
glory, and power be unto him that sytteth upon the seat, and unto the lamb
for ever ^ore. And the four beasts said: Amen. And the.xxiiii. elders fell
upon their faces and worshypped him that lives for evermore. The very meaning
of S. John is here in this place, as it is in his gospel, to prove the faith
of the godheade of Christ against all heretyckes. And for this cause he
ascrybeth unto Christ in this place, so many dyuine names and properties,
apperteynyng only to y^ godheade: first y^ he shall be invoke and prayed
unto, not only of y^ patryarkes and prophets, but also of al angels, who^ no
creature does excel in worthynes, but only y^ everlasting and the very true
only one god. And thus he sets furthe y^ godly worthiness of y^ meek and
crucified Christ, and of the Lamb y^ was slain and offered up. Unto who^ for
his humblenes, eue^ unto y^ cross, such a name is given, as is above all
names. And therefore the knees of all creatures both in heaven, in earth, and in
hell shall bow unto him. For unto him perteyneth all power, y^ is to say, all
omnipotency or all myghtines, all riches and spiritual treasures, to distrybute
y^ same according unto his will, all wisdom, which is like and equal with y^
omniscie^ce and full knowledge of al things, of the father: All strength over
and above al y^ might and power of all this wide world. All honor, praise and
laud, for his excedyng mercy and goodness, and for his infynite benefits. Unto
whom (as unto their creator) al creatures are made subject. Not only unto
him y^ sits upon y^ stool, but also unto y^ Lamb, which is Christ very
true god, and man. And unto him with y^ father and the holy ghost, apperteyneth
al laud and honor for ever and ever: which is the only one god. Which thing
shall be also ascrybed and given unto him with the vnyforme and full assent of
all the holy elect both in heaven and in earth.

The.vi. Chaptre.
The text.
And I saw, when y^ lamb opened one of y^ seals, and I heard one of
the.iiii. beasts say, as it were the noise of thonder: come and see, and I
saw. And behold there was a white horse, and he y^ sat on him, had a bow, and
a crown was given unto him, and he went forth conqueryng and for to overcome.
And when he had opened the second seal, I heard the second beast, say:
come and se. And there went out another horse that was read, and power was
given to him y^ sat thereon to take peace from the earth, and that they should
kill one another. And there was given unto him a great swearde. THe seven
special articles and mysteries of y^ christen faith may be opened eue^ like
as.vii. seals through y^ holy ghost, in y^ holy scripture of y^ old and new
testament. As y^ excellent clerk Erasmus does prove by diverse testimonies in
his paraphrases upon the.xxiiii. Chapter of luke. But yet we may understand
the opening of these seals, after an other manner. First by y^ white horse,
may be understand, y^ first state of y^ christian church, which was
altogether, pure, without blemyshe or faut, and holy, well armed and ready
prepared: yea also as swyfte as an horse unto al godliness. At y^ which time, y^
kingdom of Christ did most floryshe and increase in y^ whole world. He y^
sytteth upon this horse, has a crown upon him of y^ kingdom of heaven, with a
bow of y^ euangelycal doctrine, wherewith he has conquered and overcome
blessedly y^ errors of ydolatry, and slain them with a glorious triumph and
victory. By y^ second seal, understand y^ state of y^ kingdom of Christ,
in y^ time of y^ martirs, from the time of S. Steue^ until the time of
Co^stantyne the Emperor. When as y^ church was painted with blood, through
out y^ hole world through y^ tyranny of the Romyshe Emperor. Not with standing
y^ at the same time also, y^ Jews suffered extreme calamities, and great plages
of death under the reygne of Tytus, Vespasyan and Adriane. All which may be
sygnified by y^ dead horse, and by y^ great sword. For the Romyshe Emperors
did continually, slaye one an other, besides y^ diverse of the^ peryshed
otherwise also. And this may be well vndersta^de^ by him y^ sits upon y^ red
horse.

The text.
And when he had opened the third seal, I heard y^ third beast say, come
and se, and I beheld, and lo, a black horse: and he that sat on him, had a
pair of balances in his hand. And I heard a voice in y^ mids of the four
beasts, say: a measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for a
penny, and oil and wine se thou hurt not. By the third seal, and the beast,
and by the black horse thou may understand, the great dearth which
happened unto the christians, the heathen, y^ Jews, and the Romans at such
time as either Claudius, or Traianus reigned Emperors. Although the
providence of god did always provide sufficient noryshement for those y^ were
his, as it appears euydently to them y^ read the Chronicles of that time. The
balances, may betoken the penury and want of vytels, for as much as they were
compelled to wey and measure, how much every one should have daily for his
part to live with. For the measure of wheat, is understand to be the
portion, that was allowed for one man for his days spending.

The text.
And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
beast say, come, and se: and I looked. And behold a pale horse: and his name
y^ sat on him was death, and ^ell followed after him, and power was given unto
them over the fourth part of the earth, to kyl with swearde, and with honger,
and with death that comes of vermen of the earth. By the fourth seal, the
beast, the voice, and the pale horse, may thou understand the heretykes,
which did diverse ways and a long time vex the holy church with false
doctrine. And have made it, as it were pale and bleaked for very sorrow and
heaviness. And this myschiefe has prevailed in very many lands, and in the
whole christendom, which was at that time as great as ever it was. And than
were diverse godly bishops and other Christians persecuted to death in all
places, for the true faythes sake.

The trees.
And when he had opened the fyfte seal, I saw under the altar the souls of
them that were killed for the word of god, and for the testimonye which they
had and they cried with a loud voice, saying: How long tariest thou Lord,
holy and true, to judge and to avenge our blood on them y^ dwell on the earth?
And long white garments were given unto every one of them. And it was said
unto them, y^ they should rest yet for a little season until the number of their
fellows, and brethren, and of them y^ should be killed as they were, were
fulfilled. The fyfte seal, and the altar with the souls under it, may
sygnifye the right godly Christen men, which syghe and cry y^ they might ones
see the true honor of god shine and floryshe, and al righteousness to increase:
And y^ to proceed of y^ very true faith and true understanding of the word of
god: and again they cry also against the tyrannous governor of y^ wicked
magistrates. Unto them is given comfort of conscience, and steadfast trust and
confidence in y^ promyses of god, which can not deceive them, if they cry
earnestly and ferue^tly. For y^ is a token of the redempcio^ and great comfort
y^ is at hand. And in y^ mean time, y^ very same do obtain salvation of
their souls, immediately after their death, in y^ joys of heaven, whereas they
do wyllyngly and patiently wait after the resurreccion of their bodies, at
such time as the number of their fellows shall be accomplisshed and fulfilled.
Which time and number is only known unto the lord.

The text.
And I beheld, when he had opened the syxt seal: and lo there was a great
earth quake, and the sun was as black as sack clothe made of hear. And the moon wexed all, even as blood, and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth,
eue^ as a fygge tree casts from her her fygges, when she is shaken of a
mighty wind. And heaven vanysshed away, as a scroll when it is rolled
together. And al mountains and yles, were moved out of their places. And the
kings of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief
captains, and the mighty men, and every bondsman, and every free man, hyd them
selves in de^nes, and in rocks of the hills: and said to the hills and
rocks: fall on us, and bide us from the presence of him that sytteh on the
seat, and from the wrath of the lamb: for the great day of his wrath is
come, and who is hable to endure? This syxte seal, may be understand of the
great mysery and affliccion, which shall arise and be procured through anty
christ, which shall be a very envy of Christ, and of all true holiness which
shall esteem and make himself a god. And he shall set furthe in all things, his
own glory, honor, pomp, just and pleasure, against the holy word of god.
And all this shall he do, with all wylfulnes, tyranny, false doctrine,
hypocritical and supersticious holiness, and with man's ordinances, and he shall
have wonderful success there with. And therefore there shall great affliccions
arise in the world, and terryble earthquakes shall be seen, which shall evidently
declare the grievous myseries which shall ensue there upon. And all these things
shall be known, (according unto the manner of the scripture, and the prophets,
and of Christ himself also) through y^ ^^lypse and darckenyng of the sun* of
the Moon, and tokens of blood, and through the falling of the stars. Wha^
as in the holy state (understand y^ spiritualty) standerous persons shall
reygne, which shall blemyshe that order and state with wyckednes, and shall do
much hurt both unto the bodies and souls of them, for whose wealth and
saluacions sake they ought by duty and office, wyllyngly and gladly to give,
and to loose their own bodies and lives. For truth it is, y^ after the time of
the heretics, the enemy of Christ that hell hounde Mahomet did arise in the
East parties of the world: And the maynteyners of ydols and images, monkery
and false religions, damnable perpetual vows, purgatory, byeng and sellyng of
masses for money, the pride and pomp of the spirituality, and specially of y^
sea of Rome and of her decrees, cursyng of Emperors and Kings, theft,
robberies, wars and murders in finite without number, (which brought such
misery, sla^der and heuines, as no tongue can express) these, I say, did arise
in y^ west parts of y^ world. And this will the holy ghost sygnifye and
express in this place, with such words, as men do use, wha^ they will
express the highest sorrows, perplexites, and myseries of any time.

The.vii. Chapter.
The text.
And after that, I sewe four Angels stand on the four corners of the earth,
holdyng the four wyndes of y^ earth, y^ the wind should not blow on y^
earth, nether on the sea, nether on any tree. And I saw another angel ascend
from the rysinge of the sun, which had the seal of the living god and he
cried with a loud voice to the four Angels (to whom power was given to hurt
the earth and the sea) saying: hurt not y^ earth nether the sea, nether the
trees, till we have sealed the servants of our god in their forheades. THis
perteyneth also unto the syxt seal, as a syngular comfort unto y^ right
faithful, which are tossed and persecuted in this world for the truths
sake, and for godlynes. By these.iii.angels, Four angels.
are understand noisome ministers, which go about to hinder both the life
and doctrine of the gospel, and the true faith. These are y^ messengers of
Antichrist, scattrid thoroweout the whole world, and they do great hurt unto
al men of every degree: which is The earth, the sea, and the trees. The holy
angel.
sygnified by the earth, the sea, and the trees. The holy angel, which
ascends from the rising of y^ son, and has the token or seal of the
living god, is our lord Jesus Christ: which has not only commanded the
gospel to be preached unto al creatures, but also through his godly power, he
does hinder such as would stop or let it. And this he does through his ordinary
ministers, as well of y^ spiritual, as also of the temporal sort. And for
this cause some men have understood by this angel, ye good Emperor
Constantyne. But it may also be some other, by whom out fauiour Christ does
further, and set for the the doctrine of the gospel, and a Christen life,
against all tyannes and Antychrystes. This angel therefore, shall deliver the
elect children of god, from the mids of the wicked world, and shall mark
or seal them with the token or mark of the blessed which is faith, love, and
innocence, and by these he shall make them to be known unto the whole christen
congregation.

The t^^^^
And I heard the nombre of them which were sealed, and there were sealed. an.
C. and xliiii. ^. of at the crybes of the children of Israel. Of the trybe of
Judah were sealed. xii. M. Of the trybe of Ruben were sealed. xii. M. Of the
trybe of Gad were sealed twelve. M. Of the trybe of Aser were sealed. xii. M. Of
the trybe of Neptalim were sealed twelve. M. Of the trybe of Manasses were
sealed. xii. M. Of the trybe of Symeon were sealed. xii. M. Of the trybe of
Leuy were sealed. xii. M. Of the trybe of Isacar were sealed. xii. M. Of the
trybe of Zabulon were sealed. xii. M. Of the trybe of Joseph were sealed. xii.
M. Of the trybe of Benjamin were sealed. xii. M. Thus has our savior Jesus
Christ chosen into his church and congregation, not only out of the gentyles
or heathen but also out of the Jews, of all trybes and generacions. Out of ye
which, even before the passion of Christ, there were infynite noumbres,
scattered and dyspersed abroad through out ye whole world, which were converted
unto ye christen faith and received ye baptism or christendom. As the holy
Apostles also, preached first unto the Jews, the sincere and pure christen
faith. And the nombre of those Jews ye were converted by them, was doubtless
great, throughout the whole world, and in continuance of time increased. But
here in this place, after ye customeable use of the holy scripture, is marked
or sealed a certain appointed, and prescribed number, for an uncertain and an
vnprescrybed number, but yet a full and a perfyght number. For. xii. times.
xii. thousand, do A certain number, put for to signifye an uncertain multitude.
make an hundredth and. xliiii. thousand. For what cause certain are not here
rehearsed among the. xii. trybes, it is not necessary to search. For there
are even as many true christians, and more also (through y^ will of god)
converted unto the true faith out of y^ trybe or flock of Jacob: And more
shall be daily converted, when as the Christen religion shall be restored and
reformed after the rule and square of holy scripture, as it was first bylded,
of the Apostles and bishops of the prymatyue church.

The texte^.
After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude (which no man could nombre)
of al nations and people, and tongues, stooe before the seat, and before the
lamb, clothed with long whyre garments, and palms in their hands, and
cried with a loud voice, saying: salvation be ass^r^bed to him that sytreth
upon the seat of our god, and unto the lamb. And all the angels stood in the
compase of the seat, and of the elders, and of the four beasts, and fell
before the seat on their faces, and worshypped god, saying. Amen: Blessing and
glory and wysdom. and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be unto out
god for evermore. Amen. As was before said, there were many turned unto ye
christian faith, out of ye tribes of ye Israelites, after y^ flesh. But there
were many more, yea infynite nombres out of all other heathen people, tounges,
and nations, which eue^ from ye antyquyte (as both Sybylla and Mercurius, and
also more euyde^tly and certainly y^ patriarch Jacob in ye. xlix. of Genesis,
and likewise all ye prophets do testify) did look and wait for the savior
and Messiah. Out of ye which the christendom did daily increase, and wax
greater in y^ whole world, and thus they became right children of Abraham, and
Israel, after ye faith, to y^ glory and praise of god. Where unto all the holy
patriarchs had always more respect, tha^ either to y^ land of Chanaan, or to
ye temple of Jerusalem, or yet to y^ circumcision and cuttyng of ye foreskynne
of their bodily (but unnatural and dysobedient) children and posterite. Yea or
finally to all manner of Iewyshe ceremonies. For those christians, that were
converted from the heathen, in the whole world, did embrace and receive the
gospel very desyrously and fervently, framing their lives in every condition
thereafter, reformyng and forsakyng their old heathnyshe and sinful life and
manners: pacient in all manner of affliccions: Constant and faithful even unto
death for the true says and relygions sake, against ydolatrye, supersticion
and false religion. And for this, they have received everlasting bliss, wherein
they laud and honor god in the joys of heaven euerlastyngly. As they also
do no less, so long as they remain in the warrefare of this transitorye
life, wherein they walk, (as being marked and chosen out) in all innocence,
virtue, and godlynes: and thus even upon earth, they possess their souls with
patience, in all manner of assaults and temptacions, with a true confidence in
god, and with a quiet conscience. And by this means they take here a taste of
the blissed hope and love, until they obteyue everlasting salvation.

The text.
And one of the elders answered, saying unto me: what are these which are
arrayed in long white gatmentes, and whence came they? And I said unto him:
Lord thou wotest. And he said to me: these are they, which came out of great
tribulacion, and made their garments large, and made them white by the blood
of the lamb: therefore are they in the presence of the sear of god and serve
him day and night in his temple, and he that sytteth in the seat wylld well
among them. They shall honger no more nether thirst, nether shall the sun
light on them, nether any heat. ^or y^ lamb which is in the mids of the
^eare, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto fountaynes of living water,
and God shall wype away all tears from their eyes. A certain elder asked S.
John (to give him occasion to teach, and to instruct him) what he judged, and
thought of those blessed ones, which he saw in such honor with god,
garnysshed with white garments. And John made a quick answer, saying, that
all those which do cleave unto Christ with a true and a perfyght faith, and
for the faith and truths sake suffer patiently and wyllingly, what a^^lyctio^
so ever god shall send unto them, they shall be in great honor and estimacio^
with god. And they are such, as assc^ybe al their perfightnes, virtue, and
godlynes, not unto their own works, nor yet unto their own fulfyllyng of the
law, wherein they must needs knowledge them selves gyltye and synful: but all
together unto the merytes of the healthsome passion of Christ, which is and
shall ever be their righteousness, in whom they put their trust and confydence:
and for his sake, they are ready to suffer, whatsoever god shall lay upon
them. These are the holy and blessed, which begin in this life, to have a
delight in godlynes, even with a free spirit: And through faith they are sure
of the grace and mercy of god, which shall continue for ever toward them, and
at length they shall have the clear fruicion of all goodness, and shall fully
possess that, which they do here hope and look for. Such men are the very
true servants of god fully stablysshed in the right faith, and true love:
From the which (through the grace of god) they shall never fall: For as much
as god is their father, and ouerse^r, whose dear and loving children they
are. And they can lack no treasure, neither corporal nor spiritual, either
in this world, or in the world to come. And they live blessedly in peace and
quientnes of conscience, before god: ready at the pleasure of god, to go
through welthe and woo in this world, whom no manner of creature can hurt,
for as much as the lord favors them, unto whom they have utterly given and
committed them selves, and have offered up unto him a pleasant sacrifice and
oblacion in faith, in true Christen love and perfyght hope. For Christ that
suffered death for them, and redeemed them with his blood, will not forsake
them, but graciously rule and govern them, and through the holy gospel will
instruct them in all righteousness, which they begin here in this world, and
shall enjoy the fruit thereof in the life everlasting. And thus through y^ grace
and mercy of god, they shall overcome al woe and vexacion, and remain pacient
in persecucion, yea and merry and joyful also in him, that can strengthen and
comfort them: which dystrybuteth his plentiful grace unto them, to work al
holy and virtuous works. For the which also, being his own works, he will
yet crown and reward them (as S. Austen says) in the kingdom of heaven
eternaliy.

The.viii. Chapter.
The text.
And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven about
the space of half an hour. And I saw. vii. angels standing before god,
and to them were given seven trompertes. And another angel came and stood before
the altar, having a golden senser, and muthe of odoures was given unto him,
that he should offce of the prayers of all sa^^^res upon the golden altar,
which was before the seat. And y^ smoke of the odoures which came of the
prayers of all sa^^^res, ascended up before god out of the Angels hand. And
the Angel took the senser, and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it
into the earth, and voices were made, and thondrynges and lyghtnynges, and
earthquake. IT has often been seen, that after great troubles, and much
vexacion, through the prouysion of god, rest and quietness has followed in all
times. And thus shall it continue even from the ascencion of Christ, until
the worlds end, that after rain, the sun shall shine, and afterward it
will be cloudye and darcke again. Even so, when the faithful have once joy in
god after the victory of the dragon, then comes a new dysquietnes and
perplexite, when as the wicked Angels and spirits, through their members and
mynisters, shall set up all abhominacion, sin and wyckednes, hurtefull and
noisome unto the soul: as Satan did unto Job, what time he came, and
accompanied, him self with the children of god. Here come. vii. that is to
say very many, and those mighty and strong, with power granted and
permitted unto them to do harm. But Christ ye true and faithful king and
father of his kingdom, church, and children comes and stands, as an high
pryest at the alter of god, with the oblacion of his own body. For Christ the
lord, is both priest, altar and the oblacion himself, and he stands for
his faithful elect, with the golden censers, the highest love and humilyte,
through the which he gave him self for the sins of all the world, into the
most bitter and standerous death, for a perpetual reconciliacion for all
those that believe in him. Unto this only one and eternal priest, Christ, do
all faithful, holy, and blessed christians, render and give their imperfect
devotion, thanck es geuynge, fervent peticions and prayers, their hope, love,
and faith. All which, he receives in good part, and makes them acceptable
unto ye father, with the censers of his prayers, and with his sweet smelling
righteousness, and holiness, wherewith he is full and abundant, plentuous and
sufficient for all the elect from the beginning of the world, until the
end thereof. And by this means and no another wise, may the prayers of all the
holy and faithful come unto god, namely through the hands and merits of his
passion, so that they take the same with them, pleating with god through the
same. Which thing dilyghteth and pleases the lord god right well. Now if the
holy elect shall thus offer up their necessities and prayers unto god through
Christ, which is the only medyatour between god the father and mankind, than
will the merciful god hear them* and shall punyshe the wicked tyrannes and
oppressors of the faithful, with his fyerye darts, and thonderboltes, and
other plages, which he can, and is wont to use diverse ways for the terryble
punysheme^t of the wicked godless princes and tyrannes, both bodily and
gostly, in so much that Satan with his whole kingdom shall be amassed thereat.

The text.
And the seven Angels which had the seven trompettes, prepared them selves to
blow. The first Angel blewe, and there was made hadle and fire, which were
myngled with blood, and they were cast into the earth: and the third part
of y^ earth was set on fire, and the third part of trees was burnt and all
grieve grass was burnt. And the second angel blewe: and as it were a great
mountain burning with fire was cast into the sea, and y^ third part of the
sea turned to blood, and the third part of the creatures which had life,
dyed, and the third part of ships were destroyed. Christ brings his
punyshementes to pass through good and evil angels, even at his own
pleasure. For unto the lord there is nothing evil nor unprofitable: for as
much as he only, can make good of evil well enough. The first plage of the
church of Christ, was in the understanding and interpretacion of holy
scripture which even at the first, was assaulted with diverse dangerous
heresies, which sprang up by reason of y^ dyuersytie of understanding among
the writers and teachers: by reason whereof, infynite Schisemes, disse^cions*
perels and dangerous vproures did spring and arise. And for this cause were so
many councels holden. For the christendom suffered great decay, and many
swarued there from, at such time as god, of his mercy, gave peace and The
trees.
quietness in the church, but for a small season, as I said before. By the
trees we shall understand people of all manner of nations and degrees, in y^
christendom of no small number, as in the time of Athanasius and after. The
second plage follows afterward, against the whote and natural strength and
fearcenes of men, and specially that, which was between princes and rulers,
that were assaulted of the wicked fyende with ambicion, for power and dominion.
The which the wicked fyende did raise up, after that the godly and holy
teachers had rooted out all errors and heresies. This contencion and deuysion
in the church between the rulers of the laytie and clergy, has been the
occasion of very great myseries between the grecians and y^ Romans, Emperors
and Kings, Popes and bishops both in the spiritual and temporal regiment.
For this deuyllyshe burning fire of pride has bredde infynite and
unspeakable hurt unto y^ church of Christ. For even out of y^, sprang so
many wars, battles, burnynges, and destroyng of lands. And such common
harms will the spirit of god sygnifye by the trouble, loss and destruction
in all the eleme^tes, y^ fire, water, air and the earth. For there was no man
sure and in safegarde.

The text.
And the third angel blew, and there fell a great star from heaven, burning
as it we^ a lamp, and it fell into the third part of the ryuers, and into
fountains of waters, and the name of the star is called wormwod. And y^
third part was turned to wormworde. And many men dyed of the waters, because
they were made bitter. And the fourth Angel blewe, and the third part of the
son was smytten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of
stars: so that the third part of them was darckned. And y^ day was
smytten, that y^ third part of it should not shine, and likewise the night.
And I beheld and heard an angel flyinge through the mids of heaven, saying
with a loud voice: Woo, woo, woo, to the inhabiters of the earth, because of
the voices to come of the trompe of the three angels, which were yet to blow.
The third plage came upon y^ stars of heaven, that is, upon the most holiest
people, which were taken for the spiritual state and order, as monckes,
friars, and priests: which through their hypocrysye, have heaped unto them
selves money, goods and treasures, and have gotten lands and dominions, for
the which great dyuision was among them* And whereas the world should have
learned of them, faith, love and knowledge, it was nothing but slandered,
offended, deceived, seduced and sore hyndered by them, both in faith, and in
godly living and behaueour: both which, were utterly decayed in these
parsons* to the great undoing and dystruccion both of body and of soul. And
thus the sweet honey of christen love and concord among these orders, is turned
in to bitter wormewoode, by the which many souls are destroyed. The fourth
plage may well be understand, to be the breakyng in of the Turks and
Sarasens, which is, as it were a worthy and well deserved scourge or whyppe,
which should scourge and punyshe the christendom falling into sin and
dyssolutenes. As it has already happened in the.iii. parts of the earth,
Asya, Europa and Africa. All these has he gotten wholly into his hands. And
has also diverse times attempted Italy and Spain. And has already gotten
Austry, Etschlande, and part of Hungry. He y^ thinks not this a great loss,
and a wonderful destruction, the same has no understanding at all. Such
great myseries, perplexites and destruccions, does the scripture sygnifye in
diverse places by the darcknes of the Sun, Moon and Stars. And where as he
says, that only the third part was destroyed, he syngnifyeth thereby, that
all this did not continue in diverse places. For men addressyng themselves unto
repentance and amendment, have dysappoynted such enemies, and dyscharged
them selves of them. But not every where, nor at all times. For all these
myseries and plages returned again afterward, and were more dangerous,
hurtful and intolerable, than they were before. And both these and other
plages did increase, and get the ouerhande daily more and more, and likewise
also the sin against the word of god, against true love, against peace and
quietness, and against all virtue and godlynes, did not cease but raged
contynually against the manifest and clear gospel, even by the spiritual sort,
which have their living of the gospel, whereunto they are the most extreme
enemies, both in word and dead, a thousand parts more than the secular and
lay sort. And yet all under the pretense and color of a Christen and good
zeal, whereas they seek nothing but their own pryuate lucre, as it is euydent
and manifest.

The.ix. Chapter.
The text.
And the fyfte angel blewe, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the
earth. And to him was given the kaye of the bottomless pyt. And he opened the
botomlesse pyt, and the smoke of the pyt arose as the smoke of a great furnace.
And the sun, and the air were darckned, by the reason of the smoke of the
pyt. And there came out of the smoke locustes upon the earth, and unto them was
given power as the scorpyons of the earth have power. And it was commanded
them, that they should not hurt the grass of the earth: nether any grene
thing, nether any tree: but only those men which have not the seal in their
foreheades. And to them was commanded, that they should not kill them, but
that they should be vexed five months, and their pain was as y^ pain that
comes of a scorpion, when he has sto^ge a man. Like as in the openyng of the
fourth seal, god is become man, to wash away: all sins and wyckednes: even
so the devil, which is a counterfetter of gods works, imageneth by all
means that he can, to set up and stablyshe all manner of intolerable errors,
and to augment his kingdom: And goes about to make him self a god, and to
fight and strive against the gospel, and against all godlynes. But through
the judgment of god, he is fallen down from heaven, unto the earth, and has
received through the judgment of god, and through his permission, the key of
hell and of the botomles pyt of all wickedness, even like as Christ is
ascended and gone up and through his merits and righteousness, has opened the
heaven, and has received the kingdom of god, for all the faithful elect.
And out of this hellyshe botomles pyt, arose a smoke of worldly wisdom, and of
fleshly lusts, by the which, al godlynes planted of Christ and of the
apostles, through the preaching of the gospel, is obscured and darckened. And
there are risen up locustes, that is to say, false Locustes.
teachers, heretykes and worldly suttell prelates, s^olemen and sophisters,
which through their proud doctrine, and man's ordinances, pomp, and
covetousness, have done much harm in the church in the hearts of the
faithful, through the permission of god: And all this is suffered even for the
sin of contemnynge gods word, and for that men have loved them selves, much
more than Christ. Which word of god they have made more to be contemned, with
their syngyng, and fast or swyfte mumblynge up thereof, without understanding,
than they have profyted or edyfied either them selves or any other thereby. And
also in their high scoles and vniuersyties, with their Aristotle, and their
Philosophy, they have made y^ word of god darcke and obscure. And with their
Philosophical dysputacions, they have made it uncertain and doubtful, and
unprofitable unto the church. As it may well appear that y^ fruit and end
of al their studyes have been nothing else but covetousness and pride, worldly
honor and promocion. And with their suttyll wits and dyuises, they have done
wonderful much hurt. But through the mighty power and virtue of Christ in
his church, they have been hyndered and dysappoynted, for this purpose that
they should not hurt nor harm the true faithful, which increase and wax
grene through faith, in all godly works and exercyses: which the spirit of
god would not suffer to be hyndered, but that they should be preserved in
faith and love after the will and word of god in all holiness and virtue. But
those men which have made a covenant with pride, covetousness, fleshly lust
and pleasure, envy, hatred and excess, and such other, they were given unto
them, to use after their own pleasures, for as much as they had no seal or
token of god. Notwithstanding those should they not kill neither, for as
much as many of them might be converted and amend, but they should only
punyshe and vex them in their conscyences, and with other plages, for a
season, namely for the space of five months, which may be understand to
sygnifye, five hundredth years, wherein all such things have been seen,
practiced and suffered in the church of god. And their pain and vexacion for
so long a time, has been extreme, their conscience being fearfully and
heau^ly tormented for their great sins. Which thing did first spring of
false doctrine, and of man's tradicions, which they have not kept, as for an
example, they constrained, filthy chastity of pryestes, monckes, and nonnes,
the glotonous fasting, the miserable torment of ear confession, the dreadful
fear of purgatory, the polling of pardons, the excessyue and covetous
pouertye of beggyng friars vnsa^yable. These are the venomous stynges, which
do vex and tormente them that will forsake, and set at naught the token and
seal of gods word.

The text.
And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to dye, and death shall fly from them. And the symilytude of the
locustes was like unto horses prepared unto battayll, and on their heads were
as it were crounes, like unto gold and their faces were as it had been the
faces of men. And they had here as the here of weme^. And their teeth were as
the teeth of lions. And they had habbergions, as it were habbergions of iron.
And the sound of their wings, was as the sound of charertes, when many
horses run together to battle. And they had tails like unto scorpious, and
there were stynges in their tails. And their power was to hurt men five
months. And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the
bottomless pyt, whose name in the Hebrew tongue, is Abadon: but in the Greek
tongue, Appollyon that is to say, a destroyer. One woe is past, and behold,
two wooes come yet after this. These locustes or gresshopers shall be strong
and mighty in the church, and shall grievously vex and oppress all faithful
professors of the gospel, which can not abide nor bear their false religion.
And they shall be so afflycte and persecuted of them, that they shall wyshe a
thousand times rather to be dead than alive. For the grief and sorrow of
such as be tormented in their conscience, is unspeakable. And that all men
may the better know such locustes, these tokens are to be marked. They sit
upon horses having upon their heads, as it were crounes garnysshed with gold
and precious stones, and have faces like unto men's faces, loving lowly and
amyable in words and in outward pretense, but in effect, virtue, and
strength less and weaker tha^ any woman, garnysshed with pleasant here even
for nothing else but for a very token of hypocrysye. And besides this, they
have terryble teth, which sygnifyeth, y^ they are mighty to hurt, even like
Lions, without fear and not able to be resysted. For as much as they are
armed with habbergions of iron, hanging together with their Chains and
Behemoth knottes, byndinge and knytting them selves together with their
Councels and Decrees, that they seem inuyncible, and not able to be overcome of
the whole world. They thunder with their cursings, suspensions, and
excommunicacions, and all, to maynteine their pomp, even like a fearful army,
which in war fare would make all the world afraid. They fly with their
pardons and bulls, even as it were with wings over hills and dales, over sea
and land and poison more noysomly unto death, than they should do with very
bodyly weapons: And yet when their bulls and parchement will not help, they
will use the prycke and sword also. And the king or governor of this people
has no another proper name but Appollion, that is to say, destroyer, and the
very incarnate devil, like as his aduersarye Christ, is both in name and in
deed, a savior and preserver. This is an heavy woo and mysery to happen unto
the church of Christ. But there shall come yet.ii. other besides this.

The text.
And the syxt Angel blewe, and I herd a voice from the four corners of the
golden altar, which is before God, saying to the syrte Angel, which had
the trompe: Loce the four Angels, which are bound in the great river
Euphrates. And the four Angels were looced, which were prepared for an
hour, for a day, for a month, and for a year, for to slay the third part
of men. And the nombre of horsemen of war were.xx. times.x. M. And I heard
the nombre of them: and thus I saw the horses in a vysion, and them that sat
on them, having fyry habergions of a Iacynte color, and brymstone, and the
heads of the horses were as the heads of lions. And out of their mouths went
forth fire and smoke, and brymstone. And of these three was the third part of
men killed, that is to say of fire, smoke, and brymstone* which proceed out
of the mouths of them. For their power was in their mouths and in their
tails, for their tails were like unto serpents, and had heads, and with
them they did hurt. The syxte angelycall devil, which was set against the
syxt seal, did blow for his time also, putting forth his voice in the
christendom, where god ought to be honored with the gold of a pure and
sincere faith. And at that time, the holy Apostle. S. John heard, in spirit,
a voice, without doubt y^ voice of Christ king of all honor. Which voice
said unto the angel of wickedness: That thing which thou will, that take in
hand. For I permytte y^ now at this time, to exercise thy power to the
hurtynge and undoing of the wicked and ungodly, and to the amendment,
furtheraunce and christen exercise of the faithful and elect. Pour out the
Hypocrytical frowardnes of the high state of the malygnante church, which
hitherto has been somewhat bound, and has had a great name, eue^ like as
Euphrates, much unlike unto the holy Jordan, or unto the flode Syloa, that is
to say, the prymatyue church of the Apostles. And there is no hope of grace
nor of recouerye or salvation in her. For in this Euphrates there is nothing
that is sound and good, but all together full of death and destruction, with
y^ help of his. iii. or four streams which went out from him. It is easy to
understand, what and who they were, which went out after the decay of the
holy christen church, or after. S. Austins or S. Ambrose time, after the five
months, that is to say, after five hundredth years, and went out eue^ at one
time, namely at the time of the council holden at Laterane, and were ready to
murder and flaye the third part of mankind. And they, with their fellows, did
grievously hurt them, in person, in goods, in conscience, in body, and in the
prosperyte and wealth of their souls, through horrible errors, in faith,
relygion, and outward ceremonies, through man's ordinances and tradicions both
against the manifest holy word of god, and also against the ordinance of the
holy prymatiue church of the Apostles. And here the great number of these
horsemen, does open the understanding unto the reader, that all men may
easyly perceive, what they are, coming up in manner, about one time. But their
fruits shall show and declare that, sufficiently. Out from among these
horsemen, came their captains, ridyng upon high horses and mules, with high
pomp, pretendinge high wysdom and gostly power. But yet these holy brethren
the maynteyners of Christ's church (as they pretend) do ride, with harnes and
sallets, armed and prepared with many ordinances, decrees and statutes, by the
which (alas what remedy) the christen faith is little furthered. But it is
well fensed and armed with habbergions, one ryng folded in a another four
fold. These were set on fire with a furious madness against the pure and
sincere doctrine and profession of the gospel yelowe for very envy hatered
and malice, and also for very filthy desire and covetousness of gold, which
things go always together. And again sauering of brymstone in their
hipocritishe filthy chastity, unmeet and odious for any christian heart to
thi^cke upon, much less for any christen ears to hear, or any christen tongue
to speak. Their pomp and power, to subdue the simple and humble dysciples of
Christ, contemners of this wicked world, is like unto the power and might of
Lions, by the wit of man, not able to be resysted or withstanden. And yet
their power is not in their hands and arms, but in their mouths. Out of the
which comes, cursynge, suspendyng, excommunicating, and threatenynge with
fire, and fear of hell and purgatory, and with such like firebrandes of
brymstone. Oh, how many right godly and faithful constant men and women have
been murdered wtin these four or five hundredth years, of these horsemen,
whose power was only in their mouths. For, to the performau^ce of their
spiritual tirannie, they dyuised spies and serchers, which they called
inquisitores hereticae prauitatis, to spy out such as they took for
heretykes, as Saul was one at such time as he ra^ed so spitefully against the
faithful, from Jerusalem to Damasco. Their tail, like unto the tail of a
Scorpion or a Basiliske, are those which go after them, and follow their
example, Princes, Lords, and temporal Magistrates, which are assistent unto
them, to execute their tyranny, both otherwise and specially at general
councels, which for their pleasures (even though they be Emperors) yet they
must break their promyses of free pasporte and passage, against both their
honor and oaths, in any matters that concern their spiritual state, pomp,
lyberties, ordinances, be they never so much against the holy word of God.

The text.
And the remnant of the men which were not killed by these plages, repented not
of the deeds of their hands, that they should not worship deuyls, and images
of gold and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which nether can se,
nether hear, nether go. Also they repented not of their murder, and of their
sorcery, nether of their fornicacyon, nether of their theft. How heavy and
terryble is the might and power of the devil, and of Antichrist? yea how many
of the faithful elect of God have been tormented and slain by them, both in
their bodies and consciences? And yet even in their time there were many that
remained alive, which the merciful hand of God did preserve in all godlynes,
and through his aid and help they escaped the hands of these tyrannes. Even
in like manner as there did also many remain in their wicked purposes, in their
cruel tyranny and in their godles and blasphemous life, which not
withstanding would be both called, and also esteemed and taken for holy and
spiritual men. And yet they believe not, y^ they have any need to repent, and
therefore they proceed and go forward with their tradicions of men, y^
transgressio^ whereof they punish more sharply than the transgression of any
commandment of God. For y^ do they esteem in manner, lyghter tha^ nothing,
taking it for such a sin as may well enough be dyspensed with, and
remitted: And thus in the mean time, they please, serve and honor the deuel
with their ydolatry, supersticion, and inuocacion of saints, unto whom they
pray and say: Our father in heaven, hallowed by the name, even unto the very
images both of men and weme^. (Which thing the very living devil taught
them,) as though the saints should desire any such thing, and not rather be
dyspleased therewith, unto the which saints also, they make and set up images
of gold, silver, stone, and wood, even unto those true saints also, which
were martired and put to death, for speaking and preaching against such
heathnyshe customs, and took it for very wicked and abominable supersticions
and diuil lyshnes, to invoke and honor such false gods. And they do
these things so manifestly, that they can not, nor will not deny it. No they
have no understanding thereof. For they the^ selves are eue^ like unto their
false gods, and become so mad, and so far out of their wits, that they
can no more hear nor see tha^ their ydols and false gods can. And they will
hear of no repentance at al, much less will they perform any. But they will
rather confirm and mainteyne their deuillyshe ydolatrye and false religion,
with sword and fire, murder and poison, yea and sometime they are not ashamed
to practyse sorcerye and witchecrafte, to mainteyne their wickedness, against
y^ true faith and religion. And they will live in whordom, whosoever say nay,
eue^ of force, being extreme enemies unto holy matrimony. And thus they bleare
and blind the whole world with their falsehede and lyeng, and all to
mainteyne their possessions and infinite blasphemies, which ^^^e^e of their
ydolatry, with worldly force and tyranny as they have ever done.

The.x. Chapter.
The text.
And I saw another mighty Angel come down from heaven clothed with a
cloud, and the raynebowe upon his head. And his face as it were y^ Sun, and
his fe^e as it were pyllers of fire, and he had in his hand a little book open,
and he put his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the earth. And
cried with a loud voice, as when a Lion roreth. And when he had cried, vii.
thonders spoke their voices. And when the seven thonders had spoken their
voices: I was about to write. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me:
Seal up those things which the. vii. thonders spoke, and write the^ not. THis
strong angel, can sygnifye none other thing, but our savior Jesus Christ,
which reveled such a vision unto S. John, for the profit and comfort of the
faithful church and congregation, and for a warnyng unto the sinful world.
For he it is, which in such an evil time, and in such great perplexyte and
dangerous warrefare of the christen church upon earth, comes down from
heaven to aid and succor it according unto his promise. And he appears unto
S. John, even as though he were coming down from heaven, clothed with a
very manifest and visible cloud, which signifies his holy manhood, even as
he went up also unto heaven, and dwells with The raynebowe.
us, with his grace, aid, and prouydence. The raynebowe, sygnifieth his
heavenly imperious crown, and his gracious governance over his faithful
elect, for the which he is careful and sorrowful with mercy and daily
aid, in all things necessary and expedient for them. His face and
countenance is bright, pleasant and full of mercy, even like unto the son.
For he himself is the son of the world, that is to say, the comfort,
delyght joy and felicity of all faithful. And again, mighty strong and
rightuous in all his judgments toward y^ godless and wicked, which he
stampeth in pieces and burns them with fire, that can never be quenched. This
same Jesus Christ our Lord and savior, is come again from heaven, with his
little, meke, euangelycall book, namely with the new testament, in the which
the old is also comprehended. This book is contemptuous and of no estimacion,
unto the sage wise philosophers, high learned doctors, and pompous proud
prelates, in so much that it was clean lost out of the tempelles, for a great
space, (even as it was in y^ time of Ieremye the prophet,) being song yearly
in their monasteries and colleges, as their vows and rules, whereunto they were
sworn, required, but without all manner of understanding or feruentnes of the
spirit, which should be sought and necessarily required in holy scripture.
This book does Christ bring* being garnisshed not outwardly with gold, silver
and precious stones, for a face and a show only so that no man can read in
it, as though it were sufficient only to kiss it, but he shall bring it open,
that every man may read and understand it, in their own mother tongue, and
also in all schools, where children are taught. He it is that is come into this
world, and has set his feet upon all the earth, and also in the Isles of the
sea, which were before unknown* even like as the true faith also was, which
was readyly and joyfully received of them, which before knew nothing at all,
and were more ignorant and unlearned, than they that came from the grecians and
Romans. Which thing may be understood, by the left and the right foot.
And what may better be understood by the loud voice, than the great noise,
which the holy Bible makes, at such time as it is spread abroad in all speches
and tongues, over hundrethes and thousands of people in so short time, to the
great wonder and meruell of all faithful, and to the high furtheraunce and
edyfieng of the christen doctrine and of the knowledge of God, and to the utter
confusion and fear of the whole diuilyshe and hellyshe flock and
congregation, even as a Lion of the stock of Judah. And immediately thereupon
came. vii. thonders, that is to say, the most vii. thonders.
godly and christen interpreters of holy scripture, were famous throughout the
whole world, as were these Ambrose, Austen, Ierom, Gregory, Cypriane, Hylarie,
and diverse other, which in our time have written and taught as excelle^tly
and profytablye in the church and congregation of Christ, as ever they did.
These have taught and brought into light, the word of God very purely and
sincerely, notwithstanding whatsoever the schole writers and sophysters, the
pompous bishops and monkyshe mumry have many years decreed and dyuised, to the
contrary, with their uncertain and unstable doctrine, feigned ceremonies, fond
tradicions, and new strange articles of the faith, which have no ground in
gods word, and clean contrary both to the usage, and also to the doctrine
of the holy ancient fathers in the prymatiue church. And where it is now
added, that it should not be written what these thonders spoke, let other
understand it as they will, I think and conjecture that it is a prophecye of
the noble and excellent gift of God, y^ science of Prynting, given first unto
the Germaynes, which were esteemed the most rude and barbarous people. By and
through whom, not only the new testament has been renewed, interpreted and
translated even out of the very natural fountain and tongue wherein it was
written, but also the whole old testament out of y^ holy Hebrew tongue. Besides
this, all these before named and many other teachers and writers of the holy
church, went first out into the world, and both with word and deed, noysed
abroad the power of the gospel, so that the renewynge thereof can not be
ascribed unto those only, which preach and teach in our time, but unto the
holy bishops of the primatyue church, which preached and taught first of
all, throughout the whole christendom, where as now, all our bishops for the
most part, are domme and blind in all godly doctrine, and utterly drowned in
worldly pomp, lusts, pleasures and in all wicked dyssolutenes.

The text.
And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lift up
his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever more, which created
heaven, and the things that therein are, and the sea, and the things which
therein are: that there should be no longer time, but in the days of the voice
of the seventh Angel, when he shall begin to blow: even the mysterye of God
shall be fynished, as he preached by his servants the prophets. Christ takes
anothe, and swears by God his heavenly father, even with great earnest
feruencye and holiness, that the time of his glorious last coming to judge
all the world both quick and dead, is now already nighe and at hand. And
when the victory that was prophesied to be fulfilled of Antichrist (which
victory the seventh angel, Christ him self or his spirit, that was yet to
come in Helyas before the last day, must blow forth according unto his
office) were once past, than should all together be fulfilled, that all
prophets did ever prophecye of the kingdom of Messiah the savior of the
whole world, which is the highest misterye. Of the which things all
patriarchs and prophets, yea and the apostles also, and Christ him self, did
speak, namely, of the time of the kingdom of heaven, that was coming, and of
the coming of Christ in his highest honor and glory, which shall be manifest
and known unto all men and unto the whole world.

The text.
And the voice which I heard from heaven, spoke unto me again, and said: go
and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which
stands upon the sea, and upon the earth. And I went unto the angel, and
said to him: give me the little book, and he said unto me: take it and eat it
up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy mouth as sweet as
honey. And I took the little book out of his hand, and eat it up, and it was in
my mouth as sweet as ^on^: and as soon as I hade eaten it, my bellye was
bitter. And he said unto me: thou must prophecye again among the people, and
nations, and tongues, and to many kings. At this place, might the beginning of
the.xi. much more conveniently have been appoincted, but it is no matter. John
in the person of all faithful christians, and specially in the person of them,
which should be teachers in ye church of god (as the holy bishops and other
apostolical men) hears the voice of God, speakinge thus unto him: If thou
wylt do and perform thy office and vocacion truly and justly, than go thy
way, and appointe thy self thereunto withal thy might and power, and take in
thy hand the holy, open and most clear cronicle book of the holy gospel
and word of God, receive the same, and the holy understanding thereof, from
the holy ghost through fervent prayer. And read therein with faith, love, and
most earnest zeal, of Christ him self. But he tells him before, that he
should not only read or sing it, write or endyte it, but that he should
with a most gredy desire, even devour it up as a food from God and as the
heavenly bread of all faithful beleuers, and that ^e dygest it in to his
bowels as a most clean and wholesome food. Which thing can not come to pass
with out bytternes of repentance and of sorrow, and heaviness of the heart, and
conscience. And specially unto him that knows so much of the will of God,
and feleth that his spirit is so weak and frail and his flesh so wild and
dysobedient and his mind so stubbourne and obstinate against the spirit of
god. Or else it may be thus vnderstande^, that when a man understands the
word of god, and knows that it ought to be spread forth unto other, that is
to say, to the whole church of God, and that the truth ought to be spoken
unto the blind world, and that it can not yet be done with out great perell
and danger of body and life, than is it doutles bitter unto him. But yet not
withstandinge it is sweet in the mouth, through the comfort and joy of the
truth, and through the joyful promise of the gospel of righteousness and
holiness, through Christ the savior of the whole world in all times. All this did
John in a vision, and took also further instruccion thereof, as follows.

The.xi. Chapter.
The text.
And then was given me a read, like unto a rod, and it was said unto me: Rise
and meat the temple of god, and the altar, and them that worship therein: and
the quier which is within the temple, cast out and meat it not for it is
given unto the Gentiles, and the holy city shall they tread under foot xiii.
months. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophesye
a thousand, two hundred and.ix. days, clothed in sack clothe. These are two
olyue trees, and two candelstyckes, standing before the God of the earth. And
if any man will hurt them, fire shall proceed out of their mouths, and
consume their enemies. And if any man will hurt them, this wise must he be
killed. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophesyinge and have power over waters to turn them to blood, and to
smite the earth with all manner plages as often as they will. THe lord does
teuele and show unto John, that he will vysyte and reform his church, (being
so sore fallen and decayed) wha^ time shall be through apostolical men and godly
parsons, which have eaten up and dysgested the book of god, and with great
swetnes and plesantnes, have been fervent and earnest to further and to set
forth the will of God. And thus he gives him a ^e^wande in his hand (as he did
also unto Ezechiell) to measure and to search out the righteousness of the
churches, and the state of every one: And specially of them, which, by reason
of their office and vocacion, ought to have a special respect and regard to
the service of god: among the which, the bishops and the high and most
special doctors and teachers of the church (which are understand The quier.
and meant by the quiere, for as much as they are masters and rulers of the
quiere) were the most wicked and ungodly: And they are compared and lykened
unto the heathen and were given and delivered up unto them to be punysshed. For
the heathen, and ungodly and supersticious people given to al ydolatrie,
whether they be spiritual or secular, they shall tread down, destroy, and
defyle the church of Christ a long time, which is to be understand by the
xlii. months, ye is to say.iii. years and an half, which might well
sygnifye.iii. xlii. months.
hundredth years and an half, from the time that much false doctrine and many
supersticious ceremonies came first into ye church against the manifest word
of God. Which things sprang up through y^ pomp, pride, covetousness and
presumpcion of the spiritual prelates and watchmen, as they named them selves,
and so ought to have been in deed by their office and calling. The two
witnesses of repentance The.ii. witnesses.
and amendment of life, which should take the gospel in hand again, and
should restore and bring forth the book again, are Enoche and Elyas. For in
the wicked time of the Cainites before Noes floode, Enoche studied and went
about, without doubt, both with word and deed, to reform the world, and to
reduce them unto the true faith in God, and perfyght love to their neighbor
again. Whereunto he was moved by the holy ghost, which did work and speak in
him, yea and parauenture also did write through him. For there were once books
of Enoche, which now are not to be gotten. And like wise did Elyas also in y^
time of ye law, but with a wonderful zeal and feruentnes both in word and
deed, through the mocion of the holy ghost, which works in the ministers of
god, when he sees his time, according as the person and place requires. And
therefore they bathe received one reward of salvation, and remained as it were
immortal and are prophesied to come again in spirit before the latter day of
judgment, to resist and confound the wicked Antichrist, and to heal with
the oil of lenity such as are apt to receive it, or else with the fire of
feruente zeal to confound the wicked enemies of god both with word and
dead, as Enoche and Elyas did, by the commandment and ordinance of god, in
their time, when they were upon the wicked earth. Like as also such men might
be found in our time with their names, writings, and doings, not in one
place of the earth, moved with the same spirit and with the same word and
like zeal of god, every one after the gift of grace given unto him. Moved, I
say, by the holy ghost, of a godly mind and like purpose as the nations,
people, persons and other circumstances required. Against these and such like
friends and ministers of god, shall many grievous troubles be always devised
and attempted, by the wicked malignant church, both against their good name,
body, life, and also against their goods. And they have no another refuge,
succor, comfort, help nor weapon to defend them with, but the only, holy,
eternal and inuyncible word of god in their mouths and hands, which
confounds all their adversaries and deadly enemies, which even them selves
the longer they mainteyne their evil and naughtye cause, the worse they make
it, till at length they shall utterly confound and destroy themselves. But
these.ii. ministers of the spirit of god, workynge in love and feruentnes,
with all softnes and burning zeal like unto Enoche and Elyas, they have power
through the spirit of god (which works all things in his ministers) to
procure and obtain of god grace and vengeance according to their faith and
zeal, to ye furtherau^ce of gods glory, and to the profit and reformacion
of the faithful christen church, as necessity and conueniencie shall
require. Even like as Elyas had over the water, when as through his prayer he
obtained of god that it should not rain upon earth for the space of three
years: And again also fire from heaven, against those that mocked and
contemned his office and testymonie.

The text.
And when they have fynisshed their testimonye, the beast that came out of the
bottomless pyt, shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kyl
them. And their bodies shall lie in the streets of the great city, which
spiritually is called zodom and Egipte, where our Lord was crucified. And they
of the people and kynredes, and tongues, and they of the nations, shall se their
bodies three days and an half, and shall not suffer their bodies to be put in
graves. And they that dwell upon the earth, shall rejoice over them, and be
glad, and shall send gifts one to another, for these two prophets vexed them
that dwelt on the earth. It has always from time to time been well seen, how
this beast has behaved himself toward the messagiers and ministers of god,
which were sent unto them. And specially under Achab and Manasses, and such
like kings and ydolatrous and hethenysshe priests which served false gods,
which persecuted the faithful ministers of God, cursed and contemned them,
burnt and drowned them, so far as god permytted them. Which thing was for
the best unto the persons that suffered such things, and for the synguler
profit of the faithful church and congregation. And yet for all their
persecucion, the doctrine and workynge of the faithful was ever upright and
lively, and their good and holy name with the commendacion of their godly
fervent zeal, was also wonderfully preserved to the utter shame and confusion
of the abhomynable and terryble beast, and all his members and lymmes: As the
examples of the whole world do testifye and bear wynes: And specially even in
our time, and also the most true and infallyble storye of the prouydence and
of the holy word of god. This city, where Christ is daily crucified, The
great city.
is (in figure and symilitude) the city of Jerusalem, which for sheadyng of
the blood of his Apostles, has received her just and due reward, as she
deserved: and likewise the wicked church corrupt and poisoned of Satan,
wherein he bears rule, murtheringe the faithful friends of God, and ministers
of the gospel, whose holy zeal and truth of God, which they have preached,
they could not nor would not suffer nor abide, until they were always at
length confounded and utterly destroyed. Which thing shall undoubtedly happen
also unto them, which do resist and withstand all christen reformacion of
the church in their state and order. Yea they see already before their eyes,
and smell the indignacion of god and his terryble judgment, whereof they have
been earnestly and faithfully warned, but they were never affrayd nor abashed
of it. At that time, the holy servants and ministers of god, shall be feign
to suffer much trouble, even the very bitter and most slanderous death. But
at length when all things shall be truly discussed, all the world shall see
and perceive the true doctrine and belefe of the faithful and godly, and the
impiety of ye wicked, obstinate, blind, and ungodly infydels, which would
never believe. And thus faith and truth in god, shall have the victory.

The text.
And after three days and an half, the spirit of life from God, entered into
them. And they stood up upon their fete, and a great fear came upon al them
that saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto them:
Come up hither. And they ascended up into heaven in a cloud, and their
enemies saw them. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the
^enth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slain names of men
seven.M. and the remnaunt were feared, and gave glory to the god of heaven. The
second woo is past, and behold, the third woo will come anon. How this
beast with her members the wicked hethenyshe prelates and their sworn
adherentes have always and in our time for a long season cruelly dealt with
the ministers of gods word, and with the preachers of the truth of ye most
sacred gospel, it is plain and evident enough at this day unto all the
world: and through the cronicles, which shall be publyshed, shall not be
hydden unto our posterity, how, when, and by whom diverse godly men have
been persecuted and murdered and most shamefully handeled of the spiritual
prelates and their sworn adherentes, only for the true doctrine and faythes
sake. But an other time will come by the very judgment and grace of god, when
as these holy men and faithful witnesses of Christ, shall be had in high
honor and estimacion, and shall bring more to pass with their preaching,
writings, and monumentes which they left behind them, to the profit and
edificacion of the church, and to the true understanding of the truth in all
lands and nations of the earth, than ever they did in their life time, as it
is euydent that it so happened unto the holy prophets and martirs. And than
shall all the wicked enemies and contemners of the word of god and of Christ's
true religion, tremble and fear the judgment of god, not unworthily, and they
shall undoubtedly receive their due reward that they have deserved for the
extreme cruelty which they have showed and declared against the faithful
ministers and servants of God. Which reward they shall receive with fear,
trembling, sorrow, smart and pain, despair, and with everlasting shame and
confusion following. Whether any such thing has hitherto or may hereafter
happen, let every true christen heart that trusts in the mercy of god well
consider and wey by him self.

The.xii. Chapter.
The text.
And the seventh angel blewe, and there were made great voices in heaven,
saying: the kyngdoms of this world are our lords, and his Christ's, and he
shall raygne for ever more And the.xxiiii. elders, which sit before God on
their seats, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God, saying: we give the
thanks O Lord God almightye: which art and wast, and art to come: for thou
have received thy great might, and have reigned. And the nations were angry,
and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they should be judges,
and that thou should give reward unto thy servants the prophets and
Saints, and to them that fear thy name small and great, and should
destroy them which destroy the earth. ALL this may be well referred unto the
text and vision that went before: to this purpose, that after all matters
before mentioned, once past, there should be an universal godlynes, and
christen order, either through the general preaching of the gospel through out
y^ whole world or else through the godly life, peace and felicity, which may
be at that time upon earth. As it is possible inoughe through the grace of god,
and many good christen hearts do trust and hope, that it shall come to pass.
Or else it may be understand after the last judgment of our savior Christ,
of the quietness, which shall than immediately follow after the cruel
persecucion of Antichrist, as this blessed and comfortable angel preaches and
declares with his trompet. For sure it is that before the latter day the
kingdom of Christ shall appear, and be received of all nations and yles of
the earth, even of the Jews also which at length shall receive knowledge of
their error, and shall confess their obstinacy and ye wickedness of their
belefe and conversation, wha^ they shall see the grace and knowledge of God
manifestly reveled in all tongues and speches through the holy word of god,
and shall perceive the kingdom of Christ the true Messiah not to consist in the
straight and narow corner of Canaan nor in the unhappy city of Jerusalem
(which is unhappy by reason of the dyuision and unquietness that is in it) but
in the whole wide world, wherein shall be one only fellowship and congregation
of the servants of the only one and almyghtie god, whom alone all the holy
prophets (of whose faith the Jews have always made so high boast) have
honored and praised, and like wise the whole regiment and flock of theirs,
and the whole worlds Messiah and Savior, which was before the creation of
the world, and has appeared in the world in all humylite more than.xv.
hundredth years, almoost longer than the law of Moses did endure and continue
among the Jews from the time of their delyueraunce out of Egipte until the
coming of Christ, when he took his manhood in the time of the reygne of
Herod, when as their regiment and governance took an end. What lies soever
they feyne of their land and regyment in Vtopia (which they name Casp^a)
whereof they must shortly be a shamed and hold their peace, and confess their
deceyte, falsehede, presumpcion and damnable lies of their Talmude, and of all
their false miserable blind guydes, and Rabbynes, whose falsehede is now open
and manifest unto all the world, for as much as their books are made common
(through the benefyte of printynge) unto all men of learning and knowledge. So
that this miserable people (as the holy apostle S. Paul prays) has that
thing fulfilled unto them, which they hoped for, and which was promised of
God in their time unto their generation. Even so may it come to pass upon
earth, and that right sone, that the honor and glory of the kingdom of
Christ and of God shall appear, which shall rule for a time upon earth, and
after y^ latter judgment, in heaven in everlasting bliss. As than al holy
patriarchs, prophets, apostles and all the martirs that ever have been, shall
have honor and glory, which they shall offer up unto the everlasting and
very true God, in the sight of all Gods elect in everlasting bliss, in y^
kingdom of God and of his Messiah our savior Jesus Christ, according to the
doctrine of the infallyble and most true word of god. But the wicked and
ungodly heathen, shall have no part of this honor, glory and bliss, but
shall suffer and be damned everlastingly in eternal wrath, envy, hatred,
malice and despair. For such is the righteous judgment of God over all men
both quick, and dead, good and bad. Every one shall be rewarded according to
his works and deserts after the just judgment of almyghtye God, without all
manner of parcialytie or respect of persons, whether they be of high or low
estimacion in the world, whether they be rich or poor, and of what land or
country so ever they be. For than the holy and faithful shall receive of Christ
everlasting salvation for their trust, faith, and love toward God: and
contrary wise the wicked and ungodly tyrannes, adversaries, and persecutours
of the faithful servants of God, for their obstinate blyndnes, infydelitie,
and contemninge of Gods holy will and word, shall peryshe for ever, and
shall remain everlastingly, cursed and damned withal wicked spirits. Thus
far (as seems unto me) do the visions and prophecies reach, that are
hitherto past, and mentioned in this book. But now, that which follows, is
another reuelacion, pertaining to an other time. For a man must not seek any
other order of y^ scripture in this book (which is compact together of many
and diverse visions without any observed order,) than in other writings of the
prophets, as they that are learned do know well enough.

The text.
And the temple of god was opened in heaven, and there was seen in his temple
the arcke of his testament, and there followed lyghtnynges, and voices, and
thondrynge, and earthquake, and much hayle. Here might the.xii. chapter well
begin, and these words might be understand and taken for a preparacion unto
the very glorious, and new reuelacio^, which is now (as I said before)
opened unto him. But this temple of God is The temple of God.
the holy christen church and congregation in this time of trouble, dyscencion
and batell, and participacion of the bliss of heaven and everlasting life,
unto them that win and bear away the victory. The Arc of the testamente
is The Arc
the blessed and holy manhood of Christ, united and knit in one with the godly
nature of the everlasting word of God, which is and ever has been y^ Mercy
stool of all the world and of al men, and the only comfort, refuge and joy
of the faithful elect. But the lightening, the noise of the voices, the
thonderynge, The lyghtnyng thondering. etc.
and earthequake, with the great hayle, may sygnifie the terryble damnacion of
the wicked for ever, or else it may sygnifie a synguler ernest and wonderful
preparacion of the hearer or of the reader (like as was of the holy Apostle S.
John, which saw it) to mark, and consider it the more dilygentlye. For it is
necessary to mark and consider such reuelacions and visions, as do follow
upon such tokens, the like whereunto happened sometimes also unto the
prophets, as the holy scripture declares.

The text.
And there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman, clothed with the Sun
and the Mo^e under her fete, and upon her head a crown of.xii. stars. And
she was with child, and cried trauayling in birthe and pained ready to be
delivered. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, for behold, a great
red dragon having.vii. heddes, and ten horns and.vii. crounes upon his heads:
and his tail drue y^ third part of y^ stars and cast them to y^ earth. As
in the prophets of the old testament, the first did write more plainly and
manifestly, than the last, which are much harder to be understood, as
Ezechiel, Daniel, and zachary are much harder than Esaye, and Jeremy: Eue^ so
in the new testament, in this prophetycall book, the latter prophecies,
reuelacions, and visions are more plain and easy to be understood, tha^ the
first: in so much as this vision may in manner be an interpretacio^ of those
visions that went before. This heaven, wherein this great token did appear,
must needs Heaven.
be the kingdom of heaven, the christen church, congregation and fellowship of
all faithful from the beginning of the world until the end thereof as
Christ him self does interpret it. The woman, of whom the angel here The
woman.
speaks, is the everlasting, mighty and blissed word of god, which is
bright and mighty as the Sun, whereunto all the understanding of man, and of
all flesh is subject. And it is clothed and garnysshed with ye faith and
confession of the patriarchs* prophets, Apostles and martirs both of the old
and of the new testament. This word of God, the holy gospel promised unto us
from the beginning, and believed, has performed, and through the mercy and
goodness of God, has brought forth and borne unto us, Christ the savior of
the world, or the true faith in Christ. But this came not to pass, before
such time, as nonother salvation could in any wise be found, through the
works of the law, through the sacrifices nor through all other good works.
For none of them all had power to satisfye, or to make holy, but only the
righteousness of the word of God, that became man, namely our savior Christ,
the son of God and of Marye, which had both the nature of God and of man in
one only person, which made satisfaccion for all mankind. This being with
child, with child. The crienge
is in this place as much as an earnest lust and desire. The cryeng, is
prayer. As the holy prophets did evermore desire this salvation, and trusted
through belefe in y^ word of God, unto the promise y^ was made unto the whole
world. Against this holy word of God and this christen faith, did appear an
other token in the congregation of the church being called of God, namely a
bloody The dragon.
dragon and enemy of man's salvation and of the true faith in Christ, which
is y^ wicked spirit, Lucifer and his fellowship, by whose.vii. heads is
sygnified The.vii. heads.
all blasphemies and wickedness, wherewith he works all myschiefe. And the.x.
horns, do sygnifye his great and manyfolde tyranny, whereby he works to
The.x. horns.
hinder, and hurt the true faith and the gospel of Jesus Christ the only
savior, whereunto he is an enemy and an aduersarye with all his might and
power (so far as almightye God will permyt and suffer him) which he takes
to help him, namely the lovers friends and gredy folowers of this world,
ungodly tyrannes against all godly innocencye and christen faith. This
dragons tail, sygnifieth the might, power and ministers of the deuell, whereby
he dysyreth ^^e tail.
to hurt the elect, if God would suffer it, as it is possible, that he may:
that they should fall from the heavenly virtue and godliness, unto the love of
this world, and unto earthly and fleshely lusts and affeccions.

The text.
And the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered: for
to deuourt her child as soon as it were borne. And she brought forth a man
child, which should rule all nations with a rod of iron. And her son was
taken up unto God, and to his seat. And the woman fled into wilderness, where
she had a place, prepared of god, that they should feed her there a.M.ii.
hundred and.lx. days. The wicked spirit did bestow all his might and power
that the promise of God through the dysobedience of the children of Israel,
whom he always stirred up, might come to none effect, and that y^ truth of
God might be dysappoynted, and that the faith in Christ, in whom our
salvation does consyste, might be blemysshed and confounded, and also that the
gospel might be myxed with man's doctrine, interpretacions and errors. But the
goodness, truth, mercy, faythfulnes and love of God, is greater than the power
and wickedness of the deuell, and of al his subtilties and ministers. For the
child was borne, gods word became man, truth had the victory, and
falsehede lay on y^ ground under foot. The craft and subtlety of the deuell
was defeated by the wisdom of God, and was opened and dysclosed unto the
world. This child Christ, the everlasting word of God, which became man in
the most holy womb of the virgin Marye, was received and taken of God the
father, through grace, for the satisfaccion of the sin of all the world, and
he did merit and deserve with his high and most perfyte obedience and
humblenes, the glory of y^ heavenly father, and the kingdom of heaven,
wherein he rules for ever and ever. But the truth of the christen faith,
religion, and of the gospel of Christ did always suffer extreme sorrow and
pain, being persecuted even at the first, of the Jews, of the false Apostles,
of false and colored christians, of Emperors and Kings, of workemongers, of
false and wicked bishops, of Sorcerers, and nigromansers, of Sarasens, of
ydolaters, and Epicures, of philosophers, of the The tail of the dragon or of
the devil.
lovers of this world, of spiritual prelates and religious monks and friars.
etc. For all these and other such like, are the horns, crounes and the great
tail of this dragon, which watches, studieth and seeks all ways and means
to hurt and hinder the true faith, the christen life, and the wholesome
doctrine, that is to say our savior Christ in the faithful. And for this
cause, the doctrine of the gospel and the christen faith, has been feign to
suffer much continually even from the beginning of the world, and immediately
after the christen faith was first taught and preached. And therefore many holy
and faithful christianes have been feign to flee, and y^ truth of the gospel
in continuance of time, was strange and unknown unto the most part of the
high learned doctors, and potentates throughout the world: Although the
true christen faith was always preserved, though it were in few and in
abiecte persons of slender reputa^ion. And this continued a long space, namely
from the time of Constantine the Emperor, when as the christen church seemed
in manner to have escaped all danger and peril of decay and destruction,
until our time, wherein she appears again wonderfully after a strange manner
in despite of al tirannes, and of all the power of hell. And nombring from that
time (of Constantine I mean) until our time, even this number of years shall
euydentlye appear, reckenynge days for years, as it is a commune thing in
scripture. If any man can find out any plainer understanding of this place
(for in such dark and obscure places of scripture no man ought to be froward
or contencious) let them take it, and follow it.

The text.
And there was a great battle in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought with
the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels, and prevailed not, nether was
their place found any more in heaven. And the great dragon, that old serpent,
called the deuell and Sathanas, was cast out. Which deceaueth all the world.
And he was cast into the earth and his angels were cast our also. The power of
God, the holy word of God, and the spirit of Christ, which we may
understand by Mychaell (who by interpretacion is, who is like god) and
Gabriel, (the strength of God,) has, in all ages and times, been driven to
hold batel with Lucifer and Satan, with the pride of man's wisdom, which
have hindered the true honor of God, the true service and religion of God, the
true faith, and have ever withstanden the holy and pure gospel. But this word
of God has always had the victory although with much labor and danger,
and sometime not without harm and loss, (but not of the elect) which thing
shall continue until such time as our savior shall have his will and pleasure
of this battle, and with the breath of his mouth shall slaye the son of the
dragon, the damnable Antichrist. For the which thing, we ought continuallye to
call upon the mercy and goodness of God (in a steadfast and perfight hope and
confidence) as he has taught us, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done no less in earth than it is infalliblye in heaven. For the hand
of God is not shortened, but is able to give whatsoever he has commanded us
to ask, and ^o pray for. The peace also and quietness of the elect and
faithful to live in godlynes, may be wysshed to be more perfight, (as is also
promised through the prophets,) than it has been hitherto for lack of the
true sound doctrine of the gospel, no small space, although the very perfyght
peace can not be obtained, but only in heaven in the eternal quiet kingdom
of Christ.

The text.
And I heard a loud voice saying: in heaven is now made salvation and
strength, and the kingdom of our God and the power of his Christ. For the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God
day and night. And they oeurcame him by the blood of the lamb, and by the
word of their testimonye, and they loved not their lives unto the death.
Therefore rejoice heavens, and ye that dwell in them. Woe to the inhabiters of
the earth, and of the sea: for the devil is come down unto you, which has
great wrath, because he knows that he has but a short time. Thus through
the spirit of Christ with the continual and sincere preaching of the gospel,
Satan and his champio^ Antichrist are overcome. And thus shall the voice,
praise, and thankesgeuing of the faithful be heard in the church, as it is
here written, now is Salvation (through faith) and the strength (through love)
and the kingdom or dominion in the church, become gods. Now may all men see
the power of gods word, the judgment of Christ against the deuel, which
would have roted out y^ rightuosnes of faith in Christ, and would have directed
and appointed christen men unto the rightuosnes of works, and to the hope of
their own satisfaccion, whereby he would always have found occasion to
accuse all men before God, under a false pretense. But the preachinge of the
gospel has disclosed this suttell falsehede, and all such like, and
declares, that only the blood of the lamb, and nothing else, can wype and
wash away the sins of all the world, if they trust in god through Christ,
with a true lively faith through the grace and mercy of God, and the
righteousness of Christ, which he dystributeth unto al his faithful elect and
makes them partakers thereof. That by this means, Satan can have no quarrel
against the works of the faithful, which like thankful parsons remain and
continue steadfastly in their true faith in all manner of affliccion and
adversity, eue^ unto very death. And therefore the true joy of all godly
consciences waxes and increases in the church. And so their bliss and
salvation begins in this world, through faith, which faith works an
innocent and a godly life, and thus continues everlastingly in heaven. But on
y^ contrary part, woo unto them, which seek their righteousness by men at
certain places, certain times, certain works and certain meats, for they
can never find any true righteousness, but through the falsehede and wickedness
of y^ devil, they fall either into desperacion or else into presumpcio^,
whereunto Satan applies al his study y^ they fall not from his kingdom nor
escape out of his fingers. For he seeks nothing, but y^ damnacio^ of such.

The text.
And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman, which brought forth the man child. And to y^ woman were given two
wings of a great Egle y^ she might fly into y^ wilderness into her place,
where she is nourished for a time, times, and half a time from the presence of
the serpent. And the dragon cast out of his mouth water after the woman as
it had been a river, because she should have been caught of the floude. And
the earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed up the
river, which the dragon cast out of his mouth. And y^ dragon was wroth with y^
woman: and went and made war with the remnaunt of her sede, which keep y^
commandments of God, and have the testimonye of Jesus Christ. And I stood
on the sea sand. After that, Satan, which is a spirit of lies, marketh the
power of faith, which comes and springs of gods word, and how Christ
being borne in the faithful, does wax and increase in them through holy and
godly works acceptable unto god: than he goes about to persecute y^ gospel,
the true and holsom doctrine, and the spirit of Christ in the elect. But the
circumspecte, quickesyghted, and The wings.
high flyeng Eagle of gods spirit resists the dragon, and gives might and
power with his grace unto the Christen soul to flee into a sure place, which
is, y^ contempt of this world, and the love of the world to come, the
solitarines of a quiet conscience in y^ cross of Christ, and the comfort in y^
remembrance of gods word. With these wings she escapes from Satan and from
al his spirits, snares and suggestions. This food and noryshment is given
through the grace and mercy of god unto all the elect children of God, from
such time as the word was first written through Moses, and afterward
declared through y^ prophets, and fulfilled through Christ, and preached in all y^ world through y^ apostles, and in our time through the mercy and
goodness of God, renewed again for a thousand. and.ii. thousand years, y^
is.iii. thousand, and yet longer, how long so ever it please God which will not
have it hidden and unknown unto us. And for this cause the nombre of the
years both in this book and in other is obscure, not without a synguler
co^sideracion. As y^ disciples of Helyas, receiving it of their master, also
said y^.ii. thousand years were past before the law, and that the law of
Moses should continue likewise.ii. thousand years, and the kingdom of
Messiah upon earth also about.ii. thousand years, not so precisely reckened,
nor fullye accomplyshed, as the Rabbines and interpreters of y^ Jews do for
the most part confess and declare. But ye serpent, which he named before a
dragon, does never seace since y^ time of Adam and Eve, to persecute y^ faith
in y^ word of God and the secret mystery of Christ. For y^ merciful and
rightuous god takes and uses y^ falsehede and wickedness o^ Satan eue^ for a
game and a sport, as a man may say. And ye more y^ Satan goes about to hinder
the work and grace of god, and the performaunce of his promises, the more
does his damnacion, his wrath, envy and malice increase, and gods grace
through his mercy is the more aboundantlye multiplied in all men, and the
true righteousness of the holy and blessed seed our savior Christ is the more
perfight and effectuous, and makes more have to the full and perfyght bliss
and salvation of all faithful elect. Although notwithstanding, the infinite
wickedness of Satan never cease, and is ever more angrye, and deuyseth
continually one mischefe upon another neck against the faithful, but all to
their furtherau^ce, honor, and profit at length, yea and to the preseruacion
of y^ truth of the eternal word of God, and to the furtheraunce and
confirmacion of y^ true faith, love, and hope, against y^ which, the old
serpente is wont continually to fight, with all his fellowship and company of
wicked spirits, and of all kinds of blasphemies and vices, which are his
seed and generation, like as all manner of virtues, grace, holiness, innocencye
and salvation are y^ fruits of gods word and of the spirit of Christ, out of
the which does spring obedience and obseruacion of the commandments of
God, so far as the weakness and imperfightenes of man is able. The which
weakness y^ savior of mankind and y^ first borne of y^ children of God does
accomplish, and helps the lack of man's weakness, for y^ which cause he
became man, and our brother, y^ he might the better know our infirmity and
weakness. And thus was this vision reveled unto me, (as I thought) standinge
upon the sand of the sea.

The.xiii. Chapter.
The text.
And I saw a beast rise out of y^ sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and
upon his bornes ten crowns, and upon his head the name of blasphemye. And the
beast which I saw, was like a catte of the mountain, and his fete were as
the fete of a bear, and his mouth as y^ mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave
him his power and his fear, and great auctorite. BY this beast, which was seen
to rise up in the raging sea of this world, is signified y^ kingdom of Rome,
under y^ dominion of which kingdom, Christ was borne, and suffered his passion,
and under y^ same kyngdo^e also S. John did write both this book and his holy
gospel. For this kingdom obtained power and dominion over many nations and
lands, and overcame very many kings. Which things came not to pass for y^
virtue and godliness of y^ Romans, for they knew not their Lord and God: much
less did they honor him. For they did ascribe their wealth, good fortune,
success and their victory, not unto y^ true living God, but unto their false
gods. And diverse Emperors of Rome have set out them selves, also for
gods, and have suffered oblacions and sacrifices to be made and done unto
them. And thus have they blasphemed y^ true god, creator and governor of al
things, whose service and religion, yea and his temple, priesthode and
sacrifices, they did utterly abolishe and subvert most spitefully and
contemptuously, and set up al false religion and ydolatrie to please y^ people.
For whose pleasure they builded and set up a church of Pantheon, for y^ honor
of all saints and gods, which remains at Rome until this day. The
errors, riches and blasphemous The catte.
vices of y^ whole world, which were gotten in batel, are like unto a cat of y^
mountain with her many speckles and spots, which with her smacke and souour
draws many beasts unto her, which she destroieth. Eue^ as ye Romans under
y^ pretense of their glorious name and title, have gotten great power, and
auctoryte, whereby they have oppressed and hurt y^ whole world, in so much, y^
at length it was intolerable. The Bear has a weak head, but very strong
feet, which signifies y^ power The Bear.
of his tyranny, and the weakness and feebleness of their captains and of their
Emperors, which for y^ most part have had shamful ends, after their wicked
and shameful lives. And it was as spoilful and gredy to devour as a Lio^, and
had his power might and strength of all mighty god, but yet they have not
confessed it, nor ascrybed it unto him, but unto their own ydolles and false
gods, and unto Lucifer the king and head of their false gods, which is
here named a dragon, and will be esteemed and taken for a Lord of this world,
as he is also in the hearts of the ungodly and supersticious, heathen, and
ydolaters, which know nothing of the only true living God.

The text.
And I saw one of his heedes as it were wounded to death, and his deadly
wound was healed. And all the world wondered at the beast, and they
worshipped the dragon, which gave power unto the beast, and they worshipped
the beast, saying: who is like unto the beast? who is able to war with
him? This Empire of Rome did suffer much at the beginning, and was often times
very feeble, and many times deadly sick, by the means of the daily and
continual vproares and sedicions of the nobility against the commons, and
again of the kings against them both. In so much as at length, they made
and suffered great battles among them selves, until the dominion at the last,
came in to one hand, and so was thought to be healed, and safe again. As than
had they y^ whole earth under them, but they honored and served the devil and
false gods, the enemies of God, of all truth and true godlynes. Unto these
gods of theirs, did they ascribe the fortune and success of their power and
of their kingdom. And so did their subjects likewise, which did honor the
Romans for gods and took and esteemed them for invincible.

The text.
And there was given un to him a mouth, that spoke great things and
blasphemies: and power was given unto him to do two and fourtye months. And
he opened his mouth unto blasphemye against God, to blaspeme his name and his
tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him to make
war with the saints, and to overcome them. And power was given him over all
kindred, and tongue, and nation, and all that dwell upon the earth worshipped
him: whose names are not written in the book of life of the lamb, which was
killed from the beginning of the world. Both Jews and false christians of
very pride, malice, and obstinacye, have blasphemed and persecuted the God of
Israel, and the christen faith and Christ him self also the savior of y^
world, with deed, word, statutes, and laws and that a great deal ouerlong.
Through Pilate their depute they put our savior Christ unto death, and all the
Apostles also, under their regiment and iurisdiccion, until the time of
Constantyne, and also more than.iii. hundred years afterward. Here have we
again.xlii. months, for.iii. years and an half, and by these.iii. years
and an half is understood three hundred years and an half, in which time
y^ name of the true God and of our savior Christ has been wonderfully and
manyfolde ways blasphemed, and shamefully dishonored in his most faithful
servants and ministers, whom they have most cruelly tormented and put to most
painful death throughout y^ whole Romish Empire, only for the true faithes
sake in y^ only one god. His tabernacle, that is to say, y^ temple of
Jerusalem Tabernacle
did they pollute and break down, withal y^ service and religion of God. And
after that, they began a sore battle and persecucio^ against the christen
faith, and against al faithful beleuers throughout y^ whole world, by their
deputes. In so much that all the world must honor the kingdom and dominion
of Rome, and be obedient thereunto, only the holy elect except, which
observed y^ word of God and his will, and refused their ydolatrie: And therefore
a great number did suffer and were put to death by them.

The text.
If any man have an ear, let him hear. He that leads into captivity, shall
go into captivity: he that kylleth with a swearde must be killed with a
swearde. Here is the patience, and the faith of the saints. As though he
would say: will thou hear how the pride, abhominacion and tyranny has or
shall have an end? Than hear in one word, how the Assirians, Bybylonians,
Medes and the Grecians had an end: And even so shall Rome also. Like as y^
has overcome, robbed, spoiled murdered, shamed and condemned all the world,
eue^ so shall it be served again also. And so shall it happen unto all them,
that do like unto them, as Christ said in the garden. And therefore the angel
and S. John exhort all christians (that are combred and oppressed with
persecucion) and him self also which was banysshed into Pathmos and condemned
of Domicianus for God and the true faithes sake, unto patience in perfyte
faith in God, which shall once give and send a prosperous and a blissed end
unto al such affliccio^s. And shall either reform y^ rageing Romyshe kingdom,
or else shall utterly destroy it, as he has done the other.

The text.
And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and he had two
horns like a lamb, and he spoke as did the dragon. And he did all that the
first beast could do in his presence, and he caused the earth, and them which
dwell therein to worship the first beast, whose dedly wound was healed. And he
did great wonders, so that he made fire come down from heaven in the sight of
men. And deceived them that dwelte on the earth by the means of those signs,
which he had power to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that
dwelt on the earth: that they should make an image unto the beast, which had
the wound of a swearde and did live. When as the Romyshe kingdom, after the
time of Iulyanus began to be divided into the east and west, and to diminishe
for a ceason, than began a new Romyshe kingdom and iurisdiccion, namely the
Popes pomp: which was not only in the spiritual iurisdiccion (as he did
first pretend with his words) but also in secular power, and took upon him
this power, even with the sword. And for this cause, this beast has.ii.
horns, not with out a cause. And yet he will be named like the lamb, and
Christ's deputy or vicar, and will have all power, as Christ has, both in
heaven and in earth. This beasts dragonishe speech may well be esteemed, and
taken for none other but for y^ bloudye, murtheringe, suspendynge,
excommunicatinge and banysshinge of the good Emperor of the Grecians, because
he did take al images out of the churches, and also the godly bishops of the
Grecians, because they would have kept their Easter, as they had learned of
saint John the Apostle. This did no angel command him to do, nor yet the
word of God, but only this dragon or destroyer. This kingdom of papacy,
took upon it all the power of the first beast the romyshe Emperor, and
compels the christians to ydolatrye and the service of false gods under a
privy color and a secret pretense, as to further the true faith the honor
of the holy saints, of the martirs, of the servants of Christ, and of
Christ him self. By the means of the which pretense, it came to pass in
process of time, that men did honor and worship even the very devil, in as
much as they did perform and obey his will, transgressinge the second
commandment of images and strange gods, which is eue^ as much as to serve
the devil. This evil and wound was healed long before, of the godly Emperor
Constantine and of the holy bysshoppes throughout the whole christendom, and
now this devil brings it again into the church under a pretense of
holiness, out of y^ which pretense did spring, departinge from the faith, and
decay of love, as the Chronicles testify. What wonderful tokens have been
wrought in the papacy, and to what end Christ him self did prophecye long
ago unto his disciples, and gave them warning of them: Unto this second
beast, must images be made even according unto the pleasure of the dragon,
and as the papacye will have it without any respect, whether it be conformable
unto the word of God, or good and profitable for the conscience and soul of
man or no.

The text.
And he had power to give a sprete unto the image of the beast, and that the
image of the beast should speak, and should cause, that as many as would not
worship y^ image of the beast should be killed. And he made all both small
and great, rich and poor, fre and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hands or in their forheades. And that no man might by or sell, save he that
had the mark or the name of the beast, other the number of his name. Here is
wisdom. Let him that has wit, count the number of the beast. ^or it is
the number of a man, and his number is six hundred, three score and six. This
bringethe the dragon to pass, to establyshe and confirm the worshipping of
images, which began to do miracles, and did speak, (to the great wonder of
all men) sometime with the help of nicromancie the science of the devil: by
the which science, many of them came unto the papacye as their own stories
do testyfie. Out of this, does it follow afterward, that whosoever ever will not
worship this image, the same must dye, even as the papacye will have it yet
until this day. And with parcialite, give them marks, that is excommunicate
them, and dysherite them of their kingdoms and heretages, such as will not
worship and honor their images. Here must men speak warely and
circumspectly, that they dysplease no man, that they may enjoy life, body,
estimacion and goods quietly. But gods word and will commands otherwise,
and is an other manner of wisdom. God wills, that this beasts number and
error should have an end. Reken Ludouicus pius.viii. hundredth lvi.
from the year of our Lord, a thousand v. hundredth and.xx. backewarde this
number of.vi. hundredth.iii. score and.vi. years and look what time it was
tha^ with the popes and the Emperors.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
The text.
And I looked, and lo a lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
and xliiii. thousand having his name and his fathers name written in their
foreheades. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and
as the voice of a great thounder. And I heard the voice of harpers harping
with their harpes. HEre follows, what reward they shall have, which follow
not The lamb
this horned beast, nor them that worship it. The lamb upon the mount Sion is
our Savior Christ, rulinge and governing in his holy christen church, and
sorowing for his faithful elect. This great number, after the customable use of
the scripture, sygnifieth the infinite and exceadinge great number of gods
elect from the beginning of the world until the end thereof, unknown unto
the whole world: Although the number of the wicked and damned sort be also a
great number. These elect are they, which without fear, shame, or compulsion
have confessed, knowledged, honored, spread forth, noysed abroad, preached and
taught the name of the heavenly father before all the world, against all the
spyte and resistinge of the devil, of all his ministers, and of the wicked
world.

The text.
And they song as it were a new song before the seat, and before the four
beasts, and the elders, and no man could learn y^ song: but the hundred and
four and fourtye thousand, which were redeemed from the earth. These are
they, which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These follow the
lamb whither soever he goes. These were redeemed from men being the first
fruits unto God and to the lamb, and in their mouths was found no gyle. For
they are without spot before the trone of god. This heavenly voice, and most
pleasant musycke, is the incessaunt, continual, and endless praise,
thankesgeuinge, reioysinge, mirthe and joy of all faithful and blissed in
eternal bliss, in the kingdom of God and of our lord and savior Jesus
Christ. For they sing a new song, of a new benifite, grace and act of God
which has fulfilled in Christ in time convenient and before ordained and
appointed, that thing which from the beginning of the world, was promised
unto all holy patriarchs and old fathers, and looked for of all people and
nations, and believed upon unto salvation of the elect, which are redeemed with
the dear price of the most precious heart blood of Christ, shed upon the
cross in the earth. These elect confessors and singers of lauds and praises
unto God, are they, which are not defiled with earthly, unseemly pleasures of
this world, more delighting in fleshly lusts and filthiness, than in any right
godly and christen love of gods word and heavenly virtues, chaste thoughts, or
right godly doctrine and ceremonies: in the exercise whereof, they should have
suffered no manner of pleasure, care or love of any transitorye thing, to have
hyndred them. For this cannot be understood of any such bodily chastity or
virginity, as religious parsons, Monks, Nonnes, Priests, Deacons and such
other have pretented and falsely made their boast of, unto the world, which
has be found to be so rare, and so groslye broken and neglige^tly kept, and
so wonderful seldom given of God unto the vowers thereof. And though it were
kept, yet was it not profitable and necessary unto the right, christen and
godly relygion and gods service of the Apostles, which is only praised and
commended in y^ gospel and of S. Paul. Would God there were less of such
wild gross and wanton chastity and virginity, but little praised of the most
ancient holy fathers (Oh that it were likewise less extolled and esteemed of
the fathers of our time) seeing it has been so great a blot unto Christ's true
religion. Here might much be said, and much more be lamented: our Lord grant
that it may sone be amended, and redressed. These holy friends of God, as
Enoche, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judas, Joseph, David, Moses, and Aaron:
These patriarchs and prophets, I say, yea and without doubt Peter and Paul,
with other infinite old holy bishops, are also in this register withal the
blissed elect, and they are the most pleasant and acceptable fruit unto the
lord, desierous of his mercy and grace, and beloved of him from everlasting,
and ordained unto his kingdom, as joyful and desierous first fruits, which
men do eat with a great lust, desire, and appetite with high praise and
thanks geuynge, as it ought to be. Their faith, is so acceptable and pleasant
before God (as it was given them of his plentiful grace) that it being
accompanied with true love and hope, without the which it can not be, decketh
and hydeth all their sins, how many, how great, and how grievous so ever
they were. And unto them all euyls and misfortunes (even their sins also) and
all manner of things, happened and ended unto the best. As it happened unto David,
Peter, Paul, and Marie Magdalene, and unto al holy saints and elect,
sanctified through the blood of the innocent lamb Christ our savior. For
although all men and all saints are sinners before God, yet for the lambs
sake, in whom they trust, they are reputed without spot and blame before the
judgment seat of God.

The (...)
And I saw another angel fly in the mids of heaven having the
everlasting gospel, to preach unto them that sit and dwell on the earth, and
to all nations, kynredes and tongues, and people, saying with a loud voice:
Fear God and give honor to him, for the hour of his judgment is come, and
worship him, that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and fountains of water.
And there followed an other angel, saying: Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that
great city, for she made all nations drink of the wine of her fornicacion.
The true and faithful preachers of the holy gospel, are often called angels,
as they may well be. Of the which, the king Christ, sends many in to the
kingdom of heaven, according as the state of the world at diverse times
requires. That the holy and sincere doctrine, the gospel might sone and
frutefully fly through the christen church. Which thing the wicked dragon
does sore have, and is greuouslye dyspleased therewith, and therefore he
persecuteth it with much falsehede, and with great power, through his
ministers and deputies. And yet notwithstanding the gospel of God remains
euerlastinglye in his church, even from the beginning of the world until
the end, whereof no man in the world can excuse him self. For the voice and
truth thereof is this, both open and clear: that God only is the lord, and
that we must serve him in truth and innocencye of life, and show all love and
truth toward our neighbor, as the very natural reason teaches and all
right and pure consciences (lyghtned with gods word) do confess. And the
loud voice of the gospel sounds thus: Fear God, as godly children do
their most loving father, honor him only, for all grace, and goodness can
come from none but from him only: and fear his just and rightuous judgment
(that it be not resisted) against all wickedness, ungodliness and ungraciousness:
And worship him only with inuocacion, that has made heaven and earth, and all that is therein. Against this gospel, does the dragon evermore speak, with
his first borne and eldest son Antichrists: which syns Caims time, has
ever continued even until the adversaries, which at this time do openly
resist the manifest and open known truth, because they think and imagine,
that it will be an hinderau^ce unto their pomp, pride, ungodly and abominable
lyuinge. But this truth and word of God can not be hindered nor suppressed:
Sooner and rather must all that fall and be destroyed, which the dragon has
imagined and dyuised against this lamb, the word of God, against this truth
and against all manner of right godlynes: as well the Babilonicall confusion, as
all manner of wicked laws and decrees and all manner of falsehede and tyranny.
The holy gospel, rightly understand, shall beat down, confound and utterly
destroy that cursed and abominable Babylon, how mighty and strong so ever it
has been, for the great whoredom whereof she has made all the world to
drink is now come to light and known.

The text.
And the third angel followed them, saying with a loud voice: If any man
worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forheade, or on
his hand, the same shall drink the wine of the wrath of God, which is
powered in the cup of his wrath. And he shall be punyshed in fire and brymstone,
before y^ holy angels, and before the lamb. And the smoke of their tormente
ascends up evermore. And they have no rest day nor night, which worship the
beast and his image, and whosoever receaueth the print of his name. Here is the
patience of saints. Hear are they that keep the commandments and the
faith of Jesus. Here follows the judgment and sentence of God against all them
which worship this beast of Antichrist, resisting and withstandinge the
gospel, and envy and hate the lamb and will rob him of his honor dew unto
him, and will dyffeate Christ of his kingdom which God the father has given
him that he should be king of all kings, and also an everlasting only
priest and immortal, whom Antichrist with his.ii. horns goes about and
studieth to banysshe expel and overthrow and to set him self up, in the
temple of the christian church, as though Christ should nothing care for his
church, but were absent and had forsaken it, and had broken his promise. And
as though the gospel were in his (I mean Antichrists) power, and in such
an heart as is rather possessed with a devil of pride, infydelitie, and of
abominable presumpcion to condemn the holy gospel, and to stablyshe and set
up al such things as may subuerte and overthrow the gospel, as ydolatreous
and supersticious images to be honored in the church, hethenishe ceremonies
only invented for pomp, covetousness, pleasure, pastime, and to bleare and
deceive the simple. He gives unto his sworn champions his mark of
supersticious orders wherewith he bewitcheth and inchanteth them, whereof neither
S. Peter nor S. Paul never made mention nor never knew. And besides this he
byndeth them with a wicked oath and a deuillyshe vow, against all godlynes,
and all to confirm and stablyshe his pomp and abominable pride against all
heavenly and earthlye power institute and ordained of god, without all manner of
shame and fear. Al they which consent unto this damnable beast, or either
worship or maynteyne him, they shall surely suffer the wrath of God which is
already prepared in the Babilonicall cup, powered out of God, and redye at
hand, whereof they shall drink not only in the botomles pit of hell, but
also even here in this world according to the effect and doctrine of gods
word, and to the preachinge of the holy prophets, of Christ him self and of
the apostles, with as much shame, opprobry and destruction as is possible for
them to have in this world. And if their unrepentant heart shall heap unto
them selves the treasure of y^ wrath of God, going forward in their wickedness
without repentance, and never returning back until their last hour, until
their very death, than is it not possible but that their damnacion begone here
in this world in all myschefe and wickedness and without sorrow repentance, or
amendment, leaving example unto their posterite to commit and to maynteyne
like wickedness, it is not possible, I say, but that the smoke of their pain
and torment shall ascend up from everlasting to everlasting, without any
manner of rest day or night, with all those which did ever help unto such
ungodliness or consent unto it, and opened such a door unto wickedness, and
would be extolled and praised therefore, with their Antichrists mark
contrary to the holy token of gods elect, which they have in their
foreheades, namely the holy word of God, for the which they have suffered
much pain and opprobrye, but with exceeding great patience, for Jesus sake.

The text.
And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me: write. Blessed are the
deed, which herafter dye in the Lord, even so says the spirit: that they
rest from their labors, but their worckes follow them. In so great danger of
the faithful under the iurisdiccion of Antichrists abhominacion with his.ii.
horns, and unlawful usurped power upon body and soul, utterly against the
word of god, which is the only comfort of al faithful souls, is it
necessary that some comfort come unto them from heaven above, which the lamb
sends unto all true christians, through the holy gospel, which the spirit
of God writes in their hearts to believe stedfastlye that it can not be
otherwise in this world, but that all they which will follow Christ must bear
the cross even unto death as Christ the innocent lamb did, but afterward
shall they see nothing but everlasting salvation merited and purchased unto
them through the passion and death of Christ to the iustificacion and merit
of eternal salvation, of all the elect. Which comfort shall be much
greater in their souls in the kynkdome of Christ, than is possible for all the
merits of man to deserve or obtain: And specially at such time as the
glorified body shall be joined and united again unto the blissed soul, after
the latter day. And therefore the good works of the faithful as they do not
go before their faith and love, but are only the fruits of them, even so
shall they not prevent the merit of Christ for all elect from everlasting,
but as the spirit of Christ says, they follow and come after them, when they
have obtained rest and peace through the free grace and mercy of God, and
through the merit of Christ's righteousness, after this, I say, through faith
have followed good works out of an humble and obedient heart, which works the
lord will graciouslye crown as his gifts, and receive and reward them as
acceptable unto him.

The text.
And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one syttinge like
unto the son of man, having on his heed a golden crown, and in his hand a
sharp spckle. And another angel came out of the temple, cryinge with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud. Christ in thy syckle, and reap: for the
time is come to reap, for the corn of the earth is ripe. And he that sat on
the cloud, thrust in his syckle into y^ earth, and the ^arth was reaped.
Although the right faithful, garnyshed with good works after y^ word of
God, were evermore sure of their salvation, yet not withstanding the judgment
of God when his time is come, goes forward against all such things as are
set up against the word of God. As it was ready at hand at one time by
reason of the obscuringe and blyndinge of gods word among y^ Jews through
the cursed Talmud, whereunto they gave more faith and credence, and cleaued more
earnestly unto it, than unto the law of God and to the prophets. And likewise
among the christians, specially among the high bishops and prelates with their
glorious tytles of Popes, Patriarchs, Cardinals Primates and such other
orders, of the which, one ever desiered to be above a another, sekyng always
their own glory, lust, pomp, honor and dignity, and not the will of God,
faith, godlynes of life nor yet the gospel which they have always
pretended, falsely and craftilye to color and cloak their myschefe and
wickedness. As concerning the Turks faith we can say but little what their
greatest faut, wickedness and beastlynes is, we have had more knowledge by
writings than by any proof or experience. But it is to be feared, if God be
not merciful unto us, we shall learn it sooner than we would. In the myddest
of all this through the trompet of the gospel being blown out in our time
after a wonderful sort, through the spirit of Helyas, which appears and
comes abroad plentuouslye and effectuouslye, is risen and daily ryseth such
a mouynge and sterringe up of men's hearts, such a knowledge of the truth, such
a light and lantern of doctrine, and such a judgment of Antichrists works,
such a fear of the wrath of God: so that there is a good hope that y^ holy
and wholesome seed of gods word so plentiously sown and spread abroad, shall
not return again without great fruit and edif^enge of the faith and the life
of men. For as for the Jews whether they will or no, they must needs despair
of their workinge, their faith, their doctrine, and of all their state, when
as they see that the whole kingdom of heaven, (which they take to be theirs
peculiarely,) to be taken from them and to be made common unto all them that
fear God through the whole world more than ever was found by them. Even so
also among the christians, the doctrine and profession of the holy gospel,
true faith and all godly virtues, shall wax and increase in the heads and
rulers of the christendom as it shall also be ioyfullye received of all true
Christen subjects, notwithstanding that the number of them shall always be
least: And also the knowledge, understanding, learning and reading of the
holy scripture shall somewhat increase among the spiritual prelates, as it
should be hoped for and with most earnest and fervent prayer desired and
called for of god. And it is well to be thought and to be believed, that the
Lord will do his part also even in such wise as is here promised so y^
Antichrist being thus put to shame (but yet remayninge still impenitent) shall
be reaped down with the syckle of gods word through the spirit of Helyas,
and shall be cut down and thresshed, not to the destruction but to the
profit, edificacion, and salvation of the world. This has our Lord and
savior Christ brought to pass, which is always the head of the church,
who is not only present therewith, but also does graciouslye rule and govern
it, edifieth and helps it, and he with and roteth out the enemies and
adversaries with the sickle of his rightuous judgment, and shall utterly
banyshe and consume them according unto his most victorious and muincible
word.

The text.
And another angel came out of the temple, which is in heaven, having also a
sharp syckle. And another angel came out from the altar, which had power
ever fire: and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, and
said: thruste in thy sharp sickle, and gaddre the clusters of the earth, for
her grapes are ripe. And the angel thruste in his syckle, on the earth, and cut
down the grapes of the vyneyarde of the earth: and cast them into the great
wynefat of the wrath of god, and the wynefat was trodden without the city, and
blood came out of the fat, even unto the horse brydels by the space of a
thousand and syce hundred furlonges. Like as before the judgment of
Antichrist and his fellowship was prophesied in this world, with the spirit of
Helias and with the syckle of the gospel: even so does the spirit of god in
this place prophecy further of y^ other judgment which shall happen afterward
at the latter day unto these obstinate, impenitent and blind contemners of
gods judgment in everlasting damnacion after the latter judgment. Which
damnacio^ (or hell) is here understand and signified by the great fat of gods
wrath, where all the wicked shall come together, and with one stamp and
treadinge of gods judgment, sentence, and righteousness, shall be everlastingly
trode^, as much more greuouslye tha^ by y^ worldly and temporal punishment
in this life, as the heat of the fire is more painful and intolerable unto
the body of man, than are the clouds unto y^ earth or any darkness unto the
eyes. Which so grievous damnacion and destruccio^ is sygnified by the fearful
blood which flows over the earth that the horses tread therein even unto
their brydles. Thus uses the holy scripture to descrybe and paynt the grievous
and terryble judgment of God, by such great, vgsome and terryble figures.

The.xv. Chapter.
The text.
And I saw another sign in heaven great and marvelous, seven angels having
the seven last plages, for in them is fulfilled the wrath of god. And I saw as
it were a glassy see, myngled with fire and them that had gotten victory of
the beast, and of his image, and of his mark, and of the number of his name
stand on the glassye sea, having the harpes of God, and they song the song
of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the lamb, saying: Great and
marvelous are thy works Lord God almightye, just and true are thy ways,
thou king of saints. Who shall not fear, O Lord, and glorify thy name? For
thou only art holy, and al Gentiles shall come, and worship before thee, for
thy judgments are made manifest. THis is a another prophecye of the holy
apostle S. John reveled and opened unto him of god, that against all the wit
and reason of man, against al worldly power, against the diuises, ymaginacions
and hindrances of all enemies and of all the wicked, the gospel shall rise up
in the dominion of the Romans through the dysciples of Christ, through the
holy ghost and through the wonderful and marvelous power of God. And also many
heavy plages shall come upon those wicked and ungodly people and upon the
myghtie rulers of this world which study and go about to hinder the
procedynge of the gospel. All these plages are rekened one after a another
through the.vii. angels and the.vii. vyalles. This sea of glass myxed with
fire, sygnifieth the wickedness of this world and al wicked enemies and
adversaries of the truth and doctrine of the gospel, and of all Christen and
innocent conversation, and of all godly living. Against which enemies at all
times in this world and specially at the first beginnynge and springynge up of
the gospel and christen religion, the holy elect were feign to lie in field
and to war: Against the Jews with miracles: against the heathen with holy
scripture: against the suttell Philosophers and worldly wise men, with the
faith that the gospel teaches, and with an innocent and a godly life: against
the tyrannes, and the violence of the Romans, with patience: Against
ydolatrye and false service of God, with steadfast constantnes even unto death,
cleauynge unto the understanding and sentence of the truth. And thus through
the power of Christ and through the spirit of Helias, they have gone through
them and gotten the victory against the old dragon and his wicked spirits
and against all unfaithful in y^ whole world and in all nations. And the
laud, honor and triumph of this victory they ascribed to no creature but
only to Christ which alone can overcome the wickedness of the world, all lies
and falsehede, the devil with all infidels in spyte of all their tyranny. And
therefore as Moses did sing a song of praise and thanks geuynge after the
destruction of Pharao and after the joyful victory of the children of
Israel, even so also did they sing unto him the song of the lamb which
belongs and is dew unto him only, saying: It is gods work and not ours,
which the almightye has wonderfullye and graciously wrought for us, for his
own glorious sake, which is rightuous in his judgments and true in his
promyses, whose ways are judgment and grace, righteousness and truth, which
only preserves the faithful elect, as a puyssaunt and mighty lord, and as
a faithful and loving father, whom all men ought to fear with such
reverence as godly children give unto their fathers, and with all hartye
obedience: other wise than the wicked, which like unfaithful and contemptuous
children do despise and contemn their omnipotent and almightye God and
father, and rightuous Lord and judge which knows all things. And therefore
he is to be praised and most highly exalted in the congregation of the
faithful, as he is everlastingly hated and cursed of the wicked and damned
sort to their utter and eternal damnacion. And no man can hinder or avoid it,
how strong and mighty so ever the Emperor of Rome is, as Domicianus, Nero
and other, but that al nations shall hear, believe and receive the holy gospel,
when the time is ones come, and shall honor and worship the only eternal
almighty God, and his Messiah promised unto them, the savior of the whole
world, and the redemer of all faithful elect.

The text.
And after that, I looked, and behold the temple of the tabernacle of testimony
was open in heaven, and the seven angels came out of the temple which had the
seven plages, clothed in pure and bright lynnen, and having their breasts
girded with golden girdels. And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven
angels seven golden vyalles full of the wrath of God, which lives for
evermore. And the temple was full of the smoke of the glory of God and of his
power, and no man was able to enter into the temple, til y^ seven plages of the
seven angels were fulfilled. Now as the gospel is come abroad in to the
world through Christ and his Apostles, to the synguler profit of the
faithful and elect, and to the salvation of their souls, even so is it a
stomblynge stone, offense, co^demnacion and an hurt or loss unto the wicked,
and specially unto the kingdom and dominion of Rome for a long space, which
has resisted it with force, with diverse assaults of body, goods and
possessions against the true faith, and with cruel tyranny, which the
almightye and rightuous god at his time, has always taken in hand to punyshe
most greuouslye, and has brought it also to pass. The opening of the
tabernacle of testimonye, is the manifest fulfillynge in the new testament, of
those mysteries and secrets, which were hydden and sygnified in the old
testament under diverse ceremonies. The seven angels which came out of the
temple, are the multitude of ministers and preachers of the gospel: which
serves unto the wicked for the increase and augmentacio^ of their damnacion.
For the which cause they may be called plages (as Christ was called of
Simeon, a fall) but to the comfort of salvation unto the elect. These angels
and euangelical preachers must be pure in all their conversation, and must have
their breasts girded about with faith and love with all the heart, soul and
mind, garnysshed with all godly virtues. To one of the angels does Christ
give (through the.iiii. beasts as is also sygnified in the.iiii. Chapter)
power to bring furthe and to publyshe abroad the gospel, which may be
signified by the vyals full of the wrath of God against the wicked and
unfaithful. But full of grace and mercy unto the faithful which abide and
suffer both pain and joy, wealth and woe. And thus is the temple of God the
Christen church, filled with sweet smellinge smoke of the praise, honor and
goodness of God, truly confessing and knowledginge the power and might of God.
And the church of Christ could not be at rest, nor could not quietly
prosper, until these.vii. plages came forth, of the which plages the gospel,
being preached by the ministers of God, whereof there were a great multitude
sent of god, was the occasion.

The.xvi. Chapter.
The text.
And I heard a great voice out of the temple saying to y^ seven angels: go
your ways, pour out your vyalles of wrath upon the earth. And the first
angel went, and powered out his vyalle upon the earth, and there fell a noisome
and a sore ^otche upon y^ men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them
which worshipped his image. And the second angel shed out his vyalle upon the sea, and it turned as it were into the blood of a dead man: and every lyuinge
thing died in the sea. And the third angel shed out his vyalle upon the
rivers and fountaynes of waters, and they turned to blood. And I heard an
angel say: Lord, which art and wast, thou art righteous and holy, because
thou have given such judgments, for they shed out the blood of saints,
and prophets, and therefore have thou given them blood to drink: for they
are worthy. And I heard another out of the altar say: even so Lord God
almighty: true and righteous are thy judgments. THe mercy of God vouchsaued
to preserve, augment and to prosper the regiment of the Romans, at y^
beginning of y^ which when it was in most quietness, the time was come that
Christ should be borne. And God offered his grace unto this kingdom and sent
them his holy gospel through the holy apostles to the synguler wealth and
profit both of that kingdom and also of y^ whole earth: out of y^ which y^
world might learn peace, love, humility, patience, gentilnes, temperance and
all true virtues, and specially faith in the one only God, and hope of
salvation in time to come, and also true christen love one to another. This
does the gospel and all writings of the apostles exhort and move men unto,
most earnestly. But this so holy and profitable doctrine, and invincible
truth has the dragon always withstanden and resysted, with his beast the
Empire and regiment of Rome, the first and second, whereof is spoken before.
And for this cause this kingdom has well deserved many and diverse
punishementes, which the lord God has permitted through his ministers of
righteousness which are to be understand in this place by the angels and the
vials full of plages which are come and fallen upon the dysobediente and the
contemners and despysers of faith, love and of the truth. The first This
name is now turned and called al saints.
plage is fallen upon all ydols and false gods which they had set and packed
together in one tempel of Pantheon, that is to say all gods. But the
ydolatrye of these false Gods was subverted and over thrown through out the
whole Empire of Rome through the holy gospel as the Chronicles do evidently
testifye. Thus did the religion and gods service of the Romans first feel the
wrath of God against their wylles, but all happened unto the faithful for the
best to the honor and glory of God and to the furtheraunce and profit of the
Christen church and congregation. The second plage of the second angel, is
the second judgment of God against the regiment of Rome, and this is
imbeselynge and diminyshe of their power and dominion* many lands and people
falling from them, and that with much blood sheddynge of the Romans as it
is plainly mentioned in the stories, as of Nero, Domicianus, and Iulianus and
diverse other.

The third plage may be understand of the destruction of the city of Rome
through y^ Goths and wandales and other enemies of the Romans* which had no
manner of lettes or hynderaunce neither of hills nor of dales, of see nor of
waters, neither by any host or power of men nor yet by any strength or keeping
of cities. Of this plage of the Romans al stories make mention at large. And
as than had y^ bloody kingdom of Rome an end, for the which cause the angel
cries justly, lord thou art rightuouse. etc. The angel of the waters may be
taken for the angel of God which did gather together such a great multitude
of people, which came altogether against this kingdom, because it had so long
plaged al people and shed so much holy martirs blood for the true and
christian faithes sake which must needs be reue^ged. And therefore is this
rightuous and manifest judgment of God praised again the second time, and
preached of gods angels with high thanckes geuynge.

The text.
And the fourth angel powered out his vyall on the sun, and power was given
unto him to vex men with heat of fire* And the men raged in great heat: and
spoke evil of the name of God, which has power over those plages, and they
repented not, to give him glory. And the fyfte angel* powered out his vyalle
upon the seat of the beast, and his kingdom wexed derke, and they gnewe their
tongues for sorrow, and blasphemed the God of heaven for sorrow and pain of
their sores, and repented not of their deeds. The fourth plage went over the
second regiment of Rome which had both the temporal and spiritual governance,
and was twice worse than the first. For as much as through her.ii. horns it
had power both over body and soul, over the doctrine, and over the polytike
laws, with mouth and hand, against God, and also against the temporal
governance, against Christ and all his ministers. How it has dealte with
the Emperors, and what rule they have kept among them selves one Romyshe
Pope against another practicing all wicked sciences of the devil both with
quick and also with dead me^, against many good and godly Kings and
Emperors: and again how often Rome and the Papacye has been grievously plaged
of God with rebellyon, treason, murder, poysonynge, nigromancye and with such
other kinds of wickedness as are never herd of in any other stories, we may
read in the stories of the Popes and of the Emperors, from the time of
Charles the great until late days. That by this means the sum of christen
virtue and godlynes is turned into very desceite, fraud, falsehede and
hypocrisy. And the most part of all the wicked Popes were religious men and
most false traitors to the gospel of Christ. As for repentance there is
none found by this deuilyshe flock. The fyfte angel with his fyfte plage
fallen upon the seat of pestilence, is rebellyon and resistance against the
gospel raised up through false teachers which have preached both without, and
also against the holy law and scripture of the lord, and have rayled against
many godly and faithful men, leaving and refusing holy scripture and
setting up the study of Aristotle in the stead thereof, which in the papacye
has been more regarded and esteemed than the holy word of God. By the means
whereof so many grievous errors are crepte into the church as well in matters
of faith and relygion, as of dyscipline and Christen behauour.

Much division, many sects by the means of so many orders of religions, and
so many glorious names and tytles, yea and heresies also. Of the which al
stories are full, from Emperor Fryderiche the first of that name until y^ end
of the third Frydierche. In the which time there was much trouble raised up
in the christendom in the seculer iurisdiccion, through the Turk, and in the
spiritual through the beggyng orders of religious parsons and of the high
heathnyshe schools and universities. Of the which times much might be written,
heavy inoughe to be red, but to avoid tediousnes unto the reader, it shall be
intermitted at this time.

The text.
And the syxte angel poured out his vyall upon the great river Euphrates, and
y^ water dried up, that the ways of the kings of the east should be
prepared. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth
of the dragon, and out of y^ mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet. For they are y^ spirits of deuyls, workynge miracles, to go out
unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of y^ great day of God almighty. Behold, I come as a thief* Happy is
he that watches and keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and men see his
fylthines. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew
tongue Armagedon. Consider and way if this angel may not sygnifye the spirit
of Helias in our time, which spreedeth abroad the gospel in to all the
world, both with word and deed to the confusion and utter destruction of all
errors, and to the profit and reformacion of the world in all states and
degrees. For this seed can bring forth no another fruit. But the great
Euphrates* of the pretensed spiritualtye, is so sore fallen from their first
rule, that it is become more worldly and secular than the very secular state,
in so much that it is utterly dried up and wythered from the gospel syncerely
preached. Which is not to be merueyled at, for it is even of very necessity.
For falsehede, deceyte, lies and Hypocrisye must be opened and dysclosed by the
truth of gods word, and by the preachinge of the gospel: that sincere love,
truth and faith in the word of God, with a sure confydence of the heart in
the lord God, might be taught and prynted into the natural wit and
understanding of man. And therefore it is necessary that such wrestynge of
the true knowledge and doctrine should be dysclosed unto such as have any
understanding and are not utterly corrupt, even unto worldly princes and
higher powers, and that the innocencye and clearnes* and also the synguler
profit of the doctrine of the gospel might come to light that they might see
and confess that it is the very truth, and so acknowledge and embrace this
Sun rysinge up. Although this doctrine be to strong for their blood and
flesh and they being fleshlye, over weak in strength to live after the
gospel. Now against this evangelical Sun and manifest knowledge of the
truth, shall arise.iii. manner of enemies which shall assault it. First the
deuyllyshe dragon, the great enemy of God and of all goodness, the botomles pyt
of all wickedness, with whom the mercy and goodness of God dalyeth and
plays to show and declare his mercy and goodness manifestlye before men. The
second is the beast at Rome, of whom we spoke before, the very right
Antichrist, which speaks and works all that he can against the gospel of
Jesus Christ, whereunto he prefers his decretalles, and will be Lord over
the scripture, over the church and over the whole world, and yet he will be
taken and esteemed for the vycar and debyte of Christ, and S. Peter's friend, and
the most holy father, and for the head of the whole holy christendom. And
whosoever contraryeth or gainesayth this, he must dye, and also be cursed and
made the deuylles, by the power of this beasts mouth. The third is the false
prophet: not one person but an whole order and multitude of bishops, and
relygions parsons, monckes, friars. etc. Which by their office and calling
ought to maintain and supporte the true doctrine, but have appointed and bent
them selves, their whole life and state, utterly against the doctrine of the
gospel: that nothing can be more unlike the state of the Apostles, either in
doctrine, religion or life, than is their order and state. Whereof it is not
needful to make many words, how they have always resisted the doctrine of
the gospel. These are such.iii. foul unclean spirits, as none can be
found more unclean, which notwithstanding do work great tokens and
miracles. The devil with great wonders both among the Turks and the
Christians. The papacy, by forcerye, witchcrafte and nigromancie. The monks
and religious spiritual sort withal suttyltie, falsede and craft of such
miracles as are or have been done whereby (as it has been and is evident inoughe)
they have begyled both rich kings, princes and y^ whole world, of their
goods and possessions, through their false doctrine. And they fight and keep
batel always against y^ holy gospel, as Gog and Magog did against Jerusalem,
with diverse victories and triumphs, but they shall be overcome at length
through the power of gods word, and of y^ gospel reveled and come to light,
through the spirit of Enoche and Helyas, of the which is before mentioned, in
the great day of God the almighty, which shall come at such time as no man is
ware of, and when all men think to be most sure eue^ at such time as the
wickedness of these.iii. spirits shall be most strong and at the highest. As
than shall the godly ministers of the gospel, indewed and strengthened with the
spirit of Helias, joyfully come furthe against these devils and against al
manner of errors both of the faith and of the outward life. As than shall
those be happy which watch and are careful with great diligence for the
christen doctrine and religion, which are clothed with the power of the holy
ghost and with a right zeal, which set furthe the works of God, as did
Helyas, not only with words and wrytinges, but also with life, deeds,
examples, continuance and constantnes in goodness, without any pride or desire
of vain glory, that no man shall ever see any shame by them. But the
judgment of God has gathered the.iii. unclean spirits into one place, into
the eternal fire of damnacion, and everlasting shame, pain, and confusion,
which is prepared and promised to the devil and his angels. For Harmagdon
may sygnifye as much as the judgment of curse.

The text.
And y^ seventh angel powered out his vyalle into the air. And there came a
voice out of heaven from the seat, saying: it is done. And there followed
voices, thonderynges, and lightninges: and there was a great earthquake, such
as was not sense men were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so
great. And the great city was divided into three parties, and the cities of al
nations fell. And great Babilo^ came in remembrance before God, to give unto
her the cup of the wine of the featcenes of his wrath. Every isle also fled
away, and the mountains were not found. And there f^ll a great hayle (as it
had been talentes) out of heaven upon the men, and the men blasphemed God,
because of the plage of the hayle, for it was great and the plage of it sore.
This seventh angel is more hard and uncertain to interpret and to expound,
than all the other. Like as it is more uncertain to write of things to come,
than of such things as are already past. It may well be a great fear in time
to come that y^ kingdom of the Turks for a short space, shall be a great plage
and sorrow, an heavy judgment over the corrupt and decayed christendom. Which
plage may here be found and marked out of these words, y^ it shall happen and
come to pass before such time as the Lamb and his ministers shall rule upon
y^ earth, that both Jews and heathen shall be converted unto Christ y^ it may
be said, it is al done, and so up y^ the full end of the world to come, and
the terrible judgment of God to fall upon one sort and part of men which
shall than be a live, which is y^ first part. And the other part is of them
which shall rise up unto everlasting salvation. And y^ third, is of them
which are already damned, which is and shall be the greatest part. Unto whom this
judgment, and all that shall go before or come after it, shall be more fearful
and terrible tha^ any heart can think, or any tongue express, which terrible
and heavy thing is here sygnified (as much as is possible) by the terryble
voices, thonders, lightninges, earthquakes, and overthrowing of the greatest
and mightiest cities and kingdoms, as Babilo^ and Rome were. What thing can be
thought or ymagined more terrible and fearful? Which thing this cursed and
damnable world shall and must suffer by the rightuous judgment of God, and
it must feel the great wrath of God, forasmuch as it has always despised
the blessed gospel and Christ our savior and redemer. And therefore the great
and heavy stroke and plage of gods rightuous judgment shall fall upon the
world, and yet shall it not amend them, but as damned parsons, shall cast and
set them into everlasting blasphemye of God wherein they are hardened, and will
not amend. Which is the highest and greatest plage that the lord God may or
will send upon his enemies.

The.xvii. Chapter.
The text.
And there came one of the seven angels, which had the seven vialles: and
talked with me, saying unto me: come, I will show thee y^ judgment of the
great whore that sytteth upon many waters, with whom have committed
fornicacion the kings of the earth, and the inhabiters of the earth are
droncken with the wine of her fornicacion. And the spirit carried me away into
the wilderness. And I saw a woman sit upon a rose colored beast, full of names
of blasphemye, which had seven heads and ten horns. And the woman was arrayed
in purple and rose color, and decked with gold, precious stone, and perles:
and had a cup of gold in her hand, full of abhominacions and fylthines of her
fornicacion. And in her forheade was a name written, a mystery, great Babylon,
the mother of whordome and abhominacions of the earth. And I saw the wife
droncken with the blood of saints, and with the blood of the witnesses of
Jesus. And when I saw her, I wondered with great marueyle. ONe of the seven
angels which spoke of the second kingdom and iurisdiccion of Rome, and of y^
beast with.ii. horns, comes now again and will speak more largely, and
sufficiently of Antichrist, which is his chief prick* and mark whereat he
will shote. Whom he names here with a new name, the great whore, which will be y^
head and chief governor of many nations whose special abiding is in y^ land
named Italy, which lies in y^ see, in manner as y^ lesser Asia does. With this
pompous, suttil, deceightfull and shameless, lecherous and proud state of y^
papacy have kings committed whordo^ almost these thousa^de years, being
sometime friends together, and sometime enemies, sometime one in his chief
favor and sometime another: And thus have all Christen kyngdoms suffered them
selves to be ruled and led, yea to be put in fear, and again in comfort
and joy by him, what with his suspendinge and cursynge, until he crepte so
far into the church of God, and became the highest desolacion and decay
thereof that ever was. This woman upon the rose colored beast, is not only
arrayed with red scarlet robes* like as his Cardinales are (otherwise than ever
Christ, or his humble Apostles, bishops and spiritual ministers were) and
like bloud^ thurstye soudyers, but rather with much Christen blood sheddynge
under y^ pretense of the punyshement of heresy, as all that must be named which
has been spoken or written against the pomp, usurped power and tyranny of the
papacye. This woman is also arrayed with such infinite variable colors and
ornaments of monkery and with diverse lyueres of religious orders by whom she
would have had both honor and profit, which with their names and sects have
obscured and blemysshed the name of Christ, whereof S. Paul does complain to
the Chorinthians as an vnsemynge thing, as it is in deed a great blasphemye
that the names of S. Benet, S. Austen, saint Fraunces, should obscure the
name and honor of Christ our only savior and redemer. This woman beside her
variable garments, has also taken upon her (for to set forth her pride,
dignite, and estimacion withal,) to rule over all Christen Kings and Princes,
which she has brought under her and made subject and contributorye unto her
with falsehede and lies, utterly against the doctrine of the holy gospel, Vox
autem nonsic. So shall not ye: And also against the example of Christ's
fetewasshynge. And likewise against the holy order and commendacion of saint
Peter, which had neither gold nor silver. And against the order of the holy
Apostle saint Paul, which to avoid offense and to open the gospel would
erne his bread with his hands, as other of the apostles also did. This
whoryshe woman has garnished and decked her self far otherwise, not with
diverse and many virtues, but with precious stones, gold and silver. etc. The
cup of gold, is not the love of Christ, the christen faith, nor the law of
God, but much rather all the Popes decrees, decretalles, bulls, patentes,
dyspensacions, suspensions and cursings. This is the very abhominacion of
whordome, that she might play the whore at her pleasure after this fasshion,
with pomp, aucthorite and lust without any shame or fear beyond all measure:
And all this under the name and pretense of Christ, and of holiness, in the
honor of God and for the wealth of the soul, which through him are y^ longer
the more unblessed and unhappy. And therefore for the name of the christen
church, he has deserved a another name, that is, to be called more worthylye
the whore of Babylon, the mother of all abhominacion, ydolatrye, and of all
falling unto hethenyshe supersticions. The innocent blood of the holy godly
prophets and preachers, which the right christen church has never l^cked,
has this whore, the proud glorious papacye, shed so without number or
measure, till she was so dronken therewith, that she took and esteemed such
tyranny for a godly zeal and feruencye, and has persuaded her self, that
men must suffer it and be content therewith, what soever she did, yea although
she should send faithful souls unto hell by heaps. Is not this a great
meruell unto all men of understanding? and an offense and slander unto al
unfaithful, as Turks, Jews and other? and an intolerable violence and
oppression unto the whole world? I will not say even unto the very inhabitours
of Rome, and to all right faithful hearts.

The text.
And the angel said unto me: wherefore merueylest thou? I will show thee, the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that bears her, which has seven
heads and ten horns. The beast that thou see, was and is not, and shall
ascend out of the botomles pit, and shall go into perdicion, and they that
dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the book of
life, from the beginning of the world) when they behold the beast that was,
and is not. And here is a mind that has wisdom. In this exposicion and
declaracion good christen reader) have thou this comfort, that this woman, the
cursed damnable papacy shall have an end: not in the world, wherein
Antichrist shall have his place so long as the world shall continue and endure,
but in the hearts and consciences of the faithful Christianes, in all states
and degrees, which shall withstand and reprove him, and shall hinder and let
his presumpcion and no more fear his thonderboltes, neither regard nor esteem
his suspencions and cursings, nor take no power nor auctorite at his hand any
more. And as for the beast which bears her, which signifies the Romyshe
prescripcions, the papal seat, his indulgence, pardon, and excommunicacion,
shall be taken and esteemed as it is, and as it is known to be unto all the
world out of the holy and manifest gospel: And therefore he shall not cease to
persecute with the help of such kings as are as good and virtuous as him
self, and he shall covet always to clyme up and to be higher and higher,
until at length he shall fall down into everlasting perdicion before God and
all the world, which shall wonder thereat, and specially y^ wicked and
ungodly, which are not elect unto salvation, which had pleasure and delyght
in such pomp, pride, dygnite, tyranny, and abhominacion as he did use: They
shall wonder and meruell, I say, when they shall see the papacy to be thrown
down from heaven into the damnacion and pit of hell, like as it happened unto
his father the great dragon the devil, luke the.x. Now the knowledge of the
judgment of God and of his truth by the gospel, which teaches us to know
both Christ and Antichrist, is a syngular wisdom and a great gift of God.

The text.
The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sytteth, they are
also seven kings. Five are fallen and one is, and another is not yet come. And
when he comes, he must continue a short space. And the beast that was, and
is not, is even the eight, and is one of the seven, and shall go into
destruction. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten kings which has
received no kingdom as yet, but shall receive power as kings at one hour with
the beast. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto
the beast. These shall fight with y^ lamb, and the lamb shall overcome them.
For he is Lord of lords, and king of kings, and they that are on his side,
are called, and chosen, and faithful. This vision of the seven hills, agrees
well unto the seven hills which are in the city of Rome, of the which she
has made her boast and triumph, as she has also done of the seven head
churches. And how many the kingdoms are whereupon he has sytten appears by
the chronicles. And which of them are fallen from him and forsake him we see
daily. But he that shall come and remain for a short space, that same
parauenture shall be the king of y^ Turks, whose infidelite and tyranny,
may sooner be reformed mollyfied and altered (after man's judgment) by the
gospel, and by the instruccion of gods word, may sooner be brought unto the
religion and true faith of Christ, that the proud seat of Rome and her
adherentes. Thus may y^ be the eight beast as y^ papacy or see of Rome is the
seventh, but it shall sone be judged unto damnacion. The.x. kings receive not
y^ kingdom of God, until they receive the gospel of Christ, not of Antichrist,
but of the spirit of Christ. But in the mean time they shall receive power
and aucthorite of the beast, which power they shall exercise and practyse to
overcome y^ lamb. and to oppress the gospel for the pleasure of the. ii.
horned beast. But y^ lamb, the word of God, y^ reuelacion of y^ holy and
godly doctrine and truth, the grace of God, the lord Christ, shall overcome
them. For they shall understand and believe that there is a lord of al lords
and a king of al kings. To whose kingdom the elect which are called of God
from everlasting, do apperteine. And thus shall the. x. kings shortly hate
the whore with her court, and shall turn her naked out of y^ florishyng and
bewtifull raiment wherewith they and their auncientries have garnished and
annowrned this whore and her harlottes, and by y^ means have given occasion
unto such pride and unchristian pomp (I might well say unto such Luciferyshe
pride,) for as much as he will be like and equal unto Christ, and the
brydegrome of the holy church, where as he has given a great offense and
slander unto the holy church, and in manner has shamed her and oppressed her
through his tyranny, In as much as they (the kings and princes) them selves
must cfo^esse y^ the grauntes which this whore received of the Emperors
Constantine, Charles and Jews being deceived by her, was the poison and
confusion of the christen church. This hatred and envy against such an
whore, shall the spirit of Helias styre up in the hearts of kings to do with
one accord, as y^ truth being known shall require, as they did before indewe
her with such power. And thus shall the word of God be fulfilled. The woman
in the great city is he which has exalted himself for a bishop over all
bishops, and a regent and Lord over all Emperors and kings, sittinge also in
the place and seat of Christ, which only and alone has received power of
the father over heaven and earth, which he never gave unto any other, as it is
written Et gloriam mea^ Alterinon dabo. I will give my gloto no another. Esaye.
xlii.

The.xviii. Chapter.
The text.
And after that, I saw another angel come from heaven, having great power,
and the earth was lyghtened with his britnesse. And he cried mightily with a
strong voice, saying: Great Babylon is fallen, is fallen and is become the
inhabitacion of devils, and the hold of all foul spirits, and a cage of all
unclean and hateful birds, for all nations have droncken of the wine of the
wrath of her fornicacion. And the kings of the earth have committed
fornicacion with her, and the merchants of the earth are wexed rich of the
abundance of her pleasures. THis chapter may be taken for a song of
triumph, of al faithful against all tyrannous kyngdoms which have contemned,
the faith, truth, religion, and all godlynes, and would not abide any of
them. And specially against the kingdom and power of Rome, by reason of the
tyrannes, which from the beginning have martired tormented and murdered the
holy professors of the only one God. And most principally against the second
regyment of Rome which under the pretense of the name of Christ, has dealte
so cruellye against all faithful Christianes, and against the euangelical
kingdom of god. And y^ former chapter next going before being well understand,
there is no great difficultnes nor hardness in this. For this chapter is, as it
were, an exposicion and declaracion of the former. Christ the angel of y^
great council, like as at his first coming he came in the most highest
humility and lowlynes, became man, suffered and dyed: even so at his last
coming, he shall come in most bright glory, not into a virgins body, but
into the whole world with most high brightness, and proclamynge his
gospel unto the whole world, to rich and poor, wise and simple in evil. A
joyful gospel is it, Babylon y^ great and worishe city, she is fallen, she
is fallen. She has no such honor more that she will take upon her as she
has done. Now is it known that she has been an habitacion for the wicked,
unfaithful, desceightfull, and of Sodomites which have made all the world
drunken and mad with her poison and infectuous drink. And has committed
Simony withal spiritual things, which, even as the cursed Simon magus did,
she has sold for much monye and for great riches. And as for the high
humility and lowlynes of Christ, whose merit she has pretended to be her
own, she has chopped and changed it, yea she has sold it for princely and
lordly honor to be exhibit and done unto her feet, and with most deuely she
pride received.

The text.
And I heard another voice from heaven, say: come a way from her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plages.
For her sins are gone up to heaven, and God has remembered her wickedness
Reward her, even as she rewarded you, and give her double according to her
works. And pour in double to her in the same cup which she filled unto
you. And as much as she glorified her self and lived wantonly, somuche pour
ye in for her of punysshment and sorrow, for she said in her self. I sit
being a queen, and am no wyddowe, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her
plages come in one day^, death, and sorrow, and honger, and she shall be burnt
with fire: for strong is the Lord God which shall judge her. These words
speaks Christ, through his spirit, from heaven unto his people, that they
should forsake the company and fellowship of Antichriste, that they make not
them selves partakers of y^ horrible sin, of the double indignacion and also
of the plages which shall lighten upon him. For the sin is greater than that
gods righteousness could suffer it any longer unpunished. And therefore he
will recompense her with punishment, as she has deserved, and that by heaps
one in a nothers neck. For there would no long sufferyng of God, nor no
warninge of the word of God, help. Thus happens it unto all vyolent and
tyrannous kyngdoms, even from the Assirians unto the last of the Romans.
Great pride and pomp must be subdued and vanquysshed with great shame and
bondage. This prophecye is like unto the holy prophets Esaias, and Daniel,
although it pertains unto a another kingdom, but like unto that both in
wickedness and in punishment.

The text.
And the kings of the earth shall bewope her and wayle over her, which have
committed fornicacion with her, and have lived want only with her, when they
shall se y^ smoke of her burning, and shall stand a farte of, for fear of
her punishment, saying: Alas, alas, that great city Babilo^, that mighty
city: for at one hour is thy judgment come. And the merchauntes of the earth
shall weep and wayle in them selves, for no man will bye their ware any more,
the ware of gold and silver, and precious stones, nether of pearl, and
raynes, and purple, and skarlet, and al thynne wod, and al manner of vessels of
yuery, and all manner vessels of most precious wod^e, and of brass and iron,
and synamon, and odoures and oyntmentes, and franckynsence, and wine, and oil,
and fine ^^ou^e and wheat, beasts, and sheep, and horses, and charettes, and
bodies, and souls of men. With this Babylon have princes and prelates yea
whole kyngdoms committed whordome. For she has received and given them, yea
has set them in and out. And all for worldly gain, and for honor sake,
without any respect of righteousness, only for money and brybes. For there was
never found more shameful marchandyse, than that which they of the Popes
court, specially the Curtysans, have exercysed many years with other men's
goods, and with nothing else but with lead and silver, with parchement and
byshoprikes with sellyng of their Pallium and Robes, which should be a
spiritual iurisdiccio^, and with first fruits. etc. Yea there is no end of
such marchaundyse, like as in the text all things are named which are of
any price. So that in the Popes church there was nothing but for money, not so
much as the water or salt of the sea, nor oil nor bread, nor cream. etc.
All must serve for holiness and for the maintenance of the covetousness of the
spiritualtye. To be short, read but only a book that is called the Popes
Fair, there is his marchandyse well descrybed and proved by the customs and
laws of the Romans.

The text.
And the apples that thy soul lusted after, are departed from the. And al
things which were de^^tie, and had in price, are departed from the, and thou
shalt find them no more. The ma^ch aun^es of these things which were wexed
rich, shall stand a far of from her, for fear of the punishment of her,
wepinge, and waylinge, and saying: Alas, alas that great city, that was
clothed in raines and purple, and scarlet, and decked w^t^ gold, and precious
stones, and pearls: for at one hour so great riches is come to naught. First
of all there was much holiness and much good example and doctrine in the holy
church of Rome, as S. Paul testifies in his Epistle to the Romans, and
there were many holy bishops and martirs which loved y^ truth, unto whom the
gospel was a synguler joy, delyght, comfort and glory. But in process of
time it was turned vpsyde down. So y^ there was nothing left in the rulers
and heads of that church, but only the name of the church. All that was
perfyght, godly and holy, was lost and gone. And at length their marchandyse
which they invented would no more be esteemed among y^ true godly
christianes. For they have inoughe of those things which these merchants
do promise, of the grace and mercy of God, and of his word. And therefore the
Romanystes do meruell and frete against the gospel, because it brings no
another ware with it but her old ware, that is to say, humylite, lowlynes,
pouertye, sorrow, contempt, which all men do flee and abhorte: And it makes
an end also of all worldly pomp and honor, joy and pleasure, ydlenes and
wantonness. The outward and glorious supersticous will bring no more profit or
advantage, precious garments and perles will not become the professors of the
gospel. Coules and shaven crounes, will no longer be taken for holiness of them
that have any understanding and knowledge. Peter and John and all the
Apostolical ministers of Christ, will contemn and despise gold and silver.
For Christ has taught them faith, love and truth, pouertye and lowlynes.

The text.
And every ship gouerner, and all they that occupied ships, and shypmen
which work in the sea, stood a far of, and cried, when they saw the smoke
of her burning, saying: what city is like unto this great city? And they
^ast dust on their heads, and cried weeping, and waylynge, and said: Alas,
alas, tha^ great city, wherein were made rich all that had ships in the sea,
by the reason of her costlynes, for a^ one ^oure is she made desolate. Rejoice
over her, thou heaven and ye holy Apostles and prophets: for god has given
you judgment upon her. Thus does the lord God show and aduenge him self of
all violent and tyrannous pride and presumpcion of them, which persuade them
selves that there is no God but they, or else that he has no care of those
things that are upon earth. Whereas it is evident and manifest out of gods
word what has always been the end of all proud and presumptuous kyngdoms.
Which the spiritualtye should best have known and have taught other also. And
specially he that has had, and would have such a byshoprike. And would
also keep it until he should peryshe together with it because he has not
ordered him self therein after the will of god nor after the right rule and
square of gods word and of holy scripture, nor has not done that thing that
his office and vocacion has required as he ought to have done, as it is
evident unto all men. They have desired and studied only to have great power
and dominion upon y^ whole earth, and in all nations and yles, only for honor
and gain, with very small study or dilygence to rule the world well and
godly, or to further gods honor and the salvation of the soul only. And for
this cause does all the world wonder at such a great and horrible fall. And
they that seek and study after dignite honor and auctorite, and after worldly
lucre, they tremble for fear and mourn and bewail the heavy judgment of God
and their worldly hynderance. But the holy and faithful which not only upon
earth regard and seek the honor and glory of God, which they do chefely
desire but also in heaven, which have the fruicion and perfyght sight and
knowledge of the righteousness of God, they praise God heartily for the rightuous
judgment which is reveled unto the world.

The text.
And a mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone, and cast it into
the sea. saying, with such violence shall that great city Babylon be cast,
and shall be found no more. And the voice of harpers, and musicions, and of
pypers, and tromperters shall be heard no more in the: and no crafts man, of
whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more in the. And the sound of a
myll shall be heard no more in the: and the voice of the brydgrome and of the
bryde, shall be heard no more in the, for thy merchants were the great men of
the earth. And with thine ^^ch auntment were deceived al ancions: and in her
was found the blood the prophets, and of the saints, and of all that were
slain upon the earth. Such a another thing did Jeremy also prophecye of the
kingdom of Babilo^ and even as he prophesied, so came it to pass. And even so
doubtless shall ^^ likewise come to pass unto this proud presumpcion, and
likewise unto all ungodly tyrants whether they be of the spiritualtye or of
the temporaltie. An heavy and grievous judgment shall take and overthrow the
mighty of the world which mysuse their power and might. Yea and it shall
utterly fall and decay with all their joy, lust, pride and tyranny which
they have used in the time of their governance. And specially the spiritual
ministers of god, which for their office and vocacions sake, ought to have
done and taught otherwise. And likewise such handy crafts as have served
ydols and ydolatrie, and maynteined false gods and false gods service,
invented only for lucre and for no godlynes, shall also have an end. And
likewise the ydel priests with such as depend upon them, an unprofitable
kind of people, and al such things as have ministered occasion unto worldly
lusts, pleasures and delyciousnes, shall have like end and fall as Tyrus,
Babylon and Nynyue, of the which the prophets make mention. As Rome and the
Romyshe Empire also had once. Much more shall it happen likewise unto the
Papacye and y^ court of Rome and to y^ prelates, which ought to be spiritual,
as they also name them selves, but in very in deed are more carnal and worldly
than any other. What godly men have been destroyed for the truths sake in
councels and at Rome, it is so euydent that it neadeth not here to be rehearsed.

The.xix. Chapter.
The text.
And after that, I herd the voice of much people in heaven, saying:
Alleluya. Salvation and glory and honor and power be ascribed to the Lord
out God, for true and righteous are his judgments, for he has judged the
great whore which did corrupt y^ earth with her fornicacion, and has avenged
the blood of his servants of her hand. And again they said: Alleluia. And
smoke rose up for evermore. And the xxiiii. elders, and the four beasts fell
down, and worshypped God that sat on the seat, saying: Amen. Alleluya. And
a voice came out of the sear, saying: praise our Lord God all ye that are
his servants and ye that fear him both small and great. IF a man might so
say, what does the punishment of the wicked tyrants and their damnacion,
help or profit the godly and faithful christians which are persecuted of
the dragon, of the beast and of y^ false prophets for the true faith and
religions sake, even unto death? Hete in this place is a sufficient and
perfight answer unto this question. For thus it is said, the same godly
ministers and faithful witnesses of Christ the crucified and slain lamb,
they do nothing else in heaven in their immortal souls but sing thanks and
lauds unto God almighty, styrring, prouokyng, and exhorting one a another
with like affeccion and zeal to praise God. For Alleluia is nothing else but
praise God. Allelu, is as much to say as praise ye. And ya is one of the
names of the lord God whereby he is named, of which names there are diverse.
Now here may we learn with what manner of words we should and shall praise
God, both here and also in heaven: Namely thus, all salvation and goodness
which may be profitable unto us and may be desired of God, and again all
laud and praise, for all manner of benefits and goodness perteyneth only unto
the most merciful, eternal and almightye only one God, and must be
ascribed unto him. Honor which is a profession and a declaracion of al virtue
and godly kindness and love, and of al might, power and omnipotencye, is due
only unto the true, only and eternal God creator and maker of all
creatures. For all his works and judgments are right, commendable, holy and
true without all manner of parcialitye, and specially for as much as he has
subdued and brought down the glorious and proud tyrants both of the
spirituality and of the temporaltie, and has sent them to eternal damnacion.
And has caused their wickedness and abhominacion also to come to light in this
world, to the synguler comfort of the faithful elect that were oppressed of
them. And thus they cease not to give lawdes and thanckes unto God, saying
continually, Alleluia. But the smoke is the true oblacion and the right
sacrifice which the holy saints do offer in heaven euerlastinglye, and
perform also upon earth in the holy church even until the latter day, I
mean geuynge of thanckes and acknowledging the goodness of God, as is before
said. This oblacio^ and sacrifice is made continually without ceasynge with
infynite and unspeakable joy, of al holy patriarchs, prophets, Apostles,
mattirs, and of the whole heavenly fellowship, and of all them which ever from
the beginning have pleased the lord God with faith, love, hope and obedience.
But the manner and the ceremonies with the words reverence and joy which the
holy and faithful elect do use, does the holy scripture describe after the
manner and capacite of men, in such wise as may be best understand and
perceived of us. Amen, is as much as that God is the truth, and faithful in
keeping of all his promises and words. And here may we learn that we should
not name nor esteem the holy and faithful saints as princes and rulers of
heaven, for as much as they name them selves but servants of God, and are no
better, and that also not by merit and deserte, but only by the grace and
eleccion of god. And also some are also greater and higher than other, as
Abraham parauenture than Isaac, and Joseph than Simeon, Peter than Philip, but
that ought not curiously to be serched out of man. In heaven shall we see and
know perfitely the cause and occasion of the judgment of God, but not in this
life.

The text.
And I heard the voice of much people even as the voice of many waters: and
as the voice of strong tho^dringes, saying: Alleluia. For the Lord our god
omnipotent reigns. Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him: for
the marriage of the lamb is come, and his wife made her self ready. And to
her was granted, that she should be a^ rayed with pure and goodly raynes. For
the raynes is the rightewesnes of saints. And he said unto me, write, happy
are they which are called unto the lambs supper. And he said unto me: these
are the true sayings of God. And I tell at his fete, to worship him. And he
said unto me: se thou do it not. For I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy
brethren, even of them that have the testimony of Jesus. Whorship God. For the
testimonye of Jesus is the spirit of prophecye. This may be understand of y^
holy and faithful saints upon earth, which after the manifest and joyful
preachinge of the gospel as much as is possible, in the whole world (when as
both Jews and Turks shall become Christen) shall praise and thancke the
almighty God for such syngular grace and mercy, which has hitherto been
hindered and kept down with such force and violence by Antichrist. As tha^
shall the glory and praise of god increase in y^ christen church, which is the
kingdom of Christ: And, through the gospel, promised unto Christ the
bridegroom* which church as a faithful and dear beloved spouse which here in
this world, loves and honors Christ as much as she can, shall be filled
and satisfied with all goodness in eternal bliss and salvation. The sylken
array, is the innocence of life in this world, through y^ grace of Christ, and in
heaven it is the immortal glorificacion of body and soul. For than shall man
be right blissed wha^ as he shall be fully satisfied in god through Christ with
abounda^ce and plentuousnes of all benefits and goodness which can be desiered
or wyshed. That same is y^ everlasting supper of the marriage of Christ wherewith
Christ shall honor his elect, and make them blissed. And in all this which
John sees in this vision, it is said also unto him, y^ al these things,
visions and reuelacions came unto him from God, and to the honor of God,
which he as a true and faithful minister should further with all diligence.
But as John would have worshipped y^ parson of y^ angel which spoke unto him,
y^ angel would in no wise suffer him, like as no saint neither in heaven nor in
earth will suffer any such thing nor take it upon the^ nor yet in good worth.
For god only must be worshipped, from who^e only al goodness comes, and must
be desired and looked for of him only. The angels will be taken and esteemed for
nothing else but for brethren, fre^des and fellow servants of y^ only one
common and general lord, and fellows withal them y^ believe in Christ and are
ready for his sake unto al goodness, and to suffer al manner of things eue^ unto
death But this is the right, perfyte and sure wisdom, which the worldly wise
do not know, neither desire nor regard.

The text.
And I saw heaven open, and behold, a white horse: and he that sat upon him
was called faithful and true, and in righteousness did judge and make
barrel. His eyes were as a frame of fire: and on his head were many crowns:
and he had a name written, that noman knew but he himself. And he was clothed
with a vesture dypt in blood, and his name is called the word of God. And the
warriers which were in heaven, followed him upon white horses, clothed with
white and pure raynes: and out of his mouth went out a sharp two edged sword,
that with it he should smite the hethen. And he shall rule them with a rod of
iron, and he trod the wynefat of fearsnes and wrath of almighty God. And
has on his vesture and on his thighe a name written: King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. The spirit of God must speak with men after the manner of men, if
he should be understand. And therefore he describes the majesty of Christ,
even after the majesty of an Emperor. For the high powers are wont to be
honored even as Christ is here described with his honor, laud and name. For
he is y^ word of God, wherewith this S. John begins his gospel, and whereby
all things are made: which is also God and manne the obiecte of faith, that
is to say the thing whereunto y^ faith of al elect has her respect: And he
is also the rightuous judge over all that ever is in heaven or in earth which
has a fyerye and burning zeal and hate against all wicked which contemn and
despise his word, but crowns all the godly and faithful with the crown of
his righteousness. His name is unknown unto all the world, the truth whereof he
would not express before Pilate, and yet truth and gods word is all one
thing. This righteousness of Christ is signified by the sword, although the
word of God also does perce through the inward heart and mind of the
faithful as it is written in the.iiii. to the Hebrews. But here the sword is
taken for the righteousness in gods kingdom wherewith Christ rules the kingdom
which his father has given him for his heritage, as David says. For like as
he has joy in everlasting bliss with his wariers and host that follow him,
even so does he press and tread down all the wicked with eternal damnacion,
before whom also he trod y^ press until his vesture was blody: But they took
it for a mock and a folyshe yes^, as it was unto the Jews a slander. But yet
their knees must bow unto him, not only the angels and men in heaven and
earth, but also they that are in hell shall be trodden of him with the wrath of
God almighty. For without dout he is the king of all kings and lord of all
lords.

The text.
And I saw an Angel stand soche son, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying to all the fowls that fly by the mids of heaven: come and gather
your selves together unto the supper of the great God, that ye may eat the
flesh of kings, and the flesh of ^ye captains, and the flesh of mighty
men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of
all fre ^^^ and bond men and of small and great. And I saw the beast, and the
kings of the earth, and their warriers gathered together to make battle
against him that sat on the horse, and against his soldiers. And the beast was
taken, and with him that false prophet that wrought miracles before him, with
which he deceived them that received the beasts mark, and them that
worshipped his image. These both were cast into a ponde of fire burning with
brimstone: and the remnaunt were slain with the swearde of him that sat upon
the horse, which swearde proceaded out of his mouth* and all the fowls were
fulfilled with their flesh. Like as Christ makes a supper unto his children
and servants in heaven, even so does he also, being the son of
ryghtuousnes make a supper unto the deuylles and to al dampened sowles. In
everlasting supper of al bitterness and vnblessydnes whereof they may eat and
be partakers altogether. And there is than, desperacion, hate, envy, wrath
and murmuringe against God, and all kinds of evil which are sygnified by
corporal things according to our capacite, and after such wise as men may
be most moved thereby y^ they must of necessity mark and consider it. And it
is to be noted that S. John sees these gestes of the deuell in hell, that they
are the destr^yers of y^ world, tyrants of all manner of degrees, the beast
with.ii. horns, the dragon and false prophet, all enemies of gods truth,
religion and of all manner of godlynes, oppressors of the innocent friends of
God. To be short, all they which bear the mark and token of the dragon and
of the beast, which is infidelyte and misbelefe in Christ, like as faith in y^
crucified Christ is the sure mark and token of all the elect. These
unfaithful must live eternally in the ponde of fire, and they shall be
ponisshed and vexed painfully with unspeakable sorrow and heuines, even y^
deuel and his servants together. And although some come out of this life with
y^ sword without faith, yet their damnacio^ did begin here, and shall continue
everlastingly.

The.xx. Chapter.
The text.
And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, having the kaye of the
bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he took the dragon that
old serpent, which is the devil and Satanas, and he bound him a thousand
years: and cast him into y^ bottomless pit, and he bound him, and set a
seal on him, that he should deceive the people no more, till the thousand
years were fulfilled. And after that he must be loced for a little season.
THis chapter may be taken, as it were, for a rehearsal of the visions and
reuelacions that were before mentioned. And by the way it describes again y^
honor and majesty of Christ, of gods word, and the power of the holy
gospel, and the benefits of Christ, and adds thereunto the last judgment of
the dead which shall dye.ii. deaths. This angel that comes from heaven is
Christ which should come in to this world as was promised unto the first
man in the beginnynge of the world that he should tread the old serpent upon
the head. Which is nothing else, but that he should take his power from him
which the just and rightuous God has suffered him to exercise against man
for the sin of the first dysobedience and transgression. Which power Satan
has always exercised and practiced with all wicked disceyte and diverse
errors, and specially with ydolatrye, after the which do follow blindness and
all manner of sins. This power has Christ mightily and with force taken from
Satan the devil, through his righteousness and humblenes even until the
cross, satisfieng for all the pride, transgression, disobedience and
unfaithfulness of Adam and Eve. And thus he has bound him with the chain of
his well deserved power, that is to say, has hindered him of his proud
tyranny and shameful wicked power against the faithful elect of god. This
band should endure a thousand years y^ is to say, a long time, namely even y^
time of the right Christen faith, which after y^ saying of y^ old fathers
should endure for.ii. thousand years, but it is uncertain from what time, men
should begin to teken these years, and that the faith in this time, should be
sore assaulted, which has always been at this point even in the time of y^
Jews in y^ old testament and among gods own people has sometime increased
and sometime fallen and dedecaied. And according thereunto might Satan exercise
his power at some time more tha^ at a another. And thus through Christ, Satan is
always bond unto the right faithful. But when the faith decays and goes
backewarde, and the falsehede, desceite and dysobedience of man increases, so
that gods word is more and more contemned and forsaken, than does Satan's
power increase again (as it has often come to pass) that he may deceive the
people, the heathen, the unfaithful again, and so use his power and tyranny
again as long as there is lack and want of true faith in this world.

The text.
And I saw seats, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them:
and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witnesses of Jesus, and
for ye word of God: which had not worshipped the beast: nether his image,
neither had taken his mark upon their forheades, or on their hands: and they
lived, and raygned with Christ a.M. year: but the other of the dead men lived
not again, until the thousand year were finysshed. This is that first
resurrection. Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first
resurreccion: For on such shall the second death have no power, but they
shall be the Prestes of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand
years. The seats to judge Satan and his company, are appointed of Christ
unto the holy apostles and unto other elect, the souls of them which for the
lambs sake were beheaded, that is to say, after diverse manners and fasshions put
to death for the gospelles sake, which would not make any oblacions unto
ydols nor false gods, nor would not worship the beast, that is to say
Antichrist, nor would not fear nor honor his image, but did manfully fight
for the holy gospel and for the true doctrine and religion of the Apostles.
All these shall have seats in the kingdom of Christ to judge the whole
company and court of Satan, and to convince them of their wickedness,
blasphemies and damnable errors, which shall be open and manifest unto the
world through the gospel. And this their condemnacion being openly and
manifestly known, and their godles tyranny, shall* be their death, from the
which they shall not rise up again till a thousand years be past. This
manifest judgment, victory and honor obtained with Christ, is unto them the
first resurreccion, namely a great honor and felicity, not only in heaven
with Christ but also upon earth in the kingdom of Christ, which he has upon
earth with his spirit in the congregation of the holy elect. And they are
happy and blessed, and their life is everlasting both in the heavenly company,
and also in the holy church and congregation of the faithful and godly souls
upon earth. For they are the most dear beloved and the most acceptable and of
highest reputacion with Christ ye lord and king of heaven as right prestes and
ministers ought to be among us, and they shall rule and reign with Christ
unto the end of the world until the last day of the latter judgment, and
in the second resurreccion, and until the last and eternal judgment of the
wicked and damned blasphemers.

The text.
And when the thousand years are e^pi^ed, Satan shall be losed out of his
preson, and shall go out to beceaue the people, which are in the four quarters
of the earth, Gog and Magog, togather them together to battle, whose nombre
is as y^ sand of the sea: and they went up in the plain of y^ earth: and
compassed the centes of the saints about, and the beloved city. And fire
came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them, and the devil that
deceived them was, cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and
the false prophet shall be tormented day and night for ever more. A little time
before the last day, shall Satan obtain power again till the end of the
world, and shall exercise and practyse it, and shall work with the wicked and
ungodly in the whole world, according to his nature and wickedness. And he
shall styrte his wicked army and warriers Gog and Magog, of whom the Prophets
do much speak. And they are the great and infinite number of the enemies of
God, of the holy doctrine of the ghospel, and of all holy congregations of true
and faithful Christians, which are called and are in deed the very true
Jerusalem, which dwell upon earth as citizens of a fortunate, holy, quiet and
honorable city and comunaltie. Against this holy city and comunaltie shall
satan fight a new batell, with his army and men of war, with all his
power, might and wyckednes, and shall attempt and go about to overcome the^
and to deceive them, and to make them to forsake the truth of God, and shall
work all means to destroy souls: And this shall he do in the whole world.
He shall spare no labor to compass about, and to besege, not the stony
city of Jerusalem in Iewry, but (as it is said before) the holy christendom
upon earth, the city of the faithful citizins, namely the godly elect. But
the grace and mercy of God toward his beloved, and the promise of Christ
toward his church, is greater and stronger than the wickedness and power of
Gog and Magog, the wicked warrieis against Christ, which shall consume them
with fire, even as he did stryke Senacharibs army upon an hundredth thousand,
and.iiii. score and.v. thousand in one night thorough one of his angels, and
brought them into as^hes with the fire of Gods vengeance and ryghtuous
judgment. And even upon that shall follow the general judgment of God, by
the which the devil with all his host and company shall be thrown into
everlasting pain and damnation, which is resembled unto a lake and grave of
fire and brymstone, in the which the dragon, the beast and al false prophets
shall be tormented day and night, that is to say, perpetuallye without end. And
that shall be the second death.

The text.
And I saw a great white seat and him that sat on it, from whose face fled
away both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more found. And I saw
the dead, both great and small stand before God. And the books were opened
and another book was opened, which is the book of life, and the dead were
judged of those things which were written in the books according to their
deeds: and the sea gave up her dead which were in her, and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in the^: and they were judged every man
according to his deeds. And death and hell were cast into the lake of fire.
This is the second death. And whosoever was not found written in the book of
life, was cast into the lake of fire. The great, general, ryghtuous, most just
and last judgment of God wha^ as y^ whole world shall be judged, is here
described by the great and whit stool. Which shall be grievous, heavy and
intolerable, unto the rebellious, disobedyent, wicked and obstinate contemners
of Gods holy word, the everlasting gospel of Christ. But it shall be
joyful, sweet, pleasant, delectable, welcome and acceptable as most heartily
desired and looked for unto the godly, faithful, humble, and elcte of God. The
judge upon the stool is our savior Jesus Christ, dreadful and fearful unto
all the world and unto such earthly me^ which have set their mark, end, love,
hope and felicity upon the earth, and in those things wherein the world
deliteth, as are fleshely lusts, pride of life, and al wickedness and lack of
love both toward god and the neighbor. And therefore the earth, sygnifieth y^
men that dwell upon the earth and the devils which remain in earth, in the air
(which is also called heaven) which are thrust out of their places and
habitacions, and no more found therein, but in the place and habitacio^ which
the just judgment and omnipotency of God has prepared for the^ in ye earth
yt is most wide and distant from the kingdom of heaven. Unto this dreadful and
terrible judgment of God shall come and stand before the judgment seat of God
and Christ, all those which were dead, both masters and servants, great and
small, high and low, myghtie and vnmyghtie, men and women, young and old,
none except.

Than shall the hearts, consciences, thoughts and secrets of al men be opened
and dysclosed: not only unto them which shall and must than knowledge them
selves giltye and worthy of eternal damnacion, but also unto the other. For
as than shall all wickedness of the conscience be open, euydent and manifest: For
they shall accuse and condemn them selves, without any cloak or excuse, when
as they shall behold all men, and shall read with perfyte understanding and
with fear and trembling the other great book of gods righteousness and equite,
of his warnynges, doctrine, instruccions and threatenings which they have had
sufficiently in this world every one in their time through gods merciful and
fatherly provision and sendynge, but they have utterly contemned and despised
them with all the righteousness and godlynes that they have taught. And they
would nothing regard nor esteem the holy word of God, which was given unto
the world in the holy scripture for a perfyte rule and square: but they would
never credyte nor believe it, but rashly against their own conscience have
refused and contemned it. And therefore shall they be wyped out of the regyster
book of the faithful and of them which shall live perpetually with God and
withal his peculiar elect in eternal joy and bliss. And thus they shall
remain continually in the eternal indignacion of God, in everlasting hate,
envy and most painful torments and great impacience and continual sorrow, in
so much that their eternal death shall also be with corporal pain and
tormente of the body even with the whole fellowship of the devil, and that
without any end or ceasynge. This judgment and heavy day shall no man be able
to escape and avoid, whether he be consumed in the earth, in the fire or in
the sea. For all this stands in the hand of y^ almighty power of God,
which with one word, will and commandment made all elements, heaven and
earth and all that is therein. And where he says that the hell should give up
her dead: understand thereby (as in many other places of holy scripture) the
graves in y^ earth, or wheresoever they be, out of the which the dead shall
rise up and they that shall be than alive (as S. Paul says) shall be changed
in a short space, in the twincklynge of an eye, to stand together before the
judgment seat of God with them which shall be judged to everlasting life or
death. But every one of them which shall appear and shall know them selves
manifestly, shall judge them selves according as they have done, after or
against the will of God, in faith or infydelite, in love or contempt of god, in
the fear of God or in security, after the lusts of the flesh, rightuously
and vnrightuouslye. For there shall no color, craft, lies, dissimulacion,
violence, might, anger or respect of parsons avail or help, but every man
shall there be judged according to his works. And thus shall hell with all
such that belong unto it and shall be damned, be nothing else but a fyery lake,
a terryble and heavy state of damnacion, ordained and prepared of all the
myserie, sorrow, wickedness and evil that can be thought or ymagyned. This is
the second death, the reward punishment and recompense of all them which are
not found written in the book of life, which shall remain perpetually with
Christ in heaven (with all the holy angels and elect) in the joyful, perfyght
and eternal bliss and fruicion of all the grace and goodness that is prepared
of God and of Christ our heavenly king for all faithful beleuers. But this is
incomprehensyble unto all reason, wit and sense of man, only to consider it
generallye: as S. Austen says, salvation is a state wherein is all perfyghtnes
abundantly of all those things yt are good and to be desired either in heaven
or in earth, whereunto God of his mercy will help and bring us.

The.xxi. Chapter.
The text.
And I saw a new heaven and a new earth For the first heaven, and the first
earth were vanysshed away, and there was no more See. And I John saw that holy
city, new Jerusalem come down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride
garnisshed for her husband. And I hard a great voice out of heaven, saying:
behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them. And
they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.
Now from this place forth, the holy Apostle and Euangelyst S. John describes
the salvation of al such as are elect, their state, and the kingdom of
heaven, and finally the everlasting bliss, whereof he wrote somewhat in the
fyfte chapter, but here he writes more plainly, plentuosly and largely of it.
As concerning the new heaven and new earth, after what manner they shall be,
it is no place here to dyspute or to contend much about it.

The testymony of the holy apostle S. Peter and of S. John in this place is
suffycient for us: S. Peter in the third chapter of his second Epistle says
(as John does here) that through the word of God whereby heaven and earth are
created and made, shall there be a new heaven and a new earth again: which
the faithful elect shall well see, which had rather believe the word of God
than all the weak and deceyueable reason of the philosophers, which have
taken in hand to dyspute and discuss such things but little to the purpose.
But S. Paul dyscusseth the matter with one word, saying: we shall be always
with ye lord, in that same state where Christ our lord the everlasting king is,
namely, with all them which shall be saved, both angels and souls, and also
withal those men which did rise and went up to heaven with Christ. This is
certain that like as through the sin of Adam, this world is corrupt and infect
and the earth also with weeds and unprofitable things, which hinder and
hurt the pleasant and good fruits which might serve and be profitable unto
the world: and the sea likewise with her unquietness and ragyng, does much
harm: so shall the earth and water no more be, but altogether with out fault
like as mankind shall likewise be without any manner of fault in perfyte joy,
pleasure and bliss. Even so, I say, shall the whole earth be garnyshed after
such a sort, that it may be a very paradyse, without any manner of labor that
the blessed shall wyshe to line upon it, but that they are in their contrye in
heaven. The same heaven which was made with one word, may likewise be
prepared of God with one word for the whole and persyte bliss of the
faithful elect. Let us content and satysfye our selfs with this* in this
doubt and dysputacyon which can not be comprehended nor discussed with any
reason of man. But the holy city that John saw, is nothing else but the state
of all the faithful elect in eternal and full salvation without any manner
of imperfeccion, with abundance of all goodness, where nothing more can be
desired, and with sure and quiet possessyon of all heavenly treasures, in the
sight and fruicion of God the highest and the only goodness and felicity, as
he can give himself to be inioyed, and that most lovingly, most co^mfortably
and most blissedly unto all treatures of knowledge and understanding. And that
through the clear and blissed glass of the excellent holy and excedyng
blessed manhood of Christ, the king of all honor and bliss unto all
faithful elect. Whose blessed and sacred body and soul united and knytte in
one with the holy godhed, is a perfect and a clear glass, wherein his most
pleasant gloryfied manhood may be beholden. In which glass all the blissed
saints, that is to say, all that are saved do behold and have the perfect
fruicion of all that goodness, which the Lord God is in him self: and of all
benefits that he will give unto all his creatures euerlastyngly. This glass
is sygnified by the tabernacle of God, wherein God will abide and remain with
man, with all grace and loving kyndnes, and that in the new Jerusalem, which
is builded altogether of most precious stones, of the blyssed friends of God,
in whom God has a pleasure and a delyght to dwell and to remain and to deal
and distribute his joy, felicity, and bliss, unto the faithful elect. For
Jerusalem is not the miserable and wretched city of ye Jews, which is called
Jerusalem, and Iebus, and I can not tell with how many more names beside,
which was so often overthrown for the rebellyon and disobedience of their
citizens, and for that they forsook God, in the which city the blind,
proud, froward and obstynace Iewys do fyxe and set all their hope and
felicity, where they hope and desire to be lords and to reign over al men
with their Messiah whom they vaynely (being grossly deceived) do look and
gape for: but it is that Jerusalem, which is neither heavenly nor earthly,
but a spiritual Jerusalem, a general fellowship and brotherhoode of all
faithful servants of God, which have a right Christen faith, and a perfyte
love thoroughly furnyshed with all good and holy works, the bonds and lymites
whereof are thorout the whole compase of the earth, wheresoever the Lord God
is rightly known and truly served after his own will, expressed in his
word. So that there are.iii. manner of Ierusalems. But saynct John speaks in
this place, of the heavenly and new city of those which are blissed in God,
which city is in heaven, prepared of God and made ready of Christ the
brydegrome of all faithful, for them, his spouse. Which spouse is garnished,
not of her self, but of God with all heavenly graces and virtues, and with the
ornaments of all perfeccion. In this city of the heavenly and eternal
Jerusalem, shall the lord God in Christ dwell, as it were with and among his
people and dear beloved spowse and well garnyshed or floryshyng bryde, with
most high joy and delyght and endless bliss and felycitie.

The text.
And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes. And there shall be no more
death nether sorrow, nether criyng, nether shall there be any more pain, for
the old things are gone. And he that sat upon the seat, said: behold, I
make al things new. And he said unto me: Write, for these words are
faithful and true. And he said unto me: it is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the
beginning and the end, I will give to him that is a thirst, of the well of
the water of life, free. He that overcomes, shall inherit all things, and I
wylbe his God, and he shall be my son. How and what this bliss shall be can
no man express. But what things shall not be there, that does he declare.
First there shall be no tears: For there shall no manner of adversity, trouble
or vexacion, happen unto any man. There is also no manner of decay nor
weakness, neither of the body nor of the soul, no manner of sycknes nor
infirmity of complexions, no bodyly hurt nor affliccion, no dread nor fear
of death, no heavy nor grievous temptacio^, no lack of any thing, no myschanuce,
no weeping, nor waylyng, nor pain, smart nor impediment. For in the state of
bliss and salvation, is no thought nor sorrow to be taken for any of these
things. For the first and original occasion of all these miseries (the sin
of Adam and Eve for whose sake the world was created,) is altogether past, and
utterly ceased, ended and finyshed together with death and the devil, through
the righteousness of our savior Christ. Through the which righteousness all
mankind, so many as are faithful, is reconciled unto God for evermore. Thus
has Christ syttyng upon the stool of his kingdom and glory, ordained all
things new. This must be stedfastlye confessed and believed of all faithful
christians, as an infallyble truth, and therefore it is gods commandment that
it should be written for an everlasting remembrance, for an wholesome doctrine
and consolacion, that all men should believe the truth, and so beleuynge
obtain bliss and salvation. For this is the end of all things, the bliss
and salvation of mankind in God, which will declare and dystribute his
glory, mercy and loving kyndnes, unto them which he has chosen from
everlasting unto his honor and glory: which is the beginning and end of
all things that are, ever were, or ever shall be. Unto all them which in this
vale of mysery did thirst after righteousness and after the glory of god, unto
them will the grace and favorable mercy of God give the living well and
fountain of all goodness, and the eternal springynge floode of refreshment unto
salvation, and to perpetual joy and felicity in God. But these gifts and
rewards must be obtained with much labor and travel, yet not properly as
desert or merit: for such great everlasting reward, the highest goodness and
felicity, can not be purchased with any labor or travel of man, but it must
be obtained and enherited of and by the free grace and mercy of God. Unto them
all, which shall be thus eternally blessed, shall Christ the spouse and bryde
grome of the church, be their Jesus and savior, and also their God, and their
perfyte satisfaccion? in such manner and wise, that they shall be as his dear
children and loving sons, and he (Christ) shall be their father, brother, God
and their everlasting king and captain.

The text.
But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murdrers, and
whormongers, and sorcerers, and ydolatres, and all liars shall have their part
in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second
death. Here follows now also the contrary part, what Christ the judge shall
ordeine and make with them, which in this world were fearful and cruel unto
all godly, humble, and lowly men: hiche have hurt and noyed all men: which
never would credit nor believe the holy gospel, the holy scripture, the
everlasting word of God: which have handled and dealte abhominably against
al kind and nature and against al love: which even against their natural
kind, of very set purpose have been murderers, and shedders of innocent
blood: which have defiled and stained the natural state ordained of God,
with fylthy unchasteness. And have practiced sorcery and witchcrafte, contrary
to y^ honor and law of god, not without making some band or couenanut with
the wicked spirit the arche nemny of God, whom they have served, and obeyed
his pleasure and commandment in setting up of chapels and altares, in
serving, honoring, worshippinge, praying unto, and calling upon false gods
(under the name of saints) whom they have sought far and nere, to make
their oblacions unto them, against whom the holy prophets have always cried
out, against the false teachers, false prophets, and false apostles. Theirs
and all other liars and wicked doers part shall be in eternal damnacio^, where
nothing is but sorrow, angwishe weping and waylyng, heuines, dystresse,
delpaite with everlasting contempt and hatred of God. All which is the second
death, unto the which men do come through these forenamed sins and
blasphemies committed in the world without repentance or amendme^t. For the
first death is the corporal death of the body laid upon all men of almightye
God by reason of sin.

The text.
And there came unto me one of the seven Angels which had y^ seven vyalles full
of the seven last plages: and talked with me, saying: come hither, I will
show ^hee the bryde the lambs wife. And he carried me away in the spirit to
a great and an hye mountain, and he showed me the great city holy Jerusalem,
descending out of heaven from God having the brightness of God. And her shynyng
was like unto a stone most precious, even like a Jasper, clear as Christ all:
and had walls great and hye, and had twelve gates and at the gates twelve
Angels: and names written, which are the names of the twelve tribes of Israel:
on the East part three gates, and on the Northsyde three gates, and toward the
Southe three gates, and from the west three gates, and the wall of the city had
twelve foundacions: and in them the twelve names of the lambs.xii. apostles.
Christ is the angel of the great council, which through his angels that
serve him works and brings to pass the ordinances of God with punyshmentes
and plages of the wicked and unfaithful, which do hinder and let his
ordinances. The reward does he pay him self. For he him self is the reward
and the crown of the blessed. This Christ our lord and savior talks here
with John his beloved, and of a special trust and love toward him, he
shows him his spouse and wife, and names her the lambs wife, but it is the
christen church, the fellowship of all saints and holy elect. This christen
church is in.ii. manner of states. In the first state she is mylitant ever
striuynge, and fightyng, ever in warrefare, assaulted with much trouble and
vexacion, sorrowful, imperfect, and ever waxyng and increasynge. And in the
other state she is triumphant, victorious, ever triumphinge, quiet, free,
without care or sorrow for any vexacion, perfyte, heavenly, blessed, and
everlasting. Of both these states for certain few properties the earthly
Jerusalem the city of the Jews is set for a figure, comparison, example and
counterpane. Which Jerusalem of the Jews, lies upon an hill, has.xii. gates
and great high walls, and lies on high toward the whole land round about
on every behalf. Of the which they that will know more, may read Josephus
which writes largely thereof. Now here speaks Christ of the spiritual
Jerusalem in her double state. It lies also high for as much as it is highly
indewed with gods grace and glorious gifts, for whose sake almighty God sent
his only begotten sun upon earth to cleanse and to make her pure, to bylde
her, to bewtifie and to garnyshe her, and to make her glorious, even for an
everlasting kingdom, and for a dear beloved spouse for him self. This city
is great, for it reaches unto all the ends and coasts of the world, and it
is also holy, for it is sanctified with the holy and blessed presence of
Christ, with his precious heart blood, which was shed in the highest love and
obedience toward god and mankind, and that washes a way the sins of all
the world, in that are all the faithful purged and cleansed. This descending of
the heavenly city Jerusalem or holy christen church sygnifieth the common
fellowship and participacion of the church ^riumphant that reygnyth in victory,
with the church mylytant, that contyneweth and remains in battle and
warrefare. For they both are one church, divided and sondred in.ii. only in
this world by reason of the time. For that church, which is now militant
and lies in warrefare upon earth, shall shortly be in heaven victorious and
triumphant. This church both upon earth and in heaven has one godly glory,
and al honor, virtue, praise, might, and bliss comes unto her from God. The
light of this church, is the most precious stone, namely upon earth, faith
with love, and in heaven truth and salvation in Christ. The walls which
defend, preserve, and keep this city, is the faith and belefe in the holy
word of god, by the which the faithful beleuers are kept and preserved.
The.xii. gates may we take and understand for the.xii. articles of the holy
Christen faith, upon the gates, the xii. apostles, or patriarchs, or prophets
which have their glorious and holy names not only written in heaven, above
all other holy saints, but also upon earth in the militant or warrefaring
chutch. These gates of the articles are well and orderly set and appointed, of
the father, of the sun, of the holy ghost, of the grace and reward of
redemption. The.xii. foundacions of these walls, may be taken for the books
of the old and new testament, upon the which ye wall of the christen
church, the holy faith (which is but one both of the christianes of the
old and of the new testament, both of the prophets and of the Apostles) is
and ought to be founded and grounded. And where as the Apostles are here more
named than the prophets, it is done for this purpose, for as much as through
the Apostles the doctrine of the prophets, and the gospel promised in the
prophets was spredde abroad and publyshed in the whose wide world: which
gospel the prophets did preach and write only unto the children of Israel,
and to their neighbors the people next about them of the land of Israel,
and again because the apostles were witnesses in their own parsons of the
slaying and death of the lamb.

The text.
And be that talked with me, had a golden read to measure the city with all,
and the gates thereof and the wall thereof. And the city was buylt four square,
and the length was as large as the breadth, and he measured the city with the
read twelve ^^ furlonges: and the length and the breadth, and the heyght of it,
were equal. And he measured the wall thereof, an cxliiii. c^bytes: the measure
that the angel had, was after the measure that man uses. And the buildyng of
the wall of it was of Jasper. And the city was pure gold, like unto clear
glass, and the foundacions of the wall of the city were garnished with all
manner of precious stones. The first foundation was Iaspis, the second Sapphire,
the third a Calcedony, the fourth an Emeralde, the fyfte Sardoni^, the syrie
Sardoes, the seventh Crysolite, the eight Beral, the nynth a Topas, the tenth a
Chrisoprasos, the eleeuenth a Iaciute, the twelve than Am^chist. In the.xliiii.
of Ezechiell and likewise in zachary do we read of y^ mystery of this holy
city, which is here described as though it should be measured how long, how
broad and how high it were: But it is done of Christ after the manner of a
vision, and as it were in a mystery. For Christ knows his church well
inoughe and all which are the rin or belong thereunto. The golden reed is as it
were a golden met wonde and it signifies the right square of the holy
scripture which only declares and shows certainly and truly what is right
or crooked, well or amiss in the religion, and doctrine, ceremonies, and
dyscipline of the church. And where as the city lies four square, it
sygnifieth the.iiii. quarters of the world, in the which the almighty God
has always had his peculier elect, faithful folowers and obseruers of the
true love of God and of the neighbor, wherein consists the law and the
prophets, and also the commandment of Christ the savior of the whole
world. The length is from the east to the west, the breadth is from the north
to the south, and the higth is even from the earth to the heaven. So that
heaven and earth and the whole church both triumphant in heaven and militant
upon earth are full of the glory of God, of the power and kingdom of Christ,
which the father gave him when as he did set him at his right hand, in the
most high honor, glory and bliss for a mirror unto all faithful and holy
elect. An hundredth and.xliiii. is a full and a perfect number even.xii.
times.xii. And it signifies all perfeccion of the grace of God the holy ghost,
and of all true and perfect virtues which true faith only preserves and
makes good, and perfight, and also acceptable unto God. The true faith and
belefe which has always been preached and preserved in the holy church, as
well by the Israelites as by the christianes, stands marked through the holy
ghost in the holy scripture. And there are as many precious stones theri^ as
are holy doctrines and examples by the which the state of christendom, the
christen religion, the church of God, the holy Jerusalem is builded. This
^^^ie is buy^ded of pure gold. For faith can not be with our fervent love,
which is compared unto gold which is not also without putenes of an innocent
and godly life, which is sygnified by the glass. Now of the comparison of
the.xii. precious stones with the.xii. articles of the faith, many things
might be written and said, which I leave unto them that be learned to consider,
for as much as in effect there is nothing wa^tyng, and the holy ghost has
set forth and opened the understanding of them in no place of the holy
scripture more plainly.

The text.
The twelve gates were twelve pearls, every gate was of one pearl, and the
street of the city was pure gold, as through shynyng glass. And ^ saw no
temple therein. For the Lord God almighty and the lamb are the temple of it,
and the city has no need of the son nether of y^ moan to lyghten it. For y^
bryghtnes o^ God did light it and y^ lamb was the light of it. And the people,
which are saved shall walk in the light of it. And the kings of the ear^^
shall bring their glory (and honor) unto it. And the gates of it are not
shut by ^ay* For there shall be no night there. And into ^t shall they bring the
glory and honor of the nations. And there shall enter into i^ none unclean
thing, nether whatso^uer works abhominacio^ or makes lies: but they only
which are written in the lambs book of ly^e. Hereby ma^e it well be
perceived, that this vision, and the buyldyng of this cy^ie* must and ought
all to be understand spiritually after the manner and custom of the prophets.
For there can be found no perles so great, and again men can not make walls
and gates with perles, and specially where as he speaks of one perle. In all
streets is nothing seen but pure gold of love, and of pureness and cl^anesse
of life. He that has not that* is none of them that may dwell in the
christen^^t^^ nor that may be admitted to b^ a ci^izen in that heavenly
fellowship In the temple at Jerusalem was a bodilye* and an exterior temple and
altar with the p^^esthode of the Jews* like as the tabernacle of Moses
permitted also unto the Jews as long as they dwelt in the land, else should
there no corporal nor exterior Gods service have been done. But for as much
as the city of the faithful, the golden Jerusalem, reaches unto all people,
nations, and lands, and that almighty God will no more of the Iewishe
sacrifices, but will much rather be honored and worshipped in spirit and
truth, and requires of all faithful, the sacrifice of thanckes geuynge, for
the salvation which God has prepared for us through Christ, which is our
priest, altar and sacrifice altogether, therefore in the christen congregation
we need no such temple of stone, wood, nor of gold. A faithful, loving and a
thanckeful heart and mind, is a good and a right temple unto the lord. Only
ye lord God is y^ tempell whereunto we should turn, as often as we will pray
and give thanckes unto God. He only can hear us, help us, and save us: all
goodness comes of him only, and therefore al honor, praise, and thanckes
geuynge perteyneth unto him only. But God does all this unto us only through
ye innocent la^be, which only washes away the sins of the world, and was
offered up for us, and with his righteousness and innocencye has made full
satisfaccion for all the sins of the elect. This lamb is the Sun of
righteousness without any manner of blemyshe, which no man can see in the Moon,
which sometime waxes and sometime minisheth. And therefore the christen church
and the heavenly Jerusalem, has light inoughe and sufficient, of Christ,
which is y^ light of the world, as he says. And he is also the brightness of
God, so far as it pleased God the father that we should know through
Christ. And for this cause, there can be no sack of light and truth, of grace
and help in the wh^le church. But if in this church here beneth which is the
militant and warrefaring church, there be any darkness, it is by reason that
the word of God is kept down, and by reason that Christ is not taken of some,
for the same that he is: but they are none of the right church. Notwithstande
Christ shines bright, and burns also, in the hearts of the faithful. And
in that light which Christ is, do all people walk, which shall be saved. For
the holy christen faith, was preached by this holy man's S. John's time, and
grew, and increased in all lands and nations of the whole earth. And the kings
also of y^ heathen were called and received of Christ, and indewed with high
benefits and with great grace, so long as they did retain and keep the gospel
and the doctrine of y^ Bible and mainteyned constantly y^ true faith in gods
holy word. So long as the gates of the christen articles do stand open: so
long does y^ light and day of ye christen religion, doctrine and wisdom
continue. And so long as this faith remains and fails not: so long shall no
error hurt the christen church nor yet obscure or darken it. To the faith
of the which articles, as they were preached by the apostles, al nations, even
the heathen, were easily brought and allured, for they were manifest by the
gospel and proved evidently by the word of God. But as soon as men would go
beyond that rule and square, and so have gone about to set up new articles of
the faith in their councels, without and beside the word of God, and that
both unnecessary and against all reason, than could the true faith no more
increase, but from time to time as the multitude of their new articles did
increase, even so did this true faith diminishe and decay, and so became the
christendom (as we do see, ye more p^tie) less and less, and the burden of
ceremonies more and more till they waxed intolerable. As are the articles of
auricul^r and ear confession, of purgatory, of supersticious fasting, of ye
primac^ of the bishop of Rome, of the eleuacion and adoracion of the
sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, of the inuocacion of saints, of
worshippynge of images. All the which with other like, have brought great
offense and slander unto the christen church, and have been a great occasion
of the ruin and fall of many unfaithful. In to this holy church, shall no
unclean thing enter: for true faith and love shall prevent and avoid al manner
of evil, and the blood of the lamble shall pourge, cleanse and wash away all
manner of ^ynnes. And in like manner also, all that is abhominacion unto the
lord, as ydolatry, abominable blasphemies, and forged lies, and false
doctrine shall have no place in ye right church. For unto the right holy
church, which is known only unto God, and invisible upon earth, do only
the elect children of God perteyne, whose names are written in heaven in the
book of the living.

The.xxii. Chapter.
The text.
And he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Christ all: procedyng
out of the seat of God, and of the lamb. In the mids of the street of it,
and of e^her ^yde of y^ river was there wood of life: which bare twelve manner of
fruits: and gave fruit every month and y^ ^eues of the wood served to heal
the people with all. And there shall be no more cu^se, but the seat of God and the
lamb shall be in it: and his servants shall serve him. And they shall se his
face, and his name shall be in their forheades. And there shall be no night there,
and they need no candle nether light of the sun: for the Lord gives them
light, and they shall raygne for evermore. CHrist opens unto John his dear
beloved disciple, the secret mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, and
expounds the visions of the other prophets, as far forth as is requisite
and necessary for the christen doctrine. And thus John sees here a pure river
of water, very clear, which is the holy scripture, ye word of god, the
doctrine of Christ, and the holy gospel of our salvation. That same is clear
unto al them that have a pure heart and mind, not defiled nor blemished with
transitorye love and care of y^ world, nor with any temptacions of ye flesh.
This holy doctrine proceeds and comes out from the holy spirit of god, and
of Christ. For he is one God with y^ father and the son. He is the seat of
glory, of omnipotency and of ye godheade. He proceeds out from the welspring
of all wysedom grace and mercy, and flows through the mids of al streates
of Christ's church, which is the city of god and of the lamb. And of both
sides of y^ river do stand glorious and bewtiful trees of life which receive
their increase, their leaves and fruit, of the moisture of the river. And these
trees are ye holy fathers, of the faithful christen church, of the old and
new testament, which by their faith, and by their understanding and readyng
of the holy scripture, of ye law, of ye prophets, and of the gospel, have
lived, taught and wrought very frutefully in the holy city of the church, and
have brought forth twelve manner of fruits, that is to say many fruits, and
have served god without ceasynge with much fruit and profit in right and true
good wo^kes and virtuous exercises. The leaves, fruit and sap of these holy
trees, were very wholesome and sovereign, as were also the fruits of the
dysciples, of the prophets and apostles. For the holy bishops and preachers
of Gods word, did make repentance, faithful, holy, and christen people (by
their preachinge, ^eachinge, wrytinge, prayers, and christen example of life)
of them which were before very hethen. And in this church, there is no cursed
fruit, and no meat is unclean unto the faithful: For they shall receive and
enjoy all manner of fruits and meats with thanckes geuynge, and with all
temperatenes and measure. Neither shall the holy ghost be extingwysshed in the
holy church of God, but he shall provide ministers of God, and shall incorage
and comfort them with his aid and assystence, that they shall profit, go
forward, and proceed frutefully in all goodness, and through true faith, they
shall know the face of God, and his gracious and merciful will and pleasure
in this militant and warrfarynge church: but in the heavenly Jerusalem they
shall know him face to face, even as he is, and shall laud and praise him
everlastingly. And these ministers and servants of God, shall not be ashamed
to knowledge and to confess ye name of god, the christen faith and the holy
gospel. They shall bear about, preach and glorify the name of Christ openly,
with joy, delyght and pleasure. And neither Sun, nor Moon shall help or add
any thing to this clear and bright day of gods knowledge, for the spirit of
God shall do all together. And the blissed souls in heaven have their Sun,
and Moon, the glass of the godheade, the excellent bewty of the glorified and
exalted manhood of Christ, whereby they shall reygne in bliss for evermore.

The text.
And be said unto me: these sayings are faithful and true. And the Lord God
of saints and prophets sent his angel to show unto his servants, the
things which must shortly be fulfilled. Behold, I come shortly. Happy is he
that keeps the saying of the Prophecy of this book. I am John which saw
these things, and heard them. And when I had heard, and seen, I fell down
to worship before y^ fete of the angel which showed me these things. And he
said unto me: s^ thou ^^ it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and the fellow
servant of ^hy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the saynges of
this book. But worship God. Christ speaks unto John, and gives witness
and testimonye unto this book of Reuelacion of secret mysteries, that al
which is written in this book is certain and true, and not to be contemned and
taken as any trifle or fable. For this book was ordained of God to be spoken
(through an angel) unto John, that he should write it, and should leave it
behind him in y^ faithful and holy church of Christ. Even y^ same god which
reveled unto other holy prophets and men of God things that were to come ye
very same God has now sent his angel, and given him in commission to open and
reuele unto John these visions and prophecies of things to come, which should
happen, come to pass and be fulfilled very shortly, y^ is to say, they should
shortly begin, and so happen and come to pass one after another until they be
all fulfilled. Behold with certain things will I come very shortly. The coming
of Christ is prophesied unto us after such sort and form, y^ we should
carfully and diligently wait for it continuallye, like as true and faithful
servants do wait and watch upon y^ returning of their masters, and do
never sleep, as Christ teaches in y^ gospel. And because this book should not
be contemned nor lightly esteemed in the christen church, therefore Christ
sayethe by his messenger and angel, that he is happy, that is to say, he is
the servant of God, and pleases the Lord well and shall be partaker of
grace and salvation, which believes this book* and takes all things that
are written therein for true and holy, and estemeth y^ prophecies of this book,
which are many and diverse, no less than other holy books of the prophets
and evangelists, and other holy prophecies. And where as he says* I am John,
it is as much to say as thus, if ye believe my preaching of Christ in other
matters, because I am the same John which was conuersaunte and lived with
Christ, than believe me in this book also, because of the visions, syghtes and
sayings, which I have seen and heard my self, and have written in this
book. And I know also and am assured that this angel was an holy angel, and
therefore I, for fear and reverence, would have worshipped him as a servant
and minister of God, and I did also worship him, and fell down at his feet to
worship him, that I might seem to show thankefulnes unto him for the infinite
benefit and grace, that he reveled and opened unto me such high and holy
secret mysteries. But he would not accept and receive such honor and
worship at my hands, nor was not content therewith, whereby I am taught that I
should utterly honor and worship none, but only the almighty God. And
although the nature and dignity of angels be higher than the state and
dignite of man, yet by the reason of the manhood of Christ, and by the reason
of the salvation of mankind through Christ, the nature of man is exalted above
all angels. And therefore from hence forth the angel will not be higher
esteemed than as a fellow servant of all men unto the lord. And likewise our
savior Christ names himself a fellow brother of his disciples, and that also
after the resurreccion. And also the angel names John in this place, a brother
and fellow of y^ apostles, only for this book, and shows how acceptable they
are unto the lord, (namely reputed even as the brethren of Christ) which do
esteem this book and believe the words which are written therein. And therefore
no man ought to esteem this book lightly, nor to contemn it, for as much as
in many places it teaches the mysteries of Christ very euidentlye. Although
in diverse things prophesied in this book which have not yet beue seen to be
fulfilled (because they concern this time of ours, the latter time) it is
somewhat dark and obscure.

The text.
And he said unto me: seal not the sayings of the prophecye of this book.
For y^ time is at hand. He that does evil, let him do evil still: and he
which is filthy, let him be filthy still: and he that is righteous, let him
be more righteous: and he that is holy, let him be more holy. And behold, I
come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his
deeds shadie. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end: the first and
the last. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that their power may
be in the tree of life: and may enter in through the gates into the city. For
without shall be dogs and inchaunters, and whoremongers, and murcherers, and
ydolaters, and whosoever loves or makes leasynges. In the old testamente
before the coming of Christ, the Prophets were partly commanded to seal
their prophecyes: for like as the fulfyllynge of such things as were
prophesied and promised was fat of, even so might many diverse opynyons be
among the interpreters. But here in this place, the angel commands John
that he should not seal the book, for as much as such matters as are
prophesied therein should be fulfilled very shortly. As it is euydent that
diverse of them were fulfilled immediately, yea even the great and notable
vision of the subversion and destruction of the city of Jerusalem and of the
death and banyshment of the Jews, was already fulfilled: for the which cause
he did prophecy nothing of it, but of diverse other things which were yet to
come, he did prophecye. And therefore also after this book he wrote his holy
gospel, of the godheade of Jesus Christ, against certain heretics. And therefore
he says, the time is at hand, for the which cause men must suffer the
wicked to work according unto their wickedness, for they shall not practyse it
long. Men must suffer the wicked Jews and hethen (which so wylfullye and
maliciouslye do noye and persecute the faithful christians) to take their
pleasure. Let the false apostles, heretics and hipocrites, which pretend
great holiness, although they be shamefully defiled as well inwardly as out
wardlye, let them remain defiled and wicked, it shall shortly have an end,
the judgment of God hangs over their heads. But he that does well and
rightlye needs not to fear the judgment and coming of Christ. He that is
holy through true faith and love toward Christ, the same desiereth ernestly
from day to day the coming of Christ unto the last and general judgment.
And as soon as he sees any of those tokens happen, which have any lykelyhode
of the approchinge of the end of the world, and which should come to pass
before, than he lyfteth up his head and sygheth and wysheth for the coming
of Christ most desierously, that he might be sone rid and delivered from y^
myserp and wretchedness of this world. But now, thou John, mark and take good
head, I will come shortly and bring the reward with me for all them that have
labored and done either good or evil. For, the tyrannes and workers of
iniquite will I punyshe with dystresse and plages, and all other blasphemers
likewise. I am the beginning of all things, I have created the world,
because I am the word by the which God has created all things. And I am
also the end, for the last day shall be my day, when as I shall come to judge
the quick and the dead. They perform and do gods commandments, which in
true faith and love endeavor themselves with all diligence to do the will and
pleasure of God with holy works and virtuous exercises, and whansoeuer they have
any trouble or a ouersite, than they call and pray unto god for grace and
mercy for Christ's sake, whose righteousness they take for the oblacion and
ransom for their sins, offering up unto him the sacrifice of thankesgeuynge
with a true and perfyte faith in the mercy of God through Christ Jesus. Such
true faithful men, are like unto a fruitful tree that begins to budde out,
which in due time brings furthe much fruit. And such true faithful
beleuers can only enter, through faith, into the Christen church here upon
earth, and when the time comes, they shall also enter in to the heavenly
church. But the unfaithful do show and declare also their fruits, of all
wyckednes and fleshely lusts, wherein they defyle them selves even like swyne,
and become shameless in their sins like very dogs. For the which cause they
can not enter in to the right christen church and congregation, neither
sorcerers, inchanters, whoremongers, murderers, worshippers of ydols nor any
such as make lies of malice and of an evil conscience.

The text.
I Jesus sent mine angel, to testify unto you these things in the
congregacions. I am the rote and the generation of David, and the bright
morning star^e: And the spirit and the bryde say, come. And let him that
hears, say also: come. And let him that is a thirste, come. And let whosoever
will, take of the water of life, free. Like as almighty God says unto
Moses, I am the God of thy fathers* etc. even so says the angel here in the
person of Christ by the inspiracion of Christ's spirit, that this prophecy
was opened and reveled even of Christ him self, through the angel, unto holy
John, and therefore all men ought to credyte and believe all these sightes,
visions and reuelacions: And they ought also to be propouned and preached unto
the congregacions for their edifienge, that the faithful may take diligent
head, and beware of the terryble and shameful perels, dangers, and euyls which
shall prevail in the christen church, and shortly arise and begin, as is
already happened, and shall daily be fulfilled more and more one after a
another, as is before said. But now how Christ is y^ ^oole of David, mark this
well, for as much as for his sake, David's kingdom was preserved, and his
posterite also was preserved in the extreme and troblesome affliccions of the
Iewishe nation, until such time as Christ our lord and sautout was borne of
the stock and progeny of David. For not withstanding all the sins wherewith
David dyspleased God, and did, in manner, greater and more heinous sins than
Saul did, yet could he use the help of no another thing fauynge only of
faith in the promise of God, which assured and promised him, that Christ the
lord and promised Mess^as, should be borne of his seed, wherein he might well
rejoice both for him self and also for all his posterity, other Kings and
Lords. And therefore our lord and savior Christ is the too^e and generation of
David, by reason of his manhood: but concerning his godheade he has an
unknown rysinge up and beginning, and an unknown coming furthe of an
everlasting birthe. And likewise Christ according to his manhood is a bright
morning star, which should draw and allure the eyes of al men unto him as
unto the risyng up unto bliss and unto all salvation. All this, is the voice
of Christ* the brydegrome. And now follows the voice and desire of the bryde
and spouse which out of a true faith, and an heartye desire and zeal, in all
faithful and elect, desires and wyssheth after the second coming of
Christ unto the latter judgment, and so consequently to enjoy the
participacion of the blessed and perfyte kingdom in heaven with all faithful
elect, both with body and soul. For all the elect children of God do
hunger and thirst after the honor and glory of Christ in the kingdom of
heaven, as well they that are upon earth, as they that are already in heaven*
for they wyshe and desire in their spirit the fulfyllyng of gods will and
pleasure, whereunto with all humblenes and submission they do utterly submit
their will, for they know that his will is best and most perfyte. And this
desire and wyshe of the faithful elect* pleases God well. And although he
will not heat them at such time as they desire, even at the very same Moment,
yet he does promise unto them his gracious aid and mercy in the mean time,
which he will doutles perform. And all, of mere grace and mercy without any
manner of deserte.

The text.
I testifye unto every man that hears the words of the prophecye of this
book: if any man shall add unto these things. God shall add unto him the
plages that are written in this book. And if any man shall minishe of the
works of this prophecye. God shall take away his patre out of the dooke of
life, and out of the holy ^^^^e, and from the things which are written in
this book. He which testifies these things, says: be it. I come qu^^ly:
Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all: Amen. In this place, first after the speaking of Christ, and again after
the speaking of the holy bryde, and of the christen church, may the holy
Apostle S. John speak these words in his own parson, as he did in the
beginning of the book, to warn and exhort al men there by, y^ no man add
any thing unto this book (as a new vision) no more than to any other book of
holy scripture, nor take any thing there from, as though any thing might be
mysunderstande therein, and so refused as unholy and not good. For God will not
suffer any such thing to be unpunished nor vnaduenged: this is the very
intent and meaning of these words. And therefore such men do amysse and sin
very greatly, which do refuse this whole book, as though it were not
autentical, where as it is evident y^ it has been always song and read in
y^ holy church from the beginning to the end. Now are those books called
Apocripha, and vnautenticall, which men might well read out of the church
privately by them selves, but not in the church and congregation. Nor it is
not lawful to confirm and mainteyne any manner of doctrine, concerning our
faith and relygion by the authority of any such vnautenticall books, except
it were in all points conformable unto other holy scriptures. And now that,
that follows here after, where as he says, he which testifies these
things, says. etc. These words may be referred unto that, that goes
before, where Christ speaks of the calling of the bryde. Even the same
Christ says here at the last end again: yea I come without doubt, take no
thought nor think it not long, the time is not long unto me, which am that I
am, Amen, that is to say, without any doubt. After this does holy S. John
conclude and end this book after the manner of the apostles, desiring e^nestly
the coming of the kingdom of Christ* very quickly, as all faithful
Christians do. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with all faithful
elect Christians which shall be until the end of the world, and specially
with them which read this book with faith and an holy Christen desire and
mind.

Amen.
The end of the Reuelacion of S. John thus brefely expounded by the servant
of Christ Leo Jude, a minister in the church of Tigury, and translated out of
the high Duche by Edmonde Alen.



