THE SAINTS SVRE AND PERPETVALL GVIDE.

OR, A Treatise concerning the WORD.

Which, as the Israelites Cloud, conducts us from Egypt to Canaan; whereunto
we must take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, till the Day
dawne, and the Day Star arise in our hearts.

BY That Reverend, Learned, and Godly Minister of Christ Jesus, ROBERT BOLTON,
Bachelour of Divinity, and late Preacher of Gods Word at Broughton in
Northamptonshire.

JOHN 3. 20, 21. Every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved.

But he that does the truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest, that they are wrought in God.

LONDON, Printed by E. Purslow, for Rapha Harford, in Queenes-head-Alley in
Paternoster Row, at the Sign of the Gilt Bible. 1634.

THE SAINTS SVRE AND PERPETVALL GVIDE.
PSALM. 119. VER. 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my
paths.
OF all other parts of the holy Bible, this Book of the Psalms, (penned for
the most part by David, the sweet Singer of Israel, and a man after Gods own
heart) is stuffed and filled with greatest plenty and variety of precious
Lessons and instructions unto eternal life. The Contents and the benefit of
the Psalms in general.
The choice and flower of all things profitable and comfortable for the right
course of a Christian life, is therein briefly contained, and very movingly
and feelingly expressed. In them we may be acquainted with the Majesty and
Mysteries of God, with the Sufferings of Christ, with unfeigned Repentance,
unwearied Patience, spiritual Wisdom, and wonderful Courage of the godly
man, and true Christian. In them we may behold the terrors of Wrath, and the
anguishes of an afflicted Conscience, the comforts of Grace, and great
Deliverances, the wonderful works of Providence over this World, and the
promised Joys of that World which is to come. In a word, all good necessarily
to be either known or done, or had, is plentifully, as out of a rich
Treasury, revealed and offered unto us in these heavenly Songs of David.

Amongst which, Of the 119. in particular.
this 119. Psalm (a part of which I have now read unto you) is, as it were, a
precious Jewel, or clear Crystal; wherein we may see the right temper and
state of true godliness, and sincerity, the marks and properties of all true
worshippers of God, the zeal and affections of all faithful Christians, the
very lively Anatomy and laying open of a good and gracious Soul.

This whole Psalm does consist of 22. The Division of it.
Parts or Portions of Staves, or Octaves, even just so many as there be Letters
in the Hebrew Alphabet; and every Portion contains in it eight Verses; and
every Verse of every Portion, or Staff, begins with the same Hebrew Letter.
The which special and extraordinary penning and disposing of the Psalm,
Three Lessons to be learned thence.
does declare and set out unto us these three things:

1 The diligent intention of mind, and careful meditation of the Author, in
the framing and composing of it.

2 The preciousnesse and worth of the matter contained in it; in that it
pleased the Spirit of God to deliver it in choice and special order.

3 A desire and purpose, that it might more easily be learned by heart, and
committed to memory, and often and earnestly meditated and thought upon, being
set down unto us in so fair and easy order of the Hebrew Letters.

This Part, or Portion, which we have now in hand, is the foureteenth; and
does contain in it many worthy and gracious Lessons for our instruction and
devotion in heavenly things, proposed unto us out of the practice and Christian
carriage of this holy Prophet, and Man of God, David, a perfect pattern of all
true zeal and piety.

In the thirteenth Portion, Two things observable in the 13. Part.
immediately going before, David had delivered specially two things.

First, How by his love, reading, study, and meditation in Gods Word, 1 How
David became wiser than his enemies.
he had attained most excellent knowledge, wisdom, and understanding; so that
thereby he was become far more wise than his enemies; that is, than Saul and
all his politic Courtiers and Counselors of State. He had more understanding
than his Teachers, than the great Doctors, and Rabbis; for all their deep
Learning being not sanctified unto them. He understood more than the grave and
ancient men, for all the worldly wisdom and great experience they had
gathered in many years, and through length of days. Where, by the way, take
this Lesson.

There is no wit or policy, Doct.
not all the Learning in the World, True wisdom to be had only from and in the
Word.
or worldly wisdom, can make a man truly wise, (that is, wise unto salvation)
but only a powerful and working knowledge out of the holy Word of God.

The Reason is: The Reason.
Because all other wisdom does only provide for the Body, Because other
wisdom provides only for the body, but this for the soul^.
for a temporal happiness in this life, for a few and evil days, and leaves
the Soul in a sinful and wretched estate; shortly, in the day of Visitation,
to be overtaken and fearfully confounded with strange astonishments, horrors,
and despair; and hereafter, woefully to be tormented amongst wicked Devils in
the Lake that burns with fire and Brimstone for evermore. But wisdom out of
the Word of God does so furnish a man's Soul with Grace, and all holy Virtues,
that in despite of all creatures, he may live comfortably in this Vale of
tears, and in endless joys in the World to come.

Now (I pray you) tell me, whether is truly the wiser man; he, that for an
inch of time makes much of his wretched Body, that must shortly rot in the
grave, and be devoured of Worms, and turned into dust; but in the mean time
lets his immortal Soul, that can never die, sink into the Dungeon of
everlasting woe and misery: or he, which by taking sound and saving counsel
and direction out of the Word of God, and howsoever he be hated and neglected
of this vain World, yet yielding cheerful and constant obedience thereunto,
provides unspeakable comfort, rest, and blessedness both for Body and Soul,
through all eternity?

Secondly, In the second part and four last Verses of the former Portion, 2 He
sets down the fruits of his knowledge
David sets down the fruit, use, and benefit which sprung from his divine
knowledge. It sweetened his heart with much comfort, and sound contentment, and
cheared him with joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. 1. 8.
and glorious, amidst all crosses and discomforts; it bridled and restrained
him from every evil way; it kept and preserved him in the paths of
righteousness; it bred in him a hatred and loathing of the ways of error,
falsehood, and hypocrisy. Where, by the way, I would give you this other
Lesson.

We must labor and be sure that we draw our knowledge in Gods Word into
practice, Doct.
action, and exercise; All our knowledge must be practical.
otherwise, it will not only be unprofitable and unfruitful unto us, but
indeed bring upon us a greater and more fearful condemnation. For, Luke 12.
47.
For, He that knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with
many stripes, Luke 12. 47. All our knowledge is in vain, except by the power
of it our inward affections be sanctified, our words seasoned with grace, our
actions and conversations guided with spiritual wisdom and unfeigned
sincerity.

After David had thus, in the former Portion, laid down unto us, and confessed
what excellent knowledge he had got out of the Word of God, and the precious
fruit and benefit he had reaped and enjoyed by it: Now,

In the first Verse of this present Portion, The foureteenth Part explaned.
he makes, as it were, a protestation and profe^^ion, that he is wholly and
only enlightened and led in all his ways by this holy Word of God, as by a
Light or Lantern: The brightness thereof does not only bring him into the
ways of righteousness, and blessed estate of Christianity, but does also
conduct and guide him in all the paths and particulars of his life and actions,
in all the parts and passages of his special calling: For he says, Thy Word
is a Lamp unto my feet] that is, whereby I see and discern the way to Heaven,
and the narrow path through the Kingdom of Grace; and a Light unto my paths]
that is, a guide to direct me in every particular step, at every turning, that
so I may keep a straight course, and the ready way to the Kingdom of Glory.

That David had thus wholly yielded and resigned up himself to be guided and
governed by the glorious Light of Gods holy Word, appears in the Verses
following.

First, 1 Verse. 106.
in Verse. 106. by a solemn Oath and sacred resolution to keep Gods righteous
judgments, and an unfeigned and constant purpose to perform the same; I have
sworn, and will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous judgments.

Secondly, 2 Verse. 107.
in Verse. 107. by his patiencie and sufferance of wrongs, disgraces, and
afflictions, which the wicked and profane World heaped upon him, for his
profession of holiness and sincerity. For, except he had loved and followed
the Light of divine Truth, whenever the fire of persecution and tribulation,
because of the Word, had been kindled against him, he had shrunk back and
fallen away; I am afflicted very much, quicken me, O Lord, according to thy
Word.

Thirdly, in Verse. 108. by the offerings of his mouth, and calves of his lips;
3 Verse. 108.
that is, the spiritual sacrifices of prayers, thanksgiving, and gracious
Vows for Gods service, which with a free and fervent spirit, and earnest
desire of acceptance, he continually offered unto the Lord; O Lord I beseech
thee, accept the free will offerings of my mouth, and teach me thy judgments.

Fourthly, in Verse. 109, 110. by his steadfastness and sticking to the Law and
Word of God, 4 Verse. 109, 110.
though he was beset and strongly encompassed with snares, with dangers, and
with death it self: His soul was continually in his hand; that is, he was
ready and resolved every hour rather to part with his life, than with a good
Conscience; to shed his blood, rather than to forsake the Truth and
Commandments of God: My soul is continually in my hand, yet do I not forget
thy Law: The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I erred not from thy Precepts.

In the two last Verses, upon the former reasons he concludes the Point; 5
Verse. 111, 112.
That his heart and inward affections do dearly embrace Gods blessed Word, as
a most rich and lasting Inheritance, as his sweetest and greatest joy; and,
that he bends all the powers of his soul, and best endeavors, to be led with,
and to follow the Light thereof even unto the end, until it bring him to
immortality and Light, 1 Timothy 6. 16.
that no man can attain unto: Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for
ever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart: I have inclined my heart to
perform thy Statutes always, even to the end.

Thus you see in general the meaning of this Portion.

Before now I descend unto particulars, Six marks to distinguish a godly man
and an hypocrite.
and come to gather Notes severally from the Verses in order, let us take
notice, I beseech you, (for our instruction and examination of our own souls)
of six notable marks, and signs, by which a true Christian may be discerned
from a Temporizer; a sincere server of God, from a carnal Gospeller.

The first I gather out of the first Verse: 1 Verse. 105.
Every son and servant of God does with humility, A godly man is guided by
the Word in all his ways.
cheerfulness, and obedience, yield and submit himself to be wholly and
only directed and guided by the Light of Gods Word, in all his ways, both
generally, of Christianity, and particularly, of his special calling; as
David here did. But the natural man, A natural man not at all.
that is not yet entered into, or acquainted with the state of Grace, is led and
guided in his courses only by the Light of Reason, and worldly Wisdom; by
good Meanings, without ground and warrant out of the Word; by a blind and
ignorant Devotion; by the Multitude, Examples, Custom of the Times, and such
like blind Guides: But if he take any advice and direction out of the Word of
God, it is but in part, Or in part.
by halfes, and for a time.

A second arises out of the second Verse: 2 Verse. 106.
Every Child of God does not only promise, vow, He performs all his Vows.
and purpose to forsake and abandon all his known sins, to watch carefully
and conscionably over all his ways, to delight in and to sort himself with
godly and gracious company, to have a respect to all his Commandments, and to
keep his righteous Judgments; but he does also truly and thoroughly perform
it: he goes through-stitch with his spiritual affairs, and with constancy
and courage walks in a settled course of Christianity. An unregenerate man
does not pay them.
But the unregenerate man, not yet soundly seasoned with the power of Grace;
howsoever he has sometimes good motions and purposes arise in his heart, to
forsake his former evil ways, and to fall to godliness; howsoever in the
time of Sickness, of some great Judgment, or when his Conscience is terrified
by the Ministry of the Word, when he seriously thinks upon the day of his
death, and of that great and last Judgment, or the like; he makes Vows with
himself, perhaps, that he will be a new man, and change his courses: But when
he is once out of danger again, when he comes to the point, and practice, he
is not so good as his word, he does not pay and perform his former Vows and
purposes; he is presently choked again with worldly Cares, and drowned in
earthly Pleasures: And so all his goodness is as a morning Cloud, Hos. 6* 4.
and as the morning Deaw it goes away.

The third mark lies in the third Verse: Every Child of God does with
contented patience* 3 Verse. 107.
with strong dependence upon Gods providence, He patiently suffers persecution
for the Word.
with rejoicing in his sufferings, bear and endure many miseries and pressures
laid upon him* for his profession and practice of sincerity. He well knows
out of the Word of God, and feels by his own experience, 2 Timothy 3. 12.
That all which will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. And therefore he makes up his account with the World, and is at a
point with all that is under the Sun; he is persuaded, that all the
afflictions of this life are not near worthy the glory which shall be
revealed, Romans 8. 18.

But the carnal Gospeller he thinks it is good sleeping in a whole skin; The
carnal Gospeller spare^ himself.
he looks for a Gospel of ease, for a soft and silken service of God; for a
Church (as one speaks) all of Velvet. And therefore, rather than he will
suffer any loss, or worsing, any diminution or disparagement in his outward
estate, in his reputation, wealth, and worldly happiness, he will make
shipwreck of a good Conscience; he will yield to the corruptions of the Times,
and with the greater part, rest and repose himself peaceably and pleasantly
upon his Bed of ease, and carnal security: never considering, that the Cross
is the Christians triumph; that Christ himself was crowned with Thorns; and,
that we must through many afflictions enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Act.
14. 22.
Act. 14. 22.

A fourth mark may be gathered out of the fourth Verse: 4 Verse. 108.
The prayers and praysings of God, in the mouth of Gods Child, He is frequent
in praying and praising. The other not.
are frequent, free, and fervent; but with the carnal Gospeller, they are very
rare, cold, and formal. The Reason is; Gods Child is very sensible of his
corruptions, The Reason.
and wants, he still longs and gaspes for more grace, with a spiritual taste
he sweetly relisheth Gods great mercy and goodness unto him; he has the love
of God and the spirit of prayer shed into his heart by the Spirit of Adoption;
and therefore his heart is as full as the Moon, of godly motions and
meditations, which like a continual Spring sends out groans and sighs
unutterable, many zealous and faithful prayers and thanksgivings unto his
gracious God with a free and feeling affection. But the carnal Gospeller,
because his understanding was never enlightened, his heart never truly humbled,
his affections never sanctified; because he has no sense of his wretched
estate, nor present feeling of grace, nor sound hope and assurance of
happiness in Heaven; why, therefore he has no great mind, or heart, or list
to prayer; he has no great delight, or exercise, in this holy business: and
if he do pray (which is but seldom, and coldly) it is but lip-labor, and
lost labor, because it is without faith, and feeling; for fashion, custom, or
company, because he was so taught in his youth; or that he superstitiously
thinks, the very work wrought, and a number of prayers solemnly said over,
will sanctify him.

A fifth mark may be gathered out of the sixth and seventh Verses: 5 Verse. 109,
110.
The Child of God does not only pass through with patience, He will lose his
life for God.
for the profession of Gods truth and sincerity, less and inferior miseries;
as loss of goods, loss of friends and reputation with the World, slanders,
disgraces, and wrongs: but he also holds his soul (as it were) continually in
his hand, as David here says of himself; ready (if need be, and the times so
require) even to shed his blood under the Sword of Persecution, or to lay down
his life in the flames, rather than to dishonor so merciful a God, to betray
his holy Truth; or, by his backsliding and falling away, to hazard that Crown
of Glory, which by the eye of faith he has already in sight. A temporary is
offended.
But the carnal Gospeller, in time of peace and plenty, while he lives
quietly, and at ease, without cross or trouble, in fair and Sunshine days,
may perhaps be a stout and peremptory Professor, but he ever shrinkes in the
wetting; he pulls in the head in the fiery trial: ever, when trouble or
persecution comes, Mat. 13. 21.
because of the word, by and by he is offended.

The sixth mark is gathered out of the two last Verses: 6 Verse. 111, 112.
The Child of God holds his Word far more dear than any precious Treasure, A
Child of God counts the Word his greatest Treasure.
than the richest Inheritance, than Verse. 162.
great Spoils, than Verse. 72.
thousands of Gold and Silver: It is the joy of his heart; and therefore it
inclines and inflames his affections with love and zeal to do Gods will, and
fulfill all his Commandments. And no marvel though the true Christian find
most sound and unconceivable delight in the Word of God, The Reason.
the Doctrine of Heaven: For by it, he is borne anew, and made heir of Heaven:
by the Light of it, he sees his Name written in the Book of Life, never to be
raced out by man, A Christian man has such assurance in the good things of the
world to come, that he can easily moderate his affections as touching earthly
and transitory things. It is otherwise with an Hypocrite.
or Devil; all the sweet and gracious promises of salvation and comfort
revealed in it, are sure his own: So that thence he knows, and is persuaded
undoubtedly, that after a few and evil days spent in this miserable life, he
shall remain and reign eternally in the glory of God, of Christ Jesus, the
blessed Spirit, and the holy Angels. But it is otherwise with the carnal
Gospeller; for whatsoever show or protestation he makes to the contrary, yet
indeed in his heart, affections, and practice, he preferres his pleasures,
riches, and profit, before hearing of Gods Word, sanctifying his Sabbaths, and
obedience to his Commandments. And why?
And no marvel: for because he yet never lived the life of faith, but is a
mere stranger to the mystery of godliness, he has no true interest nor
sound assurance in the joys of another World; and therefore feeds only and
fills himself with transitory and earthly contentments.

Now I beseech you (beloved in Christ Jesus) let every one with singleness of
heart and sincerity examine his own Soul, and the spiritual state of his
Conscience, by these signs and marks which I have now delivered to you, out of
the example and precedencie of the Christian affections and holy disposition of
David, a sanctified man, and a principal pattern of piety and zeal for all
faithful ones. 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Know you not (says the Apostle) that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be
reprobates? So undoubtedly, if Jesus Christ be in you, if you be of David's
stamp and temper, that is, already possessed of the state of grace, and
marked out by the Spirit of sanctification, for the glory that shall be
revealed; you do find in some good measure these marks and signs of an holy
man in your selves.

1 That you are enlightened and guided by the Word of God in all your ways.

2 That you have not only good motions and purposes for a zealous and constant
service of God; but do faithfully, with sincerity and integrity of heart
perform the same.

3 That you suffer joyfully and patiently afflictions and disgrace in the
World, for the testimony of Gods Truth, and profession of sincerity.

4 That you freely and faithfully, with much feeling and fervencie of spirit,
offer daily prayers and praises unto the Lord.

5 That you had rather part with the dearest and most precious things in this
life, nay, life it self, than leave the service of God, and the testimony of
a good Conscience.

6 That you have more comfort and delight in hearing, reading, meditating,
conferring of, and applying unto your own souls the holy Word of God, than in
the treasures and glory of the whole Earth.

Such marks as these you must find in your selves, if you ever mean or hope
to find true contentment in this life, or the comforts of Heaven in the life
to come.

Now I come to a more special and particular consideration of every Verse in
order; and thence togather such Notes and Doctrines, as may best instruct us in
the way to Heaven.

First, Verse. 105. explained.
David tells us in the first Verse; That Gods Word is a Lantern to his feet,
and a Light unto his paths: The Word is taken three ways.
Which, that you may better understand, I will tell you the meaning of the
words, and explain unto you the several terms.

First, the Word may be taken three ways.

1 For the substantial Word of God, 1 For the substantial Word.
the second Person in the Trinity, Ioh. 1. 1. In the beginning was the Word,
and the Word was God.

2 It may be taken for the written and sounding Word; The written and sounding
Word.
as it only strikes the ear, and informs the understanding; but it is not
conveyed, neither sinkes it into the heart by the powerful assistance and
sanctified concurrence of Gods Spirit, it being not prayed for to the
conversion and sanctification of the whole man. And so the Word is heard and
understood of many, that shall never be saved, but returns unfruitful.

3 It may be taken for the working and effectual Word, The effectual Word.
as it is the power of God unto salvation; as it is rightly understood, Romans 1.
16.
applied unto the heart and Conscience, possessed of the thoughts and affections,
and practiced in the life and conversation. This Word thus understood, inlived,
managed, and powerfully applied by the Spirit of God, was a Light unto David's
steps; and so is a guide unto the paths of all true Christians, to the worlds
end.

That you may understand how the Word is a Light, 2 What is m^ant by Light?
you must consider,

1 That Christ is called Light, Ioh. 1. 4. The Ministers are called the Light
of the World, John 1. 4.
Mat. 5. 14. Mat. 5. 14.
The faithful are Lights, Phil. 2. 15, 16. The way of the righteous (says
Solomon, Phil. 2. 15, 16.
Prove. 4. 18.) shines as the Light, Prove. 4. 18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect day. The Word of God is also
called a Light; as in this place. But first,

Christ is Light of himself, 1 Christ originally.
and originally; he is the Fountain and everlasting Spring of all the Light of
Grace and Glory, both in Heaven and Earth; Mal. 4. 2.
He is called, The Sun of Righteousness. The Sun, you know, has his
Light rooted in his own fair Body, and receives that from none other; and
with that, he enlightens the Moon, the Stars, the Air, the Earth, and all
the World: Even so the blessed Son of God, the Sun of Righteousness, has
in himself, and from himself, the Light of all Wisdom and Knowledge, Mercy
and Comfort; and from him flows and springs whatsoever Light of Glory is
revealed unto his blessed Saints and Angels in Heaven, or whatsoever Light of
Grace is shed into the hearts of his sons and servants here upon Earth.

2 The Preachers of the Word are Ministers and Messengers of this Light; 2
Ministers, ministerially.
and therefore are but Light ministerially. They are as the Stars, and so
they are called, Rev. 1. 20. They receive all their Light from the Sun of
Righteousness, R^vel. 1. 20.
CHRIST JESUS, and either do or should convey and cast their borrowed beams
upon the earthly, cold, and darksome hearts of the people of God, Act. 16. 18.
that they might turn from Darkness to Light, from the power of Satan unto
God, Act. 26. 18.

3 The Word is Light instrumentally; The Word instrumentally.
which being powerfully sanctified unto us for our salvation, and being holden
out unto us by a conscionable Ministry, is as a Candle or Torch, to guide us
through the darkness of this World, unto our eternal Rest.

4 Lastly, The faithful are the subjects of this Light.
the faithful are Lights Subjective; because they receive this Light into
their Understandings, (whereby they see the Wonders of Gods Law, the Secrets of
his Kingdom, and the great Mystery of Godliness, and the way to Heaven;)
into their Consciences, (whereby they have their sinful miserable estate by
nature discovered unto them, and the way to Christ for remedy and salvation;)
into their affections, (whereby they are enkindled with zeal for Gods truth,
honor, and service,) into their actions, and conversation, whereby they shine
as Lights in the World, Phil. 2. 15.
amid a naughty and crooked generation, Phil. 2. 15. And after the Sun of
Righteousness once arise in their hearts, like the Sun in the Firmament,
they shine more and more in all holy Virtues, unto the perfect day, until they
reach the height of Heaven, and the full glory of the Saints of God.

In the third place, [ by Feet] is meant his mind and understanding, 3 What is
meant by Feet.
his affections, thoughts, actions, his whole life, all his ways. All these in
David, were guided by the Light of Gods Word.

Lastly, 4 What, by Paths.
by Paths, are meant every particular step, every turning and narrow passage in
his special calling. For this Light, the Word of God, does not only guide a
man's feet into the way of peace, and put him in the right way to Heaven; but
also goes along with him, inlightens and directs every step, that his feet do
not slide. It so informs him with spiritual wisdom, that he lays hold on
every occasion for the glorifying of God, descries every little sin, and
appearance of evil, disposes every circumstance in his actions, with a good
conscience, and warrant out of Gods Word.

This then is the meaning of this Verse. The meaning of the Verse.
David, the man of God, had the Word of God working powerfully upon his soul,
as a Light: that is; As a Lamp is to the life and safety of the body, in
dark and dangerous places; so was this Light to the life and salvation of
David's soul, in the darkness of this World, and shadow of death: To guide
his feet and paths; that is, his mind, affections, thoughts, actions, his whole
life, all his ways, and every particular step and passage thereof.

This Verse being thus understood, let us now come to gather some Lessons and
Doctrines for our instruction.

The first shall be this:

There is no man can hit the way to Heaven, Doct. 1.
or walk in the paths of Righteousness, through the Kingdom of Grace in this
World, unto the Kingdom of Glory in the World to come, except he be
enlightened, informed, and instructed in the holy Word of God.

The second Note we gather out of this Verse, shall be this:

The Word of God is a Light, Doct. 2.
not only to guide us into the way to Heaven, and instruct us in our general
calling of Christianity; but also to lead us along in a course of godliness,
and to direct us particularly in our special calling.

I will first follow the former Doctrine; which in few words, and plainly, I
thus propose unto you.

No man can at first find the entrance, Doct. 1.
or after hit the way to Heaven, except he be enlightened and led along by the
holy Word of God. For David, as here we see, a man of great worth, and
understanding, otherwise excellently and extraordinarily qualified; could not
find out, or follow any other Guide, or direction to Heaven, but only the
Light of Gods Word.

The Reasons of this Doctrine, may be these which follow.

The first may be taken from the insufficiency and inabilitie of all other
means, Reason 1.
to bring us to Heaven: No other means can bring us to Heaven.
as,

1 All the greatest Learning and deepest knowledge in the World, Not humane
Learning.
will stand us in little stead in this business: Otherwise it had gone well
with many ancient Heathens and Philosophers of old, who fadomed as deep, and
reached as high in the depths and mysteries of all humane Learning and
knowledge, as the light of Reason and strength of Nature could possibly bring
them: And yet they were utterly strangers to the life of grace, Ephesians. 2. 12.
and without God in the World. When they professed themselves to be wise, they
became fools, says Paul, Romans 1. 22.
Romans 1. 22. They were puffed up with a little vainglorious knowledge here
upon Earth, and got them a Name amongst men: But, alas, what was this? When as
for the want of the Light of Divine Truth, they lost their Souls in another
World, and their Names never came in the Book of Life. Where is the wise?
(says Paul in another place) Where is the Scribe? 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Where is the Disputer of this World? As if he should have said: All the
knowledge of the greatest Doctors and learnedest Rabbis in the World, without
Grace, vanishes into nothing, into vainglory, emptiness, and air; nay,
casts them with greater horror, and confusion, into the Pit of Hell. Every man
(says Jeremy) is a Beast by his own knowledge, (...) Iere. 10. 14. Iere. 10.
14.
Except, besides all other knowledge, he be enlightened from above, and have
that Divine knowledge sanctified unto him, he can come no nearer the
happiness of Heaven, than a very Beast.

2 Worldly wisdom and policy is so far from making men wise unto
salvation, Not worldly wisdom. The wisdom of Gods Book, and man's brain,
stand at odds, with an everlasting opposition, Romans 8. 7.
that it is not only stark foolishness with God and good men, but it does
strongly set it self and is at enmity against God. Therefore, says God; I
will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding of
the prudent, 1 Cor. 1. 19.
1 Cor. 1. 19. Ahitophel was so wise even in the affairs of Kingdoms, and
business of State, 2 Samuel 16. 23.
that the counsel which he counseled in those days, was like as one had
asked counsel at the Oracle of God; and yet all this great wisdom in the end
ended in extreme folly: for upon a little discontent and disgrace in the World,
2 Samuel 17. 23.
he sadled his Ass, and went home unto his City, and put his household in
order, and hanged himself, 2 Samuel 16. 23. and 17. 23. Although the end of all
worldly wisdom be not so shameful in the eye of the World, yet undoubtedly
it is most miserable and woeful in the World to come, except their wisdom be
sanctified and overruled by the Light of Gods Word. Carnal wisdom can
neither preserve a man from death, nor prepare him to die blessedly: it cannot
stay his Life from going, neither can it stop the Curse from coming; it cannot
deliver him from damnation in the World to come, but rather increases the
grievousnesse of his punishment: for in this life it has kept possession
against heavenly wisdom, it made him incapable of all good instructions, it
made him impatient of any rebuke, and held him in ignorance and disobedience
all his life.

3 No good meanings or intentions, Not good meanings.
without knowledge and warrant in the Word of God, will ever serve our turn
for salvation; nay, indeed they are abominable and hateful in Gods sight.
Howsoever, thousands deceive themselves in this point. 2 Samuel 6. 6.
Vzzah had a good meaning, in 2 Samuel 6. 6. when he put his hand to the Ark of God, and held it; for the Oxen did shake it: but notwithstanding, the Lord was
very wroth with Vzzah, and God smote him in the same place, and there he died.
James and John had good meanings, when they called for fire from Heaven to
consume the Samaritan, that would not entertain Christ; but Jesus rebuked
them, Luke 9. 54, 55. 1 Samuel 15.
and told them, they knew not of what spirit they were. Saul, in 1 Samuel 15. had
a good meaning, when he spared Agag, and the best of the Sheep, and of the
Oxen, to sacrifice them unto the Lord; but notwithstanding Samuel tells him,
that he had done wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and that the Lord had rent
the Kingdom of Israel from him that day. Peter had a good meaning, when in
Ioh. 13. 8. Ioh. 13. 8.
he would not suffer Christ to wash his feet; but Jesus answered him, and told
him, If I wash thee not, thou shall have no part with me. Good meanings then
are wicked missings of the true service of God, except they be guided by
knowledge, warrant, and ground out of the Book of God. Let no man then tell of
his good meaning, if he be ignorant in the Will and Word of God, for certainly
it will never serve the turn, it will never hold out in the Day of Christ
Jesus.

4 No will worship, Not will worship.
or will-service, or voluntary Religion, Col. 2. 23.
as the Apostle calls it, Col. 2. 23. which is forged and framed out of a man's
own brain, humor, and conceit, without ground or warrant in the Book of
God; though it be performed with never so glorious a show of zeal and pains,
yet it is not any way availeable for our spiritual good, and eternal
happiness: nay indeed, it is most odious in the eyes of God, and ever liable
to a very high degree of his wrath and vengeance.

Baals Prophets, 1 King. 18. 28.
1 Kings 18. 28. were so hot and hasty in their will worship, that they cut
themselves with knives, and launcers, till the blood gushed out upon them. The
Papists they whip themselves, they vow Continency, perpetual Poverty, and
Regular Obedience, and yet is the profession and practice of both, bloody and
idolatrous. When the Jews worshipped God after the devised fashions of the
Gentiles, though their meaning was to worship nothing but God, yet the Text
says, they worshipped nothing but Devils, Deuteronomy. 32. 17.
Deuteronomy. 32. 17. And God there protests, that therefore a fire was kindled in his
wrath, that should burn unto the bottom of Hell, and set on fire the
foundations of the mountains. So hated of Almighty God is all service and
worship devised by the wit and will of man, without warrant in the Word of God.

5 Lastly, Not the Word it self in the Letter, without the meaning.
not the Word of God it self in the Letter, without the spiritual meaning,
and the finger of Gods Spirit to apply it powerfully to our souls and
consciences, is any sufficient rule of life, or able to bring us into the Light
of Grace. This appears in Nicodemus, who was a great Doctor in the Law, Ioh.
3. 10.
and the Prophets, a chief Master and Teacher in Israel; yet was a very Infant
and Idiot in the power of Grace, and mystery of godliness. For all his
learning in the Letter of the Law, he had not yet made one step toward Heaven;
for he was not only ignorant of, but had a very absurd and gross conceit of
the new birth; which is the very first entrance into the Kingdom of Grace. For
when Christ told him, he could not be saved, except he were newborn, he
strangely and foolishly replies; Verse. 4.
How can a man be borne, which is old? How can he enter into his mothers Womb
again, and be borne? Thus you see, there can no other means be named, or
thought upon; not all humane Knowledge, nor worldly Wisdom, nor good
Meanings, nor Willworship, nor the Word it self in the Letter, which can lead
us into the ways of Righteousness, or bring us unto Heaven; but only the
Light of Gods holy Word, holden out unto us by a profitable Ministry, and the
power of the Spirit.

A second Reason of my Doctrine may be this: Reason 2.
No man can ever see the Kingdom of God, The Word works regeneration; without
which, no salvation.
except he be borne again, except he be a new creature, a new man, as is
plain in Christ's words unto Nicodemus. For our new birth, or regeneration, is
the necessary passage from Nature to Grace; What regeneration is?
from profaneness, to sincerity: It is that whereby we are wholly
sanctified and set apart unto God, from the sinfnll corruption of our natural
birth, and the evil fruits thereof, to serve God in our whole man, both body,
soul, and spirit. Now you must conceive, that this new birth must necessarily
spring from the immortal Seed of the word of God; 1 Pet. 1. 23.
for so it is called, 1 Pet. 1. 23. It is the Seed of our new birth, salvation,
and immortality. And you may as well look for Come to grow up in your fields
without sowing, without casting any Seed into the furrows, as to look for
Grace to grow up in your hearts, or to reap the fruit of holiness,
everlasting life; except this immortal Seed, the Word of God, be first cast
into the furrows and fallow ground of your hearts, and be there received with
reverence and attention, nourished with prayer and meditation, and fructify in
your lives and conversations. Hence it is, that Gods Word is called, Act. 13.
26.
The Word of Salvation, Act. 13. 26. Act. 14. 3.
The Word of Grace, Act. 14. 3. The Word of Life, Phil. 2. 16.
Phil. 2. 16. The Power of God unto Salvation, Romans 1. 16. Romans 1. 16.
For there is no power of Grace, or spiritual life, to be had ordinarily upon
Earth, or salvation and eternal life to be hoped for in Heaven; except a man
be enlightened with the knowledge, and enlived with the power of the holy Word
of God. There is no entering into the Kingdom of God, except a man be newborn, except he be first renewed in his spirit, soul, and body: And there
is no new birth, without the Sea Dearing, page 325. 1 Cor* 4. 15. Iam. 1. 18.
immortal Seed, the Word of God. And therefore, without knowledge and
direction in the Word of God, no salvation.

The third Reason of my Doctrine, Reason 3.
is this: The Word of God has only the power and property to search into and
to sanctify the whole man, The Word is able to sanctify the whole man.
even to the inmost thoughts and the secret cogitations of the heart. All the
devices and imaginations of man's heart lie without the walk of humane justice,
and censure: no word or writing of man is able to bridle them, or bring them
within compass; no Law of Nature, or Nations, can affright or restrain the
freedom and wanderings of thoughts: only the Word of God can amaze, search,
and sanctify them. The weapons of our warfare (says Paul) are not carnal, 2
Cor. 10. 4.
but mighty through God to cast down Holds; casting down the imaginations,
and every thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought into the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. The
Word of God (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) is lively and mighty in
operation, Heb. 4. 12. opened.
and sharper than any two-edged sword; and enters through, even to the
dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marrow,
and is a discerner of the thoughts and the intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12.

The Word of God may be said to be living or lively in three respects. The Word
is said to be lively in three regards.


1 Because, whereas we naturally live under the shadow of death, and in the
darkness of sin, it quickens us with a new and spiritual life, It quickens.
it cheares and comforts us with heavenly Light.

2 The Word may be called Living, because it self is immortal, It lasts for
ever.
and lasts forever; as does the living and eternal God, Psalm. 119. 89.
the Author of it.

3 But most especially, and agreeably to the place in the Hebrews, It
disperseth it self, and searches into every part of the soul.
it is called lively, because it enters with great power and secret insinuation
into every part and power both of soul and body: So that as our life is
scattered and dispersed into every little part, and least vein in us, and we
feel it both in pain and pleasure; even so the virtue of the Word of God
pierces into every member, into the most secret and hidden Closet of the
heart, either to break and bruise with terror and astonishment the very bones,
and crush the sinews of the sinful soul; or to fill them with marrow and
fatness, and to refresh the affections of the truly penitent with joy
unspeakable, and glorious. God tells us in Jeremy, Jer. 23. 29.
that his Word is like fire; and therefore it can easily insinuate into all the
creekes and corners of our corruptions; it can fully and clearly enlighten our
Consciences, and discover unto us the sinfulness of the most lurking and
secret thoughts.

Thus you have this first Doctrine plainly proved and confirmed unto you.

No man can at first find the entrance, or after hit the way to Heaven, except
he be enlightened and led along by the saving knowledge of the holy Word of God.

No other means, which the power of Nature, Wisdom, Learning, or the whole
World can afford, will serve the turn in this business of Salvation. It is
the Seed of our new birth (as I told you;) there can be no growing of grace, or
reaping of glory, without it: It has only power to shake, ransacke, and
search into the inmost secrets of the heart: It only can sanctify us both
inwardly and outwardly, both in soul and body, both in thoughts and actions;
without which, both inward and outward holiness, no man shall ever see the
face of God. Use 1.


Now I come unto the Uses of this Doctrine. Confutation^ of Papists, who keep
the Word in an unknown Tongue.
And in the first place, it may serve for confutation of the Papists, those
great employsoners and murderers of infinite souls of men. Is the Word of God
as a Lamp, and a Light, without which we cannot see the first step, or set
one foot aright toward Heaven? Why then, sinful and pestilent is their
practice, who hide this blessed Light from the people of God, in an unknown
Tongue; and by their bloody Inquisition, damme up the holy Fountains of
heavenly Truth, which should spring up in every man's heart unto eternal life:
Whose cruel and crafty Religion (for, blood of Princes, and cursed Policy,
are the principal supporters of Popery) teaches them to blindfold and
hood-winke the poor Laity in forced ignorance, lest they should know Gods
will, or any way to Heaven, but theirs; which indeed is the right, direct, and
desperate downe-fall into the Pit of Hell: So that millions of souls live no
less without Scriptures, than if there were none; and woefully walk in this
World, through darkness of sin, shadow of death, and ignorance both of God
and his Word, unto endless and utter darkness in the World to come. The
Prophet David tells us, Psalm. 19. 7, 8.
in Psalm. 19. That the Law of the Lord is perfect, and gives wisdom unto the
simple: The Commandments of the Lord is pure, and gives light to the eyes. In
this place he tells us, That the Word was a Lamp unto his feet, and a Light
unto his paths. Joh. 5. 39.
Christ himself, John 5. 39. bids us, Search the Scriptures: even all, without
exception; so many as look for eternal life. Not lightly, and at leisure to
read them, but with diligence to dive into them; for so the word signifies in
the Original: To seek for the right knowledge, and true sense of them, Prove.
^. 4.
as for Silver, and to search for it as for Treasures. The Noblemen of Berea,
Act. 17. 11.
Act. 17. 11. searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, that
were preached unto them. ^ Pet. 1. 19.
Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 19. calls the Word of the Prophets, a Light, which
shines in a dark place, to which we should take heed. But the Pope, and his
Factors, teach other Lessons. The Catholic Church (says one of their chief
Be^. de Verb. Dei, 2. cap. 15. At Catholica Ecclesia, etc.
Champions, out of the Council of Sess. 22. ca. 8. Can. 9.
Trent) forbids the reading of Scriptures by all, without choice, or the
public reading, or singing of them in vulgar Tongues. The wise will not here
regard (say the Rhemists in their Preface to their Testament) what some wilful
people do mutter, that the Scriptures are made for all men. And soon after,
they resemble the Scriptures to Fire, Water, Candles, Knives, and Swords; which
are indeed needful, etc. but would mar all, if they were at the guiding of
other than wise men: And this is indeed one of their principal reasons.

Many abuse the Scriptures by ignorance, Object.
infirmity, or malice, The Scriptures are ready to be abused by the ignorant,
to error, heresy, etc.
to Errors, Heresies, Schisms, and their own destruction: therefore they are
not to be read of all, without choice.

I answer; they might as well reason thus: Many men abuse Meat and Drink, Answ.
by surfeiting and excess, So may Meat be abused, and the Air infected: yet
they are not to be taken away.
to the destruction both of their souls and bodies: therefore men are to be
deprived of Meat and Drink. Some men are infected with the Pestilence, by
drawing in corrupted and empoysoned air: therefore the air is to be taken
away, and removed. But as those men which are deprived of Meat and Drink,
presently languish and pine away, and die a temporal death; and those that
enjoy not the benefit of the air, are presently stifled, for want of breath:
even so, all those that want the spiritual Food of their souls out of the
Word of God, and the holy inspirations of his good Spirit builded thereupon;
howsoever they be fat and flourishing in their outward estates, yet they are
full lean and lanke in their souls; and if they so continue, must needs die
an eternal death, and perish everlastingly. Let us then learn to detest and
hate the bloody Policy of the Synagogue of Rome, which cruelly keeps from
many thousand Souls that blessed Light of Gods Word, which should lead them to
eternal life. They indeed pretend other Reasons: But the truth is, if the Word
of Truth should be permitted and published to all, there would be old running
out of Babylon; all their Pomp and Policy would down; their shameful
Iuglings and Cousenages, their strong Delusions and Impostures would be laid
open, in the sight of the Sun. The Princes of the Earth, that have so long
been drunken with the wrath of her empoysoned Wine, would no longer commit
Fornication with her. Rev. 18.
The Merchants would buy no more her Wares; but would stand afar off from
her, for fear of her torment, weeping, and wailing. No marvel then, though
the Papists labor might and maine, and to this end maintain a bloody
Inquisition, to suppress this Light of Gods Word, lest it should discover
their darkness, and hasten their destruction.

A second Use, Use 2.
is for terror, fear, and amazement to all them that do not live and delight
in the Light of Gods holy Word, Of terror to them that delight not in Gods Word.
but yet are walking in the darkness of ignorance, and in the shadow of
death. The whole World, I Job. 5. 19.
and every man in particular, lies in darkness; that is, in ignorance, under
sin; and so subject and liable to damnation and eternal death. There is no
way to come out of this state of Darkness, Damnation, and Death, but by the
Knowledge, Light, and Ministry of the Word. Act. 26. 18.
Hence it is, that Act. 26. 18. it is Paul's charge, and he is sent to this
purpose, to open the eyes of men, that they might turn from Darkness to
Light. Ephesians. 5. 8.
And Paul himself, Ephesians. 5. 8. speaks thus unto the Ephesians; Ye were once
Darkness, but now ye are Light in the Lord; walk as Children of the Light.
1 Pet. 2. 9.
Out of 1 Pet. 2. 9. it appears, that all Gods Children are called out of
Darkness into mavelous Light. Why then, fearful and most wretched is the
state of all those, The state of those that are in Darkness.
who by the Light and knowledge of Gods Word are not translated and guided out
of this Darkness. For, as in Darkness,

1 There is much fear, He is in fear.
Genesis 15. 12.
horror, and discomfort; a man cannot enjoy the lightsomenesse of Heaven, the
comfort of the creatures, the company of men: Even so ignorant men, not
enlightened with saving knowledge, are utterly without all hope of Heaven; they
have no sight or taste of the endless joys thereof; they have no company or
conference in heavenly matters with true Christians; they have no comfort or
interest in the Covenant of Grace, or Promises of Salvation: But Fear, Horror,
and Despair are most justly treasured up for them against the Day of Wrath,
Romans 2. 5.
and of the declaration of the just Judgment of God.

2 He that walks in the Darkness (says John) knows not whither he goes:
He knows not whither he goes. Ioh. 12. 35.
He cannot discern his way; he sees not what is behind, or before him; he
cannot descry or discover the dangers which are round about him: But
especially, if the ways through which he passes, be slipperie, steep, and
rockie, full of pits and holes, he is in danger at every step, by some grievous
fall, to crush his body, bruise his bones, or break his neck. The state of
ignorant men.
It is just so with every one that lives in ignorance of Gods Word, and Truth;
he cannot possibly discern the way to Heaven, amongst the many bypath of
iniquity; he cannot judge in spiritual matters betwixt right and wrong, good
and evil* Light and Darkness, Christ and Belial, profaneness and
sincerity; though there be behind him, a Life spent in much wickedness,
lewdness, and ignorance; before him, Despair, Hell, and eternal Damnation;
about him, the World, with a thousand baits and pleasures, to entice and
entangle him in sin; Satan, like a roaring Lion, ready every hour to seize
upon his Soul, and to tear it in pieces, while there is none to help; all
the creatures armed, and in a readiness, with whole Armies of Plagues, and
Vengeance, to be revenged upon him, for dishonouring God, by ignorance in his
Word: Yet he sees none of all this. He neither knows, feels, or suspects
these many dangers, with which he is encompassed; but goes on plodding, with
ungrounded confidence, and wicked security, in the way of wickedness and
destruction: he passes, with much desperate boldness, through many dangerous
and fearful ways; wherein, at every step, he wounds his Conscience with one
sin or other in the mean time, and at length falls headlong, and suddenly,
body and soul, into the Pit of Hell. This is certainly the miserable and
woeful state of all those that live in spiritual Darkness, and are ignorant
in Gods Word, and the ways of godliness. It may be they may flatter, please,
and persuade themselves, that their case is good enough; that, when they hear
of Heaven, and those everlasting pleasures at Gods right hand, they think
notwithstanding that they shall come thither at length; though they know never
a foot of the way, take no direction by the Light of Gods Word, nor set one
step, by new obedience, toward that place of blessedness. But indeed and
truth they do very fearfully deceive and over-shoot themselves: Simile.
And their case is just, as if a man should fall asleep upon the edge of some
high and steep Rock; and there dream, that he is made a King, attended with
a glorious Train of Nobility, furnished with sumptuous Palaces, and stately
Buildings, enriched with the Revenues, Soveraignetie, and Pleasures of a whole
Kingdom: But upon the sudden, starting up, and leaping for joy, falls
irrecoverably into the merciless and devouring Sea; and so loses that little
comfort, which he had in this miserable life. Many wretched men lie and ^leepe
and snort in ignorance and spiritual blindness; thinking, that skill in the
Book of God, and points of Religion, belongs only to those that are
Booke-learned; entertaining much vain hope of salvation, without all truth or
ground: But when upon their Deathbed, their Consciences are awakened by the
finger of Gods justice, out of the slumber of sin, they then too late find
and see, that all was but a Dream; for they suddenly fall and sink into
despair, horror, and endless desolation. The state then of ignorant men,
though perhaps they little think upon it, or take it to heart, is most
fearful in this life, and will be most horrible hereafter. In this World;
because they are unacquainted, and untaught in Gods Truth, points of Religion,
and way to Heaven; they neither know their own misery, the great mystery of
godliness, or means to salvation; and therefore live as aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, Ephesians. 2. 12.
strangers from the Covenant of Promise, without hope, and without God in the
World: Which is a misery of all miseries; They are condemned already: Joh. 3.
18.
For as it is, John 3. 18. He that believes not in him, is already condemned.
And Saint Paul says, Romans 10. 14.
Romans 10. 14. How shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard; and
how shall they hear, without a Preacher? So, that without knowledge in Gods
Word, there can be no faith; and without faith, there is no salvation. You may
further see a notorious Link of many wretched mischiefs, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19.
which arise from ignorance, Ephesians. 4. 17, 18, 19. Vanity of mind, and
darkness of understanding are naturally in all men; for we are all stark
blind, and utterly dead, in respect of matters of Heaven, and spiritual
affairs. From thence comes, The fruits of ignorance.
gross Ignorance of God, and all godliness; and this Ignorance, if it be not
removed and dispelled by the Light of Gods Word, is the root and cause of
strangeness from the Life of God: Hardness of Heart; Searednesse of
Conscience, and want of Feeling; an itching, wantonness, and eagerness to
sin; a committing of any sin, without remorse, occasion being offered; an
unsatisfiednesse and greediness in the pursuit of sinful pleasures, 1 Ioh. 2.
16.
and in fulfilling the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and pride of
life. These are the bitter and poisoned fruits of Ignorance, and want of
knowledge in the Word of God, and way to Heaven. And what is to be expected
hereafter, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9.
appears 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus will show himself from Heaven,
with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do
not know God, and which obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power. Seeing then the coming of the Lord will be so terrible
and fearful to the ignorant, so that they shall desire the Mountains to fall
upon them, that they might hide themselves from the fierce wrath of the Lord,
and not behold his fearful countenance; and that they shall wish full many
times, they had never been borne; how ought every man, which lives without the
Light and knowledge of Gods holy Word, fear and tremble? And yet, God knows,
he cannot conceive the thousand part of those horrible torments which the
ignorant and wicked persons endure for ever. For as the heart of man cannot
comprehend those blessed and glorious joys, 1 Cor. 2. 9.
which God has prepared for those that love him; so the woe, torments, and
endless vexations, which shall be poured with wrath and vengeance upon the
head of the wicked, infinitely pass the understanding of man: None can
conceive how horrible they are, but only he that feels them. It very deeply
then concerns you (Beloved in Christ Jesus) as you tender the everlasting good
and happiness of your own souls, to labor by all means to be instructed
and enlightened by the holy Word of God, which is holden out unto you, as a
Lamp and Torch, to lead you through this Vale of Tears, and World of
Darkness, to the blessed fruition of the most glorious and everlasting
Kingdom of Heaven. Otherwise, if you will needs continue in ignorance still,
mark what is your woeful state and condition: howsoever you may seem to shine
outwardly, to the eye of the World, or in your own conceits, in pleasures, in
plenty, in civil honesty, in outward mirth, and other worldly contentments;
yet, in deed and truth, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4.
your life is a life of darkness. The god of this World, the Prince of
Darkness, has blinded the eyes of your minds, Ephesians. 4. 18.
that your Understandings are not only darkened, Ephesians. 5. 8.
but you are Darkness it self, Ephesians. 5. 8. Your works are the works of
Darkness, your way is the way of Darkness; Prove. 4. 19.
you are fettered and enchained in the power of Darkness, Coloss. 1. 13.
Coloss. 1. 13. In the darkness of crosses and afflictions of this life, you
shall be without any glimpse of true comfort and refreshing from the Lord: upon
your Deathbeds, you shall meet with nothing but darkness of despair and
horror: in the Grave, Satan will guard you with the Bars of the Earth, as in
a Bed of hopeless Darkness, until the Judgment of the great Day. Zeph. 1.
15.
And that Day will be unto you, a Day of wrath, a Day of trouble and
heaviness, a Day of destruction and desolation, a Day of Clouds and
blackness: as it is, Zeph. 1. 15. And at the last, you are to be cast, body
and soul, from the presence of God, and joys of Heaven, into utter
Darkness, there to be tormented amongst wicked Devils, for ever and ever.
This is certainly the state of all ignorant men, and those that will not be
enlightened with saving knowledge out of his Word: There is nothing to be
expected of them, but Darkness, Sorrow, Despair, and Horror.

A third Use of this Doctrine, Use 3.
may serve for admonition to all those, Admonition to take the Word for our
guide.
who by the Light of Gods Word have already found and are entered into the way
to Heaven; that they would suffer themselves with humility, obedience, and
constancy, to be led along in a course of sanctification, by the holy guidance
and direction thereof; that they would shine daily more and more in all
Christian virtues, exercises, and duties. For it is the property of all those
which are become new creatures, who are washed from their sins, sanctified,
and newborn by the immortal Seed of the Word, and the Spirit of Grace; to
long after, and earnestly desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that they may
grow thereby in knowledge, comfort, and new obedience. A newborn Babe will be
pleased and satisfied with nothing but the Pap; not Gold, Pearls, or any thing
else will content it: even so a new-renewed Soul does ever hunger and thirst
after the sacred and sincere Milk of Gods holy Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2.
as Saint Peter calls it, that it may daily gather strength in grace;
otherwise, as the Child, so it would languish, pine away, and die. He that
grows not, and goes not forward in grace, had never true grace. He that
faithfully labors not to feed his soul with spiritual food, never passed the
new birth. The way of the righteous (says Solomon) shines as the Light, Prove.
4. 18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect Day, Prove. 4. 18. For if the
Day Star of saving knowledge once appear unto a man, Mal. 4. 2.
and the Sun of Righteousness arise in his heart; they never set, until
they bring him unto that glorious Light above, that no man can attain unto. He
proceeds and profits in the great mystery of godliness, in faith, repentance,
and sincerity; he grows from virtue to virtue, from knowledge to knowledge,
from grace to grace, Ephesians. 4. 13.
until he become a perfect man in Christ Jesus. It may be, as the fairest
Sun may sometimes be over-cast, and darkened with Clouds, and Mists; so the
holiness of a godly man may be over-clouded and disgraced sometimes, by falls
into a sin, upon infirmity, ignorance, heedlesnesse, or the like: But, if he
be so overtaken; after his passing through sorrow and grief of heart for the
same, and his rising again by repentance; he shines far more brightly and
pleasantly both to God and man, in sincerity and all holy graces; he
afterward runs a more swift and settled course in the race of sanctification.
So that ordinarily all Gods children shine as Lights in the World, Phil. 2. 15.
in the midst of a naughty and crooked generation, being once enlightened with
saving knowledge; and they still wax brighter and brighter, until at last
they come to shine as the brightness of the Firmament, Dan. 12. 3.
and the Stars in Heaven, for ever and ever. Look to it then, I beseech you:
whosoever has already given his Name unto Christ, tasted of the good Word of
God, and received into his soul some glimpses of heavenly Light; let him be
sure to follow hard toward the Mark, for the Prize of the high calling of
God, in Christ Jesus: Let him set his best desires, affections, and endeavors,
to grow and proceed in all holy knowledge, in the Light of Gods Word, and
cheerful obedience unto the same. For it is a special note and mark of a
man that is truly religious, to go forward, and increase in grace and
understanding: He must be like the Sun, which, rising in the East, enlarges
his glorious light and heat, until he reach the height of Heaven. But, as one
well notes; the true Christian must not be like Hezekiahs Sun, Isai. 38. 8.
which went backward: If a man back-slide, wax worse, and fall away from good
beginnings, he adds weight unto the wrath of God, and doubles his damnation:
He must not be like Ioshuahs Sun, Josh. 10. 12.
that stood still. It is so far to Heaven, and the way so narrow, so rough,
and full of dangers and difficulties, that he which stands at a stay, will
light short: The Bridegroom will be entered in, Math. 25. 10.
and the Gate shut, before he come. He that has so much grace, that he
desires no more, did never truly desire any: And he that endeavors not to be
better, will by little and little grow worse, and at length become stark
naught. He therefore must be like David's Sun, that great and glorious Giant
of the Heavens, that like a Bridegroom comes out of his Chamber, Psalm. 19. 4,
5.
and as a Champion rejoices to run his Race. One grace in Gods child, begets
another; and one holy action, performed with sincerity of heart, does inflame
his affections with love and zeal, with courage and resolution, to undertake
more, and to go through-stitch with all the affairs of God, and good causes.
For he alone knows the invaluable worth, and inestimable price of heavenly
Jewels; and therefore he is ravished with their beauty, and grows unsatiable
in his desires and longings after them. He is still toyling and laboring in
the Trade of Christianity, for more gain of grace, increase of comfort, and
further assurance and security of the joys of Heaven. Since he has already
tasted and fed upon celestial and spiritual food, he finds in that such
unutterable sweetness, and pleasant relish, that he for ever after hungers
and thirsts after it. If then you would be assured, that you are in the way to
happiness, be sure to be led on by the Light of the Word in all heavenly
knowledge, spiritual wisdom, and holy obedience.

A fourth and last Use of my Doctrine, Use 4.
is for instruction to all; Instruction. See Chrysoft. in Math. page 76.
whether they be natural, or spiritual; ignorant, or instructed in the Word
of God: That they make it their chief and principal Christian care,
zealously, and conscionably, and constantly to hear, attend, and understand
the holy Word of God; and to be guided and conducted by the Light thereof in
all the passages of their life, and ways of their conversation.

1 And in this point, I will, first, lay down unto you certain Motives, that
may induce and stir you thereunto.

2 Cautions, or Caveats, to fore-arme and fore-warne you of Lets, and
Temptations, that may withdraw you therefrom.

3 Lastly, some needful instructions for your right carriage therein.

One Motive, Motives. ^
to stir us up to a reverend regard and attention, in hearing the Word of
God, to a love and liking of the heavenly knowledge therein contained, The Word
is a Love-Letter from God.
and to a sound and sincere practice of it, in our lives and conversations, may
be this: The Word of God is, as it were, an Epistle or Letter (as one of the
Fathers calls it) written from God Almighty unto us miserable men, Quid est
autem Scriptura sacra, nisi quaedam Epistola Omnipotentis Dei ad creaturam
suam? Greg. Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 48.
published by his own Son, sealed by his Spirit, witnessed by his Angels,
conveyed unto us by his Church, the Pillar and ground of Truth, confirmed with
the blood of millions of Martyrs, 1 Timothy 3. 15.
which has already brought thousands of souls to Heaven, and fills every
heart that understands it, and is wholly guided by it, with Light and Life,
with Grace and Salvation. Simile.
Now let us imagine a man to have a Letter sent unto him but by an Earthly
King, or some great Prince in the World; wherein he should have a Pardon
granted him for some capital Crime, and high Offense, whereby he were liable
to a terrible kind of death; or wherein he should be forewarned of some great
and imminent danger hanging over his head, and ready every hour to fall upon
him; or, wherein he should have assured and confirmed unto him, under the
Kings Seal, some rich Donation, or great Lordship. Now I say, if a man should
receive but a Letter from some high and mighty Potentate upon Earth, wherein
any of these favors should be conveyed unto him; how reverently would he
receive it? how thankfully would he accept of it? how often would he read it?
how warily would he keep it? how highly would he esteem of it? Why, in this
royal and sacred Letter sent from the King and great Commander both of Heaven
and Earth, all these favors, and a thousand more joys and comforts, are
conveyed unto every believer and practiser thereof. In that, we are
forewarned, lest by our ignorance, impiety, and impenitencie, we fall into
the Pit of Hell, and everlasting horror: In that, we have promised and
performed unto us the pardon and remission of all our sins, whereby we
justly stand guilty of the second death, and the endless torments of the
damned. By the virtue of it, we are not only comforted with grace in this
World; but shall undoubtedly be crowned with peace, glory, and immortality in
the World to come. Such a Letter as this, has the mighty and terrible God,
most glorious in all Power and Majesty, who is even a consuming and devouring
fire; sent unto us miserable men, by nature wretched and forlorn creatures,
Dust and Ashes: why then, with what reverence, cheerfulness, and zeal, ought
we to receive, read, hear, mark, learn, understand, and obey it?

A second Motive, 2 The matter contained in it, is excellent and precious.
may be the precious, golden, and divine matter which is contained in the Book
of God, and that true and ever-during happiness, to which it only can bring
us. There is nothing proposed and handled in the Word of God, but things of
greatest weight, and highest excellency: As, the infinite majesty, power, and
mercy of God; the unspeakable love and strange sufferings of the Son of God,
for our sakes; the mighty and miraculous working of the holy Spirit upon the
souls of men. There is nothing in this Treasury, but Orient Pearls, and rich
Jewels; as, promises of grace, spiritual comfort, confusion of sin, the
triumph of godliness, refreshing of wearied souls, the beauty of Angels, the
holiness of Saints, the state of Heaven, salvation of sinners, and everlasting
life. What Swine are they, that neglecting these precious Pearls, root only in
the Earth, wallow in worldly pleasures, feed upon vanities, transitory trash,
and vanishing riches, which in their greatest need will take them to their
wings, like an Eagle, and fly into the Heavens? Besides, the Word of God is
only able to prepare us for true happiness in this world, and to possess us
of it, in the world to come. It only begets in us a true, entire, and
universal holiness; without which, Heb. 2. 14.
none shall ever see the face of God, or the glory of Heaven: for it is
impossible, hereafter to live the life of glory and blessedness in Heaven, if we
live not here the life of grace and sincerity, in all our ways. 1 Pet. 1. 23.
It is called the immortal Seed, because it regenerates and renewes us both in
our Spirits, Souls, and Bodies: in our Spirits; that is, in judgment, memory,
and conscience: in our Souls; that is, in our will and affections: in our
Bodies; that is, in every member. If the Prince of this world has not blinded
the eyes of our minds, and that we be not reprobats, as concerning salvation,
it only is able to inlighten our understandings, to rectify our wills, to
sanctify our hearts, to mortify our affections; to set David's Door before
our lips, Psalm. 141. 3. Job 31. 1.
that are offend not with our tongues; to set Jobs Door before our eyes, that
they behold not vanity; to manacle our hands and feet with the cords and bands
of Gods Law, that they do not walk or work wickedly: nay, and it is able to
furnish and supply us with sufficiency of spiritual strength, to continue in
all these good things, and in a godly course unto the end. And if we be once
thus qualified, we are rightly fitted and prepared for the glory that is to be
revealed. As before, this holy Word did translate us from the darkness of
sin, into the light of grace; it can now much more easily, with joy and
triumph, bring us, from the light of grace, to the light of immortality, and
everlasting pleasures at Gods right hand.

A third Motive may be this: 3 We must be judged by the Word.
We must be judged by the Word of God at the last Day. If any man (says
Christ, Ioh. 12. 47, 48.) hear my words, Ioh. 12. 47, 48.
and believe not, I judge him not; for I came not to judge the World, but to
save the World: He that refuses me, and receives not my words, has one that
judges him; the word that I have spoken, it shall judge him in the last Day.
Whenever we shall come to judgment, and appear before Gods Tribunal, (and
we little know how near it is) two Books shall be laid open unto us; the
one, of Gods Law; another, of our own Conscience: The former, will tell us
what we should have done; for the Lord has revealed it to the World, to be
the rule of our faith, and of all our actions: The other, will tell us what we
have done; for Conscience is a Register, Conscience; what it is.
Light, and Power in our Understanding, which treasures up all our particular
actions against the Day of Trial; discovers unto us the equity, or iniquity
of them; and determines of them, either with us, or against us. Now we must not
take any exception against the first; that is, the Law of God: For the Law of
God (says David, Psalm. 19. 7.
Psalm. 19. 7.) is perfect, converting the soul: The testimony of the Lord is
sure, and gives wisdom unto the simple. We cannot against the second; that
is, the Book of our Conscience: for it was ever in our custody and keeping;
no man could corrupt it; there is nothing writ in it, but with our own hands.
Now, in what a terrible fearful case will a man be at that Day, when he shall
see the Book of God laid open before him; in the Light whereof he should have
led all his life, and by which he is now to be judged; and yet know himself to
have had no knowledge, but to have been a mere stranger in it? Though the
great things of the Law were many times published and preached unto him, Hos.
12. 8.
yet he counted them but as a strange thing. Every man's Conscience is
naturally corrupt, defiled, and uncomfortable; and can endure and digest
reasonable quietly the rage of disordered affections, many vile corruptions,
and sinful actions: and therefore, at the last Day, when it shall be awakened,
opened, examined, it will bring forth nothing, but the Worm that never dies,
strange confusion, and condemnation; except it has been formerly in this
World enlightened, purged, and sanctified by the Word of Grace, and the Blood
of the Lamb. Most accursed then, and forlorn, will be the state of every
ignorant man, when he shall appear before the Judge of all the World: When he
looks upon his Conscience, he shall find nothing but guilt, and horror: when
upon the Law, and upon the Word of God, after which he should have lived, and
by which he must now be judged; it will be to him but as a sealed Book; he
will see nothing but his own ignorance, blindness, and strangeness in it:
And therefore, all the Plagues and Curses denounced in it against ignorant,
wicked, and unrepentant sinners, shall be his portion, in the Lake that burns
with fire and Brimstone for evermore. This ought then to stir up every man,
with all care and Conscience, to store himself, while he has time, with
saving knowledge and holy obedience unto that Word, which must be his Judge in
the last Day: Nay, and let him take heed unto his feet, Eccles. 5. 1.
and look unto his behavior, when he enters into the House of God: For in
that Day he must answer and be countable for every Sermon that he has heard,
and for every Lesson he has been taught out of the Book of God: If they have
not enlightened his understanding, they have hardened his heart; if they do
not now reform him, they will hereafter confound him; if he do not profit by
them, he shall be sure to be plagued for the neglect of them: For Gods Word is
unto every man that hears it, either the savor of life unto life, 2 Cor. 2.
16.
or the savor of death unto death: Heb. 4. 12.
It is a two-edged Sword; it either kills the sin, or the soul, it must and
shall prosper in the work for which it is sent. Isa. 55. 11.
God will raise glory, he will win honor unto himself, from every man. If
he cannot be glorified, by his conversion, and salvation; he will glorify
his own Name, in his deserved overthrow, and just confusion.

A fourth Motive may be; 4 A fearful judgment shall befall the not hearers
and practisers of the Word.
That horrible and fearful punishment and destruction, which at length will
certainly befall all negligent and contemptuous hearers, and those that
practice not the power thereof in their lives and conversations. Whosoever
(says our blessed Savior) shall not receive you, Math. 10. 14, 15.
or hear your words; when ye depart out of that house, or that City, shake
off the dust of your feet: Truly I say unto you, it shall be easier for them of
the Land of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Day of Judgment, than for that City.
The infamous abominations, the damnable and crying sins of the Sodomites are
known unto all: Who has not heard of those floods of fire and Brimstone,
which swept them away, as the hatefullest creatures that ever lived upon the
Earth? How rufull then, and how lamentable will be their condition, who are
liable and subject to more horrible plagues than these? We should therefore
consider, that the negligent, irreverent, and unprofitable hearing of the Word
of God, is a sin of a far greater weight, and more fearful consequence,
than we ordinarily imagine. When we hear the Ministers, and Ambassadors of
God, delivering his mind, and revealing his Will unto us, out of such places as
these, we are to conceive, that in a nearer and more special manner, we stand
in the presence of the great God of Heaven and Earth, who is clothed with
infinite terror, power, and majesty; and thereafter, we ought to proportion
our behavior and carriage, with reverence, humility, and obedience to so great
a presence. Earthly Princes will not endure contempt and disgrace at their
subjects hands: Simile.
They cannot abide to have their Majesty and authority lightly set by, their
laws and commands to be neglected and trodden under foot: Why then should the
Lord of glory, of justice and power, bear such indignities at the hands of
sinful men, which are his most abject vassals, and contemptible creatures?
Certain it is, if we weight aright the greatness of that God, before whom
we stand, and our own vileness, we should hold it most just, if he should
presently in the place where we stand, punish and plague our sleepiness,
talking, wandering thoughts, and irreverent carriage at hearing his Word, with
some sudden and markable vengeance, to be a spectacle and example unto others,
for neglecting so great salvation. It is Gods great mercy that such plagues and
judgments are respited, suspended, and deferred; for even all the curses in
the book of God do naturally, deservedly, and in the course of Gods justice,
belong unto the negligent hearer, and disobedient unto the Word of God. All
these curses (says Moses Deuteronomy. 28. 49.) Deuteronomy 28. 49.
shall come upon thee and pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be
destroyed, because thou obeyest not the voice of the Lord thy God.

I come now in the second place to the temptations and lets whereby a man may
be hindered from hearing the Word of God, Hindrances from profiting by the
Word.
profiting by it, and a conscionable practicing of the same.

The highest in impiety, Let 1.
and most horrible, is a spice of Atheism, Atheism.
which Satan suggests into worldly men, whereby they wickedly, and very
blasphemously think, Some think the Word to be but a humane policy.
that the sacred Word of God, is but a politic invention and devise to keep
men in awe and order, in Cities and societies, and to preserve them from
wildness and outrages. But I would gladly know whose work and invention it
is, if it be not Gods Almighty?

It is not man's: A removing of this.
For it directly and strongly opposes against the stream of his sensual
delights, and earthly pleasures: It curbs his most desired contentments, and
crosses the natural bent of his affections.

It is not Satan's: For he in all ages has fiercely and furiously set himself
against it; and it is the engine that batters and beats down his kingdom of
darkness.

It is not any Angels, or other creatures: For the It may be discerned by a
proper, natural, and inherent Majesty from all humane writings and imitatory
delusions and impostures of Satan; such as is the Alcaron
Majesty, excellency, miraculous efficacy, and wonderful power of Gods
Word, is far above the reach and capacity of any creature; transcendent to
all created understandings, and finite comprehension. Besides, the famous
miracles, the many visions, the true foretelling of things to come* the
inward, lively and effectual workings upon the souls of the elect, and many
other singular and sacred marks and characters of divinity stamped upon it,
does plainly show, that it is the alone holy invention of Gods divine, pure and
infinite understanding, and revealed to the world for the enlarging of Gods
glory, and the salvation of many a thousand souls; for the confusion of the
kingdom of Satan, and just condemnation of the children of hell. Take heed
then in the name of God, that you give not entrance or entertainment to any
such fearful blasphemous temptation, whereby the love and zeal to Gods Word
may be cooled, or you grow less careful in purchasing and practicing the
knowledge and power of it. This let lays hold only upon men of a reprobate
sense, and those that are already marked out for certain damnation.

A second let and hinderance from hearing the Word of God, Let 2.
is recusancie, the cozenage and imposture of Popery. Recusancie.
For such is the wickedness and cruelty of that superstition and mystery of
iniquity, that it labors might and maine to keep all the world close
prisoners in the dungeon of darkness and ignorance, and for ever to deprive
them of the light of the Gospel. The profane professors of this bloody
Religion, hold ignorance to be the mother of devotion, and a very dangerous
thing for simple people to pry into the Book of God. And so they do more
safely and securely feed their followers with their own damnable principles of
treason, rebellion, disloyalty and disobedience to lawful Kings. So they lead
ignorant people which way, and as far as they will in the kingdom of
darkness, even to believe that blowing up of whole states, and killing of
Kings, are very glorious acts, and merit the brightest crown of immortality,
and the highest seat in heaven. I hope in the Lord there is none of you, but
with all his heart hates and detests this bloody, murtherous, and Idolatrous
generation; and will by no means suffer his right eye of knowledge in Gods
Word to be put out by these cursed Ammonites.

Add here another let, which is Separatisme, See Ta. page 79.

A third let and hinderance, Let 3.
is the height of hardness of heart, Hardness of heart, and desperateness in
sinning.
and most damned desperateness in sinning, when men are become so greedy of
fulfilling their sinful pleasures, that they drink up sensual delights like
water, draw on iniquity like cords of vanity, and sin as with cart-ropes:
For then they begin to say with themselves, even to God himself, with them
in ^ob 21. 14, Job 21. 14, 15.
15. Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Who is the
Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit should we have if we should
pray unto him? And with those to whom Isaiah in his fifth Chapter denounces a
fearful woe; Let him make speed, Isa. 5. 19.
let him hasten his work, that we may see it, and let the counsel of the Holy
one of Israel draw near and come, that we may know it. Men that are possessed
with such a rebellious and scornful spirit as this, neither much care for God
or his Wor^ threats or promises, judgments or mercies, heaven or hell. No
marvel then though they set light by Gods ministers, and seek not for
instruction in holy knowledge, and heavenly wisdom. A preservative against
this.
That we may be preserved from this horrible and desperate case, and so
fearfully hardening our hearts against the Word of life and salvation, we must
be very careful and watchful, that we give not way, passage, and
entertainment to wicked thoughts, and the first sinful motions: for in this
manner, a man proceeds to the height of sin, The degrees in sin.
and a reprobate sense. There first arises in his Heart an idle and wandering
thought of some unlawful thing; 1 A motion to sin.
as of Lust, Covetousness, Pride, Malice, profaning the Sabbath, Cozening, 2
The Will enticed.
and circumventing his Brother; and such like. Secondly, it begins to allure,
entice, and confer with the Will. 3 Delight.
Thirdly, the Will does, as it were, take it by the hand, and is tickled,
pleased, 4 Consent.
and delighted with it. Then follows Consent: 5 Practice.
Consent sets the affections on foot, and plots the accomplishment and practice
of it; 6 Pleasure.
and sin practiced with pleasure, brings Custom. Custom sharpens a man's
wit, and makes him look about, 7 Custom.
how to excuse it: From excusing sin, 8 Excusing.
he grows to defend it: Defense of sin, makes him obstinate, and resolved
to continue in it: 9 Defending.
Obstinatenesse begets boasting, and glorying in it. And if a man once become
impudent, and take a pride in sinning, 10 Continuance.
there presently follows a brazen Brow, 11 Boasting.
and whorish forehead, an iron sinew in the neck, a heart as hard as the
nether Millstone, a seared Conscience, 12 A reprobate sense.
and a reprobate sense. These are the steps, by which a man rises into the
Seat of the scornful: And upon the top of these stayres, Sin sits in the
greatest triumph and soveraigntie; and banisheth out of a man's heart, all fear
of God, love to his Ministers, and zeal unto his Word.

A fourth Let and hinderance from hearing Gods Word, Let 4.
and yielding entire obedience unto it, A conceit, that Gods Law, like men's
Laws, takes hold of, and will condemn only notorious sinners.
is a very pestilent and politic conceit, which possesses the hearts of very
many; whereby they are persuaded, That Laws divine are but like humane or men's
constitutions: As these execute none, but chief Malefactors; so these Decrees
of God will at last condemn none, but infamous and notorious sinners. And
therefore, if they be but petty Offenders, or only maintain but one sweet
sin in themselves; if they be not of the worst sort, though they be not so
forward hearers of Sermons, so Scripture-wise, or hold such a strict course of
holiness in their conversation: yet they think with themselves, their case is
good enough, and that it will go well enough with them at last. Hence it is,
that they are cold, and careless, in esteeming of hearing, and conforming
themselves to the Ministry of the Word. But let no man deceive himself: The
destruction of the negligent hearer of the Word of God, and the disobedient to
the Gospel of Christ Jesus, This Let is removed, Mat. 11. 23, 24.
shall be as the destruction of * Sodom, and far more grievous. He that lies
and delights in any one known sin, of which his Conscience is convicted, is
in a fearful case. Heb. 11. 6.
Without faith, it is impossible to please God: Heb. 12. 14.
and, Without holiness, no man shall see the face of the Lord. And none has
either faith, or holiness, without saving knowledge out of Gods Book. Without
the New Birth, and continuance in grace unto the end, no man shall be saved:
And, sincere obedience to a constant and conscionable Ministry of the Word,
is a means both to beget, nourish, and continue saving grace. And, let men's
conceits be what they will; as sure it is, as God is in Heaven, not one jot or
tittle of all the Plagues and Curses registered in Gods Law, but shall be
severely executed upon all ignorant and unrepentant sinners, Psalm. 88. 21.
and poured upon the hairie scalpe of all such as go on still in their
wickedness.

A fifth Let and hinderance of hearing the Word of God, Let 5.
is an excessive and immoderate delight, An eager pursuit of a man's sweet sin.
and an eager and earnest pursuit of the sinful pleasures of a man's sweet
sin. What is meant by a sweet sin. Quemadmodum nemo tam perditus, aut
flagitiosus invenitur: quin ab aliquo vitio magis quam caeteris abhorreat; sic
nemo tantae sanctitatis est, quin ad unum aliquod peccatum, quam ad caetera
propenstor sit. Cart. p. 1262.
By a man's sweet sin, I mean that, which his corrupt nature has singled
out, and made special choice of, to follow and feed upon, with greatest
delight and sensual sweetness; which, by custom and continuance, has taken
deepest root and surest hold in his heart: upon which, all his affections and
desires are carried with sharpest edge, heat, and headlongnesse; and to which,
he makes all occasions and circumstances, friends and acquaintance, Religion
and Conscience, all the powers both of soul and body, and outward estate,
serviceable and contributorie, as to that which chiefly rules and reigns in
him. This sweet sin, in some, is Worldliness, Earthly-mindednesse, and
Covetousness: In others, it is Voluptuousness, Lust, and Uncleanness; Pride,
Pleasures, Drunkenness, or such like. Now certain it is, carnal, profane,
and unregenerate men, do many times prefer the pleasures of their sweet and
most delightful sin, before the comforts of Gods House, the Congregation of
the Saints, and the preciousnesse of the Word preached. And therefore,
howsoever they may ordinarily come to Sermons, (though it be rather for
fashion, and of custom, than with hearty and true devotion) yet if some
special gain and profit be to be laid hold upon at that time; if some
extraordinary pleasure, feasting, pastime, and company be then to be enjoyed;
they make no Conscience to turn their backs upon the House of God, and the
Ministry of the Word, even upon the Sabbath day: so, for a little sinful
pleasure, or worldly contentment, wretchedly abandoning Gods holy Ordinance,
and the necessary means of their own salvation.

That many men are thus wickedly hindered from hearing the Word of God, Math.
22.
appears in Math. Luke 14.
22. and Luke 14. The glorious magnificence, and rich comforts of heavenly
Cheer in the House of God, The Parable of the great Supper let out by 3.
circumstances.
are notably set out unto us there, by diverse circumstances, in the Parable of
the great Feast. 1
First, it was a Wedding Feast; which usually is full of joy, comfort, and
great solemnity. 2
Secondly, it was made by a King; and therefore, like unto himself, Royal,
and Princely, in plenty and variety, answerable to his State and Greatness. 3
Thirdly, it was made at the Marriage of a Kings son; which would make it yet
far more sumptuous, full of pomp, and noble entertainment, than if it had
been for a servant, friend, or ordinary person.

By all this, What is meant by it.
is meant the Ministry of the Word, and Gospel of Christ Jesus; wherewith
every faithful man is feasted, made Gods son, and married to Christ himself
for ever, Hos. 2. 19.
in righteousness and in judgment, in mercy and in compassion. This Feast
being in full readiness, Servants are sent out, to invite Guests: But for all
the glory, comfort, and magnificence prepared for them, in this Wedding, and
Royal Feast; many refuse to come, Luke 14. 18.
and make excuse: One says; he has bought a Farm, and must needs go to see
it: another has bought five Yoke of Oxen, 19.
and goes to prove them: another has married a Wife, 20.
and therefore he cannot come: Math. 22. 5.
another is busied about his Merchandise, buying and selling, and can hardly
spare so much time.

Thus one sinful delight or other, profit, pleasure, company, or the like,
do many times stay and hinder profane and worldly men from hearing the Word
of God, and from this spiritual and heavenly Feast in his House; whereby their
souls might be satisfied, Psalm. 63. 5.
as it were with marrow and fatness, with the comforts of grace, and a taste
of the joys of Heaven. It is very strange, that any man should be so bloody
and cruel to his own soul; that, whereas by the breaking of the Word of Life
unto him in such places as this, he might have it furnished with spiritual
strength, toward everlasting life: yet for some earthly pelf, and temporal
pleasure, absenting himself, he suffers it to starve in ignorance and
profaneness; the immediate and certain passages to eternal death.

Let a man imagine with himself, A counter-poyson against this.
when he purposes and resolves to absent himself from a Sermon, that he
lays, as it were, in the one Scale of the Weights, the glorious Majesty,
presence, and honor of God; the comfort, happiness, and salvation of his own
Soul: and in the other, a little wretched pleasure, or profit; and so suffers
this miserable Vanity to weigh down so infinite a Majesty.

For, 1 Gods House is the Presence. Chamber of the King of Glory.
first, Gods House, where his Word is faithfully preached, is, as it were, the
Presence Chamber of the everlasting King of Glory. Here he sits in a Chair of
State, with more special and eminent Power and Majesty, as anciently he sat
between the Cherubins.

Secondly, 2 Christ is there. Math. 18. 20.
Christ himself is here present: For, Wheresoever two or three are gathered
together in his Name, he is in the midst of them. And so he is said, to walk
in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks; Rev. 1. 12.
and with special power and providence to direct and guide these holy
Exercises.

Thirdly, 3 The Spirit is there.
the holy Spirit of God is present, in our Assemblies; plentifully shedding
into the hearts of the faithful, the rich Treasures of Wisdom and Grace.

Fourthly, 4 The Angels are there. 1 Cor. 11. 10.
the blessed Angels of God are here; as appears, 1 Cor. 11. 10. not only to
do service unto the Lord, unto the Elect, and unto his Ministry; but also,
after a sort, to solace and rejoice themselves in the beauty of Gods House, 1
Pet. 1. 12.
and in the Mysteries published in the Gospel: as appears, 1 Pet. 1. 12.

Fifthly, 5 The Saints are there. Psalm. 16. 3.
Gods holy Saints here present themselves; in whom, all our delight and comfort
ought to be: for they only are truly excellent, allied unto Christ, and heirs
of Heaven.

Lastly, 6 The effect of the Word to the unconverted.
here alone ordinarily are to be had Blessings, Life, and Salvation: for the
Word preached is the ordinary means to beget the unconverted unto God; by
inlightening their eyes, opening their ears, softening their hearts, planting
faith in their souls, and holiness in their conversations: so that, of the
children of wrath, they become the sons of God. 2 Cor. 5. 18. Ephesians. 6. 15.
Act. 14. 3. and 20. 32.
Hence it is, that it is called, a Ministry of Reconciliation, of Peace; a
Word of Grace; of Salvation, and of Life.

If a man be already converted, The benefit of it to Converts.
and in the state of grace, he may receive these Blessings by it: It is a
powerful means of the Spirit,

To increase his knowledge in heavenly things, 1 It increases their knowledge.
and the affairs of the Soul; by daily clearing his judgment from ignorance
and error, by informing it with spiritual wisdom, and all necessary truths,
and needful knowledge.

To add strength, 2 Their faith.
and vigor, and increase unto his faith; that he may grow and proceed, from
the infancy and weakness in Christianity, to tallnesse and perfection in
Christ.

To preserve him from luke-warmenesse, 3 It preserves them from luke-warmenesse.
worldliness, and security; to recall him from his wanderings and strayings
out of the way of sincerity; to settle, comfort, and confirm him in a godly
course.

To prevent his falls, 4 It prevents relapses.
and relapses; because by it he is furnished with Christian armor, against
temptations? he is resolved in all doubts, and cases of Conscience; he is
admonished of all crooked ways, occasions, and down-falls to iniquity.

To reclaim him from backslidings; 5 It recovers them, being fallen.
to raise and recover him out of falls, and to restore him to his first love;
by discovering unto him the foulness and danger of sin, the power of his
own infirmities, the bitter root of Original sin, the pestilent and
impoysoned fruits thereof; and by daily urging the blessings of true
repentance, and the practice of a good Conscience.

Most absolutely to guide and conduct him in the way of righteousness, 6 It
will ^uide them aright in all their ways.
and whole course of Christianity; to furnish him with zeal and uprightness
in all holy duties and services of God; with faithfulness and conscience, in
the discharge and executions of his calling; with holy meditations, when he is
alone; with harmless behavior, and Light of good example in company, and
amongst others; with wisdom and care, ever entirely to sanctify the Sabbath,
and to teach and pray with his family. Mark now, I beseech you; since the
Ministry of the Word is ever graced with so glorious presence, and such
incomparable blessings as I have now reckoned up unto you; he that turns his
back upon a Sermon, for the enjoying of profit, pleasures, pastime, company,
feasting, or any other worldly and by-respect; he wilfully forsakes the
salvation of his own soul, he casts behind him all these happy blessings and
comforts, tendered unto him by the Ministry of the Word; he throws himself
desperately out of the presence of God Almighty, Christ Jesus, the Holy Spirit,
his blessed Angels, the congregation of Saints, into the power and clutches of
Satan, into the company of wicked and profane men, upon the just indignation
and revenge of all the creatures, upon the wrath and curse of God, and the
shipwreck of a good conscience. Take heed then I beseech you, how you be
drawn by any worldly affairs from the hearing of the Word, especially on the
Sabbath day, lest thereby you make it plain, that you prefer your own
particular, before the glory of God; earthly gain, before a Crown of
immortality; a little vanishing pleasure, before the endless joys of heaven;
and that ye yet lie and delight in one sweet sin or other, which keeps all
saving grace out of your souls.

A sixth let and hinderance from hearing the Word of God, Let 6.
are certain profane and unwarrantable persuasions and conceits, Carnal
conceits and objections.
which are entertained and harbored in the hearts of ignorant and wilful
people.

Some of them think with themselves that there is no such great need of
following Sermons, Object.
and frequenting holy assemblies, May we not be saved without hearing the Word
preached?
especially if at the same time they be not ungodly bufied and exercised at
home; and therefore they ask; What can we not save our souls, and come to
heaven, unless we trudge and trot so often to Church? Have we not the Bible,
and other good books at home to read upon? Can we not pray and praise God at
home?

They might as well ask; Answ.
Can we not have a harvest unless we have a seed time, No more than we can
reap without sowing, or live without food.
and rain, yea, both the former and the latter rain? Or can we not live
except we have meat? Certainly no. No more can any man be truly sanctified and
saved, nor live either the life of grace here, or expect the life of glory
hereafter, unless he follow the ordinary means appointed and sanctified by
God for his salvation: Except he submit himself to that policy and order which
God with great wisdom has established in his Church. Simile.
Would a man be taken for a good subject, who should peevishly oppose himself
against a law agreed upon and commanded by the King and State, for the great
good of the Commonwealth? God himself has appointed a public Ministry in
the Church; Ephesians 4. 11, 12.
Pastors and teachers for the gathering of the Saints, and all that belong to
life; and is it fit that any private exercise should cross Gods public
ordinances? No; It is both inconvenient and wicked, and Gods blessing is never
to be looked for, upon any action and exercise, though never so good in it
self, if his will be not obeyed.

I, Object. 2.
but some will say; It is good indeed sometimes now and then to hear a Sermon;
Frequent preaching is not so necessary.
but what needs so much preaching, and Sermon upon Sermon; Would they have us
Saints and Angels upon earth?

Wretched is that man which is weary of the Word of life. Answ.
And he has no true taste of holy things, It is a sign of a graceless heart
to loath the heavenly Manna.
which loathes this spiritual Manna, though never so often reigned from heaven.
There is no saving and true knowledge of God in that man, who desires not to
grow in grace, and in the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ. Simile.
Would we not think him mad and distracted that should thus reason against his
own life? I hope I have eaten meat enough heretofore, and furnished my self
with sufficient strength, so that I now need no more, and therefore I will
neither eat nor drink more while I live. Even just so does he reason and plead
against the life of his soul, who complains of too much preaching, and too
many Sermons. David, that blessed King, and holy Prophet, who was advanced both
in knowledge and holiness, above the ordinary reach and perfection of men, and
lived as an Angel upon earth; yet he acknowledges himself greatly to stand
in need of stirring up, by means ordained of God for that end. Psalm. 84.
As we may gather out of Psalm. 84. and in many other places. In that Psalm he
makes a most grievous and mournful complaint, that he is debarred and banished
from all access unto the public worship and service of God; holding himself
in this respect more miserable than some of the bruit creatures, which had
liberty to build their nests, and lay their young near the Altars of the Lord;
which benefit he could not now enjoy. Now if this man of God so longed and
labored after the means of grace and comfort, what ought those to do, who
are of little or no faith; who are but Novices and petties in the School of
Christ; who are but babes in Christianity, or utterly without grace?

I, Object. 3.
but our forefathers (will others say) were never troubled with so many
Sermons, Our forefathers had no preaching, yet are saved.
and yet we hope they are well, and in Heaven.

Our forefathers wanted the means, Answ.
and that full glorious Noone-tide of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Their
condemnation shall be easier.
which we by the grace and mercy of God enjoy. And therefore whosoever of them
perished without them, shall certainly be beaten with fewer stripes, than those
that shut their eyes against the fair and blessed Sunshine of Gods holy
truth, which is shed round about us, and if it be hid, 2 Cor 43, 4.
it is hid only to those that perish, in whom the God of this world has
blinded the eyes of their mind. Besides, 2 We are bound to bless God, who
has dealt more graciously with us.
if it so pleased the Lord in his just and secret judgment to suffer some of
our forefathers to live and die under the tyranny and darkness of Antichrist;
how much are we bound to bless God, that we are borne and brought up in the
light of the Gospel; and what heavy plagues and great damnation do we bring
upon our selves, if we neglect or despise so great salvation.

I, Object. 4.
but yet further, (will some say) we have lived some of us forty, some
thirty, some twenty years, without so much preaching, and yet have holden
good credit and reputation in the world, and prospered in our ways, would you
now have us so forward in running to Sermons?

Strange it is to see how wise the simplest are in matters of the world, Answ.
about their temporal state, but how simple and blind the wisest worldlings
are in the affairs of Heaven, and about their greatest, spiritual, and
eternal good. Let us suppose a man to have lived long in a poor Cottage, and
now at length to have some great and rich Lordship befallen him; do you think
he would reason thus: Why, I have lived some thirty or forty yeer^^ now
already in this low estate with good conte^^^ent, and credit, amongst my
neighbors; and therefore here I will rest, the rest of my days; I am too old
now, to change my former estate? Would such a fool as this, be found in a
whole Country? And yet many Countries are full of such fools, in respect of
spiritual advancement, and the salvation of their souls. Me thinks, those
that have long lived in ignorance, and blindness, should rather conclude thus:
Have I thus long and so fearfully lived without God in the World, without
knowledge of his Truth, faith in Christ, and Conscience of my ways? Oh, then
it is more than high time now at length to awake out of sleep, and to open
mine eyes, and to embrace this glorious Sunshine of the Gospel, which the Lord
of his great mercy has brought unto me, that so I may be enlightened to
eternal life.

As for prospering in the World, that is no mark of a good soul; nay, it is
commonly the Let of the wicked, not to be plagued like other men, but to bring
their enterprises to pass, Psalm 73. Nay, yet further: There is no greater
Curse can befall any man, than to prosper in the World, and be out of the way
to Heaven.

I, Object. 5.
but (will others say) to the attaining of eternal life, What needs so much
ado? The whole duty of man is soon learned.
what needs so much ado, so much preaching, catechizing, expounding,
conferring, meditating, teaching and praying with our families, which are so
much and so often urged upon us? When all comes to all, this is the sum and
end of all; To fear God, and keep his Comm^^dements; That we love God above
all, and our neigh^^^ as our selves: And we hope we can do this, without all
this ado.

To fear God, Answ.
and keep his Commandments, (which is the whole duty of man, It is soon
said, not so soon done.
as the Preacher speaks in his last chapter) and to love God above all,
Eccles. 12. 13. Math. 22. 40.
and our neighbors as our selves; ( upon which hangs the whole Law and the
Prophets, as Christ tells us, Math. 22.) are indeed soon spoken, but not so
easily, truly learned; and most hardly, sincerely practiced. Is it enough,
Simile.
think you, to make a man a good Carpenter, or Mason, to say; That, that is
soon learned; and, I know as much as the best workman can teach or tell me: To
build an House, is nothing but to lay the foundation, to rear the walls,
Simile.
and cover it with a Roose? Is it enough to make a good Husbandman, to say; I
know as much as the best Husbandman can teach me; for Husbandry is nothing
else, but to sow and reap? Is it enough to make a good Preacher, to say; It
is no such great matter, Simile.
to make a Sermon; I know as much in that point, as the best Scholar amongst
them can tell me: To preach, is nothing else but to expound the Text, gather
Doctrines, and make use and application to the hearts and consciences of the
hearers? But it would be long before these idle and empty vaunts would build
Houses, fill Barnes, or save Souls. There is far more required to these
businesses, than so: There is to be undergone much toil and labor, much care
and trouble, expense and exercise, before any of these works can be rightly
accomplished. It is even so in the great work of salvation, and the attainment
of Heaven. The state of grace, and trade of Christianity, is not so easily
purchased and practiced. There goes more to saving of a soul, than bold and
ignorant brags: than to say; If that be all, I hope I can quickly and easily
learn to love God above all, and my neighbor as my self: For before these,
Things required, before a man can love God or man.
there goes many things; as, knowledge of Gods will, and Word; a through view of
our own misery and corruptions, in the glass of the Law; strange agonies, and
sore pangs in the newbirth, and sorrow for sin, refreshings and coolings by
the mercies of God, and merits of Christ; faith, repentance, sanctification, a
blessed and holy change in the whole man, both body, soul, and spirit. And
then follows new obedience; which consists in the uprightness and sincerity
of our own hearts; a conscionable and charitable carriage toward our
neighbors, and a zealous constancy in all religious duties and right service of
God: How our service to God must be qualified.
which must be universal, in respect of the object; that is, we must walk in
all his Commandments: total, in respect of the subject; that is, we must
serve him in all the powers of our soul, and parts of our body; in our
thoughts, words, and actions: In all which things, and holy courses, if a man
be not particularly instructed, experienced, and practiced, his love of God and
his neighbor is but in word and tongue, not in deed and truth. A man, if he be
disposed, may quickly perceive and discern the truth or hollownesse of his
heart in this point. God has straightly commanded an entire sanctification and
keeping holy of the Sabbath. A trial of our love to God.
Let a man then consider, if he suffer himself to be drawn away from holy
Exercise on that day, by pleasures, profit, pastime, company, ease, idleness,
or other worldly occasions; why, then he preferres mere vanities, and the
desires of his own heart, before the glory and honor of God; and so does not
love God above all. The true love of a man's self, does chiefly and principally
consist in furnishing himself with saving knowledge, sincerity of heart,
godliness of life, a good Conscience, and spiritual comfort, against he come
to Judgment. Now, if he love his neighbor as himself, A trial of our love
to our neighbor.
he is not still talking with him of worldly matters; but especially labors
with him for his conversion, entertainment of grace, and increase in
godliness. If these be not his cares, both for himself and his neighbor, he
truly loves neither. Thus may a man examine himself through all the
Commandments in particular; and see, whether it be so easy to love his
neighbor as himself, and God above all.

I, Object. 6.
but where there is so much preaching, there is much disquietnesse and
coffeehouse: Tumults and divisions, disquietnesse and coffeehouse
accompanies your preaching.
for men are abridged of their former ancient pastimes, and pleasures, and
urged unto more strictness of life. When as all was well before, in much
quietness and peace, the preaching of the Word breeds new stirs and contrary
affections in men.

No marvel, Answ.
though there be much struggling and striving, There is good reason for it.
Luke 11. 21, 22.
great noise and stir, before the strong man in the Gospel can be dis-armed
and dispossessed of his Holds; that is, before Satan, having long reigned in
the hearts, Satan hinders the Word.
and sat in the Consciences of ignorant and profane men, will be cast out, by
the Preaching and Power of the Word. This conquest costs full dear; it will
not be had, without the loss of our dearest delights; without shedding the
very hearts-bloud of our beloved and bosome-sinne; which flesh and blood will
not yield unto, without blows and bloodshed. You may assure your self, where
the Light of Gods Truth begins once to peep out, and the power of grace to
work, for the driving away darkness, and subduing profaneness; you shall be
sure ever there to have three fierce and implacable enemies, and opposites, to
start up; Satan, wicked men, and a man's own corruptions. While men lie in
sin, ignorance, and under the shadow of death, Satan lets them alone,
meddles not much with them, never troubles or disquiets them, but procures them
all temporal happiness, and carnal contentments, that can be; (for he knows
full well, if they so continue, they are sure his own, and children of
endless perdition:) But if once, by the power of the Word, they be enlarged
out of the slaverie of sin and death, and lay hold upon salvation, and the
glorious liberty of the Saints; why then he begins to bestirre himself like a
madded and enraged Lion, and labors with all his malice and policy to hinder
and dash such proceedings. And in this Conspiracy, So do wicked men,
he joins unto himself wicked and reprobate men, to rail, revile, and rage
against sincerity: And a m^ns own corruptions.
I, and besides, a man's own corruption, and sinful flesh, does fret and fume,
when it feels it self curbed and snaffled by the Law of the Spirit.

The Gospel indeed is a Gospel of Peace: Ephesians. 6. 15.
But of what Peace? Of Peace with God, with good men, and a man's own
Conscience; of the Peace that passes all understanding: But it ever proclaims
open war against wickedness, profaneness, and corruptions; it will have no
peace with impiety, carnal security, and rebellion unto the Laws of God.
Hence it is, that our Savior tells us in the Gospel, Luke 12. 49.
that he came not to send Peace into the Earth; Math. 10. 34.
but rather, Fire, Debate, and the Sword: that is, Luke 12. 51.
Wheresoever his Word is published powerfully, and conscionably, with fruit and
effect upon the souls of his elect; there, by accident (as they say) it
stirs up much rage and bitter opposition against Gods children. For, as there
is no true inward peace unto the wicked; Isa. 42. 28.
so, in this World, there is no outward peace unto the righteous: but commonly
they are still exercised with one cross and temptation, or other; either the
Devil, or wicked men, are still plotting or practicing mischief and misery
against them.

But you must conceive, The Gospel is not the cause of troubles, but men's
corruptions.
that the disquietnesses and troubles that arise at the preaching of the Word,
are not caused by it, but by men's corruptions. Would any man think, that Saint
Paul, or his Preaching, were in fault, because there was much ado, and an
hurly-burly almost wheresoever he came; and not rather the wicked Infidels,
which could not endure to have their sins reproved? Neither the Sower, nor
the Seed, Math. 13. are to be blamed, that it does not prosper and fructify;
Math. 13. 4, 5, 7, 12.
it is the ground that is only in fault: which is either stony, or thornie,
or barren; or else, it is the envious man, that sows Tares: The Sower does
only his duty, and the Seed is pure and precious; it is men's corruptions, and
profane hearts, that causes all the stir. Amongst four kinds of Grounds,
there is but one at the most (as appears in the Parable of the Sower, Math.
13.) in which the immortal Seed of the Word takes root, prospers, and
fructifies: Only the good and honest heart profits by Preaching; to all
others, it is the savor of death unto death: And whom it does not humble, it
hardneth; whom it makes not so meek as a Lamb, and like a little Child in
humility, it makes as fierce and furious as a Lion, against the power of grace
wrought in others, and against the profession and practice of sincerity. No
marvel then, though where the Word of Truth begins to bear sway, there be
many times much ado, and resistance by carnal and profane men.

I, Object. 7.
but (will some say) this Word is brought unto us by weak and frail men; The
Word is brought to us by weak, sometimes by wicked men.
sometimes by those, who are of notorious and infamous life and conversation:
and therefore we have less heart to believe and obey them. If we had the
Word published by an Angel, or an Apostle, or some more excellent and powerful
means, and Ambassadors, we should more easily and willingly hear, believe,
and obey them.

It is Gods great mercy unto us, Answ. 1.
that it pleases him so far to condescend to our infirmity, It is Gods
goodness, to speak to us by men, like to our selves.
as to open unto us the rich Treasures of his heavenly Word, by men of the same
condition and frailty, and subject to the same passions with our selves. He
might by terrible and astonishing Voices, out of Lightnings, Thunders, and
Earthquakes, able to break the hardest Rocks, and stony Mountains, Exodus 20.
19.
(as he did in the giving of the Law) force us to obedience: Or he might send
his Angels, armed with power and puissance, to execute present vengeance upon
all those which do not presently submit themselves to the Scepter of his
Christ, and Soveraigntie of his Word. But in great mercy and compassion unto
us, he chooses rather to teach us by a still and soft Voice; by a more fair,
familiar, and fit instruction for us; even by such as our selves, of our own
nature, frailty, and condition.

Here in he shows his great love unto us, 2 It is his love so to honor
mankind, as to make men his Ambassadors.
in that he vouchsafes to put his fearful and glorious Word into the mouth
of a mortal and sinful man. What an honor and advancement is it unto man's
nature, unto mankind, that the high and mighty God of Heaven and Earth should
single them out for so glorious a service; sanctify their Tongues, to deliver
his good pleasure, and news of salvation unto the sons of men? That he
should acquaint and put them in trust with such high mysteries, and heavenly
matters, of so sovereign and saving use, 1 Timothy 4 16.
both to themselves and others?

But it may be, besides common frailty and infirmity, the Minister and
Messenger of the Word is of lewd and profane life, and condition.

If he be, more is the pity; the scandal of the Ministry is the greater,
and his own damnation more smarting and terrible. See Psalm. 50. 16, 17, etc.
The Ministers profaneness is no privilege of disobedience to the Word.
But notwithstanding, the profaneness of the Preacher is no privilege to the
hearer, either of negligence or disobedience. He that turns his ear from
hearing of the Law truly preached (though by a Pharise) even his prayer is
abominable, Prove. 28. 9.
Prove. 28. 9. He that despises the Word, shall be destroyed, Prove. Prove. 13.
13.
13. 13. He that obeys not the Son, in his Ministers lawfully sent, though
not sanctified themselves, John 3. 36.
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Christ himself, in
the Gospel; bids his followers to observe and do whatsoever they were bid by
the Scribes and Pharisees, which sat in Moses Chair; Math. 23. 2, 3.
but not to do after their works; for they said* and did not. Every Minister
is to be heard, received, and followed, so far as he follows and delivers to
the Church the Truth of God, and Doctrine of the Apostles. For therein he is an
Angel of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7.
and Ambassador in the stead of Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
And all the parts of the Ministry in his hand (he following the Word) shall
as certainly be accomplished, as if an Angel, or Christ from Heaven should
presently and potently execute them. See Ecclus. 37. 18.
If he denounce Judgments against sin, it is as if the voice of God
himself should be heard from Heaven; as if the Lion of the Tribe of Judah
should roar. If he pour the Oil of comfort into a wounded and distressed
Conscience, it is as sure and certain, as soft and sweet to the believing
soul, as if the Angels should comfort him, Luke 22. 43.
as they did Christ in his Agony; or, as if Christ himself should mercifully
reach out his glorious hand, through the Clouds, and bind up his broken heart
and bruised Conscience with a Plaster of his own precious Blood. If he
instruct, admonish, reprove, exhort, persuade, from ground and warrant out of
the Word; it is all one, as if Christ himself should do it: Luke 10. 16.
who has said; He that hears you, hears me.

Let men therefore pretend what they will; if they will not hear, believe, and
obey the Lord, speaking in the Ministry of the Word, though the means and
Messengers be never so base and vile, frail, weak, and sinful. Let an Angel
come from Heaven, a Devil from Hell, or a man from the dead; yet would they
not believe. For, if a man were truly humbled, he would tremble at Gods Word,
of whomsoever he heard it. If he had a spiritual taste, he would relish the
heavenly food, whosoever ministered it. If he had Gods holy Spirit, he would
know and acknowledge his Sword, which is the Word of God, in whose hand soever
he saw it. And until he have this spirit, a spiritual taste, and an humble
heart, he will not believe; especially with effect, fruit, and practice, let
him pretend whatsoever he will; neither Angels, nor men; dead, nor living;
Moses, nor the Prophets; Peter, nor Paul; not Christ, nor God himself; if the
one were living again upon Earth, or the other would be pleased, or it were
possible, to speak immediately to him.

For conclusion of this Point, let us know, That the Ministry of the Word is
Gods Ordinance; which depends not upon the worthiness of him who delivers
it; neither is it made void and uneffectuall, by his weakness and
wickedness: but it has it virtue, force, and power from the blessing of God,
and from the inward operation of his Spirit; who applies it to the hearts and
consciences of men, and thereby illuminates their understandings, begets
faith in them, See Downam^ C. H. page 362.
and all sanctifying and saving graces.

I, Object. 8.
but (will some say) it is a very wearisome, tyring, This course is wearisome.
and tedious thing, to be tied to the hearing of so many Sermons, to meditate
of them, confer of them with our neighbors, teach them our families, and
practice them; which are urged upon us, as necessary Christian duties.

It is a strange thing, Answ.
and sore case, that some men will not be persuaded to take half so much
pains to go to Heaven, Many will not take such pains to go to Heaven, as
others do to go to Hell.
and eternal Rest, as many thousands to go to Hell, and everlasting torment.
How many tire and torture themselves with carke and care, with much toil and
travel, to heap up those riches, which in the mean time are matter of much
vexation unto them; and hereafter will be witnesses against them, and eat
their flesh as it were fire, Jam. 5. 3.
as James speaks? How many spend their wits, their spirits, their time, that
they may become somebody in the World, and climb by indirect and unlawful
means, and steps unto those high places, from whence hereafter they must be
hurled with greater confusion, and a more fearful downe-fall, into the Pit of
Hell? How many waste their wealth, weaken their strength, consume their marrow,
fill their bones with rottenness, and their bodies with diseases, with lust
and uncleanness, with following the Whorish woman, Prove. 2. 18.
whose paths lead unto the dead; with tarrying long at the Wine, and pouring in
of strong Drink: for which, at length, they shall be sure to be filled with
drunkenness, and with sorrow, even with the Cup of destruction, and trembling;
they shall drink of it deep and large, and wring it out to the dregs? How
unwearied have Idolaters ever been in the wicked worship of their false gods?
And many Heretics, in the false worship of the true God? In thrusting toward
Hell, they neither spared cost, nor charge; loss, nor labor: They have been
prodigal both of lives, and living; of blood, and children. You know, amongst
the Jews, some mingled the rufull cries of their dearest children with Music
and melody, lest they should be moved to compassion, while they were cast into
the fire, to be burned up in sacrifice unto the Idol Moloch. Mat. 23. 15.
Scribes and Pharisees compass Sea and Land, 1 King. 18. 28.
to make a Proselyte. Baals Priests lanced and cut their flesh before their
Idol, until the blood gushed out. The blinded Papists at this day whip
themselves, waste their goods, and consume their bodies with wearisome
Pilgrimages, to see some counterfeit Relics, and rotten Bones, or to visit
accursed Idols, and Popish Saints: Nay, some of them transported with a more
bloody rage, and furious spirit of Antichrist, suffer as it were with
senselessness, with desperate and damned boldness, most horrible and exquisite
torments, for butchering of Kings; for which they hope to merit Heaven, and to
sail through a Sea of Royal blood to the Haven of endless rest; though
indeed and truth, they justly light short, and sink, before they are aware,
into the deepest Lake of the hottest fire, and most consuming flame of Hell.
Now, I pray you, shall these services of Satan be followed and pursued with
such heat and eagerness, with such pains and patiencie of all miseries and
vexations; and shall not the Lords own Ordinances, and the true worship of the
true God have power to make us step out of our doors with patience, and
pleasure, to hear the Lords will revealed unto us, to receive salvation to our
souls, and a Crown of immortality to our heads? Can some be content to toil
day after day, fare hard, break their sleep, eat the Bread of carfulness,
and all to heap up a little wealth, perhaps, with the loss of their own
souls, and sometimes they scarce know for whom; and shall not we with joy and
cheerfulness pass through holy Exercises, for the enriching of our souls,
wherein true and lasting comfort is only to be found, and whereby we may lay
up for our selves Treasures in Heaven, durable Riches, a Bag that cannot wax
old, a Treasure that can never fail, Prove. 8. 18. Luke 12. 33. unmixed joys,
endless peace, and blessed immortality, presently to be entered upon after
death, and then to be enjoyed for ever and ever? Shall rebellious Superstition,
and the Doctrine of Devils, and killing Kings, harden the Papists against any
crosses, and tortures; and shall we be tired with the peaceable Exercises of
sound and saving Religion? God forbid. In whom soever the true love of God and
Christ has taken up the heart, there their Gospel, and Word, and services are
sweeter and more tastfull than all outward delights. Little touch of Religion,
or sense of Salvation has he, that comes unto with unchearefulnesse, and
stays with weariness at the Ministry of the Word.

I, Object. 9.
but (will some say) it was never good World since so much preaching came
amongst us; There was never good world since preaching came in.
when there was less preaching, there was more plenty: and therefore, it
seems, there is little good in it. Since this new Religion was on foot, (for
so some ignorantly and maliciously call it, though it be as old as God
himself, whose eternal Truth it is; as old as the Patriarks and Prophets, as
Christ and his Apostles) there has been (say they) more scarcity of all
things, more Plagues, Famines, strange apparitions, extremity of seasons, and
other Judgments, than ever our forefathers saw, or heard of. Hospitality,
Charity, Pastimes, and Plenty were banished with the old Religion; for so
they call the bloody and idolatrous Heresy of Popery.

This has ever been the complaint of Idolaters, Answ.
and the wicked, This has always been the complaint of Idolaters.
against the Truth of God; as it is now of the Papists and profane men amongst
us, against the glorious Light of the Gospel, that shines round about us. When
Jeremy, chap. 44. had reproved the Jews, and denounced Gods Judgments against
them for their Idolatry, they answer him thus, in verse. 16. Mark that, I
befeech you; for it is the very language of the Papists at this day.
The word that thou have spoken unto us in the Name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee; but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our mouth: as,
to burn incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto
her, as we have done, both we and our fathers, our Kings and our Princes, in
the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; for then had we plenty
of victuals, and were well, and felt no evil. But since we left off to burn
incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her, we
have had scarceness of all things, and have bin consumed by the sword, and by
the famine. The very same complaint was made of the wicked Heathens and
Infidels, at the first plantation of Christian Religion among the Gentiles.
Apologetico. Vid. Calv. in Ier. 330.
Tertullian, an ancient Father, tells us in his time; If there were any
inundation and overflowing of Tibris, a great River in Rome; if there were any
extraordinary and uncouth Hayle, or Frost, or any other misery or calamity;
all the fault was presently laid on Christ, and the Christian Religion.

It appears also by Austin, Austin. Epist. 121.
another ancient Father, in his 122. Epistle, that there were wicked complaints
and murmurings against the Christian Faith, in his time; the Infidels were
still crying, that before the Doctrine of Christ was published to the World,
mankind was not vexed and distressed with so many troubles and garboyles. To
which, the good Father does there excellently answer; Out of Luke 12. 47, 48.
easily, says he, may they thence take their answer: Luke 12. 47, 48.
The servant that knew not his Masters will, and yet did commit things worthy
of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes; but he that knew his Masters
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes.

Hence then may we clearly see the reason why our Times, Our Times deserve
greater judgment, than the former Times of ignorance, for three reasons.
in all reason, should be more visited with Judgments, than former days of
ignorance.

1 Because that the Light of the Gospel is come amongst us; John 3. 19, 20.
and many love Darkness rather than that Light, because their deeds are evil:
for every man that does evil, hates the Light, neither comes to the Light,
lest his deeds should be reproved.

2 Because the Gospel is not so thankefully received and entertained, as so
excellent a Blessing and precious a Treasure ought to be.

3 Many that hear it, live not after it: Perhaps, only make a show of
godliness; but deny the power thereof, in their lives and conversations. So,
that negligence and disobedience to the Word of God, is the true cause of those
Judgments and miseries, which are wickedly and wrongfully pretended to be a
cause why they have so little care to attend and obey it.

As for Hospitality in the time of Popery, Popish Hospitality, upon what
grounds.
it did not so much spring from the truth of Religion, as

1. From a superstitious opinion of redeeming their sins, and purchasing
Heaven by almsdeeds.

2. From an excessive cheapnesse of all things, by reason of the scarcity of
money.

3. From the superfluity of the wealth, riches, lands and impropriations, the
price of the blood of souls, which Monasteries, and other religious, or rather
superstitious houses, had immeasurably and unconscionably engrossed and got
into their hands. And when they had engrossed the world to themselves, Simile.
(as one says) they seemed liberal in giving something; like unto some
vainglorious thieves, which having robbed wealthy Merchants, bestow some
pence upon beggars.

As for works of Charity: Certain it is, and a reverend and learned man of our
Church has proved it, and it will more clearly appear hereafter; That the
charitable benevolence, Our times may compare with any for works of charity.
bountiful liberality, large expenses in building and enlarging Colleges,
and erecting Hospitals, Libraries, Free-schooles, and many other works of
charity, and fruits of faith, since the light of the Gospel began to shine
amongst us, may compare with, if not far excel any time of the like or
longer continuance in any age.

As for greater dearth and higher price of all things now, The reasons of the
higher price of things now.
than in former times, it is a clear and plain case, that the reason is; that
the great store and plenty of treasure which is walking in these parts of the
world, far more in these our days, than ever our forefathers have seen in
times past. Who does not understand of the infinite sums of Gold and Silver
which are gathered from the Indies, and other Countries, and so yearly
transported into these coasts? And this is confessed to be the true cause of the
same unancient dearnesse of all things, even in other Kingdoms also, where
Popery is professed. De Rep. lib. 6, cap. 2.
One Bodin, a great Politician of France, tells us, that the common people are
much deceived, who think that the price of Corn, Cattle, and other
necessaries, should hold the same rate it did of old. They do not understand
and consider, that the price of things is more by ten parts (says he) than it
was anciently, by reason of the plenty and abundance of Gold and Silver, which
is brought out of the West Indies into Europe, whereby it comes to pass that
money is less esteemed, for plenty of any thing lessens the estimation of it.

Besides, for our own Country, wise men have observed another particular
reason. For (say they) immediately after our coin, in the time of King Henry
the eighth, the prices of all things generally among all sorts of people rose;
for that they think, that the alteration of the Coin was the chief and
principal cause of an universal dearnesse of things. And why our English
Coin being restored by our late Queen, that blessed Saint of glorious memory,
to its former purity and perfection, the prices of all things fall not back to
their old rate, they give sufficient reasons.

As for pastimes, Plays, and other fearful profanation of the Sabbath, it
is a good sign the power of grace is there planted by the Word, from whence
they are banished and abandoned. They are fit pleasures for Papists, which have
no comfort in the joys above; and well agreeing to the darkness of
superstition. But the light of the Gospel dispels such vanities, and Gods
children have all their pleasures in holy exercises upon the Sabbath day.

This last objection then of Papists and profane men; That the world is worse
since there was so much preaching, is idle, vain, and frivolous.

Many such like conceits, persuasions and objections as these, which I have now
reckoned up unto you, there are abroad in the world, and in the hearts of
profane men, by which they are hindered from hearing the Word of God, with that
heart, zeal and diligence as they ought.

Now I come to acquaint you with some slights and temptations of Satan, Satan's
sleights to hinder the effectual working of the Word.
whereby he labors to bereave us of the blessings and benefits of profitable
hearers, and to hinder the effectual working of the Word in our consciences
and conversations.

A first plot and practice of Satan, He would keep them from the Word.
is to keep men from diligent hearing the Word; If he cannot that way
prevail, in a second place he labors to make the Word in vain, Or else
hinder the power of it
fruitless, and unprofitable unto them. And that he does, by such means as
these:

I If by the grace of God we break through all lets and snares which might
withhold us from holy assemblies, He keeps them from attending.
and hearing of the Word; then Satan, that he might make it uneffectuall for
our conversion and salvation; first, labors to work in us a negligent
carelessness and heedlesnesse, in listening to those things which are delivered,
and that by a kind of heartlesnesse in holy things, by dullness of spirit,
drowsinesse, sleepiness, gazing about, talking, or such like. And such hearers
as these, are never a whit moved or affected with the Word preached, but
remain in the same state as they were before. There is neither passion or
impression wrought upon them for the present, nor any thought of it, profit or
practice afterward.

2 In this depth he uses to fill our minds with barren melancholy, or to make
men post off reproves, and apply them Pharisoically all the while to others.
He fills our minds either with worldly, or else with impertinent unseasonable
thoughts.
But if he cannot speed this way, but that we rouse up and address our selves
to hear the Word of God, as desiring with care and good conscience to profit
thereby: Why then, in a second place, he seeks by all means to fill our
heads and hearts with idle musings, and wandering thoughts, which may distract
and steal away our minds from attending to the Word. And that he does, either
by offering and suggesting to our consideration and memory, the world, and the
vanities thereof, as our affairs and business, our profits and preferments;
those pleasures and delights wherein our corrupt affections find most sensual
sweetness: Or, if this will not prevail; by casting into our minds very
craftily and cunningly, things which in their own nature may be good, honest,
and religious: But because they are thought upon out of due and convenient
time, they deprive us of the profit of the present holy Exercise; which ought
for the time, only and wholly to take up our minds.

If this yet will do no good; 3
but that we mark diligently and attentively, all the while, what the
Minister delivers unto us from God, for our good: why then, in a third place;

1 In some, Some understand not what they hear.
he makes it uneffectuall, by nourishing in them a neglect of reading the
Scriptures, and ignorance in the Principles of Religion: so that though they
attend never so well, and stare the Minister in the face; yet they understand
not the Sermons they hear. Let the younger sort therefore, to prevent this
mischief, acquaint themselves with the Scriptures from their youth; by the
example of Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15. Solomon, Prove. 31. 1, etc. Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.
24. See also Psalm. 119. Prove. 2. 1. And let the misery upon Elies House,
terrify negligent and indulgent Parents; see 1 Samuel 2. 1, 2. etc. In this
depth, the Word is either buried as it is brought forth, or dies at the Church
door.

2 In others, In others, Satan steals it away immediately.
he earnestly endeavors utterly to extinguish and abolish all thought of it;
quite to drive and banish it out of their heads, so soon as they have heard
it. And that thus: If men's hearts be hardened through unbeleefe, or custom in
sinning, and like the Highway in the Parable of the Sower; then the Evil one
comes immediately, and catches the Seed of the Word so soon as it is sown,
and steals it out of the heart. Simile.
As we may see many times Birds hovering greedily after the Sower, to snatch
away the Corn, before it be covered with Earth, or take root in the ground:
even so Satan, the ravenous Crow of Hell, waits all opportunities to pecke up
the Seed of the Word out of the hearts of men, before it sink into their
affections, or fructify in their conversations. Or otherwise, if the World
has stolen men's hearts out of their bodies, Or the World steals away their
hearts.
so that they have no hearts left within them, for matters of Holiness, and
Heaven; but are wholly set upon Gain, and exercised in Covetousness: then
needs not Satan much to bestirre himself; he knows full well, that worldly
Cares will presently choke the Seed of the Word. Mar. 4. 19.
As soon as the Sermon is heard, and ended, and they turned their backs upon
the Church, there comes immediately into their heads whole swarms of earthly
thoughts, and they are presently plunged over head and ears into the cares and
plottings of earthly businesses. So that these men, whom Satan conquers by
this temptation, never meddle with meditation, conference, or talk about the
points handled by the Preacher, by which the Word of God should be better, as
it were, digested, and prepared for practice. Nay, they have no delight at all
to hear others repeat the Sermon; but are very weary of the place and
company, and never pleased, until they bring them back again unto talk of
worldly matters and profane discourses.

If this yet will not serve the turn, 4 He labors to keep them from
practicing what they know.
but that the Word gets within a man, and works upon his understanding; so
that by his diligent hearing of it, meditation, and conference, he furnishes
himself with competent knowledge in the Book of God, and Divine Truth: why
then, Satan casts about another way; which is, to make him to content himself
with a bare fruitless knowledge, without practicing the power of it in his
life and actions; to rest contented with an ability to talk and discourse
only upon points of Religion, and places of Scripture, without inward
sanctification, and subduing the will and affections to new obedience, and
sincere exercise of Christianity. So that, for all his knowledge, he neither
meddles with Conversion, nor mends in his Conversation.

He labors here, I He would hinder their conversion sundry ways.
first, to hinder his Conversion, by planting in his heart a prejudice and
disconceit against,

1 Preaching the Law.

2 Distinguishing several estates of unregenerate men, Math. 13. the three
Reprobate Grounds.

3 The differencing the Children of God, and the Children of the Devil, by
special marks and notes, Math. 5. Psalm. 15. etc.

4 Pressing the Doctrine of Christ, of pressing in at the strait Gate, Luke 13.
24. and 4. 28. And gathering from Scripture those which shall be saved, into a
short sum.

5 And by making him make GOD all of Mercy. See Yates, page 173. and 229.


And mending in his Conversation, 2 Broad, page 100.
by motives unto presumption.

If this will not prevail, 5 He would have them rest in a partial
reformation, and superficial conversion.
but that a man endeavors to draw his knowledge into practice, and fettles
himself with care and conscience to reform his former ways and courses of
iniquity: why then Satan plots and practices, with all the cunning and
policy he has, to make him rest in a slight, superficial, and partial
reformation; to content himself with an unsound, or unsaving conversion. For,
by the way, I must tell you; there may be many conversions, Several unsound
changes.
changes, and alterations in a man, from worse to better; and yet he not truly
sanctified, not become a new creature, nor possessed of the state of grace, and
glorious comforts of true Christians.

1 He may be changed, In these cases, Truth is the truest Touchstone, to
difference a true convert from all states of unregeneration. See Gonge, p. 130.
from a notorious sinner, to a civil honest man: whereas he has been before
furious, and desperate in lewd courses, he may grow more sober and moderate in
his carriage: And yet, for all this, continue in his ignorance, and a mere
stranger to the ways of godliness.

2 From civil honesty, he may pass on to a formal Christianity, and become
an outward Professor; and outwardly do, and perform religious services: and
yet lie in his sins, and want the power of inward sanctification.

3 Yet further, by a general power of the Word, and inferior working of the
Spirit, he may in some sort be outwardly reformed, and in some measure inwardly
enlightened; he may have understanding and joy by the Ministry of the Word,
and may do many things after it, and for sake many sins. Mark. 6. 20.
Herod is said, Mark. 6. to have reverenced John, to have heard him gladly, and
to have done many things: And yet for all this, he may come short of a sound
conversion; if he suffer some maine corruption, some one sweet sin, or
other, to reign in him, which he still feeds upon with delight, and sensual
sweetness; if he do not wholly and entirely resign and give up himself,
his spirit, soul and body to the Lords service, and to please him in all
things; and with repentance, and resolution, forsake all his known sins. For
this is a certain Rule and Principle with See Hieron. p. 158. Marbury in his
Sermon at P. C. Dod upon the Commandments, p. 10. Dike, p. 195. True Watch, p.
61.
Divines; That true turning unto God, and the advised and willing remaining in
the practice of any one evil, which is discovered to a man's Conscience, by the
Light of Gods Word, to be a sin, cannot stand together.

These changes a man may have, and thus many passages, from worse to better;
and yet the great and glorious work of regeneration not wrought upon him. For
where there is a sound conversion, and through-reformation, there a man is
wholly sanctified, Fruits of a true conversion.
and set apart unto God, from the sinful corruption of his natural birth, and
the evil fruits thereof, to serve God in his whole man, both body, foul, and
spirit. He shakes hands with all sins, he sells all for the precious Jewel
of the Gospel; he regards not sin in his heart, but has a regard to all Gods
Commandments.

Now since Satan, that old Serpent, knows full well, that it will never serve
the turn for a man to part but with part of his sins; that his case is
fearful enough, whatsoever good, or good deeds seem to be in him, if he
yield not to the work of the Holy Ghost, for the leaving but of any one known
sin, which ^ighteth against the peace of his Conscience; he knows, that he
has haunt and hold enough in a man's Conscience, and affections; that he has
sufficient interest and claim to his damnation, if he can but keep his sweet
sin in heart, and alive in him. And therefore, when any by the Ministry of
the Word is moved to settle and address himself to a reformation of his
ways, and to redress his former wicked life; he puts in, might and maine, to
preserve in his vigor, and soveraigntie, one secret delightful sin, or
other, at least, in the heart and affection of him, that goes about to reform
himself: He singles out one corruption, or other, to which he finds a man
most addicted; and this he conceales, and fenceth with all the policy that he
has, that if by any means it may escape unrepented of, unmortified, and
unmedled with.

Thus he dealt with Herod: Mark. 6. 17.
Herod, by the preaching of John, reformed himself in many things; but Satan
made sure to keep him his own, by that one sin of Incest. Naaman the
Syrian, no doubt, believed, and followed the Prophet in many things; 2 King. 5.
18.
but he desired only, that the Lord would be merciful unto him, when he went
into the house of Rimmon. Math. 19. 22.
The young man in the Gospel, in his outward carriage was unreprovable; but
that one secret sin of worldliness, banished him out of the presence and
Kingdom of Christ. In this point, Act. 5.
Satan labors to persuade men to deal with God in the forsaking of their
sins, as Ananias dealt with the Apostle, in parting with his Money. It was a
custom, you know, in the Primitive Church, because of the necessity of the
Times; that many, out of a zealous and extraordinary love unto the Gospel,
sold their Lands, and brought the price, and laid it down at the Apostles
feet. Ananias amongst the rest, would needs seem as forward and zealous in
this glorious work of Charity, as any other: He sold his Lands indeed, and
brought in the Money, and tendered it at the Apostles fe^t; but yet secretly,
suspecting Gods providence, and doubting lest himself, perhaps, at length
should be brought into want, he kept back one part of the price of his
Possession; making show notwithstanding, to have brought in all. So it is in
many, by the malice of Satan, and bewitching enticements of natural
corruption, in the forsaking of their sins. In a true Conversion indeed, when
a man is about to buy the Pearl of great price and unvaluable worth in the
Gospel, the Doctrine of Salvation, the Way to Life, and Graces of Gods Spirit;
he makes an universal sale of all his sins; Math. 13. 44.
he sells (as the Text says) all that he has: not some piece of his sinful
Possession, but even the very whole Lordship, the entire Inheritance. But it is
otherwise with those whom Satan inveagleth, and ensnareth in this point. He
is well enough pleased, that they shall seem to be as forward in the
reformation and amendment of their lives, as any other; and indeed, that they
shall be reformed in good part, and carry some love and affection toward the
Word, and Ministers; so that he may keep hold and possession but in one corner
of the heart: For he knows, that that is enough to keep the whole man, body
and soul, his own. If he can stay but one sin unsold, he knows the man
continues still, by the course of divine Law, Simile.
a bondslave of Hell. By one little hole a ship will sink into the bottom of
the Sea. The stab of a Penknife to the heart, will as well speed a man, as all
the Daggers that killed Caesar in the Senat-house. The soul will be strangled
with one Cord of vanity, as well as with all the Cart-ropes of iniquity:
only, the more sins, the more plagues, and fiercer flame in Hell: but he that
lives and dies impenitent in one, it will be his destruction. One dram of
poison will dispatch a man; and one reigning sin will bring him to endless
woe and misery. Let us take heed therefore, when we go about reformation of
our selves, lest we be surprised and overtaken by this malicious craft of
Satan. Let us resolve upon a through-reformation; which is only and ever
undertaken, with a purpose not to hold on in the willing practice of any one
known iniquity, or sinful course. Which, when we shall carefully and
earnestly go about, Satan will be sure to set upon us, as Pharaoh did upon
Moses and Aaron: When the Lord had commanded them to go three days journey in
the Desert, Satan deals with men, as Pharaoh did with the Israelites.
to do service and sacrifice unto him, that by all means he might hinder
them in this holy business.

1. Exodus 8. 25.
He would have them to stay in the land, and to do sacrifice there. Nay (says
Moses) it is not meet to do so; for then we should offer unto the Lord our
God that which is abomination unto the Egyptians.

2. Since this would not then serve, but that they would needs out of the Land;
Verse. 28.
I will let you go (says Pharaoh) that you may sacrifice to the Lord your God
in the Wilderness; but go not far away. But Moses would yet none of this,
he would not abate a foot of the journey the Lord had appointed.

3. Cap. 10. 9.
Why then (says Pharaoh) if you will needs go so far, I am content your men
shall go; but, as it is fittest, your children shall stay at home. Nay (says
Moses) we will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with
our daughters, with our Sheep and with our Cattle will we go.

4. Verse. 24.
Well (says Pharaoh) I will yield so far unto you, your children shall go
with you to serve the Lord, only your sheep and your Cattle shall abide at
home.

Nay ( says Moses) our Cattle also shall go with us. There shall not an
hoof be left.

Now when all this would not do, when Moses would not accept of any
capitulations, conditions, restrictions, or limitations in holy businesses, and
the service of God, (for he was at a point, resolute, he would not leave so
much as an hoof behind.) Now, I say, when all the enticements and policies of
Pharaoh would not prevail to keep Moses from serving and sacrificing unto
God, and that precisely and strictly, according to his own appointment and
commandment, but that to this end, at length he wrung himself and all the
Israelites, out of the bloody teeth of this persecuting Wolf; why then Pharaoh
arms himself with rage and fury, Exodus 14. 7.
with six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, with fifty
thousand horsemen, and two hundred thousand footmen, Josephus.
as a Jewish Historian writes, purposing with bloody thirst to devour at once,
and swallow up quick, even all the Israel of God: But you know the conclusion
was; the Lord of Heaven gave a most glorious deliverance to his own people,
wherein his bottomless goodness, and infinite mercy shall shine clear and
bright for ever, in all generations of the Church upon earth, and through all
eternity in Heaven: But upon their enemies he brought such a strange and
terrible confusion in the Red Sea, which may strike astonishment and trembling
into the heart and loins of all profane persecutors of godliness to the
worlds end, and amaze the very maliciousest f^end in hell, while that Kingdom
of darkness stands.

Even just thus does Satan deal with all those who desire to be conducted by
the light of the Word, See Broad. page 141, etc.
out of the Egypt and slavery of ignorance, sin, profaneness; and who are
resolved frankly and freely to give themselves, souls and bodies, to Gods
service, and to enter a settled course of holiness and sanctification; he
uses all means and policies to keep and detain them in his Kingdom of
darkness. If he cannot hold them in his chief palace and Court as it were,
where sin especially reigns and revels it, yet he will so far hamper them,
that at least they still hover upon the confines and borders of the Regions of
death. If they will needs be meddling with reformation of their ^infull lives,
and that he cannot help it, but something must be done, he is content to yield
unto them upon some terms or conditions, Satan would condition with men in
their conversion.
that they cast him not quite out of their consciences, but suffer him to sway
and reign in their hearts, by some one gainful or delightful sin or other.

1. If they will needs fear God, he stands not much upon it, but that they may
do it outwardly, and in profession, so that they will continue in Egypt,
within the Kingdom of darkness, and lie still in their sins, and under the
shadow of death.

2. If this will not content them, if they will not rest here, but will needs
out of the Kingdom of darkness, and dominion of death, why he is not much
against it, but that they may go the half way; that is, he will suffer them
to forgo and forbear the outward practice and perpetration of many sins, so
that inwardly their heart and affections harbor, nourish and embrace them
still, and feed upon with a sensual and delightful remembrance, the sinful
pleasures of iniquities formerly committed.

3. If they desire and endeavor to become new men, both inwardly and outwardly,
to be sanctified in actions and affections, to serve God both in soul and
body, he will yet yield so far, that they may be rid of some sins both in
heart and practice, as perhaps of sins of custom; but then he will be a
suitor and solicitor unto them, to retain other sins, as perhaps sins of
nature. For example: It may be they may both forbear the outward practice, and
also inwardly loath swearing, drunkenness, and other such like sins of
custom; but they will nuzzle in the bosom of their affections, pride, lust,
anger, and such other sins, the natural birth as it were of original
corruption.

4. But if they also conquer these, why then he tempts them mainly to continue
at the least in worldliness. Four infallible marks of cove^ousnesse: 1
Carking: 2 Strained bowels to the necessities of the Saints, or any truly
poor. 3 Too much business in the world. 4 Injustice, or using of injurious or
indirect courses of getting wealth See Wha^^ly, page 30.
For this in many men's hearts has greater power, and bears more sway than
nature, or natural affection. He will secretly suggest unto them, that upon an
eager and excessive pursuit of gain and riches, depends their life and
livelihood, their credit and reputation, their contentment and happiness in
the world; so that perhaps at last of all, after all this, they rest and settle
themselves upon sins of advantage, as usury, oppression, unlawful and
excessive gaining, earthly-mindednesse, serving the Times, and such like.

5. But if by the grace of God any be so blessed from God above, Guard. of
Spirit. Flow. 2. part. page G 4.
as resolutely to pass through all these trains and temptations, and like
strong Samsons, break through all these Cords and Cart-ropes of iniquity and
vanity; so that they will not yield an ynch to that cruel Pharaoh of Hell,
nor leave so much as an Hoof behind them, in his Kingdom of Darkness: why
then, this spiritual Pharaoh presently arms himself with all the crafts and
policies of Hell, with Legions of Fiends, and Princes of the Darkness of this
World; with all his malice, against the salvation of the souls of men; with
the fire and furious rage of profane wretches; with the sharp swords and
impoysoned arrows of lying and slanderous tongues; and with all other
advantages, which either the lowest Hell, or the wide wicked World can afford.
And thus appointed, he pursues and persecutes, with bloody and implacable
fury, all those who have escaped out of this captivity, far more eagerly
and enviously than ever Pharaoh did the Israelites: That either he may bring
them back again into his bondage, or else take them quite away, and destroy
them; that they may not attain the full Light of the Saints, nor do long
service unto the Lord. And certainly, if all the power of Hell, the strongest
temptations, the scourge of tongues, the Worlds malice, the spightfull spirit
of profaneness, the frownings of friends, the scornful insolences of
enemies, the cursed and enticing cries of our old companions; if wicked men or
damned Devils be able to prevail, he will be sure to stay them, before they
enter into the state of grace, and true blessedness. But yet, if a man put on
Paul's armor, in Ephesians. 6. David's royal courage, Psalm. 3. 6. Moses princely
zeal, and truly Christian valor, that he will not leave a hoof behind; that
is, that he will not leave one corruption unmortified, one affection
unsanctified, one rebellious action unreformed, one known sin unrepented of,
and unforsaken; one holy duty unperformed, one Commandment unobeyed: Why
then, he may look for a more glorious spiritual deliverance, than Moses had
a temporal: Hell, and confusion, shall swallow up all his See. Isa. 25. 10.
enemies; but into his heart, in the mean time, shall be shed and plentifully
powered comfort, joy, and peace* and upon his head shall a Crown of
immortality flourish for ever hereafter.

I have stayed very long upon the fifth plot and practice of Satan, whereby he
labors to make the Word heard, unpowerfull and uneffectuall for the salvation
of our souls: For, I know, it is much and often exercised, and with great
success; and by it, he prevails with very many. When by diligent hearing of
Gods Word* faithfully urged upon them, they are driven, and do address
themselves to a reformation and amendment of their sinful lives; he mightily
endeavors to hinder, disquiet, and interrupt them in it; to make it a
reformation unto them but in part, and by halfes; unsound, and unsaving: So
that, it may be, they may forsake sins of Custom, as Lying, Swearing,
Drunkenness, and such like; but keep sins of Nature, as Pride, Lust, Anger,
and the like: Or, it may be, they may forsake both these two kinds of sins,
and yet keep sins of Advantage; as Oppression, unlawful Gaining, grinding
the faces of the Poor, serving the Time, and such like: Or, they may leave all
these* and yet keep sins of Company; as, idle and vain Talking, filthy
Ieasting, railing against and slandering their Neighbors, uncharitable judging
and censuring their Brethren, and the like. It may be, they may be careful in
their general calling of Christianity; but careless and unfaithful in those
particular places and callings, wherein God in his providence has set them: Or
contrarily; they may be of Christian behavior abroad, and in public; as at
Sermons, and in the Church: but unconscionable at home, and in their private
families; never teaching, or praying with them: They may seem zealous in the
Commandments of the first Table, and about the service of God; but in the
second, and toward their Neighbor, unmercifull, unconscionable, and
uncharitable: Or, they may deal justly and honestly with others, but be
utterly void and destitute of the knowledge and fear of God: They may be
outwardly reformed, but inwardly full of hollow-heartednesse, and hypocrisy:
They may leave all other sins, only keep one behind; which is called a
man's sweet, delightful, and bosome-sinne.

If Satan can prevail with a man any of these ways, he keeps him his own:
for he that is soundly converted, justified, and sanctified indeed, must needs
be out of love with every sin, with the whole course of iniquity; and with
sincerity and cheerfulness embrace the entire body of Christianity, and have
a regard to all Gods Commandments.

6 Now I come to a sixth slight and devise of Satan, Satan would hinder
perseverance.
whereby he labors to make the Word fruitless and unprofitable unto us. If
he cannot stay us in our reformation, but that we will needs through, and cast
away all sins; why then, he seeks by all means to hinder our continuance,
and constancy. Math. 13.
If the Seed of the Word be received with joy, and spring up for a time; that
is, be practiced for a while; he rayseth up some persecution, tribulation, or
crosses, whereby it is presently blasted, withers, and comes to nothing. The
unclean spirit may for a time go out of a man, Math. 12. 43.
and walk throughout dry places; but if it be possible, he will return with
seven other spirits worse than himself: and the end of that man, is worse than
the beginning. A man may fly from the pollution and filthiness of the World,
as it is, 2 Pet. ^. 20.
2. Pet. 2. 20. but by the policy of Satan, he may be tangled again
therein: He may be washed (as it is in the same place) for a while, and yet
after wallow again in the mire of sin: He may be endued with an inferior
sanctification of the Spirit, Heb. 10. 29.
Heb. 10. 29. and yet after, by the malice of Satan, tread under foot the
Son of God: He may have a general participation of the Holy Ghost, Heb. 6.
4. Heb. 6. 4.
and yet after a time fall away, to the very despiting of the Spirit of Grace.
I speak not this, as though that any once effectually called, truly
sanctified, possessed of the state of grace, and enrolled among the Saints, can
possibly become a castaway; it cannot be: for if once by the power of
special grace, a man be built upon the Rock; Math. 16. 18.
not the Gates of Hell, not all the powers of Darkeness, nor strongest
assaaults of Satan, shall ever prevail against him. Heaven and Earth shall
sooner be removed, than any of Gods servants. For if Gods eternal Decree of
Election be unchangeable; if his Covenant be everlasting, and inviolable; if
his Truth cannot change, nor his Mercy fail, nor his Power be weakened; if
the sacred Seal of the blessed Spirit shall stand; if the precious blood and
fervent prayers of Christ Jesus can prevail; if his Scriptures do not lie,
and deceive; if his sanctifying Grace cannot die, and perish; if Himself
cannot cease to be: then undoubtedly, if a man be once his, he is his for ever;
if he be once truly his servant upon Earth, he shall for ever hereafter be a
glorious Saint in Heaven. My meaning therefore in this point, is only this:
There is a glimmering Light of the Spirit, some manner of taste of the
sweetness of Christ, a kind of change, which may be wrought in a man by the
preaching of the Word, and yet he not truly and constantly converted, but may
by the malice and policy of Satan be repossessed by unclean spirits, and
repolluted with the filthiness of the World.

Thus we may discern this changeable change (that I may so speak) and the
saving change of Gods servants: Difference between a false and saving change.
If, after we have given our Names to Christ, and begun to profess and
practice sincerity, we pass on, and continually grow in grace, and stand for
Gods honor and service, against all comers; friends or foes, loss or
disgrace, oppression or slanders, men or devils; why then, undoubtedly, we have
the sanctifying Spirit of God, and saving grace; which makes his Children like
Trees betwixt the Rivers of Waters, fruitful in goodness, and as bold as
Lions, in good causes. But, if after we have begun well, we look back with
Lots Wife; Genesis 19. 26.
if we fall in love again with those sins which we have forsaken; if Rubbes
and Crosses in the World, will turn us out of the way to Heaven; and our
righteousness be but as the Morning Deaw, which a little heat of Persecution
will dry up: why then, our change was changeable, and not that of Gods
children. The Seed of the Word, which we received with joy, was never deeply
rooted in good and honest hearts; we were only temporary Converts, not new
creatures; temporizing Professors, not true Christians; and our End is like to
be worse than our Beginning; and our Plagues more, than if we had never begun.

Let every man take heed then, in the Name of God, lest by the trains and
temptations of Satan he be turned back again from any good course; lest
after he be washed, he wallow again in the mire of worldliness, and worldly
vanities; and after he has escaped the filthiness of the World, lest he be
again entangled therein. Let us beware of longing after those sins, which we
begun in some measure to reform; let us not lust again after the fleshpots
of Egypt, like the Israelites, after we be in some good sort enlarged from the
bondage of sin, and tyranny of the hellish Pharaoh. Lots Wife being
delivered out of Sodom, was surprised with a sensual remembrance of the
pleasures and vanities of the place which she had left, of the ease and
prosperity which she there enjoyed; and so looked back upon it: But she was
therefore presently turned into a Pillar of Salt, Genesis 19. 26. there for ever
to be a monument and fearful spectacle of Gods terrible judgments against
all back-sliders. If the unclean spirit be cast out of a man by some degrees
of reformation, and good beginnings of amendment of life, and have after leave
and liberty to return; he brings with him seven Devils worse than himself,
and makes a man far worse than he was before. 2 Pet. 2. 21.
Much better were it for any man never to have known or stepped into the way of
righteousness, than afterward to turn from the holy Commandment of God, and
out of a course of Christianity. It is a fearful Curse, to continue in
hardness of heart, profaneness of life, and sinful courses: But to leave
them for a little, and to sink back again, is to have Gods Curse bitter
against them, if they repent not, and the fire of Hell made more hot for them.
First, sicknesses are curable; but relapses are very dangerous, if not
irrecoverable. If a man (as it is Heb. 6.) has once been enlightened, Heb. 6.
4, 6.
and then fall away, it is impossible to be renewed by repentance. I know that
place principally to be understood of the highest degree of Apostacy, and
falling away; but he that falls away from any good course, and good
beginnings, falls toward that irrecoverable fall, and makes himself more
incapable of repentance, than if he never had been enlightened, or stepped into
the way of Truth: And it is just with God, to punish such with a reprobate
sense, and hearts that cannot repent. Romans 2. 5.


It then deeply and nearly concerns us; for once we have felt the
sweetness of Grace, and tasted of the Powers of the World to come; to drink
deeper of the Waters of Life, and to follow hard toward the mark, for the
price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. When we feel any good
motions and purposes arise in our hearts, let us labor to follow them, to
nourish them, to blow them up, to make a fire of them; lest they only but make
a flash, and pass away as the Lightning. Let us put them in practice with
zeal, and constancy, that we be not as the unfaithful Waters, which in the
Summer are dried up; or as the dead Trees, which perish in Winter: but that we
remain whole and sound, pure and perfect, as the living Waters and Olives of
the Lord, that ever shed forth their sweetness and fatness. Let us make a
Covenant, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
even a Covenant (as the Scripture speaks) of Salt, durable, and perpetual,
with the Lord, to live before him in holiness and righteousness all the days
of our life: For to him that goes through with his holy business, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
that fights the good fight of Faith, finisheth his course, and overcomes; to
him, and to him alone, shall all those glorious Blessings be performed, which
are promised in the first Chapter of the Revelation: Rev. 1.
To eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of God; Not
to be hurt of the second Death; To eat of the Manna which is hid, and to have
the white Stone of Victory given him; To have power given him to rule over
Nations, and to be lightened with heavenly brightness, like the Morning
Star; To be clothed with white array, (that is, with heavenly Glory) and to
have his Name continued in the Book of Life; To have a Pillar made in the
Temple of God, (that is, a firm and unmovable place of eternal Glory;) To
sup with Christ, and to sit with him upon his Throne for evermore. Thus shall
he be honored and crowned with the excellency, fullness, and variety of
all glory, joy, and happiness, who enters with sincerity, and courageously
ends his Race of Holiness, and conquers in his spiritual Fight. Rev. 21. 8:
But all fearful men, (as it is, Rev. 21. 8.) who slinke back for fear of
Men, or love of the World, or to serve the Times; all faint-hearted men in the
Lords Battles, and that fall away from good beginnings; they shall be
punished with unbeleevers, with the abominable, with Murderers and
Whore-mongers, with Idolaters and Liars, in the Lake which burns with fire and
Brimstone; which is the second Death.

7 But, if by the grace and mercy of God, we quit our selves like men, and
hold on comfortably and constantly in a settled course of godliness; yet, He
strives, if he cannot make them to fall totally and finally, that they may
fall partially, and as frequently as he can.
for all this, Satan has not done: though he can do us no deadly hurt, yet
he will still do his worst; for his craft and spite is endless. If he see
there is no hope of bringing us back again into his bondage, or making us any
more vassals and slaves to sin; yet he will labor to lay stumbling-blockes
in our way, to bring us upon our knees: now and then, to turn us out of the
right path; sometimes, even to over-turne us with some greater and more
dangerous fall; he will lay his trains to entrap and entangle us, if it be
possible, in some old sweet sin: Satan's policy.
Which, that he may bring about, he will use the benefit and advantage of
custom, because before our calling, we have much practiced it; of the
frailty of our own corruptions, because they have most delighted in it; of
our old company, because we have formerly oftenest committed it with them. He
will leave no opportunity, advantage, or circumstance omitted, and unassayed,
to hale us back into one or other special sin, of our unregeneration. If
this will not stop, he will follow all occasions, enticements, and
temptations, the tide of our own affections, the stream of the times, if by
any means he can cast us into some gross and scandalous sin. These are
Satan's plots and practices against those, who hold on in a constant course of
holiness: if they will not be brought to tumble themselves again in the mire
of sin, and sinful pleasures, yet he will do what he can, now and then, to
spot and stain their Christian lives with some grievous fall, or other; that
so, Preservatives against sin, whereby Gods children keep themselves from
gross falls.
to his utmost, he may bring upon them Gods disfavour, and angry countenance,
disgrace and disconceit amongst their brethren, discomforts and fears of heart
within themselves. But if a man, first, by keeping fresh in his mind the
uncertainties and vanities of this vain World: 1
secondly, 2
by careful and continual watching over his deceitful heart: 3
thirdly, by exercising and practicing with diligence and delight, all holy
means of preserving grace, and starving sin; as reading, hearing,
conference, meditation of the Word of God; Prayer, public and private; with
himself, 4
and with his family: fourthly, by declining profane, unprofitable, and
unchristian company, and acquaintance; and frequenting, with joy and fruit,
the fellowship of the Saints: fifthly, 5
by an humble entertainment, nourishment, and practice of the good motions of
the Spirit: sixthly, 6
by a daily examination of the state of his Conscience, and reparation of the
decays of Grace: 7
seventhly, by his godly jealousy over little sins, and present renewing
repentance after every slip. I say, if by such means as these (which are
notable preservatives against the poison of sin) a man fence himself from
gross and scandalous falls; or else, if by the politic malice of Satan, and
weakness of his own flesh, he be overtaken with some fouler sin; and yet
notwithstanding, besides pangs of grief, and anguish of spirit, for grieving
his gracious God, he look better to his feet, and run faster in the Race of
sanctification after his fall; if his falling into sin teach him these good
lessons, which in such cases are ordinarily learned of all true Christians; for
all things, even See Gouge, p. 171, 172.
sin it self, makes to the best in Gods Children.

1 He learnes by his fall, The good that they get by their falls.
to distaste his pride, and self-conceit, to let fall his Peacockes train,
and despair of his own strength.

2 To depend only upon God, the Word of his Grace, and the power and perpetual
influence of his Spirit, for his standing upright in the ways of
Righteousness, and preservation from most fearful and dangerous downe-falls.

3 To cling closer about him; to claspe faster hold with the hand of faith upon
the glorious Passion and meritorious justice of Christ; with much heartinesse
and zeal of seek and sue unto him for his special aid and assistance
against Satan's temptations, his own corruptions, and outward occasions of
sin.

4 To blush and be ashamed of himself; for that he having had his soul washed
with the precious blood of Christ, and having received so great favor, mercy,
and pardon at the hands of God, yet has wretchedly and unthankfully defiled it
again; and so woefully and wickedly abused his extraordinary love and kindness.

5 With more resolute vow, protestation, and practice, to renounce and abandon
Satan; with more perfect hatred, and detestation, to loath and abhor all
manner of sin; Jude 23. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
the Garment spotted of the flesh, and all appearance of evil.

6 To become watchful, and wise; by taking special notice of all the motives,
temptations, means, occasions, baits, allurements to that sin, into which
he fell; for the avoiding and declining of it afterward.

7 To think charitably of other men, that fall, and are suddenly overtaken in
any offense; not to be too eager, hot, and censorious against them; but out of
his own experience, to give them comfort, instructions, and directions, and to
labor to restore them with the spirit of meekness. Now, I say, if a man be
either fore-armed and fenced (as I said) from falls; or else, after his fall,
weep bitterly, repent sincerely, watch afterward more carefully, walk more
zealously; and out of his spiritual wisdom, make that use and benefit of his
fall, as I have told you: then he may have comfort, that Satan gets no great
advantage this way.

8 Like a fierce cruel Dragon, He sends forth floods of persecution and
affliction after them.
since he cannot devour the Woman's Child so soon as ever it is brought forth;
that is, he cannot repossesse and reign again in a true Christian and
regenerate man, brought forth by the power of the Word, in the Womb of the
Church; he therefore casts out of his mouth, after him, floods of outward
crosses and vexations. If he cannot wound him in his soul, yet he will vex
him in his body, goods, and good name: if he cannot hinder him of Heaven, he
will give him little rest or quiet upon Earth: if he cannot bring him into
disgrace and disfavour with God, he will be sure to raise him hatred enough,
malice, and discountenance amongst men: He will do his worst, to fill and
load him with all outward discomforts and discouragements; as poverty,
sickness, slanders, scoffings, raylings, reproaches, contempts, and a thousand
other persecutions.

But in such cases as these, Comfortable considerations against afflictions.
let every child of God comfort, refresh, and hold himself in heart, cheer,
and courage, by such considerations as these.

First, 1 From Gods Decree, the example of the Saints, and the Son of God
himself. Act. 14. 22.
it is a Decree of Heaven, resolved upon and ratified by the Lord our God,
confirmed by the experience of all the Patriarchs and Prophets, of the Apostles
and professors of Christ, of all the Saints and servants, nay, and of the Son
of God himself; Act. 14. 22.
that, through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. So
often therefore as we shall see any miseries or afflictions coming toward
us, for our profession of sincerity, and righteousness sake; let us
acknowledge them to be as so many most certain and infallible marks, that we
are in the right way to Heaven: through which, if we but walk a little further
with patience, we shall descry a Crown of Glory, Romans 8. 18.
which is our own for ever; of which, all the afflictions and pressures of a
thousand Worlds are not near worthy.

Secondly, 2 From the gracious effects of afflictions, for our good.
though by this means, by these outward crosses and afflictions, Satan
discharges upon us the very gall of his bitterness, the poison of his malice,
and arrows of his spite; yet, by the merciful and medicinal hand of God,
they are returned upon his own head, they strike through the heart of sin,
and become as precious restoratives, to repair in us the decays of spiritual
life: for in Gods children, crosses and afflictions have these worthy effects
and workings.

1 They start us out of our security, They make us watchful, etc.
carelessness, and coldness, which by little and little may grow upon the
best: They breed in us a conceit and sense of our own wants, and the
necessity of Gods providence and protection: They add Oil unto the flame of
our first love, put life into our religious exercises, and power and spirit
into our prayers.

2 They curb and control the pride, Humble, etc.
insolency, and impatiencie of our nature: They cool and kill the heat,
headlongnesse, and intemperancie of our affections: They weaken indeed the
whole old Adam in us, with all his lusts, concupiscence, and venom; but give
strength to the new man, with all his godly and gracious motions, holy and
heavenly actions.

3 They make us with indignation to spit in the very face of this vain, To
contemn the World.
deceitful, and flattering World; the temporal love of which, is the eternal
loss both of bodies and souls in the other World: They happily weane us from
the love of it, and make us willing to part with her paps; to bid all her
enticements adieu, and to trample under feet the fading pleasures and vanities
thereof: they make us to tear our grovelling hearts, and rent our dull
affections from the Earth, to which they cleave, and are glued so fast, and to
lift up both our heads and hearts to Heaven, and to the glory which is to be
revealed, longingly to desire the coming of Christ, the Life that lasts, and
to be clothed with our House, which is from above.

4 Lastly, To see further into the mystery of godliness.
they are as sharp and precious eyesalves, to clear and enlarge the
spiritual sight of our souls, too much dimmed and darkened with earthly dust,
and with gazing too long on the painted glory of the World; that so we may see
further into the great mystery of godliness, deeper into the mass and
dunghill of our own corruptions and frailties, wider upon the vanities of the
World, and higher into the happiness of Heaven, and that great Beauty, Glory,
and Majesty above: They serve unto us as sour Sawces, and bitter Wormwood,
to bring us out of love with our sweet sins, and to breed a distaste in our
mouth against transitory delights: They are as sharp pruning-knives, to lop
and cut away the excesses, vanities, and unnecessarie cares that grow upon us;
and so to trim us, that we may bring forth more profitable, plentiful, and
fairer fruits in godliness and Christianity.

Thus Satan is disappointed in his plots, and policy; his malice makes a
medicine for our souls: he purposes and hopes, by crosses and afflictions to
turn us back, or make us weary in our course of holiness; but by the mercy
of God, they become as spurs, to prick us forward in our Christian Race; and
as hedges to keep us in, from wandering out of the way.

Now, 3 Though Satan and his instruments be the instrument to afflict, yet God
is the principal Agent, who will order all for their good.
in a third place; That Gods child may not too much be cast down, or put out
of heart, for crosses and persecutions raised against him for a profession, and
the practice of sincerity; let him consider, that howsoever Satan and wicked
men be the instruments, and executioners, which maliciously procure, and
immediately inflict miseries and vexations upon the children of God; though
they be the means to lay tortures and torments upon their bodies, crosses and
losses upon their goods and outward estates, spots and impression and cruelty
upon the face of their harmless innocence, slanders and disgraces,
imputations and staining aspersions upon their reputations and good names;
sometimes terrors, temptations, and amazements upon their minds: Yet in all
these, our gracious God has the chiefest stroke, a principal hand, and the
greatest sway* he directs, limits, and moderates the rage and fury of all our
enemies, whether they be Devils or men, as it pleases him; and ever certainly
to the singular good of his children, if they be patient and faithful. Job 5.
6.
Misery (says Job, chap. 5. 6.) comes not forth of the Dust, neither does
afflictions spring out of the Earth. Neither indeed, principally and originally
from Man, the Lord of the Earth; nor from the Prince that rules in the Air;
nor from the Host of Heaven: God himself is the chief commander, guider, and
directer of all vexations, and ill of punishment that befalls any man; and
inflicts it, for our sins and corruptions, upon the reprobates, as appears
in Pharaoh, for their further hardening and confusion; upon his elect, for
their conversion and correction.

Let us then, in all our sufferings and afflictions, stirred up against us for
sticking to sincerity, and keeping a good Conscience; lift up our eyes to the
mighty Lord of Heaven and Earth: who, by the strong Arm of his Omnipotency,
holds fast in a Chain, Satan, that raging Lion, and great Goliath, that he
cannot stir one Link further than he will give him leave; he cannot go a
hairs breadth beyond his Commission: Nay, and that which he is suffered to
do, makes one way or other for our far greater good. Let us consider, what a
loving and tenderhearted Father has us under his correction; and holds in his
hand the fury of Satan, the malice of men, the power and particular stings of
all creatures, as Rods and Scourges, to reform and amend us; to keep us in a
course of holiness, and in the right way to Heaven. His fatherly love and
tenderheartednesse unto his, and such as fear him, does in dearness and
unchangeablenesse as far surpass the most compassionate bowels of any
earthly father, as God surpasses man; and, an infinite nature, a finite
creature. The kindness of a mother to her child, is nothing to that love which
God bears to a true Christian. a. 44. 15.
A mother may forget her child, and not have compassion upon the son of her
womb. But God neither can, nor will forget him. The stony Rocks and
Mountains stick fast and sure unto their foundations; but Gods love to his
child, is far surer and sounder. The Mountains shall remove, Isa. 54. 10.
and the Hills shall fall down (says God by Isaiah) but my Mercy shall not
depart from thee; neither shall the Covenant of my Peace fall away, says the
Lord, that has compassion on thee. Can any man stop the course of the Sun,
the Moon, and the Stars? Can he change the Seasons of the Day and the
Night? No more can any creature, or a world of creatures, stop and turn
aside the streams of Gods endless mercies and favors to his faithful
servants. If you can change (says God by Jeremy) if you can change the
courses of the Sun, Ier. 31. 33.
and of the Moon, and of the Stars; if you can break my Covenant of the
Day, and my Covenant of the Night, that there should not be Day and Night in
their season; then may my Covenant be broke unto David, my servant; then will I
cast off all the Seed of Israel: Ier. 31. 33. You may therefore make sure of
it; every sanctified and sincere man is ever in Gods sight, for his good and
preservation; Isa. 49. 16.
he is graven upon the palm of his hand, Cant. 8. 6.
he is set as a Signet upon his arm, and as a Seal upon his heart. God is
ever far more sensible, tender, and compassionate of the sighs, tears, and
miseries of his children, than any man can be of the pricking of the precious
ball and apple of his own eye. Zach. 2. 8.
We have his Promise, sealed with the precious blood of his own Son, bound
with an Oath; That so, Heb. 6. 18.
by two immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we
might have strong consolation; That, Heb. 13. 5.
he will never fail and forsake his; That, he never lay more upon them, 1
Cor. 1^. 13.
than he will make them able to bear. He gives them comfort in all their
afflictions, deliverance from them, and benefit by them. In all troubles, he
most certainly either quite frees them, or graciously preserves them, in them;
so far as is best for his glory, and their good; and useful for the Church,
and his other children.

Let no child of God then be dismayed or discouraged for any crosses, slanders,
or persecutions, which befall him for his profession, and practice of holiness
and sincerity. Though Satan has his work in them, and profane and wicked
men a part; yet our gracious God, so loving and tenderhearted a Father, has
the principal stroke and chief finger in them: Satan's work, and end is, to
vex and discourage.

It is evermore the work of the Devil, ( says one of the ^yptian Epist. ad
An^e^an. lib. 4. 2*
ancient Fathers) that he may with Lies tear the servants of God, and by
false Opinions spread concerning them, may defame their glorious name; that
such as are bright in the light of their own Conscience, may be darkened and
disgraced by the reports of others.

Wicked and profane men, Why the wicked hate and persecute the godly.
because they are in Darkness, and their works are evil, they cannot endure
the children of Light, and their holiness of life. 1
For this is the root and fountain of all their malice and cruelty; as
appears 1 Ioh. 3. 12. Cain sle^ his brother; 1 Ioh. 3. 12.
and wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his
brothers good. Hence grows and springs all the fury and rage, all the wrongs
and slanders, which are wont to be laid on true Christians: 1 Pet 4. 4.
They are hated even for their very goodness, and because they will not run
with the wicked unto the same excess of riot: They are filled with contempt
and reproach, with the mockings of the wealthy, and despightfulnesse of the
proud, because they will not swear, swagger, lie, pour in strong drink,
profane the Sabbaths, follow the fashions and corruptions of the Times. In a
word, because they will not be profane in this World, and damned in the World
to come. And besides, 2
I know not how, wicked men think, that by the commonnesse of sin, their
sinful courses become more commendable; and, that the multitude of offenders
makes them more excusable, and their offenses pardonable. It is the comfort
(says an ancient Jerome.
Father) of evil men, to carpe at the good; thinking, that by the great number
of offenders, the guilt of their faults is diminished and abated.

But Gods work and end, Gods aim in his childrens afflictions.
in all false reports unjustly raised against his children, and in other
crosses whatsoever; is to stir up and revive in them zeal, devotion, and
faithfulness, in praying, praising, and serving him; to purge out of them the
dross and relickes of some old sin; to humble them, and to bring them to a
true denying of themselves; to try their faith, patience, and constancy; or
for their greater good, one way or other.

A fourth consideration, 4 Afflictions are no strange things.
whereby the true Christian may be kept in heart and comfort against all
crosses and calumniations which he shall meet with, in his course of
holiness and sanctification, is this: It is no strange thing that does befall
him, when he is persecuted for sincerity; but the very beaten way to Heaven,
trodden by all such feet, The Saints have gone before us.
as ever walked in faith and obedience. Abel begun in this Cup of Persecution,
and vexation, for his service to God, to all those who would give their Names
to Christ, or fight under his Banner to the Worlds end. The Patriarchs and
Prophets, and holy men of old, followed and pledged him: Heb. 11 36, 37.
They were tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds and imprisonment; they
were stoned, they were hewn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with
the sword; they wandered up and down in Sheepes-skins, and Goats-skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented; whom the World was not worthy of; they
wandered in Wildernesses, and Dens, and Caves of the Earth. Nay, Christ
himself.
Nay, Christ Jesus himself, the Son of God, and our blessed Savior, drunk
deep and large of this Cup; it was the Baptism wherewith he was baptized.
Math. 20 23.
His Apostles and Disciples followed; they endured all the bloody and
merciless cruelties, which fierce and furious Wolves are wont to inflict upon
silly and harmless Sheep: for they were sent out into the World, Math. 10.
16.
as Sheep amongst Wolves. There come after, and drink of the same Cup,
millions of blessed men and women, under the primitive Persecutions: Of which,
some were scalded, some burned, some broyled, some hanged, some beheaded, some
thrown down from rocks upon stakes, some stabbed in with forkes, some
racked, and torn in pieces, their tongues cut out, their eyes bored out, their
flesh twitched off with Pinsons, women's breasts feared off with hot yrons,
pricked under the nails with Needles, and a thousand more ways tormented,
with as great variety and exquisiteness, as politic malice could devise, and
profane cruelty execute. If we pass along from thence, even to these Times;
yea, and if our eyes were so enlightened, that we could look upon the state of
Gods children, and their way to Heaven, even to the Worlds end; we should ever
be able to trace them along by the tears of Brine, and blood, which are powered
out and spilt for the profession of Gods Truth, and practice of holiness. This
then is, was, and ever will be, the lot and portion of all those who are
fitting and preparing for Heaven. They are ever persecuted one way, or other.
If by reason of the mild and peaceable Times, they fight not unto blood, and
pass the fiery Trial; yet they shall have their troubles, oppressions, and
disgraces; at least, they shall be ever sure to be paid home with the scourge
of tongues: they shall be laden with slanders, and false reports; they shall
be made a gazing-stocke, a byword, and Table-talke; a scorn, reproach, and
derision to them that are round about them: Psalm. 79. 4.
as David was, Psalm. 79. 4. Which being so, why should not a common case, in
the cause of God, breed a common comfort in true Christians? Why should any of
them think much to drink of the same Cup, that the dearest Saints and souls,
now blessed with the Lord, have begun to them in; and of which, all that will
be saved, even to the last day, must taste, and follow? Why should any man,
that truly loves God, or looks for the joys of the other World, seek or
desire a privilege above all the children of God, that everwere; and even
above the Son of God himself, Christ Jesus? Most unworthy is he of the
glorious comforts of Grace, of the inward Peace, that passes all
understanding, and of that Glory which is to be revealed; who, for a slanderous
tale, a lying tongue, a reproachful term, or the fear and face of any
mortal man, slinkes back from a bold profession of sincerity, and from the
true service of the living God.

In sufferings and afflictions for Gods cause, there is not only matter of
patience, but even occasion of glory. They are like stars in the forehead,
honorable maimes, conformities to Jesus Christ, Liveries of a Christian
soldier.

Fifthly, 5 2. Cor. 4. 17.
let him consider, that his momentanie crosses and afflictions cause an
exceeding and everlasting weight of glory. Afflictions are but short, and they
work a weight of glory.
Let his vexation be never so grievous, his persecutors never so great, and
mighty; neither they, nor that, can last long. For the life of man, and all
the glory thereof, does pass away like a Ship in the Water, whose tract cannot
be seen again; like an Arrow through the air, or a Weavers Shuttle through
his work; like a fading Flower, suddenly plucked up and withered; like Grass,
like Smoke, like a Dream, like a Bubble of the Water. Though a Christian
therefore be never so deeply plunged into As many times they are. See David,
Psalm. 69. 1, 2.
miseries, he shall abide but a while under the waters of affliction; the day
of redemption cannot be far off. Though he should pass through the teeth of
wild Beasts, upon the sword of the Tyrant, through the flames of fire; though
his brains should be dashed against the walls, his limbs lie scattered in the
streets, and his blood run down every channel: yet shall he, ere it be
long, gloriously rise again, in despite of all the powers of Darkness, and
bloudinesse of cruel men. He shall entirely be restored, by the mighty and
immediate hand of God; he shall be clothed with Light, and immortality; his
blood shall be revenged, and all tears wiped from his eyes; Rev. 7. 17.
and there shall be set upon his head a Crown of everlasting joy, peace, and
happiness.

Sixthly, 6 Christ does suffer and sympathize with his children in affliction.
comfort unspeakable, and glorious, may spring up in the heart of Gods child,
amidst his sufferings for the cause of God, out of a consideration, That in all
afflictions, without exception, Christ suffers with him. See Isa. 63. 9.
Paul was the mirror and miracle of all Christians, for the variety and
gloriousness of his sufferings; you may see a strange and unmatchable
Catalogue of them, 2 Cor. 11. 23, etc.
2 Cor. 11. 23. etc. He was in stripes above measure, plenteously in prison, in
death often. Of the Jews, five times received he forty stripes, save one; he
was thrice beaten with Rods, he was once stoned, he suffered thrice shipwreck;
night and day was he in the deep Sea: In journeying, he was often; in perils
of Waters, in perils of Robbers, in perils of his own Nation, in perils among
the Gentiles, in perils in the City, in perils in the Wilderness, in perils
in the Sea, in perils among false Brethren; in weariness, and painfulness;
in watching often; in hunger, and thirst; in fastings often; in cold, and in
nakedness. Yet all these, and what other crosses and afflictions befell him,
he calls and accounts them the sufferings and afflictions of Christ. Now (says
Paul, Col. 1. 24.
Col. 1. 24.) now rejoice I in my sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of
the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is the
Church. And 2 Cor. 1. 5. As the sufferings of Christ abound in us, 2 Cor. 1. 5.
so our consolation abounds through Christ. Lazarus, in all his poverty,
contempt, sickness, sores, or what other miseries, suffered nothing wherein
Christ was not partaker of his grief and sorrow. So sweet and blessed a
consent and sympathy is there betwixt Christ, the Head, and all true
Christians, his members; that so long as the great mystery of that mystical
Union stands true and sure, (which is for ever) all holy men, and servants of
God, in all their sufferings for the Name of Christ, profession of his Truth,
and practice of sincerity, shall have Christ himself partner and partaker of
their miseries; which is able to refresh the heaviest heart, in the greatest
extremities.

I have stayed long upon this point; to wit, how Satan labors might and
maine, by crosses and slanders, to discourage Gods child, and to stop his
course in the ways of righteousness; and in laying down some comforts
against them: because thousands, at the very first entrance, or after some
small continuance, are woefully turned back from grace, and sincerity, by
temptations, reproaches, and troubles raised against them; by their own
rebellious flesh, Satan, and profane men.

Now, 9 Satan hinders the working of the Word; by spiritual Pride.
in a ninth place, if all this will do no good; if the heat of persecution
inflame the zeal of the true Christian; if reproaches and afflictions be so
far from daunting and dulling his forwardness, that they set an edge upon
his affections, and add strength to his resolution, in proceeding in the
glorious state of Christianity: Why then, the last slight and temptation of
Satan, to hinder the sanctifying power and success of the Word, and to make
it fruitless and unprofitable, is spiritual Pride; which, by his malicious
cunning, and hellish Alchymie, he extracts even out of his graces and virtues;
out of such sweet flowers, he rayses poison: and since he cannot keep goodness
utterly out of the soul, he uses it self as an instrument, to weaken and
wound it self. For when a man is most endued and enriched with extraordinary
gifts, holy graces, and spiritual strength; Satan seeks most busily to make
him proud of them, and to puff him up with an overweening conceit of his own
worth; that so himself may lose the comfort of them, his brethren the fruit of
them, and God the glory of them. This spiritual Pride, is the same in our
corruptions and sinful affections, that the Shirt is in our Clothing; that is
to say, it sits the closest unto us, and is last put off: it is the white
Devil (as a worthy Divine calls it.) That sin does lie, and insensibly
insinuate it self; and lurkes amid our graces, and good actions, as a dead Fly
in the Apothecaries Ointment. It is, as it were, Satan's last intrenchment,
which he holds the longest, and with most resolute and desperate pertinacie,
and is hardlyest driven out; much spiritual wisdom, a great measure of
humility, and the whole Armor of God is required to this combat. For he is
so endless, and exercised in the point; that, if we be so humble, that he
cannot make us proud of any thing else, he will labor to make us proud even of
our humility; and proud, that we are not proud of our gifts.

Except a Christian continually and carefully watch over his heart, Spiritual
Pride may arise in Gods children.
and guard it with humility, and a lowly conceit of himself; this privy
Pride may steal upon him, before he be aware.

And first, 1 From a consideration of their privileges.
it may spring out of a consideration of the excellency of his estate, and the
variety of his peculiar blessings, and special privileges, which the ungodly
men neither can, nor do enjoy. For when he is once translated from Darkness
to Light, Privileges of the godly.
from profaneness to sincerity, from Nature to Grace; out of the Dominion of
Satan, into the Kingdom of Christ, by the great work of regeneration: he is
presently made partaker of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
2 Pet. 1. 4. he is entitled, by the right of the Son of God, to an
inheritance immortal, 1 Pet. 1. 4.
and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in the Heavens for him.
While he is thus looking upon himself, possessed of this happiness, and
planted in this glorious Paradise; Satan is secretly blowing the coals of his
hidden corruption, to enkindle and raise there-out an overweening conceit of
his own worth, and to puff him up with pride of his own gifts and graces;
whence may ensue two foul and hateful inconveniences: For so he may grow by
little and little to justify himself too much, whereby Gods glory may be
lessened and darkened; and to despise his Brethren, whereby his exercise of
charity may be hindered.

This spiritual Pride may occasionally, 2 From their care, to keep themselves
undefiled.
and by accident, spring out of a godly and gracious care, to keep and
preserve himself unspotted and undefiled in his happy and glorious state of
grace, and regeneration. For while he is casting with himself, and concluding
upon some sound and substantial course of holiness and obedience in the ways
of godliness; Satan labors might and maine, to draw him to a singularity of
unwarrantable conceits and opinions; that by a tedious and unnecessarie pursuit
and possession thereof, he may keep him cold and uncomfortable in the practice
of the chief and most material duties of Christianity; and to make him place
the height of Religion, and heat of zeal, in continual conference and most
peremptory defense of some groundless fancies; from whence Satan busily
strives to toll him out, to separation. Which course of separating from, and
condemning our Church, Against separation from our Church.
in the judgment of our sincerest Divines, is full of pride, contention, and
confusion.

For first, 1
certain it is, our Church, in that most exquisite and worthy confession of
Faith contained in the Articles of Religion, does hold and profess all
substantial points of Divinity as soundly, as any Church in the World, none
excepted, neither in this Age, nor in the primitive times of the Church.

Secondly, 2
it has communion with, and testimony of all other true Churches.

Thirdly, 3
in it are to be had the means of salvation, in a powerful and plentiful
manner: and in the bowels thereof, even they that go out of our Church, if
they be truly converted, received that precious and blessed vigor, which is
able to quicken them to eternal life.

Fourthly, 4
a Church may be a true Church, though it should have spots, and blemishes;
though there be some Swine and Dogs in it. In S. Paul's time, the Corinthians
were called the Church of God, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2. And yet, at that very time, were
some in an Heresy, some in Incest, some that had not repented of their
filthiness, 2 Cor. 12. 20, 21. The like may be said of the Churches of Asia,
Rev. 2. 3.

Fifthly, 5
though outward prosperity, worldly honor, and plenty, be rather the lot of
false, heretical, and Apostaticall Churches, than an individual and necessary
mark of the true Church; yet, if unto our unparalled Peace, both for duration
and entirenesse, we add our many and miraculous deliverances, strange
defeatments, and preventions of Popish Plots; of their Bulls, Conspiracies, and
hostile Invasions; of their Powder, Poisons, Daggers, Dags, and all manner of
execrable attempts, machinations, and underminings, which either Hell could
devise, or that desperate and bloody Faction adventure upon, and manage: I say,
if all these be put together, and well weighed; it is impossible, but that we
should therein see, acknowledge, and adore the special finger of Gods holy
providence, upholding his own Arc amongst his own people; and pointing out
to all the World, the truth of that Church, upon whose side, and for whose
safety and glory he so mightily stands. This most extraordinary grace and
favor of Divine assistance, having not in one thing, or two, showed it self,
nor for some few days or years appeared; but in such sort, so long continued,
our manifold sins and transgressions striving to the contrary: What does it
else import, or what can we less thereupon conclude, than that God would
thereby tell and teach the World, That the thing which he blesses, defends,
and keeps so strangely, cannot but be of him, and his saving and sacred Truth?

Ill do they then, who transported with a pang of spiritual Pride, abandon,
forsake, and separate from our Church, as though Gods true worship and
salvation were not there to be found. You see how Satan by spiritual Pride
may carry and cast a man, from a settled and sound course of holiness and
sincerity, upon the dangerous Rocks of singularity and separation. But
understand me aright, what I mean by singularity. I mean that only which
arises out of privy Pride, is upholden by self-will, and obstinatenesse, and
many times ends in separation; and has neither ground nor defense from sound
judgment, spiritual wisdom, or true tenderness of Conscience, joined with
humility, and willingness to be rightly informed. I mean not singularity,
in respect of holiness and unspottednesse of life, in respect of difference
and distance from the sinful fashions of the times: For in this sense, every
man that will save his soul, must be singular. Hence it is, that our Savior
asks his followers, in Math. 5. what singular thing they do, if they do but
as the Publicans do? As if he should have said: You that will be Christians,
must be of a more heavenly temper, and higher strain, than the most men, and
the greater part of the World: You must be singular, and shine as Lights amid a
naughty and crooked generation. Hence is it, that Gods children ever were, and
ever will be, Signs and Wonders, Miracles and Monsters, in the opinion and
censure of most, amongst whom they live; gazing stocks, both by reproaches and
afflictions, Heb. 10. 33. Behold (says Isaiah, Chap. Isa. 8. 18.
8. 18.) I and the children whom the Lord has given me, are as signs and as
wonders in Israel, by the Lord of Hosts, which dwells in Mount Sion. I am
become (says David) as it were a monster unto many, (or, Psalm. 71. 7. and 79.
4.
to the great men of the World, as some render it) Psalm. 71. 7. And in another
Psalm, Psalm. 79. 4. We are a reproach to our neighbors, even a scorn and a
derision unto them that are round about us. But especially you may see in Wisd.
2. (though the Book be Apocryphal) what is the counsel and conceit of the
wicked about the oddenesse and singularity of the Saints: Let us defraud the
righteous (say the wicked) for he is not for our profit, and he is, contrary
to our doings; he checketh us for offending against the Law, and blames us as
transgressors of Discipline; he makes his boast to have the knowledge of God,
and he calls himself the son of the Lord: He is made to reprove our
thoughts. It grieveth us also to look upon him: for his life is not like other
men's, his ways are of another fashion; he counts us as bastards, and he
withdraws himself from our ways, as from filthiness; he commends
greatly the latter end of the just, and boasts that God is his father.

Thus, as Gods children and godly men are indeed more excellent than their
neighbors; and singular, in respect of their sanctification and sincerity: so
they are scorned and reviled by the World, and the greater part of men, as odd
fellows, and such as must have ways by themselves, and a trick above others.
They are pointed at, as matter of scorn and contempt; they are set up, as
marks of slander and oppression; and gazed upon, as strange creatures. We are
made (says Paul, 1 Cor. 4. 9.
1 Cor. 4. 9. meaning himself, and other of Gods faithful servants) a
gazing-stocke unto the World, and to the Angels, and to men. And no marvel
though it be so: For, besides that all profane and unregenerate men are
naturally ineagered, and enraged with implacable malice and hatred against Gods
Children; they are, in all places, but few in number; which makes them more
noted, and pointed at.

That they are but few; Gods children are but few.
besides many certain demonstrative Reasons out of Scripture; it may thus
plainly appear: as a good Divine tells us.

First, 1
let there be taken from amongst us, all Papists, Atheists, and scorners of
godliness, and Religion.

Secondly, 2
let there be removed all notorious and infamous evil livers; as Swearers,
Drunkards, Whoremongers, Usurers, Worldlings, Deceivers, proud persons,
prophaners of the Sabbath, Gamesters, and all the profane and ignorant
multitude.

Thirdly, 3
let all those be passed over, that are but only civil honest men, and meddle
not with any profession, or practice of holiness; without which, no man must
see God.

Fourthly, 4
set aside all gross Hypocrites; who for advantage, or by-respects, are
outwardly religious, but inwardly corrupt, hollow-hearted, and abominable.

Fifthly, 5
let there be sorted out and rejected all carnal Protestants, formal
Professors, backsliders, cold and unzealous Christians; who falsely think,
that they may both enjoy the World, and a good Conscience too; live pleasantly
on Earth, and yet save their souls at last; and, that it is not necessary to
hold any such strict course of holiness, to come to Heaven. Let all these
kind of men, I say, (all which in one measure, or other, are in the state of
death, and under the power of Satan) be separated and shoaled out; and how
many do you think will remain amongst us, sound, sincere, faithful, and
zealous professors, and practisers of saving Truth, the power of Grace, and
holy Obedience to all Gods Commandments? For such only are Gods servants, and
in the state of Grace. Let a man come into any Town, Village, City, or
Corporation, and let all such men as are before mentioned, be removed; and how
many should he find of these last? They would certainly be thin scattered,
and like the Grapes after the gathering of the Vintage, two or three in the top
of the upmost boughs, and four or five in the high branches. Singularity
then of sanctification, is no fruit of Pride, but an inseparable mark and
necessary state of true Christianity.

I come now to a third ground, 3 Satan tempts to Pride, by a distasting of a
man's particular calling.
whence Satan may raise a temptation to privy Pride: When a man is faithful,
and diligent, in the discharge and executions of his civil calling; he may
cast a conceit into his head, that such base, earthly, and worldly employment,
and spending his time, is disgraceful and derogatorie to the providence of
God, and his Christian liberty; and, that it hinders him in his calling of
Christianity, and duties of Religion. Whence may sollow dangerous effects of
spiritual Pride; quite leaving, or neglect, discontent or distaste of his
civil calling. And so his heart and affections may be put quite out of order,
and deceive themselves, in the very maine point of making toward Heaven.

Satan, 4 From Gods providence.
by his subtle malice, may work out matter and occasion of spiritual Pride,
from the special providence of God, conducting the Christian the best and the
nearest way to Heaven. Examples in particular.
To give example, in some particulars.

1 When God, 1
out of his great wisdom and mercy, humbles him with afflictions and
pricks, the swelling of his Pride; when he cuts and loppes away his vanities,
excesses, and superfluities, with some visitation, or other; and fills him with
bitterness in this life, to the end he might long for the life to come: Why
then, Satan labors mightily to kindle in his corrupt nature a flash of
spiritual Pride, that he may drive him to grumbling and impatiencie, and so
make Gods fatherly corrections and chastisements fruitless and unprofitable to
him; which in Gods children should ever work amendment and comfort.

2 When the true Christian looks about him in the World, 2
and sees the wicked spreading themselves like green Bay-trees, in worldly
plenty, and pleasures; Satan here thrusts in, and labors to cast into his
mind a consideration of his own worth; and that, how in respect of the
wicked, he far more, and rather, deserves the fruition and enjoyment of the
creatures, and benefits and comforts of this life: because all wicked men are
but usurpers, and intruders; himself being a true owner, by the right of
Christ Jesus, Lord of the whole Earth: And that, whereas he stands for the
glory, service, causes, and children of God; the wicked labor for nothing
more, than the disgrace and ruin of goodness, and the upholding and
enlargement of the Kingdom of Satan. From such conceits as these, mixed with
spiritual, he easily draws him on to fretting and repining at the
prosperity of the wicked men, and puts him into one of David's fits, Psalm. 73.
12.
and pangs, Psalm. 73. 12. Lo (says he) these are the wicked, yet prosper
they always, and increase in riches: Certainly, I have cleansed my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocence. Or, at least, brings him to question
with God; Ier. 1^. 1, 2.
as it is, Ier. 12. O Lord, if I dispute with thee, thou art righteous; yet let
me talk with thee, of thy Judgments: Wherefore does the way of the wicked
prosper? Why are all they in wealth, that rebelliously transgress? Thou have
planted them, and they have taken root; they grow, and bring forth fruit.

3 When the Christian does presently feel, 3
or after call to mind Gods great mercies, gracious preventions, strange
protection, wonderful deliverances, against expectation, and beyond hope,
vouchsafed unto him in his direction and conduction toward the glory that is
to be revealed; then does Satan busily blow the Bellows of his corrupt nature
with the poisonous breath of his hellish malice, that so he may puff him up
with spiritual Pride, and exalt him out of measure.

4 When he beholds and observes some sudden destruction, 4
or fearful judgment, to overtake and seize upon his enemies; Satan may
secretly solicit him, out of a spice of spiritual Pride, to applaud and
please himself in the ruin and misery of his adversary: which, besides the
tainture of impiety, tastes deeply also of inhumanitie, and is quite cross
and contrary to the practice and protestation of holy Job, Job 31.
Chap. 31. In that Chapter, he imprecates and invocates upon himself many
fearful Curses, if he has done so, 22.
or so. Let mine arm (says he) fall from my shoulder blade, and let mine arm
be broken from the bones, if I have done such and such things. And after
follows: 29.
If I rejoiced at his destruction that hated me; or was moved to joy, when
evil came upon him; or if I have suffered my mouth to speak evil of him, or
to utter Curses against him.

5 When the Christian is sadly and heavily musing upon his many troubles and
distresses, 5
which many times come thick and threefold upon him, as fast and
boisterously, as one wave overtakes another; so that he finds one vexation to
be still a step unto another: Satan then he puts in, and seeing the season
advantageous for his feats, and insinuations, works what he can to make him
take on; and out of a proud conceit of better deservings, to be weary of
waiting the Lords leisure; and out of the anguishes and agonies of his heart,
to wish and desire death; especially to be rid and freed from those crosses and
calamities, which unworthily haunt and persecute his innocence. Holy Job was
strongly assailed with this temptation, Chap. 3. when he cried and said: Job
3. 3.
Let the day perish wherein I was borne; and the night, when it was said, there
is a manchild conceived, etc. And so was the Prophet Jonah, Chap. Jonah 4. 3.
4. Therefore now (says he) O Lord, take I beseech thee, my life from me; for
it is better for me to die, than to live.

6 Sometimes, 6
when the Christian is crossed and disappointed in his expectation, God wisely
and sweetly diverting, moderating, and disposing all things to his own glory,
and to the true good of his children (though they do not presently see, and
acknowledge it;) Satan steps in, and by the secret and insensible poison of
privy Pride, labors to suggest unto him, that he is prejudiced and disgraced;
that so by his inward fretting, he may make it plainly appear, that he
preferres his own particular credit, before the glory of God. Thus was Jonas
tempted, in Chap. 4. Fearful destruction was denounced by him from God,
against the Ninivites: They put on sackcloth, humbled themselves, and repented;
God stays his hand, forbeares his Judgments, which were proclaimed by Jonah:
Therefore (says the Text) that displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was
angry; and he prayed unto the Lord, and said, etc.

When he begins to observe, 5 Satan makes men to pride themselves in their
abilities and gifts.
and admire himself for some special acceptance in Christian company; for
his abilities to pray, confer, discover temptations, and the Devils depths;
to press an holy preciseness, and mortifying points, etc. Oh then, too often
a wide gap is opened in his deceitful heart, for the Devils wildfire of
spiritual Pride. So that many times, an humble silent soul does quickly
outstrip such an one, doting dangerously upon his present perfections, in the
substantialls of Christianity.

Thus, and many more ways, does Satan labor by privy Pride, to weaken the
power of Grace, and efficacy of the Word; to stain and disgrace the best
Graces and godliest actions; to grieve the good Spirit, and cool their first
Love, even in Gods children; after that, by the help of God, they have
struggled through other temptations, and obtained much spiritual peace and
Christian perfection in the doctrine of salvation, and ways of godliness.

Before I pass from this point, Preservatives against spiritual Pride.
I would propose some remedies against this swelling spiritual malady of
privy Pride, and some sovereign considerations, to keep down the Christian
heart, and to preserve it in the sweet and peaceful state of a gracious
humility.

First then, 1 Meditate upon Gods pure eyes.
let every Christian, when he first feels any overweening conceit, or proud
persuasion of his own worth, and spiritual graces, stealing into his heart;
lift up the eyes of his mind, in a divine meditation, unto those brightest and
purest eyes of God Almighty; which are ten thousand times brighter than the
Sun, and purer than purity it self: so that they see the least and
secretest infirmity in its true and native foulness; and before them, our
best righteousness is as a menstruous clout. Isa. 64. 6.
If he soundly and sincerely entertain this consideration, it will so humble
him, and keep him under, that he will rather be affrighted and surprised with
fear and terror, for his many frailties and infirmities, than be lifted up
with a conceit of his graces, and spiritual endowments.

When he begins once proudly and selfe-conceitedly to gaze upon that little
spark of holiness he finds in himself; 2 Upon Gods infinite perfection.
let him presently turn back the edge and eye of this dangerous speculation,
upon the infinite purity and endless perfection of God Almighty; before
whom, the Cherubins and Seraphins, the Crown of Gods workmanship, and the
glory of creatures, do hide and cover their faces, as not able to behold and
endure the perfect brightness of his most pure and undefiled Majesty. Isa. 6.
2.
In whose sight, the unstained splendor of the Heavens, and the glorious
beauty of the Stars are unclean, and foul; Job 25. 5.
darkness, and deformity. The Sun, the fairest Body in the World, made all
of beauty and brightness; if it were put near unto that unaccessible and
incomprehensible Light, which encompasseth the Lord of Heaven, it would vanish
away as a darkesome Moat, and Lump of Vanity. Nay, in respect of God, those
divine and heavenly creatures, the blessed Angels, pure and immateriall
spirits, are chargeable with folly and vanity. Job 4. 18.
Behold, he found no steadfastness in his Saints; yea, the Heavens are not
clear in his sight. How much more is man abominable and filthy, which
drinks iniquity like water? Job 15. 15, 16. What art thou then, wretched
man, that carriest about thee a Body of death? Shall not his excellency make
thee afraid, and his fear fall upon thee? Behold (says Job) he will give no
light unto the Moon, Job 25. 5, 6.
and the Stars are unclean in his sight: How much more man, a Worm; even
the son of a man, which is but a Worm? Job 4. 18.
Behold, he found no steadfastness in his servants, and laid folly upon his
Angels: How much more in them that dwell in Houses of Clay, whose foundation is
in the Dust, which shall be destroyed before the Moth? These considerations are
able to confound and cast down below the Earth, and Dust, the greatest admirer
and applauder of himself, for his graces, good actions, and spiritual
perfections.

When the Christian is tempted to a proud conceit of his spiritual
sufficiencies; 3 Compare thy self with other Christians.
let him compare himself with other Saints of God: which (perhaps) having
been less sinners than himself, in the time of their unregeneration; and
having less means, parts, occasions, and encouragements to glorify God: yet
excel him in zeal, sanctification, and the service of God. Paul, that great
Doctor of the Gentiles, and glorious Angel upon Earth, for all his spiritual
blessings, and incomparable graces, cries out, Romans Romans 7. 24.
7. 24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? David, a man after Gods own heart, and a special royal Mirror for
variety of spiritual excellencies, is so far from being proud of his
graces; that he is every where complaining of the burden of his sins,
spiritual poverty and want, and the miseries of his soul: Psalm. 38. 3.
There is no health in my flesh, (says he) because of thy displeasure; neither
is there any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin: for my wickednesses are
gone over my head, and are like a sore burden, too heavy for me to bear. For
his reputation in the World, Psalm. 22. 6.
he tells us; that he was a Worm, and no man; a very scorn of men, and
outcast of the people. In all times, the best Christians have ever been most
sensible of the weight of their sins, and corruption of their nature; and
from thence, entertained a lowly conceit of themselves. Where there is the
greatest measure of sanctification, there is ever the greatest humility. If
those then that be indeed in the highest favor with God, lesser sinners than
our selves, and most sanctified, be of an humble and lowly mind, of a meek
and quiet spirit, which is before God a thing much set by, 1 Pet. 3. 4. let us
take heed how we be proud 1 Pet. 3. 4.
of those graces; which, if we look for Gods blessing upon them, and comfort
from them, must bring forth in us humility and thankfulness.

Let him compare, 4 Compare thy self with Gods holy Law.
and examine, and measure himself, his ways, and works, by the Law of God;
and he shall there find much matter of humiliation, repentance, fear, and
trembling, with continual supply in abundance ministered unto him: so that
there shall be no room left for any proud and overweening conceit of any good
thing in him. That elect Vessel, and great Apostle, after he was regenerate,
(for the unregenerate feel no such strife) found such a vast and wide distance
between the Law, and his own affections, and best works; that for horror
thereof, he cried out; Oh miserable man, that I am! What spiritual good then
is there in any of us, miserable wretches, wherein we should glory? Let our
best works be as glorious as we can imagine, let them be performed with never
so great integrity and resolution, cover them with grace, derive them from the
Holy Ghost, dippe and dye them deep in the blood of Christ, put upon them all
the rich attire, and Papal magnificence, with which the Church of Rome has
invested them; yet to the purest eyes of God, and in the clear Crystal of his
undefiled Law, they appear to be foul, and spotted; impure, and like a
menstruous clout. The measuring then of our selves by the Law and Word of God,
is a notable means to keep us in humility, Phil. 2. 12.
and to make us work out our salvation with fear and trembling.

Let him consider, 5 Consider what thou had been, if God had left thee to
thy self.
what a foul and wretched, what a damned and an accursed creature he had
been; had not his gracious God, out of the unsearchable depth of his infinite
goodness and mercy, singled him out to be his servant upon Earth, and a Saint
in Heaven. It was only Gods free mercy, that before all eternity, by the
great Decree of his eternal election, marked him out for Heaven and endless
joys, from amidst the huge mass of all mankind. It was the same, that after
caused him to send his own and only Son, out of his own Bosom, and height
of Majesty; that with his dearest and precious blood, he might redeem his
Soul from the snares of Hell, into which he was fallen, by Adams fall: which
in due time, by the inward, special, and effectual power of his unspotted
Spirit, called him into his Kingdom of Grace, washed him, justified, and
sanctified him, in the Name of the Lord Jesus. Else, otherwise, had not these
everlasting and unconceivable Blessings been cast upon him, by Gods free mere
mercy, without all cause or motive from man, or any other created thing, out
of his infinite Self; his case had been unspeakably woeful: For he should
have lived in this Vale of Tears, without God, without Grace, without Comfort,
without Conscience; in Sin, in Darkness, in Profaneness, in all
Spiritual Miseries: And after the closure and period of these few and evil
days, he should have been endlessely divided and abandoned from the joys and
comforts of Gods presence, inchained without all redemption, to despair and
horror, and the hateful fellowship of the Devil and his Angels: and (that
which is the extremity and upshot of all hellish misery) he should have had
the fierce and horrible wrath and vengeance of God poured in full measure upon
his body and soul; which would have fed upon them, as fire does upon Pitch and
Brimstone, for ever and ever. Out of these considerations, me thinks a man
should rather with humility and thankfulness admire and magnify the mercies
of God, that he is not already a Firebrand in Hell; than any ways be puffed
up with any worthiness in himself, or dote upon his own nothingnesse.

When a Christian is tempted to spiritual Pride; 6 Consider the fearful
effects of Pride.
let him deeply and thoroughly weigh with himself, what fearful
inconveniences and discomforts will ensue, if he give way to such temptations:
For so, many follow, in the course of Gods just judgment, upon spiritual
Vanity, and Pride; dullness, and deadness of heart; a restraint of the
influence of the Spirit; a diminution and lessening, or a slumber and cessation
of the operations of grace, a cooling of zeal, and falling from the first
Love. Or, when he sees us so presumptuously to trust to our strength, and stay
our selves with our own staff; he may quite give us over, in some great
temptation, to some gross sin; so that we may take the foil in the
Conflict. And then, if we once be over-taken with the old sweet sin of our
unregeneration, or be ensnared with some new notorious transgression; we must
of necessity, to our great discomfort, enter again the agonies of Soul,
anguish of Conscience, and horror of Hell; we must enter combat again with
all the powers of Darkness; we must have our regeneration, regenerated; our
new birth, newborn; and the precious blood of the Son of God, as it were,
shed for us again. We turn thereby Gods favorable countenance from us, and
the hearts and affections of true Christians: we put again a sting into our
own Consciences, and weapons into the hands of Satan, to vex, wound, and
torment us: we bar and bereave our selves of Gods gracious protection, of
the guard of Angels, of peace of Conscience, of joy in the Holy Ghost, of
boldness in our ways, of reconciliation in the creatures, and of all the
comforts of godliness. As a man tenders the preservation of his Soul, from
all these spiritual miseries; let him take heed of entertaining a proud and
overweening conceit of his own graces, gifts, or good actions.

Let him consider, 7 The more a man has, the more he is accountable for.
that the more spiritual gifts and graces he has received from the free
mercy of God, the more will be required at his hands. Me thinks, this should
cool and allay any swelling conceit, or proud persuasion, that may arise in
the heart; and not suffer a man to play with them, and dote upon them, or give
him any leisure, with an overweening and selfe-conceited flattery, to gaze
upon them, or to applaud and admire them in himself, as though they were his
own; but rather, with all vigilancie and solicitousnesse, with all care and
good Conscience, to occupy and employ them for his Masters greatest advantage.

There is no gift or good thing in any man, either of Nature or Grace, of body
or mind, of wealth or honor, of reputation or authority in the World; but he
must give shortly a strict and exact account of the usage and employment of it,
before the impartial and uncorrupted Tribunal of Heaven: And the more
excellent his gifts and endowments have been in any kind, he shall in
proportion be answerable, and countable for the more. If the Lord has
enlightened, heated, and inspired any one with much saving knowledge, with a
great measure of zeal, with a high Christian courage, and resolution; he
looks and expects for great gain of glory unto himself, many spoils and
conquests over his enemies, a blazing and exemplarie brightness, in holiness
of life; much beauty and luster to the Church, much good and comfort unto
Christians: For much is required of them, Luke 12. 48.
to whom much is committed.

Let a man then not labor to make himself glorious, by those graces which are
none of his own; but how, by glorifying God with them, in humility,
faithfulness, and sincerity, and by improving and making the best of them,
for the Owners advantage, he may make a comfortable account at that great Day.

Thus far I have proposed unto you some Motives, to quicken and stir you up
to a conscionable and constant hearing and understanding of the holy Word of
God; and acquainted you with many sleights, lets, and temptations, which Satan
usually casts in our way, to hinder us therein.

Now, in a third place, I will lay down unto you certain rules, directions,
and instructions, for your right, holy, and conscionable carriage, behavior,
and importment, in and about the hearing of Gods Word.

That the holy Word of God may be unto you the Word of Grace, the savor of
Life unto Life, of power unto sanctification and salvation; you must look
carefully and conscionably unto your preparation, before you come; unto your
carriage, while you are there; and unto your behavior, afterward.

First, 1 Preparation required to profitable hearing.
for Preparation.

I am persuaded, the want and neglect of a due and profitable preparation, is
the cause that thousands receive no benefit or blessing by the Word of Life;
but that the Sermons they hear, are registered, as in a Table of Remembrance,
before God, For want of preparation, the Word becomes to men,
as so many witnesses against them, for their more fearful confusion and
greater condemnation at the Day of Accounts.

1 For hence it is, 1 The savor of death unto death.
that to many it is the savor of death unto death; because, before they come,
they do not address and prepare themselves for so glorious a Presence, and
royal Embassage from the King of Heaven: though they hear it with their
outward ears, yet it hardens their hearts, makes them inwardly more peevish,
grumbling, stubborn, rebellious, and refractarie to the power thereof, and
prepares and ripens them for more heavy vengeance. It is of it self the Word
of Grace, Salvation, and Life; a blessed preservative against Sin and Death,
Damnation and Hell: but by accident, if men do not reverence it, tremble at
it, and submit themselves to the power of it, it is a strong Hammer, and Iron
Scepter, to harden their hearts more and more, like an Anvile, or Adamant; and
at length, to break them in pieces like a Potters Vessel. Though in it self,
it be a saving and wholesome Medicine; yet men of a rebellious and stubborn
humor and temper, turn it into Poison.

2 To some, 2 As Seed in the high way ground.
this holy Word, by reason of unpreparednesse, is but as the water spilt upon
the ground, and the breath of the Minister scattered in the Air: If you call
them to an account, after Sermon, how they have profited; they are as
wordlesse, and witless, and indeed as graceless in repetition, as if they had
been deaf, asleep, in a trance, or stark dead all the while.

3 Others, 3 Men are made but only formal by it.
by their rash and profane rushing into the House of God, without all
premeditation, reverence, or regard of that holy business they go about;
become hearers only, of form and custom, for fashion and company. It may
be, they may hear, attend, and understand what is delivered; but it breeds no
more reverence, impression, or spiritual reformation, than an ordinary Tale,
or humane discourse: As though that holy toil, and sacred breath, were spent
only to entertain the Time, and busy men's ears for an Hour; and, not as
Christ tells Paul, To open their eyes, that they might turn from Darkness
unto Light, and from the power of Satan unto God.

4 Upon some, 4 Some become scornets.
the Judgment and Curse of coming without Conscience, and due preparation,
does so far prevail, and has such power, that they become scorners and
raylers against the Minister, or his Doctrine, or both; at every Sermon they
catch something, that they may cavil at, deprave, and calumniate: And so,
wickedly and wretchedly oppose their discourse, wit, and spirit of
contradiction against the face of Heaven, and heart of Divine Truth. They
wrangle and repine (in deed and truth, whatsoever their pretenses or
protestations may be to the contrary) against that Great Majesty, whose
Message it is; against that Holy Spirit, which should sanctify them; and the
Word of Grace, which should save them.

5 Others there be, 5 Others are cold and dead-hearted.
even of good hearts and affections, Professors, and in some good measure
practisers of the power of godliness; yet because they are careless and
neglective of this needful Christian duty of preparation, are possessed with
much deadness of heart, and dullness of spirit, at those holy Exercises.
Their zeal, and fervencie, which should be quickened and inflamed at every
Sermon, is dulled and benumbed with senselessness and satietie: They do not so
tremble, or are cast down with Divine Comminations and denouncements of Gods
Judgments against sin, or so refreshed with the gracious promises of Life,
and Salvation, as they ought to be: They do not enjoy and reap the thousandth
part of that delight, comfort, and benefit as they well might, by the
Ministry of the Word, because their hearts are not purged and prepared: They
do not with that cheerfulness receive, with that sweetness taste and
relish, with that life and vigor digest the Food of Life: The eye of their
mind, for want of premeditation, does not so clearly see and discern the
infinite beauty of that sacred Majesty represented unto them, or that
glorious grace shining unto them, in the face of CHRIST JESUS: Their hand of
Faith does not with that feeling, and fastness, lay hold upon and claspe
about, the rich Treasures revealed in the Gospel. In a word, they bereave
themselves of much good, blessing, comfort, and growth in grace, which they
might and ought to have, by hearing of the Word, for want of due preparing, and
disposing the heart thereto.

This duty of Preparation then, though that it be not much thought upon, or
ordinarily practiced; yet it is of great necessity and special use for all
those, which look for benefit or blessing by the preaching of the Word.

There is no great Affair, Preparation requisite in civil affairs, much more
to the hearing of the Word.
or of weight and consequence, either in Nature or Art, in necessary
businesses and civil Negotiations, or in matters of Complement, Ceremony, and
Enterview; but there is required some bethinking preparation and
prae-dispositions, for the more happy and successful accomplishment,
execution, and performance: how much more in the affairs of God, matters of
Heaven, businesses of eternity, and salvation of men's souls?

The Ground must be manured and prepared for the Seed, if we look it should
fructify and prosper: how much more should our dull and dead hearts be
stirred up, and furrowed, as it were, with humiliation, reverence, and
repentance; that by the grace of God, and the sanctifying power of the Spirit,
it may lodge and take deep root in them, and spring up to eternal life?

The Body must be fitted with a Preparative, and the humors, as it were,
gathered unto a head, if we desire the Physic should work forcibly and
kindly, and rid us of their noxiousnesse, and superfluity: how much more ought
our Souls, with an impartial and narrow inquisition, to be searched and laid
open, before they receive the Water of Life, and spiritual Manna; that so they
may more seasonably and soundly be washed and purged from corruptions and
imperfections, preserved in spiritual health, and prepared for eternal life?

The Ground must be laid, and some imperfect Draughts, Shadows, and
resemblances premised, before a Picture can be done to the Life, or a full
proportion and lively representation pourtrayed or presented to the eye; how
much more ought the ground of our hearts to be fitted and prepared, that by the
preaching of the Word, the Image of Christ Jesus may with a lively and fresh
impression be stamped upon them?

Were a man the next day to go about a business that mainely concerned either
his life, or livelihood; the state of his Lands, or danger of his life: Would
not his mind be troubled beforehand? Would it not break his sleep the night
before? Would he not be musing, and plotting, by what means he might work out
his deliverance, and safety? what behavior and carriage might be fittest, to
win favor and grace in so weighty an affair? How much more ought we,
before we intrude into the House of God, where matters of our greatest and
highest interest, are proposed, handled, and debated by the Minister of the
Word; even life eternal, and everlasting estate in another World? I say, how
ought we to think with our selves, how we may make our souls fittest to
understand and accept the Covenant of Grace, to receive the Seal of the
Spirit, and to get assurance of that glorious and royal Inheritance in the
Heavens?

Nay, yet further, even in matters of complement and enterview, there is wont
to be preparation, especially if the presence and persons were the greater.

Joseph, Genesis 41. 14.
when he was sent for to go before King Pharaoh, he shaved his head, and
changed his raiment, because he was to appear before so high and royal a
presence.

Queen Hester durst not press into the presence of King Ahashuerosh, H^st. 2.
12.
before she had prepared her self.

How much more ought we to fit and prepare our selves, base and miserable
wretches, Worms and no men, as we are, with fear and trembling, when we
come into the House and presence of the mighty Lord of Heaven and Earth;
before whom, Isa. 40.
the Seraphins hide their faces, the Nations are as a drop of a Bucket, and the
inhabitants of the Earth as Grasse-hoppers: especially, since there he offers
and tenders unto us enlargement from the slaverie of sin, purgation from our
pollutions, and a Crown of life, upon that condition, that we repent, forsake
all our sins, and resign up our selves in sincere and humble obedience unto
all his Commandments?

Inducements we have, Motives to Preparation.
and Motives many, both from Precept, 1 Precepts out of the Word for it.
and Practice, in the Book of God, for the performance of this Christian duty
of Preparation.

Take heed to thy foot ( says the Preacher) when thou enterest into the House
of God, 1 Eccles. 4. 17.
and be more near to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools; for they
know not that they do evil.

Before thou set foot into the Church, to hear the Word of God, be sure to
settle thy affections, that they be sober, moderate, and sanctified, fit to
entertain the Word of life, and salvation; let thy heart be seasoned with,
Before we hear, our hearts must be qualified with,
first, Softness; secondly, Humility; thirdly, Honesty; fourthly, Faith;
fifthly, Teachablenesse.

First, 1 Softness.
if thou do not preserve thy heart tender, soft, and flexible, the power of
the Word will not make any such print or deep impression upon it; all holy
admonitions, reproves, and instructions, will be unto thee as Arrows shot
against a Stone wall.

Secondly, 2 Humility.
we must bring with us an humble heart, to the hearing of the Word; for, the
Lord resists the proud, Iam. 4. 6.
and gives grace to the humble. Them that be meek, Psalm. 25. 9.
will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way. The proud heart is
so swelled with the wind of vanity and vainglory, of self-love, and
overweening conceit, that there is left no room in it for the precious
Treasure of saving grace. If it either be puffed up with a conceit of
knowledge, or a persuasion of holiness enough, or a boisterous peremptorinesse
against the power of the Word; the Water of Life will be unto it, but as Water
poured upon a drowned man; or as a Seal thrust upon Water, which will receive
no impression. A lowly heart, broken and bruised with Conscience of sin, is a
fit Seat for the mighty Lord and his saving graces, Isa. Isa. 57. 15.
57. 15.

Thirdly, 3 Honesty.
we must come with a good and honest heart; which hates all corruptions, both
in it self, and others; which has no delight in any sinful pleasures, or
wicked vanities; which has no manner of purpose to live and continue in any
one sin whatsoever; but is ready and resolved, though it be much cumbred
with it own corruptions, the Worlds enticements, and Satan's craftiness; yet
to serve and please God, in all the ways of his Commandments, and that
sincerely and continually. All profitable and fruitful hearers have such good
and honest hearts, and are resembled by the good ground, Luke 8. 15.
Luke 8. 15. But that is a wicked and sinful heart, and not fit to be wrought
upon by the Ministry of the Word, which purposes and resolves to cherish
and maintain but any one sin whatsoever.

Fourthly, 4 Faith.
our hearts must be seasoned with Faith; otherwise, it will not sink and soake
into them with power and profit. The old Jews heard the Word, Heb. 4. 2.
but it profited them not, because it was not mingled with faith in those that
heard it, Heb. 4. 2. The fearful threatenings and thunderbolts of the Law, by
Faith receive an edge to wound, and pierce and strike through our souls, with
amazements and trembling. And Faith it is, that animates and inspires the
promises of the Gospel with such a sovereign sweetness, and powerful
comfort; that they are able, not only to raise and revive us from the depth
and extremity of remorse, and fear; but also to put us into a Paradise of
spiituall pleasures, and possession of Heaven, as it were already. But if the
Word light upon a faithless heart, it dies, it does no good.

Fifthly, 5 Teachablenesse.
we must bring with us into the Lords Sanctuary, teachable and hearing
hearts, that will willingly and readily open themselves, to receive the Lord of
glory, with whatsoever he shall reveal unto us out of his holy Word. Psalm.
40. 6.
Sacrifice and burnt offerings (says David) thou would not, but mine ears
have thou prepared. As if he should have said: Thou have bored new ears in my
heart, that I can now reverently attend unto, rightly conceive, and with an
holy greediness devour the mystery of grace.

With such hearts as these, must we come to the hearing of the Word, if we
look that it should be unto us a Word of power, salvation, and life; and not
to be of the number of those, that offer the sacrifice of fools, and yet know
not that they do evil.

Many there are certainly, which offer these foolish sacrifices; I mean,
hearers, without care and conscience: Who, if they come into the House of God,
and vouchsafe their presence in the place, and lend their ears to the Preacher
for the time; they think themselves presently jolly fellows, for matters of
Religion; and that they are sanctified, as it were, by the Work wrought, and
their only presence in that holy place: when as yet the Word has had no more
power, nor wrought more alteration upon them, than upon the Seats where they
sat.

And that which makes these fools much more miserable, and foolish, is this;
They know not that they do evil: as it is in the Text. They think their case
good enough, that they are in the right course of Christianity; and that no
more is required, for matters of Heaven: when as, in respect of saving grace,
they are wretched, miserable, and poor; Rev. 3. 17.
and blind, and naked.

Besides this place of the Preacher, the Evangelist S. Luke, 2 luke 8. 18.
Chap. 8. 18. bids us, take heed how we hear. And good reason, in a matter of
such great weight and consequence. For there is not a Sermon we hear, but we
must be countable for it at the Day of our Visitation. God is countable unto us
for every hair of our head; is it not reason, we should be countable to him
for those precious Lessons he reaches unto us by the Ministry of the Word?
Assuredly, there is not a Sermon, which we have heard fruitlessely, and
without profit, but it will be a shrewd and sore witness against us at that
Day.

Besides these Precepts, 2 Instances for the practice of Preparation.
we find much practice in the Book of God, of this holy duty of
Preparation, when any sacred business was to be undertaken.

Moses could not approach so glorious and sacred a Presence, MOSES.
or tread upon the ground, made holy by so great a Majesty as the Lord of
Heaven and Earth, Exodus 3. 5.
before he had put off his shoes. Neither ought we to presume or press into
his Sanctuary, where he has promised his Presence in a solemn, special, and
powerful manner, and is ready to shower down his blessings of salvation into
all truly humble and prepared hearts; before we have shaken off and cast from
us all earthly encumbrances, and secret corruptions, all dullness and deadness
of heart, whith makes us unworthy and undisposed to stand upon so holy ground,
and utterly incapable of all that heavenly Wisdom, and holy instructions unto
eternal life, that are there taught, and tendered unto us; nay, turn the
blessings of the Ministry into curses and condemnation unto us.

When Ioshuah was to make a strong and lasting impression in the hearts of the
Israelites (whom after the death of Moses, IOSHVAH.
he conducted to the promised Land) of the power and providence of God for his
people, J^sh. 3. 5.
by that miraculous parting of the Waters of Jordan, for the transportation of
the Arc; he commanded the people to sanctify themselves, to prepare, and
compose their hearts; to admire and reverence with greater intention and
amazement, that omnipotent Majesty that wrought such wonders for his chosen:
For hearts emptied of worldly thoughts, and sanctified by heavenly meditation,
are fit subjects for works of Heaven, and divine impressions. How much more
ought we to prepare our souls, before we come into the Sanctuary of the Lord;
since there, they are either to be hardened for the Scepter of destruction, and
made ready for the flames of Hell, if we do not prepare our selves, hearken,
and obey: or else, to be softened and sanctified with saving grace, and fitted
for a Crown of Glory; if with reverence, humility, and obedience, we submit
our selves to the power of the Word? There, if we be unconverted, the great
and miraculous work of the new birth is to be wrought upon them; if we be
newborn, they are to be fed with the spiritual Manna, unto everlasting life.

The same Ioshuah, Josh. 7. 13.
when the excommunicate and execrable thing was to be found out, and put from
amongst them; which was the cause, they could not stand against their enemies:
he commanded them to sanctify themselves, that the Lord might prosper and
pour his blessings upon that necessary and weighty search and inquisition.
How much more ought we to prepare our selves, before we step into the House
of God; since there is to be discovered and cast out those hateful sins that
fearfully incense Gods wrath against us, and make us weak in the Lords
battles, and not able to stand against our spiritual enemies, the
corruptions of our own flesh, the enticements of the World, and temptations of
Satan?

Before the sacrifice, SAMVEL.
and anointing of David King of Israel, 1 Samuel 16. 5.
Ishai and his sons were sanctified: How much more ought we to be prepared,
before we come before the Lords Prophets, and Ambassadors; that there we may
be anointed Kings and Priests unto our God? Rev. 5. 10.


Josiah, JOSIAH.
before the eating of the Paschall Lamb, did bid the people, 2 Chro. 35. 6.
not only sanctify themselves, but also prepare their brethren: How much more
ought we, when we come to the Ministry of the Word, to seed by faith upon
that true Bread from Heaven, Joh. 6.
which gives life unto the World; which if we once soundly taste with
believing hearts, we shall not hunger, we shall never thirst?

But the most famous and fittest place for my purpose, The people, before the
giving of the Law.
and preparation in that particular holy business of hearing the Word, is that
in Exodus 19. 10. Exodus 19. 10.
The people were sanctified, and washed their clothes, and prepared themselves
for two days, and the third day they were ready to attend what the Lord would
say unto them. As in that extraordinary promulgation of the Law, the people
were to be prepared extraordinarily; so, from proportion of that practice, and
precedencie, ordinary preparation is necessary for the ordinary preaching of
the Word, if we look that it should powerfully and profitably work upon our
Consciences and affections. Verse. 15.
Their washing of their bodies, and clothes, their abstinence from their wives,
and such solemn and ceremonious purifications, were typical significations
and representations unto us, that we should weane our hearts from earthly
thoughts, purge them from secret corruptions, and bring them fair and free,
from sinful spot and worldly entanglement, when we come to hear the Lord
speak unto us by his Ministers.

Holy men of God were wont, addressing themselves to prayer, to have their
ejaculations, lifting up of their hearts, certain short prayers, before they
entered into that sacred and solemn action.

Besides Precept and Practice in the Book of God, 3 The profit of it.
for Preparation; the profit is great, the benefits and blessings that redound
unto us, and fall upon us by it, are excellent and precious. Look in the
latter end of the eleventh Chapter of Job.

If thou prepare thine heart, Job 11. 13.
and stretch out thine hands toward him.

If iniquity be in thine hand, 14.
put it far away, and let no wickedness dwell in thy Tab^rnacle.

Then truly shall thou lift up thy face without spot, 15.
and shall be stable, and shall not fear, etc.

Preparation of the heart, is here the foundation and first step unto many
glorious blessings. The heart must be first prepared, before other holy duties
can be fitly performed, or Gods blessings expected.

In the first place; first, prepare thine heart; secondly, then pour it out in
prayer, before the Throne of Grace; thirdly, then purge it from corruption;
banish far, and bar out all iniquity; fourthly, next, be sure to reform,
instruct, and pray with thy family, or those that are about thee: Let no
wickedness, ignorance, profaneness, swearing, swaggering, drunkenness, or
the like, dwell in thy Tabernacle, harbor in thine house, or rowst near thee.

And then open thy heart, and hands; for the Windows of Heaven shall be set
wide open, that all manner of spiritual comforts, all the blessings of peace
and happiness, may in abundance be showred down upon thee; the rich Treasury
of everlasting Glory and Immortality shall be unlockt unto thee, and thou
shall row and tumble thy self for ever after, amid mountains of heavenly
pearls, and golden pleasures; through Rivers, nay Seas of endless joys, that
no heart can comprehend, but that which is weaned from all worldly pleasures,
and set apart and sanctified for holy services and businesses of Heaven.

Then truly shall thou lift up thy face without spot. Verse. 15.
] Though thou have lain among the Pots, yet thou shall be now as the wings of a
Dove, that is covered with Silver, and whose feathers are like yellow Gold.
Though thou be like the Kedarims, which dwell in Tents, the black-Moores; that
is, by reason of thy sin, subject to the condemnation of God, and deprived of
his glory: yet shall thou be in Christ, goodly and glorious, as those that
dwell in exceeding glory, Cant. 1. 5.
under the Curtains of Solomon. Though thou be black with the remnants of
original corruption, and present infirmities; though the Sun have looked
upon thee, and parched thee with the scorching heat of sore affliction, and
chastisements: yet shall thou now shine like the Sun in his strength, with
the royal Robe of Christ's righteousness, with fresh comfort, and lasting
cheerfulness.

Thou shall be stable, and shall not fear.] Though the wicked tremble many
times at their own shadows, and the sound of a Leaf shaken does chase them,
and strike a faintness into their hearts, and a trembling into their loins;
yet thou shall never be afraid of any evil tidings, whether they be forged by
the spightfull and impoysoned tongues of profane men, Psalm. 112. Prove. 3. 24.
to defame and disgrace thee, or fetched out of the bottom of Hell, Job 5. 21,
22.
by Satan's malice, to terrify thee; though the messengers of miseries and
mischiefs come thick and threefold upon thee, as they did upon Job; though
the Earth be moved, and the mountains fall into the midst of the Sea; Psalm.
46. 2.
nay, though the whole World be on flames about thine ears, and the Heavens be
rouled together like a Scrowle: yet shall thou be stable, and shall not fear,
because thy heart is fixed, and believes in the Lord.

Thou shall forget thy misery, Verse. 16.
and remember it as waters that are past.] Thy happiness and comfort shall be
so entire and unmixed, so absolute and overflowing, that the very remembrance
of former miseries and terrors shall be drowned and devoured in the excess and
excellency of that; even as the travels of a woman, in her joys for a
newborn son: Or, if it be, that thy former discomforts sometimes steal
into thy mind, they shall not be able to rest or remain there, by reason of
the predominancie of spiritual pleasures; but glide away as swiftly, as the
headlong stream of the most hasty Torrent.

Thine age also shall appear more clear than the Noonday; Verse. 17.
thou shall shine, and be as the Morning.] The Morning is the very Crown of
Time, and the beauty of the Day; the Poets call it, the (...).
Rosie-finger'd Morning. When they labor to describe corporal Beauty to the
life, and set it out in the best perfection and freshest colors that the
utmost power and highest strain of wit and art can possibly devise; they take
their Metaphors and amplifications from the ruddinesse and brightness of the
Morning: And yet thou shall be as fair as the Morning, with all Divine Graces,
spiritual brightness, and beauty of thy Soul; nay, a Soul set thick with
spiritual Graces, is far more fair than the Firmament, with all those Eyes
of Gold, and fairest Lamps, that shine from it. Neither shall thou be only as
the Morning, but as the Morning Sun; thou shall rise higher and higher in
degrees of holiness, and strength of Grace, until thou come to the highest
point of perfection in this Heaven upon Earth, the Kingdom of Grace. And after
thou have finished thy course, and left behind thee the comfortable heat of thy
gracious zeal, much Light from thy good example, and the sweet influence of
thy holy life; upon thy deathbed, thou shall set with the sweetest and
brightest beams of all heavenly comfort, into the immeasurable Ocean of
endless joys.

Thou shall be bold, Verse. (...).
because there is hope; and thou shall dig Pits, and shall lie down safely.]
Thou shall be assured of Heaven, and a Crown of Glory hereafter, that thou
shall walk through this Valley of Misery like a Lion; nor Devil, nor man,
nor beast, nor any creature, shall affright or amaze thee. Cast thine eyes,
supernaturally enabled, and enlarged with the Light of Faith, from East to
West, into the bottom of Hell, and glory of Heaven; and thou shall clearly
see, that all is thine, by the purchase, right, and conquest of the Son of
God: Job 5. 23.
The stones in the street shall be at league with thee, the beasts of the field
shall be at peace with thee: The creatures shall be all sworn to thy safety;
the purest spirits, the ministers of God, shall be thy Guardians; Saints and
Angels are already in thy sight; Immortality has lengthened thy days, and
the glory of God is before thee in a Glass.

When thou do take thy rest, Verse. 19.
none shall make thee afraid; yea, many shall make suit unto thee.] When the
darkness of the Night encompasseth thee, thou shall not be affrighted with
terrors and apparitions; when blackness and silence, the habitation of fears
and astonishment, shall pitch round about thee, thou shall be lightsome with
inward comfort; when all thy Senses, the scouts and watchmen for discovering
dangers, and preserving thy safety, shall be locked up; his providence, that
neither slumbers nor sleeps, shall tenderly and carefully watch over thee;
Romans 14. 8.
Whether thou die or live, whether thou sleep or wake, thou art the Lords: And
therefore, when thou sleep, thou shall not be afraid; Prove. 3. 25.
and when thou sleep, thy sleep shall be sweet: See Job 5. 21, 22.
Thou shall not fear for any sudden fear, neither for the destruction of the
wicked, when it comes; for the Lord shall be for thy assurance, and shall
keep thy foot from being caught.

Yea, many shall make suit unto thee.] Thou shall be so encompassed with the
blessings of God, so protected from above, so high in Gods favor, that many
will come for shadow and shelter unto thee; they will look for relief and
comfort under the shadow of thy wings, thy power and authority shall be a
refuge and repose for oppressed and disgraced innocence.

All these blessings, and a thousand more, are built upon a through preparation
of the heart, as upon the first foundation stone: Preparation is the very first
step to all these degrees, and height of happiness.

But on the contrary part, if a man neglect preparing his heart, praying unto
God, forsaking his sins, reforming his family; let him look for nothing but
Curses and Plagues.

But the eyes of the wicked (says Job) shall fail, Verse. 20.
and their refuge shall perish, and their hope shall be sorrow of mind.] They
think, their formal and customarie service of God will serve the turn; and
thereupon, with great greediness and confidence, expect and look for the
salvation of their souls after this life: but they shall wail, and gaze,
until their eyes sink into their holes, and yet shall never be able to taste
of true comfort: They may cry until their tongues cleave to the roof of
their mouth, with the foolish Virgins; Lord, Math. 25.
Lord, open unto us, Math. 25. but the Gate of everlasting happiness shall for
ever be shut against them: They may struggle and strive, by the strength of
their good meanings, and formal Christianity, Luke ^3. 24.
to enter in at the strait Gate, but shall never be able.

Their refuge shall perish.] They have stayed themselves upon broken staves of
Reed, and ^ow they will run into their hands and hearts too, unto their
vexation and horror.

And their hope shall be sorrow of mind.] Their end shall be despair, and
horrible confusion.

I have stayed long upon the motives and inducements to preparation, before we
come to the hearing of the Word, or undergo any sacred b^sinesse; and upon the
necessity, blessings, and benefits of so holy a duty. The reason is, I would
gladly stir you up, and my self too, to a through and constant practice and
performance of it: and, because the neglect and omission of it, is the cause
that the Ministry of the Word is not only fruitless, and in vain, unto
thousands; but (which is a fearful thing) the savor of death unto death unto
them.

I come now to the special points considerable in preparation, before we
present our selves in this place to the hearing of the Word.

This preparation is an holy action, What preparation is.
or exercise, which by examination of our Consciences, purgation of our hearts,
prayer unto God, and private reading the Scriptures, makes our souls fit
Vessels to receive and entertain the spiritual Treasures of Grace; and food
of eternal Life, offered and tendered unto us by the Ministry of the Word;
that so they may be the more effectually and fruitfully wrought upon, and
happily subdued to the power and practice thereof.

In this preparation, Four^ things required in preparation.
I consider and require especially these four things: first, Examination of
the Conscience; secondly, Purgation of the heart; thirdly, Prayer unto God;
fourthly, Readiness of heart, to receive every truth.

First, 1 Examination.
for Examination of the Conscience.

Examination is a duty practisable by all true Christians, at many times, and
upon sundry occasions.

It is either more extraordinary; 1 Extraordinary.
and that is, either in the time of solemn Fast, and general humiliation, for
some public Plague and calamity that lies upon the State or Church. In time
of public calamity.
We are then seriously to search and ransacke thoroughly our Consciences, that
we may throw that or those sins out of our affections, practice, and
allowance, which have their part in pulling down those public Psagues upon us.

Or, 2 When our families are visited with some special judgment.
secondly, when our family is singled out, and visited with some special and
extraordinary scourge, and judgment: and then must we make an impartial
inquisition into our hearts; lest we be the Achans, which by our secret sins
provoke Gods causefull wrath.

Or, 3 When we our selves are afflicted in particular.
when our selves in a more private and particular manner, are afflicted with
some special vexation; as, by some malady and misery in our bodies, with
some terrors and fears in our minds, or with some slanders, disgraces, and
imputations upon our good names: when Gods hand is upon us any of these ways,
we are presently to conceive, that the sins of our souls are the true
causes of all the miseries and crosses which befall us any manner of ways; and
therefore we are narrowly and exactly to enquire into our selves, and to cast
out our secret beloved sins, those lurking rebels, the breeders of all our
woe.

Besides, 2 Ordinary.
examination of our hearts in these or the like cases; there is also a more
ordinary and usual examination necessary, 1 Every day.
and required of us, and that especially every day; that we may make the Score
of our sins less, and our account shorter, against the Day of our
Visitation; that we may more entirely and comfortably preserve and enjoy Gods
favor and protection, inward peace of Conscience, spiritual joy, and
Christian cheerfulness in all our affairs and passages.

2 Before we come to receive, 2 Before the Sacrament.
and be partakers of the holy Sacrament of the sacred body and blood of Christ;
lest by neglect and omission of this duty, we become unworthy receivers, and
so eat and drink our own judgment, and damnation, nay, be guilty of the
innocent and precious blood of Christ Jesus; which one day will be an heavy
and unsupportable burden to our Consciences. Simile.
To be guilty of the sinful blood of profane men, is able to make the
proudest heart and highest stomach to tremble and quake like an Aspen leaf,
and to strike through his soul; with restless horror, and ghastly sights. Who
is able then to bear the guilt of guiltless blood? Genesis 4. 13.
Abels innocent blood cried for and pulled down strange and desperate
vengeance upon cruel Cain. How loud then will be the cry of the blood of the
innocent Lamb of God? How will it ring in the ears of God the Father? How
fearfully will it fill Heaven and Earth, until it has brought down Plagues
and Curses upon those woeful Souls, who irreverently and unpreparedly profane
so high and holy a mystery?

A third ordinary examination, 3 Before we hear the Word preached.
is before we press into the House of God, and present our selves before his
Ministers and Messengers, to be instructed in his will from Heaven, out of his
holy Word; lest this blessed Ordinance should be accursed unto us. You may see
in the Prophet Ezech. 14. 7, 8. how the Lord threatens that person that comes
to his Ministers to enquire of them, or to be informed by them, and yet
separates himself from the Lord, and sets up any Idol in his heart, and
stumbling-blocke of his iniquity, before his face; that the Lord will set his
face against him, and make him a sign and a Proverb, and cut him off from the
midst of his people. Whence we may well infer, that it will be very
dangerous for any to come to the hearing of the Word, without examination of
his heart, whether there be any such stumbling-blocke of iniquity in it, or no.

2 Because that examination of the heart, The second duty besides hearing, is
purging of our hearts.
to find out our corruptions, tends especially to the cleansing of it;
therefore the second duty before the hearing of the Word, is the purgation or
cleansing of the heart, first, from sin; which the Scripture beats much upon,
Iam. 1. 21. Lay apart all filthiness and super^luiti^ of naughtiness, and
receive with meekness the ingrafted Word, etc. It is not merely lay apart,
but put away quite and clean all filthiness: and this is a fit preparative
for the hearing of the Word, as appears also by that parallel place, 1 Pet. 3.
1, 2. Wherefore putting away all malice, all guile and hypocrisy, and envy,
and evil speakings, as newborn babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word.
And there is the same reason for any other sin to be put away, that there is
for these mentioned. As it is with the body, when the stomach is foul, and
clogged with bad humors, we should first purge it, before we feed it; for
otherwise, whatsoever we eat, does but nourish and increase the corrupt
humors of the body: So it is with the soul, when it is stuffed or clogged
with sin; whatsoever is heard in the Ministry of the Word, shall be
perverted and abused by it, and wrested to the destruction of it.

It is no wonder therefore, that those that live in dissolute or scandalous
courses, those that are drunk on the evening before the Lords day, or spend it
in gaming, or company keeping, or have bin acting of some soul sin, and then
repair unto the Word; it is no wonder, I say, that such go away never a whit
the better, but rather worse than they came. Did you ever know any Salve so
sovereign, that would cure a wound that had a splint or an arrow-head
remaining in it? Surely, every known sin unrepented of, hinders the saving
operation of the Word in any man's heart; yea, it will make the Word the savor
of death unto a man. See to this purpose, Ier. 7. 9, 10.

Secondly, the heart must also be purged from all worldly cares and thoughts,
which may divide or draw away the heart: Math. 13. 22. The cares of the World
do choke the Seed of the Word: Luke 21. 34. The cares of this life do surfeit
the heart. Now, as it is with a man in a surfeit, he is not fit to eat, neither
can he digest any wholesome food: so, when as the heart is surfetted with
worldly cares, it is unfit for any spiritual food. You know how it was with
Martha, Luke 10. 41. Jesus said unto Martha; Thou art troubled about many
things, but one thing is necessary: Martha had a clutter of many worldly
matters, that made a great noise in her head, and hindered better matters, that
she cared not for hearing.

How then shall they profit by the Word, that do jumpe out of their worldly
business, and from busying their heads about their callings, into the House of
God, to hear and to perform the Exercises of Religion? Truly, though they be
never so diligent in hearing, yet their hearts will go after their
covetousness, Ezech. 33. 31.

3 A third duty before the hearing of the Word, Thirdly, Prayer, another duty.
is Prayer; no good thing can be expected from God, as a blessing, if it be not
sought by prayer, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. and we find it laid down as a condition
required, Prove. 2. 1, 2, 3, etc. My son, if thou will receive my words, and
incline thine ear to wisdom, and apply thy heart to understanding; yea, if
thou cryest after knowledge, and liftest up thy voice for understanding, then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find out the knowledge of
God. The reason is, Verse. 6. For the Lord gives wisdom, and out of his mouth
comes knowledge and understanding. Because the Lord gives knowledge,
therefore you must cry for it unto him. What is the reason that you do pray
for your daily Bread, and a blessing upon it? Why, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Man lives not by
Bread only, etc? If this be so, much more ought you to pray for a blessing
upon your spiritual food.

Now for the particulars: First, you ought to pray for the Teachers, That they
may so speak, as they ought to speak, Col. 4. 3, 4. so they are to pray for
the power and peace of the Ministry, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 1, 2. Secondly, you must
pray for your selves, that through Gods assistance you may hear profitably,
and be blessed in the hearing: Ioh. 3. 27. No man can receive any thing, except
that it be given him from above. Therefore David prayed, Psalm. 119. 18. Open
thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things contained in thy Word.
Isay 48. 17. God says, I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit:
Therefore no profiting by the Word, without seeking unto the Lord for it.

Now the profaneness of people in this case, is the general cause that our
Ministry does no more good: Few pray at all before they come to Church,
either for the Minister, or for themselves; nay, few, even when they are in the
Church, have any heart to join with the Preacher in the prayer that he makes
before the Sermon: But the complaint of the Prophet may be taken up in this
case, Isa. 64. 7. There is none that calls on thy Name, that stirs up
himself to take hold of thee.

4 You must be sure to go with an open heart, The fourth duty, opennesse of
heart.
ready to receive every truth that God shall teach you in this Ordinance. Act.
17. 11. it is said of those noble Beraeans, that they received the Word with
all readiness of mind, i. readiness to receive every truth. And Cornelius
said, Act. 10. 33. We are all here present before God, to hear all things
that are commanded thee of God. It is well added ( that are commanded thee of
God:) not what any Minister shall teach, be he never so good, or so learned;
nay, were he an Angel from Heaven, yet his Doctrine must be examined, Gal. 1.
8. But when there is such a disposition in us, as to receive both in judgment
and practice whatsoever God shall reveal unto us out of his Word; this is a
precious disposition.

But, alas, the most come to hear with prejudicate and fore-stalled hearts,
they bear a secret grudge, and quarrel, against some strict Truth, or other;
as, against the sanctification of the Lords Day, or Family Duties, or secret
communion with the Lord, by prayer daily, etc. And these imaginations seem as
strong Holds, to keep Christ and his Truth out of their hearts, 2 Cor. 10. 4,
5. And thus men, that in their hearing do limit the Spirit of God, would (if
it lay in their power) say as those wicked men, Isay 30. 10. to the Seers, see
not; and to the Prophets, prophecy not right things unto us; speak unto us
smooth things: And those that said so, the Lord calls them despisers of his
Word.

These are the maine and principal duties before the hearing of the Word.

Secondly, 2 Duties required in the hearing of the Word.
let me proceed briefly to those duties that are required in the hearing of
the Word: Which we must the rather stir up our selves unto, because we have
naturally uncircumcised hearts, Ier. 6. 10. and are dull of hearing, Heb. 5. 11.

Now the principal duties in hearing, are five; which I will briefly set
down as may be.

1 You must set your selves in Gods presence, 1 To set our selves in Gods
presence.
whilst you are hearing of his Word: and consider with your selves, that it is
God that you have to deal withal in this business, and not man; and that it
is Gods Word, and not man's. It is the great commendation of the Thessalonians,
1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. that they received the Word as the Word of God. This was that
whereby the Lord would prepare his people to receive the Law, Exodus 20. God
spoke all these words. And he not only gave the Law, but the whole sum of
the Gospel with his own voice, Mat. 3. 17. Lo a voice from Heaven, saying,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Yea, it is the Lord
himself that speaks unto you in our Ministry, Luke 10. 16. So the Lord is
present in a special manner, where his Word is preached, to observe and mark
how it is received, or delivered; and either to bless or curse the hearers, or
speakers, accordingly. So that of this and such like places, it may be said as
Jacob said of Bethel, Genesis 28. 16, 17. Surely, the Lord is in this place* and,
How dreadful is this place? This is no other than the House of God, this is
the Gate of Heaven.

And truly, this apprehension of Gods presence in the Assemblies of his people,
will work three things in us.

First, keep us in that awful and reverent disposition of body and mind that
is meet.

Secondly, it will preserve our hearts from ^oving and wandering thoughts,
which are great impediments of hearing; Psalm. 119. 113. I hate vain thoughts,
but thy Law do I love.

Thirdly, it will make us to receive and obey that that shall be taught us; for
so God has been wont to prepare his people, to receive his Word: yea, he said
of his people, when they were thus affected, Deuteronomy. 15. 29. Oh that there were
such an heart in them, to fear me and keep my Commandments always.

Now the want of this, is that which hinders abundance of benefit that the
Ministry of the Word would otherwise do us: This is the root of all the
mischief the Devil does to poor souls, in the hearing of the Word; the
practice thereof, is the fountain of all our good. Many graceless wretches
there are in our Assemblies, like him, Luke 18. 2. that neither feared God, nor
regarded man; that despise the Church of God, yea, contemn the presence of the
holy Angels, (1 Cor. 11. 10.) and of God himself in the Assemblies, who has
laid such a special charge upon us, Lev. 26. 2. to keep his Sabbaths, and to
reverence his Sanctuary; and he adds this reason, I am Jehovah.

2 The second duty in hearing, 2 Attention.
is diligent attention to that we hear: as it is said of our Savior Christ,
Luke 19. 48. The people were very attentive to hear him; or, as it is in the
Original, they hanged on him: as if their ears and minds had been tied to
his tongue; there was such a dependencie upon him. And that is a remarkable
place, Ezech. 40. 4. Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine
ears, and set thine heart upon all that I shall show thee. See what attention
is required: He bids him set his eyes and his ears, and his heart and all,
upon that he speaks; and not upon some things only, but upon all that he
should declare unto him. So Prove. 4. 20, 21, 22. My son attend unto my words,
incline thine ear unto my sayings, keep them in the midst of thine heart, for
they are life to those that find them: i. look as a condemned man will
hearken to the Sentence of the Prince; every word he speaks, being life or
death: As the servants of Benhadad, when they were in their enemies power, 1
King. 20. 33. they observed diligently whether any word of comfort would come
from him, and they did hastily catch it. Thus, with such diligence and
attention, such poor condemned creatures (as we are) are to hear the Word of
God.

Now to quicken attention, these means are profitable.

First, it is good to do as they did, Luke 4. 20. They fastened their eyes
upon Christ; so do ye upon the Minister, and suffer them not to wander up and
down: A wandering eye is always a sure evidence of a wandering heart.

Secondly, if ye do not thus, it will be a good help for those that can
write, to note the Word, as Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah, Ier. 36.
4. This holds the mind close to all that is said. Some object indeed, that it
hinders affection in hearing: but though it may do so in some, for the
present; yet afterward it will work more lasting affections upon the Word. A
Cavea^.
Only they that use this helpe-meanes, must be careful that they do not
presume upon their Notes so, as to neglect the recalling of what they have
heard, (as many use to do) and so lose all holy affections, and that
impression that the Word would make upon their hearts.

Thirdly, entreat the Lord to open thy heart, as he opened Lydia's heart, Act.
16. 14. Our hearts are shut up quite, and cannot attend unto any thing that is
good, except that the Lord opens them.

Observe then another cause, why the Word is so unfruitful unto many. Some are
like the deaf Adders, that stop their ears against the voice of the Charmer,
Psalm. 58. 4, 5. And some sleepers there are, that fail in their attention,
that the Devil usually rocks asleep, when they come to hear; but they that
are such, should know, that their damnation sleeps not, the Devil sleeps
not: he comes to the Assemblies, to pick up the good Seed that is sown; nay,
he comes to pick up their souls indeed: for he cares not so much for the
Seed, but he will take your selves napping and your souls especially, and
carry them to Hell. Besides, let them remember what befell Eutychus, Act. 20.
9, 10. he slept at a long Sermon, that lasted till midnight; but he was taken
up dead, falling from the third Loft to the ground: What shall become of such
then, that sleep in the day time, at a Sermon of an hour long? And let them
also take heed of that spirit of slumber, that the Lord has threatened to pour
upon the despisers of the Word, Isay 29. 9, 10. The like might be said of our
gazers and gapers about, and those that by their talking disturb others, and
hinder themselves: they shut their ears, and turn them away from God; and may
justly expect, that he shall turn away his ears from them: as it is
threatened, Prove. 2. 8, 9. Zach. 7. 13.

3 You must hear the Word with understanding and judgment; 3 Hear with
understanding.
i. labor to understand what we hear: And to this end, the Minister must
have a special care to teach plainly, so as he may be understood, Neh. 8. 8.
And Christ calls upon his hearers for this, Math. 15. 10. Hear, and
understand: How should we else profit by that we hear? Act. 8. 36.
Understand thou what thou read (says Philip to the Eunuch:) so say thou
to thine own heart; Understand thou what thou hear?

Now the means to understand the Word, are these.

First, come to the Word, with a willing mind to learn: you know the Eunuch,
Act. 8. though he understood not what he read, yet because he had a mind to
learn, how the Lord provided for him, and what a comfortable success Philips
Sermon had with him. Men love to teach willing scholars; so does God, when we
come with willing and ready minds to be taught.

Secondly, exercise your selves in the truth of God, Heb. 5. last; you must by
continual use, get your senses exercised to discern both good and evil: but
especially, be well acquainted with the principles and grounds of Catechism;
it is the want of this, that makes men that they understand not what is
preached: They that are not first well nourished with Milk, will not be fit to
receive and digest stronger meat: if the foundation be not well laid, it is in
vain to build.

Thirdly, walk according to Light; Psalm. 111. 10. A good understanding have
all they, that do his Commandments: Then, if thou would get a good
understanding, and know the mystery of godliness, walk according to
knowledge, employ that little knowledge thou have well, and then there is a
promise to give thee more.

Fourthly, be diligent in instructing and teaching thy family: If thou art set
over others, a little knowledge will increase greatly, by this means. Genesis 18.
17, 19. the Lord said; Shall I hide any thing from Abraham? No: And he gives
this reason; I know him, that he will command his children and his household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. If you teach your
families, God will teach you.

Well; there are a sort of doltish hearers, that will hear, and seem to be
very attentive, from years end to years end, and be never a whit the wiser, 2 Timothy 3. 7. The heavy judgment of God is upon many of them, that is mentioned,
Math. 13. 14. And in them is fulfilled the Prophecy of Isay; By hearing ye
shall hear, and shall not understand; and that, I-say 27. 11. It is a people
of no understanding: therefore he that made them, shall not save them; and he
that formed them, shall show them no favor.

4 You must hear the Word with affection, 4 Hear with affection.
and delight. It is said of Gods people in the Primitive Church, that they
heard the Word gladly; and of Christ's hearers, Mark. 12. 37. they heard him
gladly: And it is noted for a great sign of grace, to hear the Word gladly,
Psalm. 119. 162. I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds great spoils. David
had been a soldier; and ye know, that they that have lain at the siege of a
City a long time, and at the last take it, will rejoice exceedingly in the
spoil of it: therefore he rejoices in the Word, as they that do divide the
spoils. And truly, whereas common people complain of the badnesse of their
memories; this would be a mavelous help to their memories, if they would
hear with delight: therefore David says, Psalm. 119. 16. I will delight my
self in thy Statutes, I will not forget thy Word. This delight he means will
strengthen our memories.

Now contrary to this, are a great number, that hear without all delight, and
account it a great weariness, Mal. 1. 13. and those the dullest hours, that
they spend in hearing. Well, the Lord has threatened, that the Word shall never
do us good, unless that we attend to it with love and delight, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
10, 11. Because they received not the love of the Truth, that they might be
saved; therefore God shall send them strong delusions, to believe Lies. A
fearful threatening, much to be considered in these days: For this is the
reason, that Popish trumperies and hellish delusions have such entertainment,
because God in his just judgment, gives up those to such strong delusions,
that love not the strict Truth of the Word of God.

5 You must hear the Word, 5 Hear with application.
with application of it to your own hearts, and lives; apply every truth to
your selves, for your own use and comfort, and terror and instruction: as it
is Job 5. last; Hear this, and know it for thy self; carry this truth home to
thine own heart: And,

First, there is no truth of God taught out of his Word, but it concerns every
one of Gods people, and was intended for our use; Romans 15. 4. Whatsoever is
written, is written for our learning.

Secondly, there is no truth can be taught, to do us good, unless that we
apply it: as no Plaster can do the Patient good, unless it be applied; no
meat is able to do us any good, be it dressed never so curiously, unless it
be eaten and digested. This comparison is applied by the Prophet to this
purpose, Isa. 55. 2. Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good: unless we eat it, it will do us no good.

Thirdly, the faithful have been wont to apply all to themselves; as every
member of the body draws nourishment from the stomach, to make it his own:
to which the Apostle alludes, Ephesians. 4. 16. So the Disciples of our Savior did,
Math. 26. 21, 22. When our Savior had said, that one of them should betray
him, they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say unto
him; Lord, is it I?

And surely, the want of this application, is one great cause that the Word
profits not, because they believe it not, nor apply the Word unto themselves:
Heb. 4. 2. The Word preached did not profit them, because it was not mixed with
faith in them that heard it.

Now one principal work of faith, is to apply those things that are delivered
in the Word: But this, the most hearers do exceedingly fail in; either not
applying, or mis-applying of the truth; shifting off all upon others, and
taking little or nothing to themselves. As we have a notable example of this,
Romans 1. ult. compared with Romans 2. 1. In the former place, the Apostle speaks
of some, that knowing the judgment of God, That those that do such things,
are worthy of death; yet not only do such things, but take pleasure in those
that do them: yet in the beginning of the next Chapter, you find the same men
judging and condemning of others; yet thinking and persuading themselves, that
they (being guilty of the same sins) shall escape the judgment of God. Why?
but because they apply not to themselves, but mis-apply to others the things
they hear.

Many such hearers there are in these days, which are very cunning in shifting
off the threatenings of God against their own Drunkenness, and Whoredom, and
Swearing, etc. yet very apt to pin the same Word upon others. Well, these are
not wise for themselves, and all their hearing shall do them no good. Thus
much of the duties required in hearing.

Now follow those duties that are required after hearing. 3 The duties after
hearing.
And these are chiefly thus.

1 We must be very careful to remember and keep that which we have heard, 1
We must remember it.
Prove. 4. 4. My son, let thine heart retain my words: and, Verse. 21. Keep
them in the midst of thine heart. As a man that has a Jewel, will be careful
to lock it up in the safest Chest he has, lest it should be stolen away:
Which is the very comparison of the Wiseman, Prove. 6. 20, 21. So Mary, Luke 2.
51. kept all the sayings in her heart: and David, Psalm. 119. 11. hid the
Commandments in his heart; and he gives the reason, That he might not sin
against the Lord. And the truth is, that as meat that is eaten, if it remains
not in the stomach, it will never do us good: so the best spiritual food
that can be, except it be retained by us, will not profit us: Luke 8. 15. The
good Ground are they, which with an honest and good heart having heard the
Word, keep it, etc.

Many there are, that are very careless of this duty: They think they have
discharged themselves abundantly, if they hear the whole Sermon attentively;
as though there were nothing more required at their hands: Like our Saviors
hearers, Math. 22. 22. When they heard him, they marvelled, and left him, and
went their way: but we never hear more of them. So many hear desirously, and
with open and greedy ears: but, as we say, it goes in at one ear, and out
at another; it stays not for any after-use, but a little present admiration.
Others hear, and the Word smites them a little on their Consciences, and
wounds; and one would think, some good thing would be wrought upon them: but
they go away, and the motion dies. They are as men that are Seasicke, whilst
the Word humbles them, and makes their Consciences to wamble within them; but
they are as whole as a Fish, when as they are once landed at the Church door:
Or like unto Metals, which are soft and pliable, whilst they are in the fire;
so these are in the hearing: but shortly they loose all the efficacy of the
Word, and become harder than before.

Well, let us in the fear of God, hearken diligently to the words of the
Holy Ghost, Heb. 2. 1. That we ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things that we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip, or run
out (like riven Vessels:) Why; what is the danger? How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation?

2 We must meditate and seriously think of that that we have heard; 2 The
second duty, Meditation.
that is more than remembering. There is a great deal of difference betwixt the
possessing of goods, and the using and employing of them for our benefit;
betwixt the laying up of garments in our Wardrobes, and the wearing of them
upon our backs, to keep us warm: this latter is done by meditation. Prove. 6.
22, 23. My son, bind the Commandments continually upon thy heart, and tie
them about thy neck: It is a phrase of speech borrowed from garments that are
bound about the body; for meditation binds the Word close to the heart. It is
said of Mary, Luke 2. 19. that she pondered the words of the Angel in her
heart: and David was frequent in this duty, Psalm. 119. 15. I will meditate in
thy Precepts (says he:) And it was Paul's advice to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 15.
Meditate upon these things, give thy self wholly to them, that thy profiting
may appear to all.

First, this is the way to make men profit by the Word of God; and that so
evidently, that all may take notice of it, this is one great benefit of the
Word meditated upon, Josh. 1. 8. Thou shall meditate in the Book of the Law
day and night: To what end? That thou may observe to do according to all
that is written therein.

Secondly, this course will argue unfeigned love unto the Word, Psalm. 119. 97.
Oh how I love thy Law, it is my meditation all the day.

Thirdly, this will greatly increase our comfort in the Word, and cause us to
feel much more sweetness in it; even as the chewing of our meat makes us to
taste much more sweetness in it. Psalm. 119. 15, 16. he says; I will meditate
on thy Precepts, and have respect unto thy ways, I will delight my self in
thy Statutes: Meditation ever brings with it delight.

Fourthly, this will greatly increase our knowledge: Psalm. 119. 99. I have more
understanding than my teachers: Why? because thy testimonies are my meditation.

Now, if this be required after hearing; how is it possible that they should
profit by the Word, that never scarcely think of it afterward? It is noted of
the Disciples, that though they had seen Christ's mighty power in the miracle
of the Loaves; yet because they considered not the miracle, their hearts were
hardened: i. because they did not meditate upon it, they were never the better
for it. And thus it usually speedes with those that are careless in the
performing of this duty.

3 We must confer of that we have heard, 3 The third duty after hearing,
Conference and Repetition.
and repeat it amongst our selves, and examine the Scriptures about the truth
of that that is delivered. I join them all together; for so they may well be,
in the practice of them. For conference, David says, Psalm. 119. 172. My tongue
shall speak of thy Word, for all thy Commandments are righteousness. This
was ordinarily practiced by the Disciples of our Savior Christ, when he had
taught how hardly rich men shall be saved, Mark. 10. 26. They were astonished
out of measure, and said amongst themselves, Who then can be saved? So they
conferred about another Sermon of our Savior, Ioh. 16. 17, 18.

Now repetition of Sermons is especially required of them that have families,
to repeat the Word unto them: Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19. You shall lay up these my words
in your hearts, and you shall teach them your children; speaking of them when
thou sit in thy house: yea, it is said to be the chiefest thing that the
Lord had respect unto, in giving us his Word, and the knowledge thereof, that
we might instruct our families in it. Deuteronomy. 4. 10. Gather ye my people
together, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear
me, and may teach their children. And this, if it were practiced carefully,
would both make children and servants more careful to hear and to attend unto
the public Ministry; and better our memories, that we may be much better
able to retain that which we hear: and it will also work an inward feeling
in us and our children, of that which we have heard. Therefore, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7.
it is called the whetting of them upon our children; repetition does set an
edge upon their dullness.

Yea further, for the searching and examining of the Scriptures, we are
commanded, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. to try all things, and to hold fast that which is
good. And the example of those noble Beraeans is commended unto us, Act. 17.
11, 12. that searched the Scriptures daily, concerning those things that were
delivered by Paul; Therefore many of them believed.

Therefore it is a grievous neglect, that people in these days are guilty of;
that neither confer concerning the Word, they are ashamed of it, and (which
is a fearful reproach unto them) the Word of God is a reproach unto them,
Ier. 6. 10. nor yet repeat Sermons in their families; they are like Martha,
Luke 10. 41. troubled about so many worldly occasions: nor yet examine and
search the Scriptures: And therefore are easily carried about with every wind
of Doctrine, and never established and settled in the Truth.

4 We are to put in practice whatsoever we hear, 4 A fourth duty, Obedience.
till that our hearts and lives are quite changed by it: Iam. 1. 22. Be ye
doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own souls: i. they
cozen themselves by false reasonings and arguments, (...).
or by sophistical Syllogismes, reasoning after this or the like manner.

He that hears the Word, is a good Christian.
But I hear the Word, etc.
Or thus:
He that hears not, shall be damned.
But I hear the Word:
Therefore I shall be saved.
But how does this follow? For though the neglect or contempt of the Word is
sufficient to condemn a man, yet the hearing of the Word is not sufficient to
save a man.

Well, obedience is the end of hearing, Deuteronomy. 5. 1. Hear, O Israel, the
Statutes which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and
keep them, and do them. The like ye find, Iam. 1. 25. Yea, obedience to the
Word must be speedy, without any delays, or procrastinations; as it is said
of the Colossians, Col. 1. 6. that the Gospel brought forth fruit in them, from
the very day they heard it, and knew the grace of God in truth. And the Prophet
David resolved, Psalm. 119. 60. I made have, and prolonged not the time to keep
thy Commandments. And this is a singular frame of heart; because the putting
of the Word in practice immediately, is a great advantage to the hearer: seeing
then, the affections of the heart are quick, and lively; which with delays
dye, and decay very suddenly.

Now, alas, for the wonderful paucitie of such obedient hearers; for very few
do practice any thing they hear, leave any sin, or do any duty: and
therefore they must needs prove like the House built on the Sand; when the time
of trial shall come, they must needs fall, Math. 7. 27. Again, there are many
that in hearing have good motions and purposes; but they are like the sluggard,
that said, Prove. 24. 33, 34.
Yet a little slumber, yet a little sleep; so, because they delay, they vanish
and come to nothing: of whom, in respect of their spiritual poverty, it may
be said which Solomon speaks; His poverty shall come as one that travelleth,
and his want as an armed man.

AN APPENDIX OR ADDITION to this Treatise of the WORD.
PROVE. 13. 13. He that despises the Word, shall be destroyed.
BY the occasion of which words, let our Christian meditations be a little
fastened upon the greatness of the sin of contemning and despising of the
Word. My meaning is, not to handle it as a Text, but only to take a hint, to
begin to lay down the danger of this epidemicall and ordinary disease, that
so exceedingly spreads in these days; and then to add some means and
directions, to make us to be preparedly and profitably conversant about so
great an Ordinance as the hearing of the Word.

WE of this Land (let us now open our eyes to see it) have certainly most
fearfully and cursedly sinned against God, and provoked his fierce wrath
against us, by contempt of his holy Word; by shutting our eyes against the
heavenly Light of the Gospel, which has been brought amongst us; by not
prizing the Ministry which we have now enjoyed a long time, nor profiting by
it: nay, by wicked opposing it, with secret persecution at the least, and
cruel mockings.

In the first place, consider the cry of this sin, and the curses it brings,
from such places as these.

First, 1
Isa. 29. 11. and both before, and after: And the vision of all (says the
Prophet) is become unto you as the words of a Book that is sealed, etc. So may
I justly say: All the visions, revelations, discoveries of the mystery of
Christ, opening of all Gods counsels; all the expositions, interpretations,
applications of the Ministry of most places, have been unto the most of us; a
fearful thing I speak, but most true, and to be lamented with tears of
blood; as the words of a Book that is sealed, which they deliver to one that
can read, saying, Read this, I pray thee: Then shall he say, I cannot; for it
is sealed. And the Book is given to him that cannot read, saying, Read this,
I pray thee: and he shall say, I cannot read. That is, all the Sermons they
shall hear, and all the heavenly Messages are brought them from God, shall be
as a sealed Book to a learned man, or an open Book unto an Idiot. They shall
stare in the face of the Minister, when he is clearly unfolding the great
mystery of godliness, and shall not be able to understand him; they shall
have their own Conscience unript to the quick, by the power of the Word, and
shall not perceive it; they shall have their sweet sin discovered, and damned
unto the pit of Hell, by evident and unanswerable demonstration out of the
Book of God, and yet have no power to leave it: For the vision of the Prophets
(says the Prophet in the forecited Chapter) is become unto them as the words
of a Book sealed up. And therefore, all the Doctrine of salvation, though it
drop upon them as the rain, and still as the deaw, shall be but unto their
hearts as unto the hardest rocks; all holy admonitions and reproves, as
arrows shot against a stone-wall; all sacred Lessons offered and urged upon
their Consciences, be as a Seal stamped upon water, which receives no
impression. O most woeful and fearful estate!

Secondly, 2
Isa. 28. 9. Whom shall he teach knowledge, etc. This is not as many understand
it, That people must have a little by little preached unto them, but it is a
curse upon them. As if he should say: They are nothing fitter to the discipline
of the knowledge of God, than infants newly weaned, to receive any instruction.
For Precept must be upon Precept, etc. Verse. 10. As if he should say: They must
be taught as little children, a little at once, and have often repeated over and
over; and yet they can learn nothing to do them good, chiefly concerning
their repentance, and escaping Gods Judgments: I would to God it were not too
evident, by long and doleful experience; That our Ministry has done less
good amongst the elder sort, and men of much worldly wisdom, for bringing
them to any sound and comfortable knowledge in Gods Word, than amongst little
children.

Thirdly, 3
Ezech. 33. 30, 31, 32, 33. And lo, thou art unto them as a very lovely Song
of one that has a pleasant voice, etc. And is it not so with us? That even to
some that seem to be friends, and to delight in the Ministry, the Word is
become as if it had lost all power to turn them from their sin, to the holy
way; from plausible formalitie, to saving forwardness. Hear a Character of
them, Isa. 58. 2. Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a
Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God:
they ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching to
God. They may hear the Word gladly, as Herod did, and perhaps observe the
Messenger, etc. but they will not stir an ynch further from sin, and nearer
to God: say what he will, let him preach out his heart, they will still hug
their bosome-sinne, and hold exactly their heartlesse forms and formal
fashions in Religion, after five thousand Sermons: They are all unto them, as a
lovely Song of one that has a sweet voice; and leave no more impression upon
their Consciences, than a pleasant Lesson upon the Lute, upon the ear, when it
is ended.

Fourthly, 4
Ier. 23. 33. And when this people, or a Prophet, or a Priest shall ask thee,
saying, What is the burden of the Lord? etc. Nay, has not the cursed sin of
loathing this heavenly Manna, been found among us? Has not our much Preaching
been accounted a burden, a wearisomenesse, and a trouble? yea, as here it was
once unto the Jews; a matter of scorn, and reproach? The Lord complains
grievously, in the quoted place, of this sin; how they took up this custom
amongst them, concerning the faithful preaching of all the true Prophets, to
ask scoffingly; What is the burden of the Lord? Thus making a scorn of all
the right discovery of their sins, and the sound denunciation of Gods
Judgment, calling it by the name of a Burden; the Lord charge them most
severely, that they should not use that disdainefull speech any more. He tells
them, how that they had perverted and abused the holy Word of the ever-living
God, the Lord of Hoasts: and withal directs them, what phrase of speech they
should use, when they speak of his Word sent unto them by his true Prophets;
That thus each should demand, in reverence of his Majesty: What has the Lord
answered; or, What has the Lord spoken? And to leave off those reproachful
taunting terms, What is the burden of the Lord? Or otherwise, he would
surely be avenged of them for this sin; as we may see in the denunciation
following.

Fifthly, 5
Ier. 7. 4, 8, 9, 10, 11. Trust not in lying words, saying, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord, etc. They rested upon the outward forms of Gods
worship, without reformation. It is just our case. Many amongst us satisfy
themselves, and think it will serve the turn for salvation, if they rest upon
the Sabbath, hear the Word, receive the Sacrament, and conform to the outward
exercises of Religion; though they abide in their sins, and have no
acquaintance at all with the power of the Word, the Mystery of Christ,
conversion to God, or holy conversation.

Sixthly, 6
Isa. 6. 9, 10. Go tell this people; Hear ye indeed, but understand not; see
ye indeed, but perceive not: make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest etc. Oh, this is heavy, that a
Minister should be sent to a further hardening of a people! And yet it is just
with God, and they shall feel it on their Bed of Death. The Thief on the
Cross was converted with a piece of a Sermon, they are not wrought upon after
many years: therefore it is just with God, as an act of judgment, because
they would not come in, after so long a time, to give them over to such
judicial hardness.

Consider these things, and tremble all ye that have any ways struck at the
face of Christ, by contempt of his Ministry. For the humbling of your souls
into the dust, for this horrible sin; peruse in bleeding hearts, in secret,
that black and bloody Catalogue of fearful provocations, which are
ordinarily to be found in, and certainly set upon the Score of such as hate to
be reformed under a conscionable Ministry. Which made Christ say, Ioh. 15.
22. If I had not come and spoken unto them, etc.

1 Despising it; shutting their eyes against that glorious Light, 1
erected in their faces, to lead them to Heaven. See Math. 10. 14. Whosoever
shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of that house,
or City, shake off the dust of your feet.

Here is a notable place, to affright all those that are unworthie partakers of
the Ministry. For the understanding whereof, take notice of these five points.

1 It is as if they should say; Here I have gone a long journey, and have
contracted dust and sand by my travel, and taken a great deal of pains; and
lo, here I shake off this dust, in witness, that you had Christ offered you,
and you would not accept him.

2 To intimate unto them; I care not for any of you, or yours, but only I
seek the good of your souls, I respect not so much as the dust; I prize more
the conversion of any of your souls, than all yours: and this dust shall
witness it.

3 They shook off the dust, as a witness: I will have nothing to do with
this City; for I know, the Plagues and Judgments of God will seize on this
place, as it was with Sodom and Gomorrah; I will have no communion and
society with these wicked people.

4 They did shake off the dust, to intimate that destruction should come upon
them. For it is said, Psalm 1. That they should be driven away as the dust: As
that is shaken with the wind, so shall they be with the wrath of God.

5 In testimony and witness against them: This very dust shall be witness
against them. Do you think then, that their Sermons and Catechizing shall
not? If the dust that they gathered by their pains, will be witness; what
will all their Sermons, and praying, and such pains be? Now this sin of
despising the Word, is a sin above that of Sodom, Verse. 15. Verily, it shall
be more easy for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Day of Judgment, than for that
City.

2 2
Murmuring against it, Job. 6. 41. Luke 15. 2.

3 Cavilling against it, 3
Act. 13. 45.

4 Contemning it, 4
Ier. 44. 16. Act. 17. 18. What will this Babbler say? They accounted Paul's
precious preaching, vain babbling.

5 Mocking and scorning it, 5
2 Chronicles. 36. 16. Act. 2. 13.

6 Persecuting it, 6
Math. 10. 23. And so they become like mad Dogs thrown into a River, or tied
up in a Chain, which do snarle at, bite, and tear those that put out their
hands to help, and set them free; fearing, they come to torture and to trouble
them more. Just so it is with many profane wretches, which lie drowned in
sin, and chained in Satan's fetters: If a man put out his hand, by the
Ministry of the Word, to save them from sinking into Damnation, and to free
them from the Snares of everlasting death; they rage and rail, they bark and
bite like mad Dogs, holding themselves to be disquieted, disgraced, and
tormented before their time.

Thus you have seen the six Curses, and the six Sins, that the not
profiting by the Word does bring upon a people.

2 Now, 2
in the second place, let me tender to your most serious thoughts some
quickening Motives, for the stirring of you up to profit by the Word.

1 Some taken from the Word it self, 1
the Ministry whereof you have slighted.

What then is the blessed thing you have so wickedly abused? It is,

1 The Word of Salvation, Act. 13. 26. No other Word, or created Power, can
save your souls from Hell.

2 The Word of Truth, Ephesians. 1. 13. There is error in all other Truths, whether
Natural, or Moral, or Political: and go to any Art, there is weakness and
infirmity in the brain of man, that there can be no certainty; but here is
all Truth, and here is infallibility, you need not doubt of any.

3 It is called the Word of Life, Phil. 2. 16. All other Learning whatsoever,
when it has furnished you with ornaments and parts, it leaves your souls
stark dead in sins and trespasses. But this is a Word of Life, it inspires
spiritual Life, and brings eternal Life.

4 It is called a Word of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5. 19. Let the Sea run
nothing but Gold, and let Heaven and Earth be turned into Gold and Silver, and
offered unto God, it could not reconcile us. If all the creatures would lose
their being, be annihilated, and come to nothing; yet this could not save
Judas, or any one reprobate: but the Word has been a blessed instrument, for
reconciling many souls to God.

5 It is, Quid autem est Scriptura sacra, nisi quaedam Epistola Omnipotentis
Dei ad Creaturam suam? Greg. Epist. lib. 4. Epist. 84.
as it were, an Epistle or Letter (as one of the Fathers calls it) written from
God Almighty unto us miserable men; wherein he writes his Will and Word, and
sends it to us: the Ministers are the readers of it, and they bring the news
from Heaven. And what is the matter of it? Concerning eternal life, or
eternal death, concerning the good of your souls. Now, if you had a private
Letter come from the King, concerning your advancement, or your deliverance and
forgiveness for some dangerous Treason, or both; how would you take this
Letter, and how often would you read it, with what willingness of affection?
Now, here is an Epistle sent from Heaven, to advise you, that you are all
Traitors and Rebels against Heaven, and yet here in this Letter, God offers the
blood of his Son, and you may be reconciled: and will you neglect it? This is
the matter of this Epistle; it brings matter of deliverance from the greatest
Curse that can befall the creature, and the greatest advancement.

6 It is the bottomless Treasury of all high, sweet, and excellentest
things: The Mystery of the Trinity, the Majesty of God, the Love of God, and
of Christ; this sufferings, the Spirits workings, the happiness of the Saints,
and the glory of Heaven, etc.

7 It must be our Judge at the last day, Ioh. 12. 48. Every honest Sermon, is
but the Word of God unfolded; and a bunch of Arrows wrapped up, and unfolded,
are all one.

8 It only can cure a wounded Conscience, the greatest calamity that ever the
heart of man was acquainted with; and that which no Arm of flesh, or created
Power, no man or Angel, can ease at all.

9 In it only are to be had Deeds and Evidences, to show for eternal Life;
and Acquittances, for discharge from eternal Death.

10 It has saved all the souls that are in Heaven, Romans 10. 13.

11 It only is the object of divine and infused Faith. Muscul. in Man. p. 365.
Humane testimonies and authorities beget only humane Faith: Therefore you
must reverence this Word.

2 Some Motives taken from the most fearful and cursed estate of those who
neglect and reject the Ministry of the Word, 2
hating to be reformed by it. Mark and take to heart thine unspeakable
misery, whosoever thou art, that despisest the Ministry: Take a taste of it,
in these passages.

1 They are deprived by this means of the love and favor of God, the only
fountain of all comfort, peace, and glory; which is infinitely the dearest and
most unvaluable loss, that can be imagined.

2 Of their part and portion in the blood of Christ; one drop whereof, is
incomparably more worth than Heaven and Earth, men and Angels, or the creatures
of a thousand Worlds.

3 Of the fatherly protection, care, and providence of the blessed Trinity,
the glorious guard of Angels, the comfortable communion of the blessed Saints,
and all the sweet contentments that follow thence.

4 Of the quiet joy and tranquillity of a good Conscience; a Jewel far more
worth than the whole World, were it all turned into one unvaluable Pearl of
unvaluable price: and of all the heavenly illuminations, cherishments, and
comforts, wherewith the Holy Ghost is wont to visit and refresh the hearts of
holy men.

5 Of the sweet peace and true contentment in this life, and of all comfortable
right and religious interest to any of the creatures: For, without a good
Conscience, there was never found joy in any man's heart, or sanctified
enjoyment of any thing in the World; and never shall any man have a good
Conscience, that gives allowance to any Lust, or lives delightfully in any
sin.

6 Of a Crown of Life, the unspeakable joys of Heaven, that immeasurable and
endless comfort that there shall be had with all the children of God,
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, all our Christian acquaintance; yea,
with the Lord himself, and all Angels, with Christ our Savior and Lamb,
slain for us; the Prince of Glory; yea, the Glory of Heaven and Earth, and
brightness of the everlasting Light, etc.

To these privative consequents, add a serious consideration upon those
terrible flaming places; Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. Prove. 1. 23, 24. Isa. 6. 9, 10. 1 Samuel 2. 25. Act. 13. 46.

By continuing thy contempt, and rejecting the Light of the Gospel, thou may
come, thou know not how soon, to sin against the Holy Ghost, as the
Pharisees did, Math. 12. 24, 31.

For sin against the Holy Ghost may be committed as well,

1 By those, who although they do acknowledge and confess the Truth, which
they do blaspheme; yet they have not yet professed it, or given up their names
to it, as were those Scribes and Pharisees: and there are many such in these
days, who have not as yet given their name to the Truth, which yet
notwithstanding being well known and acknowledged, they do blaspheme.

2 As those, who have not only acknowledged in themselves the Truth that they
blaspheme, but have professed the same before others, that are the favorers of
Truth; as Julian, Porphyrius, Alexander the Copper-smith, and many others: of
which, you may see Heb. 6. and 10. So, many amongst us at this day.

3 Some taken from the survey of those judgments, 3
which contempt of the Ministry may bring upon the place where it is planted.

1 It may remove the Candlestick, and be plagued with the utter loss of the
Ministry. Consider, Math. 8. 34. and 10. 13. and 21. 41.

2 They may have Prophets, but such as are fools; they may have men of the
Spirit, but those that be mad, Hos. 9. 7. By a fool, is meant not a natural,
but spiritual fool, Prove. 1. 8. Ier. 4. 22. Isa. 5. 20. By mad, is understood
not a man out of his wit, or distracted in mind, but he that like a mad Dog
rages and rayleth against the Truth of God, and sincerity of his Saints;
which is a great judgment.

3 They may enjoy faithful Teachers, but to their further hardening, as the
Israelites did Isaiah, Isa. 6. 9, 10. Which of all other judgments that God
can inflict in this life, is the most fearful.

4 By this means, they may make sad the heart and affections of their
Teachers, that they cannot with that cheerfulness as they desire, perform
the offices of their Ministry: Which as it discourageth the Teachers, (and
will one day light heavy on the causers and procurers thereof) so it is
unprofitable for the hearers, and deprives them of much good they might
otherwise enjoy; as appears, Heb. 13. 17.

4 Some from consideration of those confusions and desolations, 4
which it pulls with great violence even upon whole Kingdoms. Look upon such
places as these: 2 Chronicles. 36. 16, 17, etc. Ier. 25. 3. etc. and Cap. 35. 15.
Rev. 6. 4. etc.

The glorious Light of those seven Candlestickes in Asia, mentioned in the
Revelations, was long since, for their unfruitfulnesse, coldness, and contempt
of the Word, turned into the dark Midnight of Heresy, Apostasy, and
Mahometisme. Rome, that was anciently the glory of the Western Churches, lies
now drowned in Superstition, soaking in damnable Idolatry, and plunged over
head and ears in the Doctrine of Devils. Many strong and noble Limbs of the
reformed Churches in high Germany have lain for some years in their tears of
blood, groaning under the merciless tyranny of the bloody Antichristians,
and have woefully received the mark of the Beast again. Now assuredly, it was
the loathing the heavenly Manna, which made the Lord to utter his Voice before
the Army of the enemies at Prague, Joel 2. 11.
and other places. It was their spiritual coldness, which sharpened the
Papists swords against them: It was their not entertaining the Truth, with the
love and power of it, which gave the Imperiallists power over them.

3 In a third place, take some helps and remedies, 3
to become profitable hearers and saving proficients by the Ministry your
enjoy; which has thus long been (it is a reproachful and rufull thing I
speak) the savor of death unto death unto the most.

1 Be persuaded to believe and obey the blessed Commandment of our Savior
himself, 1
Math. 6. 32. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, in the first place; and all other things shall be added to you. To
which be quickened, by considering,

1 To what end we came into this World. What a woeful and bewitched people are
they, who being reasonable creatures, having an understanding Light, like the
Angels of God; having eyes in their heads, to foresee the wrath that is to
come; hearts in their bodies, that can tremble as the leaves of the Forest,
which are shaken with the wind; Consciences, that are capable of unspeakable
horror; bodies and souls, which can burn in Hell for ever: and yet some have
lived twenty, some thirty, some forty, some sixty years; and yet to this
day, have not learnt one sound spiritual Lesson, for the true good of their
souls, either out of the Book of God, the Book of Nature, the Works of God,
or any other way? Why, to what end do you think were you created, and put
into this World? To eat, and drink, and sleep; to lie, and swear, and root
in the Earth; to Dice and Card, See Whately, page 123.
and go in the Fashion; to contemn the Ministry; shamefully to belie,
slander, and rail upon Gods people, as too precise; to die, and then not to be
damned? Assuredly, thou wast not borne, and placed upon the Earth, for to serve
thine own turn, to please thine own heart, to follow thine own ways, to
live for a while like a Beast in sensual contentments, and then to go to
Hell. Certainly, thou wast sent into this World for some other end, for some
greater business and important affair; even for that One necessary thing,
Luke 10. 42. to know, serve, and obey thy God, and to save that precious Soul
of thine in the Day of Christ; to seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, to know
and feel the virtue of Christ's death and resurrection. This, I say, is that
One necessary thing: All other things are but respectively necessary, so
far as they further this end; ought only to be subordinate, and
contributorie; nay, to be accounted but dross and dung, to this, Phil. 3. 10.

2 Consider, See my Book of walking with God, page 158.
that upon this moment depends eternity.

3 What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, See Chrysostom
upon the place.
and lose his own soul? Math. 16. 26.

4 The difference of the life and death of the Christian and Carnallist. About
which, see Chrysostom. tom. 5. sermon. contra Gulam, p. 828, 829.


2 Take the counsel of the holy Apostle, Col. 3. 16. Let the Word of Christ
dwell in you richly, 2
etc.

1 By hearing it in season, 1 See Austin. conf. lib. 6. page 16^.
and out of season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preachers and hearers, are relatives.
Christian hearers in ancient times heard their Pastors day after day.

(1) Quoniam hesterno die de latrone secimus. mentionem, etc. Ambros. de sancto
latrone, sermon. 44.
Because yesterday we made mention of the Thief, etc. says Ambrose. Which
implies his preaching the day before.

(2) Qui hesterno d^e affuistis, etc. August. in Ps. 33. Conc. 2.
You that were here yesterday, etc. Which implies his preaching the day before.
In another place: Quousque hesterno die disputatum fit, credo meminisse
charitatem vestram, ex ipso loco hodie sumamus exordium. Idem in Psalm 34 Conc.
2.
I suppose, you remember how far me discoursed yesterday: from that very
place, let us to day begin. Elsewhere he says: Vnde hesterno die multum locuti
sumus. Idem Expos. in Johan. page 12.
From whence we spoke much yesterday. Again; Hestern^ die perveneramus autem
usque ad istum versum, etc. Idem in Psalm. 48. Conc. 2.
Yesterday we came even to that Verse, etc. Hesternus sirmo protractus, etc.
Idem in Psalm. 58. Conc. 2.
Yesterdayes Sermon was protracted, etc. Posterior pars Psalmi, de quo hesterna
die locuti sumus, etc. Idem in Psalm. 78. Conc. 2.
The latter part of the Psalm, of which we spoke yesterday, etc. Hesterno die
Psalm. brevior tractabatur, etc. Idem in Psalm. 142.
Yesterday a shorter Psalm was handled.

(3) Primum igitur persuadeamus, ut iuramentorum fuga in melius mutationem
faciat: etsi enun heart and nudius tertius de ha^c vobis locutus sum ma^eria,
neque tamen body desistam, neque cras, neque perendie, eadem persuadere.
Chrysostom. ad Pop. Antioch. Hom. 5.
First therefore let us persuade you, that you would amend and abandon your
Oaths: For although I spoke of the same matter yesterday, and the day before
that; yet notwithstanding, I will not cease to day, nor to morrow, nor the day
after that, to persuade the same things. Whence it appears, that he preached
the day before, and the day before that; and would preach the day following,
and the day after that.

(4) Movent me quide^s (fratres) ad hunc sermonem vespertina spectacula, etc.
Bafil the great, Sermon. in ebriet. and luxum, quibu^ die Paschae populum
affectum ^idit, page 331.
Yesterdayes sight (Brethren) provoked me to this Sermon, etc. This Sermon was
made upon Easter Monday; and no doubt, he had preached on Easter day.

(5) Hesterno die etc. body de Baptismo ac beneficio inde ad nos promanante,
breviter disseremus. He^terna luce nos oration praeterfluxit, tum qui^ tempus
urgebat, tum ne fastidium satietatemque sermonis prolixitas pareret. Sermonis
quippe satietas non minus auribus inimica est, quam cibus immodicus corpori.
Nazianzen. Tom. 2. Orat. 40. in sanctum Baptisma, page 614.
Yesterday, etc. To day we will discourse briefly of Baptism, and the
benefits that flow from thence to us: Although yesterday our speech did flow
more hastily from us, both because the time did urge, as also least length of
speech should beget disdain and satietie: See him in Math. 15. Hom. 53. page
304. at *
for the satietie of speech is no less an enemy to the ears, than too much
meat is to the body. These Orations were divine, and as Sermons; and this was
made on the day immediately after an holy day. The Greek Church at that time
celebrated the day of Christ's Baptism.

(6) Si meministis hesterno sermon, etc. Bernard. in Psalm. Qui habitat. etc.
Sermon. 12. page 546.
If you remember, in yesterdayes Sermon, etc. Chrysostom in his tenth Homily
upon Genesis, expostulating with his people, because they were so few, tells
them, That every hour of the day is seasonable to hear a Sermon; nay, the
very night is not unseasonable, for such a purpose: urging for proof thereof,
the place I pressed before, 2 Timothy 4. 2. and Paul's practice, Act. 20. preaching
until midnight. These are his words. Quidnam sibi vult, quod minor est hodie
vest^r conventus and infrequens theatrum eorum qui ad nos confluunt? Non enim
ut humanae res, ita and spirituales ad definita tempora distinctae sunt.
Sermoni spirituali omne diei tempus idoneum fuerit. Et quid dico diei tempus?
Neque si nox ingruat, spirituali doctrinae praeiudicat. Propterea and Timotheo
Paulus scribens diccebat, Insta tempestive, intempestive, etc. Et iterum audi
beatum Lucam, dicentem: Discessurus crastino Paulus, etc. Sermonem produxit ad
mediam noctem. Number tempus obfuit, dic quaeso? Number propt^rea doctrinae sermo
impeditus?
What means it, that there is a less assembly of you to day, and not so
frequent a multitude of those, who flock to us? For it is not so with
spiritual things as with humane, which are divided to determined times: Every
time of the day is fit for a spiritual Sermon. And what do I say, the day
time? yea, if the night should come upon us, it does not prejudice or hinder
spiritual teaching. For both Paul writing to Timothy, said: Be instant in
season and out of season, etc. And again, hear blessed S. Luke, saying: Paul
being about to depart on the morrow, prolonged his Sermon to the middle of the
night. Tell me, I pray thee, did the time hinder? Was therefore his word of
Doctrine hindered?

Austin sometimes preached thrice upon the same day. Non miremini, fratres
charissimi, si body (...) sermonem, Deo au^iliante persocero. Accidit body
terribitis casus, etc. Tom. 10. part. 2. ad fratres in Eremo, Sermon. 33.
Do not wonder, dear Brethren, if I have preached thrice to day, God
assisting me: There has happened to day a fearful chance, etc.

Chrysostom in the Evening, as we may see in his eleventh Homily upon 1 Thessalonians.
Quemadmodum siquis lucis huius lychnaeo aquam inspergeret, aut oleum duntaxat
eximeret, lucem extingueret: Ita habet and donum Spiritus.
5. says he: Even as, if any one should cast water on the wicke of this
Candle, or should only take away the Oil, he would put out the Light; so is
it with the gift of the Spirit. He took his example from the Lamp that burnt
by him when he was preaching, and says; You may quench this Lamp, by putting
in water; and you may quench it, by taking out the Oil.

And great Basil also the like. Facta est igitur vespera, inquit, and factum
est mane, dies unus. Sed hi nostri de illa vesp^ra sermones ab hac vespera iam
occu^ati, hic orationi nostra finem imponunt. Hexam. Him. 2. ad finem.
The Evening and the Morning ( says he) is made one Day. But these our Sermons
concerning that Evening, now begun from this Evening, do here put an end to
our words.

Chrysostom almost in all his Homilies upon Genesis, says in the beginning of
his Sermon: Heri, etc. Yesterday I handled this or that, or the like. See 1.
Hom. 7. 2. Hom. 14. 3. Hom. 17. 4. Hom. 18. 5. Hom. 24. 6. Hom. 27. 7. Hom. 28.
8. Hom. 31. 9. Hom. 34. 10. Hom. 40. 11. Hom. 44. 12. Hom. 46. 12. Hom. 48. 13.
Hom. 52. 14. Hom. 53. 15. Hom. 54. 16. Hom. 55. 17. Hom. 56. 18. Hom. 57. 19.
Hom. 58. 20. Hom. 59. 21. Hom. 63. 22. Hom. 65.

Austin preached twice a day. See Conc. 2. in Psalm. 88.


Object. Except perhaps they preached every day only in Lent, etc. or besides
the Lords day, but only upon holy days, and their Eves.

Answ. Hear Chrysostom speaking generally. Vnde Episcopu^ necesse est in
fingulos ut sic dicam dies sementem facere, ut ipsa salte^ assuetudine
doctrinae, sermone^ auditorum animi retinere possint. De Sacerd. l. 6.
It is necessary, that a Bishop should sow his Seed every day, as I may so
say; that at the least, by that daily custom of Teaching, the minds of his
hearers may retain his words.

Austin has the like. Verbum Dei quod quotidie nobis aperitur and quodam modo
frangitur, panis quotidianus est: and quomodo illum panem ventres, sic istum
esuriunt mentes. August. Hom. 42. Ex. 50.
The Word of God, which is daily opened unto us, and after a sort broken to us,
is our daily Bread: And as our bellies hunger for that Bread, so do our minds
for this.

Object. If former and Primitive Times were so full of Preaching, how comes
it to pass, that our days will scarce down with twice a Sabbath? Since the
ancient Fathers preached daily, how happens it, that many reputed great
Scholars in these Times, preach so seldom? etc.

Answ. First, one Reason may be an affected humor of man-pleasing, or
selfe-preaching; which is ambitiously pursued, and mightily prevails abroad in
the World.

This, King James out of his deep and Princely wisdom, conceived to be the
cause of so many daily defections from our Religion, both to Popery and
Anabaptisme. He calls it a light, affected, and an unprofitable kind of
Teaching, which has been of late years too much taken up in University,
City, and Country: In which (says he) there is a mustering up of much
reading, See Instructions of comforting afflicted Consciences, page 154.
and a displaying of their own wits, etc. These are his own words, in the
Reasons of his direction for Preaching.

Now you must know, that to the scraping and patching together of the garish
and gawdie paintings and unprofitable Pomp of a selfe-Sermon, See Aust. Conf.
lib. 6. cap. 6.
there is required and ordinarily expected such a deal of curiosity, variety
of extraordinary conceits, and tricks of wit; that it puts the Penman to a
great deal of pains, and tortures his wit extremely. He dives with much ado
into the dunghill of many a Popish Postiller, and fantastical Erier, etc.
For such, as Tully said of Anthony, do magno conatu magnas nugas agere; they
sweat at it, with much vexing anxietie: And what then? Parturiunt montes, etc.
they detain and delude the itching ears of unjudicious hearers with a little
ayrie nourishment, as the King speaks in the forecited place.

The painfulnesse then of this unprofitable way of Preaching; the irksome
tediousness of committing of it so punctually and precisely to memory; the
fearfulness of deliverie, and danger of being out; vainglorious doubting,
that they shall not be applauded as they were wont; Perlatum ad nos est
Reverendiss. siatrem nos^rum Basihum, Episcap. velut unum, de Laicis, etc.
Greg. ep. l. 8. c. 11. and in Evang. Hom. 17. Col. 381. and Past. Cur. p. 2.
Col. 1248.
fear, lest the next time they should lessen their former reputation of wit
and reading, etc.

Secondly, another Reason may be, because Ministers do not so much meditate
and study divine and heavenly things, but trouble themselves too much in the
affairs of the World. Therefore the ancient Fathers, Rogatus quoque, (
speaking of Austin) a non^^^llis in eoru^ temporalibus causis, Episiolas ad
diversos dabat; Sed hanc suam a melioribus rebus occupatione^ tanquam angaria^
deputabat, suavem s^m^cr habens d^ ijs, quae Dei sunt, vel allocutionem vel
collocu^^^nem fraternae ac den^esticae familiaritatis. Possid. de vit. Aug.
spending their time, wits, and understanding wholly upon heavenly things,
diving continually into the mysteries of Gods Book, and preaching daily, were
able to preach often, and excellently: by their Ministerial diligence and
faithfulness, they attained such a happy readiness and habit, and so
enriched themselves with heavenly store, that they were able, as occasion was
offered, to bring forth out of their Treasure things new and old; whereupon
they were enabled to preach sometimes upon short warning: So Basil preached his
two Sermons upon the six days work, when he had but that morning for
meditation. Sometimes, without any premeditation; so it seems he preached his
second Sermon. De Baptismo reserente D. D. Done.
And so did Austin his Sermon, upon Psalm. 95. It seems there, his Brother
Severus failing to come, he preached himself. And I have told you heretofore
of a Sermon which he made upon a sudden, See ad fratres in Eremo, Sermon. 33.
occasioned by an heavy accident. And these Sermons were such, that they have
bin thought worthy by the Church from time to time, to be conveyed and
communicated to posterity. For in all my discourse, I am so far from giving
any allowance to idle, impertinent, or any way unsubstantiall Preaching; that I
hold it a very irksome, and loathsome, and wicked thing, liable to that heavy
Curse; Cursed is he that does the work of the Lord negligently. But let a man
be well grounded before he begin, be godly himself, ply faithfully and
painefully his Ministerial charge, in season and out of season; and it is
incredible to what he may attain in the Point I pursue, by his much exercise,
and Gods blessing upon it.

But yet some say,

First, That a man cannot preach well, under a quarter of a years provision.
See the truth hereof, in the foregoing Reasons.

Secondly, That often Preaching will make it too cheap, and contemptible;
which to affirm, is a base and carnal wrangling, and confuted by the practice
of the Fathers.

Thirdly, That Reading is to be preferred before Preaching.

We do not deny, but that the Word read, is the rule of holiness, may
convert, the Spirit accompanying companying his Ordinance; and therefore is to
have place, and due respect in the Congregation: but we will not equal it to
Preaching. If Reading were more excellent, and of greater force to convert,
than Preaching; why are not the people converted, that have a Reader? To what
end then serve Schools of the Prophets? Wherefore should men study the
knowledge of Tongues, and Arts, to divide the Word aright, and to distribute to
every man's present necessities? And why should Satan rage more against
Preachers, than Readers; except the Word powerfully delivered did not the more
batter and beat down his Kingdom? Besides, why did not Christ send out his
Apostles with this charge, Go, read; but, Go, preach to all Nations?
Wherefore does Paul pronounce a Woe to them that preach not the Gospel? And why
did he not charge his son Timothy before God, to read in season, and out of
season?

Yea, Object.
but may some say, The ancient Fathers were extraordinary men, and therefore
no Patterns for our Preaching, etc. They were glorious Lights, and we but
Glow-wormes; they were Cedars, we but Shrubs, etc.

Let them be what they were, Answ.
I as much reverence and respect them, as any man alive, if we take truth and
discretion with us. And therefore at this time, I will suppose (I say so,
because I doubt not, but our Age has brought forth as worthy Divines, if not
worthier, as any of the ancient Fathers;) I say, I will suppose them to be as
it were Giants, and we Dwarfes: Yet set a Dwarf upon a Giants shoulders, and
he will see further, and so might certainly we, but for Sloth, Idleness,
Worldliness, Ambition, and other such base and vile degenerations of these
later Times.

It may be further objected, Object.
That there was more necessity of the Fathers frequent Preaching, especially in
those Primitive Times, for more plentiful publishing and propagation of the
Gospel, etc. and suppressing Heresies, etc.

Passingly weak, Answ.
and untrue. There is far more need of much Preaching now, than in former
times. For we live in the last days, wherein those perilous times are come
upon us, which Paul fore-tells 2 Timothy 3. 1. etc. and wherein iniquity abounds,
and the love of many waxes cold, etc. Math. 24. 12. And at this day we oppose
the Hydra of all Heresies, Popery; which opposes even the whole Body of
Christianity. Again, their Homilies are against Drunkenness, Pride,
Swearing, Luxury, Covetousness, love of the World, Usury, painted Faces, false
Hair, Anger, Envy, Ambition, etc. All which sins, and many more, reign and
rage at this day with more heinousness, and an higher hand, than heretofore.

2 A second means whereby the Word may dwell plentifully in us, 2
is, by a constant and conscionable reading the Book of God. This Exercise is
commanded to Kings and Captains, Deuteronomy. 17. 17, 18, 19. Josh. 1. 8. who may
seem most privileged, by their intanglement in many and weighty affairs.

Christ bids the Jews, Ioh. 5. 39. Search the Scriptures, as the wellspring
of eternal life. The Holy Ghost commends the Jews of Berea, as more noble
than they of Thessalonica, because they received the Word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so, Act.
17. 11. See Deuteronomy. 6, 7, 8, 9. See many Motives to this duty, before: It is the
Word of Salvation, of Truth, of Life, of Reconciliation, a Letter from Heaven,
a Treasury of all excellent things: it shall judge us, it only can heal a
wounded Soul; it contains all our evidence for Heaven, and it is the object
of divine Faith, etc.

Nay, and because the Papists have wickedly dammed up this Fountain of Life
from the common people, hear the judgment and zeal of Antiquity, in
pressing this duty.

First, hear Chrysostom.

Audite, obsecre, seculares omnes, Comparate vobis Biblia, animae Pharmaca,
etc. Omnia humeris nostris injicitis. Vos operlebat duntaxat a nobis institui,
uxores vero a vobis and liberos. Nunc vero Satanicas cantiones ac saltationes
praeferunt pueri vestri, quemadmodum Coci, and Obsonatores, and Chorearum
ductores; Psalmum autem nemo novit ullu^. Chrysostom. in 3. ad Coloss. Hom. 9.
Col. 1054.
Hear, I pray you, all ye Laymen, ( says Chrysostom) get yet Bibles, a
Medicine for your Souls, etc. You cast all upon our shoulders. You ought only
to be instructed of us, but your Wives and Children should be by you, etc. But
now adays, your Children prefer divellish Songs and Dancings, even as
Cooks, and Caters, and leaders of Dances, but none knows any Psalm.

The same Chrysostom, to stir up men to diligent reading the Scriptures,
makes good this assertion; There is no affliction or misery of body or soul,
but may receive a Medicine out of Gods Book.

1 A man heavie-hearted, and of a sad spirit, (says he) takes the Bible in
his hand; after he has met with that place, Psalm. 42. 11. ( Why art thou cast
down, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? hope thou in God,
etc.) he is refreshed.

2 Another (says he) is oppressed with extreme poverty, beholds the wicked
wallow in worldly wealth, and flourish like a green Bay Tree: But after he
has cast his eye upon that, Psalm. 55. 22. ( Cast thy burden upon the Lord,
and he shall sustain thee, etc.) he is comforted.

3 Another is hunted with calumnies and insidiations, etc. and no humane help
will be had; the Prophet (says he) does teach him what to do, in these
words: Ipsi detrah^bant mihi, ego autem orabam.
They did speak against me, but I prayed.

4 Another is forsaken even of his friends and kinsmen, and contemned of those
who were most beholding to him: Hear how the Prophet behaved himself in such
a case, Psalm. 38. 11. etc. 13. etc.

He concludes thus: Vidisti quomodo, quacunque calamitate humanam naturam
premente, conveniens ex Scripturis antidotum accipere liceat, and omnis huius
vitae repellatur cura, neque ab ullo quod accidit gravemur? Propterea obsecro,
ut subinde huc veniatis, and divinae Scriptura lectionem diligenter
auscultetis; non solum cum huc veniatis sed and domi divina Biblia in manus
sumite, and utilitatem in illis positam magno studio suscipite. Insuper, quod
ad augendas vires corporis sensibilis ille cibus facit, id anima lectio facit.
Spirituale enim alimentum est, and fortem reddit animam. Chrysostom. Hom. 29. in
Genesis page 150.
Thou have seen, whenever any calamity does oppress a man, how convenient
an Antidote he may take from the Scriptures, and all care of this life may be
driven back; neither should we be grieved for any thing that falls out.
Therefore, I beseech you, that you would come hither, and diligently attend to
the reading of the holy Scriptures; not only when you come hither, but even at
home take the holy Bible into your hands, and go reap the profit that is in
them with great earnestness. Moreover, what that sensible Bread does to
increase bodily strength, that Reading does to the soul; for it is spiritual
nourishment, and makes the soul vigorous, etc.

But we may add to Chrysostomes Antidotes, these 16. more.

1 Art thou weary of the ways of vanity, and coming on with a grieved and
sorrowful heart for thy sin, to meet thy dear Redeemer; and does the
conceit of the number and heinousness of thy transgressions, cross and
confound thy hopes of being received to mercy? Why then look upon Paul; he
shed the blood of the Saints with extraordinary rage and fury, Act. 9. 1.
upon Manasseh, a man of prodigious impiety, 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. upon some of
Peter's hearers, who crucified the Lord of Life, Act. 2. 23. If these will not
serve the turn, look upon Adam; who cast away himself, and undid all, and
was the cause that all that issued out of his loins, unto the Worlds end, fell
into the damnation of Hell: and yet all these, upon repentance, were received
unto mercy. And therefore, if thou can now heartily repent, fear no former
sins.

2 Have thou by the violence of Satan's temptations, the sly enticements of
thine own sinful nature, and the cunning insinuations of thy former
bosome-sinne, been fearfully overtaken with some scandalous fall, since thou
wast converted, and gave thy Name unto Grace; and upon illumination of thy
conscience, remorse, and meditation of return, thou art ashamed to look Christ
Jesus in the face, because thou have so shamed thy profession; and thou art so
troubled with horror and conceit, that thy case is singular, that thou can
find no ease to thine humbled and sorrowful heart? Why then look upon David,
Peter, etc. transcendent instances, that thou may not sink into despair.

3 Art thou plunged into the perplexities and fearful apprehensions of a
spiritual desertion? Art thou deprived of thy former comfortable feelings of
Gods favorable countenance? Have thou no comfort in prayer? etc. Look upon
David, Ps. 77.

4 It may be, upon thy Bed of Death, See Satan's depth in this point, Help to
Devotion, p. 155.
when Satan will make thy sins appear far more ugly and horrible to the
eye of thy Conscience, than ever he did before; and will persuade thee all he
can, that all thy holy services unto God, and new obedience, was quite marred
with Pride, Hypocrisy, and by-respects; I say, it may be then thy heart will
quite fail thee, and thy conceit of Gods wrathful and angry countenance for
thy sin, may so oppress and confound thy soul, that thou may fear lest
thou be forsaken: Why then think upon thy Saviors mournful cry upon the
Cross; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

5 It may be thou art a true-hearted Nathanael, in whose spirit there is no
guile; hates all sin heartily, both in thy self and others, desire and
laborest to please God in all things, and to keep a good conscience before all
things in the World; and yet thou find and feel in thy breast many times a
heavy, sad, and unchearefull heart: why then, hear David, a man after Gods
own heart, of a more excellent spirit, and eminent graces, than thou art,
complaining Psalm. 43. 5. Why art thou so heavy, O my soul, and why art thou
so disquieted within me? 6 Art thou grievously troubled with the haunt and
horror of some special sin, of which thou can not be so easily rid; and
do thou therefore go mourning all the day? Why then look also upon David,
Psalm. 32. In such a case, he roared all the day, his bones were consumed, and
his native moisture was turned into the drought of Summer.

7 Art thou vexed to the heart, and fearfully haunted with some horrible and
hateful injections of Satan; thoughts framed by himself immediately, and put
into thee; perhaps tending to Atheism, or to the dishonor of God in some high
degree, or to the disgrace of his Word, or selfe-destruction, etc. or the like:
thoughts which thou can not remember, without horror; and dare not reveal,
or name, for their strange and prodigious hatefulness? Why then consider, how
this malicious Fiend dealt with the Son of God: He suggested unto his most
holy and unspotted imagination, these propositions: first, Murder; Make away
thy self, Math. 4. 6. secondly, Fall down and worship the Devil, Verse. 9.
What more fearful and horrible apprehensions? And yet these were suggested to
our blessed Savior; to him perhaps more sensibly, to thee more secretly. See
Dike, of Christ's temptations, p. 219.
His pure and holy heart, incapable of sin, did reject them with infinite
contempt; and himself did utterly conquer and confound the Tempter, and that
for thee, and thy sake too. And if thine heart rise against, abominate,
abandon, grieve, and be humbled for them, they shall never be laid to thy
charge, but set on Satan's Score. For all them, thou may go on chearefully
and comfortably in the course of Christianity: And so do. And let not Satan
attain his divellish end by them; which is, to work astonishment in thy
mind, horror in thy conscience, heaviness in thy heart, distractions in thy
thoughts, etc. that thereby thou may be disheartened and disabled for the
cheerful discharge and performance both of thy particular and general
calling. Or else, art thou long after thy conversion, assaulted with perhaps
sorer spiritual pangs, and more horror, than at thy change? Consider David,
Job, Hezekiah.

8 Have thou lost thy goods, or children? Does the Wife that lies in thy
bosom, set her self against thee? Do thy nearest friends charge thee
falsely? Art thou diseased from top to toe? Do the Arrows of the Almighty
stick fast in thy soul? Thy affliction is grievous enough, if thou have any
of these. But do they all, in the greatest extremity, concur upon thee at
once? Have thou lost all thy children, and all thy goods? Does thy Wife afflict
thy afflictions? etc. If this be not thy case, thou come short of Job, a
most just man, and high in Gods favor.

9 Have thou given thy Name to Religion, and art a Professor of Grace; and art
thou therefore villanously traduced with many slanderous nicknames, and odious
imputations? Art thou called Puritan, Precisian, Hypocrite, Humorist,
Dissembler, etc? Why, graceless wretches, when he was upon Earth, called
Christ Jesus, Devil. See Math. 10. 25. Ioh. 7. 20. Contemn thou therefore for
ever, the utmost malice of the most scurrill tongue.

10 Art thou a loving and tenderhearted Mother unto thy Children, and have
thou lost thy dearest? Why, the blessed Mother of Christ stood by, and saw her
own only dear innocent Son, the Lord of Life, most cruelly and villanously
murdered upon the Cross, and die a shameful death before her eyes, Ioh. 19.
25.

11 Art thou a woman, who in the time of thy travail art pressed with many
wants; with want of comfortable company, desired helps, a fairer room, and
other worldly comforts and conveniences? Why yet comfort thy self with this;
That holy Virgin, which brought into the World the Worlds Savior, brought
forth that blessed Babe in a Stable, and laid him in a Cratch, Luke 2. 7. It is
very like, far more poorly, in respect of worldly comforts, than the poorest
sort of women amongst us; with less comfortable helpers, and in a less
seemly and commodious place, for such a purpose.

12 Has thy Faith lost its feeling; and besides, does God look upon thee with
an angry countenance, and is thy heart filled with heaviness and horror? Yet
for all this, let the hand of Faith by no means loose it hold-fast upon the
precious sufferings and saving bloodshed of thy dear Redeemer. Thou have
before thee, a matchless and transcendent precedent in this point. Thus cries
holy Job, having, besides his unparalelled variety and extremity of outward
afflictions, the Arrows of the Almighty sticking fast in him, and drinking up
his spirits; Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him, Cap. 13. 15. So
Abraham, Romans 4. 18.

13 Do thou, day after day, pour out thy soul in prayer before the Throne
of Grace, with all the earnestness and instancie thou can possibly; and
do thou still rise up dull and heavy, and uncomforted, without answer from
God, or comfortable sense of his favor and love shed into thine heart? Why,
yet pray still; assuredly, at length thou shall be gloriously refreshed, and
registered in the remembrance of God, for a Christian of excellent faith. See a
pattern of rare and extraordinary patience this way, Math. 15. 23. etc.

14 Does the World, Satan, carnal men, thine own friends, formal Teachers,
suppose and censure thee to be a dissembler in thy profession, and will needs
concurrently and confidently fasten upon thee the imputation of Hypocrisy?
Why, yet for all this, let thy sincere heart, conscious to it self of it own
truth in holy services, like a strong Pillar of Brass, beat back and reject
with noble contempt and glorious disdain, all their impoysoned Arrows of
malice and slander this way. Thou have a right worthy pattern in the Book of
God, for this purpose. Job had against him not only the Devil, his enemy,
pushing at him with his poisoned weapons; but even his own friends, scourging
him with their tongues; yea, his own Wife a Thorn, pricking him in the eye;
yea, his own God miserably lashing his naked soul with Scorpions; powerful
motives, to make him suspect himself of former halting and hollow-heartednesse
in the ways of God: yet notwithstanding all this, his good and honest heart
having been long before acquainted with and knit unto his God with sincerity
and truth, makes him boldly and resolutely to protest; That until he die, Job
27. 5, 6.
he will never take away his innocence from himself; that he would keep his
righteousness, and not forsake it, and that his heart should not reprove him
for his days.

15 Have thou an untoward Wife, that is a continual dropping and a perpetual
Goade in thy side? Hear Jobs complaint, Cap. 19. 17. My breath is strange to
my Wife, though I entreated for the childrens sake of mine own body.

16 Art thou vexed with a profane dogged Husband? Abigail, a Wife, and
precious woman, had a Nabal to her yoke fellow.

Thus these patterns and precedents in the Book of God, purposely registered
for the refreshing and recoverie of his chosen, in spiritual or temporal
straits, are ordinarily proposed in a transcendent and matchless degree; that
in their greatest extremities, by reflecting their eyes upon such examples,
they may be preserved from despair, have the stronger consolation, and not
think their cases to be comfortless and singular. Let these considerations
move us to be well read in these holy mysteries, and day and night exercised in
reading and meditating on them. But to our purpose, hear further what others
say in this Point.

Secondly, hear Gregory the great.

Quid is^a Scriptura, nisi quaedam Epistola omnipotentis Dei ad creatura^
(...)? and certe sicubi esset gloria vestra alibi constituta, and scripta iam
Imperatoris accipe^^t, non cessaret, non quiesce^et, somnu^ oculis non daret,
nisi prius quid sibi Imperator terrenus scripsisset agnoviss^t. Imperator
Coeli, Dominus hominu^ and Angeloru^, pro vita tua^ tibi suas Epistolas
transmisit, and tamen, gloriose fili, easdem Epistolas ardenter legere
negligis. St^^de ergo quaeso, and quotidie Creatoris tui verba meditare. Disce
cor Dei in verbis Dei, ut ardenti^s ad aeterna susp^res, ut men's* vestra ad
coelestia regna maioribus desideriis accendatur. Greg. tom. 2. Ep. lib. 4. c.
84. Col. 808*
What is the sacred Scripture, but a certain Epistle of the omnipotent God to
his creature? And surely, if a man should receive writings from his Emperor,
he would not rest, he would not be quiet, he would give no sleep to his eyes,
unless he had first known what that earthly Emperor had written to him. The
Emperor of Heaven, the Lord of men and Angels, has sent his Letters to thee,
concerning thy life; and yet (my vainglorious son) thou do neglect
earnestly to read those Letters. Study them therefore, I pray thee, and daily
meditate upon the words of thy Creator: Learn the mind of God in the Word of
God, that thou may aspire more earnestly to eternal things, and that your
mind may with greater desire be inflamed to the heavenly Kingdom.

Thirdly, Hom. 4. in Lev.
Origin teaches, That the people should learn the Scriptures without book.

Fourthly, In Eccles. c. 10.
Jerome. counsels, That by daily reading the Scriptures, we should get
wisdom: His words import so much.

Fifthly, Read the Scriptures ( says In Psalm. 33.
Austin) for that they were written to the end we should be comforted.

Sixthly, Discat memori^^r Psalterium, and usque ad annos pub^rtatis libros
So^omonis, Evangelia, Apostolos, and Prophetas, sui cordis th^saurum faciat.
Hier^n. par. 3. tract. 15. Ep^ ad Gaudent.
Jerome writing to Gaudentius about the education of a young maid, would have
her at seven years old, and when she begins to blush, to learn without book
the Psalter; and until she come to be marriageable, to make the treasure of her
heart the Books of Solomon, the Gospels, Apostles, and Prophets.

Object. 1. But the Scriptures are hard to be understood, etc.

Answ. Hear,

(1) Chrysostom. Omnia clar^ sunt and plana ex divinis Scripturis. Quae^unque
necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt. (...). In 2. ad These. Hom. 3.
All things are clear and plain out of the holy Scriptures. Whatsoever things
are necessary, are manifest.

(2) Jerome. Domin^s per Evangelia sua locutus est, non ut pauci inte^^igerent,
sed ut omnes. Plato scripsit in Scriptura^, sed non scripsit populis, sed
paucis vix enim intelligunt tres homines. In Psalm. 86.
The Lord has spoken by his Gospel, not that a few, but that all should
understand it. Plato wrote his writings, but not to the people, but to a few;
scarce three understand him.

(3) Cyrill. contra Julian. lib. 7. medium circiter libri.
The Scriptures are profitably recommended unto us in an easy speech, that
they should not go beyond the capacity of any.

(4) Again, Chrysostom, who having said much for often reading, and
plainness of the Scriptures, concludes: Cui enim non sunt manifesta,
q^aecunque in Evangelio scripta sunt* Quis autem audiens, Beatos esse mites,
beatos misericordes, beatos mundi-cordes, caeteraque huiusmodi, desiderabit
praeceptorem, ut aliquid eorum discat, quae dicuntur. Tom. 2. de Lazar^, Con^.
3. page 876. See abundantly for this purpose, in Polan. Symphonia, page 38. etc.
Who is there, to whom whatsoever is written in the Scriptures, is not
manifest? Who is there, who hearing, that the meek are blessed, the merciful
blessed, the pure in heart blessed, and the like, shall want a Master, that he
should learn any of those things which are spoken?

Object. 2. But I am entangled with variety of businesses, I have no leisure
to spend time in reading Scripture, as you advise: I am still busied in my
Trade, Husbandry, Merchandise, in some high room, etc. I have a great charge,
Wife, children, and family to care for: Let Scholars, Ministers,
Gentle-folkes, etc. that have more time and leisure, ply such businesses, for I
cannot.

Answ. Who are more busied than Kings and Captains? and yet they are commanded
to be diligent readers of Gods Book. See Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. Josh. 1. 8.

But Chrysostom makes this Objection, and answers it himself excellently:
Quid ais homo? Non est tui negotij Scripturas evolvere, quoniam innum^ris curis
distraheris? Imo tuum magis est quam illorum, etc. De Lazaro, Tom. 2. Conc. 3.
p. 874.
What say thou, Oh man? Is it not thy duty to read the Scriptures, because
thou art distracted with innumerable cares? Yea, it is thy duty rather than
others, etc. In which Sermon also, he lets fall this confident assertion: Neque
unquam fi^ri potest: non potest, inquam, fieri, ut quisquam salutem assequatur,
ni perpetuo vers^tur in lectione spirituali.
Neither now can it be, it cannot be, I say, that any man should attain unto
salvation, unless he be continually conversant in spiritual reading.

Object. 3. But, alas, I cannot read.

Answ. Hear then Austin:

Nec solum vobis sufficiat, quod in Ecclesia divinas lectiones auditis; sed
etiam in domibus vestris aut ipsi legite, aut alios legentes r^quirite, and
libenter audite.
Neither let this be sufficient for you, that in the Church you do hear
divine reading; but also in your houses, either do you your selves read, or
get others that can read, and do you willingly hearken.

And he stirs them up to it, with these considerations:

(1) (1) Recolite, fratres, sententiam Domini nostri, qua dicit; Si totum
mundum lucr^tur homo, etc.
Remember, Brethren, ( says he) the saying of our Lord, in which he says; If
a man shall gain the whole World, and lose his own soul, what will it profit
him?

(2) (2) Quid autem permanet in homine, nisi quod quisque aut legendo, aut
orando, aut bona opera faciendo, pro animae salute, in thesauro conscientiae
suae recondiderit. De Tem. Sermon. 55. See Gregor. Moral. Dialog. lib. 4. cap. 14.
What remains and abides in a man, but that which every one, either by
reading, or praying, or doing good works for the salvation of his soul, has
laid up in the treasure of his Conscience?

Object. 4. But will not public reading in the House of God serve the turn?

Answ. By no means. Hear Chrysostom:

Etque creb^o vobis praedicimus multis ante diebus argumentum de quo sumus
loquuturi, ut bis in medio di^bus, sumpto libro, perpensaque rei summa tota^,
posteaquam intellexeritis, quid dictum sit, quid restet dicendum, mentem
vestram instructiorem reddatis ad audienda quae post disserentur. Idque semper
hortor, and hortari non desinam, ut non hic tantum attendatis ijs quae
dicuntur, verum etiam cum domi fueritis, assidue divinarum Scripturarum
lectioni vacetis. Quod quidem and ijs, qui privatim mecum congressi sunt, non
destiti inculcare. Tom. 2. de Lazaro, Conc. 2. page 874. See to this purpose in
the Answer to the third Objection, a little before.
Therefore often do I tell you beforehand, many days before the argument of
which I shall speak, that in the days in the mean while, taking a Book, and
weighing the whole sum of the matter, after ye have understood what has
been said, and what remains to be said, you may make your mind more fit to
hear those things which afterward shall be declared; and that I always exhort
to, and will not cease to do it, That you do not only attend here to those
things which are spoken, but also when you shall be at home, you may daily
attend to the reading of holy Scriptures. Which thing I have not ceased to
press upon those who privately have talked with me.

Object. 5. But from this liberty of reading Scriptures, spring many Heresies.

Answ. See Pol. Symphon. page 60. where he proves this Assertion.
The sacred Scripture is not the cause of Heresies, but the ignorance of the
holy Scripture. Hear Chrysostom:

(...). Chrysostom. in praefat. in Epist. ad Romanos.
Hence arose so many thousand evils, from the ignorance of holy Writ: Hence
sprung up so great a plague of Heresies.

Of which, see Rogers seven Treatises, page 289. The Epistle Dedicatorie to the
Practice of Christianity.
Godly Books also, with which this Age is abundantly and plentifully enriched,
must be diligently and profitably read.

3 Another means by which the Word may dwell plentifully in us, 3
is Conference. See Deuteronomy. 6. 7. Luke 24. 19. That of Austin before, page 210.
in the second Reason of our seldom Preaching: That of Chrysostom, Walking
with God, page 248. Rogers seven Treatises, page 364. etc. my Walking with God,
page 86. etc.

4 A fourth means, 4
is Meditation. Of which, see Rogers seven Treatises, page 235. etc.

Matter of Meditation.

We may meditate upon any part of Gods Word, on God himself, his Wisdom,
Power, his Mercy; or on the infinite variety of good things, which we
receive of his free bounty; upon his works, and judgments; upon our sins,
and the vileness of our corruption, that we yet carry about us; upon our
mortality, and changes in this World; upon our manifold afflictions of this
life, and how we may in best manner bear and go through them, and the
benefit thereof; upon the manifold and great privileges which we enjoy daily,
through the inestimable kindness of God toward us; upon the four last
things, but especially of those things that we have most special need of. See
Practice of Christianity, p. 289, etc.


Of the thing meditated upon, consider,

First, The definition, or description.

Secondly, The distribution, sorts, kinds, or parts.

Thirdly, Causes especially efficient, and final.

Fourthly, The fruits and effects which it brings forth.

Fifthly, The subject wherein it is, or about which it is occupied.

Sixthly, The qualities or properties adjoined. And know, that oftentimes, in
common practice, these three, the final cause, the fruit or the effect, the
use or property of a thing, are often confounded.

Seventhly, The contrary.

Eighthly, The comparison.

Exemplify in the joys of Heaven; of which, see Hall: In sin; of which, see
Practice of Christianity, page 293. Upon this occasion, let us peruse, in this
manner, Fasting, and the Plague.

5 A fifth means to profit by the Word, 5
is Teaching, Praying with, and Catechizing your children and servants.

To which Duty, be stirred up and strengthened, by

First, Scriptures; Deuteronomy. 4. 9. and 6. 7. and 11. 19. Psalm. 78. 5, 6. Exodus 12.
26, 27. and 13, 14. Josh. 4. 6, 7, 21, 22. Deuteronomy. 6. 20, 21. Ephesians. 6. 4.

Secondly, By the pattern and practice of holy Parents, from time to time.
Consider for this purpose, the carriage of Abraham, Genesis 18. 19. David, Prove.
4. 4. Bathsheba, Prove. 31. 1. Lois and Eunice, 2 Timothy 1. 5.

Thirdly, By the authority of the ancient Fathers.

(1) Hear Austin.

Veruntamen, charissimi, in tanta morum diversitate and tam detestabili
corruptela, regite demos vestras, regite silios vestros, regite fam^lias
vestras. Quomodo ad nos pertinet in Ecclesia loqui vobis: Sic ad vos pertinet
in domibus vestris agere, ut bonam rationem reddatis de his qui vobis sunt
subditi. In Psalm. 50. page 596.
Notwithstanding, my dear friends, in so great a difference of manners, and
such abominable corruption, govern your Houses, govern your Children, govern
your Families: As it behooves us to speak to you in the Church, so it pertaines
to you to do in your Houses; that ye may be able to give a good account of
those who are under you. Again; Quaeso, mi frater, quaeso, omnibus tibi
subiectis, and bonae voluntatis, in domo tua a maiore usque ad minimum, amorem
and dulcedinem regni Coelestis, amaritudinem and timorem Gehennae annuncies,
and de eorum salute solicitus and pervigil existas, quia pro omnibus tibi
subiectis qui in domo tua sunt, rationem Domino reddes. Annuncia, praecipe,
impera, suade ijs ut caveant se a Superbia, a Detractione, ab Ebrietate, a
Fornicatione, a Luxuria, ab Ira, a Periurio, a Cupiditate, quae est radix
omnium malorum. Lib. de Salutar. Documentis, page 541.
I pray thee, my Brother, I pray thee, show to all under thee, of mere good
will, from the least to the greatest in thy House, the love and sweetness of
Heaven, the bitterness and fear of Hell; and be thou solicitous and
watchful, because thou shall render an account to the Lord for all those under
thee, that are in thy House. Declare, charge, command, persuade them, that they
would take heed of Pride, of Slandering, of Drunkenness, of Fornication, of
Luxury, Anger, Perjurie, Covetousness, which is the root of all evil.

(2) Nazianzen. Infans tibi est? Ne ansam and occasionem arripiat improbitas:
ab infantia sanctirate imbuatur, ab ipsis unguiculis Spiritui consecretur.
Orat. 40. in S. Bapt.
Have thou a Child? Let not wickedness take advantage and occasion: Let it be
endued with sanctity, and consecrated to thy spirit from the very Cradle.

I know he means it immediately of Baptism: but by Analogy, that binds also
to have a care of religious education.

Fourthly, by Reasons.

First, Reason 1.
Thy Children sprung from thy Loins, and came into the World, From the end of
their being.
to increase the number of Gods people, to learn the way to Heaven, and walk
in it; not only to uphold thy House, inherit thy Possessions, and convey thy
Name to future Generations. The glorifying of our God, serving our Brethren in
love, salvation of our own Souls, are the chief ends why we live a little
while in this World. Now Parents should be most solicitous to further their
Children, for the attainement of the maine end, and most sovereign good.

Secondly, Reason 2.
Neglect of this Duty, makes Parents worse to their Children, Necessity.
than to their Beasts: For,

1 They provide for their Beasts all things necessary for them; but in their
own dear Children, they neglect that One necessary thing.

2 They procure for, and put their Beasts to all things of which they are
capable. Their Children are capable of Grace, and Immortality; and they never
meddle, nor move them to look that way, or lay hold upon eternal Life.

Thirdly, Reason 3.
Let the remarkable and rufull example of Eli, Example of Eli.
be for ever a keen spur in the sides of slothful Parents, to quicken them
to this Duty.

Fourthly, Reason 4.
Thou art far more cruel than the Ostrich and the Dragon, Equity.
and may be said to have sucked the breasts of Tygres, and to be hewed out of
the hardest Rock; if having brought thy Children forth into this World, limbs
for the Devil, and fuel for Hellfire, thou labor not might and maine, to
get them newborn the members of Christ, and freed from everlasting flames.

Fifthly, Reason 5.
Grace only is able to make thy Children truly obedient, Profit.
serviceable, and everlastingly thankful; having now a double tie; first,
birth; secondly, new birth. Then only, and never before, do they begin to
pray for their Parents, to deal faithfully in their businesses, not to long
for their death.

Sixthly, Reason 6.
A conscionable and constant performance of this Duty in their life time,
Comfort.
will fill Parents hearts full of sweetest joy and heavenly comfort upon their
Beds of Death; when they see, by their care and zeal for their spiritual
good, that holy knowledge and wisdom planted in their Childrens hearts, which
will bring them after them to eternal bliss: or how soever, consciousnesse of
a conscionable discharge of their Duty in this respect, will infinitely
refresh them.

Seventhly, Reason 7.
It is the way to make thy posterity truly honorable, Honor.
and to meet thee in Heaven. Those Children which are taught by thee, may teach
the same things unto theirs, and those to others, etc.

Eighthly, Reason 8.
Thy Children neglected in this point, and so dying impenitently, Hurt.
will curse thee everlastingly in Hell, for thy bloody inexpiable cruelty
toward them in this kind.

Ninthly, Reas. 9.
Besides innumerable sins of thine own, (the least of which, merits
eternity of Hellish torments) thou have justly Sed plerique homi^um haec non
reminiscuntur, qui filios suos ab infantia exterminant; qui filios suos and
frias suas ab incurabulis non erudiunt, non corripiunt a iuventute; non
prohibent mala, non odiunt pess^^a, non coercent illicita, non admonent timorem
Dei, non comminantur iudicium Gehennae, non vitae aeternae introitum decent;
non enim edacunt eos in disciplina, atque eruditione Domini, quia non egerunt
curam pro animabus eorum, neque soliciti sunt pro salute, vel perditione
filiorum. Huiusmodi cum non ^rudiunt neque corripiunt filios suos, and ipsorum
animam igni inextinguibili in introitum tradunt, and semet ipsos in furorem
iudicij demergunt; omnia enim quae deliquerint filij, de parentibus
requiruntur, qui non erudierint, neque corripuerint filios suos. Huius evidens
exemplum in Heli ostenditur, and in filijs eius, atque in alijs alibi. Origin.
in lib. Job. 1.
set upon thy Score, by this unconscionable murdering negligence, the sins
and sinful courses of thine own Children; which will lie full heavy upon
thy Conscience, when it shall be ragingly enlightened by the long provoked
wrath of God.

6 The next means, 6
is Prayer, Prove. 2. 3, 4, 5.

7 The seventh means, 7
is Practice. See John 7. 17.

8 The eight, 8
is Experience. See Dike of the heart, page 69.

3 Be none of the reprobate grounds, 3
Math. 13. of which, see Dike, Tailor.

4 Be none of those, 4 See Musculus and others upon the place.
who invited to the Marriage of the Kings Son, Math. 22. either, first,
wilfully contemn, Verse. 3. secondly, or carelessly dis-esteeme, Verse. 5.
thirdly, or cruelly persecute, Verse. 6.

5 Reject all those Hellish temptations, 5
which do mightily keep off the dint and power of the most piercing Word; and
being entertained, will cause the Word preached to be but as the breath of the
Minister scattered in the Air, and as Water spilt upon the Ground, which
cannot be gathered up again. They are like those strong Holds of Satan,
mentioned 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. which being set up in any heart, will blunt the edge
of this spiritual weapon, that it will do no good. They be these that follow.

1 In the first place, 1
and highest strain of impiety, the depth of our corrupt nature desires,
That there were no God: The fool has said in his heart, there is no God,
Psalm. 14. 1. That is, he labors for a resolution, and persuasion in his own
heart, That there is no Tribunal in Heaven, before which he shall hereafter
be arraigned; no Treasury of Plagues, and Woes in Hell, with which he shall
hereafter be everlastingly fettered and enchained.

2 But if it so be, 2
this spiritual fool cannot so abolish and extinguish those secret notions
and apprehensions of a sacred and infinite Deity, which are naturally
implanted in the bowels of the most desperate and damned miscreant; but that
the terrors of the last Judgment, and plagues of Hell, do eftsoons vex and
bite his Conscience with restless remorse and stingings: Why then, in a second
place, that he may procure some ease and quiet to his wallowing in sensual
pleasures, he labors might and maine to harden his for-head against Heaven,
to make his heart like the nether-Milstone, with his own Soule-murthering hand
to put a hot Iron to his Conscience; that so, if he cannot blunder and blot
out of his mind those natural impressions of a Godhead, yet at the least he
may extinguish and banish out of his heart all fear of that God, of his
Iudgement-Seat, and vengeance against sin: That so he may rush like a wild
Horse into the Battle, furiously and desperately upon all villainies and
vanities, without all check of Conscience, and controlement, from the terrors
of the Judgment to come. In this desperate and furious mood, he joins
himself with these Giants of Babel, Isa. 5. who outragiously rear up Towers
of Treason and defiance against Heaven, and throw mountains of pride and
contempt one upon another, that they may climb up to the Seat of God, and pull
him out of his Throne, crying aloud toward Heaven; Let him make speed, let him
hasten his work, that we may see it; and let the counsel of the holy One of
Israel draw near, and come, that we may know it.

3 If this will not be, 3
and that he find no success in setting himself against Heaven, ( Who ever
opposed himself against God, and prospered?) but that he is crushed and
confounded with the majesty and terror thereof: Why then, in a third place,
he fastens the fangs of his malicious and wrangling wit, and the fury of his
profane Atheism, upon his true and holy Word: And that,

First, Either by entertaining or harboring a reprobate and blasphemous
conceit, that the sacred Word of God is but a politic invention, and device of
State, to keep men in order, and moderation; to maintain Order and
peaceablenesse in Cities and Societies; and to preserve the World, and
mankind, from wildness and Barbarism.

Secondly, See my discourse of true happiness, page 58.
Or by proportioning his carnal conceit of Gods pure and undefiled Law, to
that which he holds of the Decrees and Constitutions of men.

And if it be either so, or so, it is well enough; he can, in the mean time,
therewith still the cries of his Conscience, and stop the mouth of that Worm
that never dies, that it gnaw not too eagerly, and fiercely, to the
dis-sweetning of his carnal contentments, and the making of his sensual
pleasures more unpleasant.

Now, would it not vex a man, to have the meat pulled out of his mouth, his
chain from his neck, his clothes from his back, his limbs from his body,
his right arm from his shoulder, his eyes out of his head? So it is with every
unregenerate man, and such is his torture, when that two-edged Sword, the Word
of God, strikes at his sweet sin, and sensual pleasures: And therefore no
marvel, though he strive and struggle, shift and shield himself, by any
means. Nay, the Lusts of the unregenerate man, are his very life. For, as
every godly man lives a double life; one of Grace, by the sanctifying power of
the Spirit; another, of Nature: So every wicked man has a double life; one, of
Nature; and another, of corruption, by the cursed influence of Hell.

Nay, the sensual delights of the sinful man are dearer unto him than his
life. Hence it is, (as we may observe by experience) that sometimes a covetous
man losing the Life of his life, the Wedge of Gold, See Bu^ton of Melancholy,
page 214.
and Hoords of Wealth, makes an end of himself. That the Wanton, because he
is rejected, and discarded from the object of his lustful pleasures, finds no
pleasure in life; but cuts off himself, by a violent and untimely death. That
Ahitophel being disgraced, and over-topt in a point of Policy, (the crown and
pride of his worldly happiness) put his household in order, and hanged
himself.

Nay, and yet further, the profane man preferres the sensual pleasures of his
heart, before the loss of his immortal Soul. For, how often may we see the
honor of God, and everlasting blessedness, put as it were in the one Scale of
the Balance, and a little transitory Pleasure in the other? And in this case,
the unsanctified man suffering one sweet sin or other to weigh down the
exceeding weight of heavenly bliss, the unvaluable treasure of a good
Conscience, the infinite glory of God, and the salvation of his own dear
Soul, in that great Day.

This grows out of our corrupt nature: For we have all, even in the best of
us, the source and seeds of all sin. If the Lord should leave and abandon us,
to the full swing and sway of our own corruption, and not either bridle us by
his restraining Spirit, or bless us with his sanctifying Spirit; we might
every one of us become as bad as Julian the Apostata, who did maliciously
abjure Christ; and as Judas, who did perfidiously betray him. Naturally we
would wallow in sin, without check of Conscience, or controlment by the
terror of the Judgment to come.

4 But if he cannot arm himself against the terrors of God, 4
and truth of his Word; but that he must needs acknowledge the one, and believe
the other: Why then, in a fourth place, with much spite and malice, he flies
in the face of Gods Ministers, Ambassadors, which are his tormentors before
his time: And that,

First, Either against his Preaching, or against his Person: as, too obscure,
or too plain; too cold, or too boisterous; too particular, too personal, too
precise, too imperious; too tart, and terrible; too full of Judgment; tending
to Sedition, against the State, or the like. And therefore he labors, not
only with his own heart, to breed within himself a distaste and disconceit
of it; but also puts to his helping hand, to stay and stop the free course and
current of it from others. He cannot abide to have his sweet sin struck at
still, and still to have his Conscience grated upon, by the Ministry of the
Word; and therefore he does what he can, to abandon and abolish it. When
Ieremies Sermon, denouncing Gods Judgment against Judah and Israel, were
brought unto the King, Ier. 36. 23. Iehudi had not read past three or four
sides before him, but the King stamped and raged, he presently took the
Roll, and cut it with a Penknife, and cast it into the fire that was on the
Hearth, until all the Roll was consumed in the fire, that was on the Hearth.
In the 38. of Jeremy, when the Princes and Courtiers were nettled and stung
with the downright dealing and holy severitie of Ieremies Preaching; they
presently ran unto the King, and traduced the blessed Prophet, to be a
transgressor of Policy, and an enemy to the State. Therefore the Princes said
unto the King: We beseech you, let this man be put to death; for thus he
weakeneth the hands of the men of War that remain in this City, and the
hands of all the people, in speaking such words unto them: For this man seeks
not the wealth of this people, but the hurt. And there you see what was the
issue.

Thus Profaneness and Policy does ever interpret the Doctrine of Life, and
powerful application of the word, to be the Source and Seeds of Faction and
Sedition; to be incompatible with the civil State, and the very cutthroat of
Kingdoms and States imperial. Paul, as we may see in the 24. of the Acts,
for his upright dealing, was nicknamed a Seditioner, and a troubler of the
State. Certainly (says Tertullus) we have found this man a pestilent fellow,
and a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, and a chief
maintainer of the Sect of the Nazarites. Thus the Word of Life, and news of
salvation from Heaven, is many times charged with Noveltie, Sedition, and
Heresy. But that which by the construction of carnal conceits, may be termed
Heresy, Factious, and Precise, is the very right way to Heaven. I confess
(says Paul) that after the way (which they call Heresy) so worship I the God
of my Fathers, etc. So may many good Christians, and godly Ministers, say in
these Times to the men of this World; After the way, which you call
Preciseness, Singularity, and Faction, do we truly serve the living God,
and save our souls.

Secondly, Or if the authority and power of his Preaching does so astonish and
confound him, that he has no heart to meddle that way, or oppose against it;
yet at least, rather than not be malicious, he will discharge his fury
against his person.

Hence it is, that a faithful and conscionable Minister commonly, wheresoever
he lives, is an eminent mark whereat Profaneness and Policy, Malice and
Cruelty, Hell and the World, discharge the utmost of their rage and poison.
He above all others, is sure to be wrongfully laden with slanders, disgraces,
lying imputations, and all manner of foul indignities; and many times by the
baser sort, which is more intolerable. If he be but half so honestly
careful, in providing for his family, as the carnal worldling is cursedly
carking, he is covetous: If powerful in his Preaching, he is imperious: If
he oppose against the sins of the Time, he is factious: If he be faithful
in his Ministry, he is too precise, and plain: If he comes home to men's
Consciences, he is too particular, and undiscreet. In a word, if he were
Paul, he should be a pestilent fellow; if CHRIST JESUS, blessed for ever (a
horrible thing!) he should be Beelzebub: For so that glorious Lord, and blessed
Servant, was nicknamed and branded by the profane World.

Hence it is, that the generation of the profane and wicked Crew do ever
furiously band themselves together, to transplant and root out a conscionable
Minister, whenever God brings him amongst them. Like an unquiet and raging
Sea, they continually foame out spightfull speeches, filthy and shameful
slanders, and lay things unto his charge, he never knew: That so, by
discouraging him in his Ministry, weakening his hands, and breaking his
heart, they may any ways be rid of him: Or else, by picking unnecessarie
Quarrels against him, they labor by Authority, and strong hand, to throw him
out of his place. For their malice against a powerful Minister, is endless,
and implacable.

It is ever the property of un-ingenuous profaneness, to hate and fear a
faithful and conscionable Preacher as ill as the Plague, and so to esteem of
him. This appears, by Tertullus censure of Paul; Certainly (says he) we
have found this man a pestilent fellow: When indeed himself was a pernicious
Orator, (...).
and abused his cursed Eloquence, to the confusion of Goodness. In the
Original, the word signifies, the Plague. The Plague, that great affrighter,
and terror of the sons of men, is not half so terrible and vexing, as is
that man to a carnal heart, which preaches with power and authority, and not
as the Scribes and formal Doctors; and no marvel. The Plague threatens but
only the fears and pangs of a temporal death, and takes but away the
natural Life; but the powerful Word, from the mouth of a conscionable
Minister, does strike to the very heart of a carnal man, the terrors of
Hellfire and everlasting Vengeance, and does labor to bereave him of his Life
of Corruption, and Pleasures; which, as I told you before, is more sweet and
dear unto him, than his Life of Nature.

And hereupon it is, that as you see Towns and Cities busily bestirre
themselves, watch and ward, diligently enquire, and examine passengers, to
keep out the Plague; so it is the policy and practice of those places, where
Drunkards, Swaggerers, Worldlings, and profane men swarm, jointly to conspire
and band together, for the banishing of godly Ministers, and driving them out
of their Coast. CHRIST JESUS himself, who spoke as never any man spoke, was so
used by the Swinish Gadarens; as you may read in the fifth of Luke. Paul and
Barnabas, that glorious pair of worthy Pastors, were so used by the rebellious
and stiff-necked Jews, Act. 13. whereupon they told them to their faces, That
thereby they judged themselves unworthie of everlasting life. Then Paul and
Barnabas (says the Text) spoke boldly, and said; It was necessary, that the
Word of God should have first been spoken unto you: But seeing you put it from
you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo we turn unto the
Gentiles. The Book of God, Ecclesiastical Stories, experience of our Times,
do plentifully verify and confirm this Point.

5 But if so be, 5
this Spiritual Fool, whom we have carried along through so many steps of
impiety, cannot have his will against the Preaching and the Person of the
Minister; but that he sees the Power of the Word, which he cannot decline, is
like continually to vex him, to strike through his loins, with fear and
trembling still to grate upon his Conscience for his sweet sin, to discern
and discover the very thoughts and imaginations of his heart; or that he is
more ingenuous and faire-conditioned than other unregenerate men (for sometimes
sweetness and lovingnesse of natural disposition does bridle men from raging
against the power of holy Doctrine, and sincerity of an honest man:) Why then,
in a fifth place, he

First, Either resolves (as many do) to give the Preacher hearing indeed, and
perhaps reverent attention too; but with this secret reservation, That he
shall not stir and move him with all his Preaching; That say what he will,
he shall never persuade him, that this or that sin is so heinous as he
makes it; he shall never drive him from the Fashions of the Times, and
Customs of his Forefathers; he shall never bring him out of conceit with
good-fellowship. So, that as the deaf Adder stops his ears against the
Enchanter, charm he never so wisely; so shuts he the ears of his heart
against the Word of Life: and though it sounds daily loud and strongly in his
ears, yet will he by no means suffer it to sink feelingly and powerfully
into his soul. Those men which rest upon this step of impiety, and in this
degree of profaneness, though they hear Sermon upon Sermon, yet are they
still the same men: They are Liars still, they are Drunkards still, they are
Usurers still, they are Swearers still, they are lukewarm Professors still,
etc. they are still as they were. Though these sins have again and again
been cried against, and many times reproved, and their Consciences convinced;
yet the Word which is preached amongst them, has no more power, nor wrought
more alteration upon them, than upon the Seats where they sit: Though the
glorious Light of the Gospel shine fair and bright upon them, yet they lie
still hard frozen in their dregs, and stark blind in matters of Heaven:
Though the Hammer of the Word beat often upon their hearts, yet it does not
break and bruise them, but more and more harden and emmarble them, like an
Anvill and Adamant: Though they be washed with many plentiful Showers from
Heaven, yet they still continue black Moors, and Leopards; still full of the
blackness of Hell, and spots and pollution of Satan.

Let those that are such among you, in the Name of God beware in time: for
assuredly, the Damnation sleeps not, the Day of Reckoning and every man's
particular Judgment is very near; and then we must be answerable and
countable for every Sermon we have heard: Every Sermon will then stand up,
either to witness for us, or against us; for every one we hear, either
advances us a step nearer toward Heaven, or throws us a stayre lower down
toward Hell.

Secondly, Or if he cannot so fence himself against the keen edge of the
Word, that twoedged Sword, which day after day is laid to the root of his
corruption; nor so hide his head from the heat of that glorious and sacred
Sun of Truth, which every Sabbath shines on his face; but that the sharp
Arrows of the Word of Truth and Righteousness do pierce his heart, and Sword
of Spirit gets so far within him, that it strikes and astonisheth his
Conscience: Why then he,

First, Either strives and struggles against it, by shifting and shielding
himself with Distinctions, Exceptions, Excuses, carnal Reasons, Restrictions,
Limitations, false Glosses, private and partial Interpretations, and opposing
one place of Scripture, in his own false and enforced Sense, against the true
meaning and natural power of the Word in another place, as I have told you
largely before. So wretchedly and unhappily is he wedded to the sinful
pleasures of this vain World, that he will wrest his wit, the Word of God, or
any thing, to wrest out of his heart those piercing Arrows of the Word of
Truth, shot by the hand of a skillful Archer; which if he would suffer to
search and sink, would fetch out the poison of his natural corruption,
mortify his lust, and save his soul.

Secondly, Or if he have not wit and understanding to furnish himself fitly
with probable Interpretations, formal Distinctions, and plausible Exceptions,
(for this ability only befalls profane men of better parts, and more
understanding:) Why then, being resolved not to submit to the power of the
Word, nor to forsake his carnal contentments, he takes this course; he
surfets so immoderately, and drinks so deep of sensual pleasures of that
bosomesinne to which he is so much wedded, that he casts his Conscience
asleep, drownes his heart in earthly delights, and so goes on at all
adventures, and throws himself upon Gods mercies, without all ground or
warrant, with such conceits as these: That he hopes he shall do as well as
others, who are far worse and more wicked than himself: That God, no doubt,
will be merciful to one sin: That all his other good parts and good deeds
will countervaile and make amends for one infirmity, (for so he will call it,
and conceive of it, though it be a gross and grievous sin:) That one sin
will not require so great repentance, but that it may be well enough done on
his deathbed, and such like.

Thus I have acquainted you by the way, with the steps of impiety, and degrees
of profaneness, wherein unregenerate men, which hate to be reformed, and
refuse to yield up themselves to be mastered and guided by the Power and Light
of the holy and heavenly Word of the true and ever-living God, do unhappily
rest and repose themselves, to the eternal confusion both of their souls and
of their bodies: Which you must take heed of, if you would profit by the Word.

6 Discover and defeat all those Snares of Satan, 6
that we have formerly mentioned to you in this Discourse, page 83. under the
fourth Use.

7 Deject and demolish those two strong Holds of Satan; first, 7
Carnal Reason; secondly, Corrupt Affection; which I thus define: It is the
actuated strength and rage of original pollution, which furiously executes the
sensual and unreasonable determinations of corrupted Carnal Reason; stands at
open defiance, and professes open hostility against Grace, goodness, and good
men, and courses of sanctification; feeds upon so long, and fills it self so
full with worldly vanities and pleasures, that growing by little and little
incorrigible and untameable, it breeds and brings forth, as it natural issue,
Despair, Horror, and the Worm which never dies.

By Carnal Reason, I understand the whole speculative power of the higher and
nobler part of the Soul, which we call the Understanding, as it is naturally
and originally corrupted, and utterly destitute of all Divine Light; and does
afterward, through it own sinful working and sensual discourse, grow wise in
the World and earthie affairs, but disconceitfull and opposite to the ways of
God, and heavenly wisdom, by concluding and commending to it self false
Principles, from deluded sense, and deducing false conclusions from true
Principles, and by a continued exercise and experience in contemplation of
Earth, 8
and passages of worldly Policy.

By Corrupt Affection, I mean and comprise all the active inferior powers of
the Soul, Will, Affections, Sense, as they are polluted and empoysoned in the
puddle of original corruption; and afterward being fleshed in sensual
pleasures, and enfierced by Satan's suggestions, become the furious
executioners of all the sinful decrees and unsanctified determinations of the
mis-guided understanding and wisdom of the flesh.

8 In hearing the Word, be sure,

First, (...). Adh^^ere animum, advertere animum.
To give earnest heed, Heb. 2. 1.

Secondly, (...). Mente agitare, in animo versare.
To consider seriously, 2 Timothy 2. 7.

Thirdly, (...). Nequando per fluamus, ut Terentianus ille Parmeno, se plenum
esse rimaru^ dicit, qui huc and illuc perfluat.
That we be not in this respect like leaking Vessels, and have Sieve-like
memories, Heb. 2. 1.

Fourthly, (...). Notanda est vis huius vocabuli, quo significatur, non sine
magno certamine posse istud bonum se^^^n asservari, luctante carne, ac Diabol^
adversus spiritu^ Dei, novum hospitem, and capitalem ipsorum inimicu^.
To keep the Word with much ado, with great contention and colluctation, Luke
8. 15.

9 Suffer the Spirit of Bondage to have its work upon thee. 9 See Perkins,
Vol. 1. p. 455.
Conclude horror upon thy heart, by the working of the Law, from such places as
these; Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8, 9. Rev. 21. 8.

10 When thy Conscience is once thoroughly wounded by the preparative work of
the Spirit of Bondage, 10
and all thy sins, even those in which thou have taken greatest delight,
become heavy and a grievous burden upon thy heart; then let that heavy heart
of thine receive spiritual warmth, refreshing, and life,

First, By perusing the Lord Jesus in all the passages of his Love, Sufferings,
and Satisfactions, from his coming from the Bosom of his Father, until his
returning unto his right hand again; especially hanging upon him, bleeding and
dying, and crying under the burden of our sins, Joh. 19. 30.
My God, my God, etc. and so conquering and concluding, It is finished.

Secondly, See Marrow of the Oracles of God, p. 228, etc.
By a feeling survey and sure settling upon all the Promises of Life, sealed
with his righteous blood.

Thirdly, See Ibid. p. 376, etc.
By cleaving to Gods sweetest Name, which is to forgive iniquity,
transgression, and sin, Exodus 34. 6, 7.

Fourthly, See Randalls Cygn. Cant. p. 28. My Walking with God, p. 10.
By resting with all thankful and joyful acknowledgement, and rejecting
resolutely all scrupulous and fearful injections, upon that blessed Mystery
of Gods free grace, which reaches from everlasting to everlasting.

11 Then ever after walk watchfully and fruitfully in the path which is called
holy. 11


Now for continual growing and profiting by the Ministry, in that new and
blessed course; and for thriving by the food of the Word which thou enjoyest,
take these directions, look unto these things.

First, See Chrysostom. Tom. 2. p. 682.
Look to the dressing of it; that thy spiritual Cook be cunning, and
conscionable. Otherwise, it may sometimes turn into rank poison unto thy
Soul, fill thee with wind, and puff thee up with a causeless good conceit
of thy self; impair thy spiritual health, keep thee stinted, as it were,
and at a stay, etc. Nay, an ill spiritual Cook, by his juggling Tricks, may
make thee believe all thy life long, that thou growest in Grace, and shall go
to Heaven; and thou art stark dead in sins and trespasses, and shall be
damned.

Secondly, See Rollocke in Johan. p. 377.
The emptying and disburthening of the Stomach of thy Soul, of all Humors,
Passions, Prejudice, Crosses, Troubles, Temptations, etc. or any thing that
will hinder the purity and power of the Word from taking possession of thy
Soul: even the Honey-combe, the sweetest thing in the World, is loathsome, as
the Wiseman says, to a full stomach. Thou must bring an Heart and Head, like
two empty Buckets, to draw with greediness and joy the Water of Life out of
the Wells of Salvation.

Thirdly, To procure and raise an Appetite before thou come: from
consideration; first, of its Necessity: Where the Word of God is not preached,
the people perish; as you had it in the former Treatise. Secondly, Excellency:
It is far more precious than purest Gold, dearer than thousands of Gold and
Silver. Thirdly, Sweetness: It passes the Honey, and Honeycombe. David, in his
absence from the means, holds the Swallow and Sparrow happle Birds. Fourthly,
Profit: It builds up the inner man, etc.

Fourthly, The Reception of it; That it ever be entertained with far more
attention and reverence, than if we were hearing the mightiest Monarch in the
World speaking immediately unto us, by personal compellation, about the
weightiest affair, and neereliest concerning us: That it be ever heard as the
Word of the mighty and ever-living God.

Fifthly, Retention. The most wholesome and sovereign meat, if presently
voided, nourishes not at all; many fall into a Consumption of Grace, by reason
of weakness this way. They are hot and fierce to get unto a good Sermon, and
they do well, to be careful thereabout; but their forwardness and fervencie
cooles and expires, when the Sermon is done. They after, have little more to
do with it, save only to say it was a good Sermon: As, many have an
unsatiable appetite in devouring meat, who cannot keep it for any space of
time. See Chrysostom. Tom. 2. Hom. 41. Incer to Authore.
The retentive power of the Soul then must be strengthened, and exercised, or
else the attentive and attractive adds but more deadness to a spiritual
Atrophie.

Sixthly, See Chrysostom. in Johan. Hom. 31. page 103.
Concoction. By repetition* either in way of conference, with our neighbors,
and Christian friends; Let us ruminate (of the Scripture, viz.) and as it were
chew the cud, that we may have the sweet juice, spiritual effect, marrow,
honey, kernel, taste, comfort and consolation of them, 11. Homily for reading
Scriptures.
or in way of examination, without Wives, Children, Servants, Scholars, or
other inferiors. But principally, by that, first, excellent Exercise of
Meditation, which is the very life of profitable Hearing; and the want of it,
the death of all good Lessons: It inflames the heart with a kindly heat, to
practice; as in brooding, the Hen inspires heat, and begets life: secondly, and
by the heat of Prayer; that both warmes the heart, fits the food, and brings a
blessing upon both.

Seventhly, We must, Iterum de memoria^ quasi de utero, revocare and ruminare,
and retractare. Chrysostom. or rather the uncertain Author, in Matthew. Hom. 41.
Digestion. By application of the points unto our own particular; by sorting
the particulars of the Sermon, unto our own necessities; for the conquering of
this Lust, ruling of that Passion, leaving this Sin, performing that Duty,
etc.

Eighthly, Practice. Walking in the strength of it afterward; which makes it our
own, and keeps the Soul in health, and growth, and comfortable temper.

And thus we may constantly grow by the Ministry of the Word; which is the
principal public Banquet, which the Lord has provided for feeding his
Childrens Souls.

The Sacraments are a second Service.

Even by the first, that is, Baptism, we may grow, not only when we feel
it in our own bodies; but also, when we see it administered unto others. And
therefore, the custom which has prevailed in most places, of neglecting and
contemning this part of the Food of our Souls, is to be severely censured, and
sharply reproved.

By the second, that is, the Lords Supper, we may thrive excellently, if we
follow those Directions in my Preparative to it: To which I refer you, in the
succeeding Treatise.

FINIS.
A BRIEF TABLE OF THE CHIEF HEADS Contained in this Treatise of the SAINTS
GVIDE.
A.
AFfection to be joined with hearing. page 179 Afflictions no strange thing. p.
118. They are but short. 120 Afflictions raised by the Devil against
Christians. 109 Antidotes against afflictions. 110, etc. Application required
in hearing the Word, and why. 180, 181 Apostates and their danger. 103
Atheism. 50 Attention in hearing required, 174. How hindered, 84. How helped.
175, 176
B.
Benefits of the Word. 59, etc.
C.
Catechizing our families, pressed in nine Reasons. 228, etc. Carnal Reason
and corrupt affection defined. 246, etc. Caveats, that we may profit in
hearing the Word. 247, etc. Carnal Objections against the Word. 61, to 83
Charity among Christians, as much as among Papists. 81 Christ suffers with his
afflicted, 121 Considerations sixteen for the usefulness of the Word. 216,
etc. Conversion tried. 89 Covetousness, and the signs of it. 96 Curses six
of unprofitable hearing. 190, etc. Cursed is their condition, that are not
reformed by the Word in six particulars. 199
D.
Danger in absenting from the Word. 58 Degrees in sinning. 53 Devil steals
away the Word, 85, 86. He hinders conversion, 87. And a through reformation,
88, etc. He deals with men as Pharaoh with Moses. 93, etc. Dearness of
things, why greater now than formerly. 82 Delight in the Word helps memory.
179 Duties required before hearing, 145, etc. In hearing, 173, etc. After
hearing. 182
E.
Effects of Pride. 142 The End of our Creation. 204 Examination, when required.
166, 167 Examples for the practice of Preparation. 155, etc.
F.
False changes, 88, 89. How tried. 102 Frequent preaching proved out of
antiquity. 205, etc. Feet, what is meant by them. 17 Final falling from
grace, not granted, 101. But partially and frequently, 106. The good we get by
falls. 108 Fretting at afflictions, 132. At the prosperity of the wicked. 133
G.
Grace is of a growing nature. 40 Godly men distinguished from Hypocrites, by
six marks. 8, 9 The Godly shine brighter after their falls. 39 Gods Children
but few. 130 Gods Law not like man's. 54 God is the cause of all affliction.
113. His aim in afflicting his. 117 Gods love to his, exceedes the creatures.
114
H.
Hardness of heart, and a help against it. 52, 53 Helps to hear the Word
understandingly. 177
I.
Ignorance like darkness, 31. The danger of it, p. 32. to 37. and 46, 47
Judgments of Non-proficients by the Word. 48 Judgments for the contempt of
it. 201, etc. Judgments why rather to be expected in our time. 80
K.
Knowledge must be practical, 5. Fruits of divine Knowledge. ibid.
L.
Learning humane only will not save. 19, 20 Lets of not profiting by the Word.
p. 50. to 123 Life to be lost for God. 12 Light, what meant by it. 16 Love to
God and our neighbors tried. 68
M.
Many take more pains for Hell, than some for Heaven. p. 75. to 78 The Matter
of the Word. 43 Math. 10. 4. expounded. 195 Good Meanings will not save. 21
Means to quicken attention to the Word. 175 Meditation requisite after
hearing, 184. The Benefits of it, 185. Directions for it, 227, 228 Ministers
Ambassadors: why. 72 Ministers, why they preach so seldom. 209 Ministry of
the Word like the Wedding feast. 57 The Misery of the natural estate. 141 The
More we have, the greater our account. 143 Motives, To walk by the rule of
the Word, p. 41. to 49. To prepare for hearing it, 151. To profit by it. 197
O.
Obedience to the Word required. 187 Opennesse of heart to receive the Word.
172
P.
Paths, what meant by them. 18 Papists keep the Word from the Laity, 28.
Their Objections answered. 29 Peace that the Gospel brings with it. 70
Persecution to be endured for the Word. 10 Perseverance, how hindered by
Satan, 100. How crowned by God. 105 Popish Hospitality, with its causes. 81
Prayers and praises must be fervent, and free. 10 Prayer before the Word, and
for what. 170, 171 Preaching preferred before reading, 211. More needful now,
than formerly, 213. It cannot be too much. 62, etc. Preservatives against
sin, 107. Against spiritual Pride, 136, etc. Preparation requisite before
hearing, 145. Without it, the Word hurts, 145, etc. The profit of it, 158, etc.
What it is, and what required in it. 165 Pride may spring from Gods providence.
132, etc. Privileges of the godly. 124 Profaneness of Ministers no excuse
for disobedience to the Word. 73 Psalms, their contents and benefits. 1, 2
Purging of the heart before hearing, from sin and worldly cares. 168, 169
Q.
Qualifications of the heart, before hearing. 152
R.
Recusancie. 51 Regeneration, what. 24 Reading the Word pressed, 214.
Objections against it answered. 224 Remembering the Word, a Duty. 182
Repetition and Conference, another. 185, 186, 227
S.
Satan's Policy. 106 Separatists condemned. 126, 127 Service of God how to be
qualified. 67 Six Sins follow unprofitable hearers. 194 Sin against the
Holy Ghost, how committed. 201 Singularity, what required, and what not. 128
Sleeping in the Church condemned. 176 Satan's Sleights to hinder the Words
work. 83, etc. Spiritual Pride, 123. How it arises. 124, etc. Sweet sin,
what it is. 55
T.
Things required to the love of God and men. 67
V.
Understanding of the Word required. 177 Vows to be paid. 9
W.
Wicked men hate the godly: why. 116, 117 Wicked men band together against a
powerful Minister. 239, etc. Wisdom indeed, how to be had. 3, 4 Fruits of
worldly Wisdom, 4. who is a wise man. ibid. Worldly Wisdom will not save
us. 20, 21. WORD: The meaning of the Word. 15 The Word our chiefest treasure,
12, 13. Our Light to Heaven. 19, 38 The literal Word, without the spiritual
meaning, will not profit us. 23 How men labor to blunt the edge of the Word.
233 Struglings of a wicked heart, to get the Word out, being once got in. 244
The Word works Regeneration and Sanctification, 24, 25. It is lively and
sharp in three respects, 26. It is a Love-letter from God, 42. It shall judge
us, 45. It is not man's, but Gods invention, 50. It profits converted and
unconverted, 59. It must dwell in us plentifully, and how, 105, 213, etc. It
fits every man in all occasions. 215, etc.;Will Worship hated by God. 22, 23
FINIS.

