HVMBLE MOTIVES FOR ASSOCIATION TO MAINTAIN RELIGION ESTABLISHED.

Published as an antidote against the pestilent treatises of secular Priests.

Virtus vnita valet.

IMPRINTED 1601.

A petition to the Queen, for assotiation in religion.
There be as seems unto me (Most gracious Sovereign) by the law of God, by
the law of nature, and by the law of nations, 3 things in duty to be
exhibited by the subjects to the magistrate, viz. Honor, Obedience, and
Defense. For the magistrates, (as they are rightly termed by Homer) the Guides
Leaders, and Norishers of the people. The are, as Plato calls them) Saviors
Keepers and Preseruers of the people, They are as Aristotle says aliuyugc law,
and the law* without them a ^ dumb and dead magistracy. So that the magistrate
being the life of the law, and the law the life of the common wealth, in the
safety of the magistrate must needs consist the safety of the common wealth.
This seems to me to have been the cause, that the common laws of this realm,
have ordained greiuous punishments for such as should indaunger the lives of
principal magistrates. A^ 25. Fdw. 3. It is laid down, that if a man slaye
the L. Chauncellor, L. Treaserer, Justices of either bench, Justices in Oyer,
Justices of assise, or Justices assigned to here and determine, being in
there place doing their, office, that such offense is Treason. If then their
has been and ought to be so great care and prouidene for the preservation and
safety of these inferior magistrates in respect, how much more should their
be in the establishing of the safety and security of the superior power and
most supreme magistracy, from whose throne and estat all other authorities
are derived, and by whose priuatio^ they be all extinguished. Such is the cause
we now deal with, even the defense, preservation, and safety, of your most
excellent majesty: A princes of such perelesnes and singularity, as meriteth
no less to be regarded of all men for private singularitye, than honored for
public function. For if the force and strength of virtue be such, that the
only show and shadow of it has that marvelous and magneticall attraction,
that it draws unto it the hearts and minds of infinite people, as plainlye
appears in the ancient nobles both Greeks and Romans who wantinge the
true knowledge of God from whose divine majesty all virtues do proceed as
from the fountain and to whose glory they ought all to be directed as to the
^mall scope, and had in them rather form and figure then any matter of
substance of true virtue: what in explicable effects does pure, perfect, and
sincere virtue bring to pass, being adorned with the true knowledge of God,
settled in a seat most royal in the eyes and sight of all nations to the wonder
and admiration of the world, to the singular benefit of sundry countries, to
the joy of the godly, and to the praise* honor, and glory of God. These
things appearing most plainlye in your Majesty's most royal person, cannot
but draw unto it most effectually, the hearts and minds of all good and
virtuous, who to their inestimable joy, do confess and acknowledge your
highness* for the rarest Princess in the world: for the life and light of your
land, and for the sacred fountain (next under God,) of all their felicity: so
far exceedinge the ancient princes before mentioned, as true virtue does the
counterfeite, and as far as endless glory perpetuated by eternity,
surpasses perrishing fame, consumed by time. They traveled for there own
glory which was false, fading and momentary, your Majesty seeking the glory
of God, shall assuredly be crowned with eternal glory. But to enter into
rehearsal of your highness most singular ornaments of mind and body, of art
and nature, of grace and fortune, I mean not, nor may not. It is too deep a
sea for me to wade in: too large a field for me to walk in. Theirfore, sith
thereof speak as I ought I cannot: as I can, I will not. As in the one I
acknowledge it my weakness and imbecillitie, so in the other I am lead by
discretion and judgment. For in the resplendeny of your excellency, vain were
it in me, and friuelous (in uttering my sle^der conceit,) to light as it were
a candle to discover the Sun. But whatsoever we can, let us do it in your
service: whatsoever we may, let us devise for your safetye.

The safetye of your Majesty does most consist in preservation of your most
royal person, and of your estat. Your person and estate are best preserved by
cuttinge off the perils that would most annoy them. The estate of your highness
is a free monarchy, a sovereign and absolute power, and authority instituted
and ordained of God: for the defense of the good, and punishment of the evil,
and for the government of all in piety and Justice.

This your sovereign estat is dangerously impeached with the peril of your
person by the endeavor to bring in the tyranny, superiority, and supremacye of
a foreign Prelat: whose riches in times past, has been our poverty: whose
puisaunce, our terror: whose doctrine, our destruction. These are are they that
loath manna, and long for the fleshpots of Egeipt: that love the tongue of the
Caldies, better then the language of Canaan: that madded with malice, or
blinded with error, take Sedom for Sion, and Babell for Jerusalem. Of these
people we are to observe two things, They end whereat they shoot, and the
mean they use to attain to that end.

The end for which they would advaunce their tyranny, is, that theirby they
might enjoy their groves and hill altars, that thereby they might honor again
the wholl host of heaven, and that thereby they might return again to their
superstious Idolatry and blasphemous religion.

The means whereby they would accomplish it, is, the death of your majesty,
and the erecting of a favoring successor, whereunto tend all their devises.
This is their drift and practice while there remains in them any spark of
hope to attain to this end, or any conceit (I will not say of probabillitie)
but of possibility to atchiue it. what law soever we make to punish them they
will still persist in their pernicious practisses, and your majesty's most
sacred person shall still remain in peril. But if your majesty cut off
their hope, and make it apparently impossible for their religion ever to take
place in this realm, their endeavor will forthwith surcease, the state will be
clear from their devises, and your majesty freed from danger.

The only way in mine oppinion to extinguish their hopes, and theirby their
practices, and so consequently the peril of your most sacred person, is, to
establish a firm continuance and perpetuatio^ of the substance and sincerity
of doctrine now professed in this realm, which me thinks is sensible, and is
to be done by general laws* by general league, and by general oath. To
which end it it would be enacted, that all gentlemen, magistrates, and
possessioners within this realm shall take the oath of association, for the
defense and perpetuation of religion now publiquelye professed within this
realm. And that the oath of supremacy be ministered with like addition to all
men generally within this realm, from the age of 16* years upwards, twice
every year, by the majors and gouerners of cities, towns, and corporations,
and by stewardes and other officers in manors and lordships in their
countries, and their leetes and ^aw days. And if they refuse to enter into
such league or oath, that every such person shall be holden and reputed as
suspected, and shall be theirby disabled to bear any office or authority in
this common wealth, and shall also be bound to his good behavior, sequestered
from all his armor and weapons, and (if he be possessed of lands within this
realm) shall yearly pay unto your majesty the fourth part theirof. This
pain and such others as your majesty shall like of to endure, during his
obstanacie, and upon his conformity to cease.

By this means, their hope being taken a way, I make no doubt but their
practice will end. But so long as their hope endures, they will never give
over their deuellish attempts. If Brutus had not hoped to set Rome at liberty,
he had never conspired the death of Caesar. If Phocas had not hoped to obtain
the imperial dignity, he had not slain his master M^uritius. If the papists
hoped not to establish here their religion, they would not practice the death
of your majesty* then let us put them out of all hope, lest they put us out of
all help. For most true is that saying of Plutarch, In ^acinoroses lenitas est
in bonos cradelitas.

But it will be perhapes objected, that this course is dangerous: and that under
pretense of remedying a future peril, it draws upon us a present mischeife.
The harm that there by is to be doubted, is, from the papists* If from them,
it is either by exasperating their will, or by increasing of their power,
their will cannot be worse in this their extreme coffeehouse. Nothing
can be added to their malice whether your majesty beholds the head or the
members (if so gracious an eye may behold so vile an object): you shall
easily discover their spite and rancor to be already in the highest degree.
The Pope has sent out against your highness his flame and thunderboltes of
excommunication full of falsehood and fury, of bitterness and ignominy. His
will therein has been to deprive your majesty of your estate, government, life,
crown, and dignity. He has practiced to draw unto himself favorers and
followers within our realm: to discharg your subjects of duty and aleadgeance
they owe unto you: to withdraw them from your obeidience, and to draw them unto
his.

To this end he sent, first his Agnus Dei, then his grana benidicta, and such
other treacherous baits, the ways of his trade. then next his bulls. threats,
and excommunications, as the fire of his fury. And now last of all (if ever
his practices will have end) their Jesuits and Seminary Preistes* the most
fine and subtle Brokers of Babylon. By this means he has sturred tumultes in
your land* He has allured your subeictes to disloialtie, and induced some to
actual rebellion, and some parts he has invaded with his forces: the members
following the direction of the head have assisted his attempts both at home and
abroad: some by words, some by wrighting* and some by action: and all by will
seek to advance his authority and tirannie against your majesty's most royal
titles. They have touched (though with inualiditie) your most sacreed person*
they have conspired with treachery, against your pure and sincere religion.
they have charged us with bloudines and tirannie: they have spoken it, they
have written it they have published it, they have dyed in it and can their will
be worse? yea* but some of them acknowledge you to be for their lawful
sovereign, and have both spoken and written very honorably of your most rare
and singular excellencies. what then? shall we think that their malice is
the less, because your virtue is the more: we may as well think, that the
Devils did not generally hate Christ, because some of them did confess him to
be the son of God.

Great is the force of truth, and often drives the adversary to acknowledge
it. And great is the subtlety of satan, who somtims speaks that that is
true, because he would be believed in that that is false. The papists as
ungracious herein as their grandfather, do sometimes acknowledge your most
singular virtues, but then effectually when they persuade some point of their
religion, or inueigh against some noblemen that are about you, mixinge their
gall with honey that it may the rather be received* and minglinge their
fashood with that verity, that it may the sooner be believed. A trick intruth
of their treachery, and no sign at all of their loyalty. So leauinge their
evil will at the worse, not possible to be augmented, we will consider of
their power, whether that may be increased.

The power and strength of any people or multitud, is to be augmented by one of
these 4. ways. 1 By addition or number. 2. by supply of necessaries. 3 by
advantage of place. 4. by order of government. And as by these means it is
increased, so by the contratraries it is ^^^^nished. Now if I show your
Majesty (...) their power shall be increased by no one of these ways, but
shall be lese^ed by all their contraries: I hope I shall sufficiently double this
point, and so procure clear passage to my persuasion. that this may more
manifesly appear, let me present unto your Majesty, the whole number of your
subjects divided into 4 bands.

1. Protestants of religion. 2. Protestants of state. 3. Papists of state. 4.
Papists of religim.
The first are constant and faithful unto your highness: the 2. waueringe: the
3. perilous* the 4. pernicious. the first serve you for love, the 2. for hope,
the 3. for fashion, the 4. for fear. the corruption of the 1. bredeth the 2
the corruption of the 2 breeds the 3. the corruption of the 3. bredeth the 4.
than the which nothing can be more corrupt: they being altogether possessed
with the dregs of popery, wherein the more gross the more ungracious. the have
their conversion also in assent. For of the subtilest part of the 4. is
ingendered the 3. of the subtilest part of the the 3. is ingendered the 2. of
the purest and best part of the 2. is ingendered the first. The 1 and 4. are
mere opposits, having their centers most contrary, even heaven and hell,
light and darkness, truth and falsehood, Christ and antichrist. the 2 and 3 are
intermidie* the 2. in part inclining to the 1, in part declining to the 3 the 3
in part declining to the 4: in part assendinge to the 2. the more the 1. and 2.
are increased, the more is your safety. the more the 3 and 4. are augmented,
the more is your peril. Out of these 2. and 3. the increase of the 1* and 4
must grow. for they are as it were two heaps of stones that must go to the
buildinge either of Sion or Babell. Their progresses, or dispositions are
wrought or staid, hastened or slowed by certain motives or motiones: and they
are of 2. sorts, external or internal. the external motives on the on sid be
doctrine and discipline the on the word of life, the other the work of law:
the on the sheepards voice, the other the sheepards hook* the on in the mouth
of the minister, the other in the hand of the magistrate: in the one is
contained the preaching of the truth, in the other all good laws for the
establishment and maintenance their of. The external motives on the other
side, is the doctrine of error and superstition: the policies and practices of
impiety.

The internal motives are of two sorts, natural, and supernatural. the
supernatural motives on the one side, is the operation of the holy ghost: on
the other side, the suggestions and subtilties of satan. the natural motive
is appetitio boni. How the 2 and 3 band, that is to say, the protestants of
estat and papists of estat, establish their summum bonum in this world* and
define it to be a life lead in wealth: pleasure reputation and authority. In
the appetition hereof they both agree. In the acquisition they vary. For, the
papists of estat: conceiving great brittlement and uncertainty in the course
of this present government which he supposes cannot long last, for that he
desires to have his summum bonum perdurable, he will not hassard it in this
present, but will now lay his foundation long before, to inioye it in the
future. to that end he will now be a favorer to papists of religion: he will
retain some of them that be most famous or rather most infamous on this side
and beyond the seaes: he will give some token of present coffeehouse: he
will incur the displeasure of some great man of the estate that favors the
contrary, and he will do whatsoever else may make him a man of note, whereby
he may notably be accepted off in the future.

The protestant of estate (thinkinge it teadious to tarry, and frutlesse to
trust to dead men's shoes,) resolves to taste of the present sweet, offers
his service in most dutiful sort unto your majesty, frames himself unto
the time, assocyateth himself with such as are protestants of religion, in
sinuateth himself into the favor of some great man that is favorer thereof,
hops to attain wealth, reputation and authority thereby, and herewith
becomes a serviceable member of the estat, though as yet no true member of the
church. But for that he submits himself unto the external motives it is to
be hoped that in time he will be inwardly and effectually called, and so made a
member of the mystical body of Christ: for out of these gentiles is gathered
the Israel of God* and as the dispare of the future and hope of the present
produces protestants of estat, so despair of the present and hope of the
future producerh papists of estate, now if the hope of the future be taken
away, and all means used for the perpetuation of the present, there is no
doubt but all papists of estate will become protestants of estate.

For sith they establish their summum bonum in this world, thither their inward
motive of appetitio boni must needs bring them.

It is not improbable, that of the papists in this land, the 4 part are not
papists of religion. The rest then (being papists of estate) being by this law
taken from them, their power must needs remain much weakened by this
lesseninge of their number. Moreover, for that the papists of religion at this
present stand furnished with I credict and authority, 2 wealth and ability, 3
weapons and furniture, so that they may draw followers by the one, wage them by
the other, and arm them by the 3: we by this law shall be reaue them of the 1,
impair the 2 with the increase of your majesty's treasury, and take clean
from them the 3. Further, whereas some of them at this present, publiquelye
stand in offices of credit and comoditie as it were in sorts and places of
advantage, some others lie hid as it were in the ambush of their dissimulatio^
and trenches of treachery ready through all loope holes of opportunity to
annoy us: we by this law shall remove the 1, discover the 2, and draw out both
unto the open view, where being warned of them we may be armed for them.

Lastly, whereas heretofore they have cast up their accoumpt, booked their
catholic gentlemen, measured their forces, had intelligence with our enemies,
sounded our havens marshalled by their practices, and (like Catilynes) assigned
every of us, your faithful subjects to the slaughter: we shall by this mean^
take from them their maine battle, unfurnish and disarme the residue, displant
them from their places of advantage, break their route and disorder them in
their arrayes. Thus far are we from increasing hereby their power. Sith then
it plainly appears that they shall every way be weakened herewith, It rests
that I prove unto your majesty, that their weakening shall be your
strengthening* and that this law shall be your safety. What harm soever may
grow unto your highness must spring out of one or more of these 3 causes, either
from the practices of adversaries abroad, or from the spite of your subjects
at home, or from the might of your successor either abroad or at home. The for
train enimyes of your Majesty are the Roman Prelates and their faction,
whose perpetual practices have been to compass their deaths, whose lives did
withstand their purposes. The examples hereof are infinite, whether your
highness way the acts of their public hostility, or of their private treachery
For by either of both those means have. they wrought the ruin of many
renowned personages, against whose lives they would never have attempted ought,
had they not hoped to have been gainers by their deaths. Now when it shall
appear unto them, that by your Majesty's decease, no private or public
utility to them or to their church shall accrue, (by means of this law) it
shall be a repercussiue to all their practices: which* being but an effect of
their hope, by this frustrating theirof, will clean be extinguished.

The spite of your subjects, must grow by coffeehouse. The most
discontented me^ of your realm, are papists of religion, and papists of
estate. The one solaceth his soul, theother comforeth his mind in your ruin.
the one accounpteth that hereby he shall enjoy the liberty of his conscience,
advancement of his fa^^ion, establishing of his faith, theother hops thereby
to possess his so much expected good, and his worldly long looked for
felicity.

Of which expectation being by this law bereaved, the one of them will clean
give over his course: the other will see that he has no cause to wish the
shortinge of your days, sith it will not be auailable for the attayning of his
desire.

The mightiest in succession (as your Majesty knows) are they whose
alliance, kind red, and confederacies are for the most part with papists:
whose faction being great, strong, and mighty abroad, it stands your
excellency upon, so much the more to wraken it at home, and thereby to provide
an inward strength against an outward force. whereas otherwise your state
shall seem to depend upon the will of your successor, amost unsure foundation,
and perilous, sith so easily it may be altered with ambition, and the desire of
a kingdom which knows no kindred, with the which, whenever it shall be
enflamed, their foreign forces shall not be so dangerous unto your majesty,
as the party they have within the realm, if it be of strength, whom, the
fervent desire of a third thing will join to the foreign, in such a knot of
indissoluble society, as in all probability will prove perilous and dangerous
to your highness. But this law established, your successors shall perceive
themselves so cut off, from all strong party within your land, that they
shall thereby be greatly discouraged from any such ambitious attempts. For
taking view of your whole subjects they shall find either protestants of
religion their most mortal enemies, if they attempt any thing against your
majesty: or else protestants of estate, men that will not alter their present
contentment for an uncertain innovation: or else papists of religion, who,
being but few in number, discontented, and disarmed, without either followers
or furniture, will rather daunt their spirits with their nakedness, then
encourage them with their power.

The estat of your subjects being brought to this pass, it is in your
majesty, by a better learned and more painful ministry, and by severe
discipline, as it were by motives more effectual, mightily to increase the
first, daily to diminish the second and third, and to propulse the relapsses of
either, to the great increasinge of the church of God, the great strengthing
and safeguard of your estate, and to the salvation of infinite souls. Sith then
this law can breed no peril to your highness at home, but will be the ground and
cause of much strength and securities unto your Majesty: it remains to be
considered how that mighty faction of papists will digest it abroad.

Their power assuredly, it can no way increase, and their will (I persuade my
selte) it cannot exasperate, being already at the very worst and extremest
point of coffeehouse. But if it did, I know right well that the fortitude
and magnanimity of your kingly mind would little esteem it, and utterly
despise it. And if it should come to pase in your Majesty's days, that the
princes of Meshech and Tuball, the forces of Gomer and the house of Toggarmah
out of the north, should confederate together (as it is rehearsed in Ezekiell
chapter 38. and recapitulated by S. John) and should say one to the other, we
will go up to the land of unwalled villages to them that be at rest, which
dwell safely dwellinge without walls, and having neither bars nor gates, even
to the land which bath been tossed with the sword, and is now gathered together
of many nationes, which have gotten cattle and goods and dwell safe: we will
go, together to spoil a pray, to get a booty to take away silver and gold,
to carry away cattle and goods, and to have a great pray: yet, whenever they
shall put the same in execution, it is prophesied and promised, that the sword
of the Lord shall be upon them in all the mountains of Israel.

By this law let us make our selves an un mouable mountain of Israel, for
the sword of the Lord will be upon his enemies* not in the sands, nor in the
seaes, but in the mountains of Israel. If we be neither hott nor cold, but
luke warm, and so rather frozen then fervent: when the Lord shall taste us in
to his judgment, he will void us out of the mouth of his majesty. But if we be
a mountain of Israel, the sword of the Lord will be with us against our
enemies: with pestilence and blood will he plead against them: storms rain,
and haylestones: and upon all that great people that is with them. Thus will he
be magnified, sanctified, and known in the eyes of many nations, and they
shall know that he is the Lord. This co^stancy, this zeal in the Lords cause,
this perpetuation of hi: truth to our posterity, is a part of duty acceptable
to God: it is a mean (as it were) that draws upon us his great, singular,
and manifold blessings: which notablye appears in that excellent testimony
that God gives of the integrity of Abraham genesis 18. 19* know this also
(says the Lord) that Abraham will command his children and his household
after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, that they may do Justice and
Judgment: that the Lord may brings upon Abraham the blessings that he has
promised.

I doubt not, but what the divine majesty knew herein of Abraham the father
of the faithful, he knows the same likewise of your highness a mother in
Issraell, a motherly estate that excludes not perpetual virginity: and an
heavenly estate, that includes eternal felicity; I doubt not (I say) but the
Lord knows this also, that Queen Elizabeth will command her subjects and
her servants after her to keep the way of the lord, to do Justice and
Judgment: that the Lord may bring upon Queen Elizabeth the blessings that he
has purposed.

This law and commandment of God, (to keep the way of the lord, to maintain
and perpetuate his truth and doctrine to our posterity,) is that which we most
humly and fervently desire at the hands of God, and of your Majesty. It stan
death with his glory; we crave it of his goodness: It stands with your safety:
we crave it of your wisdom.

FINIS. By Thomas Diggs Gentleman.
To the most Reverend Archbishops, and right reverend Lord Bishops of both
provinces.
I am occasioned (right reverend Fathers) or rather provoked to publish this
petition (long since penned* but whether delivered accordings to the pretense
I know not) by the Papists their packing to make Burgisses for this Parliament,
by their earnestnes against the former Bill for xi^d to be had of such, as
without convenient cause should not be present (at least on Sundays) at divine
service or preaching of Gods word, in some Church or Chapel, and by their
publishing beokes (mo than a good many) pretending a controversy between
secular Priests and Jesuits, but intending to make way (at least) for a
toler-ation of popery which they hoped (and so gave out throughout the realm)
to obtain by this parliament.

I call them papists who were so earnest against that bill: For, who but
papists would pronounce that penalty to be extreme, plead that people are not
to be compelled, but persuaded to come to Church: and doubt whether lay men may
meddle in any Church matter. But their popish and dangerous end (discovered
hereafter) ^oth manifesse them to be papists though some of them disclaymed
that name, and yet are not thereby Justified. For Dolman says that papists and
puritans would not be so called, But did they deny themselves to be Romish
Catholics? Whatsoever they pretend, I freely confess that the end of my
publishing this petition is, by putting this motion for Association to preserve
religion established, into the heads of wise and religious men, to occasion
something to be thought of, whereby the hope of the Papists might be utterly
frustrated.

I present it to your Lordships by name, as to them who have will and power to
prevent the purpose of the Papists, and to further so good a motion as this. I
will not discourse against toleration, since I wright to your Fatherhoods, who
(out of your profession) can best tell, that it is a principal clause of the
new covenant, that there should be but one Shepherd, and one sheepfould, one
God, and one way. So that, they are no sound gospellers, that harken to a
toleration of Antichristianity under a most christian Queen, who has suffered
for the gospel both subject and sovereign.

But good my Lords give me leave to say somewhat for Associatio^ in this
petition persuaded: and the rather, because, in these printed babbles and
brabbles, the Papists endeavor to make civil war between the best
christians, that is (as Dolman diuids and discribes them) Protestants, viz.
such as depend upon ecclesiastical dignities, and Puritans, viz. such as
pretend perfection in religion. Call to mind (right reverend) the course of
times, and remember, that when the Earl of Leicester lived, it went for
current, that all Papists were Traitors in action, or affection. He was no
sooner dead, But Sir Christopher Hatton (noted by Philopater, for public, and
bitter invectiues, against papists, being one himself) he bearing swaye.
Puritans were trounced, and traduced as troublers of the state: Presently after
his death, there comes forth (by means of the late Lord Treasurer) a
proclamation, and commissions throughout the land to inquire for Priests, for
their receivers, recusants: and such like, least if they were not looked unto
betime, the informations which were sent to Rome, and Spain of the number, and
readiness of prepared papists, should prove too true, at the spanish second
invasion then intended.

But now that that Lord Treasurer is gone, and the Earl of Essex, through his
fatal error, taken away, the cry is: Priests be tolerable men, but Puritans
may not be abidden. Remember (I say: and pray) these things: And consider,
Whether a Snake lurkes not under the grass, and whether there be not some
crafty Sinon of Sir Christopher Hattons stamp, (as it is imprinted by
Philopater) who makes way to these Trojan horses, the popish Books. If this
may be supposed, I beseech your Lordships enter into this further
consideration, that if division between protestants and puritans be avialable
for Popery, the contrary must needs be good for the preservation of religion
established* But if it may please your Lordships to give me leave, to signify
the cause, why they thus peswade the oppression of puritans, I doubt not, but
that ye will fear his fear, who said: Timeo Danaos vel dona ferentes, and
suspect the persuasion of such enemies, as with whom it is a ground of policy
(as well in peace as in war) Dolus an virtus, quis in host requirit, and a
Constant Cano^: that faith is not to be keept with here tiques. The cause is
sufficiently bewrayed in the wardword, and answer to a Iesuited gentleman, to
wit: that whereas they take the puritans to be their gratest opposits, they
would have the^ (especially known professors) to be kept down. Quousque?
while the catholic parttie (to use their own words) may have some swaye in
the balance with them. In which cause, let us observe three things.

First they pretend to hold only the puritans for their opposits, As if your
Lordships could be content to give way to their toleration, and yet they cannot
but take knowledge (and that with some signification of their feeling) of that
worthy Prelate the Lord Bishop of Duresme his godly exhortation at Paul's cross
against toleration, they cannot but (in their Quodlibets) scornefully term the
godly sermon of that reverend father the Bishop of Chester a preachme^t, and
report him to be a pvritans for inueighinge against the^ at Paul's cross,
equallyas against the Jesuits. and they cannot but join (even in these Books)
Caluinists with Puritans, Now this word Caluinists comprehends Protestants as
well as Puritans, So that we may gather, that (when their time serves) they
will speak out that, which Bristow in his motives writes, viz. That we are
all puritans in heart. But your Lordships are wise to conclude, that if the
Admirant of Arragon spared the papists no more then other in the borders of
Germany, and if it be true (which the priests now report) That the Duke of
Medina said, that if he had prevailed against England with his invincible
Armado. He would have spared papists no more than protestants, but make way for
his master. Then they will not spare your Lordships, in their golden or bloody
day; though ye should plead never so earnestly, that ye are L. Bishops, and no
puritans.

To this end is the second note to be observed. to wit, that known professors
are specially aimed at. And here I pray you remember, that Edward Squyre was
sent to poison her Majesty (whom God preserve) as well as the Earl of Essex:
Is our gracious Queen a puritan? Nay was the Earl a puritan, who was lead by
Papists in his sinnfull attempt, and at his arraignment misliked puritans
opinion touching Church government. No no, it is evident, that all be puritans
with them, which stand for the gospel. And therefore Dolman in his epistle,
does cunningly insinuate, and advise to make the Earl away: as if he had
written to this effect. If her Majesty were dead, we were not a whit the
nearer our purpose, so long as Essex is in place* But if we could be rid of
him, there were none of like policy, valor, resolution, authority, and savor
with the people, to hold the protestants together against the Infanta* and
popery. According to which in sinuation (for a sign is as good as a sentence
to prepared minds) friends of Spain (when Squiers poison failed) working upon
the Earls impatiency, by means and devises drew him to that attempt of making
a forcible way to present his ereifes to her Majesty. This is held for truth
S. Robert Cicill avouching as much at Cuffes arraignment) howsoever the
answerer to the Iesuited gentleman dare swear (contrary to that which is
published by authority and commonly known) that papists partakers in the
Earls desastrous action, were drawn they knew not where unto, and yet none but
papists were appointed toward the utter court gate, the hall, and presence, and
to keep the Honorable personages, whom her Majesty sent to the Earl, and none
but such cried, kill them, kill them, cast the great Seal out of the window
etc. Well the Lord of Lords preserve the L. Mountioy, from the like diulish
practices of the friends of Spain.

The third thing to be considered (as a most dangerous matter) is, that the
papists discover ami^de to make themselves strong enough, to incou^ter the
Purita^s, that is, all that stand in their way as has been showed, to which
end, their designs have respect, as shall be some what showed hereafter.

But it may be objected, that this contention between secular Priests and
Jesuits, cannot but cause a disunion amongst the lay Papists, and therefore
weaken their party. I would grant the conclusion, if I could believe the
premises, viz. that there were such a contention indeed, and that thereby the
lay Papists were divided. It may be, there was some heart burning (at the first)
occasioned by the Jesuits ambition, and desire of authority over the Priests,
But now advantage is made of this pretended continuance by dispensation, that:
our fearful eyes, and troubled thoughts being set upon the Jesuits: the
Priests may be less feared, and more favored, as I am persuaded by these
probabilities.

First if the Pope can dispense with Papists their being ministers in our
Churches, provided they maintai^e some one point of popery or other, with
their being Magistrates in our common wealth, provided they (under hand) hinder
proceedings against papists: and (at the motion of Parsons and Campion) with
their being (in show) obedient subjects not withstanding the Bull of Pius*
Quintus to the contrary, provided they be ready to rebel, when time shall
serve, Is it unlikely that he will dispense with this pretended contention,
where by he may hope to advance his popery more than by forcible means: and the
rather if the Jesuits advise the same, which (it may be) they have done. For
they be known macheuillists, and therefore carcles what they do, so they may
bring their pri^cipall desire to pass: they are few in England, and not
easily found out: they know that any thing will be received against them, and
yet impair their credii no more than it was before, because of the general
prejudice against them, and if their credit were hereby somewhat wounded, they
can heal themselves when they will, and (perhaps) by the Scorpions tale that
wounded them. But if the Infanta prevail, they may make account to be
glorified for their practices against this state, as Thomas Becket was, for his
treacherous dealing against King Henry the second.

Again I cannot see how it can be possible, that Priests should be faithful
to the sinagogue of Rom, and continue in favor with the Pope, and yet (without
dispensation) publish (and that amongst us) these volems, wherein their holy
Father is somewbat touched, his darlings the Jesuits shamefully traduced, and
all the treasonable practices of papists against our state, (in sundry Popish
discourses heretofore refuted as fictions and devises be now granted de facto,
but laif (forsooth) upon Jesuits: and there Iesuited accomplices, that is (as
time will manifest) all Priests and papists. For the priests themselves
complain (even in these Books) if ye will believe them) that lay papists (in
a manner) fail them, for the Jesuits sake, and it is strange, that Seminary
priests, who in their supplication to her Majesty, printed An no. 1595. do
glory that Cardinal Allen (that perswader and iustifier of the spanish
invasion in 88) was their ^ou^der: and that they were brought up under the
Jesuits, should be now at deadly feud with them? No no, their excessive writing
(as if they did not believe themselves) will ever be thought but counterfeite
quarreiting, except by their means, the Archprist, or some of the Jesuits be
brought to their trial. And the rather: because the Jesuits, who want nether
stomach nor means, play mum budget though they be so notoriously provoked*

Thirdly it is to be observed, that this devise to lay all treasonable
practices upon the Jesuits was never put in execution before now. Indeed* a
follower of S. Christopher Hatton conceived such a matter long since, Which,
with like devises, may (perhaps) be displayed, when all these Popish Books be
abroad, In mean while, may it please your Lordships to remember: that the
Jesuits (and Father Parsons by name) be justified as by the wardword not long
since published by H. H. and not by Parsons as I have credibly heard: and by
sundry treatizes of particular persons, so by the general commendation of
Priests in their supplication before mentio^ed. Wherefore then (at the farthest)
it may be understood, that the Priests (as is confessed in the preface to the
Quodlibets) were willing not only to color and conceal but also to make the
Jesuits their attempts, and practices their own in every thing. Which being
so, It cannot be true* That the priests discarded Jesuits and their practices:
when they were equally entangled by penal laws, as in the said preface it is
insinuated, but without praise to the priests, who stuck to the Jesuits so
long at least. For all those penal laws were in execution before the
imprinting of that supplication. Nay, since by the proclamation, which they
would refute by that supplication, they are charged with treasonable practices,
why did not they then lay load on the Jesuits, to ease their own shoulders?
So that it seems to me more than evident that this devise is but a new point
of popish policy.

Moreover, It is not to be forgotten. That Squire confessed, that VValpoole the
Jesuit remitted him to Doctor Bagshaw (one of these Priests) for direction in
his poysonfull affair, and that Priests (who dare swear as is aforesaid) can
contrary themselves when they will for a purpose.

For when the Scottish Queen lived, then her title was the clearest, but after
her death none but the Infanta has right to this crown, and Allen (founder of
the Seminaries) found fault with Saunders and Bristow for iustifiyng the
rebellion in the North, by Pope Pius his Bull, and yet the same Allen justified
S. VV. Stanly his betraying Deuenter, by the same Bull.

Lastly if this contention be hearty and not politic, I marvel there should
be so great an agreement among the lay Papists, considering the pretended
contention has been long, and (in show) is to too vehement, the Jesuits be
few, and the Priests many, and well maintained in prison, and abroad
(notwithstanding the said pretended complaining) the Jesuits are known to be
for the Infanta, and the aid of 30000. Papists, is said to have been offered
the Scottish King, (who^ they would gull by these pamphlets) if he would promis
toleration.

If I be demanded, what end beyond the forbeareing of Priests (a matter of no
great moment) may be supposed worthy a strategeme so strange, mine answer is
ready, to wit. The Priests (not maintained by the Pope, and spanish King in
Seminaries for naught) have promised to aid foreign forces (when they shall be
landed) with forty thowsands: as S. Robert Cicill reported this Parliament.
That this may be made good, The work of reconciling to the Pope must needs be
applied, and theirfore all hands must be set on work, that priests therefore,
(who are most in number) may ply their business, and be less looked unto, it
seems good in policy, to turn the eyes of the magistrate, and edge of the
sword upon some, and none so fit as the Jesuit and Puritan already in
disgrace with the state. Here (by the way) it may be inquired, why they join
purita^s with Jesuits: I answer, to fill our heads and hands the fuller of
fear and work, and peradventure, to trump in the puritans way, least they be
likewise tolerated (as reason is) if the papists hap (as the priests hope) to
obtain toleration. But to return to the matter, I remember a distinction in a
certain posicon maintained before the late Earl of Huntiugdon: That howsoever
Priests are executed (indeed) for affirming the Pops primacy, and reconciling
to the Church of Rome (which are parts of their priestly function) yet they are
not executed for these parts as they are religious, but as they be dangerous to
the state, in civil consideration. The reason is evident, For if Dolman make
account of country people as of papists and partiza^s, though they be not
absolute papists, but only (for want of that teaching which is in good towns)
profess to believe, as their Fathers believed: what account is to be made of
reconciled Papists? What? let the rebellion of the North and bloody sturres in
Ireland make it more than manifest to our state, that the Pops Bull can quickly
beget rebels and traitors, where the gospel is not effectually preached* much
more where popery is tolerated, but most of all where reconciling is looked to
but through the fingers. And if papists remembering (belike) Dolmans opinion,
that they by reason of such country people, be most likely to dispose of the
crown, were so earnest against the said Bill for coming to Church before
mentioned, knowing, that by due execution of the penalty of xijd. the common
sort would be drawn to the Church much more than by the penalty of xxl. and
thereby the popish party greatly diminished, no marvile though this stratagem
be used that priests may more freely with less fear, reconcile, theirby to
increase the Popish party. That England (to use their own words) may work it
self catholiquie again, by the proceeding practices of the Seminaries, the
Protestant being now no more unlikely to be avoided (ergo toleration is not
their uttermost end) tha^ the catholic was in the beginning of her Majesty's
reign.

Wherein if they proceed, and prevail, and if foreign forces should arrive
and invade us, (though in her Majesty's days) it would soon be seen, that
these priests which now flatter her Majesty, and speak their pleasure of
Jesuits dealing for the Infanta, would (no less diligently tha^ the Jesuits)
proclaim Bellum Dei, as John de Aquala does in Ireland, and that her Majesty
is but an usurper, and excomunicated: To say nothing of that which the Ward
word already intimates, by affirming Catherine of Spain, to to have been K.
Henry's wife, by Gods law, and man's, the^ would they urge the Infanta her
title, confirmed by the Pope, by her father, and by her brother, as also the
judgment of Cardinal Alle^ (as his last will, and testament) that they are
Machiauellists and not catholics, (who under any pretense whatsoever) do not
adhere to the In^anta, and then they will preemptorily adjure their popish
creatures to show themselves, under pain of pope pius his excomunication,
confirmed by this pope Clement, as Don John de Aquala says. In the mean while
it is to be noted, that even in these books Religion established is counted
heresy: The more than easy execution of necessary laws (and those not
rigorous) is called tir a^ny and cruel persecution: priests are avouched to
have been executed only for religion and not for treason as they were indicted
and convicted. Allen the principal procurer of the spanish armado Anno. 1588.
is highly commended, and it is held lawful, but yet not expedient for the Pope
to excomunicate, our gracious Sovereign, all which, whether it does not draw
the authors and fautors or abettors of these books within the compass of
treason, felony, or praemunire, I referr it to the judgment of learned lawiers,
and to a further discourse, In the mean while I wish that these of fenders and
namely this Watson priest (as he calls himself) find not more favor than
John Vdall preacher of the gospel who less offended.

But it is said that some of the priests be gone to procure absolution for her
Majesty, or the cancelling of that Bull. If this be so, unspeakable injury (if
it prove not flat treason) is offered to her Majesty. For be it ^arr from us
to admit, that her Majesty who professes her self to be semper eadam: who
(not long since) wrote an excelent letter to the French Kings Sister to
persuade her to be constant in religion: and who has ever been of that heroic
all magnanimity, that she has despised dangerous attempts, to provoke her to
grant the papists toleration: should now faint for fear, and betray the
gospel of Jesus Christ. If then her Majesty be not arquanted with their
message: It must needs be that the honor of her Majesty most christian
resolution is treacherously vnderminded, and theirby the Pope and spaniard
encouraged to follow their designs. Yea it is to be feared, that some in
authority have concurrence with Priests and Jesuits, and presuming on their
their credit with her Majesty, hope, partly by fears procured, and partly by
conditional absolution, indulgence or dispensation obtained, to draw her
Majesty to toleration: and then aco^pt is made (in the answer to the Iesuited
gentleman) The Lion being taken out of the way, papists would swarm infinitely,
and so the strengthening of their party, and withal the execution of their
long desired purpose, more speedily hastened. And the rather this fear may be
conceived, if it be true, that the priests are gone to Rome to sue an appeal
with the privity and consent, of some in authority, as in the said answer it is
signified with hop^ as of toleration, so of the conversion of Qther said friends
in authority. For if they dare aventurea praemunire by favoring, comforting,
counselling, or abetting an appeal to Rome contrary to the statute of 24. H.
8. cap. 22. what dare they not do?

Now your LL. may judge, whether I may not be probably persuaded, that this
contention between Priests and Jesuits is dispensed with, and tends to the
increasing and not diminishing of the popish partty. And therefore the due
consideration thereof may draw (rather then divert) your LL. to this persuasion:
That by incitting the Protestant agaiust the Purita^, they would weaken the
party against them, and strengthen their own: and the rather your LL. may be
thus persuaded since they cannot but intimate in these books that the papists
have multiplied, ever since some of your LL. have curbed the Puritans.

Wherefore (as ye have a faithful eye to the meaine chance, and love the
gospel from your hearts) take heed how any of you hearten the Papists, and
discourag the Puritan (nay every sound Protesttant) by tolerati^g points of
popery to be broached iu pulpit or print, and yet silence Puritan preachers
only for preachi^g without license or not subscribing further than law
requires though they offer to subscribe so far by inforci^g man's ceremonies
in Gods service, and standing for crosses in high ways, which in the beginning
of her Majesty's reign were defaced (in most places) as monuments of Idolatry,
and superstition, accordii^g to the 23. Iniunctio^, and doctri^e of the homiles
against the peril of Idolatry. And is it good policy to restore the^ in this
declining time when (God wot) the papists have no need of help or hope? what
(my Lords) is there so great difference between you and the papists, whose
doctrine is poison in the root, and treason in the fruit? Whereas the bone
which the Divill has cast between you and the puritans, is but of the off alls
of the whore of Babilons peace offerings. I hope I may thus speak without
offense, For I know, that some of your LL. (and I doubt not but most of you, be
of the same mind) do judge, as I do, of ceremonies: about which all this
wrangling is. O my Lords? does the 50. Iniunction stratly forbid (for peace
sake) the using of these terms, papists and heretic? and is there not
gieater reason, that some course be taken, that Protestants may no longer
(without rebuke) reproach one another (to the rejoicing of Papists) with
Puritan, and Formalist, Precisian and Timeseruer?

Here I imagine some enemy of the Puritan, and friend of the papist (who often
meet in one coat) will readily answer, and say: that it was policy not to
provoke the papists in the beginning of her Majesty reign, since then: they
were many and mighty. I reply, and affirm: That for the same reason, it is
not good in policy to provoke the purita^s, in the declining of her Majesty's
age, and reign: when it is more than high time, that protestants should use
their help against the common adversary, who most fears them: As appears
by that which is already said out of the Wardword: And by that which Dolman
(one, who thoroughly considered the state of things) affirms to wit, that
puritans be a strong party, for London and good towns, most Lords, gentlemen,
and Captains (that be of the religion) incline that way, and be men of action
and resolution. But to leave the laity, Consider the clergy, (whom ye are
especially to use against the papists) and (setting by nonresidents and dumb
dogs) ye shall find ten puritans for one formalist, and that one puritan
does more advance the gospel, and suppress popery, than ten formalists. For
he attends his ministry, and not multiplying or exchanging of benefices. he
preaches, not once a month, or less, but every saboth day, and that, not to
please the ear, but to move the heart. How can ye want the ministry of such
men? but (blessed be God) I hear, that of late, the mouths of some long
silenced be in some sort opened, continue your favor to wards them, and
encourage others that be settled, if ye desire (bona fide) to prevent
toleration, and the multiplying of papists.

Lastly. I pray ye to mark and (in your godly wisdoms) to make use of that
which is written in the book, which is called, News from Spai^e, and Holland.
where, after one (in a supposed conference) avoucheth, that Puritans would
certai^ly be extinguished, If the Queens Majesty live any number of years,
for that the counsel seems bent thereunto: It is thus answered. Tush you are
deceived, Nay much more possible and likly it is, that the Puritan shall
overcome the Protestant, tha^ the contrary: For that the puritan builds
directly upon the protestants first grounds in religion, and deduceth thereof
clearly, and by ordinary consequence, all his conclusions: which the
protestant cannot deny by divinity, but only by policy, and human ordination,
or by turning to Catholic answers, contrary to their own principles. And
theirefore it is hard for any man, sincerely to be a Protestant, but that he
will easily pass on also (more or less) to be a Puritan. And only they (in
effect) will be against them, who are interested in the other side (As
Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeacons, Cannons, Notaries, Registers, Ciuil-Lawers
and the like) for not leesing their commodities: And some few Counselors also
perhaps, for not offending the Queen etc.

In consideration of the premises, wishing (from my heart) that your LL: would
use the puritans (especially their preachers) as brethren: and that they woold
reverence your LL: as fathers, and protesting, that I have writes these
motives out of my best consideration, without all partiality I humbly crave
your favors and take my leave.

From my chamber this Instant December. 1601.

