An excellent new Commedie, Entitled: The Conflict of Conscience. CONTAYNINGE,
A most lamentable example, of the doleful desperation of a miserable
worldlinge, termed, by the name of PHILOLOGVS, who forsook the truth of Gods
Gospel, for fear of the loss of life, and worldly goods.

Compiled, by Nathaniell Woods. Minister, in Norwich.

The Actors names, divided into six parts, most convenient for such as be
disposed, either to show this Comedy in private houses, or otherwise.

Prologue. Satan. Avarice. Mathetes. Tyrranye. Suggestion. Conscience. for
one. Spirit. for one. Gisbertus. for one. Paphinitius. Horror. Nuntius.
Eusebius. Hypocrisy. Cardinal. Theologus. for one. Cacon. for one. Philologus
for one.

AT LONDON Printed, by Richard Bradocke dwelling in Aldermanburic, a little
above the Conduict. Anno 1581.

The Prologue.
When whirling winds which blow with bl^st^ng blast,
Shall cease their course, and not the Air ^ooue.
But still unstirred it does stand, it chances at the last,
To be infect, the truth hereof even day by day we prove,
For deep within the Caves of earth, of force it does beho^e,
Since that no winds do come thereto, the Air out to beat,
By standing still the closed air, does breed infections great.
The stream or flood, which runs up and down,
Is far more sweet, then is the standing brook.
If long vnworne, you leave a Cloak or Gown,
Moathes will it mar, unless you thereto look:
Again, if that upon a shelfe, you place, or set a book*
And suffer it there still to stand, the worms will soon it eat:
A Knife likewise, in sheath laid up, the rust will mar and freat.
The good road horse, if still at rack he stand,
To resty ^ade will soon transformed be,
If long vn^ld, you leave a fertile land,
From strecke, and weed, no place will be left free:
By these examples, and such like, approve then well may we,
That idleness more evils does bring, into the mind of man,
Then labor great in longer time, again expel out can.
Which thing our Author marking well, when weried was his mind,
From reading grave and ancient works, yet loath his time to loose,
Bethought himself, to ease his heart, some recreance to find
And as he mused in his mind, immediately arose,
A strange example done of late, which might as he suppose,
Stir up their minds to godliness, which should it see or hear,
And therefore humbly does you pray, to give attentive care.
The argument or ground whereon our Author chefely stayed,
Is (sure) a Hystory strange and true, to many men well known,
Of one through love of worldly wealth, and fear of death dismaide,
Because he would his life and goods, have kept still as his own,
From state of grace wherein he stood, was almost overthrown:
So that he had no power at all, in heart firm faith to have,
Till at the last, God chaungd his mind his mercies for to crave.
And here, our Author, thought it meet, the true name to omit,
And at this time* imagine him PHILOLOGVS to be,
First, for because* a Comedy, will hardly him permit,
The vices of one private man, to touch particulerly,
Again, now shall it stir them more, who shall it hear or see,
For if this worldling had been namde, we would straight deem in mind,
That all by him then spoken were, our selves we would not find.
But sith PHILOLOGVS is naught else, but one that loves to talk,
And common of the word of God, but has no further care,
According as it teaches them, in Gods fear for to walk,
If that we practice this in deed, PHILOLOGI we are,
And so by his deserved fault, we may in time beware,
Now, if as Author first it meant, you hear it with this gain,
In good behalf he will esteem, that he bestowed his pain.
And for because we see by proof, that men do soon forget,
Those things for which to call them by, no name at all they know,
Our Author for to help short wits, did think it very meet,
Some name for this his Comedy, in preface for to show,
Now names to natures must agree, as every man do know,
A fitter name he could in mind, no where excogitate,
Then, THE CONFLICT OF CONSCIENCE, the same to nominate.
A cruel Conflict certainly, where Conscience takes the foil,
And is constrained by the flesh, to yield to deadly sin,
Whereby the grace and love of God, from him, his sin does spoil,
Then (wretch accursed) small power has, repentance to begin,
This History here, example shows, of one fast wrapped therein,
As in discourse before your eyes, shall plainly proved be,
Yet (at the last) God him restoarde, even of his mercy free.
And though the History of it self, be too too, dolorus,
And would constrain a man with tears of blood, his cheeks to wett,
Yet to refresh the minds of them that be the Auditors,
Our Author intermixed has, in places fit and meet,
Some honest mirth, yet always ware, DECORVM, to exceed:
But list, I hear the players pressed, in presence forth to come,
I therefore cease, and take my leave, my Message I have done. Exit.
FINIS.
The Conflict of Conscience.
Act first.
Scene 1.
SATAN. HIgh time it is for me to stir about,
And do my best, my kingdom to maintain,
For why? I see of enemies a rought:
Which all my laws, and Statutes do disdain:
Against my state, d^^ fight and* strive amain.
Whom, in time if I do not dissipate,
I shall repent it, when it is to late.
My mortal foe, the Carpenters poor son,
Against my Children, the Pharisees I mean,
Vpbraiding them, did use this comparison,
As in the story of his life, may be seen,
There was a man, which had a vinyard green:
Who letting it to husbandmen unkind,
In stead of fruit, unthankfulness did find.
So that his Servants, firstly they did beat,
His Son likewise, they afterward did kill,
And here upon that man in fury great:
Did soldiers send, these Husbandmen to spill,
Their Towue to burn, he did them also will.
But out alas, alas, for woe I cry,
To use the same, far iuster cause have I,
For where the kingdom, of this world is mine,
And his, on whom I will the same bestow,
As Prince hereof, I did my self assign:
My darling dear, whose faithful live I know,
Shall never fail from me, but daily flow:
But who that is: perhaps some man may doubt.
I will therefore in brief; purtraict and paint him out.
The mortal man by natures rule is bound
That Child to favor, more then all the rest,
Which to himself in face, is lykest found:
So that he shall with all his goods be blessed:
Even so do I esteem and like him best,
Which does most near my dealyngs imitate,
And does pursue Gods laws, with deadly hate.
As therefore I, when once in Angels state,
I was, did think my self, with God as mate to be,
So does my son himself, now eleuate,
Above man's nature, in rule and dignity.
So that in terris Deus sum, says he:
In earth I am a God, with sins for to dispense,
And for rewards, I will forgive each manet of offense.
I said to Eve, tush, tush, thou shall not die,
But rather shall as God, know every thing:
My son likewise, to maintain Idolatry,
Says tush what hurt can carved Idols bring?
Despise this law of God, the heavenly King:
And set them in the Church, for men thereon to look,
An Idol does much good, it is a laymans book.
Nemb^oth that Tyrant, fearing Gods hand,
By me was persuaded to build up high Babell:
Whereby he presumed, Gods wrath to withstand:
So has my Boy, devised very well,
Many pretty toys, to keep men's soul from hell:
Live they never so evil here, and wickedly,
As Masses, trentalles, Pardons, and Scala coeli.
I egged on Pharao of Eg^pt the King,
The Israelites to kill, so soon as they were borne:
My darling likewise, does the self same thing:
And therefore cause Kings, and Princes to be sworn,
That with might and maine, they shall keep us his horn.
And shall destroy with fire, Are and sword,
Such as against him, shall speak but one word.
And even as I was some what to slow,
So that not withstanding, the Isralites did augment:
So for lack of murdering Gods people do grow,
And daily increase, at this time present:
Which my son shall feel incontinent.
Yet an other practice, this evil to withstand,
He learned of (...), which now he takes in hand.
For when as Moses, I might not destroy,
Because that he was of the Lord appointed,
To bring the people from thraldom to joy:
I did not cease, whilst I had invented,
An other means to have him prevented:
By accompting himself the son of Pharao,
To make him loath Egypt to forgo.
The same advise I also attempted,
Against the son of God, when he was incarnate,
Hoping there by, to have him relented:
And for promotion sake, himself to prostrate,
Before my feet when I did demonstrate,
The whole world unto him, and all the glory,
As it is recorded in Matheus Historye.
So has the Pope, who is my darlyng dear,
My eldest boy, in whom I do delight:
Least he should fall, which thing he greatly fear,
Out of his Seat, of honor pomp and might,
Has got to him, on his behalf to fight:
Two Champions stout, of which the one is Avarice,
The other is called Tyrrannicall practice.
For as I said, although I claim by right,
The kingdom of this earthly world so round:
And in my stead to rule with force and might,
I have assigned the Pope, whose match I no where found,
His heart with love, to me, so much abound:
Yet diverse men of late, of malice most unkind,
Do study to displace my son, some way ward means to find
Wherefore I marvel much, what cause of let there is,
That hitherto, they have not their office put in ure,
I will go see, for why, I fear that somewhat is amiss*
If not, to raunge abroad, the world, I will them straight procure,
But needs they must, have one to help, men's hearts for to allure:
Unto their train, who that should be, I cannot yet epsy,
No meeter match I can find out, then is Hypocrisy.
Who can full well in time and place, dissemble eithers part,
No man shall easily perceive, with which side he tooth bear.
But when once favor he has got, and credit in man's heart:
He will not slack in mine (...), I do^ (...) nothing fear:
But time does run, too fast away, for me to ^arie h^^re,
For none will be enamoured, of my shape I do^ know,
I will therefore, mine impes (...) out, from hell their shapes to show.

Exit. Act. first. Scene. 2:
MATHETES. PHILOLOGVS.
MY mind does thirst dear friend Philologus,
Of former talk to make a final end:
And where before we ^n for to discus,
The cause why God does such affli^ns send,
Into his Church, you would some more time spend.
In the same cause, that thereby you might learn,
Betwixt the wrath and jove of God, a right for to discern.
Philologus. With right good will, to your request ^rin I do consent,
As well because, as I perceive, (...) take therein delight,
As also for because, it is most chiefly pertinent,
Unto mine office, to instruct, and teach e^che Christian wight,
True godliness, and show to them, the path that leads right,
Unto Gods kingdom, where we shall, inherit our salvation,
Given unto us from God, by Christ our true propitiation.
But that a better ordered course, he^r ^n we may observe,
And may directly to the first, apply that which ensue,
To speak that has been said, before, I well a time reserve:
And so proceed, from whence we left, by course and order due,
Unto the end: At first therefore, you did lament and rue,
The misery of these our days, and great calamytie,
Which those sustain, who dare ga^nsay, the Romish Hypocrisy.

Mathetes. I have just cause, as has each Christian heart,
To wail and weep, to shed out tears of blood:
When as I call to mind, the torments and the smart,
Which those have borne, who honest be and good,
For naught else, but because, their errors they withstood:
Yet ioyed I much, to see how patiently,
They boar the crose of Christ, with constancy.

Philologus. So many of us, as into one body be,
Incorporate, whereof Christ is the lively head,
As members of our bodies which we see:
With joints of love together be conjoined:
And must needs suffer, unless that they be dead:
Some part of grief in mind which other feel,
In body though not so much by a great deal.
Wherefore by this it is most apparent,
That those two into one body are not united,
Of the which, the one does suffer, the other does forment:
And in the wounds of his Brother is delighted:
Now which is Christ's body, may easily be decided:
For the Lamb is deuonred of the Wolf always,
Not the Wolf of the Lamb as Chrisostom does say.
Again of unrighteous Cayne murdered was Abell,
By whom the Church of God was figured:
Isaac likewise was persecuted of Ismaell,?
As in the Book of Genesis is mentioned:
Israel of Pharao was also terrifyed,
David the Saint, was afflicted by his Son,
And put from his kingdom I mean by Absolon.
Elias the Thesbit, for fear of Iezabell,
Did fly to Horeb, and hid him in a Cave:
Micheas the Prophet, as the Story does tell,
Did hardly his life from Baalles Priests save:
Jeremy of that sauce tasted have:
So did Esaias, Daniell, and the Children three,
And thousands more, which in stories we may see.

Mathetes. In the new Testament, we may also reed,
That our Savior Christ, even in his Infancy,
Of Herod the King might stand in great dread:
Who sought to destroy him, such was his insolency:
Afterward of the Pharisees, he did with constancy,
Suffer shameful death, his Apostles also,
For testimony of the truth, did their crosses under go.

Philologus. James under Herod, was headed with the Sword,
The rest of the Apostles, did suffer much turmoyle:
Good Paul was murdered by Nero his word:
Domitian devised a Barrel full of Oil,
The body of John the Evangelist to boil:
The Pope at this instant sondrie torments procure,
For such as by Gods holy word will endure.
By these former stories, two things we may learn,
And profytably record in our remembrance:
The first is Gods Church from the Devils to discern:
The second to mark, what manifest resistaunce,
The Truth of God has, and what incombraunce:
It brings upon them that will it profess,
Wherefore, they must arm them selves, to suffer distress.

Mathetes. It is no new thing, I do now perceive,
That Christ's Church do suffer tribulation,
But that the same cross I might better receive:
I request you to show me for my consolation:
What is the cause, by your estimation:
That God does suffer, his people be in thrall*
Yet help them so soon as they to him call.

Philologus. The chiefest thing, which might us cause or move,
With constant minds, Christ's cross for to sustain:
Is to conceive of Heaven, a faithful love:
Whereto we may not come, as Paul does prove it plain:
Unless with Christ we suffer, that with him we may rain:
Again since that it is our heavenly Fathers will,
By worldly woes our carnal lusts to kill.
Moreover, we do use to loath that thing we always have,
And do delight the more in that which mostly we do want,
Affliction urges us also, more earnestly to crave:
And when we once relieved be, true faith in us it plant,
So that to call in each distress on God we will not faint:
For trouble bring forth patience, from patience does ensue
Experience, from experience Hope, of health the ankor true.
Again, oftimes, God does provide, affliction for our gain,
As Job who after loss of goods, had twice so much therefore:
Sometime affliction is a means, to honor to attain:
As you may see, if Iosephes life, you set your eyes before:
Continually it does us warn, from sinning any more:
When as we see the judgments just, which God our heavenly king,
Upon offenders here in earth, for their offenses bring.
Sometime God does it us to prove, if constant we will be.
As he did unto Abraham: sometime his whole intent,
Is to declare his heavenly might, as in John we may see:
When the Disciples did ask Christ, why God the blindness sent
Unto that man that was borne blind? to whom incontinent,
Christ said: neither for Parents sins, nor for his own offense,
Was he borne blind, but that God might show his magnificence.

Mathetes. This is the sum of all your talk, if that I guess a right,
That God does punnish his electt to keep their faith in ure,
Or least that if continual ease, and rest enjoy they might:
God to forget through hautinesse, frail nature should procure:
Or else by feeling punishment, our sins for to abjure:
Or else to prove our constancy, or lastly that we may,
Be instruments in whom his might, God may abroad display.
Now must I needs confess, to you my former ignorance,
Which knew no cause at all, why God should trouble his elect,
But thought afflictions all, to be rewards for our offense:
And to proceed from wrathful Judge, did always it susped:
As do the common sort of men, who will straightway direct
And point their fingers at such men, as God does chastise here,
Esteeming them by just desert, their punishment to bear.

Philologus. Such is the nature of mankind, himself to iustifye,
And to condemn all other men, whereas we ought of right:
Accuse our selves especial, and God to magnfie:
Who in his mercy does us spare, whereas he also might,
Since that we do the self same things, with like plagues us requight
Which thing our Savior Christ does teach, as testifyeth Luke,
The thirteenth Chapter, where he does vain glorious men rebuke:
But for this time let this suffice, now lets homeward go,
And further talk in private place, if need be, we will have:

Mathetes. With right good will, I will attend on you, your house unto:
Or else go you with me to mine, the longer journey save:
For it is now high dinner time, my stomach meat do^th crave:

Philologus. I am soon bidden to my friend, come on let us depart,

Mathetes. Go you before, and I will come behind with all my heart.

Act second.
Scene first.
HYPOCRISY. GOD speed you all, that be of Gods belief,
The mighty Jehovah protect you from ill:
I beseech the living God, that he would give,
To each of you present, a hearty good will,
With flesh to contend, your lust for to kill:
That by the aid of spyrituall assistance,
You may subdue your carnal concupisence.
God grant you all for his mercyes sake,
The light of his word to your hearts joy:
I humbly beseech him a confusion to make
Of erroneous sects, which might you annoy:
Earnestly requiring each one to imploye,
His whole endeavor Gods word to maintain,
And from strange doctrine your hearts to refrain.
Grant Lord I pray thee, such preachers to be,
In thy congregation, thy people to learn:
As may for Conscience sake, and of mere sincerity,
Being able twixt Corn and Cockle to discern.
Apply their study to replenish the Berne.
That is thy Church, by their doctrines increase,
And make many heirs of thine eternal peace. Amen* Amen.
But soft let me see, who does me aspect,
First sluggish Saturn of nature so cold:
Being placed in Tauro, my beams do reject,
And Luna in C^ncro in sextile he behold:
I will the effect hereafter unfold.
Now Jupiter the gentil* of temperature mean,
Poor Mercury the turn^^te, he fors^^ke clean.
Now murdering Mars retrogarde in Libra,
With amiable tryne, apply to my beam,
And splendant Sol the ruler of the day:
After his Eclips to Jupiter will lean,
The Goddess of pleasure, Dame Venus I mean,
To me her poor servant seem friendly to be,
So also does Luna otherwise called Phebe.
But now I speak mischeuously, I would say, in a mystery
Wherefore to interpret it, I hold it best done,
For here be a good sort I believe in this company:
That know not my meaning, as this man for one,
What? blush not at it, you are not alone:
Here is an other that know not my mind,
Nor he in my words, great savor can find.
The Planet Mercurius, is neither whot nor cold,
Neither good nor yet very bad of his own nature,
But does alter his qualytie, with them which do hold:
Any friendly aspect to him, even so I assure:
We Mercurialists I mean Hypocrites cannot long endure
In one condition, but do alter our mind,
To theirs that talk with us, thereby friendship to find.
The little Camelyon by Nature can change
Her self, to that color, the which she behold:
Why should it then to any seem strange?
That we d^^ thus alter, why are we controulde?
Since only the rule of nature we hold:
We seek to please all men, yet most do us hate,
And we are rewarded for friendship debate.
Saturnus is envious, how then can he leave?
Adulation or Hypocrisy to him most contrary,
The Iouists being good d^^ look high above:
And do not regard the rest of the company:
Now Mars being retrogard, foretells misery:
To tyrannical practice, to happen eftsoone,
As shall be apparent before all be done.
Which Tirannie with flattery is easily pacifyed,
Whereas Tom tell troth shall feel of his Sword,
So that with such men is fully verifyed,
That old said saw, and common by word:
Obsequium amicos, by flateries friends are prepared:
But veritas odium parit, as commonly is seen,
For speaking the truth, many hated have been.
By Sol understand, Popish principalytie,
With whom full highly I am entertained,
But being eclipsed shall show forth his qualytie:
Then shall Hypocrisy be utterly disdained:
Whose wretched exile though greatly complained:
And wept for of many, shall be without hope,
That in such pomp shall ever be Pope.
By Venns the riotus, by Luna the variable,
Betwixt whom and Mercury no variance can fall,
For they which in words be most unstable:
Would be thought faithful, and the riotous liberal:
So that Hypocrisy their doings cloak shall:
But whist not a word, for yonder come some, step aside.

While I know what they are, I will be dombe.

Act second. Scene. 2.
TYRANNY. AVARICE.
PVt me before for I will shift for one, push Avarice backwarde

So long as strength remains in this Arm,
And pluck up thy heart thou faint hearted mome,
As long as I live, thou shall take no harm:
Such as control us, I will their tongues charm,
By Fire or sword or other like torment,
So that ever they did it they shall it repent.
Have thou forgotten what satan did say,
That the K. Hipocrisy our doings should hide, HYP. Ambo

So that under his Cloak our parts we should play,
And of the rude people should never be spide,
Or if the worst should happ or betide,
That I by Tyranny should both you defend.
Against such as mischife to you should pretend.
Avarice. Indeed such words our Belsire did speak, HYP. tut Father Iotsam.

Which being remembered does make my heart glad,
But yet one thing my courage does break,
And when I think of it, it makes me full sad,
I mean the evil luck which Hipocrisy had,
When he was expelled out of this land
For then with me the matter evil did stand.
For I by him so shadowed was from light, HYP. a little (...) to hide so great a
lubber.

That almost no man could me out espy,
But he being gone to every man's sight,
I was apparent each man did descrye,
My pilling and poling so that glad was I,
From my nature to cease a thing most merueilous,
And live in secret the time was so dangerous.

Tyranny. Tush Avarice thou fear a thing that is vain, HYP. he fear eth
nothing he thinks the hangman is dead. HYP. he can play too parts the fool
and the K.

For by me alone both you shall be stayed,
And if thou mark well thou shall perceive plain,
That if I Tyranny my part had well played,
And from killing of Heretics my hand had not stayed,
They had never grown to such a great rowt,
Neither should have been able to have banished him out:
But sero sapiunt Phriges, at length I will take heed,
And with blood enough this evil will prevent, HIP. a popish policye.

For if I here of any that in word or in deed,
Yea if it be possible to know their intent,
If I can prove that in thought they it meant:
To impair our estates, no prayer shall serve, HYP. Antichirstian charity.

But will pay them their hire, as each one deserve.

Avarice. The Fish once taken, and escaped from baight,
Will ever heareafter, be ware of the hook,
Such as use hunting will spy the Hare straight,
Though other discern her not, yet on her shall look:
Again, the learned can read in a Book,
Though the unskillful ^eeing equal with them,
Cannot discern an F from an M.
So those which have tasted, the fruit that we bear
And find it so sower, will not us implant:

Tyranny. Tush Avarice, I warrant thee thou nee^st not fear, Vtilitas facit
esse Deos

In the clergy I know, no friends we shall want:
Which for hope of gain, the truth will recant:
And give them selves wholly to set out Hypocrisy,
Being egd on with Avarice, and defended by Tyranny.

Avarice. Well may the Clergy on our side hold,
For they by us no small gain did reap,
But all the temporaltie, I dare be boulde,
To venture in wager of Gold a good heap,
At our prefermentes will mourn wail and weep,

Tyranny. Though indeed no just cause of joy they can find,
Yet for fear of my sword, they will alter their mind. HYP. This is sharp
arguments.

But I marvel much, where Hypocrisy is,
Me think it is long since, from us he did go,

Avarice. I doubt that of his purpose he miss:
And therefore has hanged him self for woe. HYP. Pray for your self.

How say thou Tyranny do not think so
In faith if I thought that he might be spared, HYP. your kind heart shall ^st
me a couple of russhes.

And we have our purpose beshrew me if I cared.

Tyranny. Saw you ever the like of this doubting doult? HYP. Not I the like of
such a cut^hrote Coult.

It greeues me to hear how faint hearted he is,
A little would cause me to kill thee, thou Ascoulte:
See, see, for woe he is like for to piss:
To give an attempt, what a fellow were this?
But this is the good that comes of Covetousness
He lives always in fear to loose his riches.
Again, mark how he regards the death of his friend
So he has his purpose, he cares for no more,
A perfect pattern of a covetous mind,
Which neither esteems his friend nor his foe,
But rather Avarice might I have saides^:
Who if he were gone, my self could defend,
Where thou by his absence were soon at an eude.

Act second. Scene. 3.
HYPOCRISIS. TYRANNY. AVARICE.
O Loving Father and merciful God,
We through our sins thy punishment deserve,
And have provoked to beat with thy rod:
We stubborn Children, which from thee do swerue:
We loathed thy word, but now we shall sterue:
For Hypocrisy is placed again in this land,
And thy true Gospel as exile does stand.
This is thy just judgment for our offense,
Who having the light, in darkness did straie,
But now if thou would of thy fatherly ben^uolence:
Thy purposed judgments in wrath for to stay:
The part of the prodigal Son we would play:
And with bitter tears before thee would fall,
And in true repentance for mercy would call.
In our prosperity we would not regard,
The words of the Preachers, who threatened the same,
But flattering our selves, thought you would have spared
Us in thy mercy, and never us blame:
But so much provoked thee, by blasphemynge thy name:
Indeeds to deny, that in words we may^e,
That from thy Justice thou could not restrain.
So that Romish Pharao a Tirant most cruel,
Has brought us again into captiuytie,
And instead of the pure (...) of thy Gospel:
Has poisoned our souls with ^iuelish Hypocrisy:
Unable to maintain it, but by murdering Tyranny:
Seeking rather the (...), then the health of the Sheep,
Which are appointed for him for to keep.
Tyranny. Lo Avarice, hark what a T^ is here,
Against our holy Father this (...) to use: HYP. he speaks to you ^^ra.

I might have hard more if I would him forbear:
But for grief my ea^ (...) to hear him abuse
His tongue in this manner: wherefore no excuse,
Shall purchase favor but that with all speed,
By Sword I will render, to him his due meede.
Wherefore, thou ^ant, wh^^ thou have th^e,
Pray to the Saints, thy spokesmen to be,
That at Gods hand, from this (...) great (...):
By their intercession, thou may be ^et free:

Avarice. Nay hear thou (...) be (...) by (...):
First cut of his head, and then let him pray,
So shall he be sure, us not to ^ray.

Hypocrisy. O wicked Tyranny, thou (...) of the Devil,
Too ioyfyll tidinges to thee have I brought,
For now thou are (...), to pra^e all evil:

Tyranny. Marry thou shall not give (...) thy service for naught:
But for thy pains to please thee I thought.

Hypocrisy. Thou art nothing so ready to do any good,
As thou art to she^ poor ^ents blood.

Avarice. Nay Tyranny suffer this rascal to pra^e, HYP. on your face sir.

Till some man come by, and then he is gone*
Then will thou repent it, when it is to late*
Dispatch him therefore, while we are alone*

Hypocrisy. Well may the Covetous be lykened to a dro^,
Which of the Bees labors will sp^e and ^ast make*
And yet to get honey, no labor will ^ake.
The Coueitous likewise from poor men e^rf,
Their gains to increase, they only do seek:
And so they may have it of them a great sort:
What means they use for (...), they rare not (...) seek:
Yet will these mysers scarce once a week:
Have one good meal, at their own table.
So by Avarice, to help them selves they are unable.
Avarice to a Fire may well compared ^ee,
To the which the more you add, ^he more still it cra^e*
So likewise the Covetous mind the do see:
Though riches abound, do wi^h still more to have*
And to be short, your re^erences to save:
To a filthy Swyne, such mysers are comparable,
Which while they be dead are nothing profy^able.

Avarice. Nay farewell Tyranny, I came hither too soon,
I perceive already, I am to well known:
I were not best in their ^lawes for ^o come:
Unless I were willing to be clean overthrown:

Tyranny. By the preaching of Gods word, at this mischife is grow ^n:
Which if Hypocrisy might happily expel,
All we in safety and pleasure might dwell.
Stay therefore, while from Hypocrisy we bear,

Avarice. Dispatch then this Merchant, least our counsel he tell,

Hypocrisy. I am content for Gods cause, this cross for to bear.

Tyranny. It is best killyng him, now his mind is set well.

Hypocrisy. Your scoffing and mocking God sees each deal:

Tyranny. Yea, do thou persist, us still thus to check,
Thy speech I will hinder, by cutting of thy neck.

Hypocrisy. Nay, hold thy hand Cadby, thou have killed me enough
What never the sooner for a merry word?
I meant not good earnest, to your maship I vow:
I did but jest, and spoke but in board:
Therefore of friendship, put up again thy sword:

Tyranny. Nay caytiffe presume not, that thou shall go scotfree,
Therefore hold still and I will soon dispatch thee.

Hypocrisy. What? I pray thee Tyranny know first who I am,
Ye purblinded fools, do your lyps blind your eyes?
Why, I was in place long before you came:
But you could not see the wood for the trees:
But in faith father Avarice I will pay you your fees:
For the great goodwill which you to me bear, HYP. fights.

And in time will requight it again do not fear.

Avarice. Content your self, good master Hypocrisy.
The words which I spoke I spoke unaware.

Tyranny. Hold thy hand Hypocrisy, I pray thee heartily:
So like a mad man with thy friends do not fare.

Hypocrisy. For nether of you both, a pin do I care:
Go shake your ears both, like slaves as you be,
And look not in your need to be helped of me.

Tyranny. What Master Hypocrisy, will you take snuff so soon?
Marry then you had neeede to be kept very warm,

Avarice. I swear to your maistership, by the men in the Moon,
That to your person I intended no harm:

Hypocrisy. But that I am weary, I would both your tongs charm
See how to my face they do^ me deride,
I will not therefore in your companies abide.

Avarice. Why master Hypocrisy, what would you that I do?
For my offense, of mercy I you pray.

Hypocrisy. With thee I am at one, but of that Merchant to,
I look for some amends, or else I will away:

Tyranny. The presumptuous fools part herein thou do play,
What? of thy Master, dooest thou look for obaysance,
I will not once entreat thee, if thou will get thee hence.

Hypocrisy. Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum,
The old proverb by me is verefied,
By too much famyliaritie contemned be some:
Even so at this present to me it betide:
For of long time Hypocrisy has ruled as guide:
While now of later days, through Heretics resistaunce
I retained Tyranny to yield me asistaunce.
But through over much lenytie, he thinks himself check mate
With me his good patron, Master Hypocrisy.

Tyranny. List I pray thee Avarice, how this rascal can prate:
And with me Tyranny does challenge equalytie:
Where he of himself has neither strength nor hability
But thou to him riches, and I strength do give,
So that I must be his master, though it both him grieve.

Avarice. Two Dogs oftentimes one bone would feign catch,
But yet the third do both them deceive,
Even so Hypocrisy for the pre-eminence does snatch:
Which Tyranny gapes for, ye may, perceive:
But I must obtain it, for of me they retain
All kind of riches, their states to mayntaine,
To yield to me therefore they must be both feign.

Hypocrisy. Was Judas Christ's master, because he ba^^ the purs
Nay rather of all, he was least regarded,
Have not men of honor, Stewards to disburse:
All such sums of money, wherewith they be charged:
Yet above their master their honor is not enlarged:
Even so, thee Avarice, my Steward I account,
To pay that whereto my charges amount.
And to thee Tirranny, this one word I object,
Whether was Ioab or David the King?
When Ioab was glad his ease to reject:
The Ammonyts in Rabah, to confusion to bring:
When David with Bethseba at home was sleeping:
Was not Ioab his servant, in warfare to fight,
And so art thou mine, mine enemies to quight.

Tyranny. Nay then at the hole god give you good night:
Shall Tyranny to Hypocrisy in any point yield?

Hypoctisie. With this one word I will vanquish thee quight:
That thou shall be glad to give me the feelde:
The end to be preferred all learned men wild:
Since therefore Hypocrisy of Tyranny is end,
I must have the preferment, for which I contend.

Tyranny. I will make you both grant that I am the chief, AVA. indede you say
troth*

Or else with my sword your sides I will pearce,

Hypocrisy. That were sharp reasonyng indeed, with a mischief:

Avarice. I will yield him my right if that he be so fearce,

Hypocrysie. The nature of Hypocrites, herein we rehearce:
Which being convinced by the text of Gods word,
The end of their sp^wting is Fire and Sword.
But if you will needs be chief, God speed well ye plough
I will be none that shall follow your train,
For if I should, I know well enough:
That to fly the Country, we all should be feign,
Then were my labor done but in vain,
You know not so much as I do Tyranny,
Therefore I advise you be ruled by me.

Tyranny. Inter amicos omnia sunt communia they say,
Among friends there is reconed no properti^*
But what the one has of his own, the other, man
Have the use of the same, (...) his own liberty:
Even so among us it is of a surety:
For what the one has of his own proper right,
It is thine to use by day or by night.

Avarice. Indeed you say truth* the end is worth all, HYP. he has learned
loge^s*

Such things as to get the end are referred,
And by this reason to you I prove shall:
That I before Hypocrisy must be preferred:
The conclusion of my reason is this inserred:
Since Hypocrisy was invented to augment private gau^e,
I am the end of Hypocrisy, this is plain.

Hypoc^isie. Actum est de Amicitia, the bargen is dispatched,
And we two in friendship, are united as one.

Avarice. In the same knot, with you let me also be matched*
And of money I warrant you, you shall want none:

Hypocrisy. I agree, what say you? shall he be one?
Tyran. I judge him needful in our company to be: HYP frienship for ga^

And therefore, for my part, he is welcome to me.
Let us now speedely on our business attend,
And labor each one to bring it about.

Hypocrisy. That is already by me brought to end:
So that of your preferment you need not to doubt:
And my coming hither was to find you out:
That at my elbow you might be in readiness,
To help if need were in this weighty business.
To tell you the Story it were but to tedious,
How the Pope and I together have devised,
Firstly to inuegle the people relygious:
For greediness of gain, who will be soo^e prezed:
And for fear least heereaster they should be despised:
Of their own free will, will maintain Hypocrisy
So that Avarice alone, shall conquer the Clergy.
Now of the chiefest of his carnal Cardinals,
He does appoint certain, and give them authority,
To ride abroad in their pontificalles:
To see if with Avarice, they may win the Layitie:
If not, then to threaten them with open Tyranny:
Whereby doubt not but many will forsake,
The truth of the Gospel, and our parties take.

Tyranny. This device is praise worthy, how say thou Avarice?

Avarice. I like it well if it were put in bre,
Yet little gain to me, shall this whole practice:
More then I had before time procure:

Hypocrisy. The Legates are ready to ride I am sure:
Wherefore we had need to make no small delay,
They stay for my coming alone, I dare say,
Howbeit the Layitie would greatly mislike,
If they should know all our purpose and intent,
Yea and perhaps some means they would seek:
Our forsaide business in time to prevent:

Tyranny. Will you then be ruled by my arbiterment?
Least the people should suddenly dissolve franquyllytie,
For the Legates defense, let him use me Tyranny.

Hypocrisy. Herein your counsel is not much unwise,
Save that in one thing, we had need to beware,
Least you be known, we will you disguise,
And some grave Apparel for you will prepare,
But your name Tyranny, I fear all will mar:
Let me alone, and I will invent,
A name to your nature, which shall be convenient:
Zeal shall your name be, how like you by that?
And therefore, in office, you must deal zealously:

Tyranny. Let me alone, I will pay them home pat:
Though they call me Zeal, they shall (...) me Tyrranny

Hypocrisy. Lo, here is a Garment, come dress you handsomely:
I mary (quoth he) I like this very well:
Now, to the Deuyls Grace, you may seem to give counsel
Now must I apply al my Invention,
That I may device Avarice to hide:
Thy name shall be called Careful provision
And every man for his Ho^^hold may lawfully provide,
Thus shall thou go cloaked, and never be spide:

Avarice. Thy counsel Hypocrisy, I very well allow,
And will recompense thee, if ever I know how.

Tirranny. Now, on a boon voyage, let us depart,
For I well loathe any time to delay,

Hypocrisy. Nay, yet in sign of a merry heart,
Let us singe before we go away.

Avarice. I am content, begin I you pray,
But to singe the Treble, we must needs have one.

Hypocrisy. If you say so, let it even alone.
Exeunt.
Act third.
Scene. 1.
PHILOLOGVS. TOO true (alas) too true I say, was our Divination,
The which Mathaetes did foresee, when last we were in place,
For now (in deed) we feel the smart and horrible veration,
Which Romysh power unto us did threaten and manace:
Wherefore, great need we have, to call to God always for grace:
For feeble flesh is far too weak, those pains to undergo:
The which all they that fear the Lord, are now appoin^ted too.
The Legate from the Pope of Room, is come into our Coasts,
Who does the Saints of God each where, with Tyranny oppress,
And in the same most gloryously himself he vawnt and boast,
The more one mourns unto him, he pittieth the less,
Out of his cruel Tyranny, the Lord of Heaven me bless:
For hitherto, in blessed state, my whole life I have spent:
With health of body, wealth in Gods, and mind always content.
Besides, of friends, I have great store, who do me firmly love,
A faithful wife and children fair, of wooddes and pasture store,
And diverse other things, which I have got for my behoof,
Which now to be depraved off, would grieve my heart full sore:
And if I come once in their claws, I shall get out no more.
Unless I will renounce my faith, and so their mind fulfill,
Which if I do, without all doubt, my soul for ay I spyll.
For since I have received once the first fruictes of my faith,
And have begone to run the course, that leads to salvation,
If in the midst thereof, I stay or cease, the Scripture says,
It booteth not that I began with so good preparation,
But rather, makes much the more, unto my condempnation:
For he alone shall have the Palm, which to the end does run,
And he which plucks his hand from Plough, in Heaven shall never com.
Those Laborers which hired were in Vineard for to moyle,
And had their Penny for their pain, they tarried all while night,
For if they ceased had, when Sun their flesh with h^ did droyse,
And had departed from their work, they should have lost by right,
Their wages Penny: I like wise, shall be deprived qaight
Of that same Crown, the which I have in faith long looked for,
But for this time, I will depart, I dare here say no more.
Exit.
Act third. Scene. 2.
HYPOCRISY. HA, ha, ha, mary now the Game begin,
Hypocrisy throughout this Realwe is had in admiration,
And by my means, both Avarice and Tirranny crept in,
Who in short space, will make men tonne the way to desolation,
What did I say? my tongue did tryp, I should say, consol ation.
For now (forsooth) the Clergy must into my bosom creep,
Or else, they know not, by what means, them selves alive to keep.
On the other side, the Laietie, be they either rich or poor,
If rich then Avarice strangle them, because they will (...) loose
The worldly wealth* or else we have one subtle practice more,
That is, that sensual Suggestion, their outward man shall pose,
Who can full finely in each cause, his mind to them disclose,
But if that neither of these twain, can to my train them wind,
Then, at his Cue (to play his part, does Tyranny begin.
As for the poor knaves, such a one as this is,
We do not esteem him, but make short adoo,
If he, will not come on, we do him not mysse,
But to the Pot, he is sure to go:
Tirranny deals with him and no more.
But I marvel, what does him from hence so long stay?
Sooner named, sooner cu^me, as common Proverbs say. Sep aside.


Act. third. Scene. 3:
TYRRANNY, AVARICE. HYPOCRYSIE.
BY his wounds, I fear not, but it is cock sure now, H^ ^e has (...)
goodly grace in swearyng.

Under the Legates Seal, in Office I am placed:
Therefore who so resist me I will make him to bow, HIP. he is graceless
already.

Who can make Tyranny now ^e disgraced?
With a head of brass I will not be out faced,
But will execute mine office with extreme cruelty,
So that all men shall know me to be plain Tyranny.
Avarice. Nay Master Zeal be ruled by me,
To such as resist, such rigor you may show,

Tyranny. Zeal nay, no Zeal, my name is Tyranny,
Neither am I ashamed who does my name know, HIP. he is Kit careless.

For in my dealings the same I will show,
None dare reprove me of that I am sure,
So long as Authority on my side endure,
But to thy words a while I will list,
Therefore in brief say on what you will.

Avarice. I would have ^ou show rigor to such as resist.
And such as be ^bstinate spare not to kill,
But those that be willing your hestes to fulfill,
If they offend and not of obstinacy,
For money e^cuse them though they use villainy, HIP. hatke the practis of
spiteful Sumners.

Thus shall you perform your office aright,
For favor or money to spare the offendent.

Tyranny. So may I also of malice or spite,
Or ranckor of mine punnish the innocent,
But I will be ruled by thine arbitrament,
And will favor such as will my hand greaze,
The de^^ is a good fellow if one can him please, HIP. and you are one of his
sons me think by your head.

But to sollow our business great pains we do take,
On an hasty message we were fit to be sent.

Hypocrisy. When I lie a dying I will you messengers make,
You plye you so fast you are too to dilligent,
Hoope how, Master Zeal whether are ye bent?

Avarice. Hark me thought one hallowed and called you by name.

Tyranny. I would it were Hypocrisy. Aua. It is the very same,
What Master Hyprcrisie for you I have sought,
This hour or two but could you not find.

Hypocrisy. That is no marvel it is not for naught,
For I am but little and you two are blind,
Neither have you eyes to see with behind,
Yet may the learned note herein a mystery,
That neither Tyran, nor Auar. can find out Hypocrisy.
But what earnest business have you in charge,
That with so great speed must presently be finished.

Tyranny. Mary see here. Hip. what is it? Tyran. a commission large
From my Lord Legate him self au^thorized,
The effect whereof must presently be practiced.

Hypocrisy. What is the tenure I pray you let me know.

Tyranny. Avarice has red it, not I, let him show.

Avarice. He has firstly in charge to make inquisition,
Whether Aulters be reedified whether chalice and book,
Ves^ments for Mass, sacraments and prosession,
Be prepared again: if not he must look,
And find out such fellows as these cannot brook:
And to my Lord Legate such Merchants present,
That for their offense they may have condign punishment.
If any we take tardy Tyranny them threat,
That for their negligence he will them present,
And I desirous some money to get,
If ought they will give me, their evil will prevent,
Yea sometime, of purpose, such shifts we invent.

Hypocrisy. Peace, yonder coms one (me think) it is a priest,
By his gown cap and tippet, made of a list.

Act. third, Scene 4.
CACONOS. HYP. TYRANNY. AVARICE.
IN good seth sir, this newis de gar me lope,
Ay is as light as ay me wend, gif that yo wol me troth,
Far new again within awer land installed is the Pope,
Whese Legate with authority tharawawt awr cu^try goth,
And charge befare him far te com, us Preests end lemen bath,
Far te spay awt gif that he mea, these new sprang Arataykes,
Whilk de disturb awr hally Kirk, laik a sart of saysmataykes.
Awr gilden Gods ar brought again intea awr Kirks ilk whare,
That vnte tham awr Parishioner, ma affer thar gudewill,
Far hally Mass in ilke place, new thea auters de prepare,
Hally watter, Pax, Cross, Banner, Censour and Candill,
Cream, Crismatory, hally Bred, the rest omit ay will,
Whilt hally Fathers did invent ^e awd Antiquity,
Be new receued inte awr Kirks, with great solemnit^e.
Bay these thaugh lemen been apprest, the Clargy sall het gean,
Far te awr Sents these affer yifts all whilk we sall receive,
Awr hally Mass, thaw thea bay dear, thea de it but in vain,
Far thaw there friends frea Purgatory, te help thea dea believe,
Yet af there hope, gif need rewhayre it wawd theme all deceue,
Sea wawde awr Pilgrimage, Relics, Trentals and Pardons,
Whilk far awr geyn inte awr Kirk ar braught in far the nones.
Far well a nere what war awr tenths and taythes that gro in filled,
What gif we han of glebed land ene plawwark bay the year,
Awr affring deas de vara laytell ar nething te us yield,
Awr Beadroll geanes, awr chrisom clethes de laytle mend awr fare
Gif awt af this we pea far vale, we laytle mare can spare,
Sawl Masses, Diriges, Monethmayndes and Buryinges,
Alsow^nday, Kirkings, Baneasking and weddings.
The Sacraments, gif we mowt sell, war better then thea all,
Far gif the Jews gave thratty pence, te hang Chrayst on a tree,
Good christian folk thrayse thratty pence wawd count a price but small
Sea that te ete him with there teeth delayuered he mawght be,
New of this thing delayuerance, ne man can make but we,
Se that the market in this punt, we Preests sawd han at will,
And with the money we sowd yet, awr pooches we sowd fill.
Hypocrisy. I will go and salowt him, good morrow sir John,

Cacon. Naw bay may Priest hade God give ye ten far ene,

Hypocrisy. Do you Master Parson in this Parish singe?

Cacon. Yai sir that ay de, gif yowll give me troothing,

Tyranny. I have a commission your house and Church to seek,
To search if you any seditious Books do keep.

Cacon. When ay? well a near ay swer bay the Sacrament,
Ay had rather han a cup af nale then a Testament.

Hypocrisy. How can you without it your office discharge?

Cacon. It is the least thing ay car far bay may charge,
Far se lang as thea han Images wharon te luke,
What need thea be distructed awt af a Buke.

Hypocrisy. Tush that will nodisie them all well enowe,
As well a dead Image as a dumb Idol I make God avowe,

Cacon. Yai, ay my sen, bay experience thot con show,
Far in may Portace the tongue ay de not know,
Yet when ay see the great gilded letter,
Ay ken it sea well, as nea man ken better:
As far Example, on the day of Chra^stes Natyuitie,
Ay see a Bab in a Manger, and two Beasts standing by
The Service whilk to Newyeares day is assaygnd,
Bay the Paicture of the Circumcision ay faynd.
The Service, whilk on Twalfth day mun be don,
Ay seek ^ay the mark of the three kings of Colon.
Bay the Devil tentyng Chraist, ay faind whadragesima,
Bay Chraist on the Cross, ay search out good frayday:
Pasch for his mark, has the Resurrection,
Against Hally Thursday, is pented Chraistes Assention,
Thus in mayn own buke, ay is a good Clarke,
But gyf the Sents war gone, the Cat had eat my mark
Se the sandry mairacles, whi^^ ilk Sent have done,
Bay the Picttures on the walls sal appear to them soon
Bay the whilk thea ar learned in every distress,
What Sent thea mun prea te far succor doubtless:
Sea that all Lepers te Syluester must prea,
That he wawd free tham, there disease take away.
Layk wais, thea that han the falling saicknes,
Te be eased therfre, thea m^n prea to St. Cornelis:
In contagious aier, as in plague or pestilence,
Te hally Sent Ruke, thea mun call far assistance.
Fra parill of drawning, Sent Carp keep the Maryners
Fra dayng in warfare, Sent George guard the Soldiers,
Sent Job heal the Pox, the Agew, Sent Germayne,
Far te ease the toothache, call te Sent Appollyne,
Gif that a woman be barren and childles,
Te help her herein, she must prea t^ Sent Nicolas.
Far women in travail, call to Sent Magdalene
Far lawlynes of mind, call te Sent Katheryne,
Sent Loy save your Horse, Sent Anthony your Swyne.

Tyranny, What? this Parson, seems connyng to be,
And as far as I see, in a good vniformytie:
Yea, he is well red, in that golden Legend.

Cacon. Bay may trooth, in readyng any other, ne taym do I spend
Far that ay ken, bay gene^al cau^sell, is canonized
And bay the hely Pope himself is authorized:
That Buke farther, is wholly permytted,
Wharas, the Bayble in part is prohibited.
And therefore, gif it be lawful to utter my conscience,
Before the new Testament ays give it credence.

Hypocrisy. I allow his Iudgemnet before Ambrose and Austin,
And for Hypocrisy, a more convenient Chapleyn,

Avarice. It greeueth me much that no fault we can spy,
For now of some bribe disappoynted am I,
Yet happily he may tell us of some Heretykes.

Tyranny. Is there M. Parson in your parish no Scismatikes?

Cacon. Yai mara is there a vara busy body,
When will jest with me and call me fule and noddye,
And sets his Lads te spowt latin against me,
But ay spose then with Deparfundis Clam aui,
And oftentimes* he will reason with me of the Sacarment,
And say he can prove bay the new Tastament,
That Chraystss body is in Heaven placed,
But ays not believe him, ay woll not be awt faced,
He says besayd that the Pope is Anticraist,
Fugered of John bay the seven hedded beast,
And all awre religion is but mons invention,
And with Gods ward is at utter dissension,
And a plaguey deel mare af sayk layk talk,
That ay dar not far may nars bay his yate walk,
But ay wawd he were brunt that ay mawght be whaiet,

Tyranny. He must. have a cooler his tongue runs at riat.

Avarice. What is his name sir John, can thou tell us?

Cacon. Yai sir that ay ken he is ^leped Phailelegoos.

Tyranny. Will thou go show his house where he dwell?

Cacon. Yai or else ay wawd may sawl war in Hell,
Te de him a pleasure ay wawd gang a whole year,
Gif it war but te make him a Fadocke te bear.

Tyranny. Go with us Avarice and bear us company.

Avarice. Nay, if you go hence I will not here tarry.

Hypocrisy. Away sirs in your business in a corner do not lu^ke,
That my Lord Legate when he coms may have work.

Tyranny. Come on let us go together sir John.

Cacon. Ay sall follow after, God boy you good Gentleman.

Hypocrisy. Farewell, three false knaves, as between this and London.

Tyranny. What say thou? Hip. As honest men as ye three Kings of Colon.
This gear goes round if that we had a fiddle: Exeunt Tyr. Auar. Cacon.

Nay, I must sing too, heigh dery dery dery,
I can do but laugh my heart is so merry,
I will be minstrel my self heigh didle didle didle,
But lay there a straw I began to be weary:
But hark I here a tramplyng of feet,
It is my Lord Legate I will him go meet.

Act fourth.
Scene. 1.
CAR. HYPO. AVA. TYR* PHILO.
GO to Master Zeal, bring forth that Heretic,
Which does thus disturb our religion Catholic.
Hypocrisy. Rowm for my Lords grate: what? no manner reverence,
But Cap on head Hodge, and that in a Lords presence.

Cardinal. What? Master Hypocrisy I have stayed for you long.

Hypocrisy. You were best ^rowd in and play us among.

Cardinal. Where have you ben from me so long absent,
I appointed to have been here three hours ago,
In my consistory to have set in Judgment,
Of that wretched Scismatike that does trouble us so.

Hypocrisy. What have you caught but one and no more?
In faith father Avarice, you have plied your chaps well.

Avarice. I must needs confess that I am paid for my travel.

Tyranny. Rowme for the prisoner, what? rowme on each hand,
Or I shall make some out of the way for to stand.
Lo here (my Lord) is that seditious Scismatike,
That we have laid wait for, an arrant Heretic.

Cardinal. Sit down Master Hypocrisy to yield me assistance.

Hypocrisy. I thank your Lordship for your courteous benevolence,
I will be the Noddy, I should say the Notary,
To wright before my Lord Legate which is Comissary.

Cardinal. Ah sir, be you he that does thus disturb,
The whole estate of our faith Catholic?
Art thou so expert in Gods laws and word,
That no man may learn thee? thou arrant Heretic:
But this is the nature of every Scismatike:
Be his errors never so false Doctrine,
He will say, by Gods word, he dare it examine.

Philologus. With humble submission to your authority,
I pardon crave if ought (...) I say,
For being thus fet in peril and extreamitie,
To me unacquainted, my tongue soon trip may,
Wherefore excuse me, I do your Lordship pray,
And I will answer to every demand,
According to my conscience, Gods word being my warrant.

Cardinal. To begin therefore orderly, how say thou Philologus?
Have I authority to call the me before?
Or to be short, I will object it thus:
Whether has the Pope which is Peter's successor:
Then all other Bish^^s pre-eminence more?
If not, then it follow that neither he,
Nor I which am his Legate, to accounts may call thee.

Philologus. The question is perilous for me to determine,
Cheefely when the party is Judge in the cause,
Yet if the wholl course of Scripture ye examine,
And will be tried by Gods holy laws,
Small help shall you find to defend the same cause,
But the contrary may be proved manifestly:
As I in short words will prove to you breefely.
The surest ground whereon your Pope does stand:
Is of Peter's being at Room a strong imagination,
And the same Peter* you do understand,
Of all the Disciples had the gubernation,
Surmising both without good approbation:
Unless you will by the name of Babylon,
From whence Peter wrote is understood Room:
As indeed diverse of your writers have affirmed,
Reciting Ieromy, Austine, Primasius and Ambrose,
Who by their several writings have confirmed:
That Rome is new Babylon I may it not gloss,
But it were better for you they were dumb I suppose,
For they labor to prove Room by that acception:
The whore of Babylon spoke of in the Revelation,
But grant that Peter in Room settled was,
Yet that he was chief, it remayns you to prove:
For in my Judgment it is a plain case,
That if any amongst them to rule it did behooue,
He should be chief whom Christ most did love:
To whom he bequethed his mother most dear,
To whom in revelation Christ did also appear.
I mean John Evangelist (by birth) Coosin german,
To our Savior Christ as stories do us tell,
From whose succession if that you should claim
Superiority, you should mend your cause well,
For then of some likelihood of truth it should smell,
Where none so often as Peeter was reproved,
Nor from steadfast faith so often times removed,
But grant all were true herein you do feign,
Mark one proper lesson of a Greek Orator:
As a good child of his fathers wealth is inheritour,
So of his fathers virtues he must be possessour,
Now Peter folows Christ and al worldly goods forsakes
But the Pope leaves Christ, and himself to glory takes:
And to be short Christ himself refused to be a King,
And the servant above the Master may not be,
Which being both true it is a strange thing,
How the Pope can receive this pomp and dignity,
And yet profess himself Christ's servant to be,
Christ will be no King, the Pope will be more,
The Pope is Christ's Master not his servant therefore.

Cardinal. Ah thou arrant Heretic I will thee remember,
I am glad I know so much as I do,
I have wayed thy resons and have found them so slender
That I think them not worthy to be answered:
How say you Master Hipocrisy? HIP. I also think so,
But let him go forward and utter his conscience,
And we will awhile longer here him with patience.

Cardinal. Say on thou Heretic of the holy Sacrament,
Of the body and blood of Christ, what is thine opinion?

Philologus. I have not yet finished my former argument.

Cardinal. Say on as I bid thee, thou art a stout Minion:

Philologus. I shall then gladly: it is a sign of union,
The which should remain us Christians among,
That one should love another all our life long:
For as the bread is of many Cornells compounded,
And the Wine from the Iuce of many Graps do descend,
So we which into Christ our Rock are ingrounded:
As into one Temple, should cease to contend:
Least by our conte^tion the Church we offend,
This was not the least cause among many more,
Which are now omitted that this Sacrament was given for,
The cheifest cause why this Sacrament was ordained,
Was the infirmity of our outward man:
Whereas Salvation to all men was proclaimed.
That with true faith apprehend the same can,
By the death of Jesus Christ that immaculate Lamb,
That the same might the rather of all men be believed,
To the word to ad a Sacrament, it Christ nothing grieve*
And as we the sooner believe that thing true,
For the trial whereof more witnesses we find,
So by the means of the Sacrament many grue
Believing creatures, where before they were blind,
For our senses some savor of our faith now do find,
Because in the Sacrament there is this Analogy:
That Christ feeds our souls as the bread does our body

Cardinal. Ah thou foul Heretic, is there bread in the Sacrament
Where is Christ's body then which he did us give?

Philologus. I know to the faithful receiver it is there present:
But yet the bread remains still I steadfastly believe.

Cardinal. To here these his errors it does me greatly grieve:
But that we may shortly to some issue come,
In what sense said Christ, Hoc est Corpus meum?

Philologus. Even in the same sense that he said before:
Vos estis sall terrae, vos estis Lux mundi:
Ego sum ostium: and a hundredth such more,
If time would permit to allege them severally,
But that I may the simple sort edify,
You ask me in what sense these words I verifye,
Where Christ of the bread said: this is my body:
For answer herein, I ask you this question,
Were Christ's disciples into salt transformed?
When he said: ye are the salt of the earth every one,
Or when the light of the world he them affirmed?
Or himself to be a door when he confirmed,
Or to be a Vine did his body then change?
If not then, why now? this to me seems strange.

Cardinal. Why do thou doubt of Christ his omnipotencye?
But what so he wills does so come to pass?

Philologus. God keep me and all men from such a frencye,
As to think any thing Christ's power to surpass,
When his will to his power joined was,
But where his will wants his power is ineffectual:
As Christ can be no liar, God cannot be mortal:
Set down therefore some proof of his will,
That he would be made bread, and then I recant.

Cardinal. This C^ytif, mine ears with wind he does fill:
His words both truth and reason does want:
Christ's word is his will, this must thou needs grant.

Philologus. He spoke the word likewise, when he said: I am the door,
Was his body transformed into timber therefere?

Cardinal. Nay if thou be obstinate I will say no more.
Have him hence to prison and keep him full sure:
I will make him set by my friendship more store:
But herest thou Zeal, go first and procure,
Some kind of new torment which he may not endure.

Tyranny. I am here in redines to do your commandment,
And will return hither again incontinent.

Hypocrisy. At thy return, bring hither Sensual Suggestion.
That if need be, he may us assist,
Least that both I, and Careful provision,
The zeal of Philologus, may not fully resist.
But he in his obstinacy does still persist,
To put him to death, would accuse us of Tirranny:
But if we could win him, he should do us much honesty.

Tyranny. I hear you, and will fulfill your words spedely.

Hypocrysie. Exit Tyrran. Good Master Philologus, I pity your case,
To see you so foolysh, your self to undo:
I durst yet promys to purchase you grace,
If you would (at length) your errors forgo:
Therefore, I pray you, be not your own foe.

Philologus. Call you those Errors, which the Gospel defends,
I know not then, whence true D^rine descends.

Cardinal. Nay, Master Hypocrisy, you spend time in vain.
To reason with him, he will not be removed,

Avarice. Had I so much to live by as he has certain,
I would not loose that which I so well loved.

Cardinal. He stands in his reputation, he will not be reproved:
And that is the cause that he is co obstinate?
But I shall well enough thy courage abate.

Philologus. I humbly beseech you of Christian charity,
You seek not of purpose my blood for to spill:
For if I have displeased your authority,
In reasonable causes redress it I will,
But in this respect I fear I should kill
My soull for ever: if against my conscience
I should to the Popes laws acknowledge Obedience.

Hypocrysie. Ceace from those words, if your safety you love:
As though no man had a soul more then you:
Such nips (perchance) my Lords patience will move:
Then would you please him, if that you wist how:
But, if you will be ruled, (by my honesty) I vow,
I will do the best herein that I can:
Because you seem to be a good Gentleman.

Avarice. Were it not better for you to live at ease?
And spend that merely, which erst you have got,
Then by your own ^ol^e, your self to disease?
And bring you to trouble, which other men seek not.

Hypocrisy. In faith, Philologus, your zeal is too hot,
Which will not be quenched, but with your heart blood,
If I were so zealous, I would think my self wood.

Cardinal. Tush, it will not be, he thinks we do but jest,
Wherefore, that some trial of my mind, he may have,
That Careful Provision, should go, I think best,
Into the town, and there, assistance crave,
His House for to enter, and his Goods for me save:
Least, when his wife know, that they be confiscate,
Into other men's keepyng, the same she does dissipate.

Hypocrisy. You speak very wisely, in my simple Judgment,
Therefore, you were best to send him away.

Cardinal. Go too, Careful Provision, depart incontinent,
And fulfill the words, which I to you say,

Avarice. Of pardon herein, I do your Lordshyp pray,
You doubt not I trust, of my wyllyng mind,
Which herein most ready, you always shall find.
For who is more ready, by frawde to put loy^e,
Other men's goods then I am each where?
But least some man at me should chance to feign,
And kill me at once I greatly do fear,
I had rather persuade him his folly to forbear.

Cardinal. Prove then if thou can do him any good,
He shall not say that we seek his blood.

Avarice. Ah master Philologus, you see your own case,
That both life and goods are in my Lords will,
Therefore you were best to sue for some grace,
And be content his words to fulfi^:
If you neglect this, hence straight way I will,
And all your goods I will sure confiscate,
Then will you repent, it when it is to late.

Philologus. My case indeed I see most miserable,
As was Susanna betwixt two euyls placed,
Either to consent to sin most abominable:
Or else in the worlds sight to be utterly disgraced:
But as she her chastity at that tune embraced,
So will I now spiritual who^dom resist,
And keep me a true Virgin to my loving spouse Christ.

Avarice. Will thou then neglect the provision of thy household?
Thou art therefore wors^e then an Infydell is.

Philologus. That you abuse Gods word, to say I dare be bold:
And the saying of Paul you interpret a^isse

Cardinal. I never saw the like heretic that this is:
Away Careful Provision, about your business,

Avarice. Since there is no remedy, I am here in readiness.

Philologus. Exit A^a. I beseech your Lordship even from the heart root,
That you would vouchsafe for my contentation,
To approve unto me by Gods holy book,
Some one of the questions of our disputation:
For I will here you with hearts delectation:
Because I would gladly* to your doctrine consent,
If that I could so my conscience content.
But my Conscience cries out and bids me take hee^^
To love my lord God above all earthly gain,
Whereby all this while, I stand in great drea^,
That if I should Gods statutes disdain,
In wretched state then, I should remain:
Thus cries my Conscience, to me continually,
which if you can stay, I will yield to you gladly.

Cardinal. I can say no more, then I have done already,
Thou heardest that I called the heretic and fool:
If thou will not consent to me and that speedily:
With a new master, thou shall go to schole,

Hypocrisy. Thou have no more wit, I see then this stool,
Far unfit to dispute, or reason with my Lord,
He can subdue thee, with fire and sword, quight with one word

Tyranny. Come, ^ollow apace, sensual Suggestion,
Or else I will leave you to come all alone:

Suggestion. You go in have, you make expedition,
Nay, if you run so fast I will none:
This little iournay, will make me to groan:
I use not to trouble my self in this wise,
And now to begin, I do not advise:

Tyranny. Have not I plied me, which am come again so soon,
And yet have finished such sundry business:
I have caused many pretty toys to be done:
So that now I have each thing in readiness.

Cardinal. What master Zeal, you are praise worthy doubtless,
Art thoou prepared this gentleman to receive?
He will rest a Faggot, or else he me deceive.

Tyranny. In simple manner I will him entertain,
Yet must he take it all in good part:
And though his diet be small, he may not disdain,
Nor yet contemn the kindenes of my heart,
For though I lack instruments, to put him to smart,
Yet shall he abide in a hellish black dungeon:
As for blocks, stocks and irons, I warrant him want none.

Hypocrisy. Well, farewell Philologus, you hear of your lodging,
I would yet do you good, if that I wist how.

Cardinal. Let him go Hypocrisy, stand not all day dodging,
You have don to much for him, I make God avowe.

Hypocrisy. Stay, for Suggestion does come yonder now,
Come on lasy Lubber, you make but small haste,
Had you stayed awhile longer, your coming had been waste.

Suggestion. You know of my self, I am not very quick,
Because that my body I do so much tender,
For Sensual Suggestion, will quickly be sick
If that his own ease he should not remember:
Thus one cause of my tariaunce to you I do render,
Another I had, as I came by the way:
Which did me the longer from your company stay.

Hypocrisy. What was that Suggestion, I pray thee to us utter,
For I am with child, till that I do it hear.

Suggestion. A certain gentle woman, did murmur, and mutter,
And for grief of mind, her hair she did tear:
She will at last kill her self, I greatly do fear.

Hypocrisy. What is the cause why this grief she did take?

Suggestion. Because her Husband her company did forsake:
Her children also about her did stand,
Sobbing, and sighing, and made lamentation:
Knocking their breasts, and wringing their hand:
Saying, they are brought to utter dessolation,
By the means of their fathers wilful protestation,
Whose goods they say, are already confiscate,
Because he does the Popes laws violate,
And indeed I saw Avarice standing at the door,
And a company of Ruffians assisting him there.

Philologus. Alas alas, this pincheth my heart full sore,
Mine evils he does declare, mine own woe, I do hear,
Wherefore from tears, I cannot forbear.

Hypocrisy. Ha ha, does this touch you, Master Philologus,
You need not have had it, being ruled by us.

Suggestion. Why? what is he, thus, Master Hypocrisy,
That takes such sorrow at the words which I spoke.

Hypocrisy. One that is taken, and convinced of Heresy,
And I fear me much, will burn at a stake,
Yet to reclayme him, much pains would I take,
And have don already, howbeit in vain,
I would crave thine assistance, were it not to thy pain,

Suggestion. I will do the best herein that I can,
Yet go thou with me, to help at a need,
With all my heart, God save you, good gentleman,
To see your great sorrow, my heart does welnigh bleed:
But what is the cause of your trouble and dreede?
Disdain not to me your secrets to tell:
A wise man sometime, of a fool may take counsel.

Philologus. Mine estate (alas) is now most lamentable,
For I am but dead, which ever side I take,
Neither to determine herein am I able,
With good advice mine election to make:
The worse to refuse, and the best for to take,
My Spirit couites theone, but alas since your presence,
My flesh leads my spirit therfroe by violence.
For at this time, I being in great extremity,
Either my Lord God in heart to reject,
Or else to be oppressed by the Legates authorytie:
And in this world to be counted an abject:
My Lands, wife and Children also to neglect:
This later part to take, my Spirit is in readiness,
But my Flesh does subdue, my Spirit doubtless.

Suggestion. Your estate perhaps, seems io you dangerous,
The rather because you have not been used:
To incur before time, such troubles perilous:
But to your power such evils have refused,
Howbeit of two evils, the least must be chused:
Now which is the least evil, we will shortly examine,
That which part to take, your self may determine.
On ye right hand you say, you see gods just judgment,
His wrath and displeasure, on you for to fall,
And in steed of the joys of Heaven, ever permanent,
You see for your stipend, the torments infernal:

Philologus. That is it indeed, which I fear most of all:
For Christ said, fear not them, which the body can a^noy,
But fear him, which the body and soul can destroy:

Suggestion. Well, let that ley aside, awhile as it is,
And on the other side make the like inquisition,
If on the left side you fall, then shall you not miss,
But to bring your body, to utter perdition:
For at man's hand, you know there is no remission:
Beside your Children fatherless, your wife desolate,
Your goods and possessions, to other men consiscate.

Philologus. Saint Paul to the Romans, has this worthy sentence
I account the afflictions of this world transitory,
Be they never so many, in full equiuolence:
Cannot counteruaile those heavenly glory:
Which we shall have through Christ his propitiatory:
I also account the rebukes of our Savior,
Greater gains to me, then this house full of treasure.

Suggestion. You have spoken reasonably, but yet as they say,
One Bird in the hand, is worth two in the bush,
So you now inioying, these worldly joys may,
Esteem the other, as light as a rush:
Thus may you escape this perrillous pushe:

Philologus. Yea, but my salvation to me is most certain,
Neither doubt I, that I shall suffer this in vain.

Suggestion. Is your death meritorious, then in Gods sight?
That you are so sure, to attain to salvation,

Philologus. I do not think so, but my faith is full pight:
In the mercies of God, by Christ's mediation:
By whom I am sure of my preservation.

Suggestion. Then to the faithful, no hurt can accrue,
But what so he works, good end shall ensue.

Philologus. Our Savior Christ, did say to the tempter,
When he did persuade him, from the Pinnacle to fall,
And said, he might safely, that danger adventure:
Because that Gods Angels, from hurt him save shall:
See that thy Lord God, thou tempt not at all:
So I, though persuaded, of my sins free remission,
May not commit sin, upon this presumption.

Cardinal. What have you not yet done, your foolysh tatteling?
With that froward heretic, I will then away,
If you will tarry to hear all his prattelyng:
He would surely keep you most part of the day:
It is now high dinner time my stomach does say:
And I will not lose one meal of my diet,
Though thereon did hang an hundred men's quiet.

Suggestion. By your Lordships patience, one word with him more,
And then if he will not, I give him to Tyrrany.

Hypocrisy. I never saw my Lord so pacient before,
To suffe one to speak for himself so quietly,
But you were not best to trust to his courtesy:
It is evil waking of a Dog that does sleep,
While you have his friendship, you were best it to keep.

Cardinal. I promise thee Philologus, by my vowed chastity,
If thou will be ruled by thy friends that be here,
Thou shall abound in wealth and prosperity:
And in the Country chief rule thou shall bear,
And a hundred pounds more thou shall have in the year:
If thou will this courtesy refuse,
Thou shall die incontinent, the one of these choose.

Suggestion. Well since it is no time, for us to debate,
In former manner what is in my mind:
I will at once to thee straight demonstrate,
Those worldly joys, which here thou shall find:
And for because thou art partly blind,
In this respect look through this mirror,
And thou shall behold an unspeakable pleasure.

Philologus. Oh peerless pleasures, oh joys unspeakable,
Oh worldly wealth, oh palaces gorgious,
Oh fair Children, oh wife most amyable:
Oh pleasant pastime, oh pomp so glorious,
Oh delicate diet, oh life lascivious:
Oh dolourous death which would me betray,
And my felycitie from me take away,
I am fully resolved without further demeanor,
In these delights to take my whole solace,
And what pain so ever hereby I incur:
Whether heaven or hell, whether Gods wrath or grace,
This glass of delight I will ever embrace:
But one thing most chiesly does trouble me here,
My Neighbors unconstant will count me I fear.

Hypocrisy. He that will seek each man to content.
Shall prove him self at last most unwise,
Your self to save harmless think it sufficient:
And weigh not the peoples clamorous outeries,
Yet there mouths to stop I can soon devise:
Say that the reading of the works of S. Selfloue,
And doctor Ambition did your errors remove.
And hark in mine ear delay no more time,
The sooner the better in end you will say,
We have now caught him as Bird is in line.

Tyranny. Come on sirs have ye done, I would feign away.

Hypocrisy. Go even when you w^ll, we do you not stay,
Philologus has drunk such a draught of Hypocrisy,
That he minds not to die yet, he will master this malady.

Cardinal. Come on master Philologus, are you grown to a stay
I am glad to hear that you become tractable.

Philologus. If it please your Lordship, I say even what you say
And con^esse your relygion, to be most allowable,
Neither will I gainsay your customs lawdable:
My ^ormer follyes I utterly ^enownce,
That my self was an Heretic I do here pronownce.

Cardinal. Nay Master Philologus, go with me to my Palace
And I shall set down the form of recantation,
Which you shall read on Sunday next, in open place:
This done, you shall satisfy our expectation,
And shall be set free, from all molestation:
Into the bosom of the Church, we will you take,
And some high officer, therein will you make

Philologus. I must first request your Lordships favor,
That I may go home, my wife for to see,
And I will attend on you, within this hour.

Cardinal. Nay I may not suffer, you alone to go free,
Unless one of these, your surety will be:

Suggestion. I sensual Suggestion, for him will undertake,

Cardinal. Very well take him to you, your prisoner I him make.
Go you master Philologus and bear me company,
Or else I am sure no meat I should eat,
And go before Zeal, to see each thing ready:
That when we once come, we stay not for meat:

Hypocrisy. With small suit heereto, you shall me entreat.

Cardinal. Exit Tyr. Farewell Philologus, and make small delay,
Perhaps of our dinners, for you I will stay,
Exi Car. and Hyp
Suggestion. Had not you been a wise man, your self to have lost,
And brought your whole family to wretched estate,
Where now of your blessedness, your self you may bost:
And of all the country, account your self fortunate,

Philologus. Such was the wit of my foolish pate,
But what do we stay, so long in this place,
I shall not be well, whilst I am with my Lords grace.

Act fourth. Scene 4.
SPIRIT. PHILO. SVGGES.
PHilologus, Philologus, Philologus, I say,
In time take heed, go not to far, look well thy steps unto,
Let not Suggestion of thy flesh, thy Conscience thee betray,
Who does conduct thee in the path, that leads to all woe:
Weigh well this warning given from God, before thou further go:
And sell not everlasting joys, for pleasures temporal,
From which thou soon shall go, or they from thee bereaved shall.
Philologus. Alas, what voice is this I here, so dolefully to sound,
Into mine ears, and warns me, in time yet to beware,
Why have not I the pleasant path, of worldly pleasures found,
To walk therein for my delight, no man shall me debar.

Suggestion. Look in this Glass Philologus, for naught else do thou care,
What do thou see within the same? is not the Coast all clear?

Philologus. Naught else but pleasure, pomp, and wealth, herein to me appear.

Suggestion. Give me thy hand, I will be guide, and lead thee in the way,
What do thou shrink Philologus? where I dare go before?

Spirit. Yea, shrink so still Philologus, no time turn back I say,
In sensual Suggestions steps, see that thou tread no more:
And though the frailty of the flesh, has made the fall full sore:
And to deny with outward lyps, thy Lord and God most dear
The same to stablish with consent, of Conscience, stand in fear:
Thou art yet free Philologus, all torments thou may escape,
Only the pleasures of the world, thou shall awhile forbear,
Renownce thy crime, and sue for grace, and do not captiuate
Thy Conscience unto mortal sin, the yoke of Christ do bear,
Shut up these words within thy breast, which sound so in thine ear:
The outward man has caused thee, this enterprise to take,
Beware least wickedness of spirit, the same do perfect make.

Philologus. My heart does tremble for distres, my conscience pricks me sore
And bid me cease that course in time, which I would gladly run
The wrath of God it does me tell, does stand my face before:
Wherefore, I hold it best to cease that race I have begun.

Suggestion. These are but fancies certainly, for this way thou shall shun
All worldly woes: look in thy Glass and tell me what it show,
Thou will not credit other men, before thy self I trow.

Philologus. Oh gladsome Glass, oh mirror bright, oh cristall clear as sun
The joys cannot be uttered, which herein I behold,
Wherefore I will not thee forsake: what evil so ever come.

Spirit. If needs thou will thy self undo, say not, but thou art told:

Philologus. Hap, what hap will I will not loose these pleasures manyfolde
Wherefore conduct me once again, here take me by the hand.

Suggestion That sensual Suggestion does lead him understand.

Act fourth. Scene. 3.
CONSCI. PHILO. SVGGES.
ALas alas, thou woeful wight, what fury does thee move?
So willingly to cast thy self into consumyng fire,
What Circes has bewitched thee, thy worldly wealth to love
More then the blessed state of Soul, this one thing I desire:
Weigh well the cause with sincere heart, thy Conscience thee require
And sell not everlasting joys, for pleasures temporal,
Resist Suggestion of the flesh, who seeks thee for to spoil:
From which thou soon shall go or they from thee b^ rea^ed shall:
And take from thee which God elect, true everlasting soil.
See where confusion does attend, to catch thee in his snare,
Whose hands, if that thou go on still, thou shall no way eschew
Philologus. What wight art thou? which for my health, do take such earnest
care?

Conscience. Thy crased Conscience, which forsee, the plagues and torments due,
Which from just Judge, whom thou denyest shall by and by ensue:

Suggestion. Thou have good trial of the faith, which I to thee do bear,
Commit thy safety to my charge, there is no danger near.

Conscience. Such is the blindness of the flesh, that it may not descrie,
Or see the perrils which the Soul, is ready to incur:
And much the less, our own estates, we can our selves epsy:
Because Suggestion in our hearts such fancies often stir:
Whereby to worldly vanities, we cleave as fast as burre:
Esteeming them with heavenly joys, in goodness comparable,
Yet be they mostly very pricks, to sin abhomynable.
For proof we need no further go, then to this present man,
Who by the blessing of the Lord, of riches having store,
When with his heart to fancy them, this worldlyng once began:
And had this Glass of vanyties espied, his eyes before,
He God forsook, whereas he ought have loved him the more:
And chooses rather with his goods, to be thrown down to hell,
Then by refusing of the same, with God in heaven to dwell.

Suggestion. Nay hark Philologus, how thy conscience can teach,
And would deteyne thee with glosinges untrue:
But hear thou Conscience, thou may long enough preach,
Ear words, from whence reason or truth none ensue,
Shall make Philologus to bid me adue.
What shall there no rich man dwell in Gods kingdom?
where is then Abraham, Job, and David become?

Conscience. I speak not largelye of all them, which have this worldly wealth,
For why, I know that riches are the creatures of the Lord:
Which of themselves, are good each one, as Salamon us tells,
And are appointed to do good withal, by Gods own word,
But when they let us from the Lord, then ought they be abhord:
Which caused Christ himself to say, that with much lesser pain,
Should Camel pass through needles ey, the^ rich men Heaven obtayn,
Hereby Rich men, Christ did not mean, each one which wealth enjoy
But those which fastened have their love upon this worldly dust,
Wherefore another cries, and says, oh death, how great anoye
Do thou procure unto that man, which in his gooddes does trust?
That thou do this Philologus, thou needs acknowledge must,
Whereby each one may easly see, thou take more delight,
In Mundane joys, then thou esteemest to be with Angels bright.

Philologus. This touches ye quick, I feel ye wound, which if thou can not
cure,
As mamed in limbs I must retire, I can no further go.

Suggestion. This is the greef which Conscience takes against thee I am sure,
Because thou use those delights, which Conscience may not do,
And therefore he persuades thee, to leave the same also:
As did the Fore, which caught in snare, and escaped with loss of tail,
To cut off theirs, as burthenous, did all the rest counsayll.

Conscience. In deed I cannot use, those fond and foolish vanities
In which the outward part of man does take so great delight,
No, neither would I, though to me were given that liberty,
But rather would consume them all to naught, if that I might,
For if I should delight therein, it were as good a sight,
As if a man of perfect age, should ride upon a stick:
Or play with compters in the street, which pastime children like.
But all my joys in Heaven remaynes, whereas I long to be,
And so would thou, if that on Christ thy faith full fastened were,
For that affection, was in Paull the apostle, we may see,
The first to the Philippians does witness herein bear,
His words be these: oh would to God disolued that I were,
And were with Christ, another place his mind in those words tell,
We are but strangers all from God, while in this world we dwell:
Now mark, how far from his request, dissenting is thy mind,
He wished for death, but more then hell, thou do the same detest.

Suggestion. The cause why Paul did loath his life, may easily be assignde:
Because the Jews in every place, did seek him to molest,
But those which in this world, obtain security and rest:
Do take delight to live therein, yea nature does indue,
Each living creature with a fear, least death should them accrue.
Yea the same Paul at Antioche, dissembled to be dead,
While they were gone who sought his life, with stones for to destroy
Elias for to save his life, to Horeb likewise fled,
So did king David flee, when Saul did seek him to annoy:
Yea Christ himself, whom in our deeds, to follow we may joy,
Did secreatly conuaigh himself, from Jews so full of hate.
When they thought from the top of hill, him to precipitate.
Wherefore, it is no sin at all, a man for to defend,
And keep himself from death, so long as nature gives him leave.

Conscience. The same whom you recited have, conceived a further end:
Then to them selves to live alone, as each man may perceive,
For when that Paul had run his course, he did at last receive:
with hearts consent, the small death, which was him put unto,
So when Christ had performed his work, he did death undergo:
And would to god, thou would do yt, which these men were content,
For they despised worldly pomp, their flesh they did subdue,
And brought it under, that to spirit, it mostly did consent:
Whereby they seeking God to please, did bid the world adue:
Wife, Children, and possessions forsaking, for they knew
That everlasting treasures were, appointed them at last,
The which they thi^sting, did from them, al worldly pleasures cast.
But thou O wretch do life prolong, not that thou would gods name
As duty binds us all to do, most chiefly gloryfy,
But rather by thy living still, wilt Gods renown defame,
And more and more dishonor him, this is thy drift I spy.

Philologus. I mean to live in worldly joys, I can it not deny.

Conscience. What are those joys, which thou do mean, but pleasures
straing from god?
By using of the which, thou shall provoke his heavy rod:

Suggestion. Tush know thou what Philologus, be wise thy selse unto,
And listen not to these fond words which Conscience to thee tell,
For thy defense I will allege one worthy lesson more:
Unto the which I am right sure, he cannot answer well:
When David by vain trust in men of war, from God sore fell,
And was appointed of three plagues, the easiest for to choose,
He said Gods mercy easier is to get, then man's as I suppose.
Again he says among the Psalms, it better is to trust
In God, then that our confidence we setle should in man,
Wherefore, to this which I now say of force consent thou must:
That when two evils before us plaste, no way avoid we can:
Into the hand of God to fall by choice is lawful than,
Because that God is merciful, when man no mercy show,
Thus have I pleaded in this cause, sufficiently I trow.

Conscience. How can you say, you trust in God, when as you him forsake,
And of the wicked Mammon here, do make your fained friend,
No, no, these words which you recite against you mostly make:
For thus he thinks in his destresse, God cannot me defend,
And therefore by Suggestion frail, to man's help he has leande.
Mark who say truth of him or me* and do him best believe.

Philologus. I like thy words, but that to lose these joys it would me
grieve.

Conscience. And where Suggestion, tells thee, that God in mercies flow,
Yet is he just sins to correct, and true in that he speak,
Wherefore he says, who so my name, before men shall not know,
I shall not know him, when as Judge I shall sit in my seat*
This if you call to mind, it will your proud presumption break,
Again he says, who so his life or goods, will seek to save,
Shall loose them all: but who for Christ will lose them, gain shall have

Suggestion. What did not Peter Christ deny, yet mercy did obtain.
Where if he had not, of the Jews, he should have tasted death:

Philologus. Even so shall I in tract of time, with bitter tears complain.

Suggestion. Yea time enough, though thou defferst, until thy latest breath.

Conscience. So says Suggestion unto thee, but Conscience it denies,
And in the end what so I say, for truth thou shall espy,
And that most false, which Conscience shall in secreat heart deny.

Philologus. Ah wretched man, what shall I do? which do so plainly see,
My flesh and Spirit to contend, and that in no small thing,
But as concerning the event, of extreme misery*
Which either study to avoid, or else upon me bring,
And which of them I should best trust, it is a doubtful thing.
My Conscience speaks truth me think, butyet because I fear,
By his advice to suffer death, I do his words forbear.
And therefore pacyfy thy self, and do not so torment,
Thy self, in vain I must seek some means for to eschew,
These griping greefes, which unto me, I see now imminent.
And therefore will no longer stay, but bid thee now adue.

Conscience. Oh stay I say Philologus, or else thou will it rue.

Philologus. It is lost labor that thou do, I will be at a point,
And to inioye these worldly joys, I ieoparde will a iont.
Exit Phil. and Sug.
Conscience. Oh cursed creature O frail flesh, O meat for worms, O dust,
O blather puffed full of wind, O vainer then these all,
What cause have thou in thine own wit? to have so great a trust:
Which of thy self can not epsy, the evils which on thee fall,
The blindness of the outward man, Philologus show shall
At his return, unless I can at last, make him relent,
For why the Lord him to correct, in furious wrath is bent.

Exit Consciencia. Act. fyfth.
Scene. 3:
HYPOCRISY. SVch chopping cheer, as we have made, the like has not bin seen
And who so pleasant with my Lord, as is Philologus,
His recantation, he has made, and is dispatched clean,
Of all the griefs which unto him, did seem so dangerous:
Which thing you know, was brought to pass especially by us,
So that Hypocrisy has done that, which Satan did intend,
That men ^or worldly wealth, should cease the Gospel to defend:
What shall become of foolish Goose, I mean Philologus:
In actual manner to your eyes, shall represented be:
For though as now, he seems to be, in state most glorious,
He shall not long continue so, each one of you shall see.
But needs I must be packing hence, my fellows stay for me,
Shake hands before we do depart, you shall see me no more:
And though Hypocrisy go away, of hypocrites here is good store.

Exit Hyp. Act fyfth. Scene 4.
PHILO. GISBERT. PAPHI.
COme on my Children dear to me, and let us talk a while,
Of worldly goods, which I have got and of my pleasant state,
Which fortune has installed me, who on me cheerely smyle.
So that into the top of wheel, she does me eleuate:
I have escaped all mishaps, of which my Conscience did prate,
And where before I ruled was, as is the common ^orte,
Now as a Judge within this Land, I bear a Rulers port.
Gisbertus. Indeed, good father, we have cause, to praise your gravity,
Who did both save your self from woe, and us from begging state,
Where if you had perseuered still, as we did fear greatly:
Your goods from us, your Children should, to Legate been confiscate
Our glorious pompes, then, should we have been glad for to abate.

Paphinitius. But now, not only that you had for us, but also have
Such offices, whereby more gains, you year by year shall save:

Philologus. I was at point, once, very near, to have been quite forlorn,
Had not Suggestion of the flesh, from folly me reclaymed,
And set this Glass of worldly joys, my sight and eyes beforne:
The sight whereof did cause all things, of me to be disdained,
I thought I had felycitie, when it I had obtained:
And to say truth, I do not care, what to my soul betide,
So long as this prosperity, and wealth by me abide.
But let us homewarde go again, some pastime there to make,
My whole delight in sport and games, of pleasure I repose:

Horror. Nay stay thy iournay here awhile, I do thee prisoner take,
I shall abate thy pleasures soon, yea, to soon. thou will suppose,

Philologus. What is thy name? whence come thou? wherefore to me disclose?

Horror. My name is calde Confusion and horror of the mind,
And to correct impenitents, of God I am assignde.
And for because thon do despise, Gods mercy and his grace,
And would no admonytion take, by them that did thee warn,
Neither when Conscience counseled thee, thou would his words embrace
who would have had thee unto god, obedience true to learn:
Nor could between Suggestions craft, and Conscience truth discern
Behold therefore, thou shall of me an other lesson hear,
Which will thou, nil thou, with torment of Conscience, thou shall bear
And where thou have extinguished, the holy Spirit of God,
And made him weary with thy sins, which daily thou have done,
He will no longer in thy soul, and spirit make abode:
But with the Graces, which he gave to thee, now is he gone,
So that to Godwarde, by Christ's death, rejoicing thou have none,
The peace of Conscience faded is, in stead whereof, I brlng
The Spirit of Satan, blasphemy, confusion and cursing.
The Glasie likewise of vanyties, which is thine only joy
I will transform into the Glass of deadly desperation,
By looking in the which, thou shall conceive a great annoy:
Thus have I caught thee in thy pride, and brought thee to damnation:
So that thou art a pattern true, of Gods just indignation:
Whereby each man may warned be, the like sins to eschew,
Least the same torments they incur, which in thee they shall view.

Philologus. O painful pain of deep disdain, oh griping grief of hell,
Oh horror huge, oh soul suppressed, and slain with desperation,
Oh heap of sins, the sum whereof, no man can number well:
Oh death, oh furious flames of hell, my just recompensation,
Oh wretched wight, oh creature cursed, oh child of condempnation.
Oh angry God, and merciless, most fearful to behold,
Oh Christ thou art no Lamb to me, but Lion fearce and boulde.

Gisbertus. Alas dear Father, what does move and cause you to lament?

Philologus. My sins (alas) which in this Glass, appear innumerable,
For which I shall no pardon get, for God is fully bent:
In fury for to punish me, with pains intolerable:
Neither to call to him for grace, or pardon am I able,
My sin is unto death, I feel Christ's death does me no good,
Neither for my behoof, did Christ shed his most precious blood.

Paphinitius. Alas dear Father (alas I say) what sudden change is this?

Philologus. I am condemned into hell, these torments to sustain.

Gisbartus. Oh say not so my Father dear, Gods mercy mighty is,

Philologus. The sentence of the righteous Judge, cannot be called again,
Who has already judged me to everlasting pain:
Oh that my body buried were, that it at rest might be,
Though soul were put in Judas place, or Caines extremity.

Gisbertus. Oh Brother have you to the Town and tell Theologus,
What sudden plague and punishment, my Father has befell,

Paphinitius. I run in have, and will request him for to come with us.

Gisbertus. Oh Father, rest your self in God, and all thing shall be well,

Philologus. Ah dreadful name, which when I here, to sigh it me compel:
God is against me I perceive, he is none of my God,
Unless in this, that he will beat, and plague me with his rod.
And though his mercy does surpass, the sins of all the world,
Yet shall it not once profit me, or pardon mine offense,
I am refused utterly, I quite from God am whorld:
My name within the Book of life, had never residence,
Christ prayed not, Christ suffered not, my sins to recompense:
But only for the Lords elect, of which sort I am none,
I ^eele his justice toward me, his mercy all is gone:
And to be short, within short space, my final end shall be,
Then shall my soul incur the pains, of utter desolation,
And I shall be a president, most horrible to see:
To Gods elect, that they may see, the price of abiuration.

Gisbertus. To here my Fathers doleful plaints, it brings preturbation,
Unto my soul, but yonder comes, that good Theologus:
Oh welcome sir, and welcome you good master Eusebius.

Act. fyfth. Scene. 2:
THEO. PHI. EVSE. GIS. PAPHI.
GOd save you good Philologus, how do you by Gods grace,
Philologus. You welcome are, but I (alas) vile wretch, am here evil found

Eusebius. What is the chiefest cause (tell us) of this your dolorus case?

Philologus. Oh would my soul were sunk in hell* so body were in ground
That angry God, now has his will, who sought me to confound.

Theologus. Oh say not so Philologus, for God is gracious,
And to forgive the penitent his mercy is plentious.
Do you not know that all the earth with mercy does abound,
And though the sins of all the world upon one man were laid,
If he one only spark of grace or mercy once had found,
His wickedness could not him harm: wherefore be not dismayde,
Christ's death alone for all your sins, a perfect ransom paid:
God does not covet sinners death, but rather that he may
By living still, bewaill his sins, and so them put away.
Consider Peeter who three times his Master did deny:
Yea, with an oath, and that although Christ did him warning give,
With whom before time he had lived so long familiarly,
Of whom so many benefits of love he did receive,
Yet when once Peeter his own fault, did at the last perceive,
And did bewail his former crime, with ^alt and bitter tears,
Christ by and by did pardon him, the Gospel witness bears.
The thief likewise, and murderer, which never had don good,
But had in mischief spent his days, yea, during all his life,
With lattest breath when he his sins and wickedness with stood,
And with iniquityes of flesh, his spirit was at strife,
Through that one motion of his heart, and power of true belief,
He was received into grace, and all his sins defaced,
Christ saying, soon in Paradise with me thou shall be placed.
The hand of God is not abridged, but still he is of might,
To pardon them that call to him unfeignedly for grace,
Again, it is Gods propertye, to pardon sinners quight:
Pray therefore with thy heart to God, here in this open place,
And from the very root of heart bewail to him thy case:
And I assure thee, God will, on thee his mercy show,
Through Jesus Christ, who is with him our advocate you know.

Philologus. I have no faith, the words you speak my heart does not believe,
I must confess that I for sin, am justly thrown to hell.

Eusebius. His monstrous incredulitye, my very heart does grieve,
Ah dear Philologus, I have known by face and visage well,
A sort of men, which have been vexed, with Devils and spirits fell,
In far worse state then you are yet, brought into desperation.
Yet in the end have been reclaimde, by godly exhortation.
Such are the mercies of the Lord, he will throw down to hell:
And yet call back again from thence, as holy David wrightes.
What? should then let your trust in God? I pray you to us tell,
Since to forgive, and do us go^d, it chiefly him delights.
What would not you, that of your sins, he should you clean acquit?
How can he once deny to you, one thing you do request?
Which has already given to you, his best beloved Christ.
Lift up your heart in hope therefore, awhile be of good cheer,
And make access, unto his seat of grace, by earnest prayer,
And God will surely you relieve with grace, stand not in fear:

Philologus. I do believe, that out from God, proceed these comfortes fair,
So do the Devils, yet of their health, they always do despair.
They are not written unto me, for I would feign attain,
The mercy, and the love of God, but he does me disdain.
How would you have that man to live, which has no mouth to eat
No more can I live in my soul, which have no faith at all:
And where you say, that Peter did, of Christ soon pardon get,
who in the self same sin, with me, from God did greatly fall,
why? I cannot, obtain the same, to you I open shall:
God had respect to him always, and did me firmly leave,
But I alas, am reprobate, God does my soul reprove.
Moreover, I will say with tongue, what so you will require,
My heart I ^eele with blasphemy, and cursing is repleate.

Theologus. Then pray with us, as Christ us taught, we do^ you all desire.

Philologus. To pray with lips, unto your God, you shall me scene entreat,
My spirit, to Satan is in thrall, I can it not thence get:

Eusebius. God shall renew your spirit again, pray only as you can,
And to assist you in the same, we pray each Christian man.

Philologus. O God which dwell in the Heavens, and art our father dear.
Thy holy name throwghout the world be ener sainctified,
The kingdom of thy word and spirit, upon us rule might bear,
Thy will in earth, as by thy faincts in heaven be ratified,
Our daily bread, we thee beseech, O Lord for us provide,
Our sins remit (Lord unto us) as we each man forgive,
Let not tentation us assail, in all evil us relieve. Amen.

Theologus. The Lord be praised, who has at length thy spirit mollified,
These are not tokens unto us of your reprobation,
You morn with tears, and sue for grace, wherefore be certified,
That God in mercy gives care, unto your supplication,
Wherefore despair not thou at all of thy souls preservation,
And say not with a desperate heart, that God against thee is,
He will no doubt, these pains once past, receive you into bliss.

Philologus. No, no, my friends, you only hear and see the outward part,
Which though you think they have don well, it booteth not at all,
My lyppes have spoke the words in deed, but yet I feel my heart,
With cursing is replenished, with rancor, spite, and gall,
Neither do I your Lord and God, in heart my father call,
But rather seek his holy name for to blaspheame and curse,
My state therefore does not amend, but ware still worse and worse,
I am secluded clean from grace, my heart is hardened quight,
Wherefore you do your labor loose, and spend your breath in vain.

Eusebius. Oh say not so Philologus, but let your heart be pight,
Upon the mercyes of the Lord, and I you assertayne,
Remission of your former sins, you shall at last obtain:
God has it said (who cannot lie) at whatsoever time
A sinner shall from heart repent, I will remitt his crime.

Philologus. You cannot say so much to me, as herein I do know,
That by the mercyes of the Lord, all sins are don away,
And unto them that have true faith, abundantly it flow,
But whence do this true faith proceed to us, I do you pray,
It is the only gift of God, from him it comes always,
I would therefore he would vouchsafe, one spark of faith to plant,
within my breast, then of his grace, I know I should not want.
But it as easily may be done, as you may with one spoone,
At once take up the water clean, which in the seas abide:
And at one draught, then drink it up, this shall ye do as soon,
As to my breast of true belief, one sparkle shall betide:
Tush, you which are in prosperous state, and my pains have not tried
Do think it but an easy thing, a sinner to repent
Him of his sins, and by true faith, damnation to prevent.
The healthful need not Phisicks art, and ye which are all hail,
Can give good counsel to the sick, their sickness to eschew:
But here alas, confusion, and hell, does me assail,
And that all grace, from me is reft, I find it to be true.
My heart is steel, so that no faith, can from the same ensue.
I can conceive no hope at all, of pardon or of grace,
But out alas, Confusion is always before my face.
And certainly, even at his time, I do most plainly see,
The devils to be about me round, which make great preparation,
And keep a stir, here in this place, which only is for me.
Neither do I conceive, these things, by vain imagination,
But even as truly, as mine eyes, behold your shape and fashion.
Wherefore, desired Death dispatch, my body bring to rest,
Though that my soul, in furious flames of fire, be suppressed.

Theologus. Your mind corrupted does present, to you, this fal^e illusion,
But turn awhile, unto the spirit of truth, in your distress,
And it shall cast out from your eyes, all horror and confusion:
And of this your affliction, it will you soon redress.

Eusebius. We have good hope Philologus, of your salvation doubtless.

Philologus. What your hope is concerning me, I utterly contempne,
My Conscience, which for thousands stand, as guilty me condemn.

Eusebius. When did this horror first you take, what think you is the cause?

Philologus. Even shortly, after I did make, mine open abiuration,
For that I did prefer my goods, before Gods holy laws.
Therefore in wrath he did me send, this horrible veration,
And has me wounded in the soul, with grievous tribulation:
That I may be a president, in whom all men may view,
Those torments, which to them, that will forsake the Lord, are due.

Theologus. Yet let me bouldly ask one thing of you, without offense,
What was your former faith in Christ, which you before did hold?
For it is said of holy Paul, in these same words in sense:
It cannot be that utterly, in faith he should be cold,
Who so he be, which perfectly, true faith in heart once hold:
Wherefore rehearce in short discourse, the sum of your belief,
In these points chiefly, which for health of soul, are thought most chief.

Philologus. I did believe in heart, that Christ was 'that true sacrifice.
Which did appease the fathers wrath, and that by him alone
We were made just and sanctified: I did believe likewise,
That without him, heaven to attain, sufficient means were none.
But to reknowledge this again, alas, all grace was gone:
I never loved him again, with right and sincere heart,
Neither was thankful for the same, as was each goodmans part.
But rather took the faith of Christ, for liberty to sin,
And did abuse his graces great, to further carnal lust,
what wickedness I did commit, I cared not a pin:
For that, that Christ discharged had any ransom, I did trust:
wherefore the Lord does now correct, the same with torments just.
My sons, my sons, I speak to you, my counsel ponder well,
And practice that in deeds, which I in words shall to you tell.
I speak not this, that I would ought, the Gospel derogate,
which is most true in every part, I must it needs confess,
But this I say, that of vain faith alone, you should not prate:
But also by your holy life, you should your faith express,
Believe me syres, for by good proof, these things I do express:
Peruse the wrighting of S. James, and first of Peter's too,
which all Gods people, holiness of life exhort unto.
By sundry reasons, as for first, because we strangers are,
Again, sin from the flesh proceed, but we are of the spirit,
The third, because the flesh always, against the spirit do war,
The fourth, yt we may stop the mouths of such as would backbight,
The fifth, that other by our lives, to God reduce we might:
Again, they sing a pleasant song, which* sing in deed and word,
But where evil life ensue good words, there is a foul discord:
But I alas, most wretched wight, whereas I did presume,
That I had got a perfect faith, did holy life disdain:
And though I did to other preach, good life I did consume:
My life in wickedness and sin, in sport and pleasures vain,
No, neither did I once contend, from them flesh to refrain,
Behold therefore, the judgments just, of God does me annoy,
Not for amendment of my life, but me for to destroy.

Eusebius. We do not altogether like of this your exhortation,
whereas you warn us not to trust, so much unto our faith,
But that good works we should prepare, unto our preservation,
There are two kinds of righteousness, as Paul to Romans faith:
The one depends of good works, the other hangs of faith:
The former which the world allows, good counts it least of twain,
As by good proof, it shall to you, in words be proved plain.
For Socrates and Cato both, did purchase great renown,
And Aristides surnamed Just, this righteousness fulfilled,
Wherefore he was as iustest man, erpelde his native town,
Yet are their souls with Infydels, in hell for ever spilled,
Because they sought not righteousness, that way that God the^ willed
The other righteousness coms from faith, which God regards alone,
And makes us seem immaculate, before his heavenly throne.
Wherefore, there is no cause you should, send us to outward act,
As to the ancor or refuge, of our preservation.

Theologus. The meaning of Philologus, is not here so exact,
As do his words make it to seem, by your allegation,
He does not mean between good works, and faith to make relation
As though works were equiuolent, salvation to attain.
As is true faith, but what he meant, I will set down more plain,
He did exhort the yongmen here, by him for to beware,
Least as he did, so they abuse, Gods gospel pure,
And without good advice, vsurp of faith the gift so rare:
Whereby they think, what so they do, the^ selves from torments free,
And by this proud presumption, Gods anger should procure:
And where they boast and vaunt, the^ selves, good faithful men to be,
Yet in their lives, they do deny their faith in each degree:
Wherefore he says, as Peter said, see that you do make known,
Your own election by your works: again, S. James does say,
Show me thy faith, and by my works, my faith shall thee be shown.
And whereupon his own offense, he does to them bewray,
Whereas he did vainegloryously, upon a dead faith stay:
Which for the inward righteousness, he always did suspect,
And hereupon all godlynes of life, he did neglect.

Philologus. That was the meaning of my words, how ever I them spoke,
The truth (alas) vile wretch, my soul and Conscience too true feel

Theologus. What? do you not Philologus, with us no comfort take,
When all these things, so godlyly, to you I do reveal,
Especially, since that your self, in them are seen so well:
Some hope unto us of your health, and safety yet is left,
we do not think that all Gods grace, from you is wholly reft.

Philologus. Alas, what comfort can betide, unto a damned wretch?
what so I here, see, feel, taste, speak, is turned all to woe.

Eusebius. Ah dear Philologus, think not, yt ought can Gods grace outreache,
Consider David which did sin in lust, and murder too:
Yet was he pardoned of his sins, and so shall thou also.
Phil. King David always, was elect, but I am reprobate,
And therefore I can find small ease, by waighing his estate.
He also prayed unto God, which I shall never do,
His prayer was that God would not, his spirit take away:
But it is gone from me long since, and shall be given no more.
But what became of Cayne, of Came, of Saul, I do you pray?
Of Judas, and Barehu, these must my Conscience slay.
Of Iulyan Apostata, with other of that crew,
The same torments must I abide, which these men did ensue:

Theologus. Alas my friend, take in good part, the chastment of ye Lord
Who does correct you in this world, that in the life to come,
He might you save, for of the like, the Scripture tears re^

Philologus. That is not Gods intent with me though it be so with some,
who after bodies punishment, have into favor come:
But I (alas) in spirit and soul, these greenous torments bear,
God has condemded my Conscience, to perpetual grief and fear.
I would most gladly choose to live, a thousand, thousand year.
In all the torments and the grief that damned souls sustain,
So that at length I might have ease, it would me greatly cheer.
But I alas, shall in this life, in torments still remain,
while Gods just anger, upon me, shall be revealed plain:
And I example made to all, of Gods just indionation,
Oh that my body were at rest, and soul in condemnation.

Eusebius. I pray you answer me herein, where you by deep despair,
Say, you are worse here in this life, then if you were in hell,
And for because to have death come, you always make your prayer,
As though your foul and body both in torments great did dwell:
If that a man should give to you a sword, I pray you tell,
would you destroy your self there with? as do the desperate,
which hang or kill, or into floods, themselves precipitate.

Philologus. Give me a sword, then shall you know, what is in mine intent.

Eusebius. Not so my friend, I only ask, what herein were your will?

Philologus. I cannot, neither will I tell, whereto I would be bent.

Theologus. These words do nothing edifye, but rather fancies fill,
which we would gladly if we could, endeavor for to kill.
wherefore, I once again request, together let us pray:
And so we will leave you to God, and send you hen^e away.

Philologus. I cannot pray, my spirit is dead, no faith in me remain

Theologus. Do as you can, no more then might, we can ask at your hand.

Philologus. My prayers turned is to sin, for God does it disdain,

Eusebius. It is the fals^hood of the spirit, which do your health withstand,
That teach you this, wherefore in time, reject his filthy band.

Theologus. Come kneel by me, and let us pray, the Lord of Heaven unto:

Philologus. With as good will as did the Devil, out of the deaffe man go.
O God which dwell in the heavens. etc.
Tush sirs, you do your labors loose, see where Belzabub does come,
And does inuit me to a feast, you therefore speak in vain,
^ea if you ask ought more of me* in answer I will be dumb,
I will not wast my ^ong for naught, as soon shall one small grain
Of Musterdseede, fill all the world, as I true faith attain.

Theologus. We will no longer stay you now, but let you hence depart.

Eusebius. Yet will we pray continually, that God would you conuart.

Theologus. Gisbertus and Paphinitius, conduct him to his pla^*
But see he have good company, let him not be alone:

Ambo. We shall so do, God us assist, with his most holy grace.

Gisbertus. Come Father do you not think good, that we from hence begone?

Philologus. Let go my hands at liberty, assistaunce I crave none:
Oh that I had a sword a while, I should soon eased be.

Ambo. Alas dear father, what do you? Eusebius. His will we may now see

Theologus. Exeunt Phi. Gis. Paph. O glorious God, how wonderful, those
judgments are of thine
Thou do behold the secret heart, naught does thy eyes beguile,
Oh what occasion is us given, to fear thy might divine,
And from our ha^es to hate and loathe, iniquities so vile,
Least for the saine, thou in thy wrath, do grace from us exile.
The outward man does thee not please, nor yet, the mind alone,
But thou requirest both of us, or else regardest none.

Eusebius. Here may the worldlinges have a glass, their states for to behold,
And learn in time, for to escape, the judgments of the Lord,
Whilste they by flattering of them selves, of faith both dead and cold
Do sell their souls to wickedness, of all good men abhorde:
But godlynes does not depend, in knowing of the word:
But in fullfilling of the same, as in this man we see,
Who though he did to others preach, his life did not agree.

Theologus. Again Philologus witnesses, which is the truth of Christ,
For that consenting to the Pope, he did the Lord abture,
Whereby he teacht the wavering faith, on which side to persist:
And those which have the truth of God, that still they may endure,
The Tyraunts, which delight in blood, he likewise does assure,
In whose affairs, they spend their time: but let us home ward go.

Eusebius. I am content, that after meat, we may resort him to.
Exiunt. Theo. and Euse.
Act six.
Seane last.
NVNTIVS. OH joyful news, which I report, and bring into your ears,
Philologus, that would have hangde himself with coard,
-- Is now converted unto God, with many bitter tears,
By godly council he was won, all praise be to the Lord,
His errors all, he did renounce, his blasphemies he abhorde:
And being converted, left his life, exhorting foe and friend,
That do profess the faith of Christ, to be constant to the end,
Full thyrtie weeks, in woeful wise, afflicted he had been,
All which long time, he took no food, but forced against his will,
Even with a spoone to pour some broth, his teeth between,
And though they sought by force, this wise to feed him still,
He always strove with all his might, the same on ground to spill,
So that no sustenaunce he receiu'de, ne sleep could he attain,
And now the Lord, in mercy great has easde him of his pain.

FINIS.

