decorative border

A godly will and confession of the Christian faith, made by Rychard Brasier,
late Auditour to the kings maiesti in Ireland, which he did most constantly
cleave unto during the time that he lived, worthy to be read of all Christians.

To the Christian Reader.
HEre have thou (gentle reder) ye true copy of the last will and testament of
Richard Brasier, late Auditour for the kings majesty in Ireland, wherein is
briefly, but yet clearly declared the faith in Christ, which the said Richard
did profess in his life time, and constantly cleave unto in the time of his
departing out of this life. Which his last will and confession of the Christian
faith, the said Rychard wylled to be openly declared in a Sermon made at his
funeral in ye church of S. Patrike in Diuelyn, where he lies buried, to the
intent that the mouths of such slaunderers as do commonly imagine the
reca^tacion of faithful Christians at the time of their departing out of this
world, might be stopped. And because ye report of this confession of faith is
not yet believed of many superstitious me^, yt would al Christian me^ should in
their last hour recant their assured hope of salvation through Christ only
without any our deseruinges: it has been thought good to such as the said
Richard put in trust to se his will fulfilled, to cause this (the very true copy
hereof) to be imprinted, yt al me^ might se and judge. Beseching the to read
and remember what Christian faith Richard Brasiar stood unto in the end, and
what every true member of Christ must confess and stand unto. The merciful
goodness of ye lord preserve the to the end, that you may be salfe. So be it.

In the name of God. Amen
I Richard Brasyer the Kings majesty's Auditour, of his gracees Realm of
Ireland, being of a hole and perfect memory, do make my testament and last
will, the fyfth day of June, the.iiii. year of the raygne of our sovereign Lord
king Edward the syxte, by the grace of God king of England, France and
Ireland, defendour of the faith and of the church of England and also of
Irela^de in earth the supreme head, in manner and form as hereafter follows.

First and before al other things, I commyt me unto God the eternal Father,
and to his excedyng great mercy, trusting with out any dour or mistrust, that
by the merits of his most dear and best beloved son, that most innocent and
immaculate lamb, that pure and undefiled lamb, which takes a way the sins
of the world, our only savior, Redemer, Mediator, and Iustyfyer, Jesus
Christ, for whose sake God the father is pacifyed, satisfied and set at one
with man, and by virtue of his most bitter, but yet his most precious death
and passion, and his glorious resurreccion, I have and shall have free remission
and forgyuenes of my sins, and that in the last day I shall rise again both
body and soul according as it is written in Job the.xix. c^^p. I believe that
mi redemer lives, and that in the last day I ^^al rise out of the earth, and
in my flesh shall se my Savior Jesus Christ. And I bele^e that I shall se the
almyghtye goodness and majesty of God, in the land of the living, and that I
shall be a Citizen in the Celestial and heavenly Jerusalem, in the company of
many thousands of Angels, in joy inexplycable, and this my hope is laid up in
the bosom of my heart by faith. Although I confess and knowledge that I have
been and am a miserable and wretched sinner, which have not kept any of the
commandments of God, but have resysted his will many ways. An evil tree am I
that have brought forth no good fruit, for by nature I am the child of wrath
in all that may be named, be it secret or open, do I knowledge my self
gyltye, having hereof repentance and am sorye for it, even from the very
bottom of my heart, besechyng the almighty Lord God heavenly father, that it
will please him not to suffer me to stycke in the depth of my sins, neither
impute the^ unto me, but graciously to deliver me from them through Jesus
Christ his son and our Lord. Also, forasmuch as it has pleased God of his
unmeasurable bounty and infinite great mercy, to call me unto the knowledge of
the veritye and truth of his most holy word and gospel, eue^ out of the
bothomlesse pyt of hell, wherinto I had cast my self by my own iniquity, and
since that time that I have known that infallyble truth and verity, I have
utterly refused and forsaken the most detestable and abominable vices of
idolatry, as offering to idols and going of pilgrimages and hearing of
pestiferous popysh masses, supersticion and ipocrisy, with all the tradicions
and execrable cerymonyes invented by bishops of Rome and their wicked
adherentes, wherewith both I and all the hole world besides has been blinded
and seduced, and yet for the more part are, I pray God amend the same at his
good pleasure, and have wholly given over my self to the said truth of Gods
most holy word, and have mayntayned the same to the best of my power,
although the same was but very small, even so do I now trust by the abundaunte
grace of God, to end my life in the same. And to the intent that after my
departure out of this life, the wicked worldlynges and papists which has a
world of wyckednes in their tongues, shall not detracte, backbite and slander
me, saying: that I have forsaken those opinions, faith, trust and belie^e, in
the mercyes and promyses of God, through his word, neither touching my belefe
nor my opinion of the two reverend and holy mysteries, sacraments, signs,
tokens or sealed obligacions and commemoracions, which I have mayntayned now in
my life according to Gods word, that is to say of Baptyme and of the holy
Supper of the word, I will bryefely declare my opinion in the same, hereafter
followyng.

First as touching my faith and belefe. I believe in God the Father almighty,
maker of heaven and earth. And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which
was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the vyrgyn Mary. Suffered under
Ponce Pylate, crucified, dead, and buried, descended into hell, and rose again
the third day from the dead, ascended unto heaven, and sytteth on the right
hand of God the Father almighty, and from thence shall come again to judge the
quycke and the dead. I believe in the holy Ghost, and that there is an holy
universal Catholyke church, which is the congregation and fellowship of
saints, remission and forgyuenes of syns. The resurreccion of the flesh, and
everlasting life.

At the first I believe in one God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
which is the Lord of heaven and earth, and Creatoure of all creatures, yea,
he is father of us all, which has elected us to be his children through Jesus
Christ, and therefore shall we him alonly worship, and beside him none other
gods. Also we shall fear him as an almyghtye God, and as a mercyful father we
shall love him with all our hearts, with all our soul, with al our power, and
with all our strength and mind, and upon him must stand al our hope, for he
is the father of light, of whom al mankind lives, and has ever lasting
salvation, and al other perfect gifts pertaynyng either to the body or to ye
soul, have we from him through Jesus Christ, his son and our Lord.
Furthermore, I believe in Jesus Christ the son of the living God, which is the
very bryghtnes of his fathers glory, and the very Image of his substance, yea,
he is the only begotten son of the father, come forth out of the mouth of
the most highest God, first born before al creatures. Through whom al things are
created, and in who^ we have redemption, namely remission of sins, through
his blood, with the which he has washed and cleansed us al from sin, and
has also reconcyled us again to his most holy and glorious father, that were
before enemies to God. For after the time that God had made man after his own
image and similitude, he set him into Paradyse, that he should eat of all the fruits of the garden of pleasure, exceptyng him only the tree of knowledge
of good and evil, but man disobeyed the Lord his God, and transgressed his
commandment Through the which disobedyence, and transgression of the godly
commandment, death and curse came over al mankind. And when there was no
help nor comfort for man, whereby he might have been redeemed or delivered out
of satan's power, the^ had God the mercyful father pyty on mankind, and
promised them a sede, namely Jesus Christ his only begotten son, the which
should tread upon the head of the Serpent, and over come the devil, and restore
them to life again. And likewise as God is rightuous in all his ways and
holy in all his works, and true in all his words, so has he kept al his
promises truly. And as the time of his promise was fulfilled, god let his word
descend into the womb of the virgin Mary, and by the workyng of the holy Ghost
became flesh, as Ihon in his first chapter of his Gospel witnesses saying:
The word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw his glory, as the
glory of the only begotten son of the father, full of grace and veritye.
Also this only begotten son of God by the power of the holy Ghost became man,
and is become like unto us in all things, (sin only except) he has suffered
death for our sakes, and has taken away Satan's power, and restored life in
again, yea, he is made unto us wisdom and ryghtuousnes, satisfaccion and
redempcio^. And likewise as he dyed for our syns, and went down into hell, so
is he risen again the third day from death through the power of his father,
for our ryghtuousnes, iustificacion and salvation. And as he often times showed
him self after his resurreccion unto his disciples, so ascended he unto heaven
in their presence, and sytteth at the right hand of the almighty Father, above
al rule might, and dominion, and above all that may be named, not only in this
world, but also in the world to come, and has subdued al things under his
fete, In summa he is a Lord above al Lords, and a king above al kings, yea, he
is an almyghtye God with his father. And nevertheless he is also our only
advocate and mediator, our only hye priest, the sacrifice that he has done
once for all for our sins, abides of valor for evermore.

Furthermore likewise as Christ our Lord is ascended up into heaven, and
there sytteth upon the right hand of God his father, even so shall he come
again from heaven with the dominion of his father, and with thousands of
Angels for to give every man reward after his works, yea, even to judge the
quycke and the dead. I believe also in the holy Ghost, God with the father and
the son, which holy Ghost is a teacher of all Christen people, and he does
cloth and garnyshe them with his gifts, and gives every one the measure of
faith after his own holy will, and keeps them immovable in one faith, for he
is a ruler of the Christian congregation. He is also the anointme^t where with
all the Christian are anointed, and of that behalf are called the anointed of
the Lord. So is this holy Ghost given unto the Christian as an earnest of
their inheritance, to the redemption, and they again be his own to the
praise of his glory, to be brief, it is impossible without this holy holy
Ghost to know God ryghtly, or with all the hole heart to believe upon him, or to
call upon him as a father, and therefore does god pour this his holy spirit
upon his children, whereby they may ryghtly know him, and ryghtly believe in
him, and as a right father call upon him. This is my belief to the father,
the son: and the holy Ghost, which three persons I knoledge to be God, whose
seat is heaven, and the earth is a bench for his feet, yea the which is an
everlasting an almighty, a ryghtuous and a most mercyful God, the which alone
will be worshipped and served, for he alone can healpe us, which he does for his
names sake, and not for our righteousness sake.

Furthermore as I have said, that al they that do believe, ar joined together
and through the holy ghost knit in unity, so is there a Christian church the
which is builded of living stones, which church is the house of God, and the
house of God is the congregation of God, and the congregation of God, is the
body of Christ, and seeing that al right christians are one body in the which
they all through one spirit are baptized, so must there be a communion of
Saints, namely that all saints or true beleuers, are also joined together in
unity as the members of one body. And in this communion of Saints is remissyon
of syns, and that without it, is no sin forgiven, nor any hope of salvation,
Yea, like as it is impossible that a member can live that is not in the body,
so is it impossible that any man may live in his soul and can be released out
of death by remyssion of sin, the which is not a member of the body of
Christ, for Christ has reconcyled us al unto God his father in one body, and
therefore must al they stand in varience that are no members of this body, of
the which Christ is the head to the which he gives salvation. There shall be
also a general resurrection of the flesh, namely that all they that are dead
shall rise a gain, some to ever lastyng life, and some to everlasting
dampnacion, and they that shall live and remain upon the earth, until the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, they shall be changed in the twynklyng of an
eye at the time of the last trumpet. The trumpet says Paul shall blow, and the
dead shall rise incorruptible, and we shall be changed, for this corruptyble
body must put on vncorrupcion, and this mortal body must put on immortality.
At the last, is there also an everlasting life, which al they shall receive
that believe on Jesus Christ and stedfastlye abide in good works, sekyng
praise, honor, and immortality in the life to come. This is the su^me of my
faith and belefe, through the which faith all the ryghtuous live, and without
the which belief, no man may please God. Therefore the everlasting God be
blessed that out of his unmeasurable mercy and grace has given me this
faith through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now follows my faith and opinion of the sacramental token of baptism.

Baptysme is a sacramental token, the which is given us of Christ, and is at
the first an entryng into the Christian congregation, as Paul says: we are
baptized in one spirit, to be one body i. Cor. xii.

Secondarely, Baptysme is a fountain of regeneracio^, as Paul witnesses. Tit.
iii. saying that Christ has saved us by the fou^teine of the new birth and
renewing of the holy ghost, not that the water does save us, for nothing can
save us but only God. Esa xliii. but seeing that our Lord Jesus Christ, has
spoken, that he that believes and is baptized shall be saved. Marc. xvi. And
gods word is verity and truth. Ihon. xvii. And his promyses may not fail,
Psalm. cxlvii. Therefore must baptyme needs bring salvation, unto them that in
believe are baptized, not for the works sake, but for gods word and promyses
Deu. viii.

Thirdly baptime is a covenant of a good conscience to God, first of Pete. iii.
namely that he that in believe is baptized byndeth him self, or makes a
covenant with god, that from thenceforth he will live after his will. And on
this couenauntes behalf, which must be done out of a clean faithful
heart, has the baptyme power, and not for the water sake, wherewith the
filthiness of the flesh is washed away, but without it be that the hearts of
them that are baptized be cleansed. Acts. xv. Through gods word. Ihon. xv.
The water can not cleanse them, wherwyth it is also proved that baptysme
without faith may in no wise be allowed. Foorthelye baptysme sygnyfyeth an
offering of the flesh, and a resurreccion into a new life, as we have to the
Romans. vi. Know ye not says Saint Paul, that all we which are baptized
in the name of Jesus Christ, are baptized to die with him, therefore are we
buried with him by baptysme for to dye, that likewise as Christ was raised up
from death to life, by ye glory of the father, eue^ so we should walk in a new
life. This is now shortly expressed what baptism is and what it signifies.
But for as much as all the former scriptures are spoken of them only that be of
years of discression before they receive the faith of Christ, it is not
altering of the institucion and word of Christ, to baptize the innocents and in
fa^tes. For as in circumcision of the old law, ye faith of ye parents sufficed
to make the child one of the chosen people of God, not wythstanding, that the
circumcision of the flesh, is not circumcision, as Paul writes to the To. ii.
but the circumcision of the heart, even so the baptism of our infants not
withstandinge that the washing of the body in water is not baptysme, but the
washing of the soul in the blood of Christ by faith, yet shall the faith
of the parents be accepted of God. And their children made members of the
church of Christ thereby. And also I believe that god does move the hearts of
the infantes that be his with the holy ghost, If any require witnesses of the
scripture, for this assercyon that children or infantes be made members of the
church of Christ by the faith of their parents, Let him read and
consider well the story of Sampson and Samuel, with other like stories of the
old testament, wherein may easily be perceived how God did then accept the
children for the parents faith. Let him consider also the stories of the
Gospel, wherein appears how Christ would not have the children kept from him,
when their parents brought the^ to him that he might lay his hand upon them,
and how certain children were cured and healed of diseases even for the faith
that was found in their parents. And last of al, it is euydent both in the
Acts of the Apostles, and in the Epystles of certain of them, that when
certain men received the Gospel, both they and their whole household were
baptized. Where it is not to be thought that the infantes were rejected because
they could not understand the Apostles preaching. For S. Paul writing to the
Corinthians, said.i. Corin. vii. As concerning the children begotten between an
Heathen man, and a faithful woman, or between a Heathenish woman, and a
faithful man, the children are clean, by reason that one of his parents is
faithful And what other thing should he mean thereby, but that God accepts
those children for members of his church, who^ the faithful parents do
willingly bring to the fountain of regeneracion thereto receive the sign of the
everlasting covenant between God and us. This is with the shortest my faith
and opinion of baptysme.

Now follows likewise my faith and opinion of the supper of the Lord,

The supper of the Lord is a memoryall token of the sufferinge and death of
Jesus Christ and is instituted of Christ for this cause that the faithful
congregacyon of Jesus Christ should come together, for to show the death of
Jesus Christ and his benefytes, lauddynge and thanking him, magnyfyinge his
holy name, and then also eat of this bread, and drink of this wine, to a
remembrance that Christ has given his body and shed his blood for us. Math.
xxvi. And because that it is a comen use, that a token of remembrance, has
the name of the thing that is remembered by it. Therefore has Christ called
the bread his body and the wine his blood: not that his substance is in the
bread and wine, but that we should remember him thereby. Likewise as the Easter
lamb was called the passing by, and yet was it not in it self the very
passing by, saying now that the Easter lamb has the name of the thing that
the Israelytes remembered by it, and whereby they might euerlastinglye keep in
remembrance the benefits of God, right convenient is it yt Christ has called
the bread his body and the wine his blood, because that we should remember
thereby his death and passion, yea the only sacrifice of his body which he has
suffered to be broken and his blood to be shed for us. Nevertheless how be it
that ye material body of Christ is not in the bread, nor his blood in the
wine, yet nevertheless is the supper of ye Lord a partaking (but spiritually) of
the body and blood of Christ as Paul says. Is not the cup of
thankesgeuing wherewith we give thanks a partakynge of the blood of Christ?
And the bread yt we break is it not the partaking of the bodi of Christ? These
words of Paul do witness clearly that the faithful eat the body of Christ
spiritually under the bread and wine. Yea likewise as a Bryde receives her
husband with a ringe, even so receive the faithful Christ to be their own and
everlasting salvation, but that some men will have that the bodily presence
should be in the bread, is a great miss understanding of the godly
word, yea it is an Antichrists doctrine, which is contrary both to our faith
and to al hole scripture, for I believe and holy scripture bears witness, that
Christ after his resurreccion is ascended up into heaven, and sits upon the
right hand of his almighty father Romans viii. And bydeth there as concerning
his bodily presence, but spiritually he has promised to abide with us to the
end of the world in his word. Math. xxviii. And saying that now Christ as
concerning his bodily presence abides at the righthand of God his father. Heb.
x. so may not the body of Christ be in the bread. And again it is against al
truth, yt Christ at one time has been in many or diverse places, as touching
his body. Furthermore we do daily se ye dredeful idolatry is sprung out of the
carnal understanding of these words of Christ. This is my body, and yet daily
springs: to the great and abominable slander of the honor of god, so ye me^
worship a piece of bread for their god, yea and hold that to be their maker.
And ye papists lock him in gold and silver, not remembering what Paul and
Stephen witness saying: The most highest will not dwell in temples made with man's
hands. Act. vii. and.xvii: O blind me^ that are so be witched of ye whore that
ye can not nor will not believe ye manifest truth. O blindness and great
presumptuousnes of the papists, that will take upon the^ to teach Jesus Christ
out of heaven into a piece of bread, which is consumable, as we clearly se by
experience, and that it should be worshipped for God, which is everlasting and
unchangeable. Now what remedy for I cannot help it, therefore must I do as the
Lord Jesus Christ spoke unto his Apostels of ye Phariseis saying: Let the^ go
for they are blind, and leaders of the blind, when one blind leads an other
so fall they both into the ditche, Mat. xv. but the lord must be thanked, that
out of his unmeasurable grace has opened our eyes, that we can se and know,
wherefore we shall take the bread and the wine in the supper, namely for a
memorial and token of the suffering and death of Jesus Christ, yea for the body
and blood of Christ, but that for the hye names sake, and not of the material
things behalf, as is above rehearsed of the Easter Lamb.

Furthermore the supper of the Lord is also a ioining together of the Christen
congregation in love. And also the congregation that will hold this supper must
be well appointed and joined together in brotherlye love, yea they must stand in
one spirit and soul. Ph. i. Having a burning love, for Paul says: we many
are one bred, and one body, in as much as we are partakers of one bread, likewise
as ye members of one body are not in strife one against another but in a
charitable unity serui^g one a another i. Cor. xii. So may there no strife nor
debate be found in the co^gregacio^ of god. i. Cor. i. So that any man should
only care and take thought for him self, and not care nor look upon his
brothers lack, but the one must help and care for the other in all things
necessary where he can or may. Gal. vi And no man must seek yt, that is his, but
every one the other wealth. Phi. ii. And likewise as of the grains of corn,
cannot be baken bread, but through fire, eue^ so can not the congregation be a
right spiritual lofe whereof Paul speaks but through burning love and charity,
and so ought the christian congregation to be one lofe. i. Co. x. for likewise
as many grains are sown to ye intent that bread should be baked of it, so
sows ye great father of household his precious wheat into the aker or ground
of this world, to the intent that they al should become one lofe, and break the
supper of the lord rightly after ye words of Paul: We many are al one bread and
one body in as much as we are partakers of one bread i. Cor. x. And where so
ever the congregation is not so appointed, and the bread broken in this manner,
there is the bread eaten, and the wine dronken to their dampnacion from the
which god the merciful father will defend and keep al dilligent lovers of the
everlasting truth through his inexpressible goodness and mercy. Thus have I
briefly expressed and set forth mi faith and believe, in god the father, and god
the son, and god the holy ghost iii, distinct persons and one in the godhead
and coequall in substance, and also my faith and believe agreing with the true
word of god, of the sacraments or rather significacio^s of baptism and the holy
supper of our Lord.

Furthermore as touching the burying of my bodi, which is nothing but a piece
of vile flesh, do^g, earth, dust ashes, it avails me not where it be buried,
for as much as I know, and do faithfully believe yt according to ye saying of
saint Paul. i. Tess iiii. when the Lord him self shall come down from heaven,
with a shoute and voice of the archau^gel with the trumpe of god. And those
that sleep in Jesus Christ, shall arise first before those which remain the^
upon the earth, and shall be caught up also with them in the clouds, to mete the
Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be with the Lord, wherefore I am comforted
and satisfied with these words. And therefore I remit and refer the burying of
my body, unto ye discression of Jane my wife who is a christian woman, and who^
I only make my executrix.

And as touching the distribucion of my te^peral goods, which are but small,
although they are more a thousand times then I was worthy of, for that I
received the same at ye hands of god, honor praise and thanks be to him for
it, and has commanded me, as a faithful and wise steward, to bestow the same
according to his will. I have partly in my life time (albeit I might have done
much more) dystributed the same: And that, that is remaining at this present,
as well moveable as immovable, I give them as well hear in Ireland as England
holy unto Jane my wife. And also I give unto her my leace of the personage
Tymolynge beg, my lease of my house that I now dwell in, my lease of the
personage of Wyckelowe, my Custodia of much Cabragh and Pylletteston of ye
which I trust the lord deputy of Ireland that shall be next and the counsel of
ye same will grant unto her, a further leace for.xxi. years. Also I give and
bequeath unto her al such debtes, and other sommes of monye as are due unto me,
as well at the kings majesty's hands or at any other persons. Also I give
unto her such somes of money or land as shall please the kings majesty to
give me for my recompense of my service done hear to pay my debtes withal.
In witness of all the premises I the said Richard Brasier have subscrybed
this my last will the day and year above written. This my Testamente is of
George my servants hand and mine.

Per me. Richard Brasier.

Imprinted at London by Ihon Day: dwelling over Aldersgate beneth S. Martins.


