The taking of the Royal Galley of Naunts in Britain, from the Spaniards and
Leaguers, with the releasement of 153. Galley slaves, that were in her: by John
Bilbrough, Prentice of London, in November last.



Jmprinted at London for Richard Oliffe, and are to be sold at his shop, in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crane.

1591.

The taking of the Royal Galley of Naunts in Britain, from the Spaniards and
Leaguers, with the releasement of 153.
Galley slaves, that were in her: by John Bilbrough, Prentice of London. 1590.
ABout a seven years since, I John Bilbrough the son of Richard Bilbrough,
Citizen and Merchant Tailor of London, took my adventure to the seas, where in
short space afterward I was betrayed into the enemies hands by the treachery
of a renegat English, not worthy the name of my Countreyman; which villainy of
his extended not to me alone, but to seaue^ other of my companions; amongst
whom, my self and a Skot, remaining alive, were carried captives to the town
of New-hauen in Normandy: where being condemned into the Galleyes in the
month of September, 1584. and there having remained the space of six years,
enduring exceeding misery, as hunger, cold, stripes, with many violent
torments; bereft of all hope for ever to behold my parents, friends, or native
country again; by reason that having four times in my captivity attempted
the breaking of my chains, I was four times crossed with contrary fortune, my
purpose discovered, and being taken, my sorrowful wretchedness aggrauated.

Thus increasing cares with days, every day being sharper than the sharpest
sting of death; it chanced that Duke Mercury the governor of Naunts in
Britain caused the Galley Royal of that City to be rigged and victualled to
the seas, with commission to take all those that held with the League, as well
English. Scots, Flemmings as their own nation on the Kings part. Thus floating
on the seas, and rowing on the seas, now hither, now thither, expecting some
prize worthy the attempting, it chanced that the first day of October 1590.
being at anchor in the Isle of Use attending some ships passing either from
Rochel, Burwage, or Bordeaux, we discovered early in the morning a great hulke
of Flanders, which took her course for the Bay of Bornefe, on the coast of
Poytours, not far from the river of Naunts, whereupon rowing to the windward of
the said hulk, we did bear after her: against whom our Gunner made diverse
shootes, but could never hit her.

Then I ashamed at the untowardness of the said Gunner, said openly, he was
unworthy of his office, and that I durst lay my life to hit her the first
shot, which the Captain hearing, demanded if I would undertake to shoot at
her, I answered him, that albeit I was a stranger, and had long continued in
miserable captivity, yet if he would accept of my service, I would perform
the best that in me lay. The Captain upon my answer, commanded my chains to
be taken off, promising if I did hit her, to give me my liberty.

Being in hope of freedom from this wretched servitude, I took the Gonners
charge in hand, and did my endenour so well (through Gods assistance) that of
eleven shots, which I did make at her, I hit her with nine, but the hulke by
the greatness of the wind, escaped from out our danger.

The next day the Captain called me unto him, saying, if I would willingly
serve as a Gunner, for the space of one whole year in the Galley, I should,
upon his credit, have liberty: which (seeing no remedy) I condiscended unto.

Being thus at liberty, I was by the Captain urged often to go to Mass, of
whom I requested pradon; protesting that if I might be persuaded by
sufficient reason, and proof from the Word of GOD, that the Romish religion
were the true doctrine of Christ, I would gladly embrace it: in the mean time
(seeing I was yet utterly of another opinion) I besought him to have patience,
for that a settled Religion, could not so slightlie be removed; which he in
hope of my conversion (as he termed it) in the end granted.

Within three days after, we met three English ships to the sea-boord of
Bel-yle, having in our company a Man of War, so we bare both of us after
these three ships, where I was commanded to make a shot, but perceiving, that I
went unwillingly to work, they came about me with their swords drawn,
threatening if I would not shoot, they would kill me presently; so I shot at
them, but never hit them, and the English ships discharged so courageously at
us, that they compelled us to recoyle.

After that time, abhorring to be made the butcher of my native countrymen, I
attempted all possible means of escape, either to the Kings side, or into
England, but fearing to be taken, I discovered my intent to a Captine, being
before his thraldom a Captain, called Le pine, desiring him to lend me his
boy for my conduct to the Castle of Blyn, seven leagues distant from Naunts:
but Le Pyne answered, that his father would shortly bring his ransom, and
then promised to convey me with him: otherwise (says he) if you should
escape by the conduction of my boy, my mizerie should be increased, and my
ransom doubled; with whose persuasions, for that time satisfied, I waited
fitter opportunity.

Within four days after, there arrived at the River of Naunts two and thirty
ships, and four Gallyasses, which brought three thousand and five hundred
Spaniards unto the Duke of Mercury; amongst whom many (being sick) were sent
up to Naunts to be relieved, we also thinking to have wintered there with the
Galley: but there came presently commandment she should be rigged, to carry
munition and money to the army. So departing from Naunts, we came to the
harbor of Morbien, thinking to have found the army, but we understood the
whole fleet were returned to Spain, four Fly-boates, and two Gallyasses
only excepted, which were gone to Blewet, to take the town of Hensbon.

Our Captain hearing these news, went ashore the next morning, taking all the
munition, and two hundred Spanish soldiers with him, whom he conducted to the
town of Vannes. When they were departed, the Lieutenant being left to keep
the Galley, with no more than seven and twenty, or thirty soldiers, I came
unto the captiued Captain Le Pyne, and assured him, if he could find means
to break or widen his manacles, there was now great likely-hoode of his
escape, with the rest of the slaves. Le Pyne hearing my words, asked counsel of
a soldier in the Galley, who affected him dearly, and for his sake willingly
consented to our enterprise, appointing in his watch to put tallow into the
touch-holes of all the Calyuers, and after prime them; and I in my watch should
widen Le Pynes manacles, which accordingly I did, purposing that wednesday
morning, being the seventh of November last, to put our pretense in execution;
but the wind being contrary, we referred it, till the next night: which
sorted (through Gods sufferauce) to an happy end.

Upon thursday morning, at three of the clock, I arose and called my other
companion; being the Prouansal, with whom having counseled of the matter, I
came to a Mariner, which was in the watch, saying, I could not sleep, being
shaken with an ague, therefore, if he pleased, I would watch for him till day;
to which he gladly consented, the Prouansall did the like by the soldier which
watched in the poope, so staying till we thought every man was a sleep, I
came unto Le Pyne bidding him dispatch, and perceiving there was but one rapier
for us, I fained my self to be very sick, and came to a chamber in the
midst of the Galley, and demanded a little Aqua Vitae; from whence I
secretly conveyed the Carpenters axe, and hid it in the poope, and coming to
Le Pyne said, now dispatch come away or never, he followed presently, and I
going before, blew out all the Lamps in the Galley, that none might perceive
him pace: so coming to a Scotshman, who was appointed to aduertize the other
slaves his companions, they should suffer no soldiers that were in the prowe
to pass into the poope. But as we passed into the poope, Le pine not being
perfect in the way, stumbled at an Italian called Nicolau, who suddenly
waking, demanded who was there? It is your friend said I. And being further
questioned, whether I did watch, I answered yea, and that I came to see, if it
were fair weather. So coming into the poope, Le Pyne took the rapier, and I
the axe, the Prouansall having nothing, and so I stepped unto the Lieutenant and
killed him: Nicolau the Italian awaking, and seeing how I stroke at his
fellows, caught me in his arms; saying, English traitor yield, or thou shall
dye, I called Le Pyne to help; who thrust at him: which he seeing, left me,
thinking to have caught Le Pyne, but I followed him so hard, that at two blows
we feld him over board. Then we set upon the rest, and slew thirteen of them;
some lept into the water, and four or five getting into a boat, called aboard
a ship which was at an ancker before us, saying, shoot, shoot, the slaves
rebel against us.

But I perceiving their purpose, and fearing that the ship would have shot at
us, I got the yrons wherewith they bind and unbind the poor slaves, and gave
them to the Skot, saying, unloose thy self, and light me two Lynt-stocks and
bring them forward; so making the slaves hail forward the great cannon, and
priming the rest of the pieces, I hallid to the ship, and swore, if they in any
wise attempted to hinder our liberty, I would presently sink her, and with
that showed them my lynt-stockes light.

They of the ship hearing this, and the terrible noise that the slaves made in
breaking off their chains, answered they would not hinder us: so I cutting
one of our cables, and weying another ancher, made the slaves row out of the
haven, and being at sea unloosed them all: and that night by the help of God
came to Bel-Ile, where having but 24. loaves of bread, and small store of other
vittailes, being 153. slaves besides the Prouansall, Le Pyne, and my self, we
passed the time as well as we could. The next morning we set sail, and on
Sunday the xi. of November brought her into the town of Rochel: where she
does remain for the Kings use.

Captain Le Pyne, being at Rochel, was persuaded to go to the King for a
recompense, and in going was taken by the Leaguers of Poyters, and my self
being sore hurt returned to Rochel, and afterward came into England, having
the Mayor and governors hands to their great Seal.

Thus did I, by the help of God, escape the Spanish slavery, the very
Frenchmen themselves bearing no rule where the Spaniard is in presence: they
use them as Dogs, the Captains of the galley have been Italians, and other
officers Spaniards, the most of their galley-slaues have been Frenchmen,
Flemmings, Scots, and English. Thus wishing unto my countri-men, to be warned
by other men's harms, I end.

FINIS.
VVitnesses of the truth of this matter.
John VVilkes of London. John Harley. William Ward. Richard Bauance. Richard
Tailor. Laurence Adams. George Oliver.
And under the great seal of Rochell.


