AN EXPOSITION OF THE PROPER PSALMS USED IN OUR English Liturgy, TOGETHER
WITH A REASON WHY THE CHVRCH did choose the same.

By JOHN BOYS, Doctor of Divinity.

The first part explaining the Psalms appointed to be read on Christmas and
Easter day.

PSALM. 49.4. Aperiam in Psalterio propositionem meam.

AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for William (...)

TO THE RELIGIOUS AND EVERY WAY NOBLE KNIGHT, SIR THOMAS WOTTON of Bocton
Malherbe, Son and heir to the right honorable EDWARD Lord WOTTON, Baron of
Marleigh, Comptroller of his Majesty's household, Lord Lieutenant of the
County of Kent, and the City of Canterbury, and one of the most Honorable
Privy Counsel.
SIR, as the Scriptures excel other writings in verity; so the Psalms, other
Scriptures in variety: for whereas some sacred books are legal, as the
Pentateuchue of Moses: other historical, as the Kings, Chronicles, Acts: a
third kind Prophetical, as the Vision of Esaias, Sermons of Jeremie, Revelation
of Saint John: a fourth Evangelical, as the Gospels and Epistles: the Psalter
(as Prolog. in lib. 3 Psalmorum.
Augustine, Hom. de laudibus and virtute Psalm.
Basile, Praefat. in Psalm.
Euthymius, and Athanasius. Chrysostom.
other ancient Doctors honor it) is a common treasure-house of all good
arguments and instructions: and in this respect aptly termed Calvin. epist.
praefix. Com. in Psalm.
The Souls Anatomy, the Tremel. argument. in Psalm.
Laws Epitomie, the Sea Victorinus Strigellius epist. Dedicat. and Tilemanus,
Heshusius praefat in Psalm.
Gospels Jndex; in one word, The Turrecremat. prolog in Psalm.
Register, Io. Gaineius epist. lect. in od. David.
Enchiridion, Ex ceteris omnibus quasi Collectus. Hen. Mollerus praefat. in
Psalm.
Summarie pith, and (as it were) Agellius prolog. in Psalm.
Brief of the whole Bible.

Upon this ground the Church in Preface Com. Book.
old time, dividing the Psalms into seven portions, enjoined that they should
be read in divine service (thorough) once every Week: and in our time parting
them into thirty, once every Month: where as other parts of holy writ are
read thorough but once in the year. And the Nouelists, howsoever they mislike
bare reading of Chapters, approve notwithstanding by their positions and
practice, singing of Psalms in the Congregation.

By which it does appear that nothing is esteemed generally more necessary
for the worship of God, then the word of God, and no parcel of the word more
full and fit then the Psalms; unto which I will add, that no Psalms are more
profitable then the proper, as unfolding the four chief mysteries of holy
belief; namely, Christ's Jncarnation, Passion, Resurrection, Ascension.

An exposition whereof I have begun in the name of the Lord Jesus, and that for
his Sions sake; the which I dedicate to your worthy self, as being a noble
Theophilus, that is, a true servant of God, and obseruant of his Church,
affected so right honestly (which is right honorably) to her doctrine and
discipline; that your humble Comportament in Gods house, gives unto the world
good hope, that you will become an open book of unfeigned devotion and piety.
Now the God of all comfort, according to the multitude of his mercies, and
riches of his glory, bless you and your Honorable Family, that you may long
enjoy good days on earth, and hereafter eternal happiness in Heaven.

Yours in all good offices of duty and love: JOHN BOYS.
Hollingbourn. April. 2.
CHRISTMAS DAY Morning Prayer.
PSALM 19. The Heavens declare the glory of God, etc.


THE World resembles a Diuinitie-Schoole, (says Com. de tranquil. animi.
Plutarch) and Christ (as the Matthew. 23.8.
Scripture tells) is our Doctor, instructing us by his works, and by his
words. For as Tull. lib. 5. de finibus.
Aristotle had two sorts of writings, one called Exoterical for his common
auditors, another Acroamatical for his private scholars and familiar
acquaintance: so God has two sorts of books, as David intimates in this Psalm:
namely, The Book of his Creatures, as a Commonplace book for all men in the
world, The heavens declare the glory of God, verse. 1.2.3.4.5.6. The Book of
his Scriptures, as a statute-booke for his domestical auditorie the Church,
The law of the Lord is an undefiled law, v. 7, 8, etc.


The great book of the Creatures Du Barias 1. day, 1. week.
in folio, may be termed aptly the Sheepheards Calendar, and the Ploughmans
Alphabet, in which even the most ignorant may run (as the Abacuc. 2.2.
Prophet speaks) and read. It is a Letter Patent, or open Epistle for all, as
David in our text, Their sound is gone out into all lands, and their words into
the ends of the world; there is neither speech nor language but have heard of
their preaching. For albeit heaven, and the Sun in heaven, and the light in
the Sun are mute; yet their Non loquuntur quidem vt homines, tamen velut
loquentes a nobis intelligu^tur. Tremel. in loc.
voices are well understood, Athenagoras orat: pro Christianis.
Catechizing plainly the first elements of religion, as namely Thom. part 1.
quaest. 12. art. 12. and Caietan ibidem.
that there is a God, and that this God is but one God, and that this one God
excels all other things infinitely both in might and majesty, Vniuersus
mundus (as Cardinal Cusanus.
one pithily) nihil aliud est quam Deus explicatus: The whole world is nothing
else but God expressed. So Saint Paul, Romans 1.20. Gods invisible things, as his
eternal power and Godhead are clearly seen by the creation of the world,
being understood by the things that are made. The heavens declare this, and the
firmament shows this, and the day tells this, and the night certifieth
this, the sound of the thunder proclameth (as it were) this in all lands, and
the words of the whistling wind unto the ends of the world. More principally
the Sun, which as a bridegroom comes out of his chamber, and rejoices as a
giant to run his course. The Victorinus Strigel. in loc. Vide Bellar. de
ascensione mentis in deum per scalas Creat. grad. 7. cap. 2.
body thereof (as Mathematicians have confidently delivered) is 166. times
bigger then the whole earth, and yet it is every day carried by the finger of
God so great a journey, so long a course: that if it were to be taken on the
land, it should run every several hour of the day 225 Germane miles. It is
true that God is incapable to sense, yet he makes himself (as it were)
visible in his works; as the divine Du Bartas vbi sup. fol. 6.
Poet sweetly: Therein our fingers feel, our nostrils smell,
Our palats taste his virtues that excel,
He shows him to our eyes, talks to our ears,
In the ordered motions of the spangled spheres.


So the heavens declare, Placidus parmensis. Genebrardus in loc.
that is, they make men declare the glory of God by their admirable structure,
motions, and influence. Now the preaching of the heavens is wonderful in
Bellar. in loc.
three respects.

1. As preaching all the night and all the day without intermission: verse. 2.
One day tells another, and one night certifieth another.

2. As preaching in every kind of language: verse. 3. There is neither speech,
nor language, but their voices are heard among them.

3. As preaching in every part of the world, and in every parish of every part,
and in every place of every parish: verse. 4. Their sound is gone into all
lands, and their words into the ends of the world.

They be diligent Pastors, as preaching at all times: and learned Pastors, as
preaching in all tongues: and Catholic Pastors, as preaching in all towns.
Let us not then in this University (where the voices of so many great Doctors
are heard) be like to trewants in other schools, who gaze so much upon the
babies and gilded cover and painted margent of their book, that they neglect
the text and lesson it self. This book is Gods Primer (as it were) for all
sorts of people: but he has another book proper only for his domestical
auditorie the Church, Psalm. 147.19.
He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel, he
has not dealt so with any nation, neither have the heathen knowledge of his
laws. Heathen men read in his Primer, but Christian men are well acquainted
with his Bible. The Primer is a good book, but it is imperfect, for after a
man has learned it, he must learn more: but the law of the Lord, Bucer.
Tileman. Calvin in loc.
that is the body of the holy Scriptures, is a most absolute Canon of all
doctrines appertaining either to faith or good manners; it is a perfect law,
converting the soul, giving wisdom to the simple, sure, pure, righteous, and
rejoicing the heart, etc.

But before we treat of that part, let us examine the mystical exposition of
this part of the Psalm, being guided hereunto by the spirit of God, Romans
10.18. and by the direction of our Church accommodating this text to this time.

Allegorically then is meant by heavens generally the August. exposit. 2. in
loc. and Bellarm. de Sacramentis in genere, lib. 1. cap. 25.
Saints, especially the blessed August. exposit. 1. in loc.
Evangelists and Hierome. Melanct. Strigelius.
Apostles. A good man and a true Christian is not only Gods house, Heb. 3.16.
but also Gods heaven, as S. Augustine expounds the words of Christ, Our Father
which art in heaven, that is, dwelling not in the material heaven only, but in
the mystical heaven also: to wit, in holy men of heavenly conversation, having
their affections set on things which are above, Coloss. 3.2. These kind of
heavens declare the glory of God in their works, as much and more then in
their words, ever Philip. 2.15.
shining as lights in the world, Oecumen apud Bellar. vbi sup.
their whole life being nothing else but a perpetual sermon (as it were) to
their neighbors, and so they declare Gods glory, for that other seeing their
good deeds, are thereby moved to glorify our Father which is in heaven.

More particularly the blessed Evangelists and Apostles annunciat Gods glory,
the Gospel is Gods throne, Calvin epist. dedit. Harmon.
wherein his Majesty rides as in a chariot; and the four wheels of this
chariot are the four Evangelists, and therefore this firmament shows Christ's
handyworke, because the written Gospel is a tract of all that Jesus did and
taught, Acts 1.1. and the blessed Apostles in preaching the Gospel have
likewise declared Gods glory: for in teaching that men are Romans 3.24.
freely justified by grace, what do they but annunciat the Ephesians. 3.16.
riches of his glory? The Gospel is the power of God unto salvation; and if
thou be hereby saved, it is not thine but Gods glory. Wherefore sing with
heavens host on this day, Luke 2.14.
Glory be to God on high; and with holy Psalm. 115.1.
David, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory,
for thy mercies and truths sake. Turrecremat.
Or the Apostles declare Christ's glory, in preaching that he was and is equal
with God, as being the character of his person, and brightness of his glory,
Heb. 1.3. and they show Christ's handy work, in relating all he said, and did,
and suffered for us men and our salvation from his Cradle to his Cross, and
afterward from his Cross to his Crown. These were the Trumpetors of his
Gospel, and as it were the August. ep. 89.
bel-weathers of his flock, whose sound is gone out into all lands, and their
words into the ends of the world, as S. Paul interprets our text, Romans 10.18.
There is neither speech nor language, but their voices are heard among the^.
Eusebius. hist. lib. 3. cap. 1.
Andrew preached in Scythia, Thomas in Parthia, John in Asia, 1. Pet. 1.1.
Peter to the dispersed Jews throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia,
Bithynia, Socrates hist. lib. 1. cap. 15.
Bartholmew in India, Matthew in Aethiopia: for (as Catalog. gloriae mundi
part. 3. considerat. 29.
Cassanaeus reports) Aethiopiam nigram doctrina fidei fecit candidam. In
England (as by tradition we have received) Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 40.
Simon Zelotes first preached the Gospel, and Capgraue in Catalog. sanct.
Angl. and Magdeburg. epist. praefix. Gent. 4.
Joseph of Arimathea built a religious house for Professors in Glascenbury.
Saint Paul, howsoever he was not one of ye twelve, yet he labored more
abundantly then they all, 1. Cor. 15.10. he declared the glory of God in
Galat. 1.
Arabia, Syria, Cilicia, Acts 13.
Antiochia, Seleucia, Cyprus, Acts 14.
Lycaonia, Lystra, Acts 17.
Athens, Acts 20.
Corinth, Troas. In a word, he made the Gospel of Christ abound in every place
from Jerusalem unto Illyricum, as himself witnesses of himself, Romans 15.19.
he was a chosen vessel of the Lord to bear his name before the Gentiles, and
Kings, and the Children of Israel, Acts 9.15. Thus all the Saints in general,
the four Evangelists, and twelve Apostles, and every sound Preacher of the
Gospel in particular, annunciat the glory of God.

But what is the meaning of the next words, one day tells another, and one
night certifieth another? Literally, dies diem dicit, is nothing else but dies
diem docet. One day tells another, is one day teaches another. Vatablus in
loc.
The day past is instructed by the day present; every new day does afford new
doctrine. The Placidus Parmen. in loc.
day is a most apt time to learn by reading and conference; the night a most
apt time for invention and meditation: now that which thou can not understand
this day, thou may happily learn the next; and that which is not found out
in one night, may be gotten in another. Mystically (says In loc.
Hierome) Christ is this day, who says of himself, John 8.12.
I am the light of the world. And his twelve Apostles are the twelve hours of
this day; for Christ's spirit revealed by the mouths of his Apostles the
mysteries of our salvation, in Ephesians. 3.5.
other ages not so fully known unto the sons of men. One day tells
another, August. Hierome. Turrecremat.
that is, the spiritual utter this unto the spiritual: and one night
certifieth another, that is, Judas insinuates as much unto the Jews in the
night of ignorance, saying, Matthew. 26.48.
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that is he, lay hold on him. Or the D. Incognitus.
old Testament only shadowing Christ, is the night: and the new Testament
plainly showing Christ, is the day.

In them has he set a tabernacle for the Sunne] That is, as Vulgar Latin.
August.
other by way of Genebrard.
Hypallage, He has his tabernacle in the Sun: meaning that God the Father
dwells in Christ his son Coloss. 2.9.
bodily, which is the Sun of righteousness, Malac. 4.2. by whom he does John
1.9.
enlighten and reconcile the world to himself, 2. Cor. 5.18. The Senensis
Bibliothec. lib. 5. annot. 160.
Manichees, abusing this text, adore the Sun, conceiving that Christ at his
ascending set his tabernacle, that is, left his flesh in the Sun. See S.
August. contra Faustum Manich. lib. 20.
But this idle paradoxe contradicts the Scriptures, affirming that Christ
ascended far above all the heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. and that he there sits at
the right hand of God, as our agent and advocate, til he come again to judge
the quick and the dead. Ergo, his flesh is not in the Sun, but in the
highest places, Hebr. 1.3. even in the heaven of heavens, Acts 7.56. The sense
then of [he set his tabernacle in the Sun, in Apud Senen. vbi sup.
Origens judgment is briefly this: Almighty God placed his Church in the
Sun of righteousness, according to that of Paul, Ephesians. 2.20. The Church is
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone. Or as August. in loc. and tract. 2. in ep. Joan.
and lib. 3. cont. lit. Petilian. cap. 32.
other, He set his tabernacle in the Sun, that is, his Church in open view,
that it may be so clearly seen as the Sun; like a City that is set on a
hill and cannot be hid, Matthew. 5.14. So the word Sun is used, 1. Sam. 12.12.
Thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and
before the Sun. Or because the Scripture calls our flesh a tabernacle, 2.
Cor. 5.1. We know, that if our earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed,
we have a building given of God, not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens. And 2. Pet. 1.13. As long as I am in this tabernacle. Therefore S.
Augustine and D. Incognitus. Turrecremat.
other expound it thus: He set his tabernacle in the Sun: that is, John 1.14.
the word became flesh, and appeared in the Philip. 2.7.
shape of a servant, so manifestly, that as S. John speaks in his 1. Epistle,
chap. 1. verse. 1. he was heard, and seen, and felt, that which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the word of life. If Christ had
not on earth a true body, then he was not borne of the Virgin Mary, nor
wrapped in swaddling clothes, nor laid in a cratch, nor circumcised on the
eighth day, nor presented in the Temple. If his body were fantastical (as
Valentinus imagined) how did he thirst, and hunger, and weep, and in
conclusion, how did he dye for our sins, and rise again for our
justification? His nativity, life, death, evidently demonstrate that he was
made flesh, and that he dwelt among us, Ioh. 1.14.

Which comes forth as a bridegroom out of his chamber] The Sun of
righteousness appears in three signs especially, Leo, Virgo, Libra: 1. in
Leo, roaring as a Lion in the Law, so that the people could not Exodus 20.17.
endure his voice: 2. in Virgo, borne of a pure Virgin in the Gospel: 3. in
Libra, weighing our works in his Dan. ^2 7.
balance at the day of Judgment. Or as Sermon. 3* de aduent Dom.
Bernard distinguishes his threefold coming aptly, Venit ad homines, venit
in homines, venit contra homines: In the time past, he came unto men as upon
this day; in the time present, he comes by his spirit into men every day; in
the time future, he shall come against men in the last day. The coming here
mentioned is his coming in the flesh: for so the Hierome. August.
Fathers usually gloss the text, he came forth of the Virgins womb, as a
bridegroom out of his Chamber. As a bridegroom, for the King of heaven at this
holy time made a great wedding for his son, Matthew. 22.1. Christ is the
bridegroom, man's nature the bride, the Greg. hom. 38.
conjunction and blessed union of both in one person is the marriage. The best
way to reconcile two disagreeing families, is to make some marriage between
them: even so the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us in ye world, that he
might hereby make our Ephesians. 2.14.16
peace, reconciling God to man, and man to God. By this happy match the Son
of God is become the son of Matthew. 16.13.
man, even flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones: and the sons of men are
made the sons of John 1.12.
God, of his flesh, and of his bones, as Paul says, Ephesians. 5.30, So that now
the Church being Christ's own spouse, says, I am my welbeloueds, and my
well-beloved is mine, Cant. 6.2. My sin is his sin, and his righteousness is
my righteousness; he who knew 2. Cor. 5.21.
no sin, for my sake was made sin; and I contrariwise having no Romans 7.18.
good thing, am made the righteousness of God in him. I which am brown by
persecution, and black by nature, Cant. 1.4. so foul as the sow that
walloweth in the mire, 2. Pet. 2.22. through his favor am comely without spot
or wrinkle, so Esaias 1.18.
white as the snow, Cant. 2.2.
like a lilie among thorns, even the fairest among women, Cant. 1.7. This
happy marriage is not a mar age, but it makes a merry age, being the Luke
2.25.
consolation of Israel, and comfort of Esaias 40.2.
Hierusalems heart. Indeed Christ our husband does absent himself from us in
his body for a time, but when he did ascend into heaven, he took with him our
pawn, namely his flesh: and he gave us his pawn, namely his spirit, assuring
us that we shall one day, when the world is ended, enter with him into the
Matthew. 25.10.
wedding chamber, and there feast with him, and enjoy his blessed company for
evermore.

And rejoices as a giant to run his course] As the natural Sun in his
course goes forth from the uttermost part of the heaven, and runs about
unto the end of it again: See S. August. contra literas Petilian lib. 2. cap.
32. and Didac. de Yanguas Con. 1. de ascen. Dom.
so the supernatural Sun, Christ Jesus arising in our Horizon, Ephesians. 4.9.
descended into the lowest parts of the earth, and there continued until he
had finished the work, for which he came into the world, and afterward
ascended far above all heavens, that he might fulfill all things.

As a giant he did run his course] There you have his incarnation, and
peregrination in the flesh: his circuit was from the uttermost part of the
heaven unto the end of it again, there you have his resurrection and
ascension: and there is nothing hid from his heat; there you have his sending
of the holy Ghost in the form of fiery tongues, Acts 2.3. The resemblances
between Christ and the Sun are Strigilius in loc.
manifold: 1. As the Sun is the worlds eye: so Christ is the light of the
world. 2. As the Sun arising obscures the stars luster: so the righteousness
of Christ imputed to sinners, darkeneth all the merit and worth of our works.
3. As the Sun in the greatest height causes the greatest heat: so the
cross follows ever the most incorrupt and pure profession of the Gospel. 4.
As the Sun in winter is nearest us: so Christ in our afflictions, in our
persecutions, especially for his truth, is nearest us, as holy Fox Martyr. fol.
1492,
Bradford divinely said, If there be any way to heaven on horseback, surely
this is the way, to suffer for Christ.

Now (beloved) as the Prophet 2. King. 4.13.
Elisha a together with his servant Gehazi said unto the Shunamite, Behold,
thou have had all this care for us, what shall we do for thee? So let us say to
the Sun of righteousness, O sweet Jesus, thou have as a giant run all this
course for us, whether shall we go, or what shall we do for thee? Christ
answers our question in the 14. of S. John: If ye love me, keep my
Commandments. His chief Commandment is, that we John 3.16.24. and John 6.29.
believe in him; and the next is, that we love one another, Ioh. 13.34. Our
faith in him, is confirmed and increased at this time by coming to his table;
our love toward him, in inuiting his members unto our table. We may be fed at
his table spiritually, he may be fed at our table corporally; for he that
feeds the hungry, puts meat into Christ's own mouth; he that gives to the
needy, puts money into Christ's own hand; he that clothes the naked, puts a
coat on Christ's own back. So himself protests, and that with a great
deal of earnestnes: Verily I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto
one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. A noble Lady
being ready to dye, sent unto her absent husband two rings for a token;
whereof one was her marriage ring, and the other a ring with Deaths head on it,
heartily desiring him after her departure to be good unto her poor children:
Our blessed Savior on this day for pure love came down from heaven, and was
married after an ineffable manner unto the flesh, and on good Friday he laid
down his life for our sakes; he therefore does entreat us by his
incarnation, and passion, that we would in his absence remember the poor, his
children. If Plutarch in vita Periclis.
Pericles an Heathen rejoiced on his deathbed, for that no Citizen of Athens
had ever worn a mourning gown through his occasion; how shall a Christian (as
knowing that his Job 19.25.
redeemer and his Heb. 11.6.
rewarder lives) be comforted in his dying hour? when as he cannot only say
with 1. Sam. 12.3.
Samuel; Whose ox have I taken, or whom have I done wrong to? but also with
Job 29.15.
Job; I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame, I was a father to
the poor, and I caused the widows heart to rejoice.

The law of the Lord is a perfect law] In this part of the Psalm David commends
the Scripture: Turrecremat.
1. From the author, it is the law of the Lord: 2. From the sufficiency
thereof, it is perfect: 3. From the utility, converting the soul, giving
wisdom to the simple, etc. 4. From the infallibility, the testimony of the
Lord is sure, the fear of the Lord endures for ever. 5. From the sweetness, it
rejoices the heart, and is sweeter then the honey, or the honey comb.

First, it is the law of the Lord against the August. hares. 46. and Tertull.
cont. Marcian. lib. 4.
Manichees, affirming, that two disagreeing Gods were authors of the two
Testaments, one of the old, another of the new: but S. Paul tells us expressly
that there is one spirit, and one Lord, Ephesians. 44.5. and S. 2. Pet. 1.21.
Peter assures us, that holy men of God in old time spoke, as they were moved
by this one spirit of one Lord.

Now the Scripture (being in every part the law of the Lord) is undefiled and
perfect, so perfect, that we may neither Prou. 3.6. Reuelat. 22.18.
add thereto, nor take therefro. So Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Ye shall put
nothing unto the Word I command you, neither shall ye take ought therefrom.
Here then is a pregnant testimony to confute the Bellar. de verbo dei, lib. 4.
cap. 3. See Dr. Mortons appeal, lib. 2. cap. 25.
Papists, accusing the word of God of insufficiency, making it like a sick
man's broken and imperfit will, half written, and half paroll; adding to the
written truth, unwritten traditions as necessary to salvation. David a man
according to Gods own heart, and in penning the Psalter, a finger of Gods own
hand, says it is a perfect law: but the Pope, which is a member of Satan, and
(as many great Divines conceive) 2 Thessalonians. 2.3.
that man of sin, proclaims on the contrary that it is an imperfect law.
Saint 2. Tim. 3.16.
Paul auowes, that the Scriptures are profitable to teach, to improve, to
correct, and instruct in righteousness. That is, to teach all necessary truths,
and confute all errors in doctrine, to correct al faults in manners, and
instruct all men in all duties; and so by consequent able to make the man of
God absolutely furnished unto all good works. But the Sea Perkins reformed
Cat. tit. traditions, and Dr. Abbot ibidem.
Romanists hold, that the written word is only milk for babes in Christ, and
infants in Divinity, which are the simple sort of people; but unwritten
traditions are strong meat for the learned. Their answer to the cited text out
of Deuteronomie, Ye shall add nothing, etc. is manifold.

First, Bellar. vbi sup. cap. 10.
that it may be so well understood of the word unwritten as written, because
Moses says, Hearken unto the laws which I teach and command, and not unto the
words I write. But this evasion is idle, seeing it is apparent, that these very
words are as a preface to a long exposition of the law written, ergo to be
construed of the written word only. Again, we say that every word of the Law
was written in the book of the Law: for so the Deuteronomy. 31.24.
text plainly, When Moses. had made an end of writing the words of this law in
a book, till he had finished them, then he commanded the Levites, which bare
the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, saying, take the book of this law, and
put it in the side of the Arc, etc. and therefore that which is set down by
Moses, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Cursed be he that continues not in all the words of this
law, to do them; is thus related by Paul, Galath. 3.10. Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things, that are written in the book of the law, to
do them. Hereby showing, that all the words of the law were written in the
book of the law, and nothing left unwritten, that was any part or parcel
thereof. And the Lord giving directions unto Joshua, that he should observe the
whole law, which his servant Moses had commanded, adds in fine, Joshua 1.8.
Let not this book of the law depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein
day and night, that thou may observe and do according to all that is written
therein.

Their Bellar. vbi sup.
second shift is, God himself did add to his law, ergo we may likewise add
to his Scriptures. After Moses had uttered the words, ye shall neither add to,
nor take fro, etc. the Prophets were added to the Law, and the Gospel unto
both. Our answer to this objection is threefold: 1. Moses did not say, God
shall not add, but, ye shall not add. The Lord of the law is above the law,
but all of us are under the law: the Sovereign may dispense with his law, but
the servant must obey his law. 2. The books added by God agreed with the law;
for the Chronicles and Psalms and Prophets add no point of doctrine thereto,
but are rather expositions and Commentaries upon the law, showing the meaning
and practice thereof. And touching the new Testament, as the law was an hidden
Gospel; even so the Gospel is a revealed law. Concinunt noua veteribus,
vetera nouis, says In Psalm. 49.
Augustine: The two Testaments are like the Seraphims, Esa. 6.3. crying each to
other, one and the same thing; and therefore Mat. 17.4.
Peter was unwise to make three tabernacles in mount Tabor; one for Moses,
another for Elias, and a third for Christ; because the Law, and the Prophets,
and the Gospel accord all in one, differing only in circumstance, but not in
substance. If a man (quoth Epist. 5. Marcellin. and 49. Deo great, ad quaest. 3.
Augustine) use one kind of prayer in the morning, and another at night, he
neither changes his God, nor his religion: if one bid thee good morrow before
dinner, and good night after supper, he does not alter his good will or wish,
but only his form of saluting: so the Sacraments of the Gospel, and the
sacrifices of the Law, point out one and the same Savior, which is Christ the
Lord. Thus al added by God unto his Law, was nothing else but an explanation of
his Law; but Popish traditions and additions are contrary to the word, not
expositions, but oppositions; rather destructions, then constructions of it; as
their invocation of Saints, creeping unto crosses, auricular Confession,
Indulgences, Purgatory, prayers for the dead, denying marriage to Priests, and
the like; the which are so dissonant to Gods holy Law, that they be 1. Tim. 4.1.
doctrines of devils.

3. Though almighty God added unto his law, yet that part of his Scripture was
omni-sufficient for his servants at that time; and therefore seeing now the
whole is written, it ought to be received as an absolute Canon for all times, a
common treasure-house of all instructions, appertaining either to the reforming
of our manners, or informing of our faith. So reverend Lib. 3. cap. 1.
Irenaeus, Hom. 25. in Mat.
Origin, Hexam. lib. 3. cap. 3. and de vocat. gent. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Ambrose, Cont. lit. petil. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Augustine, and apud Dr. Morton Appeal lib. 2. cap. 25. sect;. 11.
other of the most ancient Fathers account it. And so, many learned Papists
acknowledge, when as we treat of God, nothing may be said (as Aquine does
advise, part. 1. quest. 36. art. 2.) but what is found in the Scriptures. If we
seek to confute blasphemous Heretics, there is no other way (says In Luc.
1. praefat.
Stella) then by Scriptures. If we will examine the differences of Churches,
and so discern the true from the false, the only means (as their Jesuit Com.
in Romans in proem. part. 3. disp. 3.
Salmeron tells us) is by the Scriptures. In brief, what can any Protestant
say more for the Scriptures prerogative, then to profess that which their
bishop Art. 37. aduersus Lutherum. fol. 222.
Roffensis has openly confessed, that the holy Scripture is Conclaue quoddam
omnium veritatum, qua Christianis scitu necessariae sunt, a conclaue of all
necessary Christian truth.

As the word of God in it self is a perfect and undefiled law: so likewise
making other perfect; It conuerteth the soul, and gives wisdom to the
simple. The secretaries of nature tell us, that in the life natural, our heart
is the first in living, and last in dying; even so in the life spiritual, our
heart is converted first, and then all other members have their proportionable
perfection. And therefore Psalm. 51.10.
David prays, O Lord create in me a new heart. Almighty God requires that
we Romans 10.10.
believe with our heart, and Luke 10.27.
love with our heart, and perform every good deed with our heart: Son give
me thine heart, Prou. 23.26. If we can once truly profess with the Psalm.
108.1.
Psalmist, O God, my heart is ready, my heart is ready; Psalm. 103.1.
praise the Lord O my soul, etc. Then all that is either without us, or about
us, instantly will do the same. Then our feet will be ready to run in his
ways; our eyes ready to wait upon his will; our ears ready to hear his
word; our hands ready to do his work. It is reported of Author. Latin. Chron.
de Cantuariens. Archiepis. in vita Cranmeri, page 403.
Archbishop Cranmer, that his heart (after his flesh and bones were consumed in
the merciless flames of fire) was found vnscorched and whole: so let us in the
midst of all tentations in this world, which is 1. Ioh. 5.19.
in maligno, that is, in male igne positus, keep our heart sound and whole for
the Lord, that we may profess with Romans 7.16.
Paul, I do not the good things which I would, but the evil which I would
not, that do I: now then, if I do that I would not, it is no more I that do
it, but the sin that dwells in me.

If any shall ask, wherewith shall a man cleanse his heart: Psalm. 119.9.
David does answer, by ruling himself after Gods word, that is a perfect law,
converting the soul: that is, the Romans 1.16.
power of God unto salvation, an 1. Pet. 1.23.
immortal seed, and the word of life, whereby men are borne again to the
kingdom of God. All of us are by nature the Ephesians. 2.3.
children of wrath; our souls are Paulinus epist. lib. 2. epist. 4. in fine.
like the porches of Bethesda, Ioh. 5. in which are lodged a great many sick
folk, blind, halt, withered. And the Scriptures are like the poole of
Bethesda, into which whosoever enters, after Gods holy spirit has a little
stirred the water, is made whole of whatsoever disease he had. He that has
angers frenzy, being so furious as a Lion, by stepping into this poole, shall
in good time become so gentle as a Lamb: he that has the blindness of
intemperance, by washing in this poole, shall easily see his folly: he that
has enuies rust, auarices leprosy, luxuries palsy; shall have means and
medicines here for the curing of his maladies: the word of God is like the
drugge Catholicon, that is in stead of all purges; and like the herb Panaces,
that is good for all diseases. Is any man heavy? the statutes of the Lord
rejoice the heart: is any man in want? the Judgments of the Lord are more to
be desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, and by keeping of them there is
great reward: is any man ignorant? the testimonies of the Lord give wisdom to
the simple: Euthym.
that is, to little ones, both in standing, and understanding. In standing, as
unto little History of Susanna, verse. 45.
Daniel, little Discipulum minimum Jesus amabat plurimum, Hierom. epist. ad
Heliodor.
John the Evangelist, little 2. Tim. 3.15.
Timothy: to little ones in understanding; for the great Philosophers, who were
the Wizards of the world, because they were not acquainted with Gods law,
became fools, while they professed themselves wise, Romans 1.22. but our Prophet
says, Psalm. 119.99.
I have more understanding then my teachers, because thy testimonies are my
meditation and study. To conclude, whatsoever we are by corruption of nature,
Gods law conuerteth us, and makes us to speak with Mark. 16.17.
new tongues, and to sing new Psalm. 98.1.
songs unto the Lord, and to become new men, and new creatures in Christ, 2.
Cor. 5.17. The law of the Lord gives every man a new-yeers gift, if he have
faithes hand to receive it. Unto the covetous it gives a new-yeeres gift, in
telling him plainly, that such as trust in uncertain riches, and not in the
living God, fall into tentations, and snares, and into many foolish and noisome
lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction, 1. Tim. 6.9. It gives the
voluptuous and incontinent man a new-yeers gift, aduising him, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.
to possess his vessel in holiness and honor. It gives the proud man a
new-yeeres gift, in saying, Iam. 4.6. 1. Pet. 5.5. Prou. 3.34.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. It gives the lusty
gallant a new-yeres gift, in remembering him to Ecclesiastes 12.1.
remember his Creator in the days of his youth. It gives every man a
new-yeeres gift, in bringing this news into the world, that Luke 2.11.
unto us is borne this day a Savior, which is Christ the Lord, and that Ioh.
3.16.
whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

The Pope then in denying the laws of God, unto the people of God, in a tongue
which is known, in persecuting those who translated them, as Wickliffe, and
Tyndal; and other who sold them, as a godly Fox martyrol. fol. 863.
Stationer was burnt in Auinion, with two Bibles about his neck; and other for
Fol. 752. 753.
reading and having them; and other for repeating only Fol. 761. 762.
certain sentences out of them, evidently shows himself a great Antichrist,
and adversary to the Gospel. For (as holy Letter to the University and town
of Cambridge.
Bradford said) how can he with his Prelates mean honestly, who make so much
of the wife, and so little of the husband. The Church they magnify, but Christ
they contemn. The truth is, if their Church were an honest woman (that is,
Christ's own spouse) unless they would make much of her husband (Christ and
his word) she would not be made much of them. If the law of the Lord be
perfect, converting the soul, giving wisdom to the simple, rejoicing the
heart, clean, sure, pure, more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine
gold; sweeter also then honey, and the honey comb: what impudent Pharisees are
they (who professing that the keys are in their hands only) Mat. 23.13.
shut up the kingdom of heaven before Gods people, they neither go in
themselves, nor suffer such as would enter, to come in.

It was said of them in old time, by Dr. Bassinet in a pub. oration before the
Bishops assembled in Auinion, vti Fox martyrolog. fol. 863.
some of their own side, that it was so great a wonder to hear a Bishop
preach, as to see an Ass fly. Now they preach (I confess) more then
heretofore, but their doctrine savors of policy, more then of piety, tending
rather to King-killing, then soule-sauing. Whosoever is verst in their books,
is able to give this verdict, that their Divinity tracts are worse then their
humane learning; and that their Sermons are the worst of all their Divinity,
being framed in affairs of state not according to the word of Christ, but
according to the will of Antichrist: and in matters of devotion, according to
the fopperies of their own Legend, and not according to the wisdom of Gods
law.

Epist. lib. 1. epist. 1.
Seneca said pithily, Magna vitae pars elabitur male agentibus, maxima nihil
agentibus, tota aliud agentibus. The Jesuits in their preaching are male
agentes, as making 2. Cor. 2.17.
merchandise of Gods holy word. The Friars in their preaching are nihil
agentes, 1. Tim. 1.7.
understanding neither what they speak, neither whereof they affirm. For the
most part, all Papists in their preaching, are aliud agentes, either beyond the
text, or behind the text, or beside the text. The too little learning of their
Friars, and too much of their Jesuits, have so wrested and wreathed the
Scripture, to serve their own turn, that (as De invent. rerum. lib. 4. cap. 9.
Polydore Virgil said of Lawyers) they have stretched Gods book, as shoomakers
extend a boot, See Gospel 1. Sund. in Aduent.

To leave them, and to come nearer our selves; seeing the book of Scriptures
is the word and will of God, and that a perfect law, so perfect, that nothing
may be taken therefrom, or put thereto; not only perfect in it self, but
also making others perfect, converting the soul, and giving wisdom to the
simple: let it (as the blessed Colos. 3.16.
Apostle does exhort,) dwell in you plenteously with all wisdom. It is Gods
best friend, and the Kings best friend, and the Courts best friend, and the
Cities best friend, and the Countries best friend, and all our best friend; and
therefore let us not entertain it as a stranger, but as a familiar and a
domestic, let it dwell in us. And for as much as it brings with it exceeding
profit and pleasure: profit, more to be desired then gold, yea then much fine
gold: pleasure, rejoicing the heart, sweeter also then honey, and the honey
comb, let it dwell in us plenteously. Yet in all wisdom, let us hear it in
all wisdom, read it in all wisdom, meditate on it in all wisdom, speak of
it in all wisdom, preach it in all wisdom; not only in some, but in all
wisdom, that the words of our mouths, and the meditations of our hearts, may
be most acceptable in thy fight, O Lord our strength and our Redeemer. Amen.

Psalm 45. is expounded on Whitsunday. The next allotted for this our present
festival, is,
PSALM. 85. Lord thou art become gracious unto thy land, etc.


This Psa. may be divided into two parts: a Prayer, whereof there be Tremellius.
two grounds, 1. The Churches experience of Gods former mercies, verse. 1.2.3.
2. The due consideration of Gods nature, slow to conceive wrath, and ready to
forgive, verse. 4.5.6.7. The summarie pith is briefly this; Lord thou have bin
heretofore favorable to thy land, and therefore we hope thou will be so now,
that thy people may rejoice in thee.
Precept, consisting of two branches: 1. Aduising us in all our afflictions and
misery, to have recourse unto the comfortable promises of God, I will hear,
what the Lord will say. 2. That we should lead a godly life, lest our folly
stop the free passage of these promises, as well touching things spiritual,
verse. 9.10.11. as temporal, verse. 12.



Mystically the whole Psalm, in the judgment of Hierome, Augustine, Basil,
and other ancient Fathers, is nothing else but a prophecy concerning the
redemption of mankind, from the tyranny of Satan and sin, by the coming of
Christ into the world, prefigured by the deliverances of Gods people from their
bondage, both in Egypt, and Babylon. Now the Prophet treating of Christ's
Aduent, Speaks, D. Incognitus in loc.
1. In the preterperfect tence, Lord thou have been gracious, thou have turned
away, thou have forgiven. etc. Showing three notable fruits of his coming: 1.
Benediction, in taking away the curse from his land, and captivity from his
people, verse. 1. 2. Justification, in forgiving their offenses, and covering
all their sins, verse. 2. 3. Reconciliation, turning away Gods wrathful
indignation and displeasure, v. 3.
2. In the future tence, praying that he may come, turn us then, O God, our
Savior, etc.


Bacer. Bellarmin.
Or it may be parted into a Predictio^, of our deliverance from the hands of all
our spiritual enemies, verse. 1.2.3. for the Psalmist (as prophesying by the
spirit of the Lord) speaks in the time past, of that which as yet was to come.
Petition, for execution of the prediction in the rest, an hearty prayer, that
the fact might answer the figure.


Lord thou art become gracious] The translators of the vulgar Latin read,
(...), benedixisti: but Athanasius, and other Greek Interpretors, (...).
Tremellius, beneuolus fueras: Munster, benignus factus es: Castalio, fanisti:
Vatablus, propitius. And our English Bibles accordingly, thou have been
gracious, favorable, merciful unto thy land. Here then observe, that the good
will and favor of God is the fountain of all goodness, and blessing to his
people; Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, etc. It was his
own love, which induced him to send his son, and Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all
spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ, as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame
before him in love: who has predestined us to be adopted through Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, etc.

Unto thy land] God cursed the land for the first Adams disobedience, saying,
Genesis 3.17.
Cursed is the earth for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it all the
days of thy life. Hierom. Euthym. Turrecremat.
But he blessed the land for the second Adams obedience, Genesis 22.16.18.
swearing by himself, that in him all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed. The Land, O Lord, is thy land, though of it self it can bring forth
nothing but thistles and thorns; it is thy creature, wherefore Wisd. 11.21.
thou which hate nothing that thou did make, have, out of the riches of thy
mercy, become gracious unto it.

As the Psalm. 95.5.
sea is his, for that he made it: even so the Psalm. 24.1.
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the world, and
they that dwell therein, for he has founded it, etc. T. Wilcox. exposition.
in loc.
Other think that the land of Canaan is called here, thy land, because God
had chosen it, and hedged it in (as it were) from the Commons of the whole
world, for his peculiar people the Jews, according to that of the Esaias 5.7.
Prophet, Surely the vineyard of the Lord of hosts is the house of Israel, and
the men of Judah are his pleasant plant, enclosed unto Deuteronomy. 7.6. Exodus 19.5.
himself above all places upon earth.

Thou have turned away the captivity of Iacob] Hierom. Euthym.
All true believers are the sons of Jacob, and seed of Abraham, Augustine.
as well the believing Gentiles, which are the sons of Jacob according to the
spirit, as the believing Jews the sons of Jacob according to the flesh; and
the Bucer.
Church of these true Iacobins, and Israelites, are the land of the Lord, and
the captivity here mentioned, is bondage under sin; so Paul, Romans 7.23. I see
another law in my members, rebelling against the law of my mind, and leading
me captive unto the law of sin, which is in my members. O wretched man that I
am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? In this captivity, Satan
is the Iaylor, the flesh is our prison, ungodly lusts are the manicles, a bad
conscience the tormentor, all of them against us; only Christ is Emmanuel, God
with us: he turns away the captivity of Jacob, in forgiving all his offenses,
and in covering all his sins. For the blessed order of our redemption is
Bellarmin.
briefly this: God out of his mere love to the world, quia been voluit terrae,
gave his son; the son by his death appeased the wrath of his Father, and
abundantly satisfied the divine justice, for the sins of the whole world; God
pleased in his son Jesus, forgiueth all our offenses, and covers all our
sins, and remission of sin releaseth our captivity. Whosoever then is a
true believer in Christ, is the Lords 1. Cor. 7.22.
freeman, See Aquin. lect. 4. in Romans 7.
in this life so set at liberty, that sin shall not reign in his mortal
members, Romans 6.12. but in the world to come fully free from all corruption and
concupiscence, when as his vile body shall be made like to Christ's glorious
body, Philip. 3.21. the which is called by Paul, the glorious liberty of the
sons of God. Romans 8.21.

Turn us then O God our Sauiour] Here begins the Bucer. Bellarmin.
petition, or Genebrardus.
application of ye former prophecy, wherein the Church heartily desires the
father of mercies, that he would execute his holy promise concerning our
deliverance, by sending his only Son and our only Savior Christ Jesus into
the world. Where as it is said in the prophecy, Thou have turned away the
captivity of Jacob: it is said in the Prayer, Turn us then O God our Savior.
In the prophecy, Thou have taken away all thy displeasure, and turned thy
self from thy wrathful indignation: in the Prayer, Let thine anger cease from
us: will thou be displeased at us for ever, and will thou stretch out thy wrath
from one generation to another? In the prophecy, Thou have been favorable to
thy land, thou have for given the offenses of thy people, and covered all their
sins: in the Prayer, Quicken us O Lord, that thy people may rejoice in thee,
show us thy mercy, and grant us thy salvation: Euthym.
that is, thy Son Jesus, Acts 4.12.
by whom only thou sauest.

The whole Prayer has (as D. Incognitus.
one notes) two parts: 1. The Churches request unto God, that the Messiah of
the world may come, and that for four causes especially: 1. For our
reconciliation unto God, verse. 4.5. 2. For our justification, verse. 6.7. 3. For
our illumination, verse. 8. 4. For our glorification, verse. 9.
2. Gods grant to the request of his Church in the fulness of time, Mercy and
truth are met together, etc.


I will hearken what the Lord will say] The word of God is a lantern unto our
feet, and a light unto our paths, a trusty Psalm. 119.24.
counselor in all our affairs, in our afflictions especially. The Lord
speaks peace unto his people, both in the books of his holy Scriptures, and
by the mouths of his godly Tileman in loc.
Preachers. And therefore such as 1 Thessalonians. 5.20,
despise prophesying, and for some by-respects of tithes, and other worldly
toys, hate their learned and vigilant Pastors, Luke 19.42.
understand not these things which belong unto their peace. It was ever held
commendable policy, both among Christians and Heathens, that a good thing for
the Commonweal, should be broached by the gracious lip of some man highly
honored in his country, because his precept is usually dis-respected, whose
person is despised. And this among other is one cause, why some men in Gods
house, during the time of praying and preaching, prattle so much unto their
mates; or (if their pew-fellow be more devout) prate by nods and fleares, and
other secret signs, unto their lewd companions further off. It is hard for any
(said Plutarch) to change himself so much, but that a man (at one time or
other) may catch his heart at the tip of his tongue: and so surely no hypocrite
can so deeply dissemble, but a man (ever and anon) may see his heart at his
fingers end: his wandering looks, and other irreuerent behavior in the Temple,
bewray that his soul does not magnify the Lord, nor his spirit rejoice in God
his Savior. When thou come into the Sanctuary, thou must either in thy
devotions speak unto God, or else hear, what God by his ministry speaks
unto thee.

It is the fashion of worldlings to sue their neighbors for every trifling
trespass: but a true Christian is resolved here with our Prophet, I will
hear, what the Lord God will say concerning me. Now he says, 1. Cor. 6.5.
Is it so, that there is not a wise man among you? no not one, that can judge
between his brethren? but a brother goes to law with a brother, and that
under such advocates and Judges, Saluianus lib. 5 de gubernat. dei.
qui hac lege defendunt miseros, vt miseriores faciant defendendo, like the
thornie bush fleecing the poor sheep, which in a storm comes unto it for
shelter.

It is the fashion of worldlings, if they lose goods out of their closet, or
cattle out of their Close, presently to rake hell for help, consulting with
abominable witches, and other wicked agents of the devil: but a good Christian
on the contrary says, I will hear what the Lord will say. He says in his
law, Exodus 22.18.
Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. Shall I then forsake God, who Deuteronomy.
33.26.
rides upon the heavens, for my help? and the Magistrate, Gods deputy, to
Romans 13.4.
take vengeance on him that does evil, and seek comfort at the hands of a
Coniurer, by black Arts and works of darkness? No Satan, if thou would in
consideration of my little loss, give me my house full of silver and gold, or
could (as once thou did impudently boast unto my blessed Savior) bestow
on me Matthew. 4.9.
all the kingdoms of the world, Numb. 22.18.
I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God to do less or more.

It is the fashion of worldlings, when their consciences afflict them at any
time for sin, to see merry plays, or read merry books, or hear merry
tales, or take merry cups, and so they make the remedy worse commonly then
the disease. But a good man and a true Christian hears, what the Lord says
unto him in his word and ministry, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, and thou shall
praise me. Psalm. 31.27.
Be strong, and he shall stablish your heart, all ye, that put your trust in
the Lord. Come to me all ye that labor and are laden, and I will ease you.
Though hope seem to tarry, Habacuc. 2.3.
yet wait, for it shall surely come and not stay. See Dr. Hull ser. of the
blessed In-mate.
God is like the bridegroom, Ioh. 2. who kept his best wine for his last
service. First he propounds and propines unto his followers the cup of his
Cross, ye shall drink indeed of my cup, Matthew. 20.23. but in conclusion he
turns his Cross into a Crown, Reuelat. 2.10. Be thou faithful unto death,
and I will give thee the crown of life. First he does humble, then exalt:
first he Deuteronomy. 32.39.
kills, and then he cures. A tristibus semper sed necessarijs inchoat Deus,
deinde progreditur ad hilariora, says In Iere. hom. 1.
Origene: God ever begins at necessary discontentments, and so proceeds unto
things more pleasing. He says, I wound, and I make whole: I kill, and give
life. He says not, I will first make alive, and then I will destroy: but first
he Ierem. 1.10.
plucketh up, and then he planteth: first he does overthrow, then he builds:
first he mortifieth our earthly members of sin, then he quickneth our inward
man to grace. Joseph after he had worn the Iaylors iron chain, Genes. 40.3.
was adorned with the golden chain of Pharao the King, Genesis 41.42. Mordecai
first among pages at the Court Ester 4.2.
gate, was afterward honored with the Kings ring and raiment, and mounted on
the Kings horse, and it was openly proclaimed before him even through the
streets of the City, Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the King will
honor, Ester 6.11. All which examples are Commentaries upon our text, and show,
that howsoever almighty God punishes his people for a time, yet if they will
hear what he says, he will in fine speak peace unto them.

But the Psalmist adds here by way of caveat, Let them not return again to
their folly. Sinners are fools, and their faults are their follies, as the
Scriptures every where speak, in the Proverbs especially. Covetousness is a
folly, Drunkenness a folly, Whoredom a folly, Atheism folly, Idolatry
folly. God in his Son speaks unto his people peace, but let them take heed
that they return not again to their folly, like the 2. Pet. 2.22.
sow to the wallowing in mire, and the dog to his own vomit, John 5.14.
Behold, thou art now made whole, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee. Tnou do every day beg of our heavenly Father that his kingdom may
come: look then unto the next clause, that his will may be done in earth, as
it is in heaven.

Mercy and truth are met together] Tileman. Bucer. Vatablus.
When as Gods people hear, what he says unto them in his holy word, then all
things are full of mercy, truth, righteousness and peace; then the land shall
give her increase, that is, the Church abound with these good fruits of faith.
Genebrard. Tremel. Wilcox.
Some say, that these virtues meet together and kiss, but in diverse subjects.
As for example, mercy from God, and truth from men: as if he should say, God
will turn his own justice toward his people into mercy, and their
hypocritical hearts and foul hands into sound and sincere dealing, and so
righteousness and peace kiss. The righteousness of God in executing his
promises faithfully, breeds in his people peace of conscience to their endless
comfort. Other affirm, that these virtues meet together in one subject, and
that in God. Man. Christ, God and man.


They meet together in God: for all the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth, Psalm. 25.9. Agellius. Bellarm. in Psalm. 24.
mercy in making, and truth in keeping his promise to his people. Saint Romans
15.8.
Paul says, Jesus Christ was a minister of the Circumcision for the truth of
God, to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers; and that the Gentiles
might glorify God for his mercy. God promised his Son unto the Romans 9.4.
Jews, and he gave him in the Galat. 4.4.
fulness of time to be both a Luke 2.32.
light to the Gentiles, and glory of his people Israel. Hierome. Augustine.
Turrecremat.
Herein showing his mercy more principally to the Gentiles, his truth unto the
Jews, and so his mercy and truth embraced each other, in that he made Ephesians.
2.14.
both people but one, to wit, one flock, in John 10.16.
one sheepfold, under one shepherd.

If we take truth and righteousness for Gods justice in punishing, mercy and
peace for his gratiousnesse in pardoning; yet they meet together in all his
ways, unto such as keep his covenant and his testimonies. For as the Prou.
12.10.
mercies of the wicked are full of cruelty: so the very judgments of God upon
his servants are full of mercy. In his Habacuc. 3.2.
wrath he remembers pity; punishing a little, that he may pardon a great
deal; destroying the flesh only, to save the spirit, 1. Cor. 5.5. Bernard.
sermon. cont. vitium ingrat.
Misericordiae res est aliquando subtrahere misericordiam: It was good for
Joseph that he was a captive, good for Naaman that he was a leper, good for
Bartimaeus that he was blind, good for David that he was in trouble. Fox
Martyr. fol. 1476.
Bradford thanked God more of his prison, then of any parlour or pleasure: Romans
8.28.
All things are for the best unto the faithful. And so Gods mercy and truth
are met together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other, his mercy
being just, and his justice merciful. But God in giving his only Son unto
the world, more abundantly showed his mercy and justice kissing one another.
His justice requires Ezech. 18.20.
that every soul that sins should dye; but his mercy desires not the death of
a sinner, Ezech. 33.11. He therefore gave his Son to dye for our sins, and
to rise again for our justification, and so both his justice is satisfied, and
sinners are saved. In Christ's aduent, mercy and truth are met together,
righteousness and peace have kissed each other. Sermon. 1. de annun. Dom.
Bernard has a pretty Dialogue to this purpose between righteousness and truth
on the one side, mercy and peace on the other part, contending about the
redemption of mankind. Christ our blessed Messiah and Mediator ended the
quarrel at his coming, and made them all exceeding kind kissing friends: for
in giving himself a 1. Tim. 2.6.
ransom for all men, he did at once pay both unto Justice her debt, and grant
unto Mercy her desire.

2. Righteousness and peace meet together in man: so Saint Jn loc.
Augustine expounds it, an unjust man is full of quarrels, like Ishmael, Genesis
16.12.
every man's hand is against him, and his hand against every man: but he which
is righteous and gives every man his due, shall have peace, so much as is Romans
12.18.
possible with all men, especially with his own self and soul. Righteousness
and peace are so near, so dear, that thou can not have the one without the
other. Vnam vis and alteram non facis, happily thou would enjoy peace, but
thou will do no justice. The Virgil.
Poet could say, -- Pacem te poscimus omnes: interroga (quoth Vbisup.
Augustine) omnes homines, vultis pacem? vno ore respondet totum genus hominum,
opto, cupio, volo, amo. Well then, if thou desire peace, do justice; for peace
says, I am a friend only to such as love my friend. Psalm. 34.12.
What man is he that lusts to live, and would feign see good days? keep thy
tongue from evil, and thy lips that they speak no guile; eschew evil, and do
good; seek peace and ensue it. Nay thou need not seek it, for it will of it
self come to kiss her sister Righteousness. Basilius. Agellius.
If men have truth and righteousness, God will afford mercy and peace. So
the Prophet expressly, Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is
right, for that shall bring a man peace at the last, Psalm. 37.38. At the first
happily thou may have war with ungodly men of this world, (for Bradford
apud Fox Martyr. fol. 1491.
do well, and hear ill, is written on heavens door) but hereafter, at the
last assuredly thou shall have peace to thy soul. Tileman. Tremellius.
Or righteousness and peace meet in every true believer, because being
justified by faith, we have peace toward God, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
Romans 5.1.

3. Righteousness and peace meet in Christ, God and man: for by these two, D.
Incognitus in loc.
some Divines understand the old Testament and the new. The Law does exact
justice, requiring of a malefactor Exodus 21.24.
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot: but the Gospel
is full of mercy and peace, saying unto the sinner, who truly repents him of
his sins) and unfeignedly believes the word of promise, Matthew. 9.2.22.
Son, be of good comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. Daughter, be of good
cheer, thy faith has made thee whole. Mark. 10.52.
Go thy way, thy belief has saved thee. John 5.14.
Behold, thou art now made whole, sin no more. These two Testaments meet
together in Christ, as in their proper center, they kissed each other on this
day, because the Gospel performed what the Law promised.

Euthym.
Or he showed truth in his words, and mercy in his works. Job. 17.6.17.
He delivered the will of God unto men, and his word is truth. He made the
Matthew. 11.5.
blind to see, the lame to go, the deaf to hear, he cleansed the lepers, he
cured the sick, he raised up the dead: and these without question are works
of mercy.

Or by these two virtues understand Euthym.
Christ's two natures, his divine nature by mercy, having Matthew. 9.6.
power to forgive sins, and to heal Matthew. 8.16.
all manner of sickness: by truth his humane nature, 1. For that he had true
flesh, and not (as Heretics imagined) a fantastical body. 2. For that he
was a man after Gods own image, Ephesians. 4.24.
created in righteousness and true holiness, he was blameless and undefiled,
Heb. 7.26. he knew no sin, 1. Cor. 5.21. he did no wickedness, neither was
any deceit in his mouth, Esaias 53.9. and so truth and mercy met together in the
personal union of his two natures. And this exposition is more probable by the
next verse: Truth shall flourish out of the earth, and righteousness has looked
down from heaven. Christ is truth, as he Joh. 14.6.
says of himself, I am the way, the truth, etc. and Christ is our
righteousness, 1. Corinthians. 1.30. Hierome. Arnobius. Agellius.
Now Christ as man, and borne of the Virgin Mary, budded out of the earth: and
as God, he looked down from heaven. That men might be justified by grace
from heaven, it pleased him on this day to bud out of the earth, in the words
of S. Jn loc.
Augustine, Vt iustitia prospiceret de caelo, id est; vt iustificarentur
homines diuina gratia, veritas nata est de Maria Virgin, vt possit pro illis
iustificandis offerri sacrificium, sacrificium passionis, sacrificium crucis:
and vnde offerret sacrificium pro peccatis nostris, nisi moreretur? quomodo
autem moreretur, nisi carnem indueret? and quomodo carnem indueret, nisi
veritas de terra oriretur?

Genebrard.
Other otherwise, when righteousness, that is, Gods grace looks down from
heaven, then truth among men florisheth upon earth. Placidus Parmen.
Or before Christ's coming the whole world was full of untruths, all the
Gentiles adored false gods, and many Jews worshipped the true God falsely. But
the Sun of righteousness appearing in our Horizon, 1. Pet. 2.9.
called us out of darkness into marvelous light, teaching that only 1. Kings
18.39.
the Lord is God, and that an 1. Cor. 8.4.
Idol is nothing, and so truth florisheth out of the earth, and righteousness
has looked down from heaven.

Augustine. Tileman.
Or, truth springs out of the earth, and righteousness looks down from
heaven, when a sinner humbly confesses his faults unto God: according to that
of Saint 1. Epist. 1.8.9.
John, If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is
not in us: if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Bellarmine.
Or, the divine justice manifested it self from heaven, in Christ's springing
out of the earth. For hereby we know the Romans 1.18.
wrath of God is reueiled from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness, because nothing could expiate the sins of men, but the
death of Gods own and only Son, he budded out of the earth, and was
buffeted upon the earth, and buried under the earth; and all this, and more
then this he did suffer and do for our redemption and ransom.

Paulinus epist. lib. 1. epist. 4.
Quid illi pro malis meis quae pertulit, quid pro bonis suis quae contulit,
referam? quid pro suscepta carne, quid pro alapis? quid pro flagellis? pro
cruce, obitu, sepultura, rependam? esto, reddamus crucem pro cruce, funus pro
funere, numquid poterimus reddere, quod ex ipso, and per ipsum, and in ipso
habemus omnia, etc. reddamus ergo amorem pro debito, charitatem pro munere,
animum and affectum Domino impendamus, and soluimus. PSALM. 89. My song shall
be always of the loving kindness of the Lord, etc.


THis one short verse contains the summarie pith and Bellarmin.
argument of the whole long Psalm. wherein observe the Songs dittie, the
loving kindness and truth of the Lord, manifested unto the whole world
generally, to David's house (that is, the Church) especially. Singers duty,
magnifying the mercies of God always, even from one generation to another. And
by all means, with his mouth, for that is expressed in this verse. with his
mind, for that is implied in the next, I have said, etc. Geneua gloss. Wilcox.
that is, believed it in my heart; and therefore spoke it with my tongue,
Psalm. 116.10. For out of the hearts abundance the mouth speaks, Mat. 12.34.


My song shall be always of the loving kindnesse] Or as other translations, I
will sing the mercies of the Lord, his Vatablus.
manifold and sundry mercies: as if he should say, we have tasted of more
then of one, yea we have felt all his mercies; I will therefore praise the
same for ever. I will sing his mercy for creating this universe, which is Io.
de combis compend. theolog. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Macrocosmus, a great world; and for making man, which is Microcosmus, a little
world. 1. My song shall set forth his kindness, for that he gave me being. 2.
For adding to my being, life, which he denies unto stones. 3. To life, sense,
which he denies unto plants. 4. To sense, speech, and understanding, which he
denies unto bruit beasts. I have great cause to praise the Lord, for that I am
a man; and yet greater, for that I am a sound man, having a due portion of wit,
and a true proportion of limbs and lineaments, maimed neither in the powers of
my soul, nor in the parts of my body. Some men are like the carved images of
Pagans, and Papists, Psalm. 135.16.
having mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and hear not, feet and
walk not, hands and handle not. I will therefore sing of thy mercies, O Lord,
for giving unto me perfect limbs, and perfect use thereof; eyes to see, tongue
to speak, ears to hear, feet to walk. I do not want so much as the left
hand, or the little finger of that hand, or the least joint of that finger.
Again, some men are maimed in their minds, as being either borne stark fools
(O heavy punishment!) or else for abusing their good wits in bad works, are
(by Gods secret and severe judgment) bereft of their intellectuals. Some,
which have heretofore worshipped Christ at Bethlem, and have preached also
Christ unto the King and his Court, in Bethel, are now lunaticke, bound hand
and foot in Bedlem Fatius de mortificatione. cap. 2
. In nature, the middle participates ever with his extremes, as the spring,
which is the middle between winter and summer, has (as you know) part of the
winters cold, and part of the summers heat; and the morning, which is the
middle between night and day, has a little darkness of the night, and a
little light of the day: so man is created by God, tanquam medius inter angelum
and brutu^, a middling between an Angel, and a brute; being a good deal
better then a beast, and a little Psalm. 8.5.
lower then an Angel. Having in respect of his body, something of a bruit,
being sensual and mortal; and in respect of his soul, something of an Angel,
as being intellectual and immortal. Now then, if the spring have not any
heat of summer, it is so cold as winter; and if the morning have no light of
the Sun, it is so dark as night: so man, if he want angelical abilities of
the soul, is little better then a beast, as Psalm. 32.10.
horse and mule without understanding: for as Orat. de Dione.
Synesius said, A wise man excels a fool, more then a fool does excel a beast.

As God is principium effectiuum in creatione: so refectiuum in redemptione. I
am exceeding much bound unto God for creating me when I was not; and for
preserving me under his wings, ever since I was: yet I am more bound to his
mercy for redeeming me, for blessing me with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things in Christ his Son, Ephesians. 1.3. for his electing of me, for
his calling of me, for his justifying of me, for his sanctifying of me. These
graces are the Ephesians. 2.4. and 3.16.
riches of his goodness and glory; Bellarmin.
misericordiae in aeternum, everlasting mercies, as reaching from Bernard. ser.
2. in ascen. Dom.
everlasting predestination, to everlasting glorification. O Lord, I will always
sing thy mercies in promising, and ever show thy truth in performing thy
promise made to David, thy chosen servant, concerning thy son, my Savior,
saying, thy seed will I stablish for ever. So the Hierom. Turrecremat.
Fathers expound our text, I will ever sing thy mercies, in vouchsafing to send
thy son to visit thy servants, sick to death in sin. First, I will ever
sing of thy mercifulness: and then I will ever be showing thy faithfulness.
Augustine.
Neque enim exhiberetur veritas in impletione promissorum, nisi praecederet
misericordia in remissione peccatorum. And what is Gods mercy set up for ever,
and his truth established in the heavens? but that which Esaias 55.3.
Esaias terms the sure mercies of David: that is, as Act. 13.34.
Paul construeth Esaias, the holy promises made to David: and the promise made to
David, is briefly this, thy seed will I stablish for ever, and set up thy
throne from generation to generation. For the Prophet Ethan here does August.
de ciuit. dei, lib. 17. cap. 9. Idem Euthym. and Tileman in loc.
allude to the Prophet Nathan, 2. Sam. 7. I will (says he from the Lord unto
David) set up thy seed after thee, and I will stablish the throne of his
kingdom for ever. Now this holy promise was not fulfilled in the temporal
kingdom of David, as Gods people complain in this Psalm, from the 37. to the
45. verse. It is therefore to be construed of Christ, and his spiritual
kingdom. Christ, according to the flesh, is the Romans 1.3.
seed of David, and the Mat. 1.1.
son of David: of him it is true which is said here by the Lord, My covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips: I have
sworn once by my holiness, that I will not fail David. His seed shall endure
for ever, and his seat is like as the Sun before me. He shall stand fast for
evermore as the Moon, and as the faithful witness in heaven. Of him it is
true, Psalm. 45.7. Heb. 1.8.
thy throne is for ever and ever. Of him it is true, heaven and earth shall
perish, and wax old as does a garment, and as a vesture thou shall fold them
up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not
fail, Psalm. 102.27. Heb. 1.12. Thou sweet Jesus art a Priest for ever, and a
Prince for ever. And surely God would have David's earthly kingdom to determine
in Iehoiachim and Zedechia, that his people might Hoc admonet vox intellectus
in titulo posita. Bellar. argum. huius Psalmi.
understand the holy covenant made with David of Christ, and that they might
pray, Lord, where are thy old loving kindnesses, which thou swarest unto David
in thy truth. See S. August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 17. cap. 9.10.11.12.13.

Now the Prophet, in process of his hymn, describes the natures and virtues
of Christ, as well inherent in his own person, as infused into his people.

His Humane nature, because the seed of David, a perfect man in soul and body,
against Bellarmin. de Christo. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Eutycheans, Epiphan. haeres. 77.
Apollinarists, August. haeres. 11.
Valentinians, Alphons. de haeres. lib. 4. fol. 70.
Nestorians, Idem ibid. fol. 73.
Monothelites, etc.

His Divine nature: First, for that the Church inuocates him as God, verse. 5. O
Lord, the very heavens shall praise thy wondrous works, and thy truth in the
congregation of the Saints. By heaven, is meant the Euthym. Tileman.
Church, and the Augustine. Hierom.
Preachers of Christ in the Church.

Secondly, Ethan proves Christ to be God by comparison, in the 6.7.8.9. verses.
Who is he among the clouds that shall be compared unto the Lord; or what is
he among the gods, that shall be like unto him? as if he should say, there is
neither Monarch on earth, nor Angel in heaven his peer.

Thirdly, from the preservation of all things, v. 10.11. Thou rulest the raging
of the sea, thou rulest the waves thereof when they arise, etc.

Fourthly, for that he created the world, ver. 12.13.14. The heavens are thine,
the earth also is thine, thou have laid the foundation of the round world, etc.

Having thus expressed his natures, and showed him to be Alphons. de
haeresibus. lib. 1. fol. 25.
verus homo, verusque Deus, tamen vnus vterque. He begins in the 15. verse, to
sing of his virtues, as well in his own person, as people. For himself,
righteousness and equity is the habitation of thy seat, mercy and truth shall
go before thy face. For his people, blessed are they that can rejoice in thee,
they shall walk in the light of thy countenance, their delight shall be daily
in thy name, etc. These things afford manifold instructions, according to the
prefixed title, a Psalm for instruction of Ethan the Ezrarite. But the point
aimed at most, is undoubtedly, Vatablus. Calvin.
that in all our tentations, and tempests of conscience, we should fly to the
sure mercies, and holy promises of God in Christ. If once we stay our souls on
this anchor, hold, we shall escape shipw-rack of faith. Ethan, who was either
penner, or singer of this hymn, is by Augustine.
interpretation robustus, one which is strong: now no man is strong in this
world, but he who relieth upon the sure promises of God. The consideration of
our own merits, is able to make us faint and feeble: but our trust in the
Lords everlasting mercies, makes us like mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but abides fast and firm for ever, Psalm. 125.1. And therefore Galat. de
arcan. lib. 6. cap. 12.
some Divines have construed this Scripture, by that Ierem. 9.23. Thus says
the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory
in his strength, neither the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that
glories, glory in this, that he understands and knows me to be the Lord,
which show mercy, judgment, and righteousness.

And as the Fathers under and before the law, comforted themselves in all
afflictions and misery, with the consideration of Christ's first coming: so let
us in the midst of our tentations and troubles be steadfast and immovable,
because we look for his second coming. He deferred his first coming a great
while, yet in the Galat. 4.4
fulness of time he dealt with his servants Luke 2.29.
according to his word. So the Saints expecting his second coming, cry with a
loud voice, Apocal. 6.10.
How long Lord, holy and true, do not thou judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on earth? And mockers in the last days also say, 2. Pet. 3.4.
Where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers died, all things
continue as they were from the beginning of the Creation. And yet the Lord
(says Saint Peter) is not slack concerning his promise, (as some men count
slacknes) but is patient toward us, and would have all men come to repentance.
Heb. 10.37.
Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not
tarry. Behold, (says he who never uttered untruth) Apoc. 22.12.
I come shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his
works are. The life present is so full of diseases and disasters, that our
happiness is Coloss. 3.4.
hid with Christ in God: but when he which is our life shall appear, then we
shall also appear with him in glory, for he shall Philip. 3.21.
change our vile body, that it may be like his glorious body: Martialis ad
Burdegal. epist. 8
Non euacuabitur veritas corporis, sed non erit pondus and fragilitas
corruptionis. Wherefore let us always be rich in the work of the Lord, for as
much as we know, that our labor is not in vain in the Lord, 1. Cor. 15.58.

Hitherto concerning the dittie of the song: I come now to the duty of the
singer. I will always sing thy mercies with my mouth, I will ever be showing thy
truth from one generation to another. I know Bellarmine.
some join in aeternum to the nowne misericordias, and not to the verb
cantabo, making the sense to be this: I will always sing thy mercies which
endure for ever. But always is referred as well, if not better unto the verb,
I will sing: as who would say, Lord, thy mercies are so manifest, and so
manifold, so great in their number, and so good in their nature, that I will
always, so Psalm. 146.1.
long as I have any being, sing praises unto thee. Happily some will object,
All flesh is grass, and the grace thereof as the flower of the field: the
grass withers, and the flower fades away. David being persecuted by Saul,
said, 1. Sam. 20.3.
there is but a step between death and me. Nay David, thy life is shorter then
a stride, but a spanne long, as thy self witnesses, Psalm 39.6. How can he
then that begs his bread but for a day, promise to spend his breath in
magnifying the Lord for ever? Answer is made, that the Prophet will not only
commend the mercies of the Lord in word, but also commit them unto writing.

Eobanus Hessus.
Vt sciat haec aetas, posteritasque legate. As the tongue of the Prophet is
termed Psalm. 45.2.
elsewhere, the pen of a ready writer: so the writing of the Prophet is here
termed his mouth, as Euthymius upon the place, Liber Psalmorum Acts 4.25.
os David. Wilcox.
He does intend to note the mercies of God, and to set forth his truth in a
book, the which he will leave behind him, (as an instrument) to convey the same
from generation to generation, from the generation of Euthym. Incognit.
Turrecremat.
Jews to the generation of Christians. Hierome.
Or from the old Testament to the new: for the blessed Apostles in their
Sermons usually cite sentences out of the Psalms. S. 2. Pet. 4.6.
Peter tells us, that the Gospel was preached unto the dead; so may we say,
that the Gospel is preached by the dead. For the most ancient Fathers, and
other judicious authors, which have spent their days in writing learned
expositions, and godly meditatio^s upon the holy scriptures, although they be
dead and sleep in the bed of their grave, yet they sing always the mercies of
the Lord, and show the truth of his word from one generation unto another. It
is reported in our Malmesbur. de gestis Reg. Anglorum, lib. 2. cap. 6.
Chronicles of Athelstan; Parum aetati vixit, multum gloriae. So, many zealous
and industrious Doctors have lived (in respect of their age) but a little, yet
in respect of their acts, a great while, shining still in their works and
writings, as lights of the world.

Or the Prophet may be said, to sing ever intentionally, though not actually.
Io. de Combis comp. Theolog. lib. 7. cap. 21.
For as the wicked, if he could live always, would sin always: so the good man
(if God should suffer him always to breathe on earth) would sing always the
mercies of the Lord. He will in 1. Thessal. 5.18
all things give thanks unto God, Psalm. 92.2.
early telling of his loving kindness in the morning, and of his truth in the
night season. In the morning, Dr. Incognit. Turrecremat. Glossa.
that is, in a prosperous estate, when as the Sun shines upon him, he will
acknowledge that every good gift in him is from above, coming down from the
Father of lights, and Father of mercies. And in the dark night of adversity
he tells of Gods justice, confessing ingenuously, Luke 23.41.
We receive things worthy of that we have done. He gives thanks unto the
Lord in both, in the one highly magnifying Gods favor; in the other humbly
vilifying his own fault.

Placidus. Jncognitus.
Or because God has inspired into man, not only the breath of Genesis 2.17.
this present life, but of John 3.16. Apoc. 2.10.
that also which is to come; the Saints are said to continue their song of Gods
praise in the kingdom of glory, which here they begin in the kingdom of
grace. For so the Spirit, Apoc. 19.1. I heard a great voice of a great
multitude in heaven, singing Halleluiah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and
peace be to the Lord our God.

It is objected, if the Saints in heaven always sing the mercies of the Lord,
then they remember their miseries on earth; and if they remember their sin
and sorrow here, how can they be perfitly blessed there? for the Lord says
Esaias 65.17.
I will create new heavens, and a new earth, and the former shall not be
remembered, nor come into mind. Gregor. moral. lib. 4. cap 42.
Answer is made, that as men in perfect health often remember their terrible
fits of their former sickness, with exceeding joy; yea the more they call into
mind their danger past, the greater is their delight present: even so the
Saints, in the kingdom of glory, remember happily their misdeeds and mishaps
in this valley of tears, but it is without any pollution of sin, or touch of
sorrow. So Vbi sup. Idem Augustine. lib. 22 de Ciuit. dei, cap. vlt.
Gregory the Great, Erit in illa beatitudine culpae memoria, non quae mentem
polluat, sed qua nos arctius laetitiae astringat; vt dum doloris sui animus
sine dolor reminiscitur, and debitorem se medico verius intelligat, and eo
magis acceptam salutem diligat, quo molestiae meminit quam euasit. August. apud
Io. de Combis comp. Theolog. lib. 7. cap. vlt.
Heavenly happiness consists in two things, in the necessary possessing of
every thing which is good, and in the necessary removing of every thing which
is evil. Misery then is not remembered of the Saints, as a matter of grief,
but as a motive to joy, because they be now Romans 7.24.
delivered from this body of death, and enjoy the Crown of everlasting life;
where God is to them 1. Cor. 15.28.
all in all, a glass to their sight, honey to their taste, music to their
hearing, Balsome to their smelling: where 1. Kings 3.12.
Salomons wisdom seems folly; 2. Sam. 2.18.
Ahasels agilitie, slownesse; Samsons strength, weakness; 2. Sam. 14.25.
Absoloms comelines, deformity; Caesar's empire, beggerie; Methusalems long
life, shortness of days, or a speedy death. Thus I have showed how the Prophet
may be said to sing always the mercies of the Lord, in this life unto the
worlds end, in the next for ever and ever world without end.

As for all means: he praises the Lord with his mouth, and all that is without
him; as also with his mind, and all that is within him. His Psalm. 45.1.
heart indites a good matter, and his tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
All his members are for the service of his Maker, as S. In loc.
Augustine glosseth our text, Obsequantur membra (inquit) mea, domino meo
loquor, sed tua loquor, annunciabo veritatem tuam in ore meo. Si non obsequor,
seruus non sum: si a me loquor, mendax sum. Ergo vt abs to dicam, and ego
dicam, duo quaedam sunt, vnum tuum, vnum meum: veritas tua, os meum.

Now let us according to this copy draw the lines of our lives, using all
means to set forth the loving kindness and truth of the Lord. Psalm. 105.1.
O give thanks unto the Lord, and call upon his name, tell the people what
things he has done. O let your songs be of him, and praise him, and let your
talking be of his wondrous works: O my soul praise the Lord, and all that is
within me praise his holy name; praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all
his benefits, who forgiueth all thy sins, and heals all thine infirmities;
who saves thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with loving kindness,
Psalm. 103. A good Christian is a tymbrel of the holy Ghost, his whole life
being nothing else but a well-tuned song of Sion, always magnifying the mercies
of God in his own person, and inuiting other to do the same. But the Psalm.
14.6.
mouth of the wicked is full of cursing and bitterness, their throat is an open
sepulcher, destruction and unhappiness is in their ways. A man of a foul
mouth is a beast in the form of a man, his tongue is the tongue of a Psalm.
140.3.
Serpent, Adders poison is under his lips; nay worse then a Serpent, for it
hurts not a man except it be present to see him, or to bite him, or to strike
him with his tail: but he which has a blasphemous and a bitter tongue,
hurts all, as well absent as present; neither sea nor land, neither scepter
nor sepulcher, neither heaven nor hell hinders him; he blasphemes God, he
wrongs his neighbor, he raileth on the dead, and rages against the living,
his tongue is the tongue of a Fiend, of a Fury. For as the holy Prophets of
God, when they preached, had their tongues (as it were) touched with a Esaias 6.6.
coal from the altar of God; and as godly men have their tongues inflamed with
the Mat. 3.11. Acts 2.3.
fire of Gods spirit, when as they speak graciously: so contrariwise, when a
man speaks evil, his tongue (says S. Chap. 3.2,
James) is kindled by the fire of hell, and Satan comes from thence with a
coal to touch his lips, and to set them on fire to all manner of mischief.
When as good men speak good things, their tongue is Chrysostom. hom. 99. in Mat.
Christ's tongue; but all manner of cursed and ungodly speaking, is no better
then the Devils language. Think on this all ye that forget God, whose mouths
are so far from singing his mercies always, that ye can hardly come in your
communication unto any full period, without interlacing an oath or two. It is
no wonder, that in Italy (which is a parcel of Antichrists kingdom)
blasphemies should be darted out against God and his Christ ordinarily, openly,
being made Relation of Religion, sect. 53.
phrases of gallantrie to the brauer, and very interiections of speech unto the
vulgar. But in England (where the scepter of Christ's kingdom has a long time
flourished) it cannot but wound the hearts of such, as mourn for the sins of
the land, to consider how commonly, not only the ruffin at the tavern, and
the rascal on the stage: but also the labourer at his work, and the gentleman
at his recreation, and the very boys, yea babes in the street curse their
Maker, and revile their Redeemer. Other sins are clothed (in some sort) with
excuse before men, in respect either of profit, or pleasure, content, or
credit: but in swearing there is neither good, nor gain, nor glory. I beseech
you therefore (my dear bowels in the Lord) instruct your children and
servants, how to serve God in a lively faith, and a reverend fear, let your
whole life be to them a walking Catechism, that they may sing always the
mercies of the Lord, and show forth his truth from generation to generation.

PSALM 110. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool.


THis Psalm (says In loc. Breuis numero verborum, sed magnus pondere
sententiarum.
Augustine) is in the number of words short, but in the weight of matter ample,
containing so many deep mysteries, and opposing so many dangerous heresies:
that (as In loc.
Chrysostom notes) we need many eyes for the right reading and exact
understanding of it.

If we literally refer this unto David, he brings in a subject or a
favorite speaking thus of himself, The Lord said unto my Lord the King. David
as a King is a Lord, because ye Lieutenant, and (as it were) Vicegerent of the
Lord. In this sense Paul tells us, that there be many Gods and many Lords,
1. Cor. 8.5. many Gods in title and type, but in deed and truth one God only.
Princes are Gods in name: for (says the Lord) Psalm. 82.6.
I have said, ye are Gods: but not in nature, for ye shall dye like men. All
higher powers hold their Scepters from the Prou. 8.15.
highest power, Psalm. 75.8.
he puts down one, and sets up another, according to the style, James by
the grace of God, etc. Calvin. in loc.
More principally David, who was called to his kingdom by Gods especial
grace, and used his kingdom to Gods especial glory. For he was a man
according to Gods Acts 13.22.
own heart, turning from nothing the Lord commanded him all the days of his
life, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1. King. 15.5.

And surely (beloved) if we will in sensu similitudinario, consider earnestly
the wonderful union of these two kingdoms, England and Scotland, and the
flourishing estate of the Gospel, under the government of our dread Sovereign:
we shall have good cause to take up this song, The Lord said unto King James
our Lord, sit in thy throne, for I have both appointed and anointed thee King
over great Britannie.

Dr. Incognit. in loc.
Or happily David might speak this of himself, The Lord said unto me,
concerning my Lord Saul persecuting me, sit thou down by the power of my right
hand, and be well assured of my protection, until I have made all thine
enemies thy footstool: that is, all such as hindered thee from thy kingdom,
obedient subjects unto thee, saying, 2. Sam. 5.1.
Behold, we are thy bones and thy flesh. So the Lord spoke by the Prophet
Natha^, 2. Sam. 12.7. I anointed thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out
of the hand of Saul, and gave thee thy Lords house, and thy Lords wives into
thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and Judah, and would moreover (if
that had bin too little) have given thee such and such things, etc.

But because S. Peter, Acts 2.34. and S. Paul, Heb. 1.13. expound this text of
Christ, and Christ himself applies it unto himself, Matthew. 22.44. Mark.
12.36. Luke 20.42. I forbear to treat any longer of shadows, and come to the
substance, taking this Psalm for a prophecy concerning Christ in fact, and
David only but in figure. Christ then is described here: 1. Genebrard.
As a King, verse. 1.2.3. 2. As a Priest, verse. 4.5. 3. As a Judge, verse. 6.7.


His kingdom is great in respect of Countenance, The Lord said unto my Lord,
sit thou on my right hand. Continuance, Until I make thine enemies thy
footstool, etc.


Or, Tremellius.
three points are remarkable, concerning his kingdom: 1. His calling to this
kingdom by God the Father, verse. 1. 2. His administration of this kingdom by
the scepter of his word, verse. 2. 3. His subjects obedience to this
administration, verse. 3.


Apud Pet. Galatin de arcanis lib. 8. cap. 24.
Some Doctors among the Jews have construed this of David's Angel, appointed by
the Lord for his peculiar guard and guide. But I say to them out of S. Heb.
1.13.
Paul, Unto which of the Angels said the Lord at any time, sit at my right
hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? Apud Hierom. in Mat. 22. and
D. Incognit. and Agellium in loc.
Other Rabbis expound this of Abraham, as making it a thanksgiving unto the
Lord for the victory, which he got against the four Kings, Genesis 14. Other
understand this of Justin Martyr in dialog. contra Triphonem, and Tertullian
lib. 5. contra Marcian.
Ezechiah: other of Vti Chrysostom. in loc.
Zorobabel. But all these holy Fathers are dead, and have slept long in the
dust of their grave: whereas the Lord (here mentioned) is a Priest for ever,
and has a kingdom Heb. 1.8.
without end. And so consequently this Psalm cannot aptly be construed either
of man, or angel, or of any other mere creature; but of Christ alone the
Messiah and Mediator, being the son of David as man, and the Lord of David
as God.

The Jews understood not this, and therefore they could not answer Christ's
question, Mat. 22.45. If David call him Lord, how is he then his son? neither
should we have learned this, except Christ and his Apostles had taught it us.
Nunc ergo, says In loc.
Augustine, quia didicimus, dicimus; as we have read, so we believe, that
Christ, as being Philip. 2.6.7.
equal to God, is the Lord of David: and as found in the form of a servant,
the son of David. As Ioh. 1.1.14.
in the beginning, the Lord of David: as made flesh, the son of David; as
Esaias 7.14.
conceived and borne of a Virgin, the son of David: as Emmanuel, the Lord of
David. See Hierom. in Mat. 22. pet. galatin. de arcanis lib. 3. cap. 17. and
lib. 8. cap. 24. Chrysostom. D. Incognit. August. Steuchus, Calvin, Tileman,
Agellius, Bellarmin, and alios in loc.

The Lord said then unto my Lord, is (as Turrecremat. Tremellius. Genebrardus.
if he should have said) God the Father said unto God the Son. And therefore
Galatin. de arcanis. lib. 8. cap. 24. and Steuchus in loc.
Rabbi Ionathas translateth it in the Chalde, dixit dominus verbo suo, the Lord
said to his Word. Here then observe Placid. parmen.
the distinction of persons in the Godhead against Tileman.
Artemon, Sabellius, and Seruetus. The Father said unto the Son, Ergo, the
Father is distinguished from the Son, August de ciuit. dei. lib. 11. cap. 10.
and Lombard. 1. sent. distinct. 2.
alius, howsoever not aliud, another person, albeit not another substance: for
as the Father is Lord, so the Son Lord, and the holy Ghost Lord; and yet not
three Lords, but one Lord, as Athanasius in his Creed.

The Lord said] But how, when, and where? the words of our mouths are first
(as the Aristotle. Perihermin. cap. 1.
Philosopher truly) notions of our mind. So God has a twofold word, Dr.
Incognit.
ad intra, conceived within himself, and ad extra, revealed unto men.
According to both he said this, Melanct. in loc.
Immensa sapientia decretum fecit, and id generi humano pat^fecit. First,
according to his intrinsecall word, he said it before the worlds; as it is in
the second Psalm, verse. 7. The Lord said unto me, thou art my son, this day
have I begotten thee. Secondly, according to his extrinsecall and revealed
word, he said it in the world; Tileman.
to wit, in the beginning, Genesis 3.15. the seed of the woman, etc I, (said the
Lord unto the serpent) will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed, and her seed: he shall break thine head, and thou shall
bruise his heel. Christ is that promised seed of the woman, as being Romans 1.3.
made of the seed of David, according to the flesh; he shall break the Serpents
head, is all one with our text, sit thou on my right hand, until I have made
all thine enemies thy footstool.

My] Not only, because to be borne of my seed and posterity; Agellius.
but mine, in regard of mine affection, and particular application. As his
mother Mary called him, my Savior; and his Apostle Thomas, my God; and Paul,
Galath. 2.20. Christ loved me, and gave himself for me.

Lord] Saint In loc.
Hierome, and Apud Genebrard. in loc. Adonai. Adoni.
other learned (in the Hebrew) note, that in the first place, the word
translated here Lord, is proper only to God; but in the second, communicable
to men. And so Christ according to his manhood, began to sit at the right hand
of God after his ascension into heaven, and not before. Christ (as the son of
God) was ever at Gods right hand, equal in might and majesty: for in the
Trinity none is before or after other, none is greater or less the^ another,
but all the three persons are coeternall, and coequall. As the Son is said in
this verse, to sit at the right hand of the Father: so the Father on the Sons
right hand, verse. 5. The Lord upon thy right hand shall wound even Kings in the
day of his wrath. But Christ as man, was not exalted unto this honor before
his glorious ascension, as Saint Peter expounds our text, Act. 2.^4. David is
not ascended up into heaven, but the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my
right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Therefore let all the
house of Israel know for a surety, that God has made him both Lord and Christ;
this Jesus (I mean) whom ye have crucified. And Paul, Philip. 2.8. He humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the Cross;
wherefore God has highly exalted him. And in Ephesians. 1.20.
another place, God raised him from the dead, and set him at his right hand in
heavenly places.

Yet the Lord said not this unto Christ, as unto a mere man, Esaias 42.8.
I am the Lord (quoth he) this is my name, and my glory will I not give to
another: but to Christ God and man, our Messiah and Mediator, one person in two
natures. As Christ is our Jesus and Emmanuel, he has Mat. 28.18.
all power in heaven, and on earth. Phil. 2.10.
At the name of Jesus, every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. Chrysostom. Theophylact. Gorran. in
loc. Pauli.
Angels and Saints in heaven; men on earth, and the devils of hell under earth.
Christ has all power in heaven, Dr. Incognit.
as having the godly subject to him out of their devotion: and all power on
earth, as having the wicked made subject to his footstool, will they, nill
they. For there is a Euthym. Placid parmen. in loc. idem Aquin. in Philip. 2.
lect. 3.
twofold subjection; one voluntary, another extorted. All glorious Angels, all
blessed spirits, all good men of their own accord yield obedience to Jesus
fully, cheerfully: but the wicked men on earth, and the damned fiends in hell,
in despite of their teeth, are blocks at his footstool. August. in loc.
Quaere ergo, quem locum habeas sub pedibus domini dei tui, nam necesse est vt
habeas, aut gratiae, aut poenae: for as every knee should bow, so every knee
shall bow, (says Esaias 45.23.
Esaias) that knee, that will not out of faith, shall out of fear: so David
here, the Lord said unto my Lord, sit at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.

Vntill] This word Gregor. moral. lib. 8. cap. 40. Chrysostom. Incognit. Agellius
in loc.
notes here, not a piece of time, but a perpetuity. For Christ (after all his
enemies are made his footstool) shall ever sit at the right hand of God, his
throne is for ever and ever, Heb. 1.8. And power is unto him that sits upon
the Throne, for evermore, Apocal. 5.13. So donec is used, Deuteronomy. 7.23. The Lord
thy God shall destroy them with a mighty destruction, until they be brought to
naught: hereby meaning, that they shall utterly be consumed, because they
cannot any more resist, after once they be brought to nothing. And Psalm. 112.
verse. 8. The good man's heart is established, and will not shrink, until he
see his desire upon his enemies. If his heart were not afraid for any evil
tidings, when his enemies stood up against him; how shall he shrink when he
sees their necks given unto him? And Matthew. 1.25. he knew her not, until
she had brought forth her first borne son, etc. Until, in that place does
not import (as the Hierom. Chrysostom. Theophylact. Euthym.
Doctors have well observed against Heluidius) that Joseph afterward carnally
knew Mary; for she was a perpetual virgin, as well after, as before the birth
of her son Jesus. See 2. Sam. 6.23. Mat. 5.18. and 28.20.

It is objected against this interpretation out of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 15.24.
that Christ, after he has put down all things under his feet, shall in fine,
deliver up the kingdom to God. Answer is made by Chrysostom, upon our text
out of Ioh. 16.15. Al things that the Father has, are mine. And. Ioh. 17.10.
All mine are thine, and thine are mine. Marlorat. in 1. Cor. 15.24.
As then God the Father was not without his kingdom, when as God the Son
said, Mat. 11.27. John 3.35.
all things are given unto me of my Father: no more shall God the Son be
de-thrond, when he shall deliver up his kingdom to his Father. See Luther,
Anselm. Lombard. in 1. Cor. 15.24.
He now reigns in secret, but when all his enemies once shall be made his
footstool, then he shall openly rule, much more, sitting at his Fathers right
hand for evermore.

I make] Christ is Philip. 3.21.
able to subdue all things unto himself, and according to his power he shall
also put all things under his feet, 1. Cor, 15.27. How then is it true that God
the Father says, until I make thine enemies thy footstool? Answer is made,
that Ioh. 5.19.
whatsoever things the Father does, the same things also does the Son: Euthym.
for this action is common to the Son with the Father, I say common to the
Son, Bellarmin. in loc.
in respect of his eternal generation, as God, and in respect of the
hypostaticall union as man. Yet this work is ascribed especially to the
Father, as being a work of might, according to that orthodoxall axiom; Works
of power are ascribed to the father; of wisdom, to the Son; of love, to the
holy Ghost.

Thine enemies] Tileman.
Here note, that the Church is not a kingdom living always in pomp, and
peace* but (as Cant. 6.3.
Solomon speaks) as an army with banners, exposed to great danger, as being
opposed by cruel and cunning enemies. If any man will take the Churches
portraiture, let him (says Loc. Com. tit. de persecut. verae Eccles.
Luther) paint a seely poor maid sitting in a forlorn wood, or wilderness,
compassed about on every side with hungry Lions, Woolues, Boares, Bears; in
one word, with all hateful and hurtful beasts, and in the midst of a great
many furious men, assaulting her every minute (as they did here Christ) with
Mat. 26.47.
swords and staves; and that which is more terrible, threatening fire and
water: fire, to consume her flesh and bones into ashes; water, to consume her
ashes into nothing, if it were possible.

To speak more distinctly, Christ and his Church have Tileman.
two sorts of enemies; secular, and spiritual. Secular, as idolatrous
Gentiles, blasphemous Turks, and other barbarous Infidels out of the Church:
as also violent Tyrants, virulent Heretics, fraudulent Antichrists in the
bosom of the Church. For (as Vbi sup.
Luther notes out of Augustine) the Church has had a threefold oppression. The
first violent, by persecuting Emperors: the second fraudulent, by subtle
heretics: the third both violent, and fraudulent, by pestilent Antichrists
in the kingdom of Popery; where the temporal power, and spiritual are
joined together, against all that is called God.

Now Christ is a ruler in the midst of all these: Psalm. 99.1.
the Lord is King, be the people never so impatient; he sits between the
Cherubims, be the earth never so unquiet. Howsoever the Psalm. 2.
Gentiles furiously rage together, and ungodly Princes take counsel together,
against his anointed: he that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn,
he shall have them in derision; he shall bruise them with a rod of iron, and
break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Albeit Apoc. 7.1.
four wicked Angels stand on the four corners of the earth, holding the four
winds, that the wind should not blow on the earth, neither on the sea, neither
on any tree: yet See epist. on Al-Saints day.
Christ having the seal of the living God, cries with a loud voice to the
four angels, to whom power was given to hurt the earth, and the sea: Hurt ye
not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees; until we have sealed the
servants of our God in their foreheads. He sits at Gods right hand, till his
enemies are made his footstool: Vatablus in loc.
that is, until he say to tyrants, and Hypocrites, and Heretics, and
Antichrists, and to the whole rabble of the reprobate, depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels.

The spiritual enemies of Christ and his Church, are Satan and all his
accomplices, sin, torment of conscience, malediction of the law, death, hell;
over all which our blessed Savior Coloss. 2.15.
triumphed openly. For in dying, he did overcome death; and in rising again
from the dead, he made the grave his footstool, saying, Hos. 13.14.
O death I will be thy death; O grave, I will be thy destruction. Now (beloved)
his conquest is our victory; for he did overcome the world for us, and the
devil for us, and death for us. He was wounded for our Esaias 53.5.
transgressions, and broken for our iniquities; his name is Ier. 23.6.
the Lord our righteousness; he therefore died for our sins, and rose again
for our Justification. He delivered us out of the hands of all our enemies,
that we might serve him all the days of our life without fear. As for our
sins, he says, Esa. 43.25. I, even I am he, that puts away thine
iniquities for mine own sake, and will not remember thy faults. Esaias 1.18.
Alebeit they were like Crimosin, they shall be made white as snow: though they
were red as Scarlet, they shall be like wool; the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, 1. Ioh. 1.7. He redeemed us from the curse of the
law, when he was made a curse for us, Galath. 3.13. He put out that
handwriting of ordinances against us; he cancelled that obligation, and took
it out of the way, fastening it upon his Cross, Coloss. 2.14. Concerning
torment of conscience, being justified by faith, we have peace toward God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 5.1.

Lastly, touching death and hell; he Esaias 25.8.
destroys death for ever, and wipes away the tears from the faces of all his
people, that they may triumph in the words of 1. Cor. 15.55.
Paul, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the sting of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be to God, that
has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. He that believes in the
Lord Jesus, has Ioh. 17.3.
eternal life; neither shall he taste of the Apocal. 20.6.
second death. If God then be with us, who can be against us? If the Lord have
said unto my Lord, sit on my right hand, until I have made thine enemies thy
footstool? What need I fear what either man, or Angel, or devil is able to
do against me? My Jesus is a Esaias 25.4.
refuge against the tempest, and a shadow against the heat, a Psalm. 46.1.
present help in all my tribulation and trouble. Romans 8.33.
Who shall lay any thing to my charge, seeing it is God that justifies? and who
shall condemn; seeing Christ which is dead, yea rather which is risen again,
sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us daily? Mat.
28.20.
He says, I am with you till the end, and then he will say unto us in the
end, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world.

The Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of Sion] A Plutarch in the life
of Caesar.
Captain sent from Caesar, unto the Senators of Rome, to sue for the
prolonging of his government abroad; understanding (as he stood at the
Counsell-chamber door) that they would not condescend to his desire, clapping
his hand upon the pummell of his sword; Well (said he) seeing you will not
grant it him, this shall give it him. So when the Citizens of Messana,
despising Pompei's iuris-diction, alleged ancient orders, and privileges of
the Romans in old time granted unto their town: Pompei did answer them in
choler (as Plutarch relates in his life) What do you prattle to us of your
law, that have our swords by our sides? So Caluino. turcis. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Mahumet dissolueth all arguments by the sword; in Vbertas solieta. tract. de
causis magnitud. imperij Turcici.
his kingdom no man is advanced unto places of any great worth or worship, but
the souldior; and the Augerius. Busbequius legate. Turcic. epist. 1.
left hand among the Turks is accounted most honorable, because the sword
hangs on that side. So Tyrants and Potentates of the world, end all their
quarrels, and make their enemies their footstool, by the sword. But the
scepter of Christ's kingdom, is not a sword of steel, but a sword of the
spirit; he rules in the midst of his enemies, and subdueth a people to
himself, not by the sword, but by the Melancthon. Tileman. Vatablus. Agellius.
word: for the Gospel is the power of his arm to salvation, Romans 1.16.
casting down holds, and imaginations, and every high thing that is exalted
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought unto
the obedience of Christ. 2. Cor. 10.5.

And the Lord is said here to send the rod of his power out of Sion, according
to the prophecies of Cap. 2. verse. 3.
Isaiah, and Cap. 4. verse. 2.
Micah; the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. The blessed Apostles (as we read, Act. 2.) received the gifts of
the holy Ghost at Jerusalem, and exercised also these gifts of utterance first
in Jerusalem. It is true that their Romans 10.18.
sound went out through all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the
world; and that they did execute their commission in preaching unto Mark. 16.15.
every creature: but yet according to their masters iniunction, Luke 24.47.
they began at Jerusalem. So Paul and Barnabas told the Jews, Act. 13.46. It
was necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you: but
seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life; lo we turn to the Gentiles. Here then is a pregnant text, to prove
that the Gospel is not the word of 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
man, but the wisdom of 1. Cor. 2.7.
God, and Ephesians. 6.17.
sword of his spirit; for that it is agreeable to the predictions of all his
holy Prophets, ever since the world began. Again, Tileman in loc.
this evidence confutes the Jews, obstinately denying that the promised
Messiah is come. His word comes out of Sion, he must (according to this
prophecy) begin his spiritual kingdom in Jerusalem, even while the Jews
Commonwealth and religion is standing: for the scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a lawgiver between his feet, until Shilo come, and the people
shall be gathered unto him, Genesis 49.10. But alas, Jerusalem has a long time
been made level with the Luke 19.44.
ground: Lament. 1.1.
she that was great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, is
now made tributarie. Barbarus has segetes -- the Lord has so darkened the
daughter of Sion in his wrath, and cast down from heaven unto the earth,
Isreal's glory, Lam. 2.1. that the barbarous Apocal. 20.8.
Gog and Magog, are now lords of that (sometime) holy land; Jerusalem in old
time the City of God, is now (being possessed by the Turks) nothing else but a
den of thieves. Ergo, Christ is that promised Messiah: it is Mat. 11.3.
he that should come, neither need we look for another.

Be thou ruler in the midst among thine enemies] By Agellius. Bellarmin.
rod, is meant Christ's scepter; because strong rods are for the scepters of
them that bear rule, Ezech. 19.11. and Ier. 48.17. How is the strong staff
broken, and the beautiful rod? And by his scepter is meant, his power; and the
word is that his power, by which he rules in the midst of all his enemies:
converting such enemies as appertain to Gods election; and confounding such
enemies as are the sons of perdition: his Gospel is unto the one, the savor
of life unto life; and to the other, the savor of death unto death, 2. Cor.
2.16.

The blessed Apostles preached the Gospel in the midst of their enemies,
Chrysostom. Euthym.
as being sheep in the midst of woolues, Mat. 10.16. And Lib. 1. cap. 2. and
3.
Irenaeus, who lived in the next age, witnesses also that the Church increased
in Egypt, Lybia, France, Spain, Germany, comparing the light of the Gospel
unto the Sun, illuminating all men excepting such as are lost, having their
minds blinded by the Prince of this world, 2. Cor. 4.4.

In all after times unto this present day Christ ruled, and his kingdom
flourished in despite of all his enemies, in the midst of Atheists, in the
midst of Infidels, in the midst of Heretics, in the midst of Hypocrites,
in the midst of Tyrants, in the midst of Turks, in the midst of
Antichrists. At the worlds end (when our blessed Savior sitting at his
Fathers right hand shall utterly 1. Cor. 15.19.
put down all things under his feet) the good shall be separated from the
bad, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats, Matthew. 25.32. But so
long as the world (that 1. John 5.19.
lies in wickedness) continues, the Matthew. 13.30.
wheat grows among tares, and the Church is ever as a lilie among Cant. 2.2.
thorns, assaulted on ye one side by unbelievers, and on the other side by
mis-beleeuers. On the left hand by the blasphemous propositions of Heretics,
on the right hand by the contentious oppositions of Schismatikes: openly
wronged by cut-throate tyrants, and secretly wringed by backbyting hypocrites.
Lib. de re rustica.
Varro writes, that the Romans in old time did overcome their enemies sedendo:
but the Romanists in our time think to make their enemies (as it were) their
footstool caedendo, by dagge and dagger, by powder-plots, and powder-shots, by
fire, force, fury. Yet notwithstanding Christ is a Ruler, and his subjects are
Romans 8.37.
more then Conquerours in the very midst of Anti-christianisme. For the
beheadding of Martyrs is like the Justin Mart. in dialog. cum Tryphon.
cutting of vines, the more they be cut, the more they prosper and fructify.
The Baro ius praefat. tom. 8. annal.
Church faith, as Paul, 2. Cor. 12.10. When I am weak, then am I strong. Loc
com. tit. de Luthero.
Martin Luther (assisted doubtless by Gods own spirit) so little regarded the
bloody Papists in the quarrel of Christ's Gospel, as that he said peremptorily,
Contemptus est a me Romanus furor and feruor. And therefore being advised by
some good friends, that he would not adventure himself to be present at the
meeting of the Germane Princes at Worms: he did answer them in this wise: For
as much as I am sent-for, I am resolved and certainly determined to enter
Worms, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, although I knew there were so
many devils to resist me, as there are tyles to cover all the houses in Worms:
Fox Martyr. fol. 776. And B. Mr. Fox in his martyrdom.
Latymer being brought to the stake, was so well assured, that Christ even by
his weakness should rule in the midst of his enemies, as that upon the
kindling of the first faggot, he said to his fellow martyr, Bishop Ridley:
Courage brother Ridley, we shall (by Gods grace) this day light such a candle in
England, as I hope shall never be put out again.

In the day of thy power, shall the people offer thee freewill offrings] Christ
(by the preaching of his word) subdueth unto himself a good and a great
people. Good, They shall offer thee free will offerings with an holy worship.
Great, The dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning. In the days of thy
power, Calvin.
that is, in the days of thy solemn assemblies, in the days of thy
Tremellius.
Gospel, until thou shall overcome thine enemies with the 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
spirit of thy mouth, and abolish the^ with the brightness of thy coming: thy
people shall offer free will offerings unto thee, Melanct. Mollerus. Tileman.
not enforced by law, but coming out of love: not out of fashion or faction,
but in pure devotion and cheerful obedience. They shall appear before thee
with an holy worship, or as our new translation, in the beauties of holiness:
that is, in thy Tremel. Wilcox.
Temple, which is a glorious Sanctuary, Psalm. 29.2. Agellius.
Or in a holiness equalling the holiness of thy Sanctuary; for good
Christians are the temples of God, 1. Cor. 3.16. Or by beauties of holiness,
he means happily the Tileman. Melancthon. Mollerus.
Priests garment, insinuating, that Christ's elect people should be named Esaias
61.6.
the Priests of the Lord, a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people, showing forth the virtues of him, that has called
them out of darkness into marvelous light, 1. Pet. 2.9. The sum of all is,
that the subjects of his kingdom shall appear before him in Genebrard.
all kind of sanctity, Bellarm.
resplendent in holiness, and shining in good works as lights in the world,
Philip. 2.15.

If all Christ's people then offer him free will offerings with an holy worship,
he will not abide such as are hypocrites, who serve the truth only to serve
their turn, Psalm. 50.16.
taking his covenant in their mouth, and yet hate to be reformed. Bradford in a
letter to the City of London.
To the petition (let thy kingdom come) we must adioyne thy will be done,
done on earth, as it is in heaven. He will (as S. Apoc. 3.16.
John tells us) spue such out of his mouth as are neither hot nor cold,
mungrils in religion, 1. Kings 18.21.
halting between God and Baal, having (as the Hosea 10.2.
Prophet speaks) a divided heart, an heart and an heart, like the Aul. Gellius
Noct. attic. lib. 16. cap 15.
Hares in Bisaltia, or ye Partridges in Paphlagonia. Bradford in a letter to
Dr. Hill Physician.
The way of Christ is so strait, that it will suffer no reeling to this side,
or that side: if any halt in it, he is like to fall off the bridge into the
pit of eternal perdition. The Lord (for our example) has inflicted heavy
judgments in all ages, upon such as have not uprightly walked, but halted
before him: I will only remember one, which happened upon Fox Mart. fol. 1911.
Castellanus, who (having first enriched himself by the Gospel, and afterward
forsaking the pure doctrine thereof, and turning again to his popish vomit,
so that he persecuted the Christians in Orleance) by the hand of God was
stricke^ in his body with a grievous sickness, unknown to the Physicians, the
one half of his body burning as hot as fire, and the other being so cold as
Ice, and so miserably crying and lamenting ended his life.

The dew of thy birth is of the womb of the morning] A very difficult place,
diversely construed, either of Christ himself, or of his gifts, or of his
people. First of Christ himself, and that in respect of his Godhead, and of
his Manhood. Of his Chrysostom. Hierome. Augustine. Euthym. in loc. Idem Ambrose
de fide lib. 1. cap. 6. and Eusebius. hist. lib. 1. cap. 4.
Godhead, that the Father says unto him, of the womb (that is, of mine own
essence) before the early morning (that is, before the world was) thou have the
dew of thy youth, or birth; noting his eternal generation before all worlds, as
is showed Prou. 8.22.23.24.25. And according to this sense the Septuagint
Interpretors have translated, of the womb before the morning star begat I
thee. If it be meant of his Manhood, it may be See Tertull. lib. 5. cont.
Mar. and Justin. dialog. cum Tryphon. Galat de arcanis, lib. 3. cap. 17.
Melanct. in loc.
thus expounded, of the womb of the dark morning, or Virgin, thou have the
dew of thy birth. If we will understand it of his See Steuchus and Mollerus in
loc.
gifts and grace, the plentiful and abundant dew of thy gifts and gladness
above thy fellows, was in thee from the very womb. But because David in this
verse speaks neither of the person, nor of the gifts of the Messiah, but of
his subjects, I side with Bucer. Calvin. Mollerus. Tileman. Geneua gloss.
Strigellius. Tremellius.
our Divines, who read and interpret it after this sort, thy youth, or
newborn people, shall be to thee at the morning. By the preaching of thy word,
thou shall bring forth a people not only good, but also great, whose increase
shall be so plentiful and wonderful as the drops of the morning dew. For as
the dew, that secretly falls from heaven abundantly, covers and refreshes
all the earth: so thy word, by the secret operation of the holy spirit, Deuteronomy.
32.2.
stilling as the dew, and as the shower upon the herbs, is that 1. Pet. 1.23.
immortal seed, by which an incredible number of children are begotten unto
God, ouer-spreading the face of the whole world, according to that of S. John
1.12.
John, To them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to them that
believe in his name, which are borne not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. This exposition I take to be most
agreeable to the drift of our text, and to the words of our translation.

Buchanan Paraphras. in loc.
Non roris imber ante lucem argenteis tot vest it arua gemmulis,
Quam multa cunctis gentium de finibus ad te propago confluet.
The Lord swear and will not repent] Men (as Paul teaches, Heb. 6.) swear by
him that is greater then themselves: but almighty God, as having none greater
to swear by, swear by himself to father Abraham, Genes. 22.16. By my self
have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou have done this thing, and have not
spared thine only son, therefore will I surely bless thee, and will greatly
multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon
the sea shore, and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies, and in thy
seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. This oath is repeated and
renewed again unto Isaac, Genes. 26.3. The Lord appeared unto him, and said, I
will perform the oath which I swear unto Abraham thy father. And the servants
and Saints of God ever highly reverenced and esteemed this oath. He (says our
Psalm. 105, 8.
Prophet) is the Lord our God, he has always been mindful of his covenant and
promise, that he made to a thousand generations, even the covenant that he
made with Abraham, and the oath that he swear to Isaac. And Ierem. 11.4. Thus
says the Lord, ye shall be my people, and I will be your God, that I may
confirm the oath, which I have sworn unto your fathers. And Zacharias in his
hymn, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people, etc. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets ever since the world
began, etc. performing that oath, which he swear to our forefather Abraham.

It was in the Lord great mercy to give his word, that he would in the fulness
of time send his Son for the redemption of the world, saying, The seed of
the woman shall break the Serpents head: but it was assuredly greater mercy
to swear by his Psalm. 89.34.
holiness, that he would perform this promise. God is truth, and we have good
cause to believe him upon his word, who made us and all things else by his
Psalm. 33.9.
word: but yet for our better assurance, being desirous more abundantly to show
unto the heirs of promise the stablenes of his counsel, bound himself with
an oath, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for him to
lie, we might have strong consolation. Heb. 6.18.

These two things are his word, and oath. His word is true, Psalm. 33.4. I
(quoth the Lord) Ezech. 37.14.
have spoken it, and I will perform it, Numb. 23.19.
God is not as man, that he should lie; neither as the son of man, that he
should repent: has he said, and shall he not do it? and has he spoken,
and shall he not accomplish it? Luke 21.33. Mat. 5.18.
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot of his word shall pass
away, till all things be fulfilled. And if his bare word be thus immutable,
then his Quoad nos.
oath much more, which among men is an end of all strife, Heb. 6.16. Behold
then here the goodness of the Father of mercies, and God of comfort, who for
our sake did not only say, but also swear, that Christ is our Priest for
ever. Happy men are they who believe this promise, for that is Ioh. 17.3.
eternal life: but accursed are such as Heb. 2.3.
neglect so great salvation. He that believes not God, makes him a liar
(says Saint 1. Epist. 5.10.
John): Nay, seeing God has bound his word with an oath, he that believes not
this record concerning his Son, does accuse God of perjury. This ought to
comfort us in all our tentations, at the hour of death, and in the day of
judgment. For albeit we have sinned against heaven, and against earth; against
God in heaven, against our brethren on earth: although our sins are great for
their number, and grievous for their nature; yet let us go Heb. 4.16.
boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy. For as much as we
have such an high Priest, as is touched with a feeling of our infirmities, and
says, Mat. 9.13.
I am not come to call the righteous to repentance, but sinners, and swears,
Ezech. 33.11.
as I live, I desire not the death of a sinner; let not any despair, Ferus
postil. ser. 5. in. Dom. septuages.
though he have denied Christ, as Peter; and betrayed Christ, as Judas; and
crucified Christ, as Pilate.

And will not repent] The passions of men are ascribed to God, secundum
effectum, (as 1. part. quaest. 21. art. 3.
Aquine speaks) but not secundum affectum. And so the Scripture speaking Romans
6.19.
grossly to man's understanding, says, that the spirit is Ephesians. 4.30.
grieved, and that the Lord Genesis 6.6.
repented he had made man, and 1. Sam. 15.11.
Saul King; and Jonah 3.10. God repented of the evil that he had said that he
would do to Nineueh. The Lord in his secret counsel, is yesterday, and to
day, and the same also for ever, Heb. 13.8. But unto us men (in his revealed
word) he seems to put on affections of anger and grief, Placid. parmen.
behauing himself as one who repents and grieves. Again, God speaks in his
revealed word, sometimes conditionally, sometimes absolutely. His sentence
concerning the destruction of Nineueh, was only conditional, if they did not
repent; according to that of the Psalm. 7.13.
Psalmist, If a man will not turn, then he will whet his sword. And therefore
when the Lord saw the works of the men of Nineueh, that they turned from their
evil ways, he turned away his wrath from them. Et sic Deus (as one pithily)
non vertitur, sed auertitur orationibus nostris. But when Almighty God speaks
absolutely, thou are my son, and as in our text categorically, thou art a
Priest for ever, etc. he will not repent, nor Psalm. 89.34.
alter the thing which is gone out of his mouth. See S. Augustine de diuersis
quast ad Simplicium lib. 2. quaest. 2. Rupert. Calvin in caput 3. Ionae.
Augustine. D. Incognit. Bellarmin and alios in loc.

Thou art a Priest for euer] The Lord teaches us how we should swear, by
precept, and pattern. By precept, Ierem. 4.2. Thou shall swear in truth, in
judgment, and in righteousness. Where Hierom. in loc. and Thomas 22^. quaest.
89. art. 3.
Divines observe, that these three virtues ought to be the companions of all
our oaths. Judgment forbids all rash and idle swearing; truth, all lying and
false swearing; righteousness, all blasphemous and ungodly swearing by the
creatures. God, (according to this precept) swears himself here; he
swears in righteousness, as swearing by himself, being both omnipotent, and
omni-scient: in truth, for that he will not repent: in judgment, saying to
his Son, thou art a Priest for ever. Agelsius in loc.
When he spoke before of Christ's kingdom, he said only, sit thou at my right
hand: but now treating of Christ's Priesthood, he swears: Calvin in loc.
insinuating that the priesthood of Christ is of exceeding great consequence;
for the Lord (instructing us how we may swear by his own example) swears not
in any trifling case, but for the confirmation of a serious and necessary
truth of a most high nature.

Let us examine therefore how Christ is a Priest for over. An high Priest (as
the Heb. 5.1.
Scripture defines) is a person called of God from among men, that he may
offer both gifts and sacrifices unto God for the sins of men. Such an high
Priest is Christ, immediately called of God, in that he said, thou art a
Priest, and he gave himself for us, to be both an See epist. 3. Sund, in Lent.
offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God, Ephesians. 5.2. 1.
Ioh. 2.2.
He is the reconcillation for our sins, and as an advocate with the Father in
the Court of heaven, ever pleading the merit of his oblation and obedience, the
sole mediator between God and man. 1. Tim. 2.5. and he is a Priest for ever,
because with one offering he consecrated for ever, them that are sanctified,
Heb. 10.14. The powerful operation of his passion endures for ever, being the
Apoc. 13.8.
Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, and bleeding (as it were) to the
worlds end. Saint Paul in his Epistle to the Hebrews, has unfolded this part
of our text so fully, that (as Jn loc.
Hierome speaks) it is superfluous to bring an after (or other) interpretation.
I will here rest only in his Commentatarie, consisting of two points
especially: the 1. Showing the difference between the Priesthood of Aaron, and
Christ. 2. Describing the resemblance between the Priesthod of Christ, and
Melchisedech.


1. The Priesthood of Aaron, with all the sacrifices and ceremonies belonging
thereunto, was nothing else but a type of things to come: the Heb. 9.
tabernacles and holy places, were figures of the true Sanctuary; the diverse
washings, and other carnal rites, were similitudes of heavenly things. In a
word, the whole Law had the shadow of good things to come, but not the very
substance of the things, Hebr. 10.1. But Christ is the Coloss. 2.17.
body of the shadow, and his Priesthood the truth of Aarons type. Ioh. 1.17.
The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, as being
our only Priest appeasing the wrath of God, and taking away the sins of the
world; for Act. 4.12.
among men there is given no other name under heaven, whereby we must be
saved. And therefore the holy Fathers in their killing of beasts, and
sprinkling of blood, had ever an eye to the sheadding of Christ's blood on the
Cross, believing that his blood should 1. Ioh. 1.7.
cleanse them from all their sins, and Heb. 9.12.13.
not the blood of goats, and calves, and bulls. And the Prophets in their
Sermons usually tax their hypocrisy, who neglecting spiritual devotions, and
faith in Christ, only rested and trusted in outward oblations. Esaias 1.11.
What have I to do with the multitude of your sacrifices (says the Lord) I am
full of the burnt offerings of lambs, and of the fat of fed beasts, I desire
not the blood of bullockes, nor of lambs, nor of goats, incense is an
abomination unto me, my soul hates your new moons, and your appointed
feasts, all of them are a burden unto me, and I am weary to bear them, And
Mich. 6.7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousand rivers of oil? nay, the sacrifice best accepted of God, is a troubled
spirit; a broken and contrite heart, O God, shall thou not despise. Psalm. 51.17.

2. The Priesthood of Aaron, and the kingdom of Israel were distinct offices
and incompetible; the Priest under the law might not incroch upon the royalties
of the King, nor the King execute the Priests office: for when 2. Chro. 26.16.
Vzziah the King went into the Temple of the Lord to burn incense; the Priests
of the Lord withstood him, and said unto him, It appertains not unto thee
(Vzziah) to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the Priests, the sons of
Aaron, consecrated to this office. Go forth of the Sanctuary, for thou have
transgressed: and Vzziah the King was a leper unto the day of his death. But
Christ is both a Priest, and a Prince, the Scepter and the Miter meet together
in him.

3. Aaron, Eleazar, and Leuit. 16.
every high Priest under the Law, did enter into the holy place by the blood of
goats and calves, which he did offer for himself, and for the sins of the
people. But Christ our Priest, entered into the most holy place by his own
blood, and obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. He Galath. 1.4.
gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil
world. It was impossible, that the blood of bulls and goats should take away
sins, Heb. 10.4. He therefore did Ephesians. 5.2.
offer his own body, redeeming his Church even with his own 1. Pet. 1.19.
precious blood.

4. Aaron was anointed with an Leuit. 8.12. Psalm. 133.2.
oil made of pleasant spices and balsame: but God has anointed Christ with
oil of gladness, Psalm. 45.8. The spirit of the Lord (quoth Luke 4.18.21.
he) has anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel unto the poor, and
has sent me, that I should heal the broken hearted, etc.

5. Aaron, and every High Priest of the Jews, offered up sacrifice, Leuit.
16.6. Heb. 7.27.
first for his own sins, and then for the people. But Christ as being holy,
blameless, undefiled, Hebr. 7.26. who knew no sin, 2. Cor. 5.21. who did Esaias
53.9.
no wickedness, neither was any deceit in his mouth, offered up himself only
for our sins; he was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquities, he carried our sorrows, and with his stripes are we healed.

6. Aaron and his successors were Priests of the Jews, and tied only to the
Temple of Deuteronomy. 12.11. John 4.20.
Jerusalem: but Christ is for all persons, and all places, at all times, a
Priest for ever, an universal Bishop of our souls, as he told the woman of
John 4.21.
Samaria, the hour comes, and is now, when ye shall neither in this
mountain, nor at Jerusalem worship the Father; but the true worshippers shall
every where worship him in spirit and truth.

7. Aaron, and other Priests under the Law, were made without swearing of an
oath; but Christ is made by an oath, by him that said unto him, the Lord has
sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech, Heb. 7.20.21.

8. Aarons Priesthood was temporary, but the Priesthood of Christ is for ever.
Eleazar succeeded Aaron, and Phineas Eleazar, and so downward: for among the
Heb. 7.23.
Jews many were made Priests, because they could not endure by reason of
death: but Christ, because he endures for ever, has an everlasting
Priesthood. The Jews have now Song of the three Children. verse. 38.
neither Prince, nor Prophet, nor burnt offering, nor sacrifice, nor oblation,
nor incense, for the Lord repented, Bellarmin. de cullu sanct. cap. 10..
secundo. respondet.
that is, changed Aarons Priesthood: but Christ (as our text has it) is
consecrated by God the Father a Priest for ever. None can succeed him, he will
not give his glory to another, Esaias 42.8. and therefore the blasphemous opinion
of the Sea Tileman. Heshusius in loc.
Papists is detestable, who make the Pope successor unto Peter, and Peter the
successor unto Christ, in his Priesthood. So they prate, print, and paint in
their In fine Chron. Marian. Scot. and Mart. Polon.
Catalogues of the Roman Bishops.

I will not dispute this point after Paul, Hebr. 7.25. concluding peremptorily
that Christ, and only Christ is able perfectly to save them, that come unto
God by him, seeing he lives ever to lake intercession for them, Fox Martyr.
fol. 1027.
as that learned man and martyr, John Lambert, in his greatest agony, none but
Christ, none but Christ. All the Peter's, and Peers, and Popes in the world,
which ever have been, are, and shall be, cannot sacrifice so much as may
satisfy God for the sin of one poor soul. Christ alone is our Priest for
ever, at whose right hand, God the Father stands assistant, to Genebrard in
loc.
perform whatsoever he has either said or sworn to him, even to the
confusion of Kings, and all other great enemies in the day of his wrath.

And surely this clause, for ever, (as that holy Martyr of God Fox Mart. page
1271.
John Bradford, observed) evidently shows that the Popish Mass is a most
injurious enemy to Christ, in respect of his Priesthood and sacrifice. The
Priesthood of Christ is an everlasting Priesthood, and such a function as
cannot go to another: but the Mass does utterly put him out of place, as
though he were dead for ever, and so God were a liar, who said he should live
for ever. Again, it is a pernicious enemy to his sacrifice, for, to
re-iterate a thing once done for the full accomplishing of the end, wherefore
it was begun, declares imperfection of the same thing before; but the
Mass Priests re-iterate the sacrifice of Christ once done, for the end
wherefore it was begun (that is, for propitiation and remission, a poena and
culpa) ergo, the Mass Priests make Christ's oblation imperfect, and deny that
the virtue thereof endures for ever. See Epistle Sun. 5. in Lent.

I come now to the parallel of David, showing the resemblance between
Melchisedech and Christ. This Melchisedech, as Paul (Hebr. 7.) reports out of
Moses, Genes. 14. was King of Salem, and the Priest of the most high God. So
Christ is described in this present Psalm, to be both a King and a Priest, the
King of Salem, that is, of Galat. 4.26.
Jerusalem above, Gods own City, which is the mother of us all. And the
Priest of the most high God, in giving himself for us both an offering and a
sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. In old time before the Law, the
kingdom and Priesthood appertained by birthright unto the eldest son: for so
Hierom. quaest. sen. tradit. Haebraic. in Genesis tom. 3. fol. 226. Dio. Carthus.
Em. Sa, Vatablus in Genesis 49. and Tileman in loc.
Divines have gathered out of the words of Jacob unto Reuben, Genes. 49.3.
Reuben, thou art my first borne, my might, and the beginning of my strength,
the excellency of dignity, and excellency of power, that is, primus in
regno, and primus in sacerdotio. But these two functions were severed under the
Law, the kingdom being conferred upon Judah, the Priesthood upon Leui. So that
Christ our Priest and Prince conioyning both again in his own person,
abrogated the form and frame of Moses Commonweal.

2. Melchisedech is by interpretation King of righteousness: so Christ is not
only righteous in himself, judging his folk righteously, Psalm. 67.4.
righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 145.17. but also
making us just and holy before God, Jeremy 23.6.
The Lord our righteousness, 1. Cor. 1.30.
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

3. Melchisedech is King of Salem, that is, King of peace: so Christ is the
Esaias 9.6.
Prince of peace, Ephesians. 2.16.
reconciling us unto God, and God unto us, preaching peace to the Gentiles, who
were strangers a far off; and unto the Jews, who were Citizens in the
Commonwealth of Israel, and so breaking down the stop of the partition wall,
has made of both, one. For it pleased the Father that in him all fullness
should dwell, and by him to reconcile all things unto himself; and to set at
peace, thorough the blood of his Cross, both the things in earth, and the
things in heaven, Coloss. 1.19.20. And here note, Lombard. Aquin. Anselm in
Heb. 7
that Christ is first a King of righteousness, and then a King of peace; for
he gives us first righteousness, and then peace. So Paul expressly, Romans 5.1.
Being justified by faith, we have peace toward God, thorough our Lord Jesus
Christ.

4. Melchisedech is said to be without father, and without mother;
Theophylact. Primasius in Heb. 7. and Chrysostom. in loc.
not that he was in deed so, but for that the Scripture concealeth his
genealogy: so Christ Hierome. Agellius in loc.
as man was without father, and as God without mother. Nay Christ as God was
without kindred, having neither beginning of his days, neither end of life,
being Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, Apocal. 1.11. No God before him,
or after him, Esaias 43.10.

5. Melchisedech blessed Abraham, and received tithes of him, and so
consequently was greater then Abraham* because without all contradiction the
lesser is blessed of the better. And so Christ is greater then Abraham, as
blessing him that had the promises. John 8.56.
Abraham rejoiced to see my day (says our Savior) and he saw it, and was glad.

6. Melchisedech refreshed Abraham and his army, returning from the slaughter
of the Kings, with Genesis 14.18.
bread and wine: so Christ feeds and cherishes his soldiers, fighting under
his banner against the world, the flesh and the devil, even with his own John
6.55.
flesh and blood, represented in his holy Supper by Matthew. 26.26.
bread and wine. Melchisedech gave bread and wine to Abraham, he did not offer
it up unto God, as the Apud Chemnit. exam. Con. Trident. part. 2. page 171.
Latin Fathers usually read, protulit non obtulit. And therefore the Calvin in
loc.
Papists abuse this place, when in the Mass they offer up the bread unto God,
which is to be communicated unto men. Christ's Supper was ordained to be
received of us, in the memorial of his death, for the confirmation of our
faith, that his body was broken for us, and his blood shed for our sins;
Bradfords letter to his mother apud Fox, Mart. fol. 1476.
but in the Mass there is no receiving, because the Priest keeps all to
himself alone. Christ says, Take, eat: but the Priest, gape, pepe. The
Mass Priests are gross lurchers at the Lords table; for first they take away
the wine from the laity, which is contrary to Christ's own voice, Drink ye
all of this. And as for the bread, they give it not in every Mass to the
people, but only at certain times in the year, and then also not so A
monument hereof in the Church at Stelft a Burg in Germany, about 20. miles from
Jnsprucke.
great an host or cake as themselves eat, and that without either breaking on
their part, or touching of the people. So their Masses upon the point are
Massacres of Christ, a new killing and sacrificing of him again, so much as
lies in their power.

He shall judge among the Heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies] Theodoret. Euthym. Turrecremat,
Some construe this of Christ's judgment on the last day; for we believe that
he shall come again to judge the quick and the dead, he shall in that day
of his wrath fill the pits of hell with the bodies of the Bellarmine.
reprobate, and smite in sunder the heads of all such as have lifted up their
heads against him. Calvin. Tileman. Tremellius.
Other have better expounded this of his present judgment in protecting his
followers, and in punishing his foes: for Christ is described here by the
Prophet as a valiant conqueror over his enemies. He shall rule not among the
Jews only, but among the Heathen also, Psalm. 96.13.
judging the world with righteousness, and the people with his truth. He shall
fill al places with the bodies of his adversaries being dead, and smite in
sunder, with his power and might, the heads, even Kings, and other chief
governors of his enemies. In loc.
Augustine does interpret this in the better part, glossing it thus: Implere
ruinas, est aedisicare quod cecidit: and conquassare capita, humiliare superbos
ad salutem per contritionem,

He shall drink of the brook in the way] This may have a double construction.
Either thus, he, that is, the Messiah, shall drink of the brook which shall
be made of the blood of his foes: Bucer. Mollerus. Vatablus.
as if he should have said, There shall be so much blood shed, that the
Conqueror may drink (as it were) of a river of blood, in the way as he
pursues his enemies. The like phrase we find, Numb. 23.24. Calvin. Tremel.
Or else it is a similitude taken from puissant and mighty Captains, who
egerly pursuing their enemies, stay not upon dainties or pleasures, but content
themselves with floods and brooks which they find in their passages, as they
follow the chase. And therefore he shall lift up his head, as having a full
victory to his advancement and exceeding glory: for so this manner of speech
is used, Genesis 40.13.20.

PSALM 132. Lord remember David, and all his troubles, etc.


THis hymn consists of two parts: a Prayer, for the Prince, Priests, and
people, with a commemoratio^ of their zeal to Gods holy worship and service,
from the 1. to the 11. verse. Promise, made by God particularly to David and
his seed, as also generally to the whole Church, as the ground of the prayer,
from verse. 11. to the Psalms end.


The penner of this Psalm prays for the Bucer. Wilcox.
King first as the chief, Lord remember David. And then afterward for his
state, both Luther. Mollerus. Strigellius.
Ecclesiastical and Civil, the Church and Commonweal. The Church, Arise O
Lord into thy resting place, that is, thy Temple, let thy Priests be clothed
with righteousness. The Tileman.
Commonweal, Let thy Saints sing with ioyfulnes, etc. The which is answerable
to the Suffrages in our Liturgy, Indue thy Ministers with righteousness, and
make thy chosen people joyful. And happily the Church of England aimed at this
Prayers, order, in the composition of the Letanie; where praying more
particularly, we beseech God in the first place to bless our most gracious
King and governor. In the next, to bless the whole Clergy, Bishops, Pastors,
and Ministers: and then all degrees of the Laity, superiors, as the Counsel,
Nobility, Magistrates: and inferiors, all the people.

Satan is called by John 8.44.
Christ, a liar, and a murderer from the beginning, ever busily laboring to
destroy both our soul with untruths, and our bodies with murders. Luther in
loc.
Against these two policies and kingdoms of the Devil, almighty God has
erected other two kingdoms, the politic state to fight against murders: and
the Priesthood to fight against false doctrine and heresies. So that David, and
all other Kings in governing the Commonwealth, ought to perform their best
endeavors, that their subjects may lead a 2. Tim. 2.2.
quiet and a godly life. Quiet, as being free from mutinies and murders:
godly, as being free from heresies and lies. And these two kingdoms, although
they be far unlike, are so joined together, that the one cannot stand without
the other. For where politic peace is wanting, there piety cannot be
maintained without great danger: and where the word of God is wanting, there
can be no sound and secure peace. Policy serves the Church, and the Church
preserves policy. The Priests and Preachers are said in the 17. verse of this
Psalm, to be decked with salvation, that is, the ministration of the word,
whereby they 1. Tim. 4.16.
save themselves, and those that hear them. And in this respect called Calvin.
Ribera. Vatablus in Obad.
saviors, Obadiah 21. as being helpers and laborers together with God, who
saves, 1. Cor. 3.9.

But that part of this Hymn concerning the promise, concerns our present
feast especially. The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David, etc. The
Papists (in the first verse, Lord remember David with all his afflictions; and
in the tenth verse, for thy servant David's sake, turn not away the presence of
thine anointed) dream that Solomon and the people did pray to God, that he
would hear them at David's intercession, and for his merits; and thereupon
establish invocation of Saints, and praying to the dead. But our Luther.
Mollerus. Calvin. Tileman. Strigellius.
Divines answer, that David is not here to be taken absolutely for his person
only: but as having the covenant, and clothed (as it were) with the promises
of God. For David never entreated God to be heard for his own merits, but on
the contrary cries, Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified. Neither did ye Church here desire to be heard for David's
sake, but for the promise made to David. And their meaning is briefly this, O
Lord God we pray unto thee for the kingdom, not counting our selves in any
sort worthy that we should be heard: but (as Dan. 9.18.
Daniel speaks) we present our supplications before thee, trusting in thy
great and tender mercies, and in that thou have promised to David, to wit, that
our kingdom shall endure for ever. So Moses prayed, Bxod. 32.13. Deuteronomy. 9.27.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swarest by
thine own self. He does not invoke Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as the
Papists imagine fondly: but he does allege Gods holy covenant made to them,
as touching their seed and posterity. For how could God be put in mind of
these promises better, then by reciting those persons to whom God has made
the^? Here then is a notable president for us, yt when we pray, we should
appear before the seat of God as wretched and miserable sinners, not trusting
upon our own merit, but clothed (as you would say) with his mercy; not as he
who bragged, Luke 18.12.
I fast twice in the week, I give tithe of all that ever I possess: but as he
who said, Lord remember thy promises; for the promises of God are nothing else,
but mercies and compassions offered freely unto us in Christ.

Faith is necessarily required in prayer, (for Romans 10.14.
how shall any call on him, in who^ they have not believed?) and faith is
grounded ever upon the sure promises of God, who says, Exodus 20.5.
I am the Lord thy God, and so loved the world, that he gave his John 3.16.
only begotten son, in Matthew. 3.17.
whom he is well pleased. If then he gives himself to be our own, and his
son to be our own, how shall he not with himself and his son Romans 8.32.
give us all things also? Verily, verily, (says our blessed Savior, that ever
spoke verity) whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it
you, Ioh. 16.23. These things ought to be taught diligently, because Gods holy
promises are the Luther in loc.
chief part of the Scripture, the true bosom and womb wherein the Church is
carried, and all her children the faithful.

Now the promise mentioned here touching the seed of David, is categoricall and
absolute, so far forth as it concerns Christ, of the fruit of thy body will
I set upon thy seat for evermore. But as it concerns other of David's house,
Placidus. Luther. Mollerus. Genebrard.
hypothetical and conditional, if thy children will keep my covenant, etc. In
that which is promised and prophesied touching Christ, observe The Manner of
the promise, the Lord has made a faithful oath unto David, and he shall not
shrink from it, verse. 11. The matter of the promise, 1. That the Messiah is to
be borne of David's seed, of the fruit of thy body. 2. That the Messiah is to
sit on David's seat, shall I set upon thy seat.



The Lord has made a faithful oath] Men use to swear by him, that is greater
then themselves, Hebr. 6.16. that is, by God; and that for Calvin. and
Ma^lorat. in Heb. 6.16.
three causes especially. 1. Because God is greater then themselves in credit.
2. Greater then themselves in knowledge. 3. Greater then themselves in power.
Men by sin have lost their credit, and therefore do they pawn the credit of
God, which is truth it self; and in cases of necessity, for want of other
sufficient proof, God is content to pledge his truth for honest men, who mean
well. All men are by nature Psalm. 116.10. and Psalm. 62.9.
liars, and Mark. 10.18.
only God is good and true, wherefore men use to swear by him, as being
greater in Primasius, Lombard. in Heb. 6.
credit.

2. An oath is for the manifestation of a secret truth or intention of the
heart: for to swear in things apparent, is to take the name of God in vain.
But God alone is the searcher of the 2. Chron. 6.30.
heart and Psalm 7.10.
reins; and therefore men use to swear by him, as greater in See Thomas 22 a.
quaest. 89. art. 1.
knowledge.

3. If a man violate his oath and forswear himself, the wrong is done
directly unto God, his truth is falsified, his witness abused, his name
blasphemed, and therefore men swear by him, as being greater in power, 2. King.
2.23.
that he may take vengeance on such wretches as dare wrong his sacred Majesty.

But God as having none greater to swear by, swear by himself to father Genesis
22.16.18.
Abraham, in thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed. This oath
is renewed again to Isaac, Genesis 26.3. and repeated often unto David. 2. Sam.
7.12.13. and 1. Chron. 17.12. and 2. Chron. 6.16. and remembered also by the
Prophets, Esaias 55.3. Psalm. 89.34. It was in him exceeding rich mercy, to give
his bare word, that he would in the fullness of time, give his only begotten
Son for the redemption of the world, saying, the seed of the woman shall
break the serpents head: but it was undoubtedly greater mercy, for his
servants better assurance, to bind his promise with a faithful oath, swearing
by his holiness that he will not shrink from it. See my notes upon Psalm.
110. verse. 4.

Of thy fruit of thy body] Saint Peter expounds this of Christ, Act. 2.30. for
according to the flesh he was the seed and son of David. Lib. 3. cap. 27.
Irenaeus, and In loc.
Augustine, and Hugo in loc.
other Doctors note, that it is according to the Hebrew de fructu ventris, of
the fruit of thy belly: not de fructu femoris aut renum. Because thy promised
seed is the seed of the woman, Genes. 3.15. made of a woman, Gal. 4.4. having
the materials of his body from his mother Mary, but his formale principium,
from God the holy Ghost, agent in his admirable conception. And yet for as much
as Mary was of David's house, it may be said that her son was the fruit of
David's body. For proof whereof, it is said that Genesis 47.29.
Joseph put his hand under Jacobs thigh, and the servant of Genesis 24.2.
Abraham under the thigh of his master, because (says De Abra. Patriar. lib.
1. cap. 9.
Ambrose) Christ our blessed Savior, was to proceed out of the loins of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For as Christians taking an oath in our time, lay
their hands upon some part of that sacred book wherein Christ is revealed: so
the Fathers in old time put their hands under the thighs of those Patriarchs,
of whom Christ was then to come. Moreover, Sons are called the fruit of the
fathers venture, as well as of the mothers; according to that of David; 2. Sam.
16.11. Behold my son which came out of mine own bowels, seeks my life.

Shall I set upon thy seate] You have heard, how Christ is the seed of David;
now let us examine, how he sits on the seat of David. We read in the Gospels
history, that he Ioh. 6.15.
hid himself in a mountain, when as the people would have made him a King,
and that he professed openly before Pilate, Ioh. 18.36.
my kingdom is not of this world. D. Incognitus.
Answer is made, that by David's seat, is meant Jerusalem Galath. 4.26.
above; not Jerusalem here below, mystical Jerusalem, and Apoc. 21.2.
heavenly, not material and earthly. So the Lord, Psalm. 2.6. I have set my
King upon mine holy hill of Sion, that is, I have made my begotten son ruler
and head over the whole Church, of which Jerusalem is a figure. Sion, and the
seat of David, are to be construed here typically, not topically. For Christ's
high and holy kingdom is internal and spiritual, not exaernall and
temporal. Augustine. and Theophylact. in Joan. 18. See Recognit. Bellarmin. a
page 26. ad page 46.
It is hic, not hinc; in the world, but not of the world. By the preaching of
his word, which is the scepter of his kingdom, he rules in the Psalm. 110.1.2.
midst of his enemies, and makes them all his footstool, converting such
enemies as appertain to Gods election, and confounding such enemies, as are
the sons of perdition; his Gospel is unto the one, the 2. Cor. 2.16
savor of life unto life; and to the other, the savor of death unto death.
See my notes upon the 110. Psalm 2. and third verse.

See August. in tract. 115. in Joan.
As his kingdom is not of the world; so the faithful his voluntary subjects
are not of the world, Ioh. 17.16. you were of the world (says our Savior to
his followers) but I have chosen you out of the world, Ioh. 15.19. As his
kingdom is spiritual, even so they be Romans 8.14.
led by the spirit in Ioh. 2.27.
all things. And therefore when you come into Gods house, to be made partakers
of his holy word and Sacraments, open the doors of your ears, and gates of
your hearts, that the Psalm. 24.7.
King of glory may come in, and so dwell in you, and reign in you for
evermore. Behold, he stands at the door and knocks, Apoc. 3.20. Open and
obey, that he may set up his kingdom in the parlour of thine heart. It is our
daily prayer, thy kingdom come: the meaning whereof is briefly this, O
heavenly father, let not Satan and sin reign in our souls, but rule thou by
thy word and spirit, and so build in us the kingdom of grace, and hasten the
kingdom of glory.

The difference between our heavenly King, and earthly Princes is great. 1.
Their dominions are limited, and the borders of their kingdoms bounded, their
people numbered, and the time of their reign prescribed. But Christ has Mat.
28.18.
all power in heaven and earth, he shall sit upon the Throne of David for ever,
and of his kingdom there is no end, Luke 1.33.

2. Other Kings have power only over our bodies and goods: but Christ's
authority reaches unto the soul. Their sword is material, able only to kill
the body: but his sword is spiritual, proceeding out of his Apoc. 1.16.
mouth, able to destroy Mat. 10.28.
both soul and body in hell, entering through even unto the dividing asunder of
the spirit, and of the joints, and the marrow, a discerner of the thoughts, and
intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12.

3. Other Kings derive their authority from him, Proverb. 8.15. By me Kings
reign, by me Princes rule; and stand accountable to him, he stands in the
congregation of Princes, and judges among gods, Psalm. 82.1.2. But who shall
say to the Lord of Lords, Why do thou so?

4. Other Kings reward their favorites and followers, only with a few titles
of honor, or with a few parcels of land, which are holden of them in
fee-farme, frank-almoign, Knights-seruice, etc. They make not their vassals
heirs apparent to their kingdoms: but Christ our Lord makes all his
faithful servants no less then Apoc. 1.6.
Kings, and Romans 8.17.
heirs of God, even heirs annexed with himself.

If thy children will keep my couenant] Literally this may be construed of
David's own children according to the flesh, Mollerus.
who succeeded him in his Throne, 1072. years, until the Messiah, (borne of
his posterity) constituted an everlasting kingdom without end. Calvin.
According to this sense, the Lord says, Ezech. 21.26. I will take away the
Diadem, and take off the Crown, this shall be no more the same, I will
ouerturne, ouerturne, ouerturne it, and it shall be no more until he come,
whose right it is, and I will give it him. His promise here concerning Christ,
is absolute, but his promise touching other of David's house, conditional: If
thy Children keep my covenant, and my testimonies, that I shall learn them 1.
Chron. 28.9.
. If thou seek the Lord (said David to his son Solomon) he will be found of
thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever. And therefore
because David's posterity did not observe his law, but follow their own
inventions; he made them (as we read in the Bibles history) captives of
Captains, and gave their kingdom to another people: first unto the bloody
Romans, and now to the barbarous Turks; and so Jerusalem heretofore Lament.
1.1.
great among the Nations, and Princess among the Provinces, is made
tributarie; she dwells among the Heathen, and finds no rest, among all her
lovers she has none to comfort her, all her friends have dealt unfaithfully
with her, and are made her enemies.

Mystically the Arnobius. Cassiodorus. Hugo.
Doctors apply this unto the Children of Christ according to the spirit, I
will set upon thy seat, that is, ordain Pastors and teachers, who shall sit
in thy chair, So that kind of Speech is used, Mat. 23.2.
that is, preach thy word and doctrine, for the Ephesians. 4.11.
gathering together of the Saints, and edification of the Church evermore. This
was verified in the blessed Apostles, as being made Princes in all lands.
Psalm. 45.17.

In one word, Hierome.
all true believers in Christ are the sons of God, and babes in Christ, and he
has (as Ephesians. 2.6.
Paul speaks) raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly
places. His Charter is fair, Matthew. 19.28. Verily I say unto you, that when
the son of man shall sit in the Throne of his Majesty, ye which have followed
me in the regeneration, shall also sit upon twelve Thrones, and judge the
twelve tribes of Israel. And Apocal. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant
to sit with me in my Throne, even as I overcome, and sit with my Father in his
Throne.

The Luther in loc.
wicked abuse the promises of God, applying them unto themselves, which only
belong to the true Church, the seed of David, according to the spirit. So the
Papists abuse Christ's promise, for establishing of the Popes tyranny, Matthew.
16.18.
the gates of hell shall not overcome it, and Mat. 28.20.
I will be with you always till the worlds end. Whence they conclude, that
Peter's boat (though it may be sometimes in danger) shall never be drowned, and
that the Pope (being the Churches head) cannot err. Dr. Fulke in Matthew. 16.18.
Whereas these promises concern only that Church which is built upon the
Rock Christ, and continues in Saint Peter's faith, observing all things our
blessed Savior commanded, as it is in our text, If thy children will keep my
covenant and testimonies that I shall learn them. But if the Bishop and Church
of Rome dispense with Gods holy word, and despise his truth and testimony,
teaching in stead of his infallible law, Mat. 15.9.
precepts of men, and doctrines of 1. Tim. 4.1.
devils: how shall this, or any the like promise belong to them?

So the wicked in a reprobate sense, who make their belly their god, and
commit all uncleanness even with greediness, abuse these sweet texts, at what
time soever a sinner, etc. and, Come to me all ye that are weary and laden,
and I will ease you, etc. For this promise concerns only such as are laden,
and feel the burden of their iniquity, having both a sight and a sense
thereof, acknowledging that sin is a Euthym. in Matthew. 11.
labor in accomplishing, and a load when it is accomplished. It appertains
only to such as repent, and that of all their sin, and that from the heart,
and bottom of the heart.

So the carnal Gospellers, in coming irreuerently to the Lords Table, without
any devotion, or due respect to that holy Sacrament, abuse the words of our
blessed Savior, This is my body. For (as the godly Martyr In his last exam.
apud. Fox, fol. 1463.
John Bradford well observed) the clause take, eat, is a precept; and the
clause, this is my body, a promise, the bread and wine then are not unto any
the body and blood of Christ, except they first eat and take, and none can
take and eat, but by Confess. Anglican. art. 28.
faith. A worthy receiver therefore beggeth of God both a pardon of his
faults, and an increase of his faith. To conclude this point, in the law, the
condition is, do this and live: in the Gospel, believe this and thou shall be
saved. He that neglects the precept, and yet will challenge the promise,
deceives himself, he shall not rest on Gods holy hill, and sit on his happy
seat for evermore.

PSALM. 2. Why do the Heathen so furiously rage together, etc.


This Ode may be divided into 2. parts: the 1. Describes the wickedness, and
weakness of such as bandie themselves against the Lord, and against his
anointed. Wickedness, furiously raging, standing up, and taking counsel
together. Weakness, Implied in the word why? Expressed in the clause, Imagine
a vain thing.

2. Sets down Gods Might, for their destruction, if they will not amend their
manners, and assuage their malice, verse. 4.5.6.7.8.9. Mercy, for their
instruction, if they will once be so wise, as to learn his law, and to love
his son, verse. 10.11.12.



Why do the Heathen] By Heathen, are meant the Gentiles; by people, the Jews;
by Kings, the chief Monarchs upon earth; and by Rulers, their Bucer. To.
Stephanus. Wilcox.
privy Counselors of Estate. The Gentiles, as not having Gods law, furiously
rage together, like Cassiodorus. Placidus. Tileman.
bruit beasts without understanding. The Greek word used by Saint Luke, Act.
4.25. does import fierceness and pride, as of horses that neigh, and rush into
the battle. The Jews, albeit they had Gods holy word, imagined a vain thing,
Euthym.
because they were cunning rather in the sound, then in the sense thereof. The
Kings, as men of might, stand up, and the rulers, as men of wit and policy,
take counsel together. And so men of all countries, as well the Jews, as the
Gentiles, and of all conditions, as well Princes as people, bandy themselves
against the Lord, and against his anointed.

Now this may be construed D. Jncognit. Calvin. Tremel.
either of David, or of the Messiah. Of the Lords Christ, or of the Lord
Christ. David is the Lords Christ, as his anointed King over Israel, anointed
thrice. First, in the midst of his brethren, 1. Sam. 1.16. afterward in
Hebron, 2. Sam. 2. lastly, before all the tribes of Israel, 2. Sam. 5. and he
may be called the son of God,

As a Man, for all of us are the Act. 17.28.
generation of God, it is be who made us, and not our selves, Psalm. 100.2.
Great man, or King, for Princes are styled the Psalm. 82.6.
children of the most high. Good man, or regenerate, for every one that is newborn, is 1. Ioh. 3.9.
borne of God, and adopted his son, and made his heir, Romans 8.15.17.


How the Heathen, that is, the Philistims, and other strange nations, furiously
raged together against him: how the people, that is, the Jews of Saul's house
imagined vainly to dethrone him: how the Captains stood up, and statesmen
took counsel together, that they might break his bonds asunder, and cast
away his cords from them: how the Lord that dwells in heaven laughed all his
enemies to scorn, saying, yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion:
you may read in the second book of Samuel, from the 2. to the 10. chapter.

But the blessed Apostles have construed this of Christ, Act. 4.24. O Lord,
thou art the God, which have made the heaven and the earth, and the sea, and
all things that are in them. Which by the mouth of thy servant David have said,
why did the Gentiles rage, and the people imagine vain things? The Kings of
the earth assembled, and the rulers came together against the Lord, and against
his Christ. For doubtless against thine holy Son Jesus, whom thou have
anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of
Israel, gathered themselves together, to do whatsoever thy hand and thy
counsel had determined before to be done. Bellar. in loc.
First the Princes did plot, and afterward the people did act this
insurrection. Herod the King sought to destroy Christ in his swaddling cloutes,
he was troubled at the birth of Jesus, and all Jerusalem with him, Matthew. 2.3.
And the Rulers opposed Christ in the whole course of his life: so the text
plainly, Ioh. 7, 48.
Does any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? At his death all
the Rulers Ecclesiastical and Civil accorded in one. The Gentiles, Euthym.
that is the Roman soldiers, by Pilats instigation, furiously raged together:
and the people, that is the Jews, by the counsel of the chief Priests and
Elders, imagined a vain thing. Yea but how can it be said plurally that Kings
assembled against Christ? Answer is made by Placidus. Incognitus. Agellius.
some, that the plural is used here for the singular. Or by Kings is meant
Herod and Pilate, for Herod is styled Matthew. 2.1.
King, and Pontius Pilate was a Matthew. 27.2.
Governor under the Roman Emperor, and these Viceroyes had many petite Ioh.
4.46. Matthew. 9.18.
Rulers also subject to their command. Or by Kings is meant Herod senior, who
stood up against Christ at his birth, Matthew. 2. and Herod Junior, who despised
and mocked Christ at his death. Luke 23.11.

Or, as Jn loc. Idem Euthym.
Chrysostom, with Herod were joined the Devil, and Death, and Sin. All
which are Kings of the earth. The Devil is a King, Ephesians. 2.2.
ruling in the air, the Ioh. 12.31.
Prince of this world, Luke 11.18. If Satan be divided against himself, how
shall his kingdom stand? And Death is a King, Romans 5.14. Death reigned from
Adam to Moses, etc. And Sin is a King too, Romans 6.12. Let not sin reign in
your mortal bodies, lest ye should obey the lust of it. All these Kings
assembled and took counsel together against the Lord, and against his Christ.
For as Christ consisted of humane flesh and a reasonable soul: so likewise he
had two sorts of enemies, one visible which assaulted his body, another
invisible which assaulted his soul; spiritual wickednesses, Ephesians. 6.12. Here
we may behold and bewail the blindness of the Jews in our time, who
(notwithstanding their most ancient See Galatin. de Arcanis, lib. 3. cap. 7.
and Bellar. in loc.
Rabbis apply this our text to the true Messiah) expect him as yet to come.

Lastly, for as much as Christ suffers in his Acts 9.4.
members, and 2. Tim. 3.12.
all that will live godly, that they may be made Romans 8.29.
like to his image, must of necessity suffer persecution; it may be construed
of Placidus. Bucer. Strigellius.
Christians as well as of Christ, against whom all the wicked angels, Apoc. 7.1.
standing on the four corners of the earth, are combined in a bloody league.
The Gentiles at this day furiously rage together, and the Jews at this day
still imagine vain things; at this day the Kings of the earth stand up, as the
Turk, the Pope, the Spanyard, and all their cruel agents. In a word, all
Atheists, all Antichrists, all Hypocrites, all Worldlings hurtle together
against the Lord and his anointed people. The true Church is a Cant. 2.2.
lilie among thorns, a few harmless Luke 10.3.
lambs in the midst of many ravenous wolves, on every side compassed about
with such as say, Let us break their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords
from us.

1. We may learn from hence, Wilcox.
not to depend upon the multitude for their number, because the people
mutinously rage together, and imagine vain things in their conuenticles: nor
upon the mighty for their countenance, because many Kings of the earth stand
up, and Rulers take counsel together against the Lord and his Christ.

2. We may know from hence, Bucer.
whether we are the Lords anointed, or no. The John 15.19.
world loves his own; if then it hate Christ in us, it is an infallible
sign, that we are good 2. Tim. 2.3.
soldiers of the Lord, and not servants of the world. Bradford apud Fox Mart.
fol. 1490.
The way to heaven is to sail by hell; if you will embrace Christ in his
robes, you must not think scorn of him in his rags; if you will sit at his
table in his kingdom, you must first abide with him in his tentations; if you
will drink of his cup of glory, forsake not his cup of ignominy. Can the
head corner stone be rejected, and the other more base stones in Gods building
be set by? You are one of Gods lively stones, and therefore be content to be
hewn and snagged, that you may be made more meet to be joined to your
fellows, suffering the snatches of Satan, and wounds of the world.

3. From hence we may be well assured, that the sincere profession of the
Gospel in reformed Churches, is the most incorrupt and pure religion, as being
most opposite to the children of this world. The Mass (said holy In a letter
to his mother.
Bradford) does not bite them, or make the^ to blush, as preaching. And
therefore the Apoc. 17.2.
Kings of the earth are drunken with the wine of the Babylonish whore's
abominable fornication. In Relation of religion.. 13.
Rome the humor of every worldling is fitted, and each appetite may find what
to feed on. The mother of whoredoms is content to tolerate Jews, and other
ungodly wretches of diverse and adverse faiths in her Country, but she will
not endure Lutherans. All things are lawful in great Babylon, excepting this
only, to profess the Gospel after the manner of Protestants. It is reported
by reverend Martyr. fol. 860.
Fox, that certain Lawyers and Advocates in Province, maintained openly, that
in a case of Lutheranisme, the Judges are not bound to observe either right or
reason, order or ordinance, for they cannot err, whatsoever judgment they do
give, so that it tend to the ruin and extirpation of such as are suspected
Lutherans.

Hitherto concerning the wickedness of such as oppose themselves against the
Lord, and his anointed. I am now to speak of their weakness, implied in the
word Why? Steuchus. Genebrard.
for by this interrogation he does admire their folly: non enim tam
interrogantis, quam deridentis, as a learned Agellius.
expositor upon the place. Chrysostom. Placidus.
If they be derided as unwise, who shoot arrows at the Sun, and bark at
the Moon; what errant fools are they who fight against God, dwelling in the
heaven of heavens, above Sun and Moon, Acts 4.24.
who made the heaven, and earth, and Sea, and all things that are therein?
Alas, all flesh is as the Esaias 40 7.
grass that withers, and God is a Heb. 12.29.
consuming fire ready to burn this stubble. Psalm. 144.4.
Man is like a thing of naught, but God is almighty, measuring the waters in
his fist, and meating heaven with his spanne, and weighing the mountains in
skales, and the hills in a balance, Esaias 40.12. Man is in the hands of God his
maker, as the clay in the hands of the potter, Ierem. 18.6. Now shall the thing
formed (says Romans 11.20.
S. Paul) dispute with him who formed it? or man imagine so vain a thing, as
to stand up, and take counsel against his Creator? So that the Prophet here
speaks as the Virgil. Aenead. lib. 10.
Poet, Quo moriture ruis, maioraque viribus audes?
Quid tantum insano iuuat indulgere labori?
Or as Epod. 7.
Horace begins an Epod: Quo quo scelestiruitis, aut cur dexteris
aptantur enses conditi?


He that dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorne] Note here the great
odds and difference between God and his enemies: 1. He dwells in heaven,
Calvin.
but his greatest opposites are Kings upon earth, unsettled 1. Pet. 2.11.
pilgrims in 2. Cor. 5.1.
earthly tabernacles and houses of Job. 4.19.
clay. 2. Whereas Psalm. 39.7.
man disquieteth himself in vain, raging, running, standing up against the
Lord and his anointed: almighty God is said here to sit in heaven at Bucer.
rest and ease. 3. Whereas men imagine vainly to break his bonds, and cast
away his cords: God in a moment is able to bruise them with a rod of iron, and
break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Albeit they fret and fume never
so much, he shall laugh them to scorn, and have them in derision. As it is
said of the monster Job. 41.18.
Leuiathan, He esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood; the archer
cannot make him flee, the stones of the sling are turned to stubble before him,
and he laugheth at the shaking of the spear. Now these things are said
grossly for our capacity, because the Lord in deed can neither laugh nor
cry: yet the Scripture speaking after the manner of men, affirms plainly that
God is grieved at our faults, and that he laugheth at our follies, non
secundum affectum, (as the School distinguishes aptly) sed secundum effectum,
in that he carries himself toward his enemies as one that has them in
derision. And this he does in Calvin.
two respects especially.

1. For that he can at any time when he will, as it were sportingly pull down
such as stand up against him, he does easily descrie their folly, suppress
their fury.

2. For that he suffers his enemies in their rebelling and reuelling against
his anointed, only to play with his bait, he has (as he told 2. King. 19.28.
Esaias 17.29.
Senachorib) an hook in their nostrils, and a bridle in their mouths, he can,
and he will (at his good pleasure) bring them back again the same way they
came. Psalm. 121.4.
He that keeps Israel (howsoever he seem for a while to neglect his Church,
and kingdom of his Son) shall neither slumber nor sleep. He will (in his
due time) speak with all such as combine themselves against his anointed; he
will talk with them indeed, Bellarmine.
non verbis, sed verberibus, as it is in the text, he shall speak to them in
his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure: he shall bruise them with a
rod of iron and break them in pieces like a potters vessel, and so shall he
make them a scorn to men and Angels: he derides them, in that he shows all
their plots and practices to be worthy Hierome.
derision.

For first, if we construe this of David, he laughed all his enemies to scorn,
saying, 2. Sam. 12.7.
I anointed thee King ever Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand of Saul,
and gave thee thy Lords house, and his wives into thy bosom, etc. and would
moreover (if that had been too little) give thee such and such things, etc. The
which is in effect all one with our text at the sixth verse, I have set my King
upon mine holy hill of Sion.

If we construe this of the Church, he laugheth all her enemies to scorn,
saying, Esaias 49.16.
I have graven thee in the palms of mine hands, and thy walls are ever in my
sight. Esaias 41.10.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not afraid thou worm Jacob, for I the
Lord thy God will strengthen thee, and help thee, and sustain thee with the
right hand of my justice. Behold, all they that provoke thee, shall be
confounded, and ashamed, they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with
thee shall perish, for Matthew. 16.18.
hell gates shall not overcome thee.

If we construe this of Christ, he that dwells in heaven had all his enemies
in derision, he did use these bad instruments for the effecting of his good
ends: so the text, Act. 13.27. in putting to death the Lord of life, they
fulfilled all things that were written of him in the Prophets: and Acts 4.28.
they did whatsoever Gods holy hand and counsel had determined before to be
done. All his enemies, as well spiritual as temporal, imagined vainly. The
Devil, and Death, and Sin furiously raged against him on the Cross: but he
did Coloss. 2.15.
openly triumph over them in the same Cross. By death he did overcome death,
and open unto us the gate of life: for if death could not on this day, keep
him fettered in the grave his prison, it is evident that his power is
vanquished; and if death be conquered, it follows necessarily, that sin,
which is the sting of death, is also destroyed. If death and sin be
discomfited, then assuredly the kingdom of Satan is subdued, who had the power
of death, and is author of sin, and ruler of hell.

As for his temporal enemies, the Gentiles madly raged against him, and the
Jews imagined a vain thing, in Matthew. 27.60.
rolling a great stone to the door of the sepulcher, sealing it and making it
sure with a watch. For it was Acts 2.24.31.
impossible, that the Lord of life should be holden of death, his soul could
not be left in grave, nor his flesh see corruption, and therefore the stone
being rolled away by an Herald of heaven, Matthew. 28.2. God raised him again
from the dead, and made him a King over his holy hill of Sion, Hierome.
Augustine.
that is, head of his Church, giving him all the heathen for his inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession. And the Rulers held an
idle counsel against him, in commanding the soldiers, who guarded his tomb,
to say, Matthew. 28.13.
that his Disciples came by night, and stole him away while they slept: for (as
Hom. 36.
Austin, and Greg. Nyssen orat. 2. de resurrect. Christi. Idem annotat, inter
neotericos. Caietan. in Matthew. 28.
other of the most ancient Doctors have well observed) it is a very senseless
lie, because the soldiers either were asleep, or awake: if asleep, how did
they know that his Disciples had taken him away by night? if awake, why did
they not guard the tomb? lapidem vt lapides seruabant, as Chrysostom upon
this Psalm. See Gospel on Easter day.

Thus he that dwells in heaven, raising his anointed on this day from the
dead, had all his enemies in derision. He said to Christ on Easter day, Thou
art my son, this day have I begotten thee. As if he should have said, Thou
were ever my son, before to day, before there was any day: Calvin. and Rob.
Stephanus in loc. See Suarez tom. 2. in 3. Thom. disput. 45. sect. 1.
but yet in this day of thy resurrection, I have most especially manifested
unto the world that thou art my son, whom I have begotten. See this expounded
more fully, Epist. on Tuesday in Easter week.

Be wise therefore O ye Kings] In this admonition observe four points:
Especially 1. Who, Kings and Judges. 2. When, Now. 3. What, 1. To Basil.
Bellarmine.
know their duty, Be wise, be learned. 2. To do their duty, Serve the Lord,
kiss the Son.
4. Why: Because Tremellius.
hereby Gods Heavy wrath is escaped, implied in the word therefore, having
reference to the judgments of God, verse 5.9. and expressed verse. 12. lest he
be angry, and so ye perish from the right way. Happy blessing is obtained,
Blessed are they that put their trust in him.



He does exhort Kings especially, Calvin.
because their greatness usually makes them insolent and rebellious against God.
Steuchus.
Or, lest happily the subject should be punished for the Sovereigns folly,
Quic quid delirant reges, plectuntur Achiui. Or, because like Prince, like
people. Jeroboam made Israel to sin: Herodianus lib. 1.
for the most part every man emulates the manners of his Prince.

Claudianus.
Mobile mutatur semper cum principe vulgus. Or, he speaks to Kings and Judges
more particularly, Tileman.
for that it belongs unto their office, to see the people well instructed, it
appertains to their charge (being Custodes vtriusque tabulae) that every
subject live toward himself soberly, toward his neighbor righteously, toward
God religiously. For although a King may not administer the Sacraments, or
preach the word, or execute the Ministers office de facto: yet (as our Confess.
Anglican. art 37. and in the admonition to simple men annexed to Queen Elizab.
Injunctions.
Divines have determined) it belongs to the Kings cure de Iure, to see that all
things, concerning Gods holy service, should be done in the Church orderly. The
Prophet therefore calls upon Kings and Judges earnestly to serve the Lord as
the chief, knowing that the great wheel moving in devotion, is able to carry
with it all the lesser wheels.

Here then observe, what a great charge Princes and Prelates have, for God
says unto them, of every one which is under their jurisdiction and cure, 1.
King. 20.39.
keep this man, if he be lost and want, thy life shall go for his life.
Petitur a te non curatio sed cura Bernard.
The converting of the wicked, howsoever it be Gods cure, yet it is thy care,
the Lord only gives 1. Cor. 3.6.
increase, yet Paul is to plant, and Apollos to water; and therefore Fox Mart.
fol. 1003.
John Longland, B. of Lincolme, preaching before King Henry 8. wondered at the
Popes blind folly, who makes the whole world his Diocese; for if a man at the
dreadful day of judgment shall hardly answer for himself, how shall the man
of sin answer for all the world?

Now for as much, as every private family is a model of a kingdom; and every
man in his own house, is both a Priest, and a Prince: be wise ye masters, and
learned ye parents, that ye may bring up your servants and children in Ephesians.
6.4.
instruction and information of the Lord, serve God in fear, and rejoice in
him with reverence, give good examples of piety toward God, of pity toward
your neighbors, of sobriety toward your selves. As Epist. lib. 1. epist. 10.
Seneca divinely, sic viue cum hominibus, quasi Deus videat: sic loquere cum
deo, quasi homines audiant: So converse with men, as if God did see you; so
confer with God, as if men did hear you.

Lastly, this exhortation to repentance concerns all men, as well the lowest,
as the highest, if the words ministry reach unto the Sovereign, how shall it
come short of the Euthym. Calvin.
subject? if 1. King. 18.18.
Elias may tell Ahab, it is thou and thy fathers house which have troubled
Israel, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the Lord, and have
followed Balaim? If Mat. 14.14.
John the Baptist may tell Herod to his beard, It is not lawful for thee to
have thy brothers wife? If 2. Sam. 12.
Nathan may tell David the King of his murder and adultery? then assuredly
the Prophets of Almighty God may well admonish inferiors, and tell them of
their vain imaginations, raging against the Lord and his anointed. Saint
Peter told Simon Magus, Act. 8.23.
thou art in the gall of bitterness. Saint Galath. 3.3.
Paul called his Galathians fools, because they began in the spirit, and ended
in the flesh. Saint Iam. 5.3.
James cried unto the covetous worldlings, your gold and silver is cankered,
and the rust of them is a witness against you. The Pastor may tell his
parishioners of their idleness, oppression, hypocrisy, drunkenness, etc.
exhorting them to learn Christ better, and to be more wife. Such as continue
still irrepentant in their sins, are fools, and the longer they continue, the
greater fools; if once they turn to the Lord and repent, they begin to be
wise, for Prou. 1.7.
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. And therefore the next
point is to be pressed, intelligite nunc, be wise now. Now while ye are in
the Mat. 5.25.
way, now while it is called Heb. 3.13.
to day, now while it is time, Calvin. Genebrard.
before Gods heavy judgments overtake you, mentioned in the fifth and ninth
verse.

Sin is first (as it were) a Palmer-worme, hurting only the leaves of the
tree; then a Caterpiller, destroying the fruit; last of all (if it be not in
due time prevented) a Canker that deuoures the body. Christ often compares his
Spouse the Church, unto a Dove, whose call is nunc, nunc, now, now, and the
voice of the Turtle is heard in Gods holy land, Cant. 2.12. but the Crow crying
Augustine. de verbis dom. in euang. secund. Mat. ser. 16.
cras, cras, to morrow, to morrow, seems to be curate to the devil, and
vicar of hell. An irrepentant sinner in his security sleeps between death and
the devil, as Peter did between two soldiers, bound with two chains, Act.
12.6. He that will not understand and be wise now, may perish in his folly
before to morrow. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a
day may bring forth, Prou. 27.1. O fool, this night may they fetch away thy
soul from thee, Luke 12.20. Be wise therefore now, learn now to know your
duty, and to do your duty to the Lord, lest in his anger he bruise you with a
rod of iron, and break you to pieces as a potters vessel.

Our understanding must be first informed, and then our affections reformed,
according to Gods holy laws. Lactantius institut. lib. 4. cap. 4.
Sapientia praecedit, religio sequitur, sapience goes before, religion
follows. It is our duty, first to know God, and then to worship him according
to the terms of our Terms of law. Tit. scire facias.
Common law, there must be first a scire facias, and then a fieri facias. We
cannot do the will of our heavenly Father, except we know it, and it is not
sufficient to know it (as Luke 12.47.
Christ teaches us) except we do it. The fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom, a good understanding (says our Prophet) have they that See notes
upon the 111. Psalm.
do thereafter, Psalm. 111.10. He that will commence Doctor in Israel, and be
learned in Christ's school, must agere poenitentiam, as the Latin translation
runs, Mat. 3.2. It is not enough Michael de Hungaria, ser. 5. and Stella in
Luke 15.7.
cogitare, to think of amendment, as they who defer repentance from day to
day, ye must even now be wise: neither is it enough dicere to speak of
repentance, like hypocrites, who disfigure their faces, and look sour, Mat.
6.16. Neither is it enough docere, to teach other repentance, like Judas, who
was an instrument, for the saving of other, and yet hanged himself. He that
will not burn with the devil, must of necessity turn to God, and this
turning is a whole, not half a turn. Joel. 2.12.
Turn ye to me says the Lord with all your heart, etc. We have heretofore
played the fools in abusing our souls, and bodies, and goods unto the
dishonor of God, iniuring of our neighbors, hurt of our selves. It is now
time to be wise, and to learn how to be devout in pouring out our souls unto
God; continent, in governing our body toward our selves; just, in disposing of
our goods toward other.

Now the best way to be learned, and to know our duty, is, to be versed in
Gods book, whereof there be See Basilicon Doron. page 7. 8.
two parts, his old Testament, and his new. The ground of the former is the
Law, which shows our sin, and contains justice: the ground of the latter
is the Gospel, which shows our Savior, and contains grace. The sum of
the law is the decalogue, more largely dilated in the books of Moses,
interpreted and applied in the Sermons of the Prophets, and illustrated by
manifold examples of good and evil, in the stories of Chronicles, and Kings.
But because no man is able perfectly to keep the whole law, or any part thereof;
it pleased God of his infinite goodness and wisdom, to incarnate his only
Son in our nature, who (for the satisfaction of his justice) might fulfill the
course, and suffer the curse of the law for us; that since we could not be
saved by doing, we might at least be saved by believing. The Gospels of the
four Evangelists, historically relate the birth, life, death, resurrection,
and ascension of Christ. The larger interpretation thereof is delivered in the
Apostles Canonical Epistles; and the practice of the Primitive Church, in
their Acts; and the Revelation of Saint John, is a prophecy concerning the
Church universal unto the worlds end. In the four Evangelists, he that has
eyes to see, may read the text of the Gospel, intimating what Christ is in
himself: in the Acts, Epistles, Apocalypse, as it were the Gospels golden
gloss, unfolding more fully, what Christ is in his members. If any then have a
desire to kiss the son, and to learn how to be subject unto the bords and
cords of his kingdom: let him exactly John 5.39.
search the Scriptures, for they witness of him? In the ceremonies and
sacrifices of the law, you may find him obscurely shadowed; in the Sermons and
Sacraments of the Gospel, openly declared to be the begotten son of God, and
anointed King, set over his holy hill of Sion.

Serve the Lord] Concerning the doing of our duty, Strigellius.
two things are required here more especially, Fear, serve the Lord in fear.
Faith, rejoice unto him, and put your trust in him.


Faith is opposite to desperation, and fear to security. Hierome. Euthym.
That we may not presume, we must serve God in fear: that we may not
despair, rejoice unto him in faith and hope. Fear may not be without joy,
nor joy without fear. Mark how cautionatly the spirit speaks here, serve the
Lord, but in fear: rejoice unto ye Lord, but in trembling: lest happily we
should assume too much unto our selves, and so presumptuously sin, he does
admonish us of one thing Calvin.
twice. That we may not be discouraged in serving of God, he would have us to
rejoice, yet so that our joy be with reverence. The devout women who came to
visit Christ's sepulcher, were filled with fear and great joy, Matthew. 28.8. and
S. 1. Cor. 10.12.
Paul advises every man, who thinks he stands, to take heed lest he fall:
and to Philip. 2.12.
work out their salvation with fear and trembling. God abhors hypocrites,
a people that honors him with their lips, but their Mark. 7.6.
heart is far from him: Placidus.
his perfect service requires outward obeisance of the body, joined with inward
obedience of the mind, as Hierome glosseth our text, the servants of God ought
to come into his courts, cum tremore corporis, and timore animae, with aufull
hearts, and trembling hands, so Psalm. 81.1. and 100.1.
singing to the Lord in gladness, that they may rejoice in the Lord with
reverence. This fear may not be servile, but Lorin. Turrecremat.
filial: as a father he loves us, and therefore we must as dear children
honor him, obeying with a reverend awe, whatsoever he would have us either to
suffer or do. Bellarmine.
Mire miscuit amorem cum timore, ac si diceret, timete cum amore, and amate cum
timore.

The last obseruable point is why, because hereby ye shall escape Gods heavy
curse, that falls upon such as resist his Christ, and obtain that happy
blessing, which is promised unto such as put their trust in him. Agellius.
Understand then, O ye Kings, and be no longer obstinate, ye have heretofore
stood up against the Lord, and his anointed Son: but now serve the Lord, and
kiss his Son. O ye Kings and Judges of the earth, acknowledge that Christ
is the King of Kings, even the Lord of all things, and Judge of all men, able
to make you his footstool, as having the heathen for his inheritance, and the
whole world for his possession; and holding a rod of iron in his hand, to
dash into pieces all such, as take counsel together against him. He is also
ready to destroy you, for his wrath is kindled, and Deuteronomy. 4.24.
God is a co^suming fire. Placidus.
The more fuel, the greater flame. Your offenses make you the very fuel of
his anger: and therefore Dan. 4.24.
break off your sins by righteousness, embrace the bonds of his authority,
which you meant to break, for his Matthew. 11.30.
yoke is easy: Cast not his cords away, for his burden is light. Even now
while you are in the way, kick not against the Son, but kiss the Son, See
Hierome. Steuchus. Bucer. Agellius in loc. and Bellarm. de verbo dei, lib. 2.
cap. 13.
that is, admit of his doctrine, and submit your selves to his discipline.
Christ is the truth, and the way; that therefore ye may not perish from the
right way, kiss him, and keep his Commandments, as Hierome paraphraseth it
pithely.

Kissing in old time was used in token of Devotion: for Idolaters are said to
kiss their Idols, Hosea 13.2. but Gods people refused to 1. Kings 19.18 see
Hierome in Job. 31.27. and in Hose. 13.2.
kiss the mouth of Baal. From hence worshipping is in Latin called Adoratio.
Obedience: so Samuel kissed Saul, 1. Sam. 10.1. and Aaron kissed Moses, Exodus
4.27. and it is the manner of subjects at this day, to kiss the hands of their
Kings. Love: so Genesis 45.15.
Joseph kissed his brethren: so Ruth. 1.9.
Naomi kissed her two daughters in law: so the good old father kissed his
dissolute son, Luke 15.20.


All these kinds of kisses are due to Christ: in our devotion it is our duty
to Psalm. 95.6.
fall down before him, and with Matthew. 28.9.
Mary Magdalene to kiss his feet, yea the feet of Romans 10.15.
such, as bring the glad tidings of his Gospel. And in our whole conversation,
it is our duty to give unto him (our King and Lord) the kisses of honor and
homage, serving him in fear, rejoicing unto him with reverence. We must
heartily kiss him in faith, and not hypocritically, like Judas, in fashion
only. Wherefore Placidus. Steuchus.
some translations have it thus, adorate pure, worship him in truth and
purity, Agellius.
cleave to him, and embrace his word with as Bellarmine.
loving an affection, as they do that kiss one another.

Io. Ganeius. Parasinus Theologus in loc.
Atque vni totos ipsi vos dedite, tota
Mente, animoque velut dominum amplexamini, eique
Figite amicitiae purissima basia sanctae.
The Son came into the world to Ephesians. 2.16.
reconcile us unto God his Father: he came not to kill us, he came to kiss
us, and that (as ye Church speaks in her Cant. 1.1.
loue-song) with the kisses of his mouth. His saying, Come unto me all ye that
are weary and laden, and I will ease you, is a Melanct. in loc.
sweet kiss of his mouth. His saying, I am not come to call the righteous unto
repentance, but sinners, is another sweet kiss of his mouth. His saying, God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, is another
sweet kiss of his mouth. It is Strigellius in loc.
vere suauiolum, as being sweeter then honey, Psalm. 19.10. better then wine,
Cant. 1.1. As Concordia duorum cordium, osculum duorum corporum coniunctio. Io.
a Iesu-Maria, in Cant. 1.
concord is the conjunction of two souls; even so kissing, which is a token of
concord, is the conjunction of two bodies. Our blessed Savior daily proffers
and offers to kiss us: if we then unmannerly despise the Romans 2.4.
riches of his goodness, and obstinately perish from the right way; he shall
one day speak to us in his wrath, and if his wrath be kindled, yea but a
little, what a Heb. 10.31.
fearful thing will it be, to fall into the hands of the living God, which is
a consuming fire?

If any shall ask, how shall I, which am a poor pilgrim on earth, ascend and
kiss my Savior who dwells in heaven? Answer is made by David in the very
next clause, Blessed are all they, that put their trust in him: as if he
should have said, To Strigellius. Tileman.
believe in him, and to put our whole trust in him, is to kiss him.

In this proposition, as in all other, three points are to be considered,
especially the Subject, all that trust in him. Praedicate, blessed. Copula, are.


Hierome.
Not they who trust in themselves, and their own merits, or in Princes and
their means, or in Saints and their mediations, or in Angels, or in any thing
else, beside Acts. 4.12.
Christ: only such are free from the tyrannous oppression of Satan and sin, who
put their trust in him. He says not, al they that believe him, and assent
barely to his promise: See Placidus. Melancthon. Bucer in loc.
but omnes qui confidunt, all they who confidently place their affiance in his
mercies, and believe in him, according to that of S. Ioh. 3.18.
John the Baptist, He that believes in him shall not be condemned: but he that
believes not, is condemned already, because he believes not in the name of
the only begotten son of God. I find that some Doctors among the D. Kimchi.
apud Bucerum in loc.
Jews by him understand God the Father: but Placidus. Calvin. Genebrard. Io.
Ganeius in loc. Idem Bellarm. de verbo dei, lib. 2. cap. 11
Christian interpretors usually refer this unto God the Son, making the
coherence thus: O kiss the Son, for blessed are all they that put their
trust in him. Here then is a pregnant place to prove that justification is by
faith in Christ. See Melancthon, Bucer, Tileman in loc.

There be three kinds of blessing: External, as the gifts of the world.
Internal, as the gifts of grace. Eternal, as the gifts of glory.


Now, bonorum omnium cumulus and summa, says In loc.
Augustine, belongs unto such as put their trust in the Lord. They have the
promises of the life present, and of that which is to come, 1. Tim. 4.8. Mercy
does embrace them on every side, Psalm. 32.11. Blessed in every kind of
blessing, as reverend Beza paraphrastically: -- omnibus o modis beatos
illos, qui domino deoque fidunt.


1. They be blessed in things of this world, blessed in Deuteronomy. 28.3.
their field, and blessed in their fold, blessed in the fruit of their cattle,
and increase of corn, blessed in their wives, and blessed in their children,
blessed in their going out, and blessed in their coming home: lo thus shall
they be blessed who fear the Lord, Psalm. 128.5. Or if God deny these
blessings unto them, it is for their Romans 8.28.
good, and so they be blessed in their cross, having (as Paul said) nothing,
and yet possessing all things. 2. Cor. 6.10.

2. Blessed in the gifts of grace, both illuminating and saving, blessed with
Ephesians. 1.3.
all spiritual blessing in heavenly things in Christ, blessed in respect of
Their Vocation: Matthew. 13.16. Luke 10.23.
Blessed are the eyes, which see the things that you see, and the ears which
hear the things that you hear. Blessed are they, which are called to the
Lambs Supper, Apocal. 19.9. Justification: Blessed are they, Psalm. 32.1. Romans
4.7.
whose wickedness is forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Sanctification:
Psalm. 1.1.
Blessed is the man, that has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly, etc.
Blessed is the servant, Matthew. 24.46.
whom his master when he comes shall find doing his duty. Blessed are the
poor in spirit, blessed are the meek, blessed are the merciful, Matthew. 5.


3. Blessed in the gifts of glory, Matthew. 25.34.
Come ye blessed, inherit ye the kingdom, etc. Matthew. 5.3.
theirs is the kingdom of heaven. It is now theirs in hope, hereafter it shall
be theirs in hold. See notes upon the Gospel on all Saints day.

PSALM 57. Be merciful unto me, O God, be merciful unto me, etc.


David in this hymn Melanct. Calvin. Tileman.
prays, and praises the Lord. First he prays unto God, from the 1. verse
to the 8, for deliverance from his enemies tyranny. Then, as conceiving
undoubted hope thereof, he prepares himself to praise God in the rest, O God
my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise.

In his prayer 2. points are remarkable, to wit, a Petition, Be merciful, etc.
enforced by his Duty, for my soul trusts in thee, etc. Danger, as being
persecuted By Cruel enemics, my soul is among Lions, verse. 4.5. Cunning
enemies, they have laid a net for my feet, v. 7.


Repetition, in the 6. and 12. verses, as the Tremellius.
burden of the song, Set up thy self, O God, above the heavens, and thy
glory above all the earth.


Be merciful unto me, O God,] The title shows us that David made this
Psalm, when he fled from Saul into the Cave. The story whereof is reported at
large, 1. Sam. 24. and it is in brief this: Saul persecuting David, sought him
in the wilderness of Engedi, upon the rocks, among the wild goats: and being
there in a Cave to cover his feet, David having him at his mercy, would not
kill the Lords anointed, but only cut off the lap of his coat, to show, that
he could have touched his skin so well as his skirt, and that he could have
made him (as it is in the proverb) shorter by the head, so well as curtall his
robe. Which when Saul after perceived, his heart relented for David's great
kindness, and he wept, acknowledging his fault, and taking an oath of David,
that he should not destroy his seed: he ceased his persecuting for a time.
David in this distress composed his hymn, the which is grounded upon his
faith, and his faith is grounded upon Gods mercy and might. Gods mercy, Be
merciful unto me, O God, be merciful, as being so willing to defend thy
children, as the hen is her chickens under the shadow of her wings. Gods might,
I will call unto the most high God, even unto the God, that shall The like
phrase Psalm. 138. and Philip. 1.6.
perform the cause I have in hand, who shall send from heaven, to wit, his
hand, as Psalm. 144.7. or his Angel, as Dan. 3.28. or, as it here follows,
his mercy and truth, able to save me from the reproof of him, that would eat
race up and devour my soul. Mollerus. Tileman, Calvin, opposing heaven to
terrene means.
By supernatural and extraordinary miracles, so well as ordinary means,
able to deliver his servants as well with 1. Sam. 14.6. and 2. Chron. 24.11.
few as with many. So Manasses in his prayer builds all his comfort upon Gods
almighty power, and unsearchable merciful promise. So Christ in his absolute
pattern of praying, advises us to call upon God as our father in heaven,
insinuating hereby, that God is willing to grant our requests, as being our
father: and able, because in heaven. And according to these presidents, our
holy Mother the Church of England begins her public devotion unto God,
Almighty and most merciful Father. Able to hear, because almighty: willing
to help, because most merciful.

For my soul trusts in thee] He desires to be heard in respect of his
assured affiance in Gods almighty power and holy promise. Psalm. 145.18.
The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, even all such as call upon
him faithfully: Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, etc. Psalm. 2.12.
Blessed are all they, that put their trust in him. And therefore David here
challenges (as it were) God upon his word, saying, Be merciful unto me, for
my soul trusts in thee. The Euthym. Agellius. Genebrard.
repetition of miserere, shows his earnest affection and intention in
praying, and the word Calu^ne.
soul, that his hope for help was no flying conceit of his brain, but a full
assurance settled in his heart. Lord I trust in D. Incognit. Beza. Buchanan.
nothing else but in thee alone, for under the shadow of thy wings shall be my
refuge, until this tyranny be over past. Some put their trust in 1. Tim. 6.17.
uncertain riches, and say to the wedge of gold, Job. 31.24.
thou art my confidence. But Prou 11.4.
riches avail not in the day of wrath: Baruc. 3.17.19
hoarders up of silver and gold are come to naught, and gone down to hell: O
fool! this night will they fetch away thy soul from thee, Luke 12.20.

Other trust in their own worth and holiness, as the Pharisie (Luke 18.)
stood and prayed thus with himself, O God I thank thee, that I am not as
other are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers: I fast twice in thee week, I give
tithe of all that ever I possess. But Prou. 28.1.26.
blessed is the man that fears always, for he that trusts in his own heart,
is a fool.

Other trust in their politic counsel, as Achitophel, of whom it was said in
those days that his counsel was reputed 2. Sam. 16 23.
as an oracle of God: but the Lord Job. 5.13.
catches the wise in their own craftines, and the counsel of the wicked is
made foolish.

Other boast of their strength, and put their trust (as 1. Sam. 17.45.
Goliath did) in their sword and shield: but Ierem. 17.5.
cursed be the man that makes flesh his arm, withdrawing his heart from the
Lord.

Other put their trust in Princes, and make the Kings Minion their mediator.
But, says our Psalm. 146.3.
Prophet, O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man; for his
breath goes forth, and he turns again to his earth, and then all his
thoughts perish.

Other put their trust in Psalm. 20.7.
Chariots, and other in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our
God, only blessed is he, that has the God of Jacob for his help, and whose
hope is in the Lord his God, Psalm. 146.4. and therefore be merciful unto me,
O God, be merciful unto me, for in thee have I put all my confidence. Mine
other friends and forces besides thee, what are they but miserable comforters
(as Job. 16.2.
Job speaks) if they be compared with thee. Tileman. Bellarmine.
Like as the chickens seek to the hen for defense: so run I to the shadow
of thy wings for my refuge. Lord my soul trusts in thee now, so shall it
ever, until this evil be passed over. D. Incognitus. Wilcox.
For by the word until, he means not, that when the storm was appeased, he
would then cease to trust in God; but that he would both then and for ever
depend upon him, as long as he has any being, Psalm. 146.1. So the word until
is used, 2. Sam. 6.23. Michol the daughter of Saul had no child until the day
of her death. And Psalm 110. verse. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on
my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Where the word until
(as I have showed upon the place) notes not a piece of time, but a perpetuity.
For Christ (after all his enemies are made his footstool) shall ever sit at
the right hand of God, as having a Heb. 1.18.
throne which endures ever, and a Luke 1.33.
kingdom without end.

Under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge] Euthym. Bellarmine.
By this he does understand Gods safeguard, protection and providence. The
metaphor is borrowed from the Hen, whose wings in Bonauent. Mollerus.
three things especially resemble Gods high and holy hand over us. 1. The wings
of the Hen nourish and brood her chickens: even so the Lord said unto
Jerusalem, Matthew. 23.37.
How often would I have gathered thy children together, as the hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not. 2. The wings of the Hen serve
to defend her chickens from a tempest and storm: so God is a Esaias 25.4.
refuge against the tempest, a shadow against the heat. 3. The wings of the
Hen serve to protect her chickens from the kite that houereth over them, and
would feign devour them: even so God delivers his children from the Psalm.
91.3.
snare of the hunter, Augustine. Hierome. Arnobius.
that is, from the subtle tentations of the devil, who walks about seeking
whom he may devour, 1. Pet. 5.8. The Lord hides all his under the shadow of
his wings, Psalm. 17.8. and so capa-pe, they shall be safe under his feathers;
his faithfulness shall be their shield, and his truth their buckler, Psalm. 91.4.

Until this tyranny be over past] He co^pareth his affliction and calamity to
a Geneua gloss. Wilcox.
storm that comes and goes: as it is not always Calvin.
fair weather with us in this life, so not always foul; Psalm. 30.5.
Heaviness may continue for a night, but joy comes in the morning. 1. Cor.
10.13.
God is faithful, who will not suffer his children to be tempted above their
ability, but will even give the issue with the tentation. Apud Tileman in loc.
Athanasius said of Julian, furiously raging against the Lords anointed,
nubecula est, cito transibit. Man is borne to Job. 5.7.
labor and Job. 14.1.
dolor, to travail and trouble. To labor in his Bernard.
actions, to dolor in his passions. And so Psalm. 34.18.
great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of
all. If we put our trust in him, and cast all our care upon him, he will in
his good time bring it to pass, that all our afflictions shall over pass: he
will either take them from us, or us from them, and then we shall assuredly
know, that the troubles of this life present are not Romans 8.18.
worthy of the glory, which in the life to come shall be showed unto us. For
as the globe of the earth, which improperly for his show of bigness we term
the world, and is, after the Mathematicians account, many thousand miles in
compass, yet being compared unto the greatness of the starrie skies
circumference, is but a center or little prick: so the travail and affliction
in this life temporal, in respect of the joys eternal in the world to come,
bear not any proportion, but are to be reputed (in comparison) a very
nothing, as a dark cloud that comes and goes in a moment.

This (as Idem Strigellius in loc.
Melancthon here notably) requires rather an application, then an explication
or large Commentary. Blessed is that man, who can in all his affliction and
trouble say with our Prophet, O God be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts
in thee, and under the shadow of thy wings shall be my refuge, till this
tyranny be over past. Happy man is he, who can in the midst of his crosses
and losses affirm truly with holy Job. 1.21.
Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the
Lord, Job. 13.15.
though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, Job. 5.18.
as he makes the wound, so will he bind it up, he smites, and his hands
make whole. Happy man is he, who can in the hour of tentation hide himself
with the Church in the Cant. 2.14.
holes of the rock, that is, in the wounds of Christ, our rock and refuge, in
the time of trouble.

Yea, but where dwells our blessed Savior, how shall I find him? Unto this
question himself answered, Ioh. 1.39. Come and see. The Church is his Heb.
3.6. See Cyril and Maldonat. in Joan. 1.39
house, there he Psalm. 135.21.
dwells, and there you may find him always at home, not in his mothers
arms, or on a wooden Crucifix; but in his holy word and Sacraments. Natus est
Christus de virgin, number quid semper nascitur? says Augustine, He was once
borne of the Virgin, shall he be borne still of her? He did once suck her
breasts, is he still an infant and a sucking babe? Once he did hang on the
Cross, does he still hang on it? haec transierunt, these things are past and
gone. But seek him in his word, for that witnesses of him; and in his
Sacraments, for they represent lively both his blood and body. His word is an
audible Sacrament, and his Sacraments are visible words. So long as the Church
had golden Teachers, she needed no wooden Images: but when once golden Priests
degenerated into wooden, then both wooden and golden Images crept in. If the
Queen of Matthew. 12.42.
Sheba condemned the men of Christ's age, much more the men of our time, living
in the Church of England. She was a Queen, we subjects: she left her kingdom
and country, we (God be praised) sit under our own vines in our own soil:
she came from the furthest part of the world, we have Christ among us: she was
moved only with his 1. Kings 10.1.
fame, we both hear Christ in his word, and see him in his Sacraments: she
coming to Solomon brought presents, we coming to Christ may receive rewards:
she came to behold Solomon a mere man, we may behold Christ God and man, a
greater then Solomon: greater in wisdom, for John 7.46.
never any man spoke as he did: greater in might and mercy, for never any man
did as he did, he did all things Mark. 7.37.
well, Matthew. 11.5.
he made the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the blind to see, the lame
to go, he cured the sick, and raised the dead, and that is more then ever
King Solomon did. Greater in majesty, for Solomon in all his royalty was
nothing else but a type of this our King of glory. So that if we do not come
to him in our tentations and troubles, inuiting us freely, fully, Come all ye
that labor and are laden, and I will ease you: the Queen of the South
assuredly shall arise in judgment against us, and by her example condemn us.

When Lucianus in Scytha.
Toxaris saw his countriman Anacharsis in Athens, he said unto him, I will at
once show thee all the wonders of Greece, Viso Solone, vidisti omnia, in seeing
Solon, thou see all, even Athens it self, and the whole glory of the
Greeks. In like manner I may tell a Christian: Have thou faith, and assured
trust in the Lord? then thou have more then the wonders of Greece; upon the
point, all the wonderful gifts of grace: for faith is a mother virtue from
which all other spring, and without which our best actions are no better then
sin, Romans 14.23. Wherefore let us always labor for faith, as for life,
because Habacuc. 2.4.
the just man lives by his faith, his soul trusts in the Lord, and under
the shadow of his wings shall be his refuge, till all the tyranny, both of
Satan and sin, death and hell, is over past.

My soule] That is, my life, body, person, as the word soul is often used
elsewhere, namely Genes. 14.21. Numb. 31.40. Ioh. 10.32. 1. Sam. 22.22.

Among lyons] An unregenerate man, having Gods image defaced in him, is but a
little better then a very vermin. Boethius de consolat. Philosophiae lib. 4.
prosa. 3.
Auaritia feruit alienarum opum violentus ereptor? similem lupo dixeris: ferox
atque inquietus linguam litigijs exercet? Cani comparabilis. Insidiator
occultus surripuisse fraudibus gaudet? vulpeculis exaequetur. Irae intemperans
fremit? leonis animum gestare credatur. Pauidus ac fugax non metuenda formidat?
ceruis similis habeatur. Segnis ac stupidus torpet? asinum viuit. Leuis ac
inconstans studia permutat? nil ab auibus differt. Foedis immundisque
libidinibus immergitur? sordidae suis voluptate detinetur. Ita fit, vt qui
probitate deserta homo esse desierit, cum in diuinam conditionem transire non
possit, vertatur in belluam. To this purpose, Dialog, de immortalit. animae.
Carolus Bouillus excellently, Humana sub cate plurimae latent ferae. The
Scripture says as much in calling a subtle dissembler fox, Go tell that
fox, said Christ of Herod, Luke 13.32. in calling a soule-murthering false
prophet, a Matthew. 7.15.
ravening wolf: in calling a vain man, a Job. 11.12.
wild ass colt: in calling a voluptuous man, given over to work al
uncleanness even with greediness, a 2. Pet. 2.22.
sow wallowing in the mire: in calling a proud man in honor, that understands
not how to use the good things he has, Psalm. 49.10.
a brute that perishes, as Psalm. 32.10.
horse and mule without understanding. So David here terms the children of
men, which are set on fire to do mischief, whelps of lions: My soul is
among lions. O God be merciful unto me, for my soul is persecuted by such
enemies as abound with a great deal of might and malice. Might, as being
lions, that is, hardy and haughty, Lebaim of leb, that is, heart, courage. So
lions are mentioned in holy Scripture for stoutnes: 2. Sam. 17.10. He that is
valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion: and for boldness, Prou. 28.1.
The righteous are bold as a lion. And my foes have great surie so well as
force, being set on fire, raging themselves, and Ardeliones aulici. Tremel.
inflaming other also with anger and envy, mere boutefeus. See Bellar. and
Agell. in loc.
So that if I should escape the laws of lions, which hurt at hand; yet I may
fall into their black mouths, whose teeth and tongue like lances and arrows
hit and wound a far off. By Bucer. Tileman. Rob. Stephanus.
these fiery fellows he does understand backbiting Slanderers and Sycophants
in the Court of Saul, accusing him of treason and disloyalty. For so himself
complains, 1. Sam. 24.10. Wherefore give thou an ear to men's words who say,
Behold, David seeks evil against thee?

Prou. 25.18.
Solomon says, A man that bears false witness against his neighbor, is like
an hammer and a sword, and a sharp arrow. Nay, the detracting tongue hurts a
great deal more the^ either sword or arrow. For a sword that makes a big
wound cannot hurt far off, and an arrow that hurts far off, usually makes
no big wound: but the lewd tongue cuts deeper then any sharp sword, and
flies faster and further then any swift arrow. The dagger at one blow, the
dart at one shoot kills not many: but the slanderer in telling one tale, may
murder at one time three, to wit, himself, the party to whom, and the party
of whom he tells it. Bernard. sermon. 24. in Cant.
Vnus est qui loquitur, and vnum tantum verbum profert, and tamen illud vnum
verbum, vno momento multitudinis audientium dum aures inficit, animas
interficit. The wicked (says our Psalm. 140.3.
Prophet) have sharpened their tongues like a serpent, and the tongue of a
serpent (as Not. hist. lib. 11. cap. 37.
Pliny tells us) is trisulca, three edged.

They have laid a net for my feete] As the foes of David were cruel, a Prou.
30.14.
generation whose teeth are swords, and jaws are knives to devour Gods
afflicted people: Euthym. Calvin.
so likewise crafty, laying snares for his feet, thinking to Bellarmine.
Agellius.
catch him in a pit-fall, as a bird, or as a beast in a ginne. The Psalm. 11.2.
wicked bend their bow, and make ready their arrows upon the string, that they
may secretly shoot at them which are upright in heart; that which they cannot
effect by power, they will attempt by policy. But the Psalm. 124.6.
share is broken, the Psalm. 35.8.
net, which they laid privily, caught themselves, and they who dug the pit,
are fallen into the midst of it themselves. And here we may behold Gods
infinite justice, who never leaves the deeds of charity, nor the debts of
cruelty unsatisfied. As Judges 8.
Gideon slew seventy Elders of Succoth with unmeasurable torments: even so
were his own seventy sons, all but one, murdered by his bastard Abimelec.
So the wicked Exodus 1.
Egyptians (having caused some male-children of the Hebrews to be slain, and
other of them to be cast into the water and drowned) were rewarded by God in
the like measure, destroying their own Exodus 12.
first borne by his Angel, and drowning their King and his host in the red
sea, Exodus 14. So Ester 7.10.
Haman was hanged upon the same gallows he set up for Mordecai. Knolles in his
life.
Bajazet the first, who purposed in the pride of his heart, if he should
conquer Tamberlane, to carry him in an iron cage thorough his kingdom; was
himself served in the same kind by victorious Tamberlane. The Tyrant Eusebius.
hist. lib. 9. cap. 9.
Maxentius was overthrown in the same bridge, which he craftily built as a
snare for the destruction of Constantine; and so his Psalm. 7.17.
mischief fell upon his own head, and his wickedness upon his own pate.
Pet. Bembus hist. Venet. lib. 6. Idem Pontanus de prudent. lib. 4 cap. 16.
Alexander the sixth was poisoned at supper with the very same wine, which he
had prepared as a deadly draught for his familiar friend Cardinal Adrianus: It
is said in the story, that it happened by his servants improuidence, who
mistook the bottles; and yet doubtless by Gods all-seeing providence, who
casts his enemies into the same pit they dug for other.

Mystically this Hymn may be construed of Hierome. Augustine. D. Incognitus.
Lorinus.
Christ, who was Heb. 5.7.
in the days of his flesh assaulted by the tyranny both of temporal and
spiritual enemies. His temporal enemies, Acts 4.27.
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and people of Israel, furiously
raged, and took counsel together against him. The chief Priests and Princes
were (says In loc.
Hierome) like lions, and the people like the whelps of lions, all of them in a
readiness to devour his soul. The Rulers laid a net for his feet in their
Turrecremat. Lorinus in loc.
captious interrogatories, asking, Mat. 22.17. Is it lawful that tribute be
given unto Caesar, or no? And Ioh. 8.5. whether the woman taken in the very act
of adultery, should be stoned to death, or no? The people were set on fire,
when as they raged against him, and their teeth and tongues were spears and
swords, in Augustine.
crying, Crucify him, crucify him. His spiritual enemies also sought how to
swallow him up, his soul was among lions all the days of his life, at the
hour of his death especially. The devil in tempting and troubling him, had
laid a snare for his feet; and death, in digging a pit for him, had thought to
devour him. As David was in the cave, so Christ the son of David was in the
grave. But it was Acts 2.24.
impossible yt the Lord of life should be holden of Death, or that his flesh
should see corruption, he therefore rose again from the dead on this day,
setting himself above the heavens, and his glory above all the earth. In his
anguish and agony he did Heb. 5.7.
offer up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him
that was able to save him from death, saying, Matthew. 26.39.
O my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me? nevertheless not
as I will, but as thou will. And so Christ here called upon his Father, O God
be merciful unto me, etc. But he speaks as man, and in the person of men,
Hierome.
Vnus homo dicit, sed vnus pro multis. And S. In loc.
Augustine sweetly, Qui cum patre miseretur tui, in te clamat miserere mei:
Christ, according to his See notes upon Gospel 10. Sun. after Trinit.
Thelesis and natural will, abhorred and feared death, and therefore said, O
God be merciful unto me: but according to his boulesis and rational will, he
yielded himself voluntarily to his persecutors, and said, Under the shadow of
thy wings shall be my refuge, till this evil is over past. And Psalm. 16.9.
(as S. Peter applies it, Acts 2.25.) I beheld God always before me, for he is
at my right hand, that I shall not fall. Wherefore such as affirm that he
suffered the pangs of desperation, and the very pains of the damned in hell,
err foully, not understanding the Scriptures. He says here, verse. 5.
according to the vulgar Latin, Dormini conturbatus, he was indeed grievously
troubled in his soul; yet so that he slept, August. in loc. Consule Lorin. in
loc.
tam placatus erat iste turbatus, vt quando vellet dormiret. He feared his
enemies tyranny, secundum propassionem, (as Sent. lib. 3. did. 15.
Lombard acutely) non secundum passionem. Or, to speak in the words of Epist.
25.
Bernard, he was turbatus, moved, but not perturbatus, removed from his trust
in God, and resolution to work our good. And therefore Hierom. in loc.
he said in another Psalm, I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest, as
having Ioh. 10.18.
power to lay down my life, and power to take it up again. For as he dyed when
he would, even so when he would he did arise from the dead, setting himself
above the heavens, and his glory above all the earth.

According to this exposition, our Church allotted this Hymn to be read on
this holy day: for in Christ's resurrection all his enemies tyranny was
ouerpast; in his resurrection his Turrecremat.
glory (which heretofore was obscure) did appear above all the earth; in his
resurrection he did awake right early, so the text, in the Luke 24.1.
morning early when it was Ioh. 20.1.
dark; in his resurrection his lute and harp did awake, that is, his flesh
arose from the bed of his grave. Augustine. Hierome. Lorinus.
The strings of an Harp are touched and sound upward especially, but the
strings of a Lute from below: Christ's humane nature then in working divine
miracles, which are from above, was like the Harp; but in suffering our
infirmities here below, like a Lute. The Harp did sound, when he made the
blind to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to go, etc. but the Lute did
sound, when he was a thirst, hungry, naked, whipped, when he cried, when he
dyed, when he was buffeted, and when he was buried. After his resurrection,
all the miracles he did out of his power, and all the miseries he suffered out
of his infirmity, were by the blessed Apostles, instruments of his glory,
preached first among the people, then among all nations, every where singing,
that the greatness of his mercy reaches unto the heavens, and his truth unto
the clouds.

This also may be construed of the Mollerus. Strigellius.
Church, and that both in respect of her spiritual enemies and temporal. As
for her ghostly foes, the devil is a roaring lion, 1. Pet. 5.8. and our sins
are the Nyssen apud Lorin. in loc.
whelps of lions, ready to devour us. And concerning outward enemies, the
Church in this world is like Daniel in the lions den, or as the sucking
child playing upon the hole of the Aspe, Esaias 11.8. she has here no visible
power or outward help to fly to for succor, all her trust is in the Lord,
under the shadow of his wings is her refuge, till this evil is ouer-past. In
old time Gods people were Heb. 11.36.
tried by mockings and scourgings, by bonds, and prisonment, they were stoned,
hewn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they wandered
up and down in wilderness, and mountains, and caves of the earth, clothed in
sheepskins, and in goates-skinnes, being destitute, afflicted, and tormented,
of whom the world was not worthy. Since Christ, it is well observed by Ser.
33. super Cant.
Bernard of the Churches affliction, Amara prius in nece martyrum, amarior post
in conflictu haereticorum, amarissima nunc in moribus domesticorum: Hot non
fugare, non fugere potest, ita inualuerunt and multiplicati sunt super numerum.
Her oppression in the beginning was great by the persecution of tyrants,
afterward greater by the conflict of heretics, but now greatest of all by the
dangerous positions and practices of Antichrists in the kingdom of popery,
whose very Masses are sometime for massacres, and their sacred sacrifices
offerings of blood. And surely (beloved) if the Church had not any other
enemies, but only these monstrous Antichrists of Rome, yet she might truly
complain with our Prophet here, my soul is among lions. Eleven Popes had that
name, whereof all (excepting two or three) were roaring lions in their bulls, and
ravening lions in seeking after their pray. Leo the tenth so pilled and polled
the goodly nation of Germany with impardonable Pardons and merciless
Indulgences, as that his insupportable cruelty gave the first occasion of the
reformation of religion in that Country. The foes of David are said here to
lay a net for his feet, and to dig a pit before him: and what are the
Papists intricate distinctions of Schools, and Machiauelismes of State, but
snares and nets to catch our bodies and souls, and so greedily to swallow us
up, as Saul here would have done to David. These Scribes and Pharisees have so
great a swallow, that they devour not only some few widows houses, as the
Matthew. 23.14.
Pharisees among the Jews in old time: but also whole villages and towns, as
Fox Martyr. fol. 859. see the persecutions of Angronge apud eundem fol. 871.
Merindoll and Cabriers in the County of Province, yea whole shires and
countries in Netherland: yea their intent was anno 1588. to devour this whole
kingdom of England with an invincible (fondly so called) Armado. The foes of
David had teeth as spears, and tongues as swords: and are not the tongues of
Papists answerable, who term the sincere profession of the Gospel Heresy,
Turcisme, Paganism, Diabolisme, Sir Tho. Moore preface to his confutation of
Tyndals answer among the works of More, fol. 340
far exceeding the setting up of Beel, Baal, and Beelzebub, and all the Devils
in hell: D. Carier let. to the King. page 47.
affirming in their letters and libels, that our Church has no faith, but
fancy: no hope, but presumption: no charity, but lust: no God, but an Idol.
The foes of David were set on fire: and who greater incendiaries then the
Papists? Their chief Logic in their conference was a faggot for the heretic,
delighting so much in fire work, that they burned Gods people by ye dozen, as
at Fox Mart. fol. 1738.
Stratford the Bow near London; and bound them in chains by the score, as at
Jdem ibid. fol. 1389.
Colchester in the bloody days of Queen Mary. Nay, their intent was on the
fifth of November in the year 1605. to burn, and that at one fire by the
hundreds, and those not the meanest of the people, but the very principals of
our Church and Commonwealth, even the most meek King himself, together with
his noble consort, and all their royal issue. This Powder Plot was so
transcendent in villainy, that I may well use the words of Deuteronomy. 4.32.
Moses: Ask of the days of old, that have been before you, since the day that
God created man on earth, and enquire from the one end of heaven to the other,
if there came to pass such a thing as this, or whether any such like thing
has been heard? And answer may be given out of the 19. chapter of Judges, at
the 30. verse, There was no such thing done or seen, since the time that the
children of Israel came up from the land of Egypt, unto this day. The like was
never done, nor heard of in Israel, nor thoroughout the world, since the
beginning. To speak with Habacuc. 1.5.
Habacuc: Behold a work wrought in your days, you will not believe it, when
it shall be told you. Shall I call it a work done? no beloved (as a reverend
father of our Church) it was the work of the Lord, that it was not done. The
snare was broken, and we delivered, and they fell into the pit who dug it
for us. A work of so great might and mercy, that it ought to be had in a
perpetual remembrance. Exech. 24.2.
Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of the same day; for the
King of Babel set himself against Jerusalem this same day. The fifth of
November is the day, wherein we were delivered from the Babylonish and Romish
tyranny, let us be glad and rejoice therein, and sing as David in the second
part of this Hymn, O God my heart is fixed, my heart is fixed, I will sing and
give praise, etc.

PSALM 111. I will give thanks unto the Lord with my whole heart, secretly
among the faithful, and in the congregation.


THis Hymn may be parted into three portions: 1. A protestation of King David
in the first verse, that he will in his own person (hereby giving all his
subjects a good Mollerus.
example) praise the Lord, I will give thanks; and that not Tileman. Calvin.
Agellius.
hypocritically with his mouth and lips only, but with my heart; and that not
with a Hosea 10.2.
divided heart, or a piece, but with my whole heart; and that both in the
secret assemblies of the faithful, and in the public congregation.
Bellarmine.
Or I will give thanks secretly for the satisfaction of mine own conscience,
and in the congregation openly, for the further edification of my brethren. 2.
An enumeration of Gods admirable blessings, conferred upon the whole world in
general. Upon his Church in more particular, as the Calvin.
ground and matter of his praise, from the second verse to the tenth, The
works of the Lord are great, his works of creation, and works of redemption
are worthy to be praised and had in honor. His works of creation,
Strigellius. Turrecremat.
as the making of all things of nothing, and the preserving of the same from
the beginning in a most excellent beauty. His works of redemption, as Christ's
incarnation, passion, resurrection, ascension; all which our merciful and
gracious Lord has so done, that they ought to be had in remembrance. Here then
observe the reason, why the Church allotted this Hymn to be read on Easter
day: the redemption of Israel out of Egypt, is a plain Bucer.
figure of our deliverance by Christ, out of the hands of all our spiritual
enemies; and their 1. Cor. 5.7.
Passe-ouer and 1. Cor. 10.3.
Manna (which is implied here, verse. 5) is a type of our spiritual eating and
drinking at the Lords table, which is enjoined us at Easter, above al other
times in the year. 3. A conclusion at ye 10. verse, containing a Rule
Propounded, The fear of ye Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Agellius.
Bellarmine.
Expounded, A good understanding have all they, that do thereafter.
Wilcox.
Reason, The praise of it endures for ever.



Concerning the two former parts, I have written See notes on 89. Psalm, and
sermon on Gunpowder treason day.
heretofore much, and I shall have just occasion In Psalm. 113 118 145

hereafter also to say more. My purpose for the present is to begin at the
Psalms end, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, etc. The which
Epiphonema concludes the Prophets whole discourse, touching the praise of God:
as if he should have said, seeing the works of the Lord are so great, so
worthy to be praised and had in honor, so marvelous and memorable, that they
deserve the seeking out, Arnobius. Mollerus.
seeing his name is so reverend and holy; doubtless the fear of the Lord is
the beginning of wisdom, and the praise of it endures for ever.

Melancthon.
To fear God is to believe in him, to love him, to put our trust in him, to
give him thanks, and in all our actions and passions to be ruled according to
his holy laws. In a word, to fear God (as the Ecclesiastes. 12.13.
wise man teaches) is our whole duty, concerning offices of piety toward
God, and pity toward our neighbors. For the word beginning, signifies here
not only principium, but also Agellius. Idem Calvin, and Genebrard.
praecipuum: not only primum, but also primarium: not only the first in time,
but also the first in honor and dignity. For as David here calls it the
beginning of wisdom: so Solomon, Ecclesiastes 12.13. the end of all. The
fear of the Lord is indeed the first alphabet of wisdom, the beginning, as
it were the n begetting, or (as Ecclesiasticus 1 24.
Jesus the son of Syrach terms it) the root of wisdom. Melancthon.
Calvin. Bellarmine.
But that is not all, it is not only an introduction to wisdom, but wisdom
it self, Job. 28.28. The fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart from
evil is understanding. It is deep wisdom (says our English paraphrast in
meter) yea the perfection and fulness of wisdom, Ecclesiasticus 1.20.
Genebrard.
As then in the vulgar Latin, Ecclesiasticus 11.3. honey, which is the chief
of sweet things, is called initium dulcoris, the beginning of sweetness: even
so Gods fear (which upon the point is summa summarum, as it were the sum
total of all holy knowledge) is termed initium sapientiae, the beginning of
wisdom.

This assertion, in worldly men's understanding, is a grand paradox: for they
repute the preaching of Christianity 1. Cor. 1.18.
foolishnes, and the professors of the same, fools, 1. Cor. 4.10. We are
fools for Christ's sake. Lo, say the wicked of the godly, Wisdom 5.5. We
thought their life, madness, accounting them rather mad men, then sad men. But
the spirit of truth here proclaims on the contrary, that all worldlings are
blindlings, and that none wicked are wise. To such as have not the fear of God
before their eyes, it is expressly said by Prou. 1.22.
Wisdom it self, O ye foolish, how long will ye love foolishnes, and hate
knowledge?

It is objected out of S. Luke, chap. 16. verse. 8. that the children of this
world are wiser then the children of light. Answer is made by the Origin.
Iansenius. Maldonat.
Doctors upon the place, that Christ accounts them not wiser absolutely, but
only secundum quid: they be wiser in their generation, Theophylact. Marlorat.
that is, in things appertaining to this life present, but not in the business
of regeneration, in things belonging to that other life which is to come. For
(as Hall in his Chron. Idem Fox Martyr. fol. 976.
one said of Sir Thomas More) that he was either a foolish wise man, or a wise
foolish man: even so the children of this world are wise men in foolish things,
and foolish men in wise things. They be not in genere, wise, but in genere suo,
wise to do evil (as the Jerem. 4.2.
Prophet speaks), but to do well they have no knowledge.

Atheists, acknowledging no God, are very fools: Psalm. 14. The fool said in
his heart, there is no God. If this Ignoramus had so much brain as brow, the
Vide Bellarm. de ascensione mentis in deum per scalas creat. grad. 1. 2. 8.
books of the Creatures and Conscience would inform his understanding, that
the great world without him, and the little world within him, are nothing else
(as it were) but God expressed.

The Gentiles, adoring many gods, are very fools, before Christ (the Sun of
righteousness) calls them out of 1. Pet. 2.9.
darkness into marvelous light, a blind and a foolish nation, Deuteronomy. 32.21.
Even the seven wise men of Greece (says De vera sapientia, cap. 1.
Lactantius) had no good understanding, because none but fools accounted them
wise. Nay, S. Romans 1.21.
Paul gives this judgment of all Heathen Philosophers, that they were vain in
their imaginations, and that while they professed themselves to be wise, they
became fools. In this respect Epist. ad Octauium.
Cicero had just cause to complain, O me nunquam sapientem!

The superstitious Idolaters, and mingle manglers in religion, who worship the
true God falsely, not according to his word, but according to their own will,
are very fools. So Paul called his Galathians, who joined the Ceremonies of
Moses unto the Gospel of Christ, as necessary to salvation: O Galat. 3.1.3.
foolish Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the truth?
are ye so foolish, that after ye have begun in the spirit, you will end in the
flesh?

Carnal Gospellers and hypocrites, who profess they know God in their words,
and yet deny him in their Tit. 1.16.
works, are very fools. Their prayers are sacrifices of fools, Ecclesiastes
4.17. Their disputations about religion, are foolish questions, Tit. 3.9. all
their generation are fools and blind, Matthew. 23.17. As for example, the
slow-backe neglecting the works of his vocation, and living in idleness,
(though he hears never so many sermons upon the working days) in the
judgment of the wisest is a very fool: Ecclesiastes 4.5. The fool foldeth
his hands, and eats up his own flesh. So, whosoever is ungrateful unto the
Lord (which is the Father of mercies, and God of all grace) for his manifold
blessings, is a very fool: Deuteronomy. 32.6.
Do ye so reward the Lord, O ye foolish and unwise people? the ox knows
his owner, and the ass his masters cribbe: but Israel has not known, my
people has not understood, Esaias. 1.3.

So the covetous wretch (who though he boast of his faith and hope, Habacuc.
1.16.
sacrifices unto his net, and says in his heart to the wedge of gold, Job.
31.24.
thou art my confidence) is a very fool. 1. Sam. 25.25.
Nabal is his name, and folly is with him, a blind fool, like Judges 16.21.
Samson in the mill, he grindes for other, but eats not of the fruits of his
labor himself, the which is termed by Solomon, an evil sickness, and a
vanity, Ecclesiastes 6.2.

So the proud man, as well in his ambition, as in his honor, is a very fool.
Psalm. 32.10.
Like horse and mule without understanding: like the famous fool Mensa
philosophica fab. de fatuo.
Lobelinus, who being in a new coat knew not himself. Sir R. Barckley
felicity, lib. 5.
For if in favor, he knows no man; if out of favor, none know him.

So the Drunkard is a very sot, Seneca epist. 65
mancipium corporis, a slave to his own servant, a fool with a witness, his
fault is written in his forehead and in his face, he reeles in open street,
and has in his drunken fit a little less wit then a beast, and but a little
more sense then a block.

So the wanton is destitute of understanding, Prou. 6.32. led by the foolish
woman as a fool to the stocks, Prou. 7.22. For though he may peradventure
blind the Bishop, and Vision of Pierce Plowman pass. 3.
cope the Commissarie: yet Gods Qui minime fallitur, quia minime clauditur.
Bernard lib. 5. de Considerat.
all-seeing eye (when the night is dark, the door fast, and the curtain
close) finds out his foul folly.

To conclude this point, every kind of wickedness is a weakness, and every
fault a folly. But on the contrary, every point of religion is a part of
wisdom, as conducting to blessedness (the end of wisdom). To serve the
Lord in fear, and to cast all our care upon him, is wisdom: for, Psalm. 112.1.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, blessed are they that pit their
trust in Psalm. 2.12.
him. To love thy neighbor as thy self, is a part of wisdom: for, Blessed
is the man Psalm. 41.1.
that considers the poor and needy, blessed are the meek, blessed are the
merciful, etc. To live soberly toward thy self, is a part of wisdom: for,
blessed are the poor in spirit, Matthew. 5.3. Blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments, lest he walk naked, and men see his filthiness, Apoc.
16.15.

The blindlings of the world cannot in this life see this, and therefore they
will not say this; but one day, to wit, at the last day, they change their
minds, and sighing, acknowledge within themselves, Wisdom. 5.3.
This is he, whom we sometime had in derision, and in a parable of reproach,
we fools thought his life madness, and his end without honor, how is he
counted among the children of God? and his portion is among the Saints:
therefore we have erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness
has not shined unto us, and the Sun of understanding rose not upon us.

A good understanding have all they that do thereafter.] In Philosophy
wisdom is defined by knowing, but in Divinity wisdom is prized by doing.
They be wise men in deed Aeneas Syluius comment. in Panormit. lib. 3.
Non qui facienda dicunt, sed qui dicenda faciunt; heretics read so much,
and hypocrites usually cite so much, and the devil himself knows so much of
the Gospel as any: yet all these notwithstanding have bad understanding,
Chrysostom. in loc.
only such have good understanding in Gods fear that do thereafter, Melanct.
Mollerus.
that is, in all their actions and passions altogether rely upon his sure
promises, ever ready to be ruled according to his word and will, so David
expounds himself in the Verse 99. so Moses Deuteronomy. 4.6 Jerem. 8.9.
Psalm. 119. I have more understanding then my teachers, for thy testimonies are
my study. I am wiser then the aged, because I keep thy commandments. Here
then is condemned as folly the Coloss. 2.23.
will worship, or voluntary religion of all hypocrites, especially Mollerus.
Papists, honoring God not according to his fear, but according to their own
fancy.

See Respon. Elien. ad apol. Bellar. page 207. 208 et Mort. Appeal. lib. 1. ca.
2.. 13.
Purgatory, being a figment of idle Poets, and not the judgment of holy
Prophets, is a parcel of foolery; wherein the Pope shows himself most
uncharitable, for that Bulla Clemen. 6 and apud Anto. Florent. part. 3. tit.
22. cap. 6.
having power to fetch all souls out of this hell, and to purge whole
Purgatory, suffers notwithstanding this fire to burn still, only because it
warmeth his own kitchen.

Praying to the dead, is another parcel of foolery, the which in the Book of
Gods fear has neither precept, nor pattern, nor promise; for our calling
upon God we find Esaias 28.10.
precept upon precept, and promise upon promise. Call upon me (says the Psalm.
50.15.
Lord) in the time of trouble, so will I hear thee, etc. whom have I in
heaven but thee, Psalm 73.25. So Christ openly, Come unto me all ye that are
weary, and heavy laden, and I will ease you. Come unto me, that is a precept; I
will ease you, that is a promise. Come See Gospel on S. Matthias day.
not to mine, but to me; not to my Saints, or Angels, or Martyrs, or mother:
but to my self, send not other, it is my pleasure that ye come: seek not for
help from other, I will ease you. There be likewise so many patterns of this
devotion, as there be godly prayers recorded in holy Bible; but on the contrary
never a leaf, never a line, never a letter in the Book of Wisdom that
favors invocation of Saints, and therefore we may well apply that unto the
Church of Rome, which 2. Kings 1.3.
Elia said unto the messengers of Ahaziah, Is it not because there is no God in
Israel, that ye go to enquire of Baalzebub the God of Ekron? is it not because
there is no living God in heaven, that ye pray to stocks on earth, and seek to
See Sermon on Gunpowder treason day, page 6. 7.
such Saviors, as are worthily thought to reside with Beelzebub in hell? Is it
not an idle thing to sue to the man, if the master always be present, and
ever ready to grant thy request? and is it not a greater folly to call upon
Saints in our trouble? when our blessed Savior has openly not only said, but
also sworn, John 16.23.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoeuey you ask the Father in my name, he
will give it you, etc.

Their profaning of the blessed Sacraments is another parcel of foolery, for
is not (I pray you) their christening of Durant. de ritibus eccles. li. 1. ca.
22. number. 6. see Respon. Elien. ad apolog. Bellarm. Fox Martyr fol. 786. and
Pet. Moulin. defense of our faith against Coeffetua. art. 16
Bells an impudent mocking of holy Baptism; and the denying of the Cup unto
Laymen, a notorious lurching at the Lords Table, contrary to Christ's Mat.
26.27.
express word, Drink ye all of this; in giving the bread he said only, Take,
eat, indefinitely Calu. and Marlorat. in loc. Mat.
: but when he took the Cup (as foreseeing this innovation of Papists) he did
add an universal note, bibite omnes, drink ye, drink all ye: so they make
marriage a Sacrament, and yet affirm, that holy Priest-hoode is profaned by
this holy ordinance, that it is Bellar. orat. in schol. habit. tom. 3.
controuer. in fine.
sacrilege forsooth, and not a Sacrament. And Dr. Fulke in Heb. 13.4.
so they honor it as the Jews honored Christ, in clothing him with a purple
robe. What should I speak of their Mass, which is a notorious enemy to
Christ, in respect of his oblation and office, the Lord has sworn and will
not repent that Christ is a Priest for See Chemnit. examp. par. 2. page 170.
171.
ever, Psalm 110.4. offering himself once for all, Heb. 9.26.28. Are the
Mass Priests then any better then idle fools, Con. Triden. and Bellar. lib.
1. de missa per totum fere librum.
in offering him often unto God the Father, under the forms of bread and wine
really and properly, for the sins of the quick and the dead? It is reported
of the zealous and learned Martyr Fox Mart. fol. 855.
Ioannes Mollius, that he never spoke of the name Jesus, but instantly tears
dropped from his eyes. And surely the due consideration of Christ's all-sufficient
oblation and sacrifice for all our sins on the Cross, should make us abhor
those masse-mongers, and to say with our Psalm. 139.21.
Prophet, Do not I hate them (O Lord) that hate thee, and am not I grieved
with those that rise up against thee? yea Lord, I hate them right sore, even as
though they were mine enemies.

But the maine point of their foolish wisdom, is the prohibiting of the
Scriptures in a vulgar and known tongue. John 5.39.
Christ says expressly, Search the Scriptures. Antichrist on the contrary, Ex
registro. Ioh. Longland Episc. Linc. fol. 85. apud Fox Mart. fol. 763.
the reading of holy Scriptures is against the determination of the Church. As
long as Laymen are kept from the light of the Gospel, and Lantern of the
Law, they cannot spiritually discern their Priests erroneous doctrines and
doings. Herein the popish Clergy does use the foppish Laity, like as the Judge.
16.25.
Philistines handled Samson, first they put out their eyes, and then being
blindfold; they make pastime with all degrees of them, even with Emperors and
Kings, and 2. These. 2.3.
all that is called God. I have heard often, and read Dr. Carleton, directions
to know the true Church. pa. 40.
also, that Cardinal Caietan coming into Paris, and seeing the blind people
very desirous of his blessing, and therein undoubtedly the Popes: he turned to
them and said, Quandoquidem hic populus decipi vult, decipiatur in nomine
diaboli: that is, seeing this people will needs be deceived, let them be
deceived in the name of the devil, and so gave them the Popes blessing.

In these points and many more the Papists (albeit never so learned) have bad
understanding, and the reason hereof is plain, because they have changed the
rule of faith, Council. Tride^t. idem Bell. lib. de verbo Dei non scripto. cap.
3.. contro. and cap. 4. nunc vt. and 12. dico secundo.
adding to the Scriptures unwritten traditions, and honoring them with equal
affection of devotion and reverence, and so consequently worshipping God after
their own inventions, and not according to the prescript of his holy faith and
fear.

The praise of it endures for ever.] Or as other Translations, his praise,
referring it Bucer. Agellius.
either to God, or else to the man who fears God. Chrysostom. Euthym.
Some Divines ascribe this praise to God alone, Genebr. in loc. and in Psalm.
148.13.
because Tehilla properly signifies only that kind of praise which is due to
God: and so they make this clause to contain both a Melancth. Mollerus.
precept, and a promise. Precept, exhorting us to praise God with all our
heart, both in the secret assemblies of the faithful, and in the public
congregation. And so this Hymns end does answer the beginning, and the Text
in every point, the title. Now, lest any man in executing this office should be
discouraged, the Prophet adds a promise, Gods praise does endure for ever, as
if he should have said, The Lord is Psalm. 99.1.
King, be the people never so impatient, the Lord is Kings 18.31.
God, albeit the Psalm. 2.1.
Gentiles furiously rage together, and the Jews imagine a vain thing, the
Kings of the earth stand up, and the Rulers combine themselves against him. He
that dwells in heaven has all his enemies in derision, and makes them all
his footestoole; his power is for ever, and so consequently his praise shall
endure for ever; in the militant Church, unto the worlds end, in the
triumphant, world without end.

Most interpretours have referred this unto the good man who fears the Lord,
yet diversely. In loc.
Saint Augustine expounds it thus, his praise, that is, his praising of the
Lord shall endure for evermore, because he shall be one of them, of whom it is
said, Psalm. 84.4. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be
always praising thee. Arnobius. Dr. Incognitus. Bellarmine. R. Stephanus
Tileman.
Other understand by His, that is, their praise who fear the Lord and do
thereafter, the singular for the plural. Bucer.
his praise, the commendation of the good man, both in the life present, and in
that which is to come, for his righteousenesse shall be had in an ever lasting
remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. Concerning the present, howsoever the name of the
wicked rot either in oblivion, or in ignominy: yet Prou. 10.7.
the memorial of the just is blessed, it is like the composition of the
perfume made by the skill of the Apothecary, sweet as honey in all mouths, and
as music at a banquet of wine.

Buchanan.
Hunc ventura nepotum semper dicent secla Beatum. Or as Beza
Hic sapit, hic demum mansura laud fruetur, Eccles. 49.1.

-- parere qui Deo studet.
In the world to come, the Lord will say to such as loving his fear, have
lived thereafter; Mat. 25.21.
It is well done, good servant and faithful, enter into thy Masters joy: to
become the peoples Saint, and to be commended of the most, is not always
honorable, Non minus periculum ex magna fama (said In vita Agric.
Tacitus) quam ex mala. That commendation is only true glory, which (as Tusc.
quaest. li. 3
Cicero speaks) is Consentiens laus bonorum, and incorrupta vox been
Iudicantium. And therefore to be praised by the most worthy of all honor and
praise, the Lord most high and most holy, surpasses all the wickeds glozing,
all this worlds glory.

Now then, I demand of the worldling, what is the most high and deep point of
wisdom? is it to get an opulent fortune, to be so wise as fifty thousand
pounds? behold, godliness is great gain, says 1 Timothy 6.6.
Paul, and the Christian only rich, quoth the renowned Clem. Paedag. lib. 3.
Catechist of Alexandria. Is it to live joyfully, or (to use the gallants
phrase) Iouially? behold, Psalm. 97.11.
there is joyful gladness for such as are true-hearted. A wicked man in his
madde-merry humor for a while may be Pomponius Laetus, but a good man only is
Hilarious; only he which is faithful in Psalm. 64.10. Prou. 13.9.
heart, is joyful in heart. Is it to get honor? the praise of Gods fear
(says our Text) endures for ever. many worthies of the world are most unhappy,
because they be commended where they be not, and tormented where they be, hell
rings of their pains, earth of their praise; but Psalm. 112.1.
blessed is the man that fears the Lord, for his commendation is both here
lasting, and hereafter everlasting; in this world renowned amongst men, in the
next rewarded amongst Saints and Angels in the kingdom of glory.

PSALM 113. Praise the Lord (ye servants) O praise the name of the Lord.


THis Hymn (as both Text and Title tell us in the very beginning) is an
exhortation to praise the Lord, wherein 3. points are chiefly regardable, quis,
who? ye servants. quomodo, how? With all praise, verse. 1. Praise the Lord, O
praise the name of the Lord. At all times, verse. 2. from this time forth for
evermore. In all places, verse. 3. from the rising up of the Sun, to the going
down of the same.
quapropter, why? for his Infinite power, verse. 4. Admirable providence both in
Heaven. Earth and that in Public weals, verse. 6.7. Private families, verse. 8.





The Prophet exhorts Calvin.
all people to praise the Lord, Young men and maidens, old men and Children
praise the name of the Lord, Psalm. 148.12. More specially, Gods people which
have tasted of his goodness more then other, as having his Psalm. 147.19.
statutes, and ordinances, and covenants, and promises, and service, Romans 9.4.
Wilcox.
most chiefly the Levites and Priests, as being appointed by the Lord for
leaders and guides unto the rest, his servants after a more special manner, as
it were in ordinary. All men owe this duty to God, as being the Psalm. 95.6.
workmanship of his hands; Christians above other men, as being the Psalm. 100.2.
sheep of his pasture; Preachers of the Word above other Christians, as being
Ephesians. 4.11.
pastors of his sheep, and so consequently paternes in word, in conversation,
in love, in spirit, in faith, in pureness, 1. Tim. 4.12.

Yea, but how must almighty God be praised? for as not every one that says
unto the worlds Savior, Matthew. 7.21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: Basil. Chrysostom. Euthym.
so not every one that has in his mouth a bare (the Lord be praised) is a
praiser of the Lord, but he which is ever ready to suffer and do the will of
his Master and maker. God is to be praised in thought, and word, and deed: 1.
Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your body, and in your spirit. The Lord as being
high above all heathens, and glorious above all heavens, is blessed ever in
himself; but that he may be blessed of other, let your light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven, Matthew. 5.16. A leaud life does occasion enemies of piety to revile the
Gospel, and to blaspheme God, Romans 2.24. but honest behavior (on the
contrary) to praise God in the day of visitation, 1. Pet. 2.12. In one word,
Tileman.
he does praise God most, who lives best.

The Greek, (...), and the Latin pueri, may be taken for children as well as
servants. And therefore the translation of the Psalms in meter aptly, Ye
children which do serve the Lord. There is between little children and
servants so great affinity, that (in Greek and Latin) servants are called
children, and children servants, according to that of Galat. 4.1.
Paul, The heir, as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant.
And so the translators in using the word pueri (though aude in Hebrew properly
signifies a servant) Placidus. Bellarmine, Dr. Incognitus.
insinuate, that we should be like to little children in serving of the Lord,
that is, simple, meek, pure.

Praise the Lord, O praise the name of the Lord!] The doubling and tripling of
this exhortation, is to whet our Calvin.
dullness and coldness in executing this office, Placidus.
to show that God is to be praised with an earnest affection and zeal. For
albeit Gods praise be the Christians Alpha and Omega, the first and the last
thing required at our hands as well in death as life: yet such is our
negligence, that we need Esaias. 28.10.
precept upon precept, and line unto line, to put us in mind of our duty.

Or this exhortation is doubled, Wilcox.
to show that God alone is worthy al praise; the kingdom is his, and therefore
the glory; from him is all power, and therefore to him is due all praise. And
yt not only for a little while, but from this time forth for evermore: For the
servants of the Lord are to sing his praises in this life to the worlds end;
and in the next life, world without end. See before Psalm. 89.

And as the Lord is to be praised at all times, so likewise in all places, from
the rising up of the Sun, unto the going down of the same, Bonauent.
Mollerus.
that is, in and thorough all the world; Wilcox.
for he puts the two chief parts of the world, for the whole world, because
these two quarters (of East and West) are most inhabited.

Many Christian Interpretors, and some Doctors of the Kimchi apud Genebrard in
loc.
Jews, understand this of our Lord Christ, whose kingdom is without either
limits or end. Without limits, as having Psalm. 2.8.
the heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the world for his
possession; his Malac. 1.11.
name is great among the Gentiles, and incense shall be offered unto him in
every place. The which is all one with our text, the Lords name be praised from
the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same. Without end, for God
the Father said unto God the Son, Psalm. 110.1.
sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Psalm.
89.35.
His seat is like as the Sun, he shall stand fast for evermore, like the
faithful witness in heaven. Yea though heaven be Job. 14.2.
no more, but perish and wax old as does a garment, yet he is Heb. 1.12.
ever the same, and his years do not fail. The which is answerable to the
words of our Prophet here, Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time
forth for evermore.

The Lord is high above all heathen] The most High deserves to be most
honored; but the Lord is high above all heathen, and his glory above the
heaven: Ergo, worthy to be praised more then all, either Princes or people.
The greatest of all creatures in heaven is an Angel, and the greatest of all
men on earth is an Emperor: but the Lord is greater then both, as being their
maker, Acts. 17.28.
in whom they live, and move, and have their being. Higher then all Heathen,
infinitely greater then Alexander the Great, Pompei the Great, Mahumet the
Great. Higher then all Heavens ayrie, where feathered fowls are, for he Psalm.
18.10.
flies upon the wings of the wind, and Psalm. 68.4.
rides upon the clouds as upon an horse. Higher then Heavens glorious, where
blessed souls are; for the heaven of heavens is but his seat where he
reigns, a Psalm. 95.3.
great King above all gods. Who then is like to the Lord our God, either among
the clods on earth, or clouds in heaven? Esaias. 40.12.
He measures the waters in his fist, and meateth out heaven with his spanne,
and comprehends the dust of the earth in a measure. The which In loc. Esai. See
Bellarm. de ascensione mentis in deum per scal. creat. Grad. 2. cap. 1.
Hierome out of Aquila does interpret after this sort; He measures the waters
with his little finger, the earth greater then the waters, with three fingers:
the heaven greater then both, with his hand and spanne. He fills all things,
and nothing is able to comprehend him; according to that of 2. Chron. 6.18.
Solomon, Heavens, and heavens of heavens are not able to contain thee. Nay
the whole world, in respect of his greatness, is but as a drop of the morning
dew, Wisdom. 11.19.

This may teach us, in whatsoever estate to Luke 21.19.
possess our souls in patience, to be Ephesians. 6.10.
strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might; albeit our enemies come
about us like Psalm. 118.12.
Bees, he which is higher then the highest, and greater then all men, and all
Devils, is our protector, stony rock, tower of defense, buckler, salvation
and refuge, Psalm. 18.1. And as God is most able to help us in trouble, so
likewise most apt and ready: for, as it follows in the next clause, though
he dwell on high, yet he does humble himself to behold the things, that are
in heaven and earth.

Apud Ambros. de officijs lib. 1. cap. 13.
Some Philosophers thought it too great a labor for God to govern the whole
world, and other on the contrary too base. But Ambros. in Hexam. lib. 5. cap.
2.
Divines answer both of them in one word, Deus neque laborat in maximis, neque
fastidit in minimis. Indeed the Poet said, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse loui:
but the Matthew. 10.30.
Scripture tells us otherwise, that the very hairs of our head are numbered,
and that not so much as a sparrow, which is sold for a farthing, can fall on
the ground, without our heavenly Fathers providence. Disponit membra culicis
and pulicis, as Augustine in Psalm. 148. For besides his Calvin Instit. lib. 1.
cap. 16. Vide Thom. 1. part. quaest. 22. art. 2. and Caietan. ibid.
general providence, which is seen in the government of the whole universe,
he has a particular also, moderating every singular action and accident. He
dwelling on high, beholds us as Emmots upon the mole-hils of this earth, in
him we live, and move, and have our being. He supporteth all things by his
mighty word, Heb. 1.3. he reaches from one end to another, and orders all
things sweetly, Wisdom. 8.1. We read, Mat. 9. that there was a woman diseased
with an issue of blood twelve years: and Ioh. 5. that a certain man had been
sick eight and thirty years: and Ioh. the 9. that one was blind from his
birth. All which happened not by humane chance, but by divine choice, that John
9.3.
the works of God might be showed on them. Lipsius de Constant. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Omnia non permissa solum a Deo sed etiam immissa: The Lord does not only
suffer and see what is done here below, but also disposes of every particular
event, to the glory of his name, and good of his children. He beheld David in
his trouble, Daniel in his dungeon, Peter in his prison, and ordered their
short affliction to their endless consolation. And this may comfort us in all
our wants and wrongs, He that dwells on high, humbles himself to behold the
things below, Psalm. 121.4.
he that keeps Israel, neither slumbers nor sleeps. I Esaias. 49.16.
have graven thee (says the Lord) upon the palms of my hands, and thy walls
are ever in my sight. He hears the very Psalm. 38.9. Judges 2.18.
groans of his servants in their closets, and Psalm. 41.3.
makes all their beds in sickness; as S. Confession lib. 3. cap. 11.
Aug. sweetly, he cares for all his children, as if all were but one: and for
every particular Christian, as if one were all.

See Mollerus and Strigel. in loc.
Some Divines apply this unto Christ: He which is Romans 10.12.
Lord over all, is high above al heathen; all lands are his inheritance, all
people his possession, Psalm. 2.8. He triumphed over death and hell in his
resurrection, and his glory shined above the heavens in his ascension: A Acts
1.9.
cloud took him up out of this world, and he did ascend far above all
heavens, Ephesians. 4.10. Here then observe the reason, why the Church allotted
this Hymn for this day, because Christ in his Romans 1.4.
resurrection from the dead, is declared mightily to be the Son of God, high
above all heathens, and heavens. That which is here said, he humbled himself
to behold the things that are in heaven and earth, is all one with that, Esaias.
61.1. and Luke 4.18. The spirit of the Lord has anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the poor, to bind up the broken hearted, and to comfort such as
mourn in Sion. Marlorat in Luc. 1. See Magnificant, and epist. 3. Sund. after
Trinit.
Almighty God can not look above himself, as having no superiors; nor about
himself, as having no equals; he beholds such as are below him. And therefore
the lower a man is, the nearer unto God: he resists the proud, and gives grace
to the humble, 1. Pet. 5.5. he pulls down the mighty from their seat, and
exalts them of low degree: the most high has a special eye to such as are
most humble. For, as it follows in our text, he takes up the simple out of
the dust, and lifts the poor out of the dirt.

The Poet said, Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat res angusta
domi; that it is an hard thing for a man of low birth and small means, to be
preferred unto high places of honor. But our Prophet here to demonstrate Gods
admirable power and providence, shows how the Lord raises the poor man out
of the mire, that he may set him with the Princes, even with the Princes of his
people.

Aelian. hist. lib. 2.
Darius was borne of a servant, Archelaus King of Macedonia base begotten;
Antigonus, Themistocles, Phocion, Epaminondas, and other noble worthies issued
from ignoble parents. Knolles Turk. hist. page 4.
Tangrolipix of an ordinary Captain, became Sultan of Persia, and first
erector of the high and huge Turkish Empire. Tamberlaine (as Apud Knolles in
the life of Bajazet. 1. fol. 212.
some think the son of a Shepherd) was in his time the scourge of the
great Turk, treading under his foot insolent Bajazet the first, of his
violent and fierce nature surnamed Knolles vbi sup. fol. 203.
Gilderun or lightening. Abraham Bucholcer. Iud. Chron.
Willegis Archbishop of Mentz was the son of a Wheelewright, and therefore
that he might always remember, how the Lord had exalted him out of the dirt, to
set him with Princes, he caused the walls of his privy Chamber to be hung
with instruments of Carpentry, to which he joined this Motto, Willegis,
Willegis, recole vnde veneris: and from hence the Bishops of that Sea give
two wheels in their arms. In England also many Prelates have been lifted out
of the mire to the Miter, it is the Lords doing that has his dwelling on high,
and yet humbles himself to behold the things in heaven and earth. Renowned
Sir Camden in Elizabetha page 301
Francis Drake, the son of a poor Vicar in Kent, was in our age both a
terror to proud Spain, and the mirror of England in the most unknown and
uttermost parts of the world.

The Scriptures afford manifold examples in this kind, Moses a Exodus 2.
castaway child, was afterward a leader, and a god (as it were) to the
children of Israel, Exodus 4. So Daniel of a poor Captive, Dan. 1.6. became a
chief ruler, Dan. 2.48. So Psalm. 105.17
Joseph sold for a bondseruant (whose feet were hurt in the stocks, and the
iron entered into his soul) was afterward (Gods high and holy providence so
disposing) set free by Pharao the King: he made him also Lord of his house, and
ruler of all his substance, that he might inform his Princes after his will,
and teach his Senators wisdom. So the Lord Psalm. 78.71.
chose David his servant, and took him away from the sheepefold, as he was
following the Ewes great with young-ones, that he might feed Jacob his people,
and Israel his inheritance: the Lord did not only lift him out of the mire,
but also prefer him, he set him with Princes, and Genebrard.
those not Princes of other nations, as Joseph was exalted in Egypt, and
Daniel in Babell: but even with the Princes of his own people, to wit, of his
own country, where men of eminent parts are most John 4.44.
neglected, Mollerus.
Or his may be referred unto God, as if the Prophet should have said, he
takes up the poor man out of the mire, that he may set him in authority, not
among the heathen only, but over the Church his own people: the which is the
greatest honor of all, according to that of David, Psalm. 84 11.
I would choose rather to sit at the threshold in the house of my God, then to
dwell in the tents of ungodliness: and the good Emperor Theodosius (to the
fame purpose) desired rather to be membrum ecclesiae, quam caput imperij: that
is a member of the Church, then head over all unbelievers. Now David was
advanced according to both interpretations, in that he ruled his own people,
who were Gods people: so the text, 2. Sam. 12. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel, I anointed thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand
of Saul, and gave thee thy Lords house, and thy Lords wives into thy bosom,
and gave thee the house of Israel and Judah, etc.

As God (in his holy providence) takes up some poor men out of the mire, to
set them with Princes, even with Princes of his people: so many times he puts
down the mighty from their seat, and brings them unto the very dunghill,
Psalm. 75.8.
he rules as a Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. Examples hereof
in holy Scripture: Ester. 3.1.
Haman a man exalted above all the Princes in Assuerus court, was (upon the
sudden) hanged on the tree that he had prepared for his enemy, Ester. 7.10.
Nabuchadnezzer a proud king, was driven from men's society to converse with
beasts, Dan. 4.30.
He did eat grass as the Oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of Heaven,
till his hairs were grown as Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds
claws, and all for this end, that he might know that the most high rules
over the kingdom of men, and gives it unto whom soever he will. Acts 12.12.
Herod in the midst of his glory, (when the people hearing his oration in
the seat of Justice, gave a shoute, saying, The voice of God and not of man)
was immediately smitten by the Lords Angel, so that he was eaten up of worms,
and gave up the ghost.

In profane history we find that See Sir Walter Raulegh preface to the
worlds hist.
Darius played the part of the greatest Emperor, and the part of a most
miserable beggar, a beggar begging water of an enemy to quench the great
drought of death. Knolles in his life.
Bajazet the first, in the morning was the grand Seignior of the Turks, and in
the same day the footestoole of Tamberlaine. Procopius de bello. Goth. lib. 1
and 3. idem. Simon Schardius in vita Petri de vineis epist. eiusdem praefix.
vbi multa huiusmodi reperias.
Bellisarius a most victorious captain (by whose valor and policy the
Persians were vanquished: the Vandals subdued, and Africa recovered to the
Empire) became before his death a distressed blind beggar in exile, begging
his bread from door to door, craving and crying, a penny for poor Bellisarius.

In our own Chronicles we read, that Holinshead in the life of Rich. the 2.
Trisilian chief Justice of England in the days of King Richard the second,
was pulled from the bench above, to the bar below: nay, he which had often
judged other to death, in fine was damned himself to the gallows. Holinshead
in the life of Edw. the 5.
Shores wife, the merry minion of Edward the fourth, in her flourishing estate
was sued unto more then all the Peers in the land, but afterward so despoyled
of all her goods, and so despited by her merciless foe, then usurper of the
Crown, that none durst give her so much as a crust of bread, or a drop of
drink. She who whileom had stretched her self on beds of down, and was
frolike with Princes in iuorie palaces, ended her days in open street, even
in a dirtie ditch, and nomina fecit aquis, as some think Shorditch is so
called as it were Shoresditch. The Seas of examples in this kind have no
bottom, and therefore we should make no other account of this ridiculous world
Sir Walter Rauleigh, vbi sup.
the^ to resolve, that the change of fortune on the great theater, is but as
the change of garments on the less: for when on the one and the other, every
man wears but his own skin, the players are all one. God which is on high,
and humbles himself to behold the things in heaven and in earth, appoynts
every man his part and apparel on the worlds stage, lifting up and pulling
down whom he list. He therefore that complains of wants or wrongs is either
a fool, or ungrateful to God, or both; that does not acknowledge how mean
soever his estate be, that the same is yet far greater then that which God
owes him: or does not acknowledge how sharp soever his afflictions be, that
the same are yet far less, then those which are due unto him: howsoever it
be with him, it is the Lords doing, he gives and takes away, blessed be his
name for evermore.

Chrysostom. Arnobius Jacob. de valent. Bellarmin.
This also may be so well applied unto Christ as the rest of the Psalm, for in
taking our vile nature upon him, he raised the poor out of the dust, and the
beggar out of the dunghill. He said to Adam, Genesis 3.19.
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall return; but Christ in his resurrection
and ascension has Ephesians. 2.6.
raised us up together, and made us sit together in the heavenly places, even
with the Princes of his people, that is, Angels, and Apostles, and other his
holy Saints reigning in his kingdom of glory.

He lifts our souls out of the dust and dirt in this life, when our Coloss.
3.2.
affections are by his grace set on things above, and not on things which are
on earth. Our flesh is an house of Job. 4.19.
clay, but our Luke 1.47.
spirit rejoices in God, and has her conversation in Philip. 3.20.
heaven. A man is where his mind is, if then we mind heavenly things, our
souls are raised out of the mire: Dr. Jucognit.
so Christ in calling Matthew (from the receite of custom) to make him an
Apostle, lifted him out of the dunghill; and Iacobus de Valent.
in calling the rest of his Apostles, from their durtie courses in the world,
to the preaching of his word, he raised them out of the dust, and made them
(as it is in the 45. Psalm, verse 17.) Princes in all lands: and in raising
Mary Magdalene from her old vomit and filthiness of sin, what did he but
lift her out of the dunghill? To be brief, See Gospel Dom. 13. after Triuit.
man is like the trauellour, who went from Jerusalem to Jericho, Luke 10. he
falls among thieves, into manifold tentations and noisome lusts: and they
rob him of his raiment, of his righteousness and holiness, wherewith
Almighty God adorned him in his Creation: and they wounded him and departed,
for sin wounding the conscience, leaves a man in a desperate case. But
Christ is the true Samaritane, who takes compassion on man, He binds up his
wounds, and powers in oil and wine; he puts him on his own beast, and makes
provision for him at an Inn: thus he takes up the distressed out of the dust,
and the beggar out of the dung.

At our death he lifts our souls out of the mire, when his glorious Luke
16.22.
Angels attend to convey them, out of this earthly tabernacle to his heavenly
kingdom, which is immortal and cannot be shaken.

At the last day he will also lift our bodies out of the dirt and mire. Man
that is borne of a woman is full of troubles, and of short continuance, such a
sack of dung, that the Ierem. 22.29.
Prophet calls him thrice earth, at one breath, O earth, earth, earth, hear
the word of the Lord, etc. After man has in this world Wisdom 5.7.
wearied himself, he goes to bed, and sleeps in the dust of the grave,
neither shall he be raised or awake from his sleep till heaven be no more,
says Job. 14.12.
Job. But in the end, when as the 2. Pet. 3.10.
heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the elements shall melt with heat,
and the earth with the works that are therein shall be burnt; then our blessed
Savior shall rouse us out of the dust, and raise us out of the mire, Philip.
3.21.
changing this our vile body, that it may be like his glorious body; then this
corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal immortality; then both
our souls and bodies shall have their perfect consummation in his kingdom of
glory.

He makes the barren woman to keep house,] Tileman.
As baseness in men, so barrenness in women is accounted a great
unhappiness. But as God lifts up the beggar out of the mire, to sethim with
Princes: even so does he make the barren woman a joyful mother of children.
He gouernes all things in the private family, so well as in public weal.
Children and the fruit of the womb are a gift and heritage, that comes of
the Lord, Psalm 127.4. and therefore the Tileman.
Papists in praying to S. Anne for children, and the Gentiles in calling upon
Diana, Juno, Latona, are both in error. It is God only who makes the barren
woman a mother, and that a joyful mother. Every mother is joyful at the
first, according to that of John 16.21.
Christ, A woman when she trauaileth has sorrow, because her hour is come:
but as soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the
anguish, for joy that a man is borne into the world. But when babes are grown
up and come to their proof, Proverb. 10.1.
Solomon says, A foolish son is an heaviness to his mother. And our Solomon
in his kingly gift, I protest before that great God, I had rather be no Father
and Childlesse, then a Father of wicked Children. Now God makes the barren
wife, not only fruitful but also joyful.

Beza Paraphras.
Et nuper steriles, repent matres
longa beat propagine.
He made barren old Genesis 17.
Sara fruitful in bearing a son, and joyful in that her son was Isaac, in
whose seed all the nations of the world are blessed. He made Judges 13.
Manoahs wife both a mother, and a joyful mother, in that she bare Samson the
strong, who saved Israel out of the hands of the Philistines. He made 1. Sam.
1.
Hannah both a mother and a joyful mother, in that she bare faithful Samuel
the Lords Prophet: he made Anne both a mother and a joyful mother, in bearing
blessed Marie the Luke 1.43.
mother of our Lord: he made Elizabeth a mother and a joyful mother, in
bearing John the Baptist, a Prophet, yea more then a Prophet, for among them
which are borne of women, arose there not a greater then John Baptist, Matthew.
11.11.

Chrysostom. Hierom. Arnobius.
Divines apply this also mystically to Christ, affirming that he made the
Church of the Gentiles heretofore barren, a joyful mother of many children,
according to that of the Esaias 54.1.
Prophet, Rejoice (O barren) that did not bear, break forth into joy, and
rejoice thou that did not travel with child: for the desolate has more
children then the married wife, says the Lord. See Epistle 4. Sund. in Lent.

Or it may be construed of true Christians; all of us are by nature barren of
goodness, conceived and borne in sin, not able to think a good thought, 2.
Cor. 3.5. but the father of lights and mercies makes us fruitful and abundant
always in the work of the Lord, 1. Cor. 15.58. he gives us grace to be
fathers and mothers of many good deeds, Ambros. de interpell. libr. 2. cap. 4.
Idem Dr. Incognitus. in loc. and in Psalm. 102.17.
which are our children, and best heirs, eternizing our name for ever.

PSALM 114. When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among
the strange people, etc.


THere be two chief parts of this Psalm, the 1. A description of Isreal's
admirable deliverance out of Egypt, in the four former verses. 2. A dialogue
between the Prophet and the Creatures about the same deliverance, in the four
latter verses.


In the deliverance, note 1. The parties delivered, Israel, and the house of
Jacob, being Gods Sanctuary. Seigniorie.
2. The peril, out of which they were delivered, and Chrysostom. Mollerus.
that was 1. Bondage. 2. Bondage among strangers in Egypt. 3. Bondage among
such strangers as were cruel, a barbarous people.
3. The manner how they were delivered, not by means ordinary, but miracles
extraordinary, wrought on the Water, verse. 3. The Sea saw that and fled,
Iordaine was driven back. Land, verse 4. The Mountains skipped like Rams,
etc.



In the dialogue two points are to be considered: 1. A question, What ayleth
thee O thou Sea, etc. Verse 5.6. 2. An Vatablus. Tremellius. Bellarmine.
answer, Tremble thou earth, etc. Or as Vulgar latin. English-Geneua.
other translations, The earth trembled at the presence of the Lord, etc.


When Israel] The Bellarmine.
latter clause does expound the former, Israel, that is, the house of Jacob:
for this holy Patriarch had two names, first Jacob that signifies a
supplantor, Genesis 25.26. and then Israel, that is, one which has power with
God, Genesis 32.28. teaching us hereby, says In loc.
Hierome (as we have received grace) to supplant vice, that we may prevail
with God and see him, according to that of Matthew. 5.8.
Christ, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. As Genesis 25.22.
Jacob and Esau strove together in their mother Rebeccaes womb: so the Galat.
5.17.
flesh in man lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh. If
we play Jacobs part in supplanting sin, which is a red and a rough Esau, we
shall assuredly gain the blessing of our heavenly Father.

By Jacobs house then is meant his Euthym. Genebrard.
posterity the children of Israel, of whom it is reported by Moses, Deuteronomy.
10.22. Thy fathers went down into Egypt with seventy persons, and now the
Lord thy God has made thee as the stars of the heaven in multitude. These
people were Gods sanctification and dominion, Geneua gloss.
that is, witnesses of his holy Majesty in adopting them, and of his mighty
power in delivering them: Melancth. in loc.
or his sanctification, as having his holy Priests to govern them in the
points of piety; and dominion, as having godly Magistrates ordained from above
to rule them in matters of policy: or his sanctuary x both actiuely, because
sanctifying him; Genebrardus. Iacobus de Valentia.
and passiuely, because sanctified of him. It is true that God, as being ever
the most holy so well as the most high, cannot be magnified and hallowed in
respect of himself, but in respect of Calvin. in loc.
other only. For God is sanctified of his servants, as wisdom is said to be
justified of her children, Luke 7.35. that is, acknowledged and declared to be
just, according to that of the Lord by the mouth of his holy Ezech. 38.23.
Prophet, Thus will I be magnified and sanctified, and known in the eyes of
many Nations, and they shall know that I am the Lord. Wherefore let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven. Again, Judah was his Sanctuary, Bucer. Agellius.
R^b. Stephanus.
because sanctified of him, adopted his holy heritage, chosen a peculiar and a
precious people to himself, Deuteronomy. 7.6.
above all Nations in the world. I have carried you (said the Exodus 19.4.
Lord) upon Eagles wings, and have brought you unto me, that ye might be my
chief treasure above all people, though all the earth be mine, consecrated
and hallowed to my worship, as holy Temples and Sanctuaries in whom I may
rule, for so the latter clause may well Bellarmine.
explain the former, Judah was his Sanctuary, because his Dominion, in whom he
Chrysostom. Euthym. Bucer.
reigned as a king by his laws and spirit. And therefore when Israel asked a
king of the Lord to judge them, he said to 1. Sam. 8.7.
Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should
not reign over them. According to this exposition Israel is termed (Ex. 19.6.)
a kingdom of Priests: or (as S. 1. Pet. 2.9.
Peter has it) a royal Priesthood; royal, as being his Seigniory; Priesthood,
as being his Sanctuary. For the beter understanding of this phrase, remember I
pra'y, that there be two kinds of kingdoms in holy Scripture, the kingdom of
darkness Coloss. 1.13.
, which is the kingdom of the devil; and the kingdom of heaven, which is the
kingdom of God. When all had sinned in Adam, it pleased the Lord out of his
unsearchable Justice, to lay this heavy punishment on all his posterity; that
seeing they could not be content to be subject to their creator, they should
become vassals under Satan's tyranny: so that all men are now (by nature) the
Children of Ephesians. 2.3.
wrath, and Ephesians. 6.12.
the Prince of darkness rules in their hearts, until Christ the Luke 11.22.
strong man comes, and binds him, and John 12.31.
casts him out, and so brings all his elect out of darkness into
maruailous light, 1. Pet. 2.9.

Blind ignorant people cannot abide this doctrine, they spit at the very naming
of the devil, and say that they defy him and all his, even with all their
heart, and soul, and mind. Yet, whereas they live still in ignorance and
impiety, which are the two maine pillars of Satan's kingdom, they make plain
proof, that they be Children of the Luke 16.9.
world, Children of Coloss. 3.6.
disobedience, Children of Hosea 10.9.
iniquity, Children of 1. Sam. 26.16.
death, Children of the John 8.44.
devil, Children of John 17.2.
perdition, Children of Mat. 23.15.
hell. Israel is Gods dominion, and Judah Gods sanctuary: but Aegipt and
Babylon, and other parts and persons of the world, living in sin without
repentance, what are they but the suburbs of hell, and (as it were) the devils
Empire, where he holds up his Scepter, and rules as a Prince, Ephesians. 2.2.

Gods kingdom is taken in the Bible two ways especially, Generally, For that
government which is termed See To. Steph. Concord. in dictione regnum and
Bellarm. Catech. cap. 4.
Regnum potentiae, by which he rules all men, and disposes of all things,
even of the devils themselves, according to his good will and pleasure.
Specially, For his administration of the Church, and that is Twofold.
Regnum gratiae, the kingdom of grace. Regnum gloriae, the kingdom of glory.




Of that kingdom which is potentiae Regnum, it is said by 1. Chro. 29.11.
David, Thine is the kingdom O Lord, and thou excellest as head over all. Of
that kingdom Dan. 4.31.
Daniel speaks, His kingdom is from generation to generation, and his Dan.
6.26.
dominion everlasting. Of that kingdom Christ in the conclusion of his prayer,
Thine is the kingdom, power, and glory. For albeit perverse men do mischief,
and observe not the laws of God, yet he reigns over them as an absolute Lord:
for that (when it pleases him) he hinders their designments; and when he
permits them sometime to have their desires, he does afterward punish them
according to their own misdeeds, and so Psalm. 135.6.
Whatsoever the Lord pleases, he does in heaven, and in earth, and in the Sea,
and in all deep places.

By his kingdom of grace he gouernes the souls and hearts of good Christians,
giving them his spirit and grace to serve him in holiness and righteousness
all the days of their life. Christ is the king of this kingdom, upon whom
the Father has conferred Mat. 28.18.
all authority both in heaven and earth. The subjects of this kingdom are such
as Psalm. 110.3.
offer unto him free will offerings with an holy worship, ever ready to give
cheerful obedience to the rod of his power. The laws of this kingdom are
the Scriptures and word of God, in this respect called Mat. 13.11.
the kingdom of heaven, the Mark 1.14.
Gospel, and Mat. 13.19.
word of the kingdom, the Esaias 11.4.
rod of Christ's mouth, and Romans 1.16.
power of his arm to salvation. And so consequently the kingdom of grace is a
preparation and entrance to the kingdom of glory, which is the blessed estate
of all Gods elect in that other life, where God is to them all in all. And in
this respect the kingdom of grace many times, is termed in the Gospels History
the kingdom of heaven, as being the way to the kingdom of glory, which is in
the heaven of heavens.

This one verse then expounds and exemplifies two prime petitions in the Lords
prayer, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come; for Judah was Gods sanctuary,
because hallowing his name: and Israel his dominion, as desiring his kingdom
to come. Let every man examine himself by this pattern, whether he be truly
the servant of Jesus his Savior, or the vassal of Satan the destroyer. If
any submit himself willingly to the domineering of the devil, and suffer
sin to Romans 6.12.
reign in his mortal members, obeying the lusts thereof, and Ephesians. 4.19.
working all uncleanness even with greediness: assuredly, that man is yet a
Chapel of Satan, and a slave to sin. On the contrary, whosoever unfeignedly
desires that Gods kingdom may come, being ever ready to be ruled according to
his holy word, acknowledging it a lantern to his feet, and a guide to his
paths; admitting obediently his laws, and submitting himself always to the
same; what is he, but a Citizen of heaven, a subject of God, a Saint, a
Sanctuary?

Two questions are moved here, the first is, what antecedent answers the
relative his: and the second, what is meant by Judah. The relative eius has an
antecedent Mollerus.
employed, howsoever not expressed, Genebrard.
as Psalm 87.1. Fundamenta eius, her foundations are upon the holy hills. And
God is that antecedent, as I have partly said, and it may likewise be fully
showed both out of the text and title. The Euthym.
circumstances of the Text lead us to this antecedent, the Lord is the God of
Jacob, verse 7. Ergo, the house of Jacob is Gods Sanctuary, the children of
Israel Gods dominion. Again, the Bellarmine.
Title points at this antecedent, Alleluia, praise the Lord; as if the Prophet
should have said, ye have good and great cause to praise the Lord, because when
Israel went out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob from among the strange people,
then Judah was his Sanctuary, etc. Lastly, though it should be granted, that
neither Title nor Text here can afford us an antecedent, yet we need not run
(with In loc.
Agellius out of this Hymn) to fetch one from the last words of the next going
before, He makes the barren woman to keep house, etc. Because his in this
verse may be construed of God Catexochen, as being hic ille, the most high, He,
who turned the hard rock into a standing water, and the flint stone into a
springing Well; at whose presence the mountains skip like Rams, and the
little hills like young sheep; yea, the Sea flees, and the earth trembles at
the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob.

By Judah Placidus. Turrecremat. Genebrard.
some understand Judea, for Psalm. 76.1.
God is known in Jury, his name is great in Israel, at Salem is his
tabernacle, and his dwelling in Sion. Dr. Incognitus. Agellius.
Other have construed this only of the tribe of Judah, for that God in Judah
would choose a Prince, 1. Chron. 28.4. or because the Messiah of the world,
which is the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, was to be borne of Genesis 49.10.
that tribe. Or because the Sea Placidus. Bucer. Genebrard. Dr. Incognit. in
loc.
Jews have a tradition, that Judah was the first tribe that adventured after
Moses and Aaron, and entered into the red sea with undaunted courage. So we
find in the numbering of Isreal's host, that the standerd of Judah was in the
first place, Numb. 10.14. and Nahshon the son of Aminadab was their Captain,
Numb. 2.3. Hence it is said, Cant. 6.11. My soul made me like the chariots of
Aminadab, or my willing people.

But Calvin. Rob. Stephanus. Tremellius. Strigellius. Bellarmine.
most Interpretors understand by Judah, not only that tribe, but also the rest
of the children of Israel. It is nothing but a Synecdoche, pars pro toto, the
chief tribe, for the whole body of Gods people, that went out of Egypt into
the land of promise, called often in holy Scriptures Israel, of the fathers
name, and Judah of the chief sons name.

Bondage was the peril, out of which Israel and Judah were delivered, and that
in the Plautus in Amphit.
Poets judgment is worse then any danger or death, omni malo, and omni exitio
peior. Brunuica faem. Britanica apud Zephilin in vita Neronis.
A woman of a manly spirit said as much, Honestius est mortem occumbere, quam
capita tributaria circumferre. The younger Reusnerus in Symbol.
Iustine used this apophthegme for his Motto: Libertas res inaestimabilis: and
Epist. 76.
Seneca to the same purpose, for a man to be his own man, is an inualuable
treasure. The resolution of our contrymen to William the Conqueror is
renowned in English history, Kentish men must have liberty, Kentish men will
have liberty. Lambert perambulation of Kent, page 14.
There was never any bondmen or villains in Kent. The Apud Holinshed hist. of
Scotland, page 204.
prouerbialest uttered reason as well as rhyme.

Dico tibi verum, libertas optima rerum,
Nunquam seruili sub nexu viuito (fili).
But bondage is more grievous and insupportable when it is in a sorreine land,
as this of Jacobs house was in Egypt. The stranger is sad in heart, though at
liberty, wherefore God enjoined his own people not to Exodus 22.21. Leuit.
19.33.
grieve the stranger, considering they themselves were sometime strangers in
the land of Egypt. The condition of the stranger is to be pitied, as that of
the fatherless and widow, Ierem. 7.6. Oppress not the stranger, the
fatherless, and the widow, Zach. 7.10. Oppress not the widow, nor the
fatherles, nor the stranger, nor the poor. And when uncharitable men
unconscionably vex the^, almighty God takes their cause into his own hands:
Psalm. 146.9. The Lord cares for the strangers, he defends the fatherless
and widow, he will maintain their cause, and spoil the soul of those that
spoil them. Prou. 22.23. A man at home being in durance has among his own,
some mediators, or means for his deliverance; but an aliant in thraldom, for
the most part is helpless, if not hopeless. Psalm. 137.
By the waters of Babylon (say Gods people) we sat down and wept, when we
remembered Sion: as for our merry harpes, we hanged them up upon the trees,
for how should we sing the Lords song in a strange land?

We must ascend yet one step higher: Israel was oppressed not by strangers
only, but also by such strangers as were Placidus. Genebrard. Beza Paraphras.
cruel, as Chaldea. Septuagint. Hierome. Munster. Castalio. Geneua.
other translations, a barbarous people, barbarous both in their usage and
language. Concerning their tyrannous behavior toward Gods Israel, it is
reported by Moses, Exodus 1.14. that they made them weary of their lives, by
sore labor in mortar and brick, and in all work in the field, with all
manner of bondage which they laid upon them most cruelly. Moreover, the King of
Egypt commanded the Midwiues of the Hebrew women to kill every man-child in the
very birth. And because the Midwiues fearing the Lord, which is the Father of
mercy, would not execute that bloody design; Pharao charged his own people,
saying, every male-childe that is borne, cast into the river. Yea but how was
Egypt a barbarous nation in language, being highly renowned in history for
knowledge? and S. Stephen, Acts 7.22. records it as a remarkable commendation
in Moses, that he was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. Answer is
made by Agellius. Bellarmine. Genebrard.
some, that they were called barbarous, as speaking Aquila apud Agellium.
another tongue, or a strange language which Israel understood not; according
to that of Paul, 1. Cor. 14.11. Except I know the meaning of the voice, I shall
be to him that speaks a barbarian, and he likewise that speaks a barbarian
unto me. But Tileman.
other (in my judgment better) affirm, that they were barbarous, as being a
most idolatrous people, notwithstanding all their humane learning, ignorant in
the knowledge concerning the worship of the true God, adoring the creatures in
stead of the Creator. Barbarous, as not speaking the Esaias. 19.18.
language of Canaan, as not understanding the 1. Tim. 3.16.
mysteries of godliness. So profound Plato, learned Aristotle, witty
Plutarch, eloquent Demosthenes, were barbarians unto the house of Jacob, as
being unacquainted with Gods fear, which is the beginning of wisdom.

This of the peril out of which Israel was delivered, it follows in the next
place, that I show the manner of their deliverance, brought to pass by Gods
Deuteronomy. 5.15.
mighty hand, and outstretched arm, working a world of wonders in Egypt, and
in the wilderness, for their safe conduct into the land of promise. All which
are registered at large by Moses in the second book of his history, called in
Dio. Carthus. Vatablus. Sa.
this respect by the Grecians, Exodus, as principally treating of Isreal's
wonderful egresse from out of Egypt, and progress in the wilderness. Two
sorts of miracles are remembered in this Hymn: the first upon the waters, The
sea saw that and fled, etc. The second upon the land, The mountains skipped
like rams, etc.

The sea saw that and fled] Exodus 14.21.
That is, the red sea seeing Gods people coming toward it, and desirous to
pass thorough it, at the presence of the Lord runned back all the night, and
was divided, so that the children of Israel went through the midst of the sea,
upon the dry land; Wisd. 19.7.
the great deep became a green field, and the waters were a wall unto them on
their right hand, and on their left hand. Some scoffing Atheists have given
out, that the sea fled not by miracle, but by a course mere natural,
affirming that Gods people watched their opportunity, when the sea was at an
ebb, and so passed through the midst of it on dry foot. This impudent
assertion is notably confuted by judicious Exercitat. 52.
Scaliger, proving it an egregious paradox, contradicting not only the
principles of Divinity, but also the rules of reason and grounds of
Philosophy. The text says expressly, that the sea was divided: but Haeres.
64.
Epiphanius, and the Apud Genebrard. and Jacob. de Valent. in loc. Idem Dr.
Incognit. in Psalm. 105.
Rabbis auow further, that it was parted into twelve paths, according to the
number of the twelve tribes of Israel, every troop having a several (as it
were) to march in. But when their enemies followed them into the midst of the
sea, the waters returned, and covered the chariots and horsemen, even all the
host of Pharao, that entered after them into the sea, there remained not one of
them; and so the Lord saved Israel out of the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel
saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea bank. Exodus 14.28.30.

When Israel upon the sight of Pharaohs innumerable host were sore afraid, and
cried unto the Lord, and said unto Moses, Have thou brought us to dye in the
wilderness, because there was no graves in Egypt? Moses answered the people,
Fear ye not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he will
show to you this day, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen this day, ye shall
never see them again. How then are these two seeming contrary places in one
chapter accorded? Israel shall never see the Egyptians again, yet afterward,
Israel saw the Egyptians. Answer is made by S. Quast. 51. sup. Exodus
Augustine, ye shall never see them again living as to day, but ye shall see
them dead. Ye shall never see them again fighing against you, but ye shall
see them at your feet drowned in the waters, and cast up at the sea bank. Ye
shall see the^ again to your comfort, but ye shall never see the^ again to your
terror.

How Jordan was driven back, you may read in the third and fourth chapter of
Joshua. How the mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like young
sheep, Exodus 19.18. Habacuc 3.6.10. How the hard rock was turned into
standing water, and the flint stone to a springing well, Exodus 17.6. Numb.
20.11. Psalm. 78.16. and Psalm. 105.40. The sum whereof is in brief, that all
the creatures, at the commandment of the Creator, are See Wisd. 19.18.
turned vpside down; ready to do, or not to do, to show forth, or keep in
their ordinary courses, according to his good will and pleasure. The sea
flowing forward, at the word of God turned backward: the mountains so called a
non mouendo, because they do not move, skippe like rams, and the little hills
like young sheep: the hard rock, the flint stone, both exceeding dry, made
standing waters, and springing wells. It is the nature of Psalm. 22.13.
ramping and roaring lions to be Psalm. 17.12.
greedy of their pray; yet the Lord Dan. 6.22.
shut the lions mouths, that they could not hurt Daniel in their den. It is
the nature of water to drown and devour men in the deep, for the wicked
Egyptians sanke to the bottom (says Exodus 15.5.
Moses) as a stone: yet Jonas 1.17.
Jonas, by Gods appointment, being thrown into the midst of the sea, and
swallowed up in a Whales belly three days and three nights, was afterward
cast out again upon the dry land, safe and sound, Jonas 2.10. It is the nature
of fire to burn and consume; yet Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, put into a
fiery furnace made seven times more hot then ordinary, walked in the midst
of the flame without any danger. Dan. 3.27.
The fire had no power of their bodies, not one hair of their head scorched,
neither were their coats changed, nor any smell of fire came upon them. The
blessed man and Martyr of God Saint Bilney (for so Father Sermon. 7. before King
Edw. 6.
Latymer is bold to call him) often Fox Martyr. fol. 923.
comforted himself and his acquaintance with the words of our Lord, Esaias 43.1.
Fear not Israel, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name,
thou art mine; when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and
through the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee: when thou walk through
the very fire, thou shall not be burnt: neither shall the flame kindle upon
thee. So Fox vbi sup. fol. 939.
James Baynham another holy Martyr (being at the stake in the midst of
furious and outrageous flames) cried out, Behold ye Papists, ye look for
miracles, and here now ye may see a miracle, for in this fire I feel no more
pain, then if I were in a bed of down: yea it is to me like a bed of roses.
So Jo. Crispin in Catalog. martyr. ex epist. Poggij Florentini quae est ad
Leonardu^ Aretinum.
Hierome of Prage, when the deaths man at his burning would have kindled the
fire behind at his back, (left it might otherwise seem too terrible)
presently called unto him, and said, Come hither, and let me see the fire
before me; for if I had feared the fire, I needed not to have come hither. In
all things behold then, how good and joyful a thing it is to serve the Lord,
to be subject to his kingdom, to march under his colors, and to fight his
battles. For God is a Exodus 15.3.
man of war, yea the Lord of hosts, having all creatures in heaven, on
earth, and under earth at his absolute command, to protect such as follow him,
and to fight against such as fight against him. At his word the Wisd. 19.17.
elements are changed among themselves, as one tune is changed upon an
instrument of music, and the melody still remains. At his word the waves
are calm, the fire cold, the mountains moving: at his word the valleys Psalm.
65.14.
sing, and the hills dance. O Psalm. 8.1.
Lord our governor how excellent is thy name in all the world, so Exodus 15.11.
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders, able to do
whatsoever thou will, and willing to do whatsoever is best for Judah thy
sanctuary, for Israel thy dominion.

Mystically the temporal Exodus of Israel out of Egypts bondage, Augustine.
Hierome. Arnobius. Jacob de Valentia.
prefigureth our spiritual deliverance by Christ from the tyrannous oppression
of Satan and sin. Here then, according to the method propounded, I am to
treat first of the parties delivered; secondly, of the peril and place from
which all holy Christians are set free; thirdly, of the manner and means of
our redemption.

Concerning the first, all true believers (as Galat. 3.29.
Paul teaches) are the seed of Abraham, and the house of Jacob. And the reason
hereof is very plain, they be the sons of Abraham that do the works of
Abraham, John 8.59. but Abraham's chief work was faith, as the Genesis 15.6 Romans
4.3.
text expressly, Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for
righteousness. Ergo, they which are of faith are the children of Abraham,
Galat. 3.7. Christian people (says In loc.
Augustine) are not aliants from the Commonwealth of God, and strangers from
the covenants of promise: Sed magis Israel, as it were, more Israel then Israel
it self. Luther in Galat. 3.7.
For unbelieving Jews are the Sons of begetting Abraham after the flesh
only; but all the faithful among the Genesis 12.3. Galat. 3.8.
Gentiles are the Sons of believing Abraham, after the spirit. The Lord said
to blessed Abraham, a Father of many Nations have I made thee, Genes. 17.5.
that is, as Saint Paul expounds it, Romans 4.11. The Father of them that
believe, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, as Saint Peter, Acts 10.35. In
every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness, is an Israel,
accepted of him, adopted his Sanctuary, wherein he will be served; and his
Seigniory wherein he will (as a King) reign by his holy word and Spirit.

Now, for the second obseruable point of our redemption, Isreal's bondage in
Egypt lively represents our miserable thraldom under Satan and sin. The
Exodus 10.22.
black darkness in all the land of Egypt, was no darkness in comparison of
the kingdom of darkness, out of which our blessed Savior Christ Jesus has
brought us into maruailous 1. Pet. 2.9.
light. The devil is the Prince of darkness, hell is a pit of darkness, sin
is a work of darkness. But all the redeemed by Christ have light where they
dwell, his word is a Lantern to their Psalm. 119.105.
feet, his commandments a light to their Psalm. 19.8.
eyes, his spirit an illuminatour of their Ephesians. 1.18.
understanding, and so their works are called Romans 13.12.
armor of light, and themselves honestly walking as in the day, Children of
light, John 12.36.

The king of Egypt and his people so vexed Gods Israel, that they made them
weary of their lives by sore labor in mortar, and in Brick, with all manner
of bondage which they laid upon them most cruelly, Exodus 1.14. So the Devil
and his accomplices have cast insupportable burdens upon the Sons of men,
heavy yokes Acts 15.10.
, which neither our Fathers, nor our selves are able to bear. But Christ our
true Joshua, says unto Jacobs house, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are wearied, and heavy laden, and I will ease you;
take my yoke upon you, and you shall find rest unto your souls. Iansen.
Concor. cap. 47. and Pontan. ser. in festo Matthiae.
Divines observe three kinds of burdens, upon that text, namely, the burden
of Affliction. The Law. Sin.


In this Egypt of the world, great Eccles. 40.1.
travail and Job. 14.1.
trouble is created for all men, every Son of Adam is borne to labor and
dolor; to labor in his actions, and to dolor in his passions: as Bernard
pithily, as Israel went through Egypt and the Wilderness, into the Land of
promise; so we must of necessity Acts 14.22.
pass through many tribulations into the kingdom of God, which is the
heavenly Canaan. If we Heb. 12.2.
look unto Jesus the founder and finisher of our faith, he will even in this
world afford us, as he did Deuteronomy. 34.1.
Moses upon the top of Pisgah, a little sight of the promised Land, making it
ours in hope, though as yet not in hold, bringing us to the resolution of Saint
Romans 8.18.
Paul, I count, that the afflictions of this life present, are not worthy of
the glory which shall be showed unto us hereafter.

As for the burden of the law, which is a yoke of Galat. 5.1.
bondage, Mat. 23.4.
grievous and heavy to be borne, Christ eases us of it also, being made
under the law, to redeem them under the law, Galath. 4.4. He blotted out the
handwriting of ordinances that was against us, and took it out of the way,
nailing it to the Cross, Coloss. 2.14. We cannot indeed exactly keep any
part of the Law, much less the whole: but (as the blessed Apostle speaks) it
was in the hand, Tho. Patmore apud Fox Martyr. fol. 953. Idem fere Primasius.
Aquine. Lombard. in Gal. 3.
that is, in the power of a Mediator, Galat. 3.19. And he did abundantly Mat.
3.15.
fulfill all righteousness in our person and place, Anselm.
or in the hand of a Mediator, as having authority to cancel it, and to take
the burden away from our shoulders.

Lastly, touching sin, He, who knew no sin, made himself to be sin for
us, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor. 5.21. The
Mica. 7.15.
Lord says, According to the days of thy coming out of the Land of Egypt,
will I show maruailous things. Now, when Israel went out of Aegipt, and the
house of Jacob from among the strange people, He did ouerturne the Chariots and
Horsemen, and destroyed all the host of their enemies in the midst of the
red Sea: August. in loc.
so likewise will he subdue our iniquities, which are our greatest enemies, and
cast all of them into the bottom of the Sea, Mica 7.19. that they may never
appear before us again, to confound our consciences in this world, or
condemn our souls in the next. If the man be blessed Psalm. 32.1.
whose unrighteousness is forgiven, and whose sin is covered; O well is it
unto thee, happy shall thou be which art of the Galat. 6.10.
household of faith! as having all thy foul faults and foes destroyed by
Christ's death, and buried in his grave.

The King of Egypt commanded the Midwiues of the Hebrew women, to kill every
male-childe in the very birth, Exodus 1.15. And semblablely the Apoc. 12.4.
red Dragon standing before the woman in the Wilderness, is ready to devour
her child so soon as she brings it forth; that is, the devil is always at
hand to quell every virtuous motion arising in our mind, but the spirit of
Christ (as a cunning midwife) brings forth our good intentions into good
actions, working in us both the will and the deed, Phil. 2.13.

Concerning the means of our deliverance, Christ is our Moses and Joshua, who
brought us out of Egypt into the Land of promise, for Acts 4.12.
among men is given none other name whereby we must be saved. All other (in
holy Scripture) styled Jesus, are but types of our Lord Jesus. Jesus Naue,
renowned for his valor, is the type of Christ as he was a king. Jesus Sidrach,
renowned for his knowledge, the type of Christ as he was a Prophet. Jesus
Iosadach, renowned for his piety, the type of Christ as he was a Priest. Our
Jesus is the hardrocke, mentioned at the latter end of this Hymn. That Christ
is a rock, we read Mat. 16.18. and 1. Pet. 2.8. that Christ is an hard rock,
we find also Math. 21.44. Whosoever falls on this stone shall be broken,
and on whom soever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder. That Christ is
that hard rock turned into a standing water. S. Paul tells us, 1. Cor. 10. I
would not that ye should be ignorant (quoth he) that all our Fathes were under
the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual
meat, and all drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ.

He seemed at the first an hardrocke, Augustine.
when his Disciples said, Joh. 6.60.
This is an hard saying, who can hear it? but afterward pleasant waters did
flow from him, unto such as Mat. 5.6.
hunger and thirst after righteousness. Exodus 17.6. Numb. 20.11.
Moses smote the rock in the Wilderness, and water came forth of it in such
abundance, that all the congregation of Israel drank thereof, and were
refreshed. Strigellius in loc. and Mollerus in Psalm. 105. v. 41.
So Moses rod, that is, the Law, smote Christ on the Cross for our sins; he
was made a curse for us, Galat. 3.13. He was wounded for our transgressions,
and broken for our iniquities Esaias 53.5. and out of this hard rock thus
smitten by Moses rod, a Well of water sprang forth into everlasting life, John
4.14.

The Sea saw that and fled] The world is called a Sea, Revelation 4.6. the
world then Dr. Jncognitus.
persecuting Christ and his Apostles, is a red sea, this red sea fled at the
preaching of the Gospel and gave place. Christ rebuked the winds, and the
waters, and so there was a great calm, Matthew 8.26. Jordan was driven back,
Matthew. 3.16.
Christ himself was baptized in Jordan, and such as are Romans 6.3.
baptized into Christ, and believe, send not (as other Ecclesiastes 1.7.
rivers usually) their streams into the sea, that is, they fashion not
themselves according to this world, but are renewed in their minds, Romans 12.2.
they repent and turn back from their old courses, and walk in newness of
life, Romans 6.4.

The mountains skipped like rammes] By mountains In loc.
Arnobius does understand the Prophets, quia locuti sunt altitudines Dei, they
rejoiced at the fulfilling of their Prophecies, and skipped as Rams, in
seeing that shepherd borne, John 10.11.
who would lay down his life for his sheep. S. In loc.
Augustine makes the blessed Apostles and other Preachers of the Gospel, old
sheep, and their auditors as it were lambs and young sheep, begotten in
Christ unto God by the disposers of the secrets of God, according to that of 1.
Cor. 4.15.
Paul unto his Corinthians, In Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel.

Isreal's Exodus out of Egypts bondage was so great, that God himself in
perpetuam rei memoriam, instituted the Exodus 12.
passover to be kept of his people for ever, and further inserted a short
remembrance thereof in the prologue to his law, I am the Lord thy God, which
have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. This
deliverance was temporal and particular only concerning Israel and the house
of Jacob: but the redemption by Christ is spiritual and general, appertaining
to men of all conditions and countries, of all tribes, and at all times, even
from the beginning unto the worlds end. For so God loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16. and therefore the Church (upon
good grounds) ordained the feasts of Christ's Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, Ascension. And for as much as Christ is our 1. Cor. 5 7.
Passe-ouer, the Church of England Melancthon in loc. affirms, that it was
usually sung among the Jews at their celebration of Easter.
appointed this hymn fitly to be read on Easter day.

The Church of Rome Apoc. 17.6.
drunke^ with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus
Christ, is spiritually Babylon and Egypt. And the Papists, her followers, a
generation of barbarous people, barbarous in their doings, and barbarous in
their doctrines. Concerning their barbarous usage, their bloody butchering of
Gods Israel in Angrongne; their massacre in France; gunpowder treason in
England, are clouds of witnesses against them unto the worlds end.

As for their sayings, is it not barbarous language to call that man of sin,
most holy father; and, as if that were not enough, holiness it self, Bellarm.
epist. dedic. Tom. 1. controuers.
sanctitas vestra, Idem epist. dedic. Tom. 2. Baronius epist dedic. Tom. 2.
annal and reliqui papistae communiter.
beatitudo vestra? Is it not barbarous language, to set Antichrist in the
seat of Christ, and to term him expressly Cap. quoniam de immunitate in 6.
and Turrecremat sum. lib. 2. cap. 27. per totum.
the husband of the Church? Is it not barbarous language to magnify the Romish
Pharaoh above 2. Thessal. 2.4.
all that is called God, making him a Demi-god, yea Semi-god, neither
absolutely God, nor simply man, but a midling between both? Is it not barbarous
language to say, that none may presume to tell him of his faults, though he
should, through his ill example, draw millions of men into hell? as their In
Decreto cap. si Papa did. 40.
own text runs, innumerabiles populos cateruatim secum ducit primo mancipio
gehennae, cum ipso plagis multis in aeternum vapulaturus, huius culpas istic
redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus.

Is it not barbarous language to say, that no minorite Friar, observing S. Hen.
Sedulius apolog. lib. 2. c. 9.
Francis order and rule, can be damned? and that a certain Friar upon a time
being carried into hell, and surueying in it every corner, found not so much as
one Franciscan Friar. That a Friar should go to hell is thought no great
marvel, but that he should return from thence to tell us this tale, seems
incredible, considering the Pope himself determines, ex inferno nulla
redemptio.

Is it not barbarous language to say, Fox Martyr. fol. 913. and 1011
that to be buried in a gray Friars frocke, in S. Francis Cowle, should remit
four parts of penance, three parts of our sins?

Buchanan fratres fraterrimi.
Qui fit vt moriamur in cucullo,
Cum nemo been viuat in cucullo.
Is it not barbarous language to say, that it is an Card. Campegius, Albertus
Pighius apud Jewel defense of his apolog. part 4. cap. 1. diuis. 1.
honester thing for a Priest to be entangled with many concubines in secret,
then openly to be joined in marriage with one wife? For he may not keep one
benefice with one wife, Cornelius Agrippa de vanit. scient. cap. 64.
but he may have two benefices and three whores.

Is it not barbarous language to say, Jo. Lambert apud Fox Martyr. fol. 1018.
that for repeating over the fifteen Ooes, every day once through a whole
year, we shall apertly see our Lady to help us after our death? or, that we
shall have the like benefit, for saying of her Psalter upon the ten beads,
that come from the crossed Friars; or upon the five beads hallowed at the
Charter House; or for fasting the Ladies fast, as they call it, yea for fasting
on the Wednesday?

Is it not barbarous language to say, that our Bellarm. de Iustificat. lib. 2.
cap. 2. and cap. 10.
own inherent righteousness is the formal cause of absolute justification,
and not the righteousness of Christ imputed unto us? This opinion is so
barbarous, that S. Paul says of it, Galath. 5.4. Ye are abolished from
Christ, and fallen from grace, whosoever are justified by the law.

Is it not barbarous language to say, that the Thom. part. 3. quaest. 25. art.
3.
Crucifixe is to be reverenced and adored with the self same kind of
worship, that is due to Christ, eadem reuerentia imagini Christi exhibenda and
ipsi Christo?

In respect of these barbarismes, and many more, the blessed Martyr Fox Martyr.
fol. 821.
Aymondus, being condemned by the Papists of Bourdeaux and Angeow to dye, sung
this hymn as he went to the stake, When Israel went out of Egypt, etc.
insinuating that the kingdom of Popery was like Egypt, an house of bondage,
where the man of sin domineering in the conscience, does impose grievous
burdens upon Gods Judah, worse then any sore labor in mortar and brick. If
Adam in his innocence did not exactly keep one precept of God; how shall
Adams posterity, compassed about with infirmity, do works of
supererogation? observing not only the Commandments of God, but also the
Councels of the Church, and ordinances of men, almost infinite for their
number, altogether insupportable for their nature.

Almighty God has, out of the riches of his glory, delivered us alone from
these barbarians; and that we now continue yet free from them, is not our own
warines, or worthiness, but his work only Psalm. 136.4.
that does all wonders. The planting of the Gospel among us in the days of
King Henry the 8. was a great wonder; the watering of it in the days of King
Edward the 6, another great wonder; the flourishing of it in the days of our
renowned Queen Elizabeth, and our gracious Sovereign King James, another
great wonder. Our deliverance from the Northern Conspiracy, from the Spanish
Armado, from the Gunpowder-plot, are great arguments of Gods might and mercy,
manifested to his English Israel. In regard of all which, and many more fresh in
our memory, we may well (as Septuagint. Vulgar Latin. Augustine. Hierome.
other translations have done before us) adioyne the next hymn to this, and
say, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise, for
thy loving, mercy, and for thy truths sake.

The dialogue between the Prophet and the creatures, instructs us how we
should stand in awe of God, seeing the very dumb creatures and insensible
fear before him. Does an Esaias 1.3.
ox know his owner, and an ass his masters cribbe? and shall not Israel
understand? Shall unreasonable beasts of the field, and feathered fowls in the
air, praise the Lord in their kind? and shall not man sanctius his animal,
mentisque capacius altae, Psalm. 89.1.
sing always the loving kindness of God, and with his mouth ever show forth
his mercy from generation to generation? Shall Psalm. 148.8.
hail, snow, wind, water, and weather fulfill his word? Shall the sea flee,
the earth tremble, the mountains and hills skip at the presence of the God of
Jacob? and shall nor Jacob himself Psalm. 2.11.
serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice unto him in trembling? Shall the hard
rock be turned into a standing water, and the flintstone into a springing
well? and shall not our hard and flintie hearts, in consideration of our own
miseries, and Gods unspeakable mercies in delivering us from evil, (if not
gush forth into Ierem. 9.1.
fountains of tears) express so much as a little standing water in our eyes?
It is an hard heart indeed, Bernard. lib. 1. de considerat.
quod nec compunctione scinditur, nec pietate mollitur, nec mouetur precibus,
minis non cedit, flagellis duratur, etc. O Lord touch thou the Psalm. 144.5.
mountains and they shall smoke, touch our lips with a Esaias. 6.6.
coal from thine altar, and our Psalm. 51.15.
mouth shall show forth thy praise. Smite Lord our flintie hearts, as hard as
the Job. 41.15.
nether millstone, with the hammer of thy word, and mollify them also with the
drops of thy mercies, and dew of thy spirit, make them Matthew. 11.29.
humble, Ezech. 11.19.
fleshie, Joshua 24.23.
flexible, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
circumcised, Job. 23.16.
soft, Pro. 23.12.26.
obedient, Ezech. 36.26.
new, Matthew. 5.8.
clean, broken, and then a broken and contrite heart (O God) shall thou not
despise, Psalm. 51.17. August. medit. cap. 1.
Domine Deus meus, da cordi meo te desiderare, desiderando quaerere, quaerendo
inuenire, inueniendo amare, amando mala mea non iterare. O Lord my God, give me
grace from the very bottom of mine heart to desire thee, in desiring to seek
thee, in seeking to find thee, in finding to love thee, in loving utterly to
loathe my former wickedness; that living in thy fear, and dying in thy
favor, when I have passed thorough this Egypt and wilderness of this world, I
may possess that heavenly Canaan, and happy land of promise, prepared for all
such as love thy coming, even for every Christian one, which is thy dominion
and sanctuary.

PSALM 118. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy
endures for ever.


THis Hymn seems to be made by David, after some great troubles in the days
of Saul, Wilcox.
before he was King; or Mollerus. Calvin. Tremel.
else for some notable victory gained against his enemies, after he was
established in his Throne, to wit, after he had overcome the Philistims, 2.
Sam. 6. or happily when he triumphed over the children of Ammon, 2. Sam. 12.

It consists of 3. parts especially: 1. An exhortation to praise God, in the
four first verses. 2. A reason of this exhortation, from the 5. to 21. 3. A
conclusion or application of both, from the 21. to the Psalms end.


In the former observe the Time when, now. Parties who Exhorting, David the
King. Exhorted Generally al people, verse. 1. Specially Gods Israel above other
people, verse. 2. Singularly the house of Aaron, above the rest of Israel, verse.
3.




Concerning the time, now, that is, instantly without any delay; as God helps
us in time, so we must also praise him in season. Or now, that is upon this
occasion, indeed we must praise God ever, because his mercy does endure for
ever: yet for especial mercies, we must invent especial songs, and yield
new thanks for new things: and therefore David here being wonderfully
delivered from a great many troubles (having now taken his enemies 2. Sam.
12.30.
crown from his head, which weighed a talent of gold with precious stones, and
set it upon his own) calls upon his Priests and people to confess now, that
the Lord is gracious. All other men ought at all other times to perform this
duty: but his subjects at this time principally, let Israel now, let the house
of Aaron now. Or now, that is at this solemn Bucer. Mollerus. Genebrard.
feast appointed for the same purpose, for albeit we must always laud the Lord,
Yet ought we most chiefly so to do, when we meet and assemble together, to
render thanks for the great benefits that we have received at his hands, and
to set forth his most worthy praise.

The person exhorting is David the King: Princes actions are the peoples
instructions; a Courtier is a strange creature, who loses himself in
following other, he lives a great deal by the bread of other, a good deal
by the breath of other; oftentimes his clothes are not his own, his hair not
his own, his complexion and very skin not his own; nay that which is worst
of all, his soul (which as Plato said is most himself) is not his own, while
he lives at the devotion of other.

Martial. Epigram. lib. 9. ep. 81
Nemo suos (hac est aulae natura potentis)
Sed domini mores Caesarianus habet.
Courtiers (as Gueuara lib. de vita priuata.
one said) rise late, come late to the temple, dine late, sup late, go to bed
late, and repent last of all, if at all: and the reason hereof is plain,
because they want such examples and patterns as David, to go before them in
giving thanks unto the Lord.

The peoples welfare does especially consist in the Princes safety, David
therefore being delivered from his enemies (who compassed him about, and kept
him in on every side, swarming in multitude like Bees) is not content to give
thanks unto God privately himself, by himself; but openly proclaims his
thankfulness, exhorting all his people to do the same: saying, O give
thanks unto the Lord, let Israel, and the house of Aaron and all that fear
the Lord, confess that his mercies endure for ever: the which is answerable to
that which he has Psalm. 34.3.
else where, O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together.

The very name of peace is sweet, but the very sound of war terrible, for
(...), in greek signifies much blood, and the latin bellum is so called
Seruius.
quasi minime bellum, or as Festus, idem Godescallus praefat in Veget. de re
militari.
other a belluis, in respect of their beastly rage showed in wars. As when
Tamberlane had conquered Princes, he did use them as coach horses to draw him
up and down in triumph: and Judges 1.7.
Adonibezeke made seventy Kings gather crummes of bread under his table. When
the Lanquet. Chron. page 261.
Switzers in the year 1443. vanquished the Thuricenses in battle, they made
great bankets in the place where they won the victory, using the dead corpse
of their adversaries in steed of stools, and tables, and moreover opening
their bodies, drank their blood, and tare their hearts. The Gueuara epist.
Numantines assaulted by the Romans, made solemn vows among themselves, no
day to break their fast but with the flesh of a Roman, not to drink before
they had tasted the blood of an enemy: And when Plutarch.
Scipio took their town, they killed all their old men, women, and children;
and heaped up all their riches in the market place giving fire to every part of
the City, leaving the conqueror neither goods to spoil, nor persons over whom
he might insolently triumph. What need I seek so far, the cruel outrages
between the Spaniard and the Hollander have been such, as all eyes of pity
and piety had just cause to lament them.

These are the fortunes of foreign wars, now concerning civil, or rather
uncivil dissentions among our selves. It is a conclusion agreed upon at
weeping cross, that nothing in the world ruinateth a commonweal more then
it: example hereof Jerusalem, example Rome, both which by private factions
made themselves a prey to the common enemy. Example hereof unfortunate France,
in whose late civil wars (as Brutum sulmen. page 144.
some account) there were slain twelve hundred thousand French borne, beside
other of their allies. Example hereof England in old time, before the houses
of York and Lancaster were united, in which unhappy quarrel (as Hist. lib. 1.
cap. 7.
Cominaeus reports) besides an infinite number of the Commonaltie, there were
cruelly butchered fourscore Princes of the blood royal. In bellis ciuilibus
omnia sunt misera (quoth Epist. lib. 4. epist. 51.
Tullie) sed nihil est miserius, quam ipsa victoria. The Walsingham in Ed. 2.
page 95.
Chronicle says of Edward the second, ouercomming and killing his own Barons,
Tunc vere victus, quando tot vicit prudentes milites. In homebred and intestine
garboyles, if the worst obtain victory, then instantly the State becomes a
very shambles, or a sink of sin. If the good men conquer, albeit they be by
their disposition and ingenuous education harmless and humane, yet necessity
will often make them exceeding furious and bloody: so that as the Poet said,
Vna salus victis, nullam sperare salutem. In this extremity we must either
fight, and so look for sudden death; or else fly, and so lead a tedious
life, having a continual sound of fear in our ears, either the piteous
outcries of fatherless children, of comfortless widows, of hopeless and
hapless kinsemen; or else terrible roaring of Canons, and dreadful alarums of
merciless enemies.

Owin. Epigr.
Omega nostrorum M^rs est, mars alpha malorum. On the contrary, peace procures
all good and joyful things unto the commonwealth. In peace the Merchant
tradeth abroad, and brings home Psalm. 104.15.
wine to glad the heart of man, and oil to make his countenance cheerful: in
peace the Church and University flourish, and the messengers of peace preach
unto you the sweet tidings of the Gospel. In peace the Plough-man sowes in
hope, and reapes with joy. In peace widows are comforted, and maidens are
given to marriage; no leading into captivity, no complaining in our streets.
In peace we rejoice with the Prou. 5.18.
wife of our youth, and she is like the Psalm. 128.3.
fruitful vine, and our children as olive branches round about the table. Our
sons grow up as the young plants, and our daughters as the polished corners of
the Temple. In peace our valleys stand so thick with corn, that they Psalm.
65.14.
laugh and sing; our garners are full and plenteous with all manner of store;
our oxen are strong to labor, and our sheep bring forth thousands and ten
thousands in our streets. In one word, all honest occupations and honorable
professions thrive, while brethren dwell together in unity. Wherefore David
expending on the one side the rents of the kingdom under Saul, and pondering
on the other side the manifold blessings of a flourishing peace, being
ouercharged (as it were) with joy, breaks forth into these words, Psalm. 133.
Ecce quam bonum, O behold, how good and joyful a thing it is, for brethren (
Calvin. Mollerus.
that is, subjects of the same kingdom) to dwell together in unity! Placidus.
Bellarmine. Agellius.
Many things are good, which are not joyful. Again, many things are joyful,
which are not good: but amity between brethren is both a good and a joyful
thing. If it were good and not joyful, it would be tedious: if joyful and not
good, it might be vicious: but good and joyful together, is excellent good;
omne tulit punctum, it is a double sweet, when as profit and pleasure meet: it
is good, there is ye profit; it is joyful, there is ye pleasure. It is like
the precious ointment of Aaron, there is the sweet of pleasure; it is like the
dew of Hermon, there is the sweet of profit. As sweet perfumes are pleasant
not only to such as use the^, but also to the whole company: so concord is not
only profitable to good men, which are the peacemakers; but even unto all
other in the same Commonwealth, of whatsoever function or faction. And
therefore David being now quietly seated in his kingdom, free from wars
abroad, and iarres at home, calls upon all his people, to confess that the
Lord is gracious, and that his mercy endures for ever.

But in more particular he calls upon the house of Aaron, Numb. 18.
that is, the Priests and Levites, and that for two reasons especially: First,
because such as trouble Israel, hate most of all the Priests and Preachers of
the word. Secondly, Dr. Jncognit. Mollerus.
because the Priests are the Prouosts of the people, Heb. 13.7. the salt of the
earth to season other, Matthew. 5.13. and therefore seeing they be Precentors in
Gods quire, it is their office to sing first, that other may sing after. In
respect of danger and duty, the house of Aaron have good cause to praise God
more then other, and to confess that his mercies endure for ever.

Now, for as much as Romans 2.28.
all are not Jews, which are Jews outward, and all are not Romans 9.6.
Israel, which are of Israel: I say, for as much as there be many Mollerus.
Calvin.
hypocrites as well among Priests and people; therefore David in the fourth
verse (chiefly) calls upon such as truly fear the Lord, Yea let them now
that fear the Lord confess, that his mercy endures for ever. For hereby
such enjoy not only a civil and outward peace, which is common to the whole
State: but further, a religious and inward peace of conscience, which is proper
to themselves. For when there is Psalm. 122.
peace within the walls of Jerusalem, and plenteousnes within her palaces,
every one may go into the house of the Lord, and stand in the gates of the
beautiful Temple. Then all the Tribes ascend to give thanks unto the name of
the Lord, to Psalm. 95.6.
worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker, entering into
his Psalm. 100.3.
courts with praise. Then, as it is in this Psalm, they bind the sacrifice
with cords, even unto the horns of the altar, exercising all acts of religion,
and pouring out their whole soul before the God of heaven. On the contrary,
in time of war the Gentiles, and other who know not God, enter into the
inheritance of God, and defile his holy Temple; they do not only cry, Down
with it, down with it unto the ground, as it is in the 137. Psalm: but as we
find in the 79. Psalm, they pull it down in deed, and make Jerusalem an
heap of stones, giving the bodies of Gods dear servants to be meat unto the
fowls of the air, and the flesh of his Saints unto the beasts of the field.
Ye therefore that do truly profess, have greatest occasion duly to confess
Gods exceeding mercy, for enjoying the sweet benefit of peace. For if once ye
should a little while want the comfort ye reap, by public prayers and
preaching in Gods house; ye would complain grievously, Psalm. 84.
Lord, how amiable are thy dwellings! my soul has a longing desire to enter
into thy courts. How blessed are the Who make their nests in houses and trees
near thy Tabernacle, Hen. Mollerus in loc. Or mystically, whether I lead an
active life like the Sparrow, or a co^templatiue, like the Turtle, thy altars
are the best nests to rest in. Bellarmine.
sparow and swallow, who may come to thy altars, and set upon thy Temple! For
one day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a doore-keeper
in the house of my God, then to command in the tents of ungodliness.

The reasons of this exhortation are manifold, expressed by David here
particularly from the 5. verse to 21. but they be generally these Two: Gods
mercies toward his children In general, He is gracious, and his mercy
endures for ever. In particular to David; I called upon the Lord in trouble,
and he heard me at large, etc.
Gods judgments upon his enemies, in whose name alone they be destroyed, and
become extinct as fire among the thorns, etc.


The mercies of the Lord are so rich and abundant, that our Prophet Psalm. 145.9.
else where says, his mercy is over all his works. And it is seen in two
things chiefly: 1. In giving every thing which is good. 2. In taking away
whatsoever is evil. Now we may the better understand the greatness of his
goodness in both, if we will examine the breadth, and length, and depth, and
height thereof, as S. Paul intimates, Ephesians. 3.18.

First, for the breadth of his mercy, whatsoever is good is originally from
God, James 1.17.
every good and perfect gift is from above descending from the Father of lights,
even the very minnoms and minutes are mercies, holden as it were by
Franck-almoigne. And as he bestows on his every thing which is good: so
likewise he takes from them every kind of evil. Bread takes away hunger, and
drink takes away thirst, and apparel takes away nakedness, and fire takes
away coldness, and other things deliver us from other miseries in this world.
But all these creatures are the Lords, and they cannot help us, except he
bless them. Again, there be many miseries unknown unto the creatures, as
the subtle tentations of the devil, and the manifold blindness of our
understanding and erroneous conscience, from which only God is able to deliver
us, as being the Physician of our soul, so well as the protector of our body.
Moreover, as the creatures take not away all miseries, but a few, so they take
them away not from all, but from a few. God alone is able to deliver all men
from all miseries, and though he do not this unto all, yet there be none but
have tasted of some, yea of many of his mercies; which occasioned our Prophet
to say, Psalm. 33.5.
the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord; and our Church to pray, O God
whose nature and property is ever to have mercy and to forgive. But ye will
object, if the Lord can deliver from all evil, why does he not, as being the
2. Cor. 1.3.
Father of mercies? Answer is made, that God our Father in Heaven knows what
is best for us, his children on earth; he therefore does afflict us, and
scourge us for our benefit. Saint 2. Cor. 12.8.
Paul desired thrice to be delivered from the buffeting of the flesh, and not
heard; that Gods power might be made perfect thorough weakness. And so the
Lord took not from Lazarus his sickness and poverty, that he might crown
him with a greater mercy, commanding his Luke 16.22.
Angels to carry him into the bosom of Abraham. And so he suffers his
servants to be tempted and tried with imprisonment, and losses, and crosses for
their good: in this respect he is termed the God of all consolation, 2. Cor.
1.3. of all, as knowing how to comfort us in all our tribulation, a present
help in every kind of trouble. Nothing in the world can do this, and
therefore Job. 16.2.
Job said to his acquaintance, who could not understand his grief aright,
miserable comforters are ye all. Again, God is the God of all comfort, in that
he comforts his children so fully, that it is a joyful thing for them to be
sometimes in affliction. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in them, even
so their consolation abounds thorough Christ, 2. Cor. 1.5.

Touching the length of his mercy, David says, it endures for ever: as his
mercy compasses us about Psalm. 32.11.
on every side; so likewise at every season, it continues unto our end, and in
the end: yea, further in that other life which is without end; his mercies are
from everlasting to everlasting, that is, from everlasting predestination to
everlasting glorification. His mercies in forgiving our offenses, and in
covering all our sins, are exceeding long: the Lord says our Prophet is
Psalm. 103.8.
full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, and of great goodness. For
though impenitent sinners provoke him every day, walking in their own ways,
and committing all uncleanness even with greediness: yet he nevertheless
affoords his good things, in Acts 14.17.
giving them rain, and fruitful seasons, and filling their hearts with food
and gladness; his mercy does exceed their malice, being patient toward them,
and desiring that none should perish, but that all should come to repentance,
2. Pet. 3.9. He makes as though he saw not the sins of men, because they
should amend, Wised. 11.20. Christ advises us (Mat. 18.22.) to forgive one
another, not only seven times, but also seventy times seven times: and Luke
6.36. to be merciful, as our Father in heaven is merciful, insinuating hereby
that God is infinitely merciful unto sinners, even to great sinners which owe
his Justice ten thousand talents.

Concerning the depth of his mercy, love is seen in our Sayings. Doings.
Sufferings.


Love superficial is in word only, that which is operative, manifesting it
self in deeds is deep, but the profoundest of all is in suffering for
another. Now the Lord has abundantly showed his mercies in all these. First,
in his word written and preached, written Macab. 12.9.
For we have the holy Books in our hands for comfort, and whatsoever things
are written before time, were written for our learning, that we through patience
and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope, Romans 15.4. By his word preached,
for the Ministers of the Gospel (as 2. Cor. 5.20.
Ambassadors) entreat you to be reconciled unto him; unto them is committed
the word of reconciliaton and peace, they be the 1. Cor. 4.1.
disposers of his mysteries, and messengers of his mercies, it is their duty to
bind up the broken hearted. And therefore David says in the 85. Psalm, verse
8. I will hearken what the Lord will say concerning me, for he shall speak
peace to his people.

Secondly, God shows his mercy toward us in his doings, in Psalm. 103.4.
saving our life from destruction, and in crowning us with his loving
kindness. But as love is seen in deeds more then in words, so more in
suffering then in doing, and of all suffering, death is most terrible; and of
all deaths, a violent; and of all violent deaths, hanging upon the Cross is
most hateful and shameful; yet God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son to dye for our sins on the Cross. Doubtless one will scarce dye
for a righteous man, but yet for a good man it may be, (says Romans 5.7.
Paul) that one dare dye; but he sets out his love toward us, seeing, that
while we were yet sinners, and his enemies, Christ dyed for us.

Lastly, for the height of his mercy, the depth appears in it is effects, but
the height by the cause moving to mercy, which is exalted above the Heavens,
according to that of David, Psalm. 36.5.
In Coelo misericordia tua Domine. Men use to pity their servants in respect
of their own commodity, the which is the lowest degree of mercy, for every
man (if he be not a fool) pittieth his very Proverb. 12.10
beast. Other pity men in regard of friendship and alliance, which is an
higher degree of mercy. Some show pity to men in that they be men, not only
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, but also created according to Gods
own likeness and similitude, which is among us the highest degree of mercy.
Now God takes pity on all things as being his Creatures, on men especially
being created after his own Image, but on true Christians principally, being
the Sons and heirs of his kingdom. If any shall ask what cause moved him
to make the world, to create man after his own likeness, to justify sinners,
and adopt us for his children? it is nothing else but his mere mercy, that
endures for ever. He loved us when we would not, yea, when we could not love
him; and he continues his goodness not in respect of his own benefit, for he
needs not our help, but only for our good. The Lord is gracious, because
gracious. And therefore the blessed Angels aptly divided their Christmasse
Caroll into two parts, Luke 2.14.
Glory to God on high, and on earth peace. God has indeed all the glory, but
we reap the good of his graciousnes and mercy that endures for ever.

I called upon the Lord] Hitherto King David, concerning the graciousnesse of
God in general. He comes now to treat of his mercy toward himself in
particular, the which is applied by Divines unto the Augustine. Mollerus.
Church; and Calvin. Placidus. Tileman. Agellius.
Christ himself, who was in his Passion heard at large, and in his
Resurrection he saw his desire upon his enemies. The pith of all which is
summarily comprised in the 24. verse, This is the day which the Lord has made,
let us rejoice and be glad in it. In which observe, 1. What day is meant by
this day. 2. How the Lord is said to have made this day, more then other days.
3. Why we should in this day so made, rejoice and be glad.


For the first, Bucer. Calvin. Mollerus.
literally this ought to be referred unto the solemn day, wherein Israel and
Aaron, as well Priests as people being assembled together, gave public thanks
unto the Lord, for that their good king David was now fully delivered from all
his enemies, and quietly settled in his princely throne. So this text (...) a
very fit theme for the Coronation days of our late blessed, blessed Queen,
and present gracious King: as also for the Commemoration of our happy
deliverance from the Spanish Invasion, anno 88. and from the bloody Gunpowder
plot on the fifth of November 1605.

Augustine. Arnobius. Melancthon.
But mystically this day is the time of grace, behold now is the accepted
time, now the day of Salvation, 2. Cor. 6.2. and this day is termed here
Catexochen, The day, Mollerus. Dr. Jncognitus.
because the whole time wherein a man lives without Christ, is called in holy
Scripture, The night and darkness, as being full of terrors and errors, of
blindness and ignorance. So Saint Paul, Romans 13.12. The night is past, and the
day is come. And Ephesians. 5.8. Once ye were darkness, but now light in the
Lord; your selves, John 12.36.
Children of light, and your works, Romans 13.12.
Armor of light.

Bonaue^t. in loc.
Dominus est Dies, Christ is the day, or rather indeed the John 1.9.
light of the world, and Mal. 4.2.
Sun of the day Luke 1.78.
springing on high, to give light to such as sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death. This day did appear to the world in some measure Tileman.
from the beginning. For the manifestation of Christ Jesus, the supernatural
Sun of righteousness, arising with health under his wings, to them that
fear the Lord, resembling a great deal, the rising of the natural sun in
our Horizon. First, the sun being ready to rise, sends forth a little
glimpse of his brightness, whereunto we may compare the mystery of that
Aphorism: The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head, Genesis 3.15.
Then it does enlarge the same brightness with more splendor, to which happily
Noah's prophecy may be likened, Blessed be the Lord God of Sem, Ge^. 9.26
Afterward ascending higher, and approaching nearer unto us, it puts forth
his glittering beams of clearer light, whereto we may resemble the plainer
promises concerning Christ, communicated to the latter ages of Abraham, Genesis
12.2. of Isaac, Genesis 26.3.4. of Jacob, Genesis 28.14. of David, 2. Sam. 7.12. At
length it discovers it self and appears openly, whereunto Christ's
incarnation and living in the world answers, 1. Ioh. 1. That which was from
the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we
have looked upon, and our hands have handled, etc. Last of all, it gloriously
mounteth up above the earth, and Psalm. 19.6.
nothing is hid from the heat thereof: and to this accords our Saviors
resurrection and ascension, whereby himself was glorified, and he drew other
men unto him, Ioh. 12.32. and gave them power, believing in his name to be the
sons of God, Ioh. 1.12. Wherefore, seeing the Messiah of the world, is now
dead for our sins, and risen again for our justification, and sits at the
right hand of God in heaven, ever making intercession for us; and seeing the
Romans 10.18.
sound of his Gospel is gone through all the earth, and the words of his
Apostles unto the ends of the world, we have good cause to sing and say, this
is the most acceptable time, the day of salvation and grace, Ephesians. 3.5.
which in other ages was not opened unto the sons of men, as it is now
revealed, and therefore let us rejoice and be glad in it.

Now, for as much as the resurrection of Christ, is the Mollerus.
complement of all the promises concerning the Messiah, and as it were, the
Church Ho^. for Easter day.
lock and key of faith, on which all other Articles depend; the Church of
England, and Chrysostom. Euthym. Melanch. Bucer.
other Divines ancient and orthodoxe, have made this Hymn proper on Easter
day: for on this day Christ arising from the dead, was heard at large; on this
day, he saw his desire upon his enemies; on this day he did openly triumph
over the devil, and death, and hell, albeit they compassed him round about,
and kept him in on every side; yet in the name of the Lord he destroyed them.
On this day he did not dye, but live to declare the works of the Lord. On
this day, the same stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone
of the corner; it is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes, and
therefore let us heartily sing, This is the day which the Lord has made, we
will be glad and rejoice therein.

God made the Genesis 1.5.
morning and evening, the light and the darkness are his. How then is he said
here, to make this day more then other days? the Chrysostom. Euthym. Placidus.
Doctors upon the place answer, that albeit all days are good in respect of
themselves and God: yet some be joyful, and other doleful, in respect of the
good and evil that happens in them unto us. For Melancthon. Mollerus.
the day wherein Adam fell, and in him all his posterity, was an evil and a
black day, made so (doubtless) by the devil, and not by the Lord: but this
day wherein the second Adam arose from the dead, and in him 1. Cor. 15.22.
all men are made alive, is a good day, wherein the faithful are joyful. It
is the Lords doing, and therefore the Lords day. The Lords doing, that the same
stone which the builders refused, is now become the head and corner stone in
the building; that he who was a despicable man, a worm rather then a man,
Psalm 22.6. should now triumphing over the devil and death, hell and the
grave, become the Psalm 24.7.
king of glory; that Phil. 2.10.
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. Now the Lord is said to make this
day more then other, as Agellius.
honoring it above other, exalting it and making it Calvin.
memorable to posterity. So the word making sometime signifies, as 1. Sam.
12.6. It is the Lord that made Moses and Aaron, s that is, exalted Moses and
Vatablus.
Aaron; and so we say, that a man advanced in honor or riches, is a made man;
in this sense, the making of a day is the sanctifying and observing of a day,
Deuteronomy. 5.15. Exodus 34.22. how then is Easter day more magnified and hallowed,
then other days in the year? to this objection answer may be, that all
Christians (herein imitating the pattern of the blessed Acts 20.7. 1. Cor.
16.2. Apoc. 1.10.
Apostles) in honor of Christ's resurrection, observe their Sabbath upon the
eight day, which is the first day of the week; whereas the Jews hallowed
their Sabbath upon the seventh day, which is the last day of the week. So that
Easter day is the Sabbath of Sabbaths, an high and holy day, from which every
other Sunday has his name, being so called, because the sun of righteousness
arose from the dead upon this day. This day is the Lords day, the day which
himself made so good a day, that all his true servants ever since have
rejoiced in it, and sanctified their Sabbath on it.

Eoban. Hessus.
Haec est illa Dies toti celebrabilis orbi,
Quem facit, and proprio signat honor Deus.
The reasons, why we should this day rejoice so much, are manifold; but they
may be reduced all unto two principal heads, A motion from evil, Promotion in
good.


Christ on this day rising from the dead, overcame the devil, which is the
author of death; and the grave, which is the prison of death; and sin, which
is the Cor. 15.56.
sting of death; and the Law, which is the strength of the sting of death; and
all this he did for us men and our salvation. The devil, which is the Prince
of Ephesians. 6.12.
darkness, had no part in the sun of righteousness: Christ therefore being
Luke 11.22.
stronger then he, came upon him, and overcame him; he took from him all his
armor wherein he trusted, and divided his spoils, and cast him out of his
hold, that he might have no part in us, or power over us. As Ser. de
quadruplici debito.
Bernard sweetly, Fortitudo Diaboli per redemptoris vulnera traducta and
deducta ad nihilum, in the words of Saint Paul, The God of peace shall tread
down Satan under your feet, Romans 16.20.

So he who was above the Law, was made Gal. 4.4.
under the Law, that he might redeem those which are under the Law, that he
might put out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, and fasten it
upon his Cross, Coloss. 2.14. So he who knew no sin, made himself to be
sin for us, that we should be made the righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor.
5.21. He was wounded (...) our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities,
Esa. 53.5. If the tormentours of Christ should ask now, as they did once, Luke
22.64. Who is he that smote thee? we may quickly become Prophets, and answer
for him, our sins smote him; every one of us might ingeniously confess with
Jonas 1.12.
Jonas, for my sake this great tempest is upon thee (sweet Jesus). He triumphed
over hell, and the grave for us also: for as for himself it was impossible,
that the Lord of Acts 3.15.
life should be holden of death, Acts 2.24. Wherefore let us say with Saint 1.
Cor. 15.55.
Paul, O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? the sting of
death, is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law: but thanks be to God,
which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. And let us heartily
sing with our Prophet, Easter is the day which the Lord has made, we will be
joyful and glad in it.

Bonaue^t. in loc.
Some Divines affirm, that the year wherein our blessed Savior arose from the
dead, should (according to the Law), have been the year of Iubile, wherein
Leuit. 25.10.
liberty was proclaimed in the Land; to all the inhabitants thereof; every man
returned to his possession and family, debts were released, and oppressions
abated. And surely the Jubilees in old time, were Dr. Incognit.
figures of the joys in this acceptable time; for by the resurrection of
Christ, every true believer is set free from the hands of all his enemies, his
trespasses are forgiven, and he is restored again to his interest, in that
heavenly possession and immortal inheritance, which he lost in the
transgression of his great grandfather Adam. The redemption of Christ is a
year of Iubile, the resurrection of Christ, is the chief day in the year.
Let us therefore rejoice for it, and be glad in it. David says Psalm. 41.11.
elsewhere, By this (O Lord) I know thou fauourest me, that mine enemy does not
triumph against me. 2. Sam. 22.41.
Thou have given unto me the necks of my foes, that I might break them as small
as the dust of the earth, and tread them flat as the clay in the street. That
which he speaks of his temporal enemies, opposing him in obtaining of an
earthly kingdom: we may well apply to the spiritual, hindering us in our way
to the kingdom of heaven. O Lord, our strength and redeemer, thou have on this
day Genesis 3.15.
broken the serpents head, and utterly confounded all such as hate us. On this
day thou did laugh them to scorn, and have them in derision, Psalm. 2.4.
and therefore we will in memorial of this one day, sing thy mercies all the
days of our life; sounding forth unto the worlds end, This is the day, this
is thy day, which thou (Lord) have made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Concerning our promotion in good, the resurrection of Christ is a proof of
our justification, a means of our sanctification, a demonstration of our
resurrection. First, it proves our justification, according to that of Paul,
Romans 4.25. He was given to death for our sins, and is risen again from the
dead for our justification. See the Gospel on S. Thomas day.

Secondly, the resurrection of Christ is a notable means to work inward
sanctification, as Saint Peter teaches in 1. Epistle 1. Chap. 3. Verse, God
has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ
from the dead. And Saint Romans 6.4.5.
Paul, As Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of his Father; so we
should also walk in newness of life; For if we be grafted with him to the
similitude of his death, even so shall we be to the similitude of his
resurrection. Which words import, Aquin. Aretius. Marlorat.
that as the graft grows in the stock, and is become one body with it: even
so the faithful have their living, and spiritual being in Christ. As he by
the power of his own Godhead, freed his manhood from death, and from the guilt
of our sin; so does he likewise free those, that are knit unto him by the bond
of one spirit, from the corruption of their natures in which they are dead,
that they may live unto God. Raymund. de Sabunde Theolog. natural. tit. 277.
In the natural body, the head is the fountain of all motion and sense; for
the hands and the feet move by that power, which is by sundry nerves derived
from the head, and dispersed among the members. And so it is in (Christ's
mystical body) the Church; he is the head and fountain of life spiritual,
and Perkins exposit. Creed. art. Christ resur.
that very power of his Godhead, whereby he raised up himself when he was
dead, he conuaieth from himself to his members, and thereby raises them up
from the death of sin, to newnes of life. For the better understanding of
this point, let us examine the means and the measure of the spiritual life.

For the means, if we will have common water, we may go to the common well;
and if we desire water of Life, we must have recourse unto Christ, who says,
Ioh. 7.37.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink, and Ioh. 4.14.
he shall have a well of water springing up into everlasting life. Now this
well, (as the woman of Samaria said of Jacobs well) is very deep, and we have
nothing to draw with. And therefore we must have pipes and conduits to convey
the same unto us; and these pipes are the sincere preaching of the word, and
the right administration of the Sacraments. As for the preaching of Gods holy
Word, Christ openly proclaims in the fifth of S. John's Gospel, at the 25
Verse, The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear
it, shall live. August. tract. 22. in Joan. Ide^ Calvin and alij in loc.
Where, by dead is meant, not the dead in the grave, but the dead in sin. For
so the Scripture speaks elsewhere, Matthew. 8.22.
Let the dead bury the dead, and Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou that sleep, and
stand up from the dead: and 1. Tim. 5.6. A widow living in pleasure, is dead
while she lives. He that hearts the word, and abides in unbelief,
continues among the dead: but (says our Savior) John 5.24.
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, but
has passed from death unto life, because the words that I speak unto you are
spirit and life, Ioh. 6.63. that is, conueying unto your dead hearts, spirit
and life.

As Christ, when he raised up dead men, only spoke the word and they revived:
and at the last day, when the 1. Thessal. 4.16.
trumpet of God shall blow, the dead shall rise again: so it is in the first
resurrection, they which are dead in their old sins, are raised again to
newnes of life by his powerful voice, uttered in the Gospels ministry. We
read of three that Christ raised from death, Matthew. 9.25.
Iairus daughter newly dead; the Luke. 7.15.
widows son dead, and wound up, and lying on the hearse; and John 11.44.
Lazarus dead, and buried, and stinking in the grave. Now these three sorts of
Coarses (as Sermon. 44. de verbis dom. and de hac allegoria vide eundem tract.
49. in Joan.
Augustine notes) are three sorts of sinners. Iairus daughter lying dead in her
fathers house, resembles those that sin by inward consent: the widows son
being carried out of the gate of the City, those that sin by outward act:
Lazarus having been dead, and buried four days, those that sin by
continual habit. The first day (says Augustine) he was dead, by conceiving
sin: the second, by consenting to sin: the third, by committing sin: the
fourth, by continuing in sin. The young maiden, lay in a bed: the young man,
in a coffin: Lazarus, in a grave. The first was dead but an hour, the second
but a day, the third four days. After their raising up, Iairus daughter
instantly walked; because for her that had stepped aside but by consenting to
sin, it was easy to recover, and to walk foorth-with in the ways of Gods
holy Commandments. The widows son sat up, began to speak, was delivered
to his mother; because for him, which had actually transgressed, it was a
matter of greater difficulty to recover, and therefore by little and little
he came to it, as Con. de misericord. Domini.
Erasmus observes excellently. First sitting up, by raising up himself to a
purpose of amendment: then beginning to speak, by confessing his own misery,
and acknowledging Gods mercy: lastly, being delivered to his mother, by
returning to the bosom of the holy Church, and enjoying the remission of his
sins. Lazarus came forth of his grave bound hand and foot with bands,
because for him that had a Moles imposita sepulchro ipsa est vis dura
consuetudinis. August. ser. 44. de verb. Dom.
stone laid upon him, and had made his heart as hard as a graue-stone, or as a
Job. 41.15
nether millstone, by making a custom, and (as it were) a trade of sin; it
was in the judgment of man impossible to recover. And yet Christ's omnipotent
voice brought him forth bound hand and foot, and brake these bands asunder,
and restored him again to the liberty of the sons of God.

The Confess. Anglican. art. 25.
Sacraments are conduit-pipes also, whereby God inuisibly conueieth his vital
or saving graces into the heart, if they be rightly used; that is, if they be
received in unfeigned repentance for all our sins, and with a lively faith in
Christ for the pardon of the same sins. And in this respect aptly compared
unto Cant. 2.5.
flagons of wine, which revive the Church being sick, and fallen into a swound.

As for the measure of spiritual life, derived from our head Christ, it is but
small in this world, and given by little and little; the which is figured in
the Ezech. 47.3.4.5.
vision of water that ran out of the Temple. First a man must wade to the
ancles, then after to the knees, and so to the loins: and last of all the
waters grow to a river, that cannot be passed over; even so the Lord conueieth
his gifts and graces by little and little, till his children at the last
attain a large measure thereof, and have full growth in Christ. The same we
may likewise see lively described in the vision of dry bones, Ezech. 37. The
Prophet in a vision is carried into the midst of a field, full of dead bones,
and the Lord commanded him to prophecy over them, and to say to them, O ye
dry bones, hear the word of the Lord. At the first there was a shaking, and
the bones came together bone to bone, verse. 7. then the sinews and flesh grew
upon them, and upon the flesh a skin covered them, verse. 8. ^^en he
prophesied unto the wind, and they lived, and stood upon their feet; for the
breath came upon them, and they were an exceeding great army of men, verse. 10.
These bones are the whole house of Israel, verse 11. but the faithful are Gods
Israel.
Hereby doubtless is signified not only the state of the Jews after their
captivity, but in them the state of the whole Church, in whose heart God
almighty works his graces of regeneration by little and little. First he
gives his children flesh, and then a skin to cover the flesh, and afterward
he powers upon them further gifts of his spirit to quicken them, and to make
them alive unto God.

3. The resurrection of Christ is a Non modo per seipsum probauit
resurrectionem Saducaeis, sed in seipso omnibus. Tertul. lib. de carnis resur.
demonstration of our resurrection, according to that of S. Paul, 1. Cor.
15.12. If it be preached that Christ is risen again from the dead; how say
some among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead? Yea but ye will
object, what promotion is that unto the godly, seeing all men at the last day
must of necessity rise again? Answer is made, that the wicked are raised by
the power of Christ as a Judge to condemn them: on the contrary, the
faithful are raised by the power of Christ as a Jesus to save them. Almighty
God said unto Adam, At what time he should eat of the forbidden fruit, he
should Genesis 2.17.
dye the death. Hereby August. de Ciuitat. dei, lib. 13. cap. 12. Aquin. Dion.
Carthus. in Genesis 2.
meaning a double death, as the Scripture speaks Apoc. 20.6.
elsewhere, the first and the second death. Natural death is the dissolution
of the body, spiritual death is the destruction of the soul, eternal death
is both of body and soul. Prima constat ex duabus, secunda ex omnibus tota,
says Augustine. Now Christ as a Judge raises again the reprobate from the
first death, that he may inflict upon them all the punishments of the second
death, as a reward of sin: but he raises his elect, as their head and
redeemer, that they may be partakers of the benefit of his death, enjoying
both in body and soul the kingdom of glory, which he has so dearly
bought for them.

Wherefore seeing on this day we have been delivered from so much (...)
promoted unto so much good; let us Chrysostom. Euthym. Placidus.
spirituallie rejoice, being Dr. Incognitus.
glad inwardly, joyful outwardly, Colos. 3.16.
singing unto the Lord with a grace in our hearts, This is the day which the
Lord has made.

FINIS.

