MVSICA TRANSALPINA.

CANTVS.

Madrigales translated of four, five and six parts, chosen out of diverse
excellent Authors, with the first and second part of La Verginella, made by
Master Byrd, upon two Stanza's of Ariosto, and brought to speak English
with the rest.

Published by N. Young, in favor of such as take pleasure in Music of voices.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, the assign of William Byrd* 1588.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Gilbert Lord Talbot, son and heir to the right
noble and puissant George Earl of Shrevvesbury, Washford and Waterford, Earl
Marshall of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of
Blackmeere, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy council, Justice of
the forrestes and chases by north the river of Trent, and knight of the most
honorable order of the garter. Nicholas Young wishes increase of honor,
with all happiness.
RIght honorable, since I first began to keep house in this City, it has
been no small comfort unto me, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants
of good account (as well of this realm as of foreign nations) have taken in
good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poor ability was able to
afford them, both by the exercise of Music daily used in my house, and by
furnishing them with Books of that kind yearly sent me out of Italy and other
places, which being for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetness of Air,
very well liked of all, but most in account with them that understand that
language. As for the rest, they do either not sing them at all, or at the
least with little delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set
forth by a great Master of Music, which for skill and sweetness may content
the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with
variety have wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I
endeavored to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthy,
and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good
friends, certain Italian Madrigales translated most of them five years ago
by a Gentleman for his private delight, (as not long before certain Napolitans
had been englished by a very honorable personage, and now a Counselor of
estate, whereof I have seen some, but never possessed any). And finding the
same to be singulerly well liked, not only of those for whose cause I
gathered them, but of many skillful Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who
affirmed the accent of the words to be well maintained, the descant not
hindered, (though some few notes altered) and in every place the due decorum
kept: I was so bold (being well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat
the rest, who willingly gave me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies)
and also some other more lately done at the request of his particular friends.
Now when the same were seen to arise to a just number, sufficient to furnish a
great set of Books, diverse of my friends aforesaid, required with great
instance to have them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but
could never obtain the Gentleman's consent, though I sought it by many great
means. For his answer was ever, that those trifles being but an idle man's
exercise, of an idle subject, written only for private recreation, would blush
to be seen otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the
common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he took his pen,
and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the
Books these verses of the Poet Martial.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus,
Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli,
Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by me, not
presuming to put my sickle in an other man's corn, till such time as I heard,
that the same being dispersed into many men's hands, were by some persons
altogether unknown to the owner, like to be published in Print. Which made me
adventure to set this work in hand, he being neither privy nor present, nor
so near this place as by any reasonable means I could give him notice. Wherein
though he may take a just offense, that I have laid open his labors without
his license: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by strangers, lame
and imperfect by means of false Copies, I hope that this which I have done to
avoid a greater ill, shall deserve a more favorable excuse. But seeking yet a
stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to
offer my self and my bold attempt to the defense and protection of your
Lordship, to whose honorable hands I present the same. Assuring my self, that
so great is the love and affection which he bears to your L. as the view of
your name in the Front of the Books, will take away all displeasure and
unkindness from me. And although this may be thought a greater boldness then
the first (I being not any way able to do your L. such a service, as may
deserve so great a favor) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well
esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for
themselves, shall not be thought unworthy of your honorable defense. With
which hope I humbly commit your L. to the protection of the Almighty: wishing
to the same, that increase of honor which your true virtue derived from so
noble and renowned Ancestors does worthily deserve. From London the first of
October. 1588.

Your Lordship's most humble at commandment, N. Young.

Of 4.
I.
Noe Faignient.
^ THese that be certain signs of my tormenting, no sighs, * no sighs be
they, no sighs, nor any sigh so show-eth, those have their truce sometime,
these no relenting, these no relen-ting, not so exhales the heat that in me
gloweth, fierce Love, fierce Love that burns my heart, makes all this venting,
fierce Love that burns my heart, makes all this venting, while with his wings
the raging fire he blows, while with his wings the raging fire he blows,
say Love, say Love with what devise thou can for ever, keep it in flames and
yet consume it ne-uer, keep it in flames and yet consume it never, and yet
consume it never.

II.
Giouan di Macque.
^ THe fair Diana never more revived, the fair Diana, the fair Diana never
more revived, * her lovers heart that spied her in the fountain, while she her
naked lims, her naked lims in wa-ter dy-ued, then me the country wench set by
the mountain, washing a veil to cloth the locks re-fy-ned, washing a veil to
cloth the locks refyned, to cloth the locks re-fy-ned, that on fair Laura's
head the gold resemble, which made me quake, although the Sun then shined,
though the Sun then shyned, and every joint * and every joint with loving
frost to tremble, and every joint with loving frost to tremble.

III.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ Joy so delights my heart and so relieues me, and so re-lieues me, when I
behold the face of my beloved, beloved, that any hard mischau^ce or pang that
grieves me, that grieves me, is quite exiled and presently removed, and if I
might to perfect up my plea-sure, to perfect up my pleasure, without
controul-ment, bestow mine eyes where I re-pose, repose my trea-sure, for a
crown and a kingdom sure possessed, I would not change my state so sweet and
bles-sed. I would not change my state so sweet and bles-sed, for a crown and
a kingdom, sure possessed, I would not change my state so sweet and bles-sed.

IIII.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ FAlse Love now shoot and spare not, false Love, false Love now do thy worst
I care not, and to dispatch me, use all thine art and all thy craft to catch
me, and all thy craft to catch me, for youth amiss bestowed, I now repent me,
and for my faults I languish, which brought me nothing else but grief and
an-guish, and now at last have vowed, at liberty to live, since to assail me,
both thy bow and thy brand naught does a-uayle thee, for from thee good nor
ill, comfort nor sorrow, comfort nor sorrow, I will not hope nor fear now nor to
morrow, I will not hope nor fear, now nor to morrow.

V.
Baldessar Donato.
^ O Grief if yet my grief be not believed, O Grief, * if yet my grief be
not believed, cry with thy voice outstretched, that her dispightful heart and
ears disdayning, may hear my just complaining. may hear my just complaining.
And when thou have her told my state most wretched, and when thou have her told
my state most wret-ched, tell her, that though my heart be thus tormented, I
could be well con-tented, if she that now does grieve me, had but the least
desire, once to relieve me. once to relieve me. had but the least desire, once
to relieve me. once to relieve me.

VI.
Baldessar Donato.
^ AS in the night we see the sparckes re-ui-ued, and quite extinct so soon,
so soon as day ap-peareth, so when I am of my sweet son depri-ued, new
fears approach and Joy my heart forbeareth, but not so soon she is again
arrived, as fear re-tireth, and present hope me cheareth, O sacred light, oh
turn again to bless me, and drive away this fear, * that does oppress me.
O sacred light, oh turn again to bless me, and drive away this fear * that
does op-presse me. and drive a-way this fear, and drive away this fear, that
does op-presse me.

VII.
Filippo de Monte.
^ IN vain he seeks for beautye that excels, that has not seen her eyes
where Love seiorneth, how sweetly-here and there the same she tur-neth, he
knows not how Love heals, he knows not how Love heals, and how he
quelleth, he knows not how Love heales and how he quelleth, that knows not
how she sighs and sweet be-guileth, that knows not how she sighs and sweet
beguileth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smy-leth, and how she
swetely speaks and sweetly smy-leth. and sweetly smyleth.

VIII.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ WHat means Love to nest him, in the fair eyes, with lovely grace and
heauen-ly spryte inspyred, in-spy-red, of my mistres delightful, of my mistres
delightful, envious dames confess and be not spite-full, envious dames
confess and be not spite-full, ah fools do you not mind it, that Love has
sought (and never yet could find it) from Sun arysing, till where he goes to
rest him, till where he goes to rest him, a brauer place, the^ in her eyes to
nest him* a brauer place, then in her eyes to nest him* a brauer place, then in
her eyes to nest him.

IX.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ SWeet Love when hope was flow-ring, with fruits of recompense for my
deser-uing, for my deser-uing, rest was the price of all my faithful ser-uing.
Oh spiteful death accur-sed, Oh life most cru-ell, the first by wrong does
pain me, and all my hope has turned to lamen-ting, the last against my will
here does detain me, feign would I find my Iuell, but death to spite me more,
yet with a mild relen-ting, me thinks within my heart her place she hol-deth,
and what my torment is plainly beholds, and what my torment is plainly
beholds, plainly behol-deth, plainly be-holdeth.

X.
Marc' Antonio Pordenone.
^ LAdy that hand of plenty, lady that hand of plenty, that gave unto the
needful, did steal my heart vnheedefull, sweet these of Love so dainty, sweet
these of Love so dainty, that rob when you are giving, are giving, but you do
give, * so surely, that you may rob and steal, * the more securely, that my
poor heart be eased, * you do it not to Joy me, but still by fresh assaults
quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me. but still by fresh assaults quite to
de-stroye me.

XI.
Giaches de Vuert.
^ WHo will ascend to heaven and there obtain me, my wits forlorn and sil-ly
sense decay-ed? for since I took my wou^d that sore does pain me, from your
fair eyes my sprites are all dismay-ed. Nor of so great a loss I do complain
me, if it increase not, * * but in some bounds be stayed, but if I still grow
worse, I shal-be lot-ted, to* wander through the world fond and assot-ted, to
wa^der through the world fond and assot-ted. but if I still grow worse I
shall be lot-ted, to wa^der through the world fond and assot-ted. to wa^der
through the world fond and assot-ted.

XII.
Cornelio Verdonch.
^ LAdy your look so gentle so to my heart deep sinketh, so to my heart deep
sinketh, that of none other, nor of my self it thincketh, why the^ do you
constrain me (Cruel) to live in plaint in pain and sad-nes, when one sweet
word may gain me, * peace to my thoughts, * and euer-lasting gladness, peace to
my thoughts, * and e-uer-lasting glad-nes, peace to my thoughts, and
euerlast-ing gladness, peace to my thoughs, and everlasting gladness, peace to my
thoughts, * and e-uer-lasting gladness.

Of 5.
XIII.
Filippo di Monte.
^ FRom what part of the heaven, from what example brought was the mould whence
nature has deri-ued, that sweet face full of beauty, that sweet face full of
beau-tie, in which she striued, to prove in earth her power above, her power
above was ample? nor syluane queen adored, that so dainty fine locks in air
displaied, nor heart divine with so great virtue stored, yet by her looks my
life is all betrayed.

XIIII. The second part.
^ IN vain he seeks for beauty that excel-leth, that has not seen her eyes
where Love seiourneth, how sweetly here and there the same she tur-neth, he
knows not how Love heales and how she quel-leth, that knows not how she
sighs, she sighs and sweet beguileth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly
smy-leth, he knows not how Love heales, and how he quel-leth, that knows not
how she sighs, she sighs and sweet beguileth, and how she sweetly speaks and
sweetly smy-leth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smy-leth.

XV.
^ IN every place I find my grief and an-guish, save where I see, save where
I see those beams, those beams that me have burned, and eke mine eyes to
floods of tears have turned, to floods of tears have turned, thus in
extremest pangs, extremest pangs, each hour I lan-guish, O me, O me, my
shining star* so sweet and sacred, cause of all comfort, of this world the
Iuel, for want of thee my life I have in hatred, my life I have in ha-tred, was
never grief so great, nor death so cru-ell, was never grief so great, nor
death so cru-ell.

XVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ THirsis to dye desired, Thirsis to dye desired, marking her eyes that to his
heart was nearest, and she that with his flame no less was fyred, said to him,
Oh hart's love dearest, Oh hart's love dearest, alas forbear to dye now, * by
thee I live, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too, by thee I live, with thee
I wish to dye too, to dye too, to dye too.

XVII. The second part.
^ THirsis that heat refrayned, wherewith in have to dye he did betake him,
thinking it death yet, and while his look full fixed he re-tained, on her eyes
full of pleasure, and lovely Nectar sweet from the^ he tasted, his dainty Nymphe
that now at hand es-pyed, the harvest of Loves treasure, said thus with eyes
all trembling faint and wasted, I dye now, * the shepherd then replied, and I
sweet life do dye too, * and I sweet life too, and I sweet life do dye too.

XVIII. The third part.
^ THus these two lovers, * fortunately dy-ed, of death so sweet, so happy,
and so desi-red, that to dye so again, * their life retired, that to dye so
a-gaine, * their life retired.

XIX.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ Susanna fair sometime of love reque-sted, sometime of love requested, by
two old men whom her sweet looks allured, was in was in her heart full sad
and sore molested, seeing the force her chastity endured, to them she said, if
I by craft procured, do yield to you my bo-dy to abuse it, I kill my soul, I
kill my soul, and if I shall refuse it, you will me judge * to death
reprochfully, but better it is, * in in-noce^ce to choose it, in innoce^ce to
choose it, then by my fault, the^ by my fault, * t'offe^d my God on hye, then by
my fault, * t'offe^d my God on hye.

XX.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ Susanna fair sometime of love requested, Susanna fair sometime of love
reque-sted, by two old men whom her sweet looks al-lur'd, was in her heart
full sad and sore molested, * full sad and sore mole-sted, seeing the force her
cha-stitie en-dur'd, to them she said, if I by craft procured, do yield to you
my body to abuse it, I lose my soul, * and if I shall refuse it, you will me
judge to death reprochful-ly, but better it is in innocence to choose it, then
by my fault to offend my God on hye, then by my fault, * to offend my God on hye.

XXI.
Noe Faignient.
^ WHen shall I cease lamenting, lamenting, lamenting, when shall I cease
lamen-ting, lamenting, when shall I cease, * lame^ting? when shall my plaint
and moning, to tunes of Joy be turned? when shall my plaint and moning, to
tunes of Joy be turned? good Love, * good Love leave thy tormenting, * good
Love leave thy tor-me^ting, too long thy flames within my heart have burned. O
grant alas with quicknes, * O grant alas with quicknes, * some little comfort,
* after so long a sickness. Some little com-fort, * Some little comfort, for so
long a sickness.

XXII.
Luca Marentzio.
^ I Must depart all haples, * I must de-part al haples, so that if I live
hartles, if I live hart-les, Love does a work miraculus and blessed, If I live
hartles * Love does a work miraculous and blessed, but so great pain assail
me, that sure ere it be long, * my life will fail me. * that sure ere it be
long * my life will fail me. * my life will fail me. will fail me.

XXIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Saw my Lady wee-ping, and Love did lan-guish, and of their plaint ensued
so rare consen-ting, that never yet was heard more sweet lamen-ting, that never
yet was heard more sweet lamenting, made all of tender pity and mournful
anguish, and morunful ang-guish, the floodes forsaking their delightful
swelling, the floodes forsaking their delight-full swel-ling, stayed to at-tend
their plaint, the winds enraged, the winds enra-ged, still and con-tent to
quiet calm assuaged, their wonted stor-ming, their wonted stor-ming, and every
blast rebelling.

XXIIII. The second part.
^ LIke as from heaven the dew full softly showring, does fall, and so refresh
both fields and clo-ses, both fields and clo-ses, filling the parched flowers
with sap and savor? so while she bathed the violetts and the roses, upon her
lovely cheeks, her loue-ly cheeks, so freshly flowring, the spring renewed his
force with her sweet favor, with her sweet fa-uour. so while she bathed the
violetts and the roses, upon her lovely cheeks, her loue-ly cheeks, so
freshly flowring, the spring renu'd his force with her sweet favor, with her
sweet fa-uour, with her sweet fa-uour.

XXV.
Giouan Feretti.
^ SO gracious is thy sweet self, so gracious is thy self, so fair so
framed, so gracious is thy sweet self, so gracious is thy self, so fair, so
framed, that who so sees thee, * without a heart enflamed, either he lives not,
either he lives not, or loves delight he knows not, either he lives not, * or
loves delight he knows not.

XXVI.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ Cruel unkind, my heart thou have bereft me, my heart thou have bereft me, *
my heart thou have bereft me, * Cruel unkind, my heart thou have bereft me, my
heart thou have bereft me, * my heart thou have bereft me, * and wilt not leave
yet, and wilt not leave while any life is left me, while any life is left me,
and yet, and yet, and yet still will I love thee, and yet, and yet, and yet
still will I love thee.

XXVII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ WHat does my pretty dearling, my pretty dear-ling, what does my pretty
dear-ling? what does * what does my song and chau^ting, that they sing not of
her, * the praise and vaunting? to her I give my violets, to her I give my
violets, and garland sweetly smelling, for to crown her sweet locks pure gold
excellng, to her I give my violetts, * and garland sweetly smelling, for to
crown her sweet locks pure gold excelling, for to crown her sweet locks pure
gold excelling.

XXVIII.
Stephano Felis.
^ Sleep Sleep, mine only Iu-ell, mine one-ly Iu-ell, mine only Iuell,
Sleep Sleep mine only Iu-ell, mine only Iuell, mine one-ly Iuell, * much
more thou did de-light me, then my beloved too cruel, that hid her face,
that hid her face to spyte me. her face to spyte me. that hyd her face to spyte
me. to spyte me. that hid her face to spyte me. much more thou did delight
me, then my beloved too cru-ell, that hid her face to spyte me, her face to
spyte me, that hid her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, that hid her
face to spyte me, to spyte me.

XXIX. The second part.
^ THou bringst her home full nigh me, while she so fast did fly me, while she
so fast did fly me, by thy means I behold those eyes so shining, long time
absented, * that look so myld appeased, thus is my grief decly-ning, thou in
thy dreams do make desire well pleased, Sleep, if thou be like death as
thou art fay-ned, as thou art feigned, * a happy life by such a death were
gained, a happy life by such a death were gay-ned, a happy life by such a death
were gained.

XXX.
Gianetto Palestina.
^ SOund out my voice with pleasant tons recording, recor-ding, the new
delight that Love to me inspireth, * pleased and content with that my mind
de-sireth, my mind desires, thanked be Love so heavenly Joys affording, she
that my plaints with rigor long rejected, reiec-ted, bynding my heart with those
her golden tresses, * In recompense of all my long distresses, Said with a sigh
thy grief has me infected. Said with a sigh thy grief has me infec-ted.

XXXI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ LIquide and wa-trye perles Love wept full kindly, Liquide and watery pearls,
* Love wept full kindly, to quench my heart enfla-med, but he alas, * alas, alas
unfriendly so great a fire had framed, as, as were enough to burn me. * as
were enough to burn me, without recomfort; * and into ashes turn me.

XXXII.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, * in greenewood groves, in
greenewood groves delights to make his dwel-ling, in fields to fly chanting
his roundelay, * at liberty, at liberty against the cage rebel-ling, but my
poor heart, * with sorrows ouerswelling, through bondage vile, bynding my
freedom short, bynding my freedom short, no pleasure takes, no pleasure takes
in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receives no comfort. nor of his
song receives no comfort, nor of his song, nor of his song receives no
comfort.

XXXIII.
Giouan Feretti.
^ WIth in a green wood, * sweet of myrtle savor, when as the earth was with
fair flowers reuested, I saw a shepeherd with his Nymph that rested, thus
spoke the Nymph with sugared words of favor, say (sweet Love) to thy love,
tell me my dearling, the shepeherd answered then with a deep sighing, all full
of sweetness, * and of sorrow mixed, on thee dainty dear life my love is fixed,
my love is fixed, with that the gentle Nymph full sweetly smy-ling, with kind
words of delight and flattering gloses, she kindly kissed his cheek, * with
lips of roses, * she kindly kissed his cheek with lips of roses, * with
lips of roses.

XXXIIII.
Rinaldo del Melle.
^ SOmetime when hope relyu'd me, I was contented to see my star so sightly,
that shines so clear and brightly, to see my star so sightly, that shines so
clear and brightly, that shines so clear and brightly, O since she first
consented to leave the world all earthly Joy defy-ing, to leave the world all
earthly joy defying, all earthly joy defying, in vain lament I, since a veil
now hides the rarest beauty that on earth abides, the rarest beauty that on
earth abides, the rarest beauty that on earth abides, that on the earth
abides.

XXXV.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ RVbyes and perles and treasure, kingdoms, renown and glo-ry, kingdoms,
renown and glo-ry, please the delightful mind, and cheer the so-ry, please
the de-lightfull mind, and cheer the so-ry, but much the greater measure of
true delight he gay-neth, that for the fruits of love, * sues and ob-tay-neth,
but much the greater measure, * of true delight he gayneth, that for the fruits
of Love, * sues and obtay-neth, sues and obtay-neth.

XXXVI.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ O Sweet kiss full of comfort, * O Joy to me enuy-ed, so often sought, so
often to me de-nyed, to me denied, deny-ed. Yet thee I never tas-ted, O lips so
false and wyly, so false and wy-ly, that me to kiss prouo-ked, and shrounck so
slyly, O looks empoysned, O face well may I fear thee, that kilst who thee
beholdes and comes not near thee, I dye a death most pain-full, * killed with
unkindness, farewell sweet lips dis-dayn-full, killed with unkindness, fare well
sweet lips disdayne-full, I dye now farewell sweet lyppes disdaynfull.

XXXVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SOme time my hope full weak-ly, went on by line and lea-sure, but now it
grows to do my heart some plea-sure, some time my hope full weak-ly went on by
line and lea-sure, but now it grows to do my heart some pleasure, to do my heart
some pleasure, but now it grows to do my heart some plea-sure. Yet that my hope
decay not by over much contenting, Love will not give my Joys their full
augmenting, their full augmenting, their full augmenting, allayes my bliss
that hope may be the fas-ter, but still with some desas-ter, allayes my bliss
that hope may be the faster, the faster, allayes my bless that hope may be the
fas-ter.

XXXVIII.
Lelio Bertani.
^ LAdy that hand of plenty, * which gave unto the needful, Lady that hand of
plenty, which gave unto the neede-full, did steal my heart vnheedfull. did
steal my heart vnheede-full, sweet thief of love so daynty, what will you do
by theeuing, that rob when you are giving? but you do give so surely, that you
may rob and steal the more secure-ly, that you may rob and steal the more
securely, that my poor heart be eased, * you do not that to joy me, but still by
fresh assaults quite to destroy me, you do not that to joy me, * but still by
fresh assaults quite to destroy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to
destroy me; quite to destroy me.

XXXIX.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ MY heart, my heart alas why do thou Love, my heart alas why do thou love
thine enemy, why do thou love thine enemy, thine enemy, laughing so merely
she goes, * laughing so merely she goes with glad-nes, with gladness, * to see
thy grief and sad-nes, Cruel disdain, cruel dis-dayne, merely does she go
with gladness, merely does she go, merely does she go, * with gladness, to see
thy grief and sad-nes, cruel disdain, * lasting pain no remedy, * save most
singular beauty, * and little pitye, and little little pi-ty, save most singular
beauty, * and little pity, and little little pi-ty.

XL.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ LAdy if you so spite me, if you so spite me, * if you so spite me,
wherefore do you so often kiss and delight me, kiss and delight me, wherefore do
you so often kiss and delight me, sure that my heart oppressed and ouer-ioy-ed, and
o-uerioyed, may break and be destroy-ed, destroyed. If you seek so to spill
me, if you seek so to spil me, come kiss me sweet and kill me, * so shall
your heart be eased, and I shall rest content, * shall rest content and dye well
pleased* shall ^ rest content, and dye well plea-sed. So shall your heart be
ea-sed, and I shall rest content, * and dye well plea-sed, and dye well
pleased.

XLI. Cantio rustica.
Giouan Battista Pinello.
^ WHen I would thee embrace, when I, when I would thee embrace, * when I would
thee embrace, thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock me, thou do but
mock me. When I would thee embrace, when I, when I would thee embrace, * when I
would thee embrace thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock me * and when I
lament, and when I lament my case, and when I lament, when I lament my case
thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, * ^ thou cryest ty hy, and no no no no, still
says my piggs nigh, and no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no
no no no no no no no no no no no no, so says my piggs nigh, and no, and no, and
no, still says my piggs nigh.

XLII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THirsis enjoyed the gra-ces, Thirsis enjoyed the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet
embraces, sweet embraces, yet both their joys were scanted, for dark it was
and can-dle light they wanted, and candle light they wan-ted, where with kind
Cinthia in the heaven that shined, her nightly veil resigned, and that fair
face disclosed, and that fair face disclosed, then each from others looks
such joy derived, then each from others looks such joy de-ryued, such joy
derived, that both with mere delight, dyed and reuyued, that both with mere
delight dyed and reui-ued, revived.

LXIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THe Nightingale so plea-sant and so gay, the Nightingale, the Nightingale so
plea-sant and so gay, in greenwood groves, in greenwood groves delights,
delights to make his dwel-ling, in fields to fly chaunting his roundelay, in
fields to fly, * chaunting his roun-de-lay, at liberty against the cage
rebel-ling, but my poor heart, with sorrows o-uer-swel-ling, through bondage
vile, binding my * fre-dome short, no pleasure takes * in these his sports
excelling, nor of his song receives no com-fort, * receives no com-fort, nor
of his song receives no com-fort, * receives no com-fort.

XLIIII. The first part.
William Byrd.
^ THe fair young Virgin is like the rose vn-tayn-ted, in garden fair while
tender stalk does bear it, sole and untouched, with no resort acquainted, no
shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock does once come near it, the air full of
sweetness, the morning fresh de-painted* the earth, the water, with all their
favors cheer it, dainty young gal-lants, and ladies most desi-red, delight to
have therewith, delight to have therewith their heads and breasts attyred,
dainty young gal- ^ lants, and ladies most desi-red, delight to have
therewith, * their heads and breasts attyred.

XLV. The second part.
^ But not so soon, from green stock where it grow-ed, the same is plucked, *
and from the branch removed, as lost is all from heaven and earth that
flow-ed, both favor grace and beauty best beloved. The virgen fair, * that
has the flower bestow-ed, which more then life to guard it her behooved, loses
her praise and is no more desired, of those that late unto her love aspired. of
those that late unto her love as-pi-red, loses her praise and is no more
de-sired, of those that late unto her love aspired. of those that late unto her
love as-pired.

Here ends the songs of five parts.
Of 6.
XLVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Will go dye for pure love, except rage and disdain come to recure love,
since in reward of all my faithful ser-uing, my lady gives disgrace for well
deserving, and in my flames sans measure takes her disport and pleasure, takes
her disporting, takes her disport and pleasure, unless some frost, unless
some frost assuage this heat and cure love, I will go dye for pure love, I
will go dye for pure love.

XLVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THese that be certain signs of my tormenting, of my tormenting, sighs
they be none, no, nor any sigh so shew-eth, those have some truce, but these
have no relen-ting, not so exhales the heat that in me gloweth, the heat that
in me gloweth, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this venting, makes
all this venting, fierce Love that burns my heart, makes all this ven-ting,
while with his wings the ra-ging fire he blows, say Love, say Love with what
devise thou can for ever, keep it in flames and yet consume it never, and
yet consume it never, keep it in ^ flames still and yet consume it never, and
yet consume it never, say Love with what devise thou can for ever, keep it
in flames and yet consume it never, keep it in flames still and yet consume it
never, and yet consume it never.

XLVIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SO far from my delight, what cares torment me, what cares torment me, what
cares torment me, fields do record it, and vallyes and woods and mountains,
and woods and moun-taynes, and running ryuers and repo-sed foun-taynes, where I
cry out, and to the heavens lament me, none other sounds but tunes of my
complay-ning, Nymph of the groves or pleasant byrd once hears, still recount
I my grief, * and her dis-dayning, to every plant that grows, to every plant
that grows, or blossom bears, or blossom bea-reth.

XLIX. The second part.
^ SHe only does not feel it, * O fields, O mountains, * O mountains, O
woods, O vallyes, O floodes and foun-taines, Oh stay no more, oh stay no more
to hear a wretch appealing, oh stay no more to hear a wretch appealing, O
that some one this life and soul would se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed,
and these mine eyes oppressed would cloze for e-uer, for best were me to dye so,
for best were me to dye my love concealing, for best were me to dye so, for
best were me to dye, my love concea-ling.

L.
^ Lo here my heart in ke-ping, I leave with her that laughes to see me
we-ping, to see me weping, oh what comfort or treasure, oh what comfort, is
life with her dis-pleasure? that she which still does pain me, may live the
more content when grief has slain me, may live the more content when grief
has slain me, may live the more content, when grief has slain me, that she
which still does pain me, may live the more content when grief has slain
me, may live the more content, when grief has slain me, when grief has
slain me, may live the more contented, when grief has slain me.

LI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ NOw must I part, now must I part my dear-ling, of life and soul, and soul
disseised, and Love, oh oh what a death is parting, * is parting? but if the
fates ordain it, who can refrain it? oh what grief is now lacking? yet must
I needs be packing. farewell, farewell, farewell sweet heart unfeigned, I dye to
part constray-ned, but if the fates ordain it who can refrain it? oh what
grief is now lacking? yet must I needs be packing, farewell * farewell sweet
heart vn-fayned, I dye to part constrained, farewell, I dye to part constrained.

LII. The first part.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, * with flowers and herbs
and winters frost exi-leth, * Progne now chirpeth, and Philomele lame^teth,
Flora the garla^ds white and read com-pileth, Flora the garlands white and read
compileth, * fields do rejoice, the frowning sky relenteth, * Jove, to
be-hold his dearest daughter smyleth, * the air, the air the water the earth to
Joy consen-teth, each creature now to love him reconcyleth, the air the air the
water the earth to Joy consen-teth, each creature now to love him reconcyleth.

LIII. The second part.
^ But with me wretch the storms of woe persevere, and heavy sighs, but with me
wretch the storms of woe persevere, and heavy sighs, but with me wretch the
storms of woe persevere, and hea-uy sighs, which from my heart she straineth, *
that took the kay thereof to heaven for ever, * so that sing-ing, so that
sing-ing of birds and spring time flow-ring, so that sing-ing of birds and
spring time flowring, and ladies love that men's af-fection gayn-eth, * are like
a desert, * and cruel beasts devouring, and ladies love that men's affection
gayn-eth, * are like a desert, * and cruel beasts devouring.

LIIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I was full near my fall, and hardly escaped, and hard-ly sca-ped, and
hard-ly escaped, through fond desire that headlong me transpor-ted, that Love
him self for me devised and sha-ped, and if my reason but a while had stayed,
to rule my sense misled and vnadui-sed, to my mishappe I had no noubt assay-ed,
what a death is to live with love surprised, what a death is to live with love
surpri-sed, what a death is to live with love surpri-sed.

LV. The second part.
^ But as the byrd that in due time espy-ing, that in due time espying the
secret snares and deadly bush en-lymed, quick to the heaven does mount with
song and plea-sure, with song and pleasure: traynes of false looks and
faith-les words defying, mounting the hill so hard for to be clymed, so hard
for to be clymed, I sing for Joy of liberty the treasure, I sing for Joy of
liberty the treasure, I sing, I sing for Joy of li-berty the trea-sure.

LVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Soung sometime, I soung, I soung sometime the freedom of my fan-cye, the
fire extinct, the yoke and bonds subdu-ed, with heart congealed, * with heart
congealed, I quenched the burning phransye, and with dis-dayne, * and with
disdain, the harmefull bayte eschewed, but now I wayle my bondage and my
enchayning, all naked unarmed, in lovely netts engaged, nor by tears, nor by
tears can I find, nor by complay-ning, mercy, mercy, mercy, nor comfort nor
comfort, nor yet my grief assuaged.

LVII.The second part.
^ BEcause my Love too lofty and too dispightfull, and too dispight-full, while
I with sighs do sound her name delightful, does smyle when as the flame my
life depri-ueth: my life depriueth: if I seek to break of, if I seek to
break of the strings, the strings, that bynd me, the more I fly, * the
faster, I the faster, I * do find me, like a byrd in the snare in vain that
stri-ueth, in vain that strives, like a byrd in the snare in vain that
stry-ueth.

The Table of all the madrigales contained in these books, with the names of
their several authors, and originalles.
Of 4.
THese that be certain signs. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Faignient. The fair
Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Joy so delights my heart. III Gioia
s'abond' al cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Love now shoot. IIII Amor
ben puoi. O grief, if yet my grief. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar
Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donate. In vain he seeks
for beauty. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What means Love to
nest him. VIII Perch s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Love
when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc'
Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your
look so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch.

Of 5.
From what part of the heaven. XIII In qual part del ciel. Filippo di Monte.
The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza. 2. pars. In every place. XV Ogni
luogo. Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second
part. XVII Freno Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi moriro. 3.
pars. Susanna fair. Sing this for the 20. song. Alfonso Fe. XX Susann' un
iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. Susanna fair. Sing this for the 19. song. Orlando di
Las. XIX Susann' un iour. Orlando di Lasso. When shall I cease. XXI to the note
of Chi per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca
Marenzio. I saw my lady weping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco.
The second part. XXIIII. Come dal ciel. So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa.
Giouan Ferretti. Cruel unkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What does my pretty dearling.
XXVII Che fa hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleep mine only jewel. XXVIII
Sonno scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni.
2. pars. Sound out my voice. XXX to the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto
Palestina. Liquide and watery perls. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The
Nightingale. XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di Lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII
In un Boschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope relieved me. XXXIIII Gia
fu ch' io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini. Alfonso
Ferabosco. O sweet kiss. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII
Gia fu mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio
Bertani. My heart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so
spite me. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee
embrace. XLI Quand' io volena. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enjoyed the
graces. XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alfonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le
Rossignol, The fair young virgin. XLIIII La verginella. 1. pars. William Byrd.
The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars.

Of 6.
I will go dye for pure love. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that
be certain signs. XLVII Questi ch'inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far from my
delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi
no'l sentite. 2. pars. Lo here my heart. L Ecco ch'io lasso. Now must I part.
LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzo. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1.
pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was
full near my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The
second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1.
pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my love. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars.

FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA.

ALTVS.

Madrigales translated of four, five and six parts, chosen out of diverse
excellent Authors, with the first and second part of La Verginella, made by
Master Byrd, upon two Stanza's of Ariosto, and brought to speak English
with the rest.

Published by N. Young, in favor of such as take pleasure in Music of voices.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, the assign of William Byrd* 1588.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Gilbert Lord Talbot, son and heir to the right
noble and puissant George Earl of Shrevvesbury, Washford and Waterford, Earl
Marshall of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of
Blackmeere, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy council, Justice of
the forrestes and chases by north the river of Trent, and knight of the most
honorable order of the garter. Nicholas Young wishes increase of honor,
with all happiness.
RIght honorable, since I first began to keep house in this City, it has
been no small comfort unto me, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants
of good account (as well of this realm as of foreign nations) have taken in
good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poor ability was able to
afford them, both by the exercise of Music daily used in my house, and by
furnishing them with Books of that kind yearly sent me out of Italy and other
places, which being for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetness of Air,
very well liked of all, but most in account with them that understand that
language. As for the rest, they do either not sing them at all, or at the
least with little delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set
forth by a great Master of Music, which for skill and sweetness may content
the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with
variety have wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I
endeavored to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthy,
and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good
friends, certain Italian Madrigales translated most of them five years ago
by a Gentleman for his private delight, (as not long before certain Napolitans
had been englished by a very honorable personage, and now a Counselor of
estate, whereof I have seen some, but never possessed any). And finding the
same to be singulerly well liked, not only of those for whose cause I
gathered them, but of many skillful Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who
affirmed the accent of the words to be well maintained, the descant not
hindered, (though some few notes altered) and in every place the due decorum
kept: I was so bold (being well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat
the rest, who willingly gave me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies)
and also some other more lately done at the request of his particular friends.
Now when the same were seen to arise to a just number, sufficient to furnish a
great set of Books, diverse of my friends aforesaid, required with great
instance to have them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but
could never obtain the Gentleman's consent, though I sought it by many great
means. For his answer was ever, that those trifles being but an idle man's
exercise, of an idle subject, written only for private recreation, would blush
to be seen otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the
common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he took his pen,
and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the
Books these verses of the Poet Martial.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus,
Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli,
Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by me, not
presuming to put my sickle in an other man's corn, till such time as I heard,
that the same being dispersed into many men's hands, were by some persons
altogether unknown to the owner* like to be published in Print. Which made me
adventure to set this work in hand, he being neither privy nor present, nor
so near this place as by any reasonable means I could give him notice. Wherein
though he may take a just offense, that I have laid open his labors without
his license: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by strangers, lame
and imperfect by means of false Copies, I hope that this which I have done to
avoid a greater ill, shall deserve a more favorable excuse. But seeking yet a
stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to
offer my self and my bold attempt to the defense and protection of your
Lordship, to whose honorable hands I present the same. Assuring my self, that
so great is the love and affection which he bears to your L. as the view of
your name in the Front of the Books, will take away all displeasure and
unkindness from me. And although this may be thought a greater boldness then
the first (I being not any way able to do your L. such a service, as may
deserve so great a favor) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well
esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for
themselves, shall not be thought unworthy of your honorable defense. With
which hope I humbly commit your L. to the protection of the Almighty: wishing
to the same, that increase of honor which your true virtue derived from so
noble and renowned Ancestors does worthily deserve. From London the first of
October. 1588.

Your Lordship's most humble at commandment, N. Young.

Of 4.
I.
Noe Faignient.
^ THese that be certain signs of my tormen-ting, no sighs, no sighs they
be, nor any sigh so shows, those have their truce sometime, those have their
truce sometime, these no rele^ting, these no relenting, these no relenting, not
so exhales the heat that in me gloweth, fierce Love that burns my heart makes
all this venting, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this venting,
fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this ven-ting, while with his wings
the raging fire he blows* say Love, with what de-uise thou can for ever,
for ever, keep it in flames and yet consume it never, and yet consume it
never, keep it in flames and yet consume it never, and yet consume it never.

II.
Giouan di Macque.
^ THe fair Diana never more revived, the fair Diana never more re-uiued, the
fair Diana never more revived, her lovers heart that spyed her, her lovers heart
that spyed her in the fou^tayne, while she her naked lyms in wa-ter dy-ued,
then me the country wench set by the mountain, wasshing a veil to cloth the
locks refyned, * to cloth the locks refyned, that on fair Laura's head the
gold resemble, which made me quake although the Sun then shined, though the
Sun then shyned, and every joint with loving frost, and every joint with
loving frost to tremble, and every joint with loving frost, with loving frost
to tremble.

III.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ Joy so delights my heart and so reliues me, when I be-hold the fair face of
my beloved, that any hard mis-chaunce or pang that griues me, that griues me is
quite exild, and presently remo-ued, and if I might to perfect, and if I might
to perfect up my plea-sure, without controul-ment bestow mine eyes where I
repose my treasure, where I repose my trea-sure, for a crown and a kingdom,
sure posses-sed, I would not change my state so sweet and bles-sed, I would
not change my state so sweet and blessed, for a crown and a kingdom sure
posses-sed, I would not change my state so sweet and bles-sed, my state so
sweet and bles-sed.

IIII.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ FAlse Love now shoot and spare not, false Love, now do thy worst I care not,
and to dispatch me, use all thine art and all thy craft to catch me, use all
thine art and all thy craft to catch me, for years a-misse bestowed and time
consu-med, in vain pursutes I languish, I languish, that brought me nothing
else, that brought me nothing else but grief and anguish, and now at length
have vowed at liberty to live, since to assail me, both thy bow and thy brand
naught does avail thee, for from thee good nor ill, * com-fort nor sorrow, I
will not hope nor fear now nor to morrow, I will not hope, I will not hope nor
fear now nor to morrow.

V.
Baldessar Donato.
^ O grief if yet my grief be not bele-ued, O grief, * if yet my grief be
not belee-ued, cry with thy voice outstretched, may hear my just complaining,
* my just com-playning. And when thou have her told, * my state most wret-ched,
tell her that though my heart be thus tormen-ted, I could be well contented, if
she that now does grieve me, had but the least desire, once to relieve me, once
to relieve me, once to relieve me, had but the least desire, once to relieve
me, once to relieve me, once to relieve me.

VI.
Baldessar Donato.
^ AS in the night we see the sparks, we see the sparks reui-ued, and quite
extinct, so soon as day appe-areth, so when I am of my sweet son deprived,
new fears approach and joy my heart forbea-reth, but not so soon, but not so
soon she is again arrived, as fear retyreth, and present hope me cheareth, O
sacred light, O re-turne, O turn again to bless me, and drive away this
fear that does op-presse me. And drive away this fear that does oppress me.
O sacred light, O re-turnne, O turn again to bless me, and drive away this
fear that does op-presse me, and drive away this fear that me oppresses and
drive away this fear that does oppress me, and drive away this fear, that
does oppress^ me.

VII.
Filippo di Monte.
^ IN vain he seeks for beauty that excels, that has not seen her eyes
where Love seiorneth, how sweetly here and there the same she turns, he
knows not how Love heals, he knows not how Love heals, and how he
quelleth, he knows not how Love heales and how he quelleth, that knows not
how she sighs and sweet be-guyleth, that knows not how she sighs and sweet
beguyleth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smy-leth, and how she sweetly
speaks and sweetly smy-leth, and sweetly smy-leth.

VIII.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ WHat means Love to nest him, in the fair eyes ad-mi-red, with lovely
grace and heavenly spryt in-spi red, inspi-red, of my mystres delightful, of
my mys-tres delightful, envious dames confess and be not spytefull, envious
dames con-fesse and be not spite-full, Oh fools do you not mind it, that Love
has sought and never yet could find it, from Sun arysing, from Sun
arysing till where he goes, where he goes to rest him, a brauer place then in
her eyes to nest him. A brauer place then in her eyes to nest him* a brauer
place then in her eyes to nest him.

IX.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ SWeet Love when hope was flow-ring, * with fruits of recompense for my
deser-uing, for my deser-uing, rest was the price of all my faithful ser-uing,
oh spiteful death accursed, oh life most cruel, the first by wrong, the first
by wrong does pain me, and all my hope has turned, and all my hope has
turned to lamen-ting, the last against my will does here detayne me, feign
would I find my Iuell, but death to spite me, yet with a sweet relen-ting, me
thincks within my heart, her place she holds, her place she holds, and what
my torment is, plainly be-holdeth. and what my torment is, plainly beholds,
plainly beholds.

X.
Marc' Antonio Pordenone*
^ LAdy that hand of plenty, * which gave unto, which gave to them the
needful, did steal my heart vnheedefull, sweet these of Love so dainty, *
that rob when you are giving? but you do give so surely, but you do give so
surely, * that you may rob and steal * the more securely, If you sometime be
pleased, * that my poor heart be eased, you do it not to Joy me, but still by
fresh assaults quite to destroy me. but still by fresh assaults quite to
destroy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me.

XI.
Giaches de Vuert.
^ WHo will ascend to heaven and there obtain me, my wits Madame and silly
sense decayed? for since I took my wound that sore does pain me, from your
fair eyes, my sprites are al dismayed. Nor of so great a loss I do complain
me, if it increase not, * * but in some bounds be stayed, but if I still grow
worse, I shall be lotted, I shall be lot-ted, to wander through the world fond
and assot-ted. * but if I still grow worse I shall be lot-ted, I shall be lot-ted,
to wander through the world, * fond and assot-ted. to wander through the world
fond and assotted.

XII.
Cornelio Verdonch.
^ LAdy your look so gentle so to my heart deep sincketh, * that of none
other, nor of my self it thinck-eth, why then do you constrayne me, (cruel) to
live complaining, in pain and sadness, when one sweet word may gain me, when
one sweet word may gain me, peace to my thoughts and everlasting glad-nes*
peace to my thoughts peace to my thoughts, and everlasting glad-nes, and
euerlas-ting gladness, and ever las-ting, gladness, and everlasting glad-nes,
peace to my thoughts and everlasting glad-nes.

Here ends the songs of four parts.
Of 5.
XIII. The first part.
Filippo di Monte.
^ FRom what part of the heaven, from what example brought was the mould whence
Nature has derived that sweet face full of beauty, that sweet face full of
beau-tie, in which she striued to prove in earth her power above was am-ple,
was never Nymph nor syluane queen a-dored, that so dainty fine locks in air
display-ed, nor heart divine with so great virtue sto-red, yet by her looks my
life is all betrayed.

XIIII. The second part.
Filippo di Monte.
^ IN vain he seeks for beauty that excel-leth, that has not seen her
eyes where Love seiour-neth, he knows not how Love heales and how he quelleth,
that knows not how she sighs and sweet beguileth, and how she sweetly
speaks and sweetly smy-leth, he knows not how Love hea-leth, nor how he
quelleth, that knows not how she sighs, and sweet beguyleth, and how she
sweetly speaks, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smy-leth.

XV.
^ IN every place I find my grief and an-guish, save where I see those
beams, those beams that me have bur-ned, and eke mine eyes to floods of
tears have turned, have turned, to floods of tears have tur-ned, thus in
extremest pangs, extremest pangs each hour I languish, each hour I
languish, I languish, O me, O me, my shining star so sweet and sacred, cause
of all comfort and of this world the Iew-ell, for want of thee my life, my life
I have in hatred, my life I have in hatred, was never grief so great, * nor
death so cru-ell. was never grief so great, * nor death so cruel.

XVI. The first part.
Luca Marenzio.
^ THirsis to dye desired, Thirsis to dye desired, marking her eyes that to his
heart was nea-rest, no less was fyred, said to him, Oh hearts love dearest, *
alas forbear to dye now, * by thee I live, with thee I wish to dye too. by
thee I live, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too, by thee I live, with thee
I wish to dye too, to dye too,

XVII. The second part.
^ THirsis that heat refrayned wherewith in have to dye he did betake him,
thinking it death yet that life would not forsake him, and while his eyes full
fixed he retained on her eyes full of plea-sure and lovely Nectar sweet from
them he tasted, his dainty Nymph that now the harvest of Loves treasure, said
thus with eyes all trembling faint and wasted, I dye now, * the shephard then
replied, and I sweet life too, and I sweet life do dye too, and I sweet life do
dye too. *

XVIII. The third part.
^ THus these two lovers so fortunately dyed, of death so sweet so happy and
so de-syred, and so de-syred, that to dye so again, * their life retired. that
to dye so a-gaine, * their life retired, retired.

XIX.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ Susanna fair, * sometime of love requested, * sometime of love requested,
by two old men whom her sweet looks allured, was in her heart * full sad and
sore molested, * full sad and sore molested, seeing the force her chastity
endured, to them she said, if I by craft procured do yield, do yield to you my
body to abuse it, I kill my soul, and if I do refuse it, you will me judge to
death reproch-fully, but better it is * in innocence to choose it, in innocence
to choose it, then by my fault to offend my God on hye. then by my fault, *
to offend my God on hye.

XX.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ Susanna fair sometime of love requested, by two old men, * whom her sweet
looks al-lur'd, was in her heart full sad and sore molested, full sad and sore
moles-ted, seeing the force, seeing the force her chastity endured, to them
she said, if I by craft procured, If I by craft pro-cur'd, do yield to you my
body to abuse it, I lose my soul, and if I do refuse it, you will me judge to
death, * reprochfully, but better it is in innocence to choose it, in innocence
to choose ^ it. then by my fault, then by my fault, * to offend my God on hye,
then by my fault, * * to offend my God on hye, my God on hye.

XXI.
Noe Faignient.
^ WHen shall I cease lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting, lamen-ting,
lamenting, lamenting, when shall I cease lamen-ting, when, shall I cease, *
when shall I cease lame^ting, when shall I cease lamenting? when shall my
plaint and moning, to tunes of Joy be, to tunes of Joy be turned, * to tunes of
Joy be turned, good Love, * leave thy torme^ting, good Love leave thy
tor-menting, good Love leave thy torme^ting, to long thy flames within my heart
have bur-ned, * within my heart have burned. O grant alas with quicknes, * some
little comfort, * some little comfort, * for so long a sickness some little
comfort, some little comfort, some little comfort for so long a sickness.

XXII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Must: Oh haples, all haples, I must depart all haples, but leave to you my
careful heart oppressed, so that if I live hartles, if I live hartles, Love does
a work miraculous and blessed, if I live hartles, if I live hartles, Love does
a work miracu-lous and blessed, but so great pains assail me, that sure ere
it be long, * my life will fail me, * that sure ere it be long, * my life will
fail me. *

XXIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Saw my lady wee-ping, I saw my lady wee-ping, and Love did languish, and
of their playnt ensued so rare concen-ting, that never yet was heard more sweet
la-menting, that never yet was heard more sweet lamen-ting, was heard more
sweet lamenting, made all of tender pity and mournful an-guish, and mournful
anguish, and mournful an-guish, the floods forsa-king their delightful
swel-ling, their swelling, the floods forsaking their delightful swelling,
their [old] delightful swel-ling, stayed to attend their playnt, the wyndes
enraged, the ^ winds enrag-ed, still and content to quiet calm assuaged,
still and content to quiet calm assuaged, their wonted storming, their wonted
storming. * and every blast rebelling, and every blast rebelling.

XXIIII. The second part.
^ LIke as from heaven, the dew full softly showring, does fall, the dew so
softly showring, does fall, and so refresh and so refresh both fields and
clo-ses, both fields and clo-ses, filling the parched flowers with sap and
savor: so while she bathed the violets and the roses, upon her lovely cheeks,
upon her lovely cheeks so freshly flowring, so freshly flow-ring, the spring
renu'd his force with her sweet favor, the spring reneu'd his force with her
sweet favor, the spring reneu'd his forces with her sweet fa-uour, so while
she bathed the violetts and the ^ roses upon her lovely cheeks, upon her
lovely cheeks so freshly flowring, so freshly flow-ring, the spring renu'd his
force with her sweet favor, the spring renu'd his force with her sweet
favor, the spring renu'd his for-ces with her sweet fa-uour.

XXV.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ SO gracious is thy self, so fair so framed, so gracious is thy self, so
fair so framed. So gracious is thy self, so fair so framed, * so fair so
framed, that who so sees thee, * without a heart enflamed, either he lives not,
* either he lives not, or loves delight he knows not, either he lives not, *
either he lives not, or loves delight he knows not.

XXVI.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ Cruel unkind, my heart thou have bereft me, my heart thou have bereft me, *
my heart thou have bereft me, Cruel unkind, my heart thou have bereft me, my
heart thou have bereft me, * my heart thou have bereft me, and wilt not leave
yet, and wilt not leave while any life is left me, while any life is left me,
and yet, and yet, and yet still will I love thee, and yet, and yet, and yet
still will I love thee.

XXVII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ WHat does my pretty dear-ling? what does my pre-ty dearling? what does, what
does my song and chaun-ting? that they sing not of her, * the praise and
vaun-ting? to her I give my violets and garland sweetly smelling, for to crown
her sweet locks pure gold ex-celling, to her I give my violets and garland
sweetly smelling, for to crown her sweet locks pure gold ex-celling, for to
crown her sweet locks pure gold excel-ling.

XXVIII. The first part.
Stephano Felis.
^ Sleep Sleep, mine only Iuell, mine only Iuell, Sleep Sleep, mine only
Iuell, Sleep Sleep, mine only Iu-ell, mine one-ly Iuell, much more thou
did delight me, much more thou did delight me, then my beloved too cruel,
that hid her face to spyte me, that hid, that hid her face to spyte me, that
hid, that hid her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, much more thou did
delight me, much more thou did delight me, then my beloved too cruel, that
hid her face to spyte me, that hid, that hid her face to spyte me, that hid,
that hid her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me.

XXIX. The second part.
^ THou bringst her home full nigh me, while she so fast did fly me, while she
so fast did fly me, so fast did fly me, while she so fast did fly me, by thy
means I be-hold those eyes so shy-ning, long time absen-ted, long time
ab-sented, that look so mylde appeased, thus is my grief declyning, * thou in
thy dreams do make desire well pleased, Sleep if thou be like death as thou
art feigned, as thou art feigned, as thou art fay-ned, a happy life by such a
death were gained. * a happy life by such a death were gained. *

XXX.
Gianetto Palestina.
^ SOund out my voice with pleasant tunes recording, re-cor-ding, the new
delight that Love to me inspy-reth, that Love to me in-spyreth, pleased and
content, content with that my mind desi-reth, thanked be Love so heavenly
Joys affor-ding, she that my plaints with rigor long rejected, reiec-ted,
binding my heart with those her golden tresses, with those her golden tres-ses,
In recompense of all my long distres-ses, said with a sigh, thy grief has me
in-fec-ted, said with a sigh, thy grief has me infec-ted, has me in-fected.

XXXI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ LIquid and watery perles, * Love wept full kindly, Love wept full kinde-ly,
to quench my heart enflamed, but he alas, * alas, * a-las unfriendly so great a
fire had framed, as were enough to burn me, * without recomfort, as were
enough to burn me, without recomfort, and into ashes turn me.

XXXII.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, the Nightingale so pleasant and so
gay, * in grenewood groves delights to make his dwelling, in fields to fly
chaunting his roundelay, in fields to fly, chaunting his roundelay, * at
liberty against the cage rebelling but my poor heart, * with sorrows
ouerswelling, * through bondage vile bynding my free-dome short, bynding my
freedom short, no pleasure takes, * no pleasure takes in these his sports
excel-ling, nor of his song receives no comfort, re-ceiueth no comfort, nor of
his song receives no comfort, nor of his song receives no comfort.

XXXIII.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ WIthin a greenwood sweet of myrtle savor, when as the earth was with fair
flowers reuested, I saw a shepherd with his Nymph that rested, thus spoke the
Nymph then, say (sweet Love) to thy love, tell me my dearling where is thy heart
bestowed, where is thy lyking? the shepherd answered the^ with a deep sighing
all full of sweetness and of sorrow mixed, * on thee dainty dear life, my heart
is fix-ed, my heart is fixed, with that the gentle Nymph full sweetly smy-ling,
with kind words of delight and flatring glo-ses, she kindly kissed his cheek, *
with lips of roses, with lips, with lips of roses she kindly kissed his cheek, *
with lyps of roses, with lyps, * with lyps of roses.

XXXIIII.
Rinaldo del Melle.
^ SOmetime: To see my star so sightly, sometime when hope relieved me, I was
co^-tented, to see my star so sightly, that shines so clear and bright-ly, O
since she first consented, to leave the world all earthly Joy defying, to leave
the world all earthly Joy defying, clouds of care all about my heart are
fly-ing, in vain lament I, since a veil now hy-deth, the rarest beauty that
on earth abides, the rarest beauty that on earth aby-deth, the rarest beauty
that on earth aby-death, the rarest beauty that on earth abides.

XXXV.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ RVbyes and* pearls and treasure, rubyes and pearls and trea-sure,
kingdoms renown and glory, kingdoms renown and glory, please the
delightful mind and cheer the sorry, please the de-lightfull mind and cheer
the sorry, and much do cheer the so-ry, but much the greater measure, but much
the greater mea-sure, of true delight he gayneth, that for the fruits of Love
sues and obtay-neth, sues and obtayneth, but much the greater measure, the
greater measure, of true delights he gayneth, that for the fruits of Love, that
for the fruits of Love, sues and ob-tay-neth, obtayneth.

XXXVI.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ O Sweet kiss full of comfort, O sweet kiss full of com-fort, O sweet kiss
full of comfort, O joy to me envied * so often sought, so often, so often
sought, so often to me denied. For thee my life is wasted yet thee I never
tasted, O lips so false and wyly, so false and wyly * that me to kiss
prouok'd and shrou^ck so slyly, O looks empoysned * O face well may I fear
thee, * that kilst who thee beholds, and co^es not near thee, I dye a death
most painful I dye now, killed with unkindness, * farewell sweet lips
disdainful, killed with vn-kyndnes, I dye now, killed with unkindness, farewell
sweet lyppes disdaynfull, killed with unkindness, farewell sweet lips
disdaynfull, I dye now, farewell sweet lips disdainful.

XXXVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SOmetime my hope full weakly went on by line and leisure, but now it grows
to do my heart some pleasure, sometime my hope full weak-ly, * went on by line
and leisure, but now it grows to do my heart, to do my heart some pleasure. Yet
that my hope decay not, my hope decay not, by over much conte^ting, Love will
not give my Joys their full augmen-ting, Love will not give my joys their full
augme^-ting, but still with some desaster, allayes my bliss that hope may be
the fas-ter, but still with some desaster, allayes my bliss that hope may be
the faster, allayes my bliss, that hope may be the fas-ter, that hope may be
the fas-ter.

XXXVIII.
Lelio Bertani.
^ LAdy that hand of ple^-ty, which gave unto the needful, Lady that hand of
plenty, which gave unto the needful, did steal my heart vnheedful, did steal
my heart vnheedfull, sweet these of Love so dainty, what will you do by theuing,
that rob when you are giving? but you do give so surely, so surely, that you
may rob and steal the more secure-ly, the more secure-ly, If you sometime be
plea-sed, that my poor heart be eased, be ea-sed, you do not that to joy me,
quite to destroy me, you do not that to joy me, but still by fresh assaults
quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me but still by fresh assaults quite to
destroy me, quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me.

XXXIX.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ MY heart alas why do thou love, * why do thou love thine enemy, my heart
alas why do thou love thine enemy, thy mortal enemy, laughing so merely she
goes, merely with gladness, merely, laughing so merely does she go with gladness,
to see thy grief and sadness, cruel disdain, merely does she go with gladness,
with gladness, merely does she go with glad-nes, with gladness, to see thy
grief and sadness, cruel disdain, las-ting pain no remedy, * lasting pain no
remedy, save most singular beauty, * and little pity, and little little pity,
save most singular beauty * and little pity, and little little pity.

XL.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ LAdy if you so spite me, if you so spite me, so spite me, wherefore do you
so often kiss and delight me, wherefore do you so often kiss and delight me? sure
that my heart oppressed and over ioy-ed, may break and be destroyed. sure that my
heart oppressed, may break and be destroyed, de-stroyed, may break and be
destroyed. If you seek so to spill me, if you seek so to spill me, come kiss
me sweet and kill me, come kiss me sweet and kill me, so shall your heart be
eased, and I, * shall rest content, * and dye well pleased. and dye well pleased,
* well pleased* so shall your heart be eased, and I, shall rest co^-tent * and dye
well pleased, * and dye well pleased, well pleased.

XLI. Cantio rustica.
Giouan Battista Pinello.
^ WHen I would thee embrace, * when I would thee embrace, when I would thee
embrace, thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock me * thou do but mock
me, when I would thee embrace * when I would thee embrace, * thou do but mock
me, * thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock me, * and when I lament my
case, and when I lament my case, thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, * and no no no
no no no no no no so says my piggs nigh, and no no no no no no no no no no no
no no, and no, and no, so says my piggs nigh, and no no no no no no no no,
still says my piggs nigh.

XLII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THirsis enjoyed the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet embraces, of Clori's sweet
embraces, embra-ces, yet both their joys, * were scanted, for dark it was and
candle light they wan-ted, for dark it was and candle light, and candle light
they wanted, wherewith kind Cinthia in the heaven that shi-ned, her nightly
veil resigned, resig-ned, and that fair face disclosed, fair face disclosed,
where Love and Joy were met and both reposed, the^ each from others look such
joy derived, that both with mere delight died and reui-ued, died and revived,
the^ each from o-ther, the^ each from others looks such joy derived, that both
of mere delight died and revived, * died and reui-ued.

LXIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THe Nightingale so plea-sant and so gay, the Nightingale so plea-sant and so
gaye, and so gaye, and so gaye* in grenewood groves delights to make his
dwelling, delights, delights to make his dwelling, to make his dwelling, in
fields to fly chaunting his roun-delay, in fields to fly chaunting his
roundelay, chaunting his roundelay, at liberty against the cage rebelling,
rebelling, but my poor heart, * with sorrows ouerswelling through bondage
vile, bynding my freedom short* * no pleasure takes, * in ^ these his sports
excelling, nor of his song receives no comfort, nor of his song receives, nor
of his song receives no comfort, receives no comfort, no com-fort, nor of his
song receives no comfort, nor of his song receives, nor of his song receives
no comfort, receives no comfort, no comfort.

XLIIII.
William Byrd.
^ THe fair young virgin, the fair young vir-gin is like the rose vn-tain-ted
in garden fair while tender stalk does bear it, sole and untouched with no
resort acquainted, with no resort acquainted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his
flock, does once come nere it, the air full of sweetness, the morning fresh
depainted, the earth the water, * with all their fa-uors cheer it, dainty
young gal-lants, young gala^ts and ladies most desi-red, de-light to have
ther-with, to * their heads and breasts, their heads and breasts at-ty-red,
dainty * young galla^ts, and ladies most desi-red, de-light to have ther-with,
to have ther-with, their heads and breasts, their heds and breasts atty-red.

XLV. The second patt.
^ But not so soon, * * from green stock, * where it growed, the same is
plucked, * and from the brau^ch re-moued, remo-ued, as lost is all from heaven
and earth, * that flow-ed, both favor grace and beauty best belo-ued. The
virgin fair, * that has the flower bestowed, the flower bestowed, which more
the^ life to guard it her behooved, loses her praise and is no more desired, of
those that late unto her love aspi-red. of those that late unto her love
aspired. loses her praise and is no more desired, of those that late unto her
love aspi-red. of those that late, unto her love aspired.

Here ends the songs of five parts.
Of 6
XLVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Will go dye for pure love, except rage and disdain come to recure love,
since in reward of all my faithful serving, my lady gives disgrace for well
deserving, and in my flame sans measure, takes her disport and pleasure, takes
her disporting, takes her disport and plea-sure, unless some frost, unless some
frost assuage this heat and cure love, I will go dye for pure love, I will
go dye for pure love.

XLVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THese that be certain signs of my torme^ting, of my torme^ting, sighs be
they none no, nor any sigh so shows, nor any sigh so show-eth, have no
re-len-ting, not so exhales the heat that in me glow-eth, not so exhales the
heat that in me gloweth, the heat that in me glow-eth, fierce Love that burns
my heart makes all this ve^ting, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this
ve^ting, * while with his wings the raging fire he blow-eth, say Love, * with
what devise thou ea^st for ever, keep it in flames and yet consume it never, *
keep it in flames still and yet consume it never, * say love, say love with
what devise thou can for ever, keep it in flames still and yet consume it
never, and yet *

XLVIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SO far from my delight what cares torment me, what cares torment me, what
cares torment me, fields do record it, and vallyes, and vallyes, and woods and
mountains, and running ryuers, and running ryuers, and repo-sed fou^taines,
where I cry out, and to the heavens lament me, lament me, none other sounds
but tunes of my complaining, Nymph of the groves or pleasant byrd once hears,
still recount I my grieves and her disday-ning, to every plant that grow-eth,
to every plant that grow-eth, or blossom bears, or blossom bea-reth.

XLIX. The second part.
^ SHe only does not feel it, * she only does not feel it, O sweet
fields, O fields O mountains, O mountains, O floods O fountains, O floods
O foun-taines, O stay no more, O stay no more, to hear a wretch appealing, O
stay no more to hear a wretch appealing, to hear a wretch appealing, O that
some one this life and soul would sever, O that some one this life and soul
would se-uer, and these mine eyes op-pressed, * would close for e-uer, for best
were me to dye so, for best were me to dye my love concea-ling, for best were
me to dye so, my love concealing, for best were me to dye my love concealing.

L.
^ Lo here my heart in keeping I leave with her that laughes, * to see me
wee-ping, to see me we-ping, Oh what comfort or treasure, * break heart and dye
then, that she that still does pain me, that she that still does pain me, may
live the more content when grief has slain me, may live the more content when
grief has slain me, may live the more con-tent when grief has slain me,
that she that still does pain me, that she that still does pain me, may live
the more content when grief has slain me, may live the more content when
grief has slain me, may live the more content when grief has slain me.

LI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ NOw must I part, * now must I part my dear-ling, of life and soul
dis-sei-sed, and Love therewith is pleased, oh what a death is parting? is
parting? oh what grief is now lacking? yet must I needs be packing,
farewell, farewell, * sweet heart vnfay-ned, I dye to part constrained. Oh
what grief is now lacking? yet must I needs be packing, farewell, farewell, *
sweet heart unfeigned, I dye to part constrained, farewell sweet heart unfeigned,
I dye to part constrained.

LII.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, Zephirus brings, Zephirus
brings the time that sweetly senteth, with flowers and herbs and winters frost
ex-ileth, Progne now chirpeth and Philomele lamenteth, Flora the garlands white
and red compileth, * Flora the garlands, white and red com-pileth, fields do
rejoice the frowning sky re-lenteth, Jove to behold his dearest daughter
smyleth, * the air the water, the air the water, the earth to Joy consents,
each creature now to Love, each creature now to Love him reconcyleth, the air
the water, the air the water the earth to joy co^se^teth, each creature now to
love, * him reco^cy-leth.

LIII. The second part.
^ But with me wretch the storms of woe persevere and hea-uy sighs, storms of
woe persevere and heavy sighs, but with me wretch the storms of woe persevere
and heavy sighs, storms of woe persevere and heau-uy sighs, which from my
heart she strayneth, * that took the kay thereof to heaven for ever, that took
the kay thereof to heaven for ever, so that sing-ing, of birds and spring time
flouring, so that sing-ing of birds, so that sing-ing of birds and spring
time flowring, and * and Ladies love that men's affection gayneth, are like a
desert, are like a de-sert, and cruel beast devouring, and ladies love that
men's affecti-on gains, are like a desert, are like a de-sert* and cruel
beasts devouring.

LIIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Was: And hardly escaped, I was full near my fall, and hardly escaped,
through fond desire that hedlong me trans-ported, and with the darts, and with
the netts I sported, which Love him self for me devised and sha-ped, and if my
reason but a while had stayed, but a while had stayed, to rule my sense misled
and vnadui-sed, I had no doubt assay-ed, what a death is to live, by Love
surprised, by Love surpri-sed, what a death is to live by Love surpri-sed.

LV. The second part.
^ But as the byrd that in due time espying, that in due time espying, the
secret snare and deadly bush enly-med, the secret snare and deadly bush
enlymed, quick to the heaven does mount, * with song and pleasure: traynes of
false looks and faythles words defying, mounting the hill so hard for to be
clymed, I sing for Joy of liberty the treasure, I sing for Joy of liberty the
treasure, I sing for Joy of liberty the trea-sure, I sing for Joy of liberty
the treasure.

LVI. The first part.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Soung sometime I Soung, the fire extinct the yoke and bonds subdued, with
heart con-gealed, * I quenched the burning frenzy, and with disdain, and with
dis-dayne the harmefull bayte eschued, but now I wayle my bonds and my
enchai-ning, unarmed, in lovely nets engaged, nor by tears, nor by tears,
nor by tears can I find, nor by complaining, mercy nor comfort, mercy nor
comfort, nor my grief assuaged, assuaged.

LVII. The second part.
^ BEcause my Love too lofty and dispightfull, and too dis-pightfull, while I
with sighs resound her name de-lightfull, does smyle when as the flame my life
depri-ueth, my life depriueth: If I seek to break of from the strings that
bind me, if I seek to break of the strings that bind me, like the byrd in
the snare in vain that stri-ueth. in the snare in vain that strives, like
the byrd in the snare in vain that stri-ueth.

FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contained in these books, with the names of
their several authors, and originalles.
Of 4.
THese that be certain signs. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Faignient. The fair
Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Joy so delights my heart. III Gioia
s'abond' al'cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Love now shoot. IIII Amor
ben puoi. O grief, if yet my grief. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar
Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donate. In vain he seeks
for beauty. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What means Love to
nest him. VIII Perch s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Love
when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc'
Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your
look so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch.

Of 5.
From what part of the heaven. XIII In qual part del ciel. Filippo di Monte.
The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza. 2. pars. In every place. XV Ogni
luogo. Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second
part. XVII Freno Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi moriro. 3.
pars. Susanna fair. XIX Susann' un iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fair. XX
Susann' un cour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI to the note of Chi
per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I
saw my lady weping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second
part. XXIIII Come dal ciel. So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa Giouan
Ferretti. Cruel unkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What does my pretty dearling. XXVII
Che fa* hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleep mine only jewel. XXVIII Sonno
scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2.
pars. Sound out my voice. XXX to the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide and watery perls. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale.
XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di Lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In un
Boschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope relieved me. XXXIIII Gia fu ch'
io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini. Alfonso Ferabosco.
O sweet kiss. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fu mio
dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertani. My
heart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spite me.
XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee embrace. XLI
Quand'io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enjoyed the graces. XLII
Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alfonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol,
The fair young virgin. XLIIII La verginella. 1. pars. William Byrd. The second
part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars.

Of 6.
I will go dye for pure love. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that
be certain signs. XLVII Questi ch'inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far from my
delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi
no'l sentite. 2. pars. Lo here my heart. L Ecco ch'io lasso. Now must I part.
LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzo. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1.
pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was
full near my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The
second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1.
pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my love. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars.

FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA.

TENOR.

Madrigales translated of four, five and six parts, chosen out of diverse
excellent Authors, with the first and second part of La Verginella, made by
Master Byrd, upon two Stanz's of Ariosto, and brought to speak English with
the rest.

Published by N. Young, in favor of such as take pleasure in Music of voices.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, the assign of William Byrd. 1588.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Gilbert Lord Talbot, son and heir to the right
noble and puissant George Earl of Shrewesbury, Washford and Waterford, Earl
Marshal of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of
Blackmeere, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy council, Justice of the
forests and chases by north the river of Trent, and knight of the most
honorable order of the garter. Nicholas Young wishes increase of honor, with
all happiness.
RIght honorable, since I first began to keep house in this City, it has
been no small comfort unto me, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants
of good account (as well of this realm as of foreign nations) have taken in
good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poor ability was able to
afford them, both by the exercise of Music daily used in my house, and by
furnishing them with Books of that kind yearly sent me out of Italy and
other places, which being for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetness of
Air, very well liked of all, but most in account with them that understand
that language. As for the rest, they do either not sing them at all, or at the
least with little delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set
forth by a great Master of Music, which for skill and sweetness may content
the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with
variety, have wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I
endeavored to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthy,
and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good
friends, certain Italian Madrigales translated most of them five years ago
by a Gentleman for his private delight, (as not long before certain Napolitans
had been englished by a very honorable personage, and now a Counselor of
estate, whereof I have seen some, but never possessed any.) And finding the
same to be singulerly well liked, not only of those for whose cause I gathered
them, but of many skillful Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed
the accent of the words to be well maintained, the descant not hindered, (though
some few notes altered) and in every place the due decorum kept: I was so
bold (being well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat the rest, who
willingly gave me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some
other more lately done at the request of his particular friends. Now when the
same were seen to arise to a just number, sufficient to furnish a great set of
Books, diverse of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to have
them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could never obtain
the Gentleman's consent, though I sought it by many great means. For his answer
was ever, that those trifles being but an idle man's exercise, of an idle
subject, written only for private recreation, would blush to be seen
otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the common view of all
men. And seeing me still importunate, he took his pen, and with an obstinate
resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Books these verses of the
Poet Martial.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus,
Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli,
Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by me, not
presuming to put my sickle in an other man's corn, till such time as I heard,
that the same being dispersed into many men's hands, were by some persons
altogether unknown to the owner, like to be published in Print. Which made me
adventure to set this work in hand, he being neither privy nor present, nor
so near this place as by any reasonable means I could give him notice.
Wherein though he may take a just offense, that I have laid open his labors
without his license: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by
strangers, lame and imperfect by means of false Copies, I hope that this
which I have done to avoid a greater ill, shall deserve a more favorable
excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all
humble and duetifull sort to offer my self and my bold attempt to the defense
and protection of your Lordship, to whose honorable hands I present the same.
Assuring my self, that so great is the love and affection which he bears to
your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Books, will take away all
displeasure and unkindness from me. And although this may be thought a greater
boldness then the first (I being not any way able to do your L. such a service,
as may deserve so great a favor) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well
esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for
themselves, shall not be thought unworthy of your honorable defense. With
which hope I humbly commit your L. to the protection of the Almighty: wishing
to the same, that increase of honor which your true virtue derived from so
noble and renowned Ancestors does worthily deserve. From London the first of
October. 1588.

Your Lordshp's most humble at commandment, N. Young.

Of 4.
I.
Noe Faignient.
^ THese that be certain signs of my torme^ting, no sighs, * no sighs they
be nor a-ny sigh, nor a-ny sigh, so shows, those have their truce sometime,
those have their truce sometime, these no rele^ting, these no relenting, not so
exhales the heat that in me glow-eth, fierce Love that burns my heart makes
all this ve^ting, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this ve^ting,
fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this ve^ting, while with his wings
the raging fire he blows, while with his wings the raging fire he blow-eth,
say Love with what devise thou can for ever, with what devise thou can for
e-uer, keep it in flames and yet consume it never, and yet consume it never,
keep it in flames and yet consume it never and yet consume it never.

II.
Giouan di Macque.
^ THe fair Diana never more revived, the fair Diana never more revived,
never more revived, her lovers heart that spied her * in the fountain, while
she her naked lymmes in wa-ter dy-ued, then me the country wench set by the
moun-tayne, washing a vale, * to cloth the locks refy-ned, washing a vale to
cloth the locks refined, that on fair Laura's head the gold resemble, which
made me quake although the sun the^ shined, though the sun the^ shined, and
every joint with loving frost to tremble, and every joint with loving frost to
tremble, with loving frost to tremble.

III.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ JOY so delights my heart * and so relieues me, when I behold ye face of my
beloved, belo-ued, that a-ny hard mischance or pang that grieves me, mischance
or pang that grieves me, is quite exiled, and presently remo-ued, and if, and
if I might to perfect up my pleasure, without controulment, bestow mine eyes
where I repose, where I repose my trea-sure, for a crown and a kingdom sure
possessed, sure possessed, I would not change my state so sweet, I would not
change my state so sweet and blessed for a crown and a kingdom, sure possessed
to be possessed, I would not change my state so sweet, I would not change my
state so sweet and blessed.

IIII.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ FAlse love now shoot and spare not, now do thy worst I care not, and to
dispatch me, use all thine art and all thy craft to catch me* and all thy
craft to catch me, for years amiss bestowed, for years amiss bestow-ed,
and time consumed, in vain pursuites I lan-guish, that brought me nothing
else, but grief and anguish, and now at length have vowed, at li-ber-ty to
live, since to assail me both thy bow and thy brand naught does avail thee,
for from thee good nor ill, for from thee good nor ill, comfort nor sorrow, * I
will not hope nor fear now nor to mo-row, I will not hope nor fear now nor yet
to mo-row.

V.
Baldesser Donato.
^ O Grief if yet my grief be not bele-ued, O grief, * if yet my grief, be
not bele-ued, cry with thy voice outstretched, that her despightful heart and
ears disday-ning, may hear my just complaining, my just complaining, may
hear my just complay-ning. And when thou have her told my state most wretched,
my state most wret-ched, tell her that though my heart be thus tormented, I
could be well con-ten-ted, if she that now does grieve me, had but the least
desire, had but the least desire, once to relieve me. once to relieve me, had
but the least desire, had but the least desire, once to relieve me, once to
relieve me.

VI.
Baldessar Donato.
^ AS in the night we see the sparks reui-ued, and quite extinct so soon as
day appears, so when I am of my sweet son deprived, new fears ap-proch and
joy my heart forbereth, but not so soon, but not so soon she is again
ar-riued, as fear re-tires, and present hope me chea-reth, O sacred light, O
turn, oh turn again to bless me, and drive away this fear that does
oppress me, and drive away this fear that does oppress me, O sacred light,
O turn, O turn, again to bless me, and drive away this fear yt does
oppress me, and drive away this fear yt does oppress me, and drive away
this fear that does oppress me, and drive *

VII.
Fillippo de Monte.
^ IN vain he seeks for beauty that excels, that has not seen her eyes
where Love seiourneth, how sweet-ly here and there the same she turns, he
knows not, he knows not how Love heals, he knows not how Love heals, and
how he quelleth, he knows not how Love heals and how he quelleth, that
knows not how she sighs and sweet beguileth, that knows not how she sighs
and sweet beguileth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smyleth, and
sweetly smyleth and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smileth and sweetly
smileth, and sweetly smy-leth.

VIII.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ WHat means Love to nest him in the fair eyes, ad-my-red, with lovely
grace and heavenly sprite inspyred, of my mistress delightful, of my mistress
delightful, envious dames confess and be not spiteful, en-ui-ous dames
confess and be not spiteful. Oh fools do you not mind it, that Love has
sought and never yet could find it, from the Sun ry-sing, till where he goes
to rest him, a brauer place then in her eyes to nest him, a brauer place then*
in her eyes to nest him, a brauer place then in her eyes to nest him.

IX.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ SWeet Love when hope was flowring, with fruits of recompense with fruits of
recompense for my deserving, rest was the price of all my faithful serving,
Oh, oh spitfull death ac-cursed, O life most cruel, the first by wrong does
pain me, and all my hope has turned to lamen-ting, the last against my will,
here does detain me, but death to griue me more is not consen-ting, yet
with a mylde relen-ting, me thincks with-in my heart her place she holds,
her place she holds, and what my torment is, and what my torment is plainly
beeholdeth, and what my torment is plainly beehol-deth, plainly beeholdeth.

X.
Marc' Antonio Pordeuone.
^ LAdy that hand of plenty that gave unto, * the needful, did steal, did
steal my heart vnheedefull, sweet thief of Love so dainty, * what will you
do by theeuing, that rob when you are ge-uing, but you do give so surely, *
but you do give so surely, that you may rob and steal, * the more
se-cure-ly, that my poor heart be eased, that my poor heart be eased, you do
it not to joy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, quite to
de-stroy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me.

XI.
Giaches de Vuert.
^ WHO will ascend to heaven and there obtain me, my wits forlorn and silly
sense decay-ed? for since I took my wound that sore does pain me, from your
fair eyes, * my sprites are all dismayed, nor of so great a loss I do
complain me, if it increase not * * but in some bounds be stayed, but if I
still grow worse, I shall be lot-ted, to wander through the world fond and
assotted, * but if I still grow worse I shall be lot-ted, to wander through the
world fond and assotted, to wander through the world fond and assotted.

XII.
Cornelio Verdonch.
^ LAdy your look so gentle so to my heart deep sinck-eth, that of none other,
nor of my self it thincketh, why the^ do you constrain me, cruel to live in
playnt, in pain and sadness, when one sweet word may gain me, when one
sweet word may gain me, peace to my thoughts, my thoughts and everlasting
gladness, peace to my thoughts, peace to my thoughts with everlasting gladness,
with everlasting glad-nesse, peace to my thoughts with everlasting gladness,
peace to my thoughts, * my thoughts peace to my thoughts with everlasting
glad-nesse.

Here ends the songs of four parts.
Of 5.
XIII. The first part.
Fillippo de Monte.
^ FRom what part of the heaven, from what ex-ample brought was the mould
whence Nature has de-ri-ued, that sweet face full of beauty, yt sweet face
full of beauty, in which she striued to prove in earth her power above was
am-ple, was never Nymph yet, nor heart de-uine with so great virtue stored, yet
by her looks my life is all beetrayed.

XIIII. The second part.
^ IN vain: That has not seen her eyes where Love seiorneth, how sweetly
here and there the same she turns, he knows not how love heales and how
he quel-leth, that knows not how sweet she sighs, and sweet beguileth, and
how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smi-leth, he knows not how love heales
and how he quel-leth, that knows not how sweet she sighs and sweet
beguileth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smi-leth, and how she
sweetly speaks and sweetly smi-leth.

XV.
^ IN every place: Save where I see those beams, those beams that me have
bur-ned, and eke mine eyes to floods, to floods of tears have turned, thus in
extremest pangs, extremest pa^gs each hour I languish, each hour I lan-guish,
each hour I languish, O me, O me, my shining star so sweet and sacred,
cause of all comfort, and of this world the Iew-ell, of this world the Jewel,
for want of thee my life I have in hatred, my life I have in hatred, was never
grief so great, * nor death so cruel, * was never grief so great, nor death
so cruel.

XVI. The first part.
Luca Maranzio.
^ THirsis Thir-sis to die desired, marking her fair eyes that to his heart was
nearest, and she that with his flame, Oh hearts love dearest, oh hearts love
dearest, alas forbear to dye now, ij. by thee I live, with the I wish to dye
too, * to dye too, * by thee I live, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too,
to dye too.

XVII. The second part.
^ THirsis that heat refrayned, where with in have to dye he did betake him,
thinking it death yet that life would not for-sake him, and while his look
full fix-ed he retained on her eyes full of pleasure, his dainty Nymph that
now, the harvest of Loves treasure, said with eyes trembling, dye now sweet
heart, I dye now, the shepherd then replied, and I sweet life do dye to, * and
I sweet life do dye too.

XVIII. The third part.
^ THus these two lovers of death so sweet so hap-pie, that to dye so again,
their life retired, that to dye so again, their life retired.

XIX.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ SV-san-na fair, sometime of love requested, sometime of love requested, *
by two old men whom her sweet looks allured, was in her heart, full sad and sore
mole-sted, full sad and sore molested, seeing the force, * her chastity
endured, to them she said, if I by craft procured, do yield to you my body to
abuse it, I kill my soul, and if I shall refuse it, you will me judge to
death reprochfully, but better it is, in innocence to choose it, then by my
fault to'ffend my God no hye.

XX.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SV-san-na fair * sometime of love reque-sted, of love reque-sted, by two
old men whom her sweet looks allured, was in her heart full sad and sore
mole-sted, full sad and sore mole-sted full sad and sore mole-sted, seeing the
force her chastity endured, to them she said, if I by craft procured, if I by
craft procured do yield to you my body to abuse it, I kill my soul, and if I
do refuse it, I do refuse it, you will me judge, * to death, *
reproch-ful-ly, but better it is, * but better it is, in innocence to choose ^
it, then by my fault to offend my God on hye, then by my fault, then by my
fault, offend my God no hye, then by my fault to offend my God on hye, then by
my fault to offend my God, then by my fault to offend my God on hye.

XXI.
Noe Faignient.
^ WHen shall I cease lamenting, lamenting, lame^ting, lamenting, when shall I
cease lamenting, * when shall I cease, when shall I cease lamenting? when shall
my plaint and moning to tunes of joy be turned, when shall my plaint and
moning to tunes of Joy be turned, to tunes of Joy be turned, good Love leave
thy tormenting, good Love leave thy tormenting, too long thy flames within my
heart have burned, * O grant a-las with quickness, * grant with quickness, *
some little comfort, * some little comfort, * some little comfort, some little
comfort for so long a sickness.

XXII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Must: All haples, I must depart all haples, but leave to you my careful
heart oppressed, so that if I live hartles if I live hartles, Love does a work
miraculous and blessed, if I live hartles, if I live hartles, Love does a work
miraculous and blessed, miraculous and blessed, but so great pains assail me,
that sure ere it be long, my life will fail me. * that sure ere it be long, *
my life will fail me, * my life will fail me.

XXIII. The first part,
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Saw my Lady weeping, my Lady weeping, my: * and Love did languish, and of
their plaint ensued so rare consenting, so rare consenting, that never yet was
heard, was heard more sweet lamen-ting, made all of ten-der pity, and
mornefull anguish, and mournful anguish, the floods forsaking their
delightful swelling, the floods forsaking their (old) delightful swelling,
the floods forsaking, their delight-ful swelling, stood to attend their plaint,
ye winds enraged, * still and content to quiet calm assuaged, still and
content to quiet calm asswa-ged, their wonted storming, their wonted storms,
and every blast rebelling, and every blast rebelling.

XXIIII. The second part.
^ LIke as from heaven the dew full softly showring, does fall, and so refresh
both fields and clo-ses, both fields and clo-ses, filling the parched flowers
with sap and sa-uour, with sap and sa-uour, so while she bathed the
violets and the roses, upon her fair and lovely cheeks, so freshly flowring,
so freshly flowring, the spring his force renewed, ye spring his force renewed,
with her sweet favor, with her sweet fa-uour. so while she bathed the violetts
and the roses, upon her lovely cheeks, her loue-ly cheeks, so freshly flowring,
so flowring, ye spring renu'd his force with her sweet fa-uour, with her sweet
favor, ye spring renu'd his force with her sweet favor, with her sweet favor.

XXV.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ SO gracious is thy self, so fair, so framed, So gracious is thy sweet
self, so fair so framed, So gracious is thy self so fair so framed, so
gracious is thy sweet self so fair so framed, that who so sees thee, with out
a heart enflamed, either he lives not, * ey-ther he lives not, or Loves delight
he knows not, either he lives not, * either he lives not, or Loves, delight he
knows not.

XXVI.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ Cruel unkind, my heart thou have bereft me, my heart thou have bereft me,
Cruel unkind, my heart thou have be-reft me, my heart thou have bereft me, and
wilt not leave yet, * while any life is left me. and yet, and yet, still will
I love thee. *

XXVII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ WHat does, what does my pretty dearling? what does what does my song and
chaunting? that they sing not of her the praise and vaunting? To her I give my
violets, to her I give my violets and garland sweetly smelling, for to crown
her sweet locks pure gold excelling. to her I give my violets * for to crown
her sweet locks pure gold excelling, for to crown her sweet locks pure gold
excelling.

XXVIII. The first part.
Stephano Felis.
^ Sleep mine only Iuell, Sleep Sleep mine only Iu-ell, * mine only
Iuell, mine one-ly Iuell, much more thou did de-light me, that hyd her face
to spite me, her face to spite me, that hyd her face to spite me, * that hid
her face to spite me, much more thou did de-light me, that hyd her face to
spite me, her face to spite me, that hyd her face to spite me, * that hyd
her face to spite me, to spite me.

XXIX. The second part.
^ THou bring her home full nigh me, while she so fast did fly me, while
she so fast did fly me, while she so fast did fly me, by thy means I
behold those eyes so shining, long time absen-ted, that look so mild appeased,
that look so mild appeased, thus is my grief decly-ning, sleep if thou be
like death as thou art feigned, as thou art fay-ned, as thou art fay-ned, a
happy life by such a death were gay-ned, a happy life by such a death were
gained, a happy life by such a death were gained.

XXX.
Gianetto Palestina.
^ SOund out my voice, with pleasant tunes recording, recor-ding, the new
delight that Love to me inspi-reth, pleased and content with that my mind
de-si-reth, my mind de-si-reth, thanked be Love so heavenly Joys affoording,
she that my plaints with rigor long reiec-ted, reiec-ted, bynding my heart
with those her golden tresses, in recompense of all my long distresses, my long
distres-ses, said with a sigh, thy grief has me infected, said with a sigh,
thy grief has, said with a sigh thy grief has me in-fec-ted.

XXXI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ LIquid and wa-try pearls, Love wept full kindly, * Liquide and wa-try
pearls, Love wept full kindly, to quench my heart enflamed, but he a-las, * *
a-las a-las vn-friendly, so great a fire had framed, as, as were enough to
burn me, * without recomfort, as were enough to burn me, without recomfort,
and in-to ashes turn me.

XXXII.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, * so pleasant and so gay, in
greenewood groves delights to make his dwelling, to make his dwel-ling,
delights to make his dwelling, in fields to fly chaunting his roundelay, * at
liberty, at liberty against the cage rebelling, but my poor heart, * with
sorrows ouerswelling, with sorrows ouerswel-ling, through bondage vile,
binding my freedom short, no pleasure takes, no pleasure takes in these, no
pleasure takes in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receueth no
comfort. * * nor of his song receueth no comfort.

XXXIII.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ WIthin a greenewood sweet of myrtle savor, when as the earth was with fair
flowers reuested, I saw a shepherd, with his Nymph that rested, thus spoke the
Nymph with sugared words of favor, say (sweet love) to thy love, tell me my
dearling, where is thy heart beestowd, where is thy li-king? all full of
sweetness, all full of sweetness and of sorrow mixed, and of sorrow mixed, on
thee dainty dear life, my heart is fix-ed, with that the gentle Nymph full
sweetly smy-ling, full sweetly smy-ling, with kind words of delight and
flattring glo-ses, and flattring glo-ses, she kindly kissed his cheek, with
lips of ro-ses, * she kindly kissed his cheek, with lips of ro-ses, * with
lips of ro-ses,

XXXIIII.
Rinaldo del Melel.
^ SOmetime: that shines so clear and brightly, sometime when hope reliu'd
me, I was contented, that shines so clear and brightly, O since she first
consented to leave ye world all earthly Joy defying, to leave the world all
earthly Joy defy-ing, all earthly Joy defying, clouds of care all about my
heart are flye-ing, in vain lament I, since a veil now hydeth, the rarest
beauty that on earth aby-deth. that on earth adydeth, the rarest beauty that
on earth abides, the rarest beauty that on earth aby-deth, abides.

XXXV.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ RVbies and perles and trea-sure, Rubies and perles and trea-sure, kingdoms
renown and glo-ry, please ye de-lightfull mind and cheer the so-ry, and much
do cheer the sorry, but much ye greater measure, of true delight he gayneth, he
gayneth, sues and obtains, but much ye greater measure, ye greater measure of
true delight he gayneth, he gayneth, that for the fruits of love, * sues and
obtai-neth.

XXXVI.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ O Sweet kiss full of comfort, * O sweet kis full of comfort, O joy to me
envied, O Joy, O joy to me en-ui-ed, so often sought, so often to me denied, so
often to me denied. Yet thee I never ta-sted, O lips so false and wy-ly, so
false and wy-ly, * and shronke so slyly, O look empoysned, O face well may I
fear thee, that kilst who thee beholds and comes not near thee, I dye now, I
dye a death most painful, I dye a death most paine-full, I dye now, farewell
sweet lips disdainful, killed with unkindness, farewell sweet lips
disdainful, killed with unkindness, farewell sweet lips disdainful.

XXXVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SOmetime my hope full weakly, went on by line and leisure, but now it grows
to do my heart some pleasure, but now it grows to do my heart some pleasure. But
that my hope decay not, my hope decay not by over much contenting, Love will
not give my Joys their full augmenting, Love will not give my joys their full
augmenting, augmen-ting, but still with some desaster, allayes my bliss that
hope may be the fa-ster, but still with some desa-ster, allayes my bliss that
hope may be the faster, that hope may be the faster, allayes my bliss that
hope may be the faster.

XXXVIII.
Lelio Bertani.
^ LAdy that hand of plenty, which gave vn-to the need-full. Lady yt hand of
plenty, which gave vn-to the needful, La-dy yt hand of plenty, which gave
vn-to the needful, did steal my heart vn-heedfull, did steal my heart
vnheedfull, but you do give so surely, you give so surely, that you may rob
and steal the more securely, If you some-time be pleased, that my poor heart
be eased, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, you do not that
to joy me, but still by fresh asaults quite to destroy me, quite to destroy
me, destroy me. but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me. quite to
destroy me.

XXXIX.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ MY heart a-las why do you love, why do you love, why do thou love thine
e-ne-my, my heart a-las why do thou love, why do thou love thine e-ne-mie,
why do thou love thine e-ne-my, thine e-ne-mie? laughing so me-re-ly she goes
with glad-nes, * laughing so me-re-ly she goes with gladness, with glad-nes *
to see thy grief and sad-nes, cruel disdain, * me-re-ly does she go with
gladness, * with gladness, to see thy grief and sad-nes, cruel disdain, *
lasting pain no remedy, lasti^g pain, lasting pain no remedy, save most
singular beuty, * and little pity, and lit-le little pity, save most singular
beauty, * and little pity, and lit-tle lit-tle pity.

XL.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ LAdy if you so spite me, will spite me, wherefore do you so often, * kiss
and de-light me? sure that my heart oppressed, oppressed and ouer-ioyed may break
and be destroy-ed. may break and be destroy-ed, destroyed, may break and be
destroyed. * If you seek so to spill me, if you seek so to spill me, to
spill me, come kiss me sweet and kill me, * so shall your heart be eased, *
and I shall rest con-tent * shall rest content, * and dye well pleased, * so
shall your heart be eased, * and I shall rest content, * shall rest con-tent, *
and dye well pleased* and dye well pleased.

XLI. Cantio rustica.
Giouan Battista Pinello.
^ WHen I would thee embrace, * when I would thee em-brace, * thou do but mock
me, * thou do but mock me, * thou do, thou do but mock me, when I
would thee em-brace, * when I would thee embrace, when I, when I would thee
em-brace, you do but mock me, * thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock
me, and when I lament, * lament my case, you cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, * thou
criest ty hy hy hy hy hy, and no no no no no no no no, so says my piggs nie,
and no, and no no no no no, and no, and no, and no no no still says my piggs
nie.

XLII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THirsis enjoyed the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet embraces, yet both their joys,
yet both their joys were scanted, for dark it was and candell light and
candle light they wanted, wherewith kind Cinthia in the heaven that shyned, her
nightly veil resig-ned, and that fair face disclosed, where Love and Joy were
met and both repo-sed, then each from others looks such joy deryued, dyed and
re-ui-ued, then each from others looks such Joy derived, such joy de-riued,
that both with mere delight, * that both with mere de-light, dyed and
re-uiued.

XLIII.
Alfonso Ferabsoco.
^ THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, so plea-sant and so gay, the
Nightingale so plea-sant and so gaye, so plea-sant and so gaye, in green wood
groves delights, delights to make his dwel-ling, delights, * * to make his
dwel-ling, in fields to fly, in fields to fly chaunting his roundelay,
chaunting his roundelay, at liber-ty, * against the cage rebelling, but my
poor heart, but my poor heart, with sorrows o-uerswelling, through bon-dage
vile, bynding my binding my freedom short, no pleasure takes, ^ * in these his
sports excelling, nor of his song receives no com-fort. receives no comfort,
nor of his song receives no comfort, nor of his snog receives no comfort,
receives no comfort, nor of his song receives no comfort.

XLIIII. The first part.
William Byrd.
^ THe fair young virgin, the fair young vir-gin is like the Rose untainted,
untainted, in garden fair while tender stalck does bear it, sole and all
untouched, sole and untouched, with no resort acquainted, no shepherd, no
shepherd nor his flock does once come near it, the air full of sweetness, * the
morning fresh depainted, depain-ted, the earth the wa-ter, with all their
favors do cheer it, do cheer it, do cheer it, dainty young gallants,
dainty young gal-lants and ladies most desired, and ladies most de-si-red, ^
delight to have therewith their heads and breasts atty-red, their heads and
breasts atty-red. dainty young gallants, * and ladies most desired, * delight
to have therewith their heads and breasts attyred, their heads and breasts
at-ty-red.

XLV. The second part.
^ BUT not so soon, * from green stock, from green stock where it grow-ed,
where it growed, the same is plucked and from ye branch re-mo-ued, as lost is all
from heaven and earth yt flowed, from heaven and earth that flowed, both favor
grace and beauty, and beauty, best be-loued. The virgin fair * that has ye
flower bestowed, ye flower bestowed, which more the^ life to guard, to guard it
her behooved, loses her praise, and is no more desired, loses her praise, her
praise, and is no more desired, of those yt late vn-to her, vn-to her love
aspired, unto: ij. loses her praise and is no more desired, loses her praise,
her praise and is no more desired, of those yt late unto her, unto her love
aspired, unto her love aspired.

Here ends the songs of five parts.
Of 6.
XLVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Will go die for pure love, come to recure love, since in re-ward of all my
faithful serving, my La-dy gives disgrace for well deserving, and in my flame
sans measure, takes her disporting, takes her disporting, takes her disporting,
unless some frost, unless some frost assuage this heat and cure love. I will go
die for pure love, I will go die for pure love.

XLVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THese that be certain signs of my tormenting, of my tormenting, nor a-ny
sigh so shows, no sigh so show-eth, those have some truce, but these have no
relenting, not so exhales, the heat that in me gloweth, that in me gloweth,
fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this venting, makes all this
ven-ting, * while with his wings the ra-ging fire he blows, Say Love, *
with what devise thou can for e-uer, keep it in flames and yet consume it
never, and yet consume it ne-uer. say love * with what devise thou can for
e-uer, keep it in flames and yet con-sume it ne-uer, keep it in flames still,
and yet consume it ne-uer,

XLVIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SO far from my delight, * what cares tor-ment me, torment me, fields do
record it, and vallyes, and vallyes, and woods and mountains, and wods and
moun-taynes, and running ryuers, and still reposed fountains, where I cry out
and to the heavens, ye heavens lament me, none other sounds but tunes of my
complaining, Nymph of the groves or pleasant bird once hea-reth, Nymph of the
groves or pleasant byrd once hears, still recount I my grief, and her
disday-ning, and her disdayning, to every plant that grows, to every plant
that grow-eth, * or blossom bea-reth.

XLIX. The second part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SHE only does not feel it, * O fields, O mountains, O mountains, O
woods, O vallyes, O floods and fountains, O floods and foun-taines, O stay no
more, to hear a wretch appealing, ( oh) to hear a wretch appealing, to hear
a wretch appealing, appealing, O that some one this life and soul would se-uer,
and these mine eyes oppressed, and these mine eyes oppressed would cloze for
e-uer, would choze for e-uer, for best were me to die so, for best were me to
die my love concealing, my love concealing, for best were me to die so, my
love concealing, my love concealing.

L.
^ LO here my heart in keeping, I leave with her yt laughes to see me
wee-ping, to see me weeping, Oh what comfort or treasure, Oh what comfort or
treasure, is life with her displea-sure, break heart and die then, that she
which still does pain me, that she which still does pain me, may live ye more
content, when grief has slain me, may live the more content when grief has
slain me, may live the more content, when grief has slain me, that she
which still does pain me, may live ye more con-tent when grief has slain
me, may live ye more conten-ted, may live the more content when grief has
slain me.

LI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ NOW must I part my dear-ling, of life and soul too, of life and soul
disseised, of life and soul disseised, oh what a death is, oh what a death is
parting? but if the fates ordain it, who can refrain it? yet must I needs
be packing, farewell, * farewell sweet heart unfeigned, but if the fates
ordain it, who can refrain it? yet must I needs be packing, farewell, *
farewell sweet heart unfeigned, farewell, sweet heart unfeigned, I dye to part
constrained.

LII. The first part
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ ZE-phirus brings, Zephirus brings ye time that sweetly senteth, with
flowrs and ( green) herbs, with flowers and herbs and winters frost ex-ileth,
Progne now chirpeth, and Philomele la-menteth, Flo-ra the garlandes white and
read compi-leth, * white and red compileth, fields do rejoice, the frowning
Sky relenteth, Jove to beehold his dearest daughter smyleth, Jove to beehold
his dearest daughter smy-leth, the air, the water, the air the water the earth
to Joy consents, each creature now to love, * him reconcileth, the air the
water, the air the water the earth to Joy consents, each creature now to
love, each creature now to love him reconci-leth.

LIII. The second part.
^ BUT with me wretch the storms of woe persevere, and heavy sighs, but with
me wretch the storms of woe perse-uer, and heavy sighs, ye storms of woe
persevere, and heavy sighs, ye from my heart she straineth, that from my heart she
stay-neth, yt took ye kay thereof to heaven for e-uer, for e-uer, that: * so
yt sing-ing of ( sweet) byrds, so that sing-ing of ( sweet) byrds, so that
sing-ing of ( sweet) byrds and spring time flowring, * and ladies love yt men's
affection gains, are like a de-sert, * are like a desert and cruel beasts
devouring. and ladies love that men's affection gains, are like a de-sert, *
are like a desert, and cruel beasts deuour-ing.

LIIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Was full near my fall, and hardly escaped, * and hardly escaped, * through
fond de-sire that headlong me transported, that Love himself for me devised
and shaped, and if my reason but a while had stayed, but a while had stayed, to
my mishappe, to my mishappe, I had no doubt assayed, what a death is to live
with love surprysed. what a death is to live with love surprysed, what a death
is to live, with love surprysed.

LV. The second part.
^ But as the byrd that in due time espying, that in due time espying, the
secret snare and deadly bush enly-med, the secret snare and deadly bush
enlymed, quick to the heavens does mount, quick to the heavens does mount with
song and plea-sure, traynes of false looks and faithles words defying,
mounting the hill so hard for to be clymed, so hard for to be cly-med, I sing
for Joy of liber-ty the treasure. I sing for Joy of liberty the treasure, the
treasure.

LVI. The first part.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Soung sometime the freedom of my fatncie, ye fire extinct, the yoke and
bonds subdu-ed, with heart congealed, with heart congealed, I quenched the
burning phran-sye, and with disdain, and with disdain, and with disdain, *
the harmefull bayte escheued, my bondage my bonds and my enchayning, all naked
unarmed, nor by tears, * mercy, nor comfort, * mercy, nor comfort, nor my
grief assuaged.

LVII. The second part.
^ BEcause my Love: while I with sighs re-sound her name de-lightfull, my life
depriueth: If I seek to break of the strings, that bind me, If I seek to
break of the strings that bind me, the more I fly, * the more I fly the
faster I do find me, like the byrd like ye byrd in the snare in vain that
stry-ueth, in the snare in vain that strives, in the snare, in the snare in
vain that stry-ueth.

FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contained in these books, with the names of
their several authors, and originalls.
Of 4.
THese that be certain signs. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Fagnient. The fair
Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Joy so delights my heart. III Gioia
s'abond'all cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Love now shoot. IIII Amor
ben puoi. O grief, if yet my grief. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar
Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donato. In vain he
seeks for beauty. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What means
Love to nest him. VIII Perch s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino.
Sweet Love when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella
mano. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de
Vuert. Lady your look so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch.

Of 5.
From what part of the Heaven. XIII In qual part del ciel. Filippo di Montte.
The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza 2. pars. In every place. XV Ogni
luogo. Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second
part. XVII Freno Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi moriro. 3.
pars. Susanna fair. XIX Susann' un iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fair. XX
Susann' un iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI To the note of Chi
per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io par^iro. Luca Marenzio. I
saw my lady weeping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second
part. XXIIII Come dal ciel. Giouan Ferrettie So gracious. XXV Sci tanto
gratiosa. Cruel unkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What does my pretty darling. XXVII
Che fa* hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleep mine only Jewel. XXVIII Sonno
scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2.
pars. Sound out my voice. XXX To the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide and watery perles. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale.
XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In un
Roschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope reliu'd me. XXXIIII Gia fu
ch'io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini Alfonso
Ferabosco. O sweet kiss. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII
Gia fu mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio
Bertany. My heart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so
spite me. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee
embrace. XLI Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enjoyed the
graces XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alofonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le
Rossignol, The fair young virgin. XLIIII La verginella* 1. pars. William Byrd.
The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars.

Of 6.
I will go dye for pure Love. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These
that be certain signs. XLVII Questi ch' inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far
from my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1 pars. The second part. XLIX
Sola voi no'l sentite. 2* pars. Lo here my heart. L Ecco ch'io lasso. Now must
I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzio. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro
torna. 1 pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2.
pars. I was full near my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso
Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI
Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my love. LVII Che la mia donna. 2.
pars.

FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA*

QVINTVS.

Madrigales translated of four, five and six parts, chosen out of diverse
excellent Authors, with the first and second part of La Verginella, made by
Master Byrd, upon two Stanza's of Ariosto, and brought to speak English
with the rest.

Published by N. Young, in favor of such as take pleasure in Music of voices.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, the assign of William Byrd. 1588.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Gilbert Lord Talbot, son and heir to the right
noble and puissant George Earl of Shrevvesbury, Washford and Waterford, Earl
Marshall of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of
Blackmeere, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy council, Justice of
the forrestes and chases by north the river of Trent, and knight of the most
honorable order of the garter. Nicholas Young wishes increase of honor,
with all happiness.
RIght honorable, since I first began to keep house in this City, it has
been no small comfort unto me, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants
of good account (as well of this realm as of foreign nations) have taken in
good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poor ability was able to
afford them, both by the exercise of Music daily used in my house, and by
furnishing them with Books of that kind yearly sent me out of Italy and other
places, which being for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetness of Air,
very well liked of all, but most in account with them that understand that
language. As for the rest, they do either not sing them at all, or at the
least with little delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set
forth by a great Master of Music, which for skill and sweetness may content
the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with
variety have wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I
endeavored to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthy,
and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good
friends, certain Italian Madrigales translated most of them five years ago
by a Gentleman for his private delight, (as not long before certain Napolitans
had been englished by a very honorable personage, and now a Counselor of
estate, whereof I have seen some, but never possessed any). And finding the
same to be singulerly well liked, not only of those for whose cause I
gathered them, but of many skillful Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who
affirmed the accent of the words to be well maintained, the descant not
hindered, (though some few notes altered) and in every place the due decorum
kept* I was so bold (being well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat
the rest, who willingly gave me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies)
and also some other more lately done at the request of his particular friends.
Now when the same were seen to arise to a just number, sufficient to furnish a
great set of Books, diverse of my friends aforesaid, required with great
instance to have them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but
could never obtain the Gentleman's consent, though I sought it by many great
means. For his answer was ever, that those trifles being but an idle man's
exercise, of an idle subject, written only for private recreation, would blush
to be seen otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the
common view of all men. And seeing me still importunate, he took his pen,
and with an obstinate resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the
Books these verses of the Poet Martial.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus,
Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli,
Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by me, not
presuming to put my sickle in an other man's corn, till such time as I heard,
that the same being dispersed into many men's hands, were by some persons
altogether unknown to the owner, like to be published in Print. Which made me
adventure to set this work in hand, he being neither privy nor present, nor
so near this place as by any reasonable means I could give him notice. Wherein
though he may take a just offense, that I have laid open his labors without
his license: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by strangers, lame
and imperfect by means of false Copies, I hope that this which I have done to
avoid a greater ill, shall deserve a more favorable excuse. But seeking yet a
stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all humble and duetifull sort to
offer my self and my bold attempt to the defense and protection of your
Lordship, to whose honorable hands I present the same. Assuring my self, that
so great is the love and affection which he bears to your L. as the view of
your name in the Front of the Books, will take away all displeasure and
unkindness from me. And although this may be thought a greater boldness then
the first (I being not any way able to do your L. such a service, as may
deserve so great a favor) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well
esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for
themselves, shall not be thought unworthy of your honorable defense. With
which hope I humbly commit your L. to the protection of the Almighty: wishing
to the same, that increase of honor which your true virtue derived from so
noble and renowned Ancestors does worthily deserve. From London the first of
October. 1588.

Your Lordship's most humble at commandment, N. Young.

Of 5.
XIII. The first part.
Filippo di Monte.
^ FRom what part of the heaven, from what example brought was the mould whence
Nature has deri-ued, that sweet face full of beau-ty, in which she stri-ued,
to prove in earth her power above was ample, was never Nymph or syluane queen
ado-red, that so dainty fine locks in air display-ed, nor heart Divine with so
great virtue sto-red, yet by her looks my life is all betrayed.

XIIII. The second part.
^ IN vain he seeks for beauty that excels, that has not seen her eyes
where Love seiorneth, how sweetly here and there the same she tur-neth, he
knows not how Love heales, and how, and how he quelleth, that knows not how
she sighs and sweet beguyleth, and how she sweetly speaks, he knows not how
Love heales and how he quel-leth, that knows not how she sighs and sweet
beguyleth, and how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smy-leth, and how she
sweetly speaks and sweetly smyleth.

XV.
^ IN every place I find my grief and anguish, save where I see those beams
that me have bur-ned, and eke mine eyes to floods, to floods of tears have
tur-ned, have tur-ned, thus in ex-tream-est pangs, each hour I languish, each
hour I languish, O me, O me, O me, my shining star, so sweet and sacred,
cause of all comfort, of this world the Jewel, and of this world the Jewel,
for want of thee my life I have in hatred, my life I have in hatred, * was
never grief so great, nor death so cruel, was never grief so great, * nor
death so cru-ell.

XVI. The first part.
Luca Marenzio.
^ THirsis, Thirsis to dye desired, marking her fair eyes that to his heart was
nearest, no less was fy-red, said to him Oh hearts Love dearest, alas forbear
to dye now. * to dye too, by thee I live, with thee I wish to dye too, * by
thee I live, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too.

XVII. The second part.
^ THirsis that heat refrayned, wherewith in have to dye he did betake him, that
life would not forsake him, and while his look full fixed he retained, on her
eyes full of pleasure, the daintye Nymph that now at hand espied, the harvest
of loves treasure, said thus with eyes all trembling faint and wasted, dye now
sweet heart I dye now, I dye now, and I sweet life do dye too, * and I sweet
life too, and I sweet life do dye too.

XVIII. The third part.
^ THus these two lovers so fortunately dy-ed, and so desi-red, that to dye so
again their life retired, that to dye so again their life rety-red.

XIX.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ Susanna fair sometime of love reques-ted, sometime of love re-quested, by
two old men, * whom her sweet looks allured, was in her heart, * was in her
heart full sad and sore molested, full sad and sore mo-lested, * seeing the
force her chastitye endured, to them she said, * If I by craft procured, do
yield to you my body to abuse it, I kill, I kill my soul, and if I shall
refuse it, you will me judge to death reproch-fully, but better it is, * but
better it is in innocence to choose it, the^ by my fault to offend my God on hye,
then by my fault to offend my God on hye.

XX.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ Susanna fair sometime of love reques-ted, by two old men whom her sweet
looks allured whom her sweet looks allured, was in her heart full sad and
sore mo-les-ted, full sad and sore molested, seeing the force her chastity
endured, her chastity endured, to the^ she said, if I by craft procured, do
yield to you my body to abuse it, I kill my soul * and if I do refuse it, and
if I do refuse it, you will me judge to death, * but better it is, * in
innocence ^ to choose it, * then by my fault to offend my God on hye, to offend my
God on hye, then by my fault to offend my God on hye, then by my fault, then by
my fault to offend my God on hye, then by my fault to offend my God on hye.

XXI.
Noe Faignient.
^ WHen shall I cease lamenting, lamenting, * lamenting, la-menting, * * when
shall I cease, * lamenting, when shall I cease lame^ting, * when shall my playnt
and moning, to tunes of joy be turned, when shall my plaint and mo-ning, to
tunes of Joy be turned, good Love, * good Love, good Love, leave thy
tormenting, good Love, * leave thy torme^-ting, to long thy flames within my
heart have burned, * O grant alas with quicknes, quicknes, O grant alas with
quicknes, * * some little comfort, * * for so long a sickness, some little
comfort, * some little comfort for so long a sickness.

XXII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I must depart al haples, I must depart all haples, but leave to you my
careful heart oppressed, so that if I live hartles, if I live hartles, Love
does a work miraculous and blessed, if I live hartles, if I live hart-les, Love
does a work miraculous and blessed, miraculous and blessed, that sure ere it be
long, * my life will fail me, * my life will fail me, that sure ere it be
long, * my life will fail me, * my life will fail me.

XXIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Saw my lady wee-ping, I saw my lady wee-ping, and Love did lan-guish, and
Love did lan-guish, and of their plaint ensued so rare co^centing, that never
yet was heard more sweet lame^ting, that never yet was heard more sweet
lame^ting, made all of tender py-tie, and mournful anguish, * the floods
forsaking their delightful swelling, the floods for-saking, the floods
forsaking their delightful swel-ling, stayed to attend their plaint, the winds
enraged, * * still and content to quiet calm assuaged, still and * their
wonted stor-ming, their won-ted storms, and every blast rebel-ling, and every
blast rebel-ling.

XXIIII. The second part.
^ LIke as from heaven the dew full softly showring, does fall, full softly
show-ring does fall, and so refresh both fields and closes, both fields and
closes, filling the parched flowers, with sap and savor, * so while she
bathed the violetts and the roses upon her lovely cheeks, her loue-ly cheeks,
so freshly flowring, * the spring renu'd his force with her sweet fa-uour, with
her sweet favor, ye spring renu'd his force with her sweet favor, with her
sweet favor. so when she bathed the violetts and the roses, upon her fair and
lovely cheeks, so freshly flowring, so freshly flowring, the spring his force
renewed, the spring his force renewed, with her sweet favor, with her sweet
favor.

XXV.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ SO gracious is thy self, so fair so framed, so gracious is thy self, so
fair so framed, so gracious is thy self so fair so framed, * that who so
sees thee, that who so sees thee with out a heart enflamed, either he lives not,
* either he lives not, or loves delight he knows not, either he lives not, *
either he lives not, or loves delight he knows not.

XXVI.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ Cruel unkind my heart thou have bereft me, * my heart thou have bereft me, *
my heart thou have bereft me, Cruel unkind, my heart thou have bereft me, * my
heart thou have bereft me, * my heart thou have bereft me, and wilt not leave,
and wilt not leave while any life is left me. And yet, and yet, and yet, and
yet still will I love thee, and yet, and yet, and yet, and yet still will I love
thee.

XXVII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ WHat does my pretty dear-ling? what does my pretty dearling, my pretty
dear-ling? what does, what does, my song and chau^ting, yt they sing not of
her, * the praise and vaunting? to her I give my violetts, * and garland
sweetly smelling, for to crown her sweet locks pure gold excelling. To her I
give my violets, * and garla^d sweetly smelling, for to crown her sweet locks
pure gold excelling, for to crown her sweet locks pure gold excelling.

XXVIII. The first part.
Stephano Felis.
^ Sleep sleep mine only Iew-ell, sleep sleep mine only Iuell, mine only
Iuell, sleep sleep mine one-ly Iew-ell, mine one-ly Jewel, much more thou
did delight me, the^ my beloved too cru-ell, that hyd her face to spyte me,
her face to spyte me, that hyd her face to spyte me, her face to spyte me, that
hyd her face to spyte me much more thou did delight me, then my belo'd too
cruel, that hyd her face, that hyd her face to spyte me, her face to spite me,
that hyd her face to spite me, to spyte me, that hyd her face to spyte me, to
spyte me.

XXIX. The second part.
^ THou bring'st her home full nigh me, while she so fast did fly me, while
she so fast did fly me, * by thy means I behold those eyes so shining, long
time absen-ted, * that look so mylde appeased, thus is my grief decly-ning,
thou in thy dreams do make desire well pleased, sleep if thou be like death
as thou art fained, as you art fained, a happy life by such a death were gained,
* a happy life by such a death were gay-ned.

XXX.
Gianetto Palestina.
^ SOund out my voice with pleasant tunes recording, re-cor-ding, the new
delight that Love to me inspy-reth, pleased and content, content with that my
heart desires, thanked be Love so heavenly joys affor-ding, affording, she
that my plaints with rigor long re-iected, rejected, binding my heart with those
her golden tres-ses, in recompense of all my long distres-ses, said with a
sigh, thy grief has me infec-ted, infected, said with a sigh, thy grief has
me infected, thy grief has me infected.

XXXI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ LIquide and watery pearls, Love weept full kindly, Love wept full kindly,
Love wept full kindly, * to quench my heart enfla-med, but he alas alas, * alas
unfriendly so great a fire had framed, as, as were enough to burn me, *
without recomfort, * as were enough to burn me, * without recomfort, and into
ashes turn me.

XXXII.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, * in green-wood groves, * delights
to make his dwelling, to make his dwelling, in fields to fly chaunting his
roundelay, in fields to fly chaunting his roundelay, chaunting his roundelay,
at liberty against the cage rebelling, against the cage rebelling, but my poor
heart, * with sorrows ouerswelling, with sorrows ouerswelling, through bondage
vile bynding my freedom short, binding my free-dome short, no pleasure takes,
* no pleasure takes in these his sports excelling, nor of his song receives no
comfort, nor of his song receives no comfort, * nor of his song receives no
comfort.

XXXIII.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ WIthin a greenewood, * sweet of myrtle favor, when as the earth was with
fair flowers reuested, I saw a shepherd with his Nymph yt rested, thus spoke
the Nymph with sugared wrodes of favor, say (sweet love) to thy love tell me my
dearling, where is thy heart bestowed, where is thy lyking? the shepherd answered
then with a deep sighing all full of sweetness, * and of sorrow myxed, and of
sorrow mixed, on thee dainty dear life my love is fix-ed, my love is fix-ed,
with yt the gentle Nymph, * full sweetly smy-ling, with kind words of delight
and flattring gloses, she kindly kissed his cheek, with lips of roses, * she
kindly kissed his cheek, * with lips of roses* *

XXXIIII.
Rinaldo del Melle.
^ SOmetime when hope relyeu'd me, I was contented, to see my star so
sightly, that shines so clear and brightly, to see my star so sightly, that
shines so clear and brightly, that shines so clear and brightly, O since she
first consen-ted, to leave the word all worldly Joy defying, to leave the world
all earthly Joy defying, all worldly Joy defying, in vain la-ment I, since a
veil now hydeth, the rarest beauty that on earth abides, the rarest beauty
that on earth aby-deth, that on the earth abides.

XXXV.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ RVbyes and pearls and treasure, rubyes and pearls and treasure, kingdoms
renown and glo-ry, * please the delightful mind and cheer the so-ry, please
the delightful mind and cheer the so-ry, but much the greater measure, but
much the greater measure, of true delight he gayneth, that for the fruits of
love, * sues and obtay-neth, but much the greater mea-sure of true delight he
gay-neth, that for the fruits of love, * sues and ob-tayneth, sues and
obtayn-eth.

XXXVI.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ O Sweet kiss full of comfort, * O sweet kiss full of comfort, O joy to me
enuy-ed, so often sought, so often to me deni-ed. For thee my life is wasted, yet
thee I never tasted, O lips so false and wyly, * that me to kiss prouok'd,
and shrou^ck so slyly, O looks empoy-sned, O face well may I fear thee, yt
kilst who thee beholds and comes not near thee, I dye now, I dye a death most
payne-full, killed with vn-kindnes, farewell sweet lips disdainful, I dye now,
farewell sweet lips dis-daynefull, killed with unkindness, I dye now, farewell
sweet lips disdayn-full*

XXXVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SOmetime my hope full weakly went on by line and lea-sure, but now it
grows to do my heart some plea-sure, went on by line and leisure, but now it
grows to do my heart some plea-sure, but now it grows to do my heart some
pleasure, my heart some pleasure. Yet that my hope decay not, by over much
contenting, Love will not give my joys their full aug-men-ting, but still with
some desaster, but still with some desaster, allayes my bliss, allayes my
bliss that hope may be the faster. that hope may be the fa-ster.

XXXVIII.
Lelio Bertani.
^ LAdy that: Which gave unto the need-full, Lady that hand of plen-ty, * which
gave unto the needful, did steal my heart vn-heedfull, did steal my heart
vnheede-full, sweet thief of Love so dainty, what will you do by the-uing, yt
rob when you are giueing? but you do give so surely, yt you may rob and steal
ye more securely, yt you may rob and stele ye more securely. If you sometime be
plesed, yt my poor heart be eased, you do not yt to joy me, you do not that to
joy me, * but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me. but still by fresh
assaults quite to destroy me, quite to destroy me.

XXXIX.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ MY heart alas why do thou love thine enemy, why do thou love thine enemy,
my heart alas why do thou love thine enemy, * thine enemy? laughing so merely
she goes * merely with gladness, merely with gladness, with gladness, to see thy
grief and sadness, cruel disdain, merely does she go, * merely does she go
with glad-nes, to see thy grief and sadness, cruel disdain, lasting pain no
remedy, lasting pain, lasting pain no remedy, save most singular beauty, *
and little pity, and little little pity, save most singular beauty, * and little
pity, and little little pi-ty.

XL.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ LAdy if you so spite me, lady if you so spite me, if you so spite me,
wherefore do you so often kiss and delight me, wherefore do you so often kiss and
delight me, kiss and delight me? sure yt my heart oppressed and ouerioy-ed, may
break and be destroyed, and be destroyed, sure yt my heart oppressed and
ouerioy-ed, may break and be destroy-ed. If you seek so to spill me, * to
spill me, come kiss me sweet and kill me, * so shall your heart be ea-sed, and
I shall rest content, * and dye well plea-sed, * so shall your heart be ea-sed,
and I shall rest content, * shall rest content and dye well pleased: shall rest
content and dye well plea-sed^

XLI. Cantio rustica.
Giouan Battesta Pinello.
^ WHen I would thee embrace, * when I would thee embrace when I, when I would
thee embrace, thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock me, * thou do but
mock me, when I would thee embrace, * when I would thee embrace, * thou do
but mock me, * thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock me, and when as I
lament my case, and when I lament my case, thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, *
thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, and no no no no no no no no so says my pigs
nigh, and no no no no no no no, and no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no
no still says my piggs nigh, and no no no no no no no no still says my piggs
nigh.

XLII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THirsis enoy'd the gra-ces, the graces, of Clori's sweet embraces, of
Clori's sweet embra-ces, yet both their Joys were scanted, for dark it was and
can-dle light they wanted, for dark it was and candle light and candle light
they wan-ted, wherewith kind Cinthia in the heaven yt shined, her nightly veil
resigned, resigned, and yt fair face disclosed, and that fair face
disclo-sed, where Love and Joy were met, and both re-po-sed, that both of
mere delight dyed and re-uiued. the^ each from others looks such Joy deri-ued,
that both of mere delight dyed and revived, dyed and reui-ued.

XLIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THe Nightingale so plea-sant and so gay, so plea-sant and so gaye, in
greenewood groves delights to make his dwelling, in greenewood groves delights
* * * to make his dwelling, in fields to fly chau^ting his rou^delay,
chau^-ting his roundelay, in fields to fly chaunting his rou^delay, chaunting
his rou^delay, at liberty, against the cage rebel-ling, but my poor heart, but
my poor heart with sorows over ouerswelling, through bondage vile, bynding my
free-dome short, * no pleasure takes, * ^ in these his sports excel-ling, nor
of his song receives no comfort, nor of his song receives no comfort,
receives no comfort, nor of his song re-ceiueth no comfort, nor of his song
receives no comfort, receives no comfort.

XLIIII. The first part.
William Byrd.
^ THe fair young vir-gin is like the rose, the rose vntain-ted, in garden
fair while tender stalk does bear it, sole and vn-toucht, sole and untouched
with no re-sort acquain-ted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock does once
come near it, once come near it, the air full of sweetness, the morning fresh
depaynted, the morning fresh depayn-ted, the earth, the wa-ter, the earth, the
water, with all their favor cheer it, dainty young ga-lants, dainty young
gallants, and ladies most de-syred, ^ thire heads and breasts atty-red, dainty
young gal-lants, * and ladies most de-syred, their heads and breasts atty-red.

XLV. The second part.
^ But not so soon, not so soon, but not so soon, from green stock where it
growed, where it growed, the same is plucked and from the branch, the same is
plucked and from the branch removed, as lost is all from heaven and earth, from
heaven and earth, that flowed, that flow-ed, both favor grace and beauty, and
beauty best beloved. The virgin fair, * that has ye flower bestow-ed, which
more then life to guard, it her behooved, loses her praise and is no more
desired, loses her praise and is no more desired, of those that late unto her
love aspired. loses her praise, and is no more desired, loses her praise and
is no more desired, of those that late unto her love aspired.

Here ends the songs of five parts.
Of 6.
XLVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Will go dye for pure love, except rage and disdain come to recure love,
and in my flame sans measure takes her disport and pleasure, takes her disport
and plea-sure, plea-sure, unless some frost, I will go dye for pure love, I will
go dye for pure love.

XLVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THese that be certain signs of my tormen-ting, of my tormen-ting* of my
tormenting, sighs be they none no, nor any sigh so shows, nor any sigh so
shows, those have some truce, but these, but these have no relenting, have no
relen-ting, not so exhales the heat that in me glow-eth, the heat that in me
glow-eth, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this venting, makes all
this venting, while with his wings the raging fire he blows, say Love, * say
Love with what devise thou can for e-uer, keep it in flames and yet consume
it never, and ^ not consume it, say Love say Love, with what devise thou can
for ever, keep it in flames and yet, and yet consume it never, keep it in
flames and yet con-sume it never, and yet consume it never.

LXVIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SO far from my delight, * so far from my delight, what cares torment me,
fields do record it, and valleys, and woods and mountains, and woods and
mountains, and running rivers, and running rivers, and re-posed fou^taines,
and still reposed foun-taines, where I cry out and to the heavens the heavens
lament me, none other sounds but tunes of my complaining, Nymph of the groves
or pleasant byrd once hears, still recount I my grief, and her disdaining,
and her disdayning, to every plant that grows, that grow-eth, to every plant
that grows, to every plant that grow-eth, or blossom bears.

XLIX. The second part.
^ SHe only does not feel it, * O fields, O mountains, * O mountains, O
woods, O vallyes, * O floodes, O fountains, oh, oh stay no more oh, oh stay no
more, oh, to hear a wretch appealing, O that some one this life and soul
would sever, O that some one this life and soul would se-uer, and these mine
eyes oppressed, and these mine eyes oppressed would cloze for e-uer, would cloze
for e-uer, for best were me to dye so, for best were me to dye my love
concea-ling, for best were me to dye so * my love concealing, my love
concea-ling.

L.
^ Lo here my heart in kee-ping, I leave with her that laughes to see me
weeping, to see me wee-ping, to see me weeping, Oh what comfort or treasure,
break heart and dye then, that she yt still does pain me, may live the more
content, when grief has slain me, may live the more conten-ted, may live the
more content when grief has slain me, that she yt still does pain me, that
she yt still does pain me, may live ye more content, when grief has slain
me, may live the more content when grief has slain me, may live the more
content when grief has slain me.

LI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ NOw must I part, now must I part my dearling, of life and soul, of life and
soul, of life and soul disseised, and Love ther-with is pleased, Oh, oh what
a death is parting? is parting, oh what grief is now lacking? farewell, *
farewell, I dye to part constrained, oh what grief is now lacking? farewell,
* farewell, I dye to part constrained, fare-wel sweet heart unfeigned, I dye to
part constrained.

LII. The first part.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, Zephirus brings the time that
sweetly senteth, with flowers and herbs and winters frost exileth, with
flowers and herbs and winters frost it ex-ileth, Progne now chirpeth, and
Philomele lamenteth, Flora the garlands * white and read compileth, Flora the
garlands white and red compileth, fields do rejoice the frowning sky relenteth,
Jove to behold his dearest daughter smileth, * dearest daughter smy-leth,
the air the wa-ter, the earth, the air the water, the earth to Joy consents,
each ^ creature now to Love him reconcileth, the air the wa-ter, the earth,
the air, the water, the earth, to Joy consents, each creature now to Love,
him reconcyleth.

LIII. The second part.
^ But with me oh wretch the storms of woe per-se-uer, and hea-uie sighs, the
storms of woe persevere, and heavy sighs, the storms of woe persevere and
heavy sighs, which from my heart she strayneth, which from my heart she
stray-neth, that took the kaye thereof to heaven for e-uer, That took the
kaye thereof to heaven for ever, so that sing-ing of byrds and spring time
flowring, so that sing-ing of byrds and spring time flowring, and ladies love
that men's affection gayneth, are like a desert, * ^ are like a desert and
cruel beasts devouring, and ladies love that men's af-fection gayneth, are
like a desert, * are like a de-sert and cruel beasts deuou-ring.

LIIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Was full near my fall, and hardly escaped, * and hardly escaped, through
fond desire, that headlong me that headlong me transported, and with the darts
and with the netts I sported, that Love himself for me devised and shaped, and
if my reason, but a while had stayed, had stay-ed, to my mishappe, to my
mishappe I had no doubt assayed, what a death is to live with Love sur-pri-sed
what a death is to live, what a death is to live, with Love sur-prised, with
love surprised.

LV. The second part.
^ But as the byrd that in due time espying, but as the byrd, that in due time
espying, that in due time es-py-ing, the secret snare and deadly bush enlymed,
the bush en-ly-med, quick to the heaven does mount, * with song and pleasure,
traynes of false looks, and faithles words defy-ing, mounting the hill so hard
for to be clymed, mounting the hill so hard for to be cly-med, I sing for Joy
of liberty the treasure, I sing for Joy of lyberty the trea-sure, I sing for
Joy now, I sing for Joy now, of lyberty the treasure, the trea-sure.

LVI. The first part.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Soung sometime, I soung, the freedom of my fancye, with heart congealed, *
I quenched the burning phransye, and with disdain, and with disdain, * ye
harmeful bayte eschued, but now I wail my bonds, my bonds and my enchay-ning,
all naked, in lovely netts engaged, nor by tears, * can I find, nor by
complaining, mercy, nor comfort, mercy, mercy, nor com-fort, nor yet my grief
assuaged.

LVII. The second part.
^ BEcause my Love: While I with sighs resound her name de-lightfull, my life
depriueth: If I seek to break of* from the strings that bynd me, If I seek
to break of, the more I fly, * the more I fly the faster I do find me, like
the byrd in the snare, like the byrd in the snare, in vain that stry-ueth,
like the byrd in the snare, in vain that strives.

FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contained in these books, with the names of
their several authors, and originalles.
Of 4.
THese that be certain signs. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Faignient. The fair
Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Joy so delights my heart. III Gioia
s'abond' al cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Love now shoot. IIII Amor
ben puoi. O grief, if yet my grief. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar
Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donate. In vain he seeks
for beauty. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What means Love to
nest him. VIII Perch s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. Sweet Love
when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella mano. Marc'
Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de Vuert. Lady your
look so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch.

Of 5.
From what part of the heaven. XIII In qual part del ciel. Filippo di Monte.
The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza. 2. pars. In every place. XV Ogni
luogo. Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second
part. XVII Freno Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi moriro. 3.
pars. Susanna fair. XIX Susann' un iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fair. XX
Susann' un iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI to the note of Chi
per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I
saw my lady weping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second
part. XXIIII Come d^l ciel. So gracious. XXV Sci tanto gratiosa. Giouan
Ferretti. Cruel unkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What does my pretty dearling. XXVII
Che fa* hoggil mio sol^. Luca Marenzio. Sleep mine only jewel. XXVIII Sonno
scendosti. 1* pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2*
pars. Sound out my voice. XXX to the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide and watery perls. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale.
XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di Lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In un
Boschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope relieved me. XXXIIII Gia fu ch'
io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini. Alfonso Ferabosco.
O sweet kiss. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fu mio
dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertani. My
heart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spite me.
XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee embrace. XLI
Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enjoyed the graces. XLII
Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alfonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol,
The fair young virgin. XLIIII La verginella. 1. pars. William Byrd. The second
part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars.

Of 6.
I will go dye for pure love. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that
be certain signs. XLVII Questi ch'inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far from my
delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola voi
no'l sentite. 2. pars. Lo here my heart. L Ecco ch'io lasso. Now must I part.
LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzo. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro torna. 1.
pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2. pars. I was
full near my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso Ferabosco. The
second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI Cantai gia. 1.
pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my love. LVII Che la mia donna. 2. pars.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East, dwelling in Aldersgate street, at the
sign of the black Horse. 1588.

MVSICA TRANSALPINA.

SEXTVS.

Madrigales translated of four, five and six parts, chosen out of diverse
excellent Authors, with the first and second part of La Verginella, made by
Master Byrd, upon two Stanz's of Ariosto, and brought to speak English with
the rest.

Published by N. Young, in favor of such as take pleasure in Music of voices.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, the assign of William Byrd. 1588.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Gilbert Lord Talbot, son and heir to the right
noble and puissant George Earl of Shrewesbury, Washford and Waterford, Earl
Marshal of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of
Blackmeere, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy council, Justice of the
forests and chases by north the river of Trent, and knight of the most
honorable order of the garter. Nicholas Young wishes increase of honor, with
all happiness.
RIght honorable, since I first began to keep house in this City, it has
been no small comfort unto me, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants
of good account (as well of this realm as of foreign nations) have taken in
good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poor ability was able to
afford them, both by the exercise of Music daily used in my house, and by
furnishing them with Books of that kind yearly sent me out of Italy and
other places, which being for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetness of
Air, very well liked of all, but most in account with them that understand
that language. As for the rest, they do either not sing them at all, or at the
least with little delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set
forth by a great Master of Music, which for skill and sweetness may content
the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with
variety, have wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I
endeavored to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthy,
and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good
friends, certain Italian Madrigales translated most of them five years ago
by a Gentleman for his private delight, (as not long before certain Napolitans
had been englished by a very honorable personage, and now a Counselor of
estate, whereof I have seen some, but never possessed any.) And finding the
same to be singulerly well liked, not only of those for whose cause I gathered
them, but of many skillful Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed
the accent of the words to be well maintained, the descant not hindered, (though
some few notes altered) and in every place the due decorum kept: I was so
bold (being well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat the rest, who
willingly gave me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some
other more lately done at the request of his particular friends. Now when the
same were seen to arise to a just number, sufficient to furnish a great set of
Books, diverse of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to have
them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could never obtain
the Gentleman's consent, though I sought it by many great means. For his answer
was ever, that those trifles being but an idle man's exercise, of an idle
subject, written only for private recreation, would blush to be seen
otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the common view of all
men. And seeing me still importunate, he took his pen, and with an obstinate
resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Books these verses of the
Poet Martial.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus,
Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli,
Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by me, not
presuming to put my sickle in an other man's corn, till such time as I heard,
that the same being dispersed into many men's hands, were by some persons
altogether unknown to the owner, like to be published in Print. Which made me
adventure to set this work in hand, he being neither privy nor present, nor
so near this place as by any reasonable means I could give him notice.
Wherein though he may take a just offense, that I have laid open his labors
without his license: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by
strangers, lame and imperfect by means of false Copies, I hope that this
which I have done to avoid a greater ill, shall deserve a more favorable
excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all
humble and duetifull sort to offer my self and my bold attempt to the defense
and protection of your Lordship, to whose honorable hands I present the same.
Assuring my self, that so great is the love and affection which he bears to
your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Books, will take away all
displeasure and unkindness from me. And although this may be thought a greater
boldness then the first (I being not any way able to do your L. such a service,
as may deserve so great a favor) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well
esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for
themselves, shall not be thought unworthy of your honorable defense. With
which hope I humbly commit your L. to the protection of the Almighty: wishing
to the same, that increase of honor which your true virtue derived from so
noble and renowned Ancestors does worthily deserve. From London the first of
October. 1588.

Your Lordshp's most humble at commandment, N. Young.

Of 6.
XLVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Will go dye for pure love, except rage and disdain come to recure love,
since in reward of all my faithful serving my lady gives disgrace for well
deserving, and in my flame sans mea-sure, takes her disport and pleasure, takes
her disporting, takes her disport and plea-sure, unless some frost assauge
this heat and cure love, I will geo dye for pure love. I will go dye for pure
love.

XLVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THese that be certain signs of my tormenting, of my tormenting, of my
tormen-ting, sighs be they none, no, nor any sigh so shows, those have some
truce, but these have no re-len-ting, not so exhales the heat that in me
gloweth, not so exhales the heat that in me gloweth, fierce Love that burns
my heart, makes all this venting, fierce Love that burns my heart, makes all
this venting, * Say Love, say Love with what devise thou can for e-uer,
keep it in flames and yet consume it never, and yet consume it never, keep ^
it in flames still, and yet consume it never, say Love, say Love with what
devise thou can for e-uer keep it in flames and yet consume it never, and
yet consume it ne-uer.

XLVIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SO far from my delight, what cares torment me. * fields do record it,
and vallyes, and woods, and mountains, * and running ry-uers, * and running
ryuers, and re-posed fountains, where I cry out, * and to ye heavens lament
me, none other sounds but tunes of my complaining, of my complaining, Nymph of
the groves or pleasant byrd once hears, Nymph of the groves or pleasant byrd
once hea-reth, still recount I my grief and her disday-ning, to every plant
that grows, that grows, to every plant that grows, to eue-ry plant that,
that grows, or blos-some bea-reth.

XLIX. The second part.
^ SHE only does not feel it, she only does not feel it, O fields, O
mountains, * O mountains, O woods, O vallyes, O floods and foun-taines, O
stay no more to hear a wretch appealing, to hear a wretch appealing, O stay
no more to hear a wretch appealing, appealing, O that some one this life and
soul would se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed, and these mine eyes oppressed
would cloze for e-uer, would cloze for e-uer, for e-uer, for best were me to
die so, for best were me to die my love concea-ling, my love concealing, for
best were me to die so, my love con-cealing, concealing, my love concea-ling.

L.
^ Lo here my heart in kee-ping, I leave with her that laughes to see me
weeping, to see me weeping, Oh what comfort or treasure, Oh, to live in her
displeasure, that she that still does pain me, may live the more content when
grief has slain me, may live the more content when grief has slain me,
when grief has slain me, may live the more con-tented, when grief has
slain me, that she that still does pain me, may live the more content, when
grief has slain me, may live the more con-tent when grief has slain me,
may live the more content when grief has slain me.

LI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Must depart, I must depart my dearling, of life and soul, of life and
soul disseised, and Love therewith is pleased, Oh, oh what a death is parting?
oh what a death is parting? but if the fates ordain it, who can refrain it?
oh what grief is now lacking? yet must I needs be pack-ing, farewell,
farewell, * I dye to part oh, to part constrained, but if the fates ordain it,
who can refrain it, oh what grief is now lacking? yet must I needs be
pack-ing, farewell, * * I dye to part, oh, to part constrained farewell sweet
heart unfeigned, I dye, to part constray-ned.

LII. The first part.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ ZEphirus brings the time that sweetly senteth, Zephirus brings, Zephirus
brings the time that sweetly senteth, with flowers and herbs and winters frost
exi-leth, * Progne now chirpeth, and Philomele lamenteth, Flora the garlands
white and read compileth, * Flora the garlands white and read compileth,
fields do rejoice, the frowning Sky relenteth, * Jove to behold his dearest
daughter smyleth, * the air, the water, the air, the water, the ^ earth to Joy
consents each creature now to Love, him re-con-cy-leth, the air the water,
the air the water, the earth, to Joy consents, each creature now to love,
him reconcyleth.

LIII. The second part.
^ But with me wretch ye storms of woe persevere, and heavy sighs, but with
me wretch ye storms of woe persevere, and heavy sighs, which from my heart she
stray-neth, which from my heart she straineth, * that took ye kaye thereof to
heaven for ever, * for ever, so ye sing-ing of byrds and spring time flowring,
so ye sing-ing of byrds, so ye sing-ing of byrds and spring time flowring, and
ladies love ye men's affection gayneth, * are like a de-sert, * are like a
desert and cruel beasts de-uouring, and ladies love that men's affection
gains * are like a de-sert, are like a desert are like a desert and cruel
beasts devouring.

LIIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Was full near my fall, and hardly escaped, and hardly escaped, * that
headlong me transported, and with the darts and with the netts I spor-ted,
that Love himself for me devised and shaped, and if my reason, * but a while
had stayed, to my mishappe, I had, I had no doubt assayed, what a death is to
live, by love surpri-sed, to live by love surpri-sed, what a death is to live
by love surprised, what a death is to live by Love surprised, by Love
surpri-sed.

LV. The second part.
^ BUT as: That in due time espy-ing, but as the byrd, that in due time
e-spy-ing, that: * the secret snare, and bush en-ly-med, quick to the heauan
does mount, * quik to the heaven does mount with song and pleasure, trains of
false looks, false looks, and faithles words defy-ing, mounting the hill so
hard for to be clymed, I sing for Joy of li-ber-ty ye treasure. I sing for Joy
of li-ber-ty the trea-sure, I sing for Joy of li-ber-ty the treasure.

LVI. The first part.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Soung, I soung some-time, I soung, the freedom of my fancye, the yoke and
bonds subdu-ed, with heart congealed, * with heart con-gealed, I quench the
burning phransye, and with disdain, the harmefull bayte eschu-ed, but now I
wail my bonds, my bonds and my enchay-ning, all naked, vn-armed, nor by
tears, * nor by tears can I find, nor by complaining, mercy, mercy, mercy,
nor comfort, nor yet my grief assua-ged.

LVII. The second part.
^ BEcause my Love too lof-ty and dispightfull, and ( too) dispightfull, while
I with sighs resound her name delight-full, her name delightful, does smyle
when as ye flame my life depriueth, my life depri-ueth, If I seek to break of,
the strings that bind me, If I seek to break of, the more I fly, * the more
I fly, the fa-ster I the fa-ster I do find me, like the byrd in ye snare, in
vain that stryueth, in the snare in vain that stri-ueth, like the byrd in the
snare in vain that stry-ueth.

FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contained in these books, with the names of
their several authors, and originalls.
Of 4.
THese that be certain signs. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Fagnient. The fair
Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Joy so delights my heart. III Gioia
s'abond'all cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Love now shoot. IIII Amor
ben puoi. O grief, if yet my grief. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar
Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donato. In vain he
seeks for beauty. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What means
Love to nest him. VIII Perch s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino.
Sweet Love when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella
mano. Mare' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de
Vuert. Lady your look so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch.

Of 5.
From what part of the Heaven. XIII In qual part del ciel. Filippo di Montte.
The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza 2. pars. In every place. XV Ogni
luogo. Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second
part. XVII Freno Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi moriro. 3.
pars. Susanna fair. XIX Susann' un iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fair. XX
Susann' un iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI To the note of Chi
per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I
saw my lady weeping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second
part. XXIIII Come dal ciel. Giouan Ferrettie So gracious. XXV Sci tanto
gratiosa. Cruel unkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What does my pretty darling. XXVII
Che fa* hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleep mine only Jewel. XXVIII Sonno
scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2.
pars. Sound out my voice. XXX To the note of Vestin'icolli. Gianetto Pales^^^^
Liquide and watery perles. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale.
XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In un
Roschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope reliu'd me. XXXIIII Gia fu ch'
io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini* Alfonso Ferabosco.
O sweet kiss. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII Gia fu mio
dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio Bertany. My
heart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so spite me.
XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee embrace. XLI
Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enjoyed the graces XLII
Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alofonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le Rossignol,
The fair young virgin. XLIIII La verginella, 1. pars. William Byrd. The second
part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2* pars.

Of 6.
I will go dye for pure Love. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These
that be certain signs. XLVII Questi ch' inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far
from my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1 pars. The second part. XLIX
Sola voi no'l sentite. 2. pars. Lo here my heart. L Ecco ch'io lasso. Now must
I part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzio. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro
torna. 1* pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2.
pars. I was full near my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso
Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI
Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my love. LVII Che la mia donna. 2.
pars.

FINIS.
MVSICA TRANSALPINA.

BASSVS.

Madrigales translated of four, five and six parts, chosen out of diverse
excellent Authors, with the first and second part of La Verginella, made by
Master Byrd, upon two Stanz's of Ariosto, and brought to speak English with
the rest.

Published by N. Young, in favor of such as take pleasure in Music of voices.

Imprinted at London by Thomas East, the assign of William Byrd. 1588.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

To the right honorable Gilbert Lord Talbot, son and heir to the right
noble and puissant George Earl of Shrewesbury, Washford and Waterford, Earl
Marshal of England, Lord Talbot, Furniuall, Verdune, Louetoft, and Strange of
Blackmeere, one of her Majesty's most honorable privy council, Justice of the
forests and chases by north the river of Trent, and knight of the most
honorable order of the garter. Nicholas Young wishes increase of honor, with
all happiness.
RIght honorable, since I first began to keep house in this City, it has
been no small comfort unto me, that a great number of Gentlemen and Merchants
of good account (as well of this realm as of foreign nations) have taken in
good part such entertainment of pleasure, as my poor ability was able to
afford them, both by the exercise of Music daily used in my house, and by
furnishing them with Books of that kind yearly sent me out of Italy and
other places, which being for the most part Italian Songs, are for sweetness of
Air, very well liked of all, but most in account with them that understand
that language. As for the rest, they do either not sing them at all, or at the
least with little delight. And albeit there be some English songs lately set
forth by a great Master of Music, which for skill and sweetness may content
the most curious: yet because they are not many in number, men delighted with
variety, have wished more of the same sort. For whose cause chiefly I
endeavored to get into my hands all such English Songs as were praise worthy,
and amongst others, I had the hap to find in the hands of some of my good
friends, certain Italian Madrigales translated most of them five years ago
by a Gentleman for his private delight, (as not long before certain Napolitans
had been englished by a very honorable personage, and now a Counselor of
estate, whereof I have seen some, but never possessed any.) And finding the
same to be singulerly well liked, not only of those for whose cause I gathered
them, but of many skillful Gentlemen and other great Musiciens, who affirmed
the accent of the words to be well maintained, the descant not hindered, (though
some few notes altered) and in every place the due decorum kept: I was so
bold (being well acquainted with the Gentleman) as to entreat the rest, who
willingly gave me such as he had (for of some he kept no Copies) and also some
other more lately done at the request of his particular friends. Now when the
same were seen to arise to a just number, sufficient to furnish a great set of
Books, diverse of my friends aforesaid, required with great instance to have
them printed, whereunto I was as willing as the rest, but could never obtain
the Gentleman's consent, though I sought it by many great means. For his answer
was ever, that those trifles being but an idle man's exercise, of an idle
subject, written only for private recreation, would blush to be seen
otherwise then by twilight, much more to be brought into the common view of all
men. And seeing me still importunate, he took his pen, and with an obstinate
resolution of his former speech, wrote in one of the Books these verses of the
Poet Martial.

Seras tutior ibis ad lucernas,
Haec hora est tua, dum furit Lyaeus,
Dum regnat rosa, dum madent capilli,
Tum te vel rigidi legant Catones.
Wherefore I kept them (or the most of them) for a long time by me, not
presuming to put my sickle in an other man's corn, till such time as I heard,
that the same being dispersed into many men's hands, were by some persons
altogether unknown to the owner, like to be published in Print. Which made me
adventure to set this work in hand, he being neither privy nor present, nor
so near this place as by any reasonable means I could give him notice.
Wherein though he may take a just offense, that I have laid open his labors
without his license: yet since they were in hazard to come abroad by
strangers, lame and imperfect by means of false Copies, I hope that this
which I have done to avoid a greater ill, shall deserve a more favorable
excuse. But seeking yet a stronger string to my bow, I thought good in all
humble and duetifull sort to offer my self and my bold attempt to the defense
and protection of your Lordship, to whose honorable hands I present the same.
Assuring my self, that so great is the love and affection which he bears to
your L. as the view of your name in the Front of the Books, will take away all
displeasure and unkindness from me. And although this may be thought a greater
boldness then the first (I being not any way able to do your L. such a service,
as may deserve so great a favor) yet I hope these Songs being hitherto well
esteemed of all, shall be so regarded of your L. as I for them, and they for
themselves, shall not be thought unworthy of your honorable defense. With
which hope I humbly commit your L. to the protection of the Almighty: wishing
to the same, that increase of honor which your true virtue derived from so
noble and renowned Ancestors does worthily deserve. From London the first of
October. 1588.

Your Lordship's most humble at commandment, N. Young.

Of 4.
I.
Noe Faignient.
^ THese that: of my tormenting, no sighs * no sighs be they ( no) nor any
sighe so shows, those have their truce some-time, those have their truce
sometime, these no relenting, but these have no relen-ting, not so exhales the
heat that in me gloweth, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this
venting, fierce Love, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this venting,
while with his wings the raging fire he blows, while with his wings the
raging fire he blows, say Love, say Love, with what devise thou can for
ever, with what devise thou can for ever, keep it in flames and yet co^-sume
it never, and yet consume it never.

II.
Giouan di Macque.
^ THe fair Diana never more revived, the fair Diana never more revived, her
lovers heart that spyed her in the fountain, while she her naked lims in
waters die-ued, the^ me the country wench, * set by the mountain, washing a
veil to cloth the locks re-fined, washing a veil to cloth the locks refined,
that on fair Laura's head the gold resemble, which made me quake although the
Sun then shined, though the Sun then shined, and every joint with loving
frost to tremble, and every joint with loving frost to trem-ble.

III.
G.PA. Prenestino.
^ Joy so delights my heart, and so reliues me, when I bee-hold the face of my
beeloued, that any hard mischaunce or pang that griues me, is quite exild and
presently removed, and if I might to perfect up my pleasure, to perfect up my
pleasure, without controulement, be-stow mine eyes where I repose my treasure,
for a crown and a kingdom sure pos-sessed, sure possessed, I would not
change my state so sweet and bles-sed, for a crown and a kingdom sure
possessed, sure pos-sessed, I would not change my state so sweet, sweet and
blessed.

IIII.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ FAlse Love now shoot and spare not, now do thy worst, now do thy worst I
care not, and to dispatch me use all thine art and all thy craft to catch
me, for youth amiss bestowed, I now repent and for my faults I languish, that
brought me nothing else but grief and anguish, and now at length have vowed
at liberty to live, since to assail me, for from thee good nor ill, nor good
nor ill, comfort nor sorrow * I will not hope nor fear, now nor to morrow, I
will not hope nor fear, nor fear, now nor to morrow.

V.
Baldessar Donato.
^ O Grief if yet my grief be not believed, O Grief, * if yet my grief be
not beeleeued, cry with thy voice outstretched, that her dispightfull heart
and ears disdayning, may hear my just complaining, may hear my just
complaining, my just complaining. And when thou have her told my state most
wretch-ed, tell her, tell her, I could be well contented, if she that now
does grieve me, had but the least desire, * once to relieve me, * had but the
least desire, * once to relieve me, once to relieve me.

VI.
Baldessar Donato.
^ AS in the night we see the sparcks revived, and quite ex-tinct so soon, so
soon as day appears, so when I am of my sweet son deprived, new fears
approach, and joy my heart forbeareth. But not so soon she is again arrived,
as fear retires, and present hope me cheareth, O sacred light, oh turn, oh
turn again to bless me, and drive away this fear, that does oppress me,
and drive away this fear that does oppress me. O sacred light, oh turn, oh
turn again to bless me, and drive away this fear that does oppress me.
And drive away this fear that does oppress me. And drive away this fear
that does oppress me, and drive away this fear that does oppress me.

VII.
Fillippo de Monte.
^ IN vain he seeks for beauty that exceleth, that has not seen her eyes
where Love seiorneth, how sweetly here and there the same she turns, he
knows not, he knows not how Love heals, he knows not how Love heales and
how he quelleth, that knows not, that knows not how she sighs and sweet
beguileth, and how she sweetly speaks, and sweetly smileth, and how she
sweetly speaks and sweetly smileth, and sweetly smi-leth.

VIII.
G: P. Prenestino.
^ WHat mea: in the fair eyes ad-myred, with lovely grace and heavenly spryte
inspired, of my mistres delight-full, of my mistres delightful, envious dames,
envious dames confess and be not spiteful, ah fools do you not mind it,
that Love has sought and yet could never find it from Sun ary-sing, till
where he goes to rest him, a brauer place then in her eyes to nest him, a
brauer place then in her eyes to nest him.

IX.
G.P.A. Prenestino.
^ SWeet Love when hope was flow-ring, with fruits of recompense for my
deserving, rest was the price of all my faith, of all my faithful serving, Oh
spiteful death ac-cursed, oh life most cruel, the first by wrong does pain
me, and all my hope has turned, the last against my will does here detain
me, but death to spite me more is not consenting, me thinks with in my heart
still her place she holds, and what my torment is plainly beehold-eth, and
what my torment is plainly beeholdeth, plainly beeholdeh.

X.
Marc' Antonio Pordeuon.
^ LAdy that: Sweet thief of Love so dainty, * what will you do by theuing,
that rob when you are ge-uing? but you do give so surely, but you do give,
* so surely, yt you may rob and steal the more securely. If sometime you be
pleased, * that my poor heart be eased* you do it not to joy me, but still by
fresh as-saults quite to destroy me, but still by fresh assaults quite to
destroy me, quite to destroy me.

XI.
Giaches de Were.
^ WHO will ascend to heaven and there obtain me, my wits forlorn and
sil-ly sense decayed? for since I took the wound that sore does pain me from
your fair eyes, my sprytes are all dismayed. Nor of so great a loss I do
complain me, if it increase not, * * but in some bounds be stayed, but if I
still grow worse I shal-bee lotted, but if I still grow worse I shall be lotted,
to wander through the world fond and assotted. * but if I still grow worse I
shal-bee lotted, * to wander through the world fond and assotted. * fond and
assotted*

XII.
Cornelio Verdonch.
^ LAdy your look so gentle so to my heart deep sincketh, so to my heart deep
sincketh. why the^ do you constrain me cruel to live in playnts in pain and
sadness, when one sweet word may gain me, when one sweet word may gain me,
peace to my thoughts and everlasting gladness, peace to my thoughts and
everlasting gladness, euer-lasting gladness, peace to my thoughts with
everlasting gladness, peace to my thoughts, * with everlasting gladness.

Here ends the songs of four parts.
Of 5.
XIII.
Fillippo de Monte.
^ FRom what part of the heaven, from what example wher-by dame Nature framed,
that sweet face full of beauty, in which she aimed to prove in earth her
power above above was ample, was never Nymph yet nor Syluane queen a-do-red,
that so dainty fine locks in air display-ed, yet by her looks my life is all
beetrayed.

XIIII. The second part.
^ IN vain: That has not seen her eyes where Love seiorneth, he knows not
how love heales and how he quelleth, and how she sweetly speaks, he knows
not how Love heales and how he quelleth, and how she sweetly speaks, and
how she sweetly speaks and sweetly smy-leth.

XV.
^ IN every place: Save where I see those beams * those beams that me have
burned, and eke mine eyes to floods, to floods of tears have turned, thus in
extremest panges each hour I languish, each hour I languish, * O me, O me my
shining star cause of all comfort of this world the Jewel, for want of thee
my life my life I have in hatred, my life I have in hatred, was never grief so
great, was never grief so great nor death so cruel, was never grief so
great, * nor death so cruel.

XVI. The first part.
Luca Maranzio.
^ THirsis Thirsis to die desired, marking her eyes yt to his heart was
nea-rest, and she that with his flame no less was fyred, said to him, oh hearts
love dearest, alas forbear to dye now, ij. by thee I live, with the I wish to
dye too, to dye too, by thee I live, with thee I wish to dye too, to dye too.

XVII. The second part.
^ THirsis: Thinking it death that life would not forsake him, his dainty
Nymph that now, the harvest of Loves trea-sure, said thus with eyes all
trembling, faint and wasted, dye now sweet heart, the Shepherd thus replied,
and I sweet life do dye too, and I sweet life do dye too, and I sweet life
do dye too.

XVIII. The third part.
^ THus these two lovers so fortunatly dyed and so desired, that to dye so
again, * that to dye so again, * their life retired.

XIX.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ SV-sanna fair, * sometime of love re-que-sted, by two old men, by two old
men whom her sweet looks allured, was in her heart, * full sad and sore
mole-sted, seeing the force, * her chastie endured, to the^ she said, if I by
craft procured, do yield to you my body to abuse it, I kill my soul, and if I
shall refuse it, you will me judge to death reprochfully, but better it is, *
in innocence to choose it, then by my fault, * to'ffend my God on hye.

XX.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ Susanna fair sometime of love requested, by two old men whom her sweet
looks allured, was in her heart, * full sad and sore moles-ted, seeing the force
her cha-stitie endure'd, to them she said, to them she said, if I by craft
procured do yield to you my bo-dy to abuse it, my body to abuse it, I kill my
soul and if I do refuse it, you will me judge, you will me judge to death
reproach ful-ly, but better it is, * but better it is, in in-no-cence to choose
it then by my fault to offend my God on hye, then by ^ my fault to offend my God
on hye, then by my fault to offend my God on hye, then by my fault to offend my
God on hye. *

XXI.
Noe Faignient.
^ WHen shall I cease: Lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting, when shall I
cease lamenting, when shall I cease lamenting? when shall my plaint and
mourning to tunes of Joy be turned, when shall my plaint and mourning to
tunes of Joy be turned; good Love leave thy tormenting, good love, good love
leave thy tormenting, to long thy flames within my heart have burned, within my
heart have burned, O grant a-las with quick-nesse, * O grant a-las with
quickness, some little comfort, * some little comfort, * some little comfort, *
for so long a sickness.

XXII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Must depart oh haples, but leave to you my careful heart oppressed, so
that if I live hartles * if I live hartles, * Love does a work miraculous and
blessed, but so great pains assail me, that sure ere it be lnog, that sure
ere it be long my life will fail me * that sure ere it be long, that sure ere
it be long, my life will fail me, my life will fail me.

XXIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Saw my lady weeping, I saw my lady wee-ping, and Love did languish, and
Love did languish, and of their plaint ensued so rare consenting that never yet
was heard more sweet lamenting, was heard more sweet lamenting, made all of
tender pity and mornefull an-guish, and mournful an-guish, the floods
forsaking their delightful swel-ling the floods forsaking, the floods
forsaking their delightful swelling, staid to attend their plaint, the winds
enraged, the winds enraged, still and content to quiet calm assuaged, still
and content to quiet calm assuaged, their won-ted stor-ming, and every blast
rebel-ling, and every blast rebelling.

XXIIII. The second part.
^ LIke as from heaven the dew full softly showring* does fall, and so refresh
both fields and closes, both fields and closes, filling the parched flowers
with sap and savor? so while she bathed the Violets and ye Roses, so
freshly flowring, so freshly flowring, the spring reneued his force with her
sweet favor, the spring renewed his force with her sweet fa-uour, with her
sweet favor: so while she bathed the Violetts and the Roses, so freshly
flowring, so freshly flowring, the spring renu'd his force with her sweet
favor, the spring renu'd his force with her sweet fa-uour, with her sweet
favor.

XXV.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ SO gracious is thy sweet self * so fair so framed, so gracious is thy
sweet self, * so fair so framed, that who so sees thee, * with out a heart
enflamed, either he lives not, * either he lives not, or Loves delight he
knows not, either he lives not, * either he lives not, or Loves, delight he
knows not.

XXVI.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ Cruel unkind, my heart thou have bereft me, my heart thou have bereft me, *
my heart thou have bereft me, * Cruel unkind my heart thou have bereft me, my
heart thou have bereft me, * my heart thou have bereft me, * And wilt not leave
yet, and wilt not leave while any life is left me. And yet, and yet, and yet,
still will I love thee. *

XXVII.
Luca Marenzio.
^ WHat does my pretty dear-ling? what does that they sing not of her, the
praise and vaunting? To her I give my Violets, To her I give my Violets and
garland sweetly smelling, For to crown her sweet locks pure gold excelling.

XXVIII.
Stephano Felis.
^ Sleep mine only Iuell, sleep sleep mine only Iu-ell, sleep sleep mine
only Iuell, mine only Iu-ell, much more thou did delight me, that hyd her
face to spite me, * that hyd her face to spite me, * much more thou did
de-light me, that hyd her face to spite me, that hyd her face to spite me,
that hyd her face to spite me, that hyd her face to spite me.

XXIX. The second part.
^ THou bringst her home full nigh me, while she so fast did fly me, did
fly me, while she so fast did fly me, long time absented, that look so
mild appeased, thus is my grief declyning, thus is my grief declyning, sleep
if thou be like death as thou art feigned, as thou art fay-ned, as thou art
fay-ned, a happy life by such a death were gained, * a happy life by such a
death were gay-ned.

XXX.
Gianetto Palestina.
^ SOund out my voice, with pleasant tunes recording, the new delight that Love
to me inspireth, pleased and con-tent with that my mind de-sireth, my mind
de-sireth, thanked be Love so heavenly, so heavenly ioys affoording, she that
my plaints with rigor long rejected, bynding my heart with those her golden
tresses, in recompense of all my long dis-tresses, my long distresses, said
with a sigh, thy grief has, thy grief has me in-fec-ted, said with a sigh,
thy grief has me infected, thy grief has me in-fec-ted.

XXXI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ LIquid and: To quench my heart enflamed, but he a-las, * a-las, oh, as were
enough to burn me, without recomfort, as were enough to burn me, without
recomfort, and in-to ashes turn me.

XXXII.
Orlando di Lasso.
^ THe Nightingale so pleasant and so gay, so pleasant and so gay, in
greenewood groves, delights to make his dwel-ling, in fields to fly chaunting
his roundelay, chau^ting his roundelay, at liberty against the cage rebel-ling,
but my poor heart, with sorrows ouerswel-ling, * through bondage vile binding
my freedom short, no pleasure takes, * no pleasure takes in these his sports
excelling, nor of his song receives no comfort. nor of his song receives no
comfort, nor of his song receives no comfort.

XXXIII.
Giouan Ferretti.
^ WIthin: Thus spoke the Nymph with sugared words of fa-uor, say (sweet love)
to thy love, tell me my dearling, where is thy heart beestowd, where is thy
liking? all full of sweetness and of sorrow mixed, with that the gentle Nymph
full sweetly smiling, with kind words of de-light and flattring gloses, she
kindly kissed his cheek with lips of ro-ses, with lips of ro-ses, she kindly
kissed his cheek, with lips of ro-ses, with lips of ro-ses, with lips of
roses.

XXXIIII.
Rinaldo del Mel.
^ SOmetime: O since she first consented to leave the world all earthly Joy
defying* to leave the world all earthly Joy defying, clouds of care all about
my heart are flye-ing, in vain lament I, since a veil now hydeth, the rarest
beauty thar on earth abides. the rarest beauty that on earth adydeth, the
rarest beauty that on earth abides.

XXXV.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ RVbies and perles and treasure, Rubies and perles and trea-sure, kingdoms,
renown and glory, kingdoms, renown and glory, please the delightful mind and
cheer the so-ry, but much the greater mea-sure, of true delight he gayneth,
sues and obtains, but much the greater mea-sure of true delight he gay-neth,
that for the fruits of love, * sues and obtains, sues and obtains.

XXXVI.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ O Sweet kiss full of com-fort, O joy to me enui-ed, * so often sought, so
often to me denied, to me de-ny-ed, de-ny-ed. Yet thee I never ta-sted, O lips
so false and wy-ly, so false and wy-ly, so false and wy-ly O looks empoysned, O
face well may I fear thee, that kilst who thee beholds and comes not near
thee, I dye a death most paine-full, * farewell sweet lips disdainful, killed
with unkindness, farewell sweet lips disdainful, farewell sweet lips,
disdainful.

XXXVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SOmetime my hope full weakly, went on by line and leisure, but now it grows
to do my heart but now it grows to do my heart some pleasure. Yet that my hope
decay not, by over much contenting, Love will not give my Joys their full
augmenting, allayes my bliss that hope may be ye fa-ster, but still with some
de-sa-ster, allayes my bliss that hope may be the fa-ster, that hope may be
the faster.

XXXVIII.
Lelio Bertani.
^ LAdy that hand of plenty, which gave vn-to the needful, which gave vn-to
the needful, Lady that hand of plenty, which gave vn-to the needful, did
steal my heart vnheedfull, my heart vnheedfull. But you do give so surely *
that you may rob and steal the more securely, If you sometime be pleased, that
my poor heart be eased, but still by fresh assaults quite to destroy me, you
do not that to joy me, quite to destroy me, but still by fresh a-saults
quite to destroy me.

XXXIX.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ MY heart alas why do you love thine enemy, thine ene-mie, my heart alas why
do thou love thine enemy, thine enemy, laughing so merely she goes,
laughing so merely she goes, * with gladness, with gladness: cruel disdain,
cruel disdain, merely does she go with gladness, merely does she go, merely
does she go with gladness: cruel disdain, * lasting pain no remedy, lasting
pain no remedy, save most singular beutie, and little pity and little little
pity, save most singular beauty and little pity and little little pity.

XL.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ LAdy: If you so spite me, if you so spite me, so spite me, wherefore
do you so often kiss and de-light me, kiss and delight me, kiss and delight
me? may break and be destroy-ed, sure that my heart oppressed and ouerioy-ed,
may break and be destroyed, destroyed. If you seek so to spill me, * come
kiss me sweet and kill me, * so shall your heart be eased, and I, and I shall
rest content, * shall rest content, and die well pleased. So shall your heart be
eased, and I shall rest content, * shall rest content, and dye well pleased.

XLI. Cantio rustica.
Giouan Battista Pinello.
^ WHen I would thee embrace, * when I would thee embrace, thou do but mock
me, * thou do but mock me, when I would thee embrace, * when I would thee
embrace, thou do but mock me, * thou do but mock me, and when I lament,
and when I la-ment my case, thou cryest ty hy hy hy hy hy, * thou criest ty hy
and no no no no no no no no no, so says my piggs nie. and no no no no no no no
no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no no so
says my piggs nie. and no no no no, and no no no no, still says my piggs nie

XLII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THirsis enjoyed the gra-ces, of Clori's sweet embra-ces, of Clori's sweet
embraces, yet both their Joys were scan-ted for dark it was, and candle light
they wanted, for dark it was, and can-dle light they wanted, wherewith kind
Cin-thia in the heaven that shy-ned, her nightly veil resig-ned, and that
fair face dis-closed, and that fair face disclosed, where Love and Joy were
met and both re-posed, that both of mere delight dyed and revived, the^ each
from oth^^s looks such Joy derived, that both of mere delight dyed and
re-uiued, revived.

XLIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco
^ THe Nightingale so plea-sant and so gay, so plea-sant and so gay, in
greenewood groves de-lights delights to make his dwelling, delights, * delights
to make his dwel-ling, in fields to fly, chaunting his roun-delay, chau^ting
his roun-delay, at liberty, * against the cage rebelling, but my poor heart
with sorrows ouerswel-ling, through bondage vile, bynding my freedom short,
my freedom short, no pleasure takes, * in these, in these his sports
excelling, nor of his song * receives ^ no comfort. Nor of his song receives
no com-fort, nor of his song * receives no comfort, nor of his song receives
no com-fort.

XLIIII.
William Byrd.
^ THe fair young virgin, * is like the rose untainted, in garden fair while
tender stalck does bear it, sole and all untouched, sole and untouched with no
re-sort acquain-ted, no shepherd, no shepherd nor his flock does once come
near it, the air full of sweetness, of sweet-nes, the morning fresh depainted,
the earth the water, * with all their favors do cheer it, dainty young
gal-lants, * and ladies most desired, desi-red, de-light to have therewith,
their heads and breasts, their heads and breasts attyred, Dayntie young
gal-lants, * ^ and ladies most desired, desi-red delight to have therewith
their heads and breasts, their heads and breasts attyred.

XLV. The second part.
^ BUT not so soon, * from green stock where it growed, the same is plucked, *
and from the branch re-moued, as lost is all from heaven and earth, from heaven
and earth that flow-ed, both favor grace and beauty best beloved, and beauty
best beloved. The virgin fair, * that has the flower, that has the flower
beestowed, which more then life to guard it her behooved, loses her praise and
is no more de-sired, of those yt late unto her love, unto her love a-spi-red.
loses her praise and is no more desired, of those yt late unto her love, unto
her love aspyred.

Here ends the songs of five parts.
Of 6.
XLVI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Will go dye for pure love, except rage and disdain come to recure love,
and in my flame sans measure, takes her disport and pleasure, takes her disport
and pleasure, takes her disport and pleasure, unless some frost, I will go die
for pure love, I will go die for pure love.

XLVII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ THese that be certain signs of my tormenting, of my tormenting, nor a-ny
sigh so shows, have no relenting, not so exhales the heat that in me
gloweth, not so exhales the heat that in me glow-eth, the heat that in me
gloweth, fierce Love that burns my heart makes all this venting, makes all this
ven-ting, makes all this venting, Say Love, * with what devise thou can for
e-uer, keep it in flames still, and yet consume it ne-uer* and yet consume it
never, say Love, say Love with what devise thou can for e-uer, keep it in
flames and yet consume it never, keep it in flames still, and yet con-sume it
never? and yet consume it ne uer,

XLVIII.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ SO far from my delight, * what cares torment me, fields do record it, and
vallyes, and woods and mountains, and running ryuers, and still repo-sed
fountains, and still reposed fountains, where I cry out and to the heavens,
lament me, none other sounds but tunes of my complaining, Nymph of the groves
or pleasant byrd once hears, still recount I my grief, and her disday-ning,
to every plant that grows, * or blossom bears, to every plant that
grow-eth, or blossom bears.

XLIX. The second part.
^ SHE only does not feel it, * O fields, O mountains, O mountains, O
woods, O vallyes, O floods, O fountains, * O stay no more to hear a wretch
appea-ling, to hear a wretch appealing, to hear a wretch appealing, O that
some one this life and soul would se-uer, and these mine eyes oppressed, and
these mine eyes oppressed, would cloze for e-uer, would cloze for e-uer, for best
were me to dye so, for best were me to dye, my love concealing. For best were
me to die so, for best were me to dye, my love concealing, my love concealing.

L.
^ LO here my heart in keeping, I leave with her that laughes to see me
wee-ping, Oh what comfort or treasure, break heart and die then, that she which
still does pain me, may live the more content, when grief has slain me, may
live the more con-tent, when grief has slain me, may live the more
contented, may live the more content, when grief has slain me, may live the
more content, when grief has slain me.

LI.
Luca Marenzio.
^ NOW must I part my dearling, of life and soul, of life and soul disseised,
and love therewith is pleased, oh what a death is parting? but if the fates
ordain it? who can refrain it? oh what grief is now lacking? yet must I
needs be packing, farewell, * farewell sweet heart unfeigned, but if the fates
ordain it, who can refrain it? oh what grief is now lacking? yet must I
needs be packing, farewell, * farewell sweet heart unfeigned, I dye to part
constrained.

LII. The first part.
Gironimo Conuersi.
^ ZE-phirus brings the time yt sweetly senteth, * with flowers and herbs and
winters frost ex-ileth, Progne now chirpeth* and Philomele lamenteth, Flora the
gar-lands * white and read compileth, Flora the garlands white and read
compi-leth, fields do rejoice, the frowning Sky relenteth, Jove to beehold
his dearest daughter smy-leth, * the air, the water, the earth to Joy
consents, each creature now to love, him reconcileth, the air the water, the
earth, to Joy consents, each creature now to love, him re-conci-leth.

LIII. The second part.
^ BUT with me wretch ye storms of woe perse-uer, and heavy sighs, but with
me wretch the storms of woe per-se-uer, and hea-uy sighs, which from my heart
she straineth, which from my heart she strayneth, that took the kay thereof to
heaven for e-uer, that took the kay thereof to heaven for e-uer, so yt
sing-ing of byrds and spring time flow ring, so that sing-ing of byrds and
spring time flowring, * and ladies love that men's affection gains, are like a
de-sert, * are like a de-sert, and cruel beasts devouring. and ladies love
that men's affection gains, are like a de-sert, * are like a desert, and
cruel beasts deuour-ing.

LIIII. The first part.
Alfonso Ferabosco.
^ I Was full near my fall, and hardly escaped, I was full near my fall, and
hardly escaped * and with the darts and with the nets I sported, that Love
himself for me devised and shaped, and if my reason but a while had stayed,
to rule my sense misled and vnaduis'd. to my mishappe I had no doubt assayed,
what a death is to live by Love surprised, what a death is to live, what a
death is to live by Love surprised, by Love surprised.

LV. The second part.
^ But as the byrd that in due time espying, but as the byrd that in due time
espying, the se-cret snare and deadly bush enlymed, quick to the heavens does
mount, * with song and pleasure: traynes of false looks and faith-les words
de-fying, mounting the hill so hard * so hard for to be clymed, I sing for Joy
of liberty the treasure. I sing for Joy of liberty the treasure, the trea-sure.

LVI. The first part.
Luca Marenzio.
^ I Soung, sometime, I soung, the fire extinct, the yoke and bonds subdu-ed,
with heart congealed, with heart congealed, with heart congealed, I quench the
burning phransye, and with disdain, the harmefull bayte eschued. But now I
wail my bonds and my enchay-ning, in lovely nets en-gaged, mercy nor
comfort, mercy nor comfort, mercy nor comfort, nor my grief assuaged.

LVII. The second part.
^ BEcause my Love: While I with sighs resound her name de-lightfull, my life
depriueth: If I seek to break of * the strings that bind me, like the byrd
in the snare in vain that stry-ueth. like the byrd, in vain that strives.
Like the byrd in the snare, in vain that stry-ueth.

FINIS.
The Table of all the madrigales contained in these books, with the names of
their several authors, and originalls.
Of 4.
THese that be certain signs. I Questi ch' inditio. Noe: Fagnient. The fair
Diana. II Non piu Diana. Giouan de Macque. Joy so delights my heart. III Gioia
s'abond'all cor. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino. False Love now shoot. IIII Amor
ben puoi. O grief, if yet my grief. V Dolor, se'l mio dolor. Baldessar
Donato. As in the night. VI Come la notte. Baldessar Donato. In vain he
seeks for beauty. VII Per diuina bellezza. Filippo di Monte. What means
Love to nest him. VIII Perch s'annida Amore. Gio: Petraloysio Prenestino.
Sweet Love when hope. IX Amor quando fioriua. Lady that hand. X Donna la bella
mano. Marc' Antonio Pordenone. Who will ascend. XI Chi salira. Giaches de
Vuert. Lady your look so gentle. XII Donna bella e gentile. Cornelio Verdonch.

Of 5.
From what part of the Heaven. XIII In qual part del ciel. Filippo di Montte.
The second part. XIIII Per diuina bellezza 2. pars. In every place. XV Ogni
luogo. Thirsis to dye desired. XVI Tirsi morir volea. Luca Marenzio. The second
part. XVII Freno Tirsi il desio. 2. pars. The third part. XVIII Cosi moriro. 3.
pars. Susanna fair. XIX Susann' un iour. Orlando di Lasso. Susanna fair. XX
Susann' un iour. Alfonso Ferabosco. When shall I cease. XXI To the note of Chi
per voi non. Noe: Faignient. I must depart. XXII Io partiro. Luca Marenzio. I
saw my lady weeping. XXIII Vidi pianger Madonna. Alfonso Ferabosco. The second
part. XXIIII. Come dal ciel. Giouan Ferrettie So gracious. XXV Sci tanto
gratiosa. Cruel unkind. XXVI Donna crudel. What does my pretty darling. XXVII
Che fa* hoggil mio sole. Luca Marenzio. Sleep mine only Jewel. XXVIII Sonno
scendosti. 1. pars. Stefano Felis. The second part. XXIX Tu la ritorni. 2.
pars. Sound out my voice. XXX To the note of Vestiu'icolli. Gianetto Palestina.
Liquide and watery perles. XXXI Liquide perle. Luca Marenzio. The Nightingale.
XXXII Le Rossignol. Orlando di lasso. Within a greenwood. XXXIII In un
Roschetto. Giouan Ferretti. Sometime when hope reliu'd me. XXXIIII Gia fu
ch'io. Rinaldo del Melle. Rubyes and perles. XXXV Perle rubini* Alfonso
Ferabosco. O sweet kiss. XXXVI O dolcissimo bascio. Sometime my hope. XXXVII
Gia fu mio dolce speme. Lady that hand. XXXVIII Donna la bella mano. Lelio
Bertany. My heart alas. XXXIX Alma gui dotta. Gironimo Conuersi. Lady if you so
spite me. XL Donna se voi m'odiate. Alfonso Ferabosco. When I would thee
embrace. XLI Quand' io voleua. Giouan Battista Pinello. Thirsis enjoyed the
graces XLII Godea Tirsi gl'amori. Alofonso Ferabosco. The Nightingale. XLIII Le
Rossignol, The faire-yong virgin. XLIIII La verginella, 1. pars. William Byrd.
The second part. XLV Ma non si tosto. 2. pars.

Of 6.
I will go dye for pure Love. XLVI Io moriro d'amore. Luca Marenzio. These that
be certain signs. XLVII Questi ch' inditio. Alfonso Ferabosco. So far from
my delight. XLVIII Se lungi dal mio sol. 1. pars. The second part. XLIX Sola
voi no'l sentite. 2 pars. Lo here my heart. L Ecco ch'io lasso. Now must I
part. LI Parto da voi. Luca Marenzio. Zephirus brings the time. LII Zephiro
torna. 1 pars. Gironimo Conuersi. The second part. LIII Ma per me lasso. 2.
pars. I was full near my fall. LIIII Fui vicin' al cader. 1. pars. Alfonso
Ferabosco. The second part. LV Hor come augel. 2. pars. I soung sometime. LVI
Cantai gia. 1. pars. Luca Marenzio. Because my love. LVII Che la mia donna. 2.
pars.

FINIS.

