A Murmurer.

LONDON Printed by ROBERT RAVVORTH, and are to be sold by John Wright, at his
shop near Christ-Church gate. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable privy
Counsel.
RIght Honorable, It cannot be unknown to your wisdoms, how perilous a
thing, both to the Crown, the Peers, and the Nobles; yea and to all the parts
of the commonwea^th, is the ungracious, ungodly, yea, profane, and hellish
humor of murmuring: especially against God, the king, or any their ordained
magistrates, in a Kingdom: for the cure whereof, what care is to be taken, your
discreet considerations can determine: and knowing in your honorable
dispositions, an assured hate unto all such unpleasing and unprofitable
spirits, as no doubt, but you will weed, out from the good herbs in the ground
of your charge; and again, how blessed a thing, the vnio^ of hearts will be to
your honorable Spirits, whose continual care of the preservation, both of our
king, and his whole kingdom, deserves no little honor: I have presumed rather
upon your honorable pardons, of what may offend your patience, then your
favorable accepta^ce of my unworthy service, to present your Honors with a
little tract against Murmurers and murmuring, in which if I have passed any
thing displeasing to your good patience, hu^blie craving pardon, I atte^d the
sorrovv of my Imperfection, but if I have in any thing contented the least of
your good likings, I will leave murmurers to the fruit of their malice, and
pray to God, so to bless your good minds, that you may find out such
offenders, and give them the due of their desert; and in your selves, among
your selves, may be so lincked in your loves, that to God and his Majesty, you
may ever live together in your service, that when wickedness is weeded out, and
Grace is planted in the place, God may be pleased, the King best preserved, and
the Common wealth best governed: So fearing with tediousnes, to be a trouble to
your good patience, beseeching God to bless you al, with as much happiness, as
murmurers are worthy to want, I humbly rest.

Your Honors in all Humblenes,

To the Reader.
LET me entreat you (by the kindness I hope in you) to be persuaded that what I
have written in this little Tract, is rather done to reveal the folly of a
malicious humor, then to tax any person with the infection: The labor is not
long, nor the sense obscure; the substance whereof, leaving to the censure of
your discretion, or correction of your good patience, with my love to your kind
desert, I rest as I find cause.

Against Murmurers, and Murmuring.
OH Murmurer, what would thou have? was there ever any Kingdom so many
years, and so many ways blessed? and thou in it, so little worthy of thy
comforts, and so worthy of the contrary: is not thy Earth fertile? are not thy
Rivers sweet? is not thy Air temperate? are not thy Cities fair, thy people
rich, thy men strong, thy women fruitful, thy Magistrates wise, and thy King
gracious? are not thy Seas as a wall to defend thee from the assaults of thine
enemies? and has not thy peace bred such a plenty, as maks thee admired in
the whole world? have thou not with all this, the richest jewel in the world?
yea, and more worthy then the whole world? which is the heavenly word of
God, to direct thee in his holy will? and vvil not all this suffice thee, to
bring thee to the service of thy God? to acknovvledge his goodness, to admire
his greatness, and to give glory to his Majesty? what shall I then say unto
thee? but as I said in the beginning: oh what would thou have? In the time
of blindness, when the book of life was shut from thy reading, when thy
learned preachers, and zealous people were put unto the fire, when civil
vvarres did breed thy penury, and thy foreign enemies were ready to invade
thee, when thy Governor was a Tyrant, thy life a bondage, and thy estate a
misery, then how glad would thou have bin, to have tasted the least of
the blessings? that now thou art full of; and then would thou have prayed
for deliverance from thy sorrovves, and ioyed in the least hope, that might
have cleared thy heavy heart: and art thou now so hard hearted? so ill natured,
so void of se^ce, or so full of ingratitude? that thou can not conceive, thou
vvilt not acknovvledge, thou do not understand, or vvilt not be thankful,
for this great measure of grace that God has bestovved upon thee? what then
will beco^e of thee? but let me ask thee, what does aile thee? is ease a
grief? pleasure a pain? peace a Trifle? plenty a Toy? a good King, a small
blessing? a grave Counsel, a mean comfort, and the word of God, a slight
Jewel? learned Preachers, and profou^d Lawiers little blessing; what shall I
then say unto thee? but that they are ill bestovved on thee; do thou murmr
at Religion? is it not better to serve God, then Man? and to believe the Truth,
then follovv Error? to worship God in the Heavens, then make a kind of God on
the Earth, and to beg pardon of thy God at home; then to buy it of a man
abroad: do thou murmr that the Saints are not worshipped? and will thou
forget to worship God above? will thou murmur at thy Loyalty? and learn the
witchcraft of Rebellion? will thou forget thy vocation, and fall into the sin
of presumption? are these the fruits of thy devotion? fie upon thy folly,
that have no more taste of discretion: would thou rather hear the word? and
understand it not, then understand it, and believe it? or trust rather to the
word of a Priest for thy comfort, then to thine own faith for thy Salvation:
oh pitiful imperfection! what shall I say unto thee? but only pray for thee;
that God vvil forgive thee, and open the eyes of thy understanding, that by the
light of his grace, thou may get out of thy darkness, and beholding the
greatness of his mercy, give glory to his holy Majesty. Leave therefore thy
murmuring, and turn it to thanksgiving, that so great a part of the world,
being shut up in the cave of Error, thou vvalkest in the understanding path, of
the perfection of all truth: least if thou continue in thy accursed nature, thy
gracious God, seeing thy vngratfulnes; either deprive thee of thy comfort, or
cast thee into utter darkness; while the Bulls of Rome shall breed too many
calves in Britanie: Again, do thou murmur at peace? have thou a spirit of
discord? do thou delight in blood? oh brood of Caine, look on thy brother
Abell, and hear the curse on thy condition: do thou walk in quiet? work
in quiet? eat in quiet? sleep in quiet is thy wife in thy bosom? thy Children
at thy Table? thy servants in thy business? do thy friends come to see thee? thy
neighbors salute thee? and thine enemies live from thee? does Music fill
thine Ears? Beauty thine Eyes? Wisdom thy Heart? and Treasure thy mind? and
are all these benefits to be despised, and this peace not to be applauded? God
forbid: when children with Drums strike marches of mirth, and Trumpets sound
dances in stead of deadly marches; when men may sing, women dance, and children
play; and altogether rejoice* and give praises unto God; is this peace to be
murmured at? fie upon such wicked spirits, that can be possessed with such
hellish humors: leave therefore thy murmuring at this great blessing of peace,
and give glory unto God for the comfort of so great a grace; for by it thou
possessest more the^ all the world without it: for though by labor may wealth
be gotten, and by wisdom honor, yet without that blessing of peace through
the malice of Ambition, thou may soon loose all that thou enioyest: pray
then for the continuance of so great a comfort, and murmr not at the
ordinance of God, in so gracious a showing of so glorious a mercy: show not the
dogged nature, of such a deuilish spirit, to drown thy soul in the delight of
blood: Think on the misery of civil wars, or what wars soever;
subversion of States, death of Princes, massacres of People, tears of
Widows, cries of Children, Cities burning, Tyrants killing, Terror spoiling,
and hearts dispairing; when thou shall see before thy face, thy wife
dishonored, thy daughter deflowred, thine infant slain, and thy self made a
slave to villainy* and if it possible might be, a hell upon earth, where devils
like men, or men like devils, seek the destruction of the whole world. Murmr
not then at the joyful blessing of peace, but embrace it with such
thankfulness, as may continue thy happiness, least when thou would have
peace thou can not, because when thou had it, thou regardest it not:
Again, do thou murmr at plenty? pity but thou should want that is
necessary, who had rather see thy brother starve then to relieve him out of
thy abundance: Oh ungracious wretch, so far from the feeling of Gods grace,
that for a private gain would wish a general grief, like a miser that
pinching his belly to spare his purse, would see the death of a whole Kingdom,
to fill up one corner of his cofers: or do thou murmr at the plenty of
another, beholding thine own penury? Why, remember thou broghtest nothing into
the world, nor shall carry any thing with thee out of it, and what thou have,
is but lent thee, and shall be taken from thee, or thou from it: can thou not
then content thy self with thy portion? and rather labor for thine own good,
then envy at the wealth of another? or do thou murmur at the wealth of many,
and thine own poverty? look into thy self, and see if there be not more
poorer, then richer then thy self; and if not, yet, that thou art not alone to
bear the burden of thy cross. But had thou rather see a bare harvest, a
naked tree, a thin Meadow, and a blasted vineyard? then thy barnes full of
corn, thy stacks full of hay, thy trees full of fruit, and thy vessels full of
wine? can thou so much forget God, to be unthankful for his blessings, and
be so unnatural to thine own heart, as to seek the misery of thine own
Soul? What dog would show so devilish a nature? Had thou rather gnaw
upon a crust, then have a whole loaf? sippe of a little cruse, then drink of
a full cup? wear a piece of a ragge, then a whole suite of apparel? and a
penny in thy purse, rather then thy chest full of gold? then art thou either a
fool, that understand not what is good for thee; or a dog, that
dispisest that is given thee; or a devil, in not acknovvledgeing the goodness
of thy God toward thee: had thou rather see a table without meat, a stable
without horses, a pasture without Cattle, and a purse without a penny;
then good meat, fair horses, fat cattle, and a full purse? oh monster of
nature, what do thou then among men? leave therefore thy murmuring, and let
me thus far advise thee: what thou have, spend not vainly; what thou gainest,
get not vilely; what thou vvantest, bear patiently; and what thou give,
give frankely, and murmr not to part with thy plenty, nor at the plenty of
another, for plenty is a blessing of God, which taken thankfully, breeds many
comforts, while penury is a plague, either inflicted upon sin, or sent for a
trial of virtue, where patience possessing the soul, the body may be the
better servant. Murmur not therefore at the blessing of plenty, either upon thy
self, or others. Again, do thou murmr at ease? oh what madness does
possess thee? had thou rather tire out thy body, the^ give rest to thy mind?
and labor out thy heart, the^ give comfort to thy spirit? had thou rather
mourn the^ sing? cry then laugh? run the^ walk? and be beaten of thine
enemy, the^ be kissed of thy friend? had thou rather watch two nights, the^
sleep one? work ten days, then play one? and fast ten weeks the^ fare well
one? I do not believe thee, or else believe thee to be mad. Had thou rather
ride a hard trotter, the^ an ambler? sit on a Pitchforke the^ a pillovv? lie on
a board the^ a bed? if thy vvil so much exceed thy wit, I shall never take
thee for a reasonable Creature; and therefore murmr not at ease, which to
nature is so comfortable, and to reason so acceptable: but do thou murmur at
ease in others, and pain in thy self? others may have the ease thou wa^test,
and thou the ease they cannot have: they may sit while thou walk, but
perhaps walk when thou sleep: they may have health, and thou sickness, yet
thy conscience may be at better quiet: they may fare delicately, and thou
hardly, yet thy stomach may digest better: they may possess more, yet thou
be better contented. Murmr not therefore at ease, either in thy self, or
other, for it is a blessing sooner lost then gotten; and murmuring is the work
of malice, which once settled in the mind, overthrows more then body, when
many kinds of diseases rob the heart of all ease. Again, dare thou murmr
at thy King, that he is not in all things to thy mind: Traitor unto God and
man, how can thou excuse thy villainy? when if thou can consider his worth,
and confess his worthynesse, thou will hate thine own soul, to conceive one
discontentiue thought of his Majesty, or the least thought of hurt to his
sacred person: but, base wretch that thou art, to grudge at that which thou
can not judge off, or to enjoy that thou art not worthy off: for, if thy
King were unlearned, it might be a sorrovve to thy heart; if irreligious, a
torment to thy soul; if of base lineage, it might have bin a vvound to thine
Honor; if Tiranously minded, a vvoe to thy comfort* if wickedly inclined, a
plague to thy patience: but of a Royal Line, from the Loins of many Kings,
and from one Kingdom to an other, or rather by uniting of Kingdoms to make a
Monarchy of peace, to the admiration of the world, so profoundly read in the
rules of best learning, and so well Linguist in the most necessary Languages,
as are gracious in his person, and Maiesticall in his place; in Religion, so
zealous; in disposition, so virtuous; in mercy, so gracious; as both for his
presence and his spirit, is worthy to be honored, honorably loved, and
lovingly served. How can thou be so vile of disposition, or senceles of
good, as to murmr at so great a blessing, as God has given thee in his
government? Do thou murmr at his pleasures, and love the same thy self?
Does he hunt and delight in Dogs? better to nourish dogs, who show but
their natures, and will be at their Masters Service, then to maintain those
monsters of men, that contrary to the nature of men, will murmr at the
welfare of their Master. Again, had thou a King without a Queen, thou
might fear trouble through want of Issue, but so gracious a Queen, and the
mother of so blessed Children, so Princely a Progeny, as may glad the hearts
of the whole Kingdom; Villain to thine own Soul, that vvilt murmr at
these Comforts, and not be thankful for these blessings? Did he hunt thine
heirs from their possessions? their heads from their shoulders? thy Preachers
from their Churches? or thy Cities from their Liberties? then had thou cause
to grieve, but have no vvarrant to murmr: but he that seeks thy safety,
continues thy peace, increases thy plenty, and maintayneth thy pleasure, is
loving to thee, rejoices in thy love, and deserves to be loved of thee, What
devil can possess thee, that such a King cannot please thee? would thou
have him governed by thee, who gouernes the whole Kingdom besides thee? thou
art foolish, who being a Subject, would be a King; and how can thou
think to govern, when thou have not learned to be governed? Again, can
thou by thy policy unite kingdo^s, as he has don by his person? art thou so
well allied as to link such love in royal lines? No, thou art not; and if thou
were* yet God has made thee a Subject, and therefore make not thy self a
rebel, but rather learn how to obey his will, then to murmr at his
government: be thankful to God for the much good in him, and murmr not at
the evil that thou misconceiuest in him; least God seeing thy vileness, bring
thy villainy to light, and with a shameful death give thee the due of thy
desert: leave then to murmr at him, and be thankful for him, murmr not at
his greatness, considering his goodness; nor at his case, for thou know
not his care; nor at his wealth, considering his worthiness; nor at his
power, considering his wisdom: but love him, serve him, honor him, and obey
him, and be thankful to the Majesty of the heavens, that thou may behold
such a Majesty on Earth: Murmr not at the tribute thou payest him, for all
thou have is too little for his service: Murmr not at the Service thou do
him, for thou can never do him enough for his worthiness: Murmr not at thy
want of his bounty, least he see more thy greediness then good vvil. In
sum, murmr not at him, not any thing that may dislike thee in him, least
God making him see thy wickedness, thy life make answer for thy folly, while
continuing in thy murmuring till thy death, it carry thee headlong to the
devil. Again, do thou murmr at the Counsel, either for the power of
their authority, the honor of their place, or the State of their possessions?
Look back into thy self, and be ashamed of thy sin: Is not the care of
the Commonwealth the course of Justice, the quiet of the state, and the
preservation of the whole Kingdom under God and his Majesty, in the hands of
those Magistrates, whose vvisdome deserves honor, whose care deserves
praise, whose labor deferueth wealth, and whose vvil deserves obedience;
and can thou (senseless wretch) fretting in melancholy, not able to discern
the least part of their perfectio^s, offend thy God, thy King, thy State, yea,
thy self, and thine own Soul, with the wicked humor of Ingratitude? which
grown out of Ignorance, bred in Envy, grows up in Ambition, and shall die in
Ignominy: Fie upon thy inhumane Nature; that, abiding nothing that is good,
do only seed upon Evil: who being careless of order, would have no
Law; dissolute in thy will, vvilt endure no Counsel; fond in thy wit,
make no reckoning of Wisdom: and not knowing the labor of Study,
would allow nothing for the Studient. Oh what a common vvoe would be in
that commonwealth, where thou should have power to appoint Governors? but
leave thy murmuring at them, reverence them in their places, honor them in
their vvisedomes, love them in their virtues, serve them in their worthiness,
and obey them in their commands: least finding thy condition, they take order
with thy disposition, when to vveede out such a venomous Serpent, is
necessary for the preserving of better spirits: for Murmurers are like to
Mutiners, where one cursed villain may be the ruin of a whole Camp; for
which, if there were not Martial Law, there were no life for the Souldior,
nor honor in Arms. Again, do thou murmr at the Lawyer? oh vvitlesse
creature, how would thou keep thy Lands, Goods, or Houses? if there were
no Law to maintain thy right? How would thou have thy wrongs redressed, if
there were no power of Justice? How should the King govern, and the Subject
be governed, but by the course of Law? And are not the Judges, Counselors,
and true Administers of the Law, rather to be honored for their learning, and
rewarded for their labors, then to be murmured at for their service: But live
thou within the limits of the Law, and thou vvilt not murmr at their Laws:
For who hates the Judge but the Thief, the Traitor, the Cosener, or the
Consumer? and therefore murmr at thy self, and leave murmuring at Lawyers.
Again, do thou murmr at the word of God? oh, child of the devil? is it
not the key of Grace, that opens the gate of heaven? and the lamp of Love
that gives light unto the way of life? Is it not the comfort of the heart? and
the food of the Soul? and being a Jewel of such price, as all the world
cannot purchase; a Treasure of that vvorth, that all the world cannot value: a
joy of that Nature, that does ravish the Souls of the Elect: What shall I say
to thee? But, thou art a Devil incarnate, that so far from the Spirit of
Grace, can be ungrateful for so gracious a blessing, or murmr at so
glorious a gift of Mercy: for to scorue the tidings of Salvation, is to hasten
the way unto Damnation? Note, what it is to murmr, and the estate of
Murmurers. Coran, Dathan, and Abiram, murmured at Moses: what became of them?
The earth swallowed them. Pharaoh murmured at the Israelites: What was his
reward? Drowned with all his host in the red Sea. Joseph's brethren murmured
at him: what became of them? They became all his Servants. Saul murmured at
David's ten thousands: What was his end? He killed himself. Judas murmured
at the Box of Oil, that was poured on Christ's head: What was his reward?
He hanged himself. Take heed therefore, murmr not at the Word, nor at the
will of God, least thy reward be with the Reprobate: For if thou murmr at
God, the Devil will meet with thee; if thou scorn the Word of God,
wickedness will follow thee; if thou murmr at the grace of God, Hell will
gape to receive thee. Leave therefore thy murmuring at God, his Word, his
Grace, or his Will, least with Lucifer, thou be thrown out of Heaven with
Caine be accursed, or with Esau loose thy blessings on the Earth; and learn
with Abell to serve God, with Abraham to believe in God, with David to love
God, with Job to fear God, with Moses to honor God, and with Christ to
obey God; and then shall the Devil have no power to make thee murmr at God.
But let me come to particulars; Do thou murmr at this man, or that man,
for this cause, or that cause? Oh unhappy wretch, how do thou trouble thy
self? Call thy wits a little better together, and weigh thy thoughts in an
even Balance: If thou be vviser then another, that is preferred before thee,
it may be he is more Honorable: If thou be more Noble, he may be more
wise: If thou more learned, he more valiant: If thou more valiant, he more
vvealthie: If thou more vvealthy, he more honest; If thou have a good face,
he may have a better body; if thou a good body, he a better face; if thou a
good face and body, he a better wit; if thou a better wit, he a better heart;
if thou an honest heart, yet he a more gracious Soul: and therefore, if
another be advanced, and thou displaced, have patience, and murmr not; for,
what know thou whether God will bless his humility, and correct thy
pride, or make him swell till he burst, and make a trial of thy love in the
truth of thy patience* But let me see with thy murmuring, what manner of man
he should be, whom thou would have molded to thy mind; if thou be tall
of stature, then less then thou, are dwarfes; if low of stature, the^ tall men
are Cyants; if of a mean stature, then that is the best proportion: So that
except all be as thou art, thou vvilt find fault with God in his Creation, or
Nature in her Generation, or (through lack of wit) with Fortune, in her
Indiscretion, in preferring such before thee, as thou fondly think should
come behind thee: when, if thou had thine own eyes, thou should see in
the glass of Truth so many imperfections in thy self, as in the conceit of
unworthiness, might make thee rather come behind many, then go before any,
and rather grieve at thy self, then murmr at an other: art thou finical and
fantastical? and would have a man to thine own mind? what manner of man
shall he be? shaped like a picture? countenanced like a Bride? and talk like a
Player? oh fine fool, how thou would have the sign of a man stand for a
man? and if thou be such a one, would thou have all like thy self? alas,
the world is so full of fools already, that there is no need of any more of
them: and therefore leave thy murmuring, and fall to some beter reckoning, least
thy account come to worse then nothing, and while thou art wise in thine own
conceit, there may be more hope of a fool then of thee: do thou murmr to
see a Traveler advanced for his virtue, while thou art forgotten for thy
service? perhaps his knowledge is more worth then thy toil, and he has taken
pains, while thou have lived at ease: art thou a Trauailer, and murmurest at
the home servant? perhaps, he has gotten more wealth at home, then thou
abroad, and taken pains at home, while thou have had pleasure abroad; and what
know thou, whether the wisdom of State, or rather the will of God,
think it necessary, to make a Trial of thy condition, ere they reward thy
deserts: for advancement may be a hurt to Ambition, while humility begins
her heaven in this world. Murmr not therefore at the good of another, nor
grieve at the nature of thine own Cross: for, when patience does kindly carry
it, it is the best badge of a Christian; and do thou murmr to see one of
base Lineage come to honor, while thou live in disgrace? Take heed that he
be not the first, and thou the last of a Noble House, and rather learn to
thrive by his virtue, then continue thy decay by thine own folly. In sum,
leave thy murmuring at the will of God, or the vvelfare of any man, or at
thine own vvoe; for God has his vvoorking in all things, and if thou vvilt be
one of his children, thou must lovingly allow of what he does. But now, as to
men, let me a little speak to women. Do thou being fair, murmr at the
preferment of a foul one, and in thy rage call her foul dowde? Alas, think
Fortune had need to do somewhat for her, when Nature is so little her
friend. Again, it may be her inward virtue might be of more worth then thy
forced Beauty. Art thou a foul one? and murmurest at the advancement of a
fair creature? and in distemper of thy brain, call her Picture? Fie upon
thee, so shall thou be no man's meat, foul without and within: for the evil
mind is more foul, then the blackest face; and if she be virtuous with her
beauty, is she not then vvorthie of Honor? Again, do thou murmr at the
wealth of another, while thou art in poverty? why, it may be thou know
not how she gets it, and perhaps, thy self would not so have it: do
thou murmr, that she is more suedto by Lovers? why, it may be she is loved
for change, and thou for choice: do thou murmr at her that has more
children then thou? perhaps thou deseruest them not, or it may be God does not
bless thee to thy desire. Rather pray therefore then murmr, least a worse
plague befall thee: do thou murmr to see a wicked vvench put thee down
in preferment? what do thou know whether she have her heaven in this
world, which thou seek not, or begin her hell, ere she came at it? again,
it may be, her repentance may be gracious, when thy pride may be odious: And
therefore be she fair or foul; wise, or fond; vvealthie or poor; godly, or
wicked, Murmr not at any whatsoever she be, in what state soever thou
thy self be: least, in fretting at others fortune, thou consume thy self
with folly, while he that hates the grudging heart, plague home the Spirit
of malice: but leaving women as the weaker vessels, let me come again to
men, that should have the stronger spirits, to withstand the power of
Impatience. Note, I say, first of murmuring, how many incontieniences do grow
to the Murmurer himself, and then, to other, by his means; and again, how
great are the comforts of the contrary: Murmuring troubles the mind,
disquiets the heart, distempereth the body, and sometime breeds the
consumption of the purse; it forgets reason, abuses nature, shows
disloialty, displeases a friend, and does purchase an enemy: it carries wit
from reason, Reason from Grace, and Nature from her self, yea and sometime,
man, even from God to the Devil: while patience enduring those perplexities,
that put reason to his best power; nature is not distempered, reason not
abused, grace is embraced, and God is truly honored, the league of amity is
continued, the law of nature is not broken; Truth is gracious, and the soul is
blessed, where the body is not distempered, nor the mind disturbed, the
creature is most able to give glory to his Creator: Note then the differences
of these two natures: Murmuring, a horrible vice, and patience a heavenly
virtue; do but think on the fruit of murmuring, and the condition, and end of
murmurers, rages, frettings, wars, death, poverty, sickness, and sorrovv,
while the child is sick of the father, the wife of the husband, the brother
of the sister, and one friend of another; what massacre, or murder has there
grown, but through the invention of murmuring, and the malice of murmurers?
look a little, if thou be a murmurer, of what kind thou art, and who thou
art, and so note the condition of thy nature, or nature of thy condition. If
thou be a man, and murmurest against God, thou art a Devil; if thou be a
Subject, and murmr against thy King, thou art a Rebel; if thou be a Son
and murmr against thy father, thou show a bastards nature* If thou murmr
against thy Brother, an unkind nature; if against thy friend, an unthankful
nature; if against an honest man, an dishonest nature; if against a fool, an
unwise nature; if against a Christian, a hethenish nature; if against a man, a
dogged nature. Thus thou see by murmuring what thou shall be esteemed of God
and man, yea, and in thine own conscience, of thy self, either a Fool, a
Knave, a Heathen, a Bastard, a Traitor, a Dog, of a Devil: and do thou
then see the villainous nature and condition of this quality, and wilt not
leave it? take heed least if thou continue in it, that God vvil hate thee for
it, do not send thee to the devil with it, who was the first Author, and is
the continual nourisher of it. Again think with thy self, when another man
shall find thee in thy murmuring, either by thy disco^tentiue countenance, or
soletarie delight, sequestring thy self from men, to converse with the Air,
how great will be thy shame to hear the skoffings, that will fall upon thy
folly? Some will say thou art mad, other, thou art foolish, another thou art
dogged, but noe man, that thou art either wise, kind, or well in thy wits:
Again, when thou have revealed thy folly to the world, and fretted thy self
to the heart, with the humor of an evil spirit, and yet art never the better
any way, but many way a great deal the worse, what can thou think of thy
self? but fret that thou did fret? blush at thy shame? grieve at thy
folly, and murmr at thy self, that thou did murmr at thy self or any
other, while repentance which brings sorrow, is the best fruit of such a
frenzy: Again, when thou shall see the patience of another blessed, and thy
murmuring accursed, an others patience enriched, and thy impatience
impouerished, an others patience advanced, and thy murmuring disgraced, what
can thou think of it? but a Canker eating into thy Soul worse then any
Fistula in thy flesh: pray then to the heavenly Surgeon for a plaster of
patience, with the oil of true repentance to cure thee of this disease, which
in the world, at least, by all the Art of the World is Incurable: will thou
see a murmurer truly discribed? that thou may the better hate to be his
image: Behold his Eyes, like a hog, ever bent downwards as if he were
looking into Hell: his cheeks like an Anathomie, where the flesh from the
bones does fall, with fretting; his brows ever wrinckled with frowns, to show
the distemper of his unquiet Brain; his lips ever pulled inward, as if Envy
would speak, and durst not; his tongue, like the sting of a Serpent, which
utters nothing but poison; his voice, like the hissing of an Adder, which
makes music but for hell; his neck, like a weak pillar, whereon his head
stands tottering, and ready to fall; his breast like an impostume, that is
ready to burst with corruption; and his heart, the Anuile whereon the devil
frames his fireworke; his body a Trunk where Sin has laid up her store; his
hands like claws, that catch at the world; and his feet like wings, that
make have unto hell: Now, do thou behold this ougly sight? and do not
fear to be such a monster? what shall I then say unto thee, but if God have
given thee over to a reprobate sense, there is no reason to be had with thee,
nor hope of recovery to be had of thee; but, hoping a little better in thee,
let me go a little further with thee: The word of God says Beati pacifici,
blessed are the peace makers, think then it is a work of the Devil to sovv
sedition, and being at war with thy self; how can thou be at peace with
the world, except it be the good war betwixt the spirit and the flesh,
where the peace of conscience ouercomes the trouble of conceit; by patience is
the Soul possessed, which is more vvorth then the whole world, and by
murmuring is the soul lost, which gone, what is the gain of the world? Is
it not strange that all the parts and the members of the body, can so well
agree together, and one do service to another, and men, the parts and members
of a commonwealth, should be so at variance among themselves? In the body of
man, if the head ache, the heart is not well, if the Eye be hurt, the head is
distempered, the heart is diseased, and all the body is the worse, if the
finger be hurt, the head will seek to help it, the heart has a feeling of
it, the Eye vvil pity it, and the feet will go for ease for it; if the
foot be hurt, the Head, Heart, and Hands will seek for cure of it, while the
Eye will be careful to look to the dressing of it; If the body be diseased,
the head with all the members will labor for the help of it, that all parts
being in their perfect state, the mind or Soul may be at rest: and if in this
private body of man, all things be brought unto this good order, what shame
is it for a commonwealth, that men should be so out of order? and while all
parts of the body are at the service of the head, to the great peace of the
heart, why should not all Subjects join together in unity of service to their
King, to the great and blessed peace of the whole Kingdom? God made all the
parts of the body for the Soul, and with the Soul to serve him, and all the
Subjects in a Kingdom to serve their King, and with their King to serve him.
If the head of the body ache, will not the heart be greatly grieved? and
every part feel his part of the pain of it? and shall a King in his will
be displeased, and the heart of his kingdom, the hearts of his Subjects,
not have a feeling of it? Can the Eye of the body be hurt, or grieved, and
neither the head, heart, nor any other member be touched with the pain of
it? No more can the Counsel, the Eye of the common wealth be disturbed; but
the King will find it, and the Commonwealth will feel it; can the hand, the
Artificer, be hurt? but the commonwealth will find the lack of it, the Eye
with pity vvil behold it, and the head with the eye, the King with the
Counsel take care for the help of it? Can the labourer, the foot be vvounded?
but the body of the State will feel it, the head be careful, the eye
searchfull, and the hand be painful in the cure of it? and the
commonwealth? the body be diseased, but the King, his Counsel, and every
true Subject, will put to his hand for the help of it? how then grows this
murmuring at the will of God in men? while there is such an agreement of the
parts in man, but only by the work of the devil in man, to bring him from
God and the world, to work against himself, his service in the world, and
as he taught it first our parents to bring them out of paradise, so he vvil as
many as he can of their posterity, to lead them into Hell: But let me tell
thee, it is better that a fevv murmurers perish with their murmuring, then a
whole kingdom perish with their malice: In the holy word I find written;
If thine Eye offend thee, pull it out; if thy hand offend thee, cut it off:
better to enter into heaven with one hand, or one eye, then with both into
hell. But all this while, there is nothing spoken of the head, that must still
be kept on: so if a great man, or a mean man do offend, cut him off, or cut
him short, that he may do no hurt; for better a member perish, the^ the head or
the heart should ache, then either the King, or the commonwealth should be
diseased: but for the King howsoever he be disposed, he must not be
disturbed: for it is written, Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no
harm: again, transgressio^ is as the sin of vvitchcraft; and what greater
transgression, then Rebellion? which chiefly has her breeding in murmuring.
If thou have a cruel and wicked King, take him for a punishment, and pray for
his amendment; but murmr not at his power: but if thou have a good King,
take him as a blessing; and having a good King, be thankful to God for him, and
for his prosperity, serve him, love him, and obey him, and hate thy self to
have a thought of murmuring against him, or any thing commanded by him: look a
little more into thy glass of murmuring, and see (if at last thou have the
least spark of Gods grace) what thou beholdest: God in the heavens frowning
upon thee, his angels either murmuring for thee, or ready to plague thee, his
servants on the Earth hating thee, and the devil with his angels ready to
distroy thee; thy Soul made a Receptacle of sin, thy mind made a torment to
thy Soul, thy heart made a grief to thy body, and every part of thy body
out of temper: while being driven out of the ground of all goodness, Thou
shall be left in the maze of al wickedness, where, loosing the hope of all
comfort, thou shall live in the hell of all misery; yet, a little look further
into thy self, and into the vileness of thy nature, if it be touched with
that infection: If the weather please thee not, thou will murmr at the
heavens: if the world go not with thee, thou willt murmr at the world; if
thy friend rebuke thee, thou vvllt murmr at his care of thee: If thine enemy
overcome thee, thou will murmr at his fortune; If thy Father be aged, thou will murmr at his life; If thy brother be thine elder, thou will murmr at
his Inheritance; If thy neighbor grow rich, thou will murmr at his
prosperity; If a Stranger be favored, thou will murmr at his grace, if a
Beggar be relieved, thou will murmr at his Alms; and if a godly man be
beloved, thou will murmr at Gods blessing; If thou be a woman, or a womanish
man, then how many things will trouble thee? thou will murmr at fashions,
coulors, toies, tricks, words, gestures, and a world of such idle fancies, when
always the other is the best, and nothing pleases but variety: he, or she
has the best face, the best eye, the best hand, the best leg, the best body,
or the best foot, speaks best, has the best countenance, sings best, dances
best, rides best, feeds fineliest, goes gaiest, has apparel the best made,
and wears it best: and thus all is best where there is none good; while, that,
which should be best, serves God best, is not spoken of: for indeed, who
serves God best, will not let his spirit be led away with these idle humors:
do thou the^ see the folly of this murmuring, and the hurt of so great a
poison? seek the cure of it by prayer, and keep it from thee by patience;
least if it once get hold of thy heart, it breed a cureles wou^d in thy Soul:
If thou be a king, keep thy seat; If a Courtier, know thy place; if a
Scholar plie thy book; if a Soldier, look to thine honor; If a marcha^t,
take thy fortune; if a farmer follow thy plough; if a beggar, fall to prayer*
but murmur not, oh King, if thou be not an Emperor; nor courtier if thou have
not grace; nor Scholar if thou want preferment; nor Soldier if thou loose thy
day; nor Marcha^t, if thou loose goods; nor farmer, if thou lose thy labor; nor
beggar if thou get bare alms: but murmuring at Gods will; take heed that thou
loose not thine own soul, more precious to thee, then the whole world: Is it
not strange to see the insensible Creatures, what a concord there is, and among
the Creatures of best sense, so great a disagreement: In music the Treble is
the highest, and the base the lowest; the Tenor and Counter-Tenor betvveen
the^: yet though every one has his place, when they are in their full concord,
they make the sweetest harmony: so in a Kingdom: a King is the highest, and
the labourer the lowest: (I leave out the Beggar as an unnecessary member, but
only for the exercise of Charity) bur, betwixt the King and the labourer, there
are Counsailers, Preachers, Lawyers, Souldiars, Merchants, and Artificers, and
when all these together in due allegiance to their King, do true service unto
God, how excellent a music is the sound of peace in such a kingdom: If the
strings be out of tune, the music will be harsh, and if the people be out of
order, the State cannot be in peace: Think then, if among these inse^sible
Creatures be such an unity as is most pleasing, why should not among men be so
great an union? that may be as well pleasing as profitable? we can be
contented with the gold of India, the Sugar of Barbary, the oil of Candie, the
Spices of Spain, the wine of France, and so, of other things, of other
Countries, to mingle with our own, to make a medicine for the comfort or
preservative of our bodies, and can we not unite unto our selves, a people so
like our selves, and so near unto our selves, as might be to us as our selves;
if we would look with the eye of Charity, what blessing does grow of love:
nothing did part our land, but a little water, and nothing can part our love,
but a little will: but, as it may be said, of a more wilful then wise man,
who having a coat made all of one piece, was persuaded by a Tailor to have it
cut in pieces, and wear guardes upon the seames; only to set himself on
work, and make again of the shreds, giving that part another name, then
before it had, that was new set on again; So, I may say, this Land, once all
one, and by what persuasion, I know not cut off, was so long guarded, that it
seemed to be of some other stuff, then the whole piece, till it pleased God
by the great power of his Grace, in the Majesty of our King to bring both
Lands again into one: which done, it now rests, that the guards taken
away, no seame of disseuering be to be seen* but, the Lands, as one piece of
Earth, enlarging the bounds of one Kingdom, the people be united in that vnio^,
that, to avoid ambition, there be no dissension, and to maintain an unity,
there be no Rebellion: for, as there is one God, one King, and one kingdom:
so, there should be one law, one love, and one life, one voice, one heart, and
one people: to the co^tradictio^ whereof, when all reasons are alleged, it is
only lack of love, that hinders the heaven of such a happiness; But, what
ever thou be, that murmurest at this motion, let me say unto thee, as the
poor woman of Ireland says to her dead husband: oh man, man, why did thou
die? Thou had Cowes, and thou had a horse; thou had a sword, and a shirt
of male, and why would thou die? so thou have a good King, a sweet
Country, a kind people, and a blessed peace, and why do thou murmr? do
thou fear to have many friends? then get the among enemies, art thou unwilling
to have many neighbors? then live among strangers: do thou love no
Christians, then dvvell among Turks; or do thou love no men? then live
among Devils; or do thou love no house but home? make thy grave in thy bed;
vvilt thou eat no meat but milk? Baby, suck thy dambe, till thou be a
dizard; vvilt thou abide no company, but thine one kindred? lap thy self in
thy mothers apron; or do thou doubt thy neighbor will overthrow thee? oh,
let not lack of wit so deceive thee: for if God has not so blessed thee, as
to make thee know what is good for thee, thou need nothing more then thy
self to undo thee: consider therefore of every thing, if thou can in the
best kind, and make thy construction with that care, that God first may be
pleased, thy King obeyed, thy Country benefited, and thy self contented: That
when the murmuring of malice is put away, and patience has brought peace
into thy bosom, thy heart may find the happiness of that blessing, that thy
Soul may be joyful to behold where, the people united, God is served, the
Kingdom preserved, and the State most blessed, where such a peace is
applauded. The Seas are a wall unto our Earth, to keep it from the enemies,
and shall we within our land be at vvarres within our selves? or shall we
make a show of love in our words, and harbor hatred in our hearts? or shall
we be borne neighbors, and live as strangers? God forbid: let not the Devil
so work among the servants of God, to cross the course of such a peace, as
is so much to Gods glory: Our heavenly master Christ Jesus king of kings, vvare
his coat without a Seame, and our King would have his Kingdom without a
Seuerance: It is the word of Christ; that when a kingdom is divided in it
self, it cannot stand: If therefore we will be christians; we must follow
Christ; if we will be subjects, we must obey our King; if we will stand,
we must not be divided: For example, to allege ancient histories offorrain
Princes, at least a far of is needles, when near hand before our Eyes that
cannot deceive our Judgments: how grevv the wars in the Low Countries? but,
by the malice of murmurers? how grevv the massacres in France? but, by the
division of the Princes, and noble houses; and how many broils have been
betwixt Scotland and us, while we were in the State of division? Again,
how strong are the States where they are united in the Lovv Countries, how
is France enriched by his peace? and how are we; or at least may be with
GODS blessing strengthened by this union? Esope tells a pretty tale to this
purpose: That a Father having many sons often disagreeing, and as it were at
jar one with another, called them before him, and caused every one to bring
unto him, a little rod, or wand, which taken of them, he bound them up
altogether in one bundel; which made fast with a ba^d, he gave to every one
of his sons, one after another to break; which they found impossible:
whereupon the Father took out every rod, and gave one to each one of his
sons to break, which was quickly performed: Now quoth the father, ye see my
sons of what a strength is love, vvher hearts are united together; for as
these vvandes, so are ye; strong when ye are knit together in the band of
brotherly love, and vveake and to be broken, when you are divided one from
another* Surely so it may be said of us: If we be united, and knitte together
in the band of brotherly love, our strength will be great to vvithstand our
enemies; but if we fall at variance, what peace can continue betwixt us? nay
what hurt shall we do unto our selves, while the enemy will be ready to
invade us? It is written. O quam bonum et iucundu^? fratres concordare in
vnum? Oh how blessed a thing it is brethren to agree in unity? Are we not
all brethren in Christ? brethren in respect of our near birth? brethren in
our language? and is it not possible for our lives to make us brethren in
loves? Let us see, vvher is the fault, what is the cause? and why it should
take place? In God? no, he loves unity: In the King? no, he would have an
Union: In the Subjects? noe, they would be obedient to their King: In the
Godly? noe, they would be obedient to GODS will: In whom then? Surely in
none, except in some private persons for some private causes, to some private
ends: oh then those private persons are not for the public weal: those
private causes for no common good, and those private ends, are for no godly
end, but hoping there are none such: I speak to none, but vvish all well,
that all may be well: Is not our Religion all one? and shall we differ in
Ceremonies? and if our Laws were all one, should we differ in the
execution? our earth all as one, and shall we then differ in nature? what
should be the cause? but this; while God is vvorking, and the King is
vvilling, the Devil is stirring, and man is striving, but, God is above the
Devil, and a King is above his kingdom; and while God is God, and the King
gracious, though the Devil be wicked, let not man be vvilfull. A true loves
knot is long in knitting, when both ends must meet in the midst: but once
well put together, it is both fair and fast: So, an union of people is long a
vvorking, but once sast lincked in Jove, where far and near meet in the
midst of a good mind, how beautiful is such a peace, where the people are
so blessed? let then al murmurers be shut out from the sound of such a Parlee,
where wisdom may show her grace in the work of such a worth for it must
be that our King* and theirs, is, and must be (and ever I pray God be) al one:
our Religion and theirs one: and our laws and theirs all one: else how can
there be love in our lives? or union in our hearts? but I hope, that God who
did create our hearts by his will, will so work our hearts to his will, that
we shall not swerve from his will: but as he has made all into one kingdom;
so we shall be all as one people, with one voice praising God, with one
heart serving one King, and with one love, embrasing one another: Many little
birds fly together in one flock, many kinds of cattle feed in one field:
many kind of sheep lie together in one fold, and shall two neighbor borne
Children, not live together in one love? God forbid: It is an old saying, and
ever true, Concordia paruae res crescunt, discordia maxima dilabuntur: by
Concord small things prove great, by discord the greatest do decay: Two
little Lands have made a great Kingdom, and shall one great people be
little in love? God forbid: The Lands were divided, and are united; and if
the people may be united, let them not be divided: Division breeds Ambition,
Emulation, and faction, and what are the fruits of these frenzies? how many
kingdoms to their great misery have tasted? but vnio^ breeds love Charity,
and faith, of which blessings what are the benefits, what kingdom may not
be glad to taste? A King of a divided people may have power in his svvord, but
a king of union may rejoice in his Scepter: a people divided may be grievous to
themselves, but a people united may be pleasing to God: division is the cause
of destruction, and union of Comfort: compare them then together, and see
which is to be accepted: division breeds fear, and ielouzie; union breeds the
resolution and trust: division breeds war and hatred; union breeds peace and
love: division breeds dearth, and danger; union plenty, and safety; division
breeds malice and murder: union breeds love, and life: division breeds grief
and sorrow, union breeds mirth and Comfort: Think then upon the venom of the
one, and the virtue of the other; and if thou be not senceles of thine own
good, run not headlong upon thine own ill: desire not rather to live in the
hateful nature of division, then to be lincked in the lively knot of union;
least the God of love that offers it, and thy loving King, that desires it,
both hate thee for refusing it, and deny thee it when thou would have it:
The Tovver of Babell could not be builded, when the languages were divided:
Jerusalem went to ruin when the Princes were divided, Rome has been
shaken since Religon has been divided: Antwerpe has been decayed, since the
States were divided: France was impouerished, when the Nobles were divided,
and England was disturbed, when Scotland was divided: but now the Lands all
bearing one name, the Subjects all one, under one King, the laws all tending to
one end; why should not the Nations be all one people? Flowers grovve
svveetely together, Trees bear fruit naturally together, fishes swim friendly
together, birds sing merrily together; and beasts seed quietly together, and
is it not then a shame for men, that we cannot live lovingly together? a drop
of water is weak, but many drops of water will drive a mill: a spark of
fire is little, but many sparks together, will make a fire to consume a whole
Country: a corn of powder is little, but a great many together will discharge
a great shot: a herring is a small fish, but a skull of them together will
overthrow a pretty ship: a pike is a small vveapon, yet a stand of them
being together will overthrow a great Troop: and a man is a small
Creature; but where men hold together, what monster can hurt them? So these
Lands being one land, and the people one people; what kingdom can annoy us? no
let us say, and if we be our selves, to our selves, and in peace among our
selves, and that our God be with us; neither the world nor the Devil can hurt
us: But if there be a breach in a bank, the Sea breaks in, and ouerflowes the
Land: If there be a breach in a furnace, the fire will burst out, and burn the
whole house: If there be a breach in a wall, the Bore will break in, and
spoil the whole vineyard: If there be a breach in a hedge, the cattle will
break in and eat up the grasses if there be a breach in a Fort, the enemy
will enter and sack the Town: if there be a breach among pikes, the horsemen
will break in, and ruin the Camp: If there be a breach in a conscience,
Corruption will get in, and kill the whole man: and if there be a breach of love
in the hearts of a people, the enemy will take advantage for the invasion of
the kingdom. See then, and consider how dangerous a thing is division, and
how safe an assurance is unity; and take the best, and leave the worst; and
so shall none of your pales be broken* oh heavens, what a hell is this in the
world? that men should live so like Devils one one with another: It is
written that a man should be as a God unto man, but it may be written, that
man is, or at least many men are, as Devils unto men: where there are so many
murmurers, that there can be fevv lovers; the rich man murmures at the poor
man, that he should dwell nigh him: the Usurer murmures at the Broker; that he
g^^eth any thing by him: the Tradesman murmures at his neighbor, that he
should prosper or thrive by him: the Lawyer murmures at the Term that it is
so short a harvest for him: The Merchant murmures at the vvindes, that his
Ships come not home to him: the Soldier murmures at the pay-maister, that
he keeps his money from him: The Courtier murmures at his Tailor, that his
clothes are not fit for him: The Minister he murmures at the Parson, because
he has the greatest profit from him: and the Parson murmures at the parish,
that they come not to Church to pay their duties to him; and the parish
murmures at the Parson, that they pay so much, for so little pains from him:
the Tenant murmures at his Landlorde for racking of his rent: the Landlord
murmures at his Tenant to see him thrive by his husbandry. In sum there is
almost no profession or condition wherein one does not murmre at an other; which
murmuring while it continues in the hearts of people, it will suffer love to
have no life among them: but were the world purged of that malicious humor,
then would there be as great a heaven, as thereis now a hell in the world;
vvher love should establish such a Law, as should never be broken: among men;
do not two Eyes in one head, two hands, and two legs to one body make one
man; and shall not two lands make one kingdom; nay more; does not one Eye the
same that the other, the one hand, the same that the other, and shall not one
people so nere another, as one member is to another, have one will, one law,
and one love one with another? It is strange it should be so, But I hope it
will be otherwise; God will have his will, and our good King his will: in
this work of GODS will, every good Christian, and good Subject will give
his good will to Gods and our Kings will; against which, if any shall murmr,
God will be displeased that the King is not obeyed; the King will be
displeased, that God is not obeyed: the Counsel will be displeased, that God
and the king are not obeyed: the court will be agreeued to see God, the king,
and Counsel displeased: and the Commonwealth will have a common vvoe, when
all these are displeased. Look therefore betimes to this business, detract no
time for this dispatch, suppress the power of the devils pride; and plant in
your hearts that grace of humility, that in the life of true love, may bring
forth fruit to Gods glory. Break an Angel, and you shall have loss in the
metal; break a Cup, and you shall have loss in the fashion; break a
Glass, you shall loose the fashion and the Metal; break wedlock, and you
loose your credit; break the Law, and loose your liberty; break Love, and
loose the joye of life: But keep your Coin whole, and it will go current;
keep your Cup whole, and you shall save the fashion; keep your Glass whole,
and you shall save Metal and fashion; keep your wedlock from breaking, and
save your credit from cracking; keep your Law from breaking, and your love
will be great; keep your Love from breaking, and your lives will be blessed:
Divide the head, and the Brains vvil come out; divide the Body, and the heart
will come out; divide the Mind, and the vvittes will come out; divide the
Wits, and the vvilles come out; and divide the Wills, and the vvoes come
out* but keep the head whole, and the Brains will be the better; keep the
Body whole, the heart will be the better; keep the mind quiet, the wits
will be the better; keep the wits in temper, the vvilles be the better, and
keep the wills together, the commonwealth vvil be the better. Note therefore
in all causes, and al courses, division breeds loss, grief, or sorrovv: and
union, gain, comfort, and joy. But I doubt I have only spoken of that which
would quickly be helped, if the right way were once found: and therefore it
is rather the manner, then the matter, that the vvorkeman cannot agree upon:
but to help the ill hammering of a piece of work so vvorth the framing, let
me make a comparison betwixt a house and a kingdom: There is a great
Landlord will have a house builded, his will must be obeyed, he gives
command unto the master workman that it be speedely performed: The master
vvorkeman calls his laborers, and gives order for the work, every one in his
place, and according to his quality: Now when the work is in hand, Timber,
Stone, Brick, Lime, and water, Iron, Glass, and Lead, and all is ready that
is necessary: If either the workmen be unwilling to work, or cannot agree
upon their work, there will no house be built: But if they fall to their
business, and agree upon the direction, the ^ame will soon up: Even so the lord
God, our Savior Jesus Christ, the great Landlord, and Lord of Heaven and
Earth, will have a commonwealth builded, and his will must be obeyed: for
performance whereof, he has given commandment to his servant, and our
Sovereign Lord King James in this world, under God only workemaister of this
union: where if either the people be unwilling to yield unto the course or
order set down by the workemaister, or among themselves disagree upon the
manner of their working, whatsoever fair words be used, whatsoever good
reasons be alleged, or whatsoever shows of love be made, there will be no
true league of friendship, nor peace for the ground of a Commonwealth: but let
the laborers be willing to be directed by their vvorke-maister, and every one
in his place, show the best of his good will; and no doubt, but such a
commonwealth will be built, as while God does bless it, all the world
shall not hurt it. Consider therefore the inconveniences of division, and the
comforts and commodities of union, and let not self-will carry you away from
the course of wisdom: you see, if you will still murmr against this so
gracious an action, how many are against you? God himself, who loves unity:
the King, who would have an union: Subjects, that love their King, and godly
men that love God, for they will be obedient to his will: the flowers of the
field are against you, for they will grow together; the trees, for they will
bear fruit together; the fish, for they vvil swim together; the birds, for
they will sing together: and is it not then a shame for men, that we cannot
live and love together. For shame then go from your selves unto God, and go
from the Devil unto man: and in the name of God agree together; live under one
God, one King, one law, and one love: so shall God best be pleased, the King
best contented, the kingdom best governed, and every wise and honest man best
satisfied: where living in murmuring and malecontent, God may be displeased,
the king disquieted, the State disturbed; and fevv men but some way
discontented: what shall I say, to conclude, but this? Is not union a kind of
marriage, wrought by the hands of God? and performed in the hearts of his
people? I say, a marriage where hearts joining hands, make two bodies as one:
and is not a kind atonement, better then an unkind diuorcement: let then these
two kingdoms be one, marry them in love, and since our King is the Father
that gives them, while God himself does unite them, what Subject or Christian
can be so ungracious, as not to give his consent to them? yea let me say with
the minister in the time of marriage: if any man know any lavvfull, or just
cause, why these two Lands, now one kingdom, should not in marriage be
lincked with such a love, as may make them live under one law, and dvvell
together as one people, let him now speak, or ever hereafter hold his peace:
But if there be any man, that knovving no just, nor lavvfull cause, will out
of the malicious humor of a wicked spirit, hating to see a heavenly Action
upon earth, murmur at the blessed proceeding of so gracious a work, the God of
peace make him for ever hold his peace.

Amen

