CHOICE, CHANCE, AND CHANGE: OR, Conceits in their Colors.



Imprinted at London for Nathaniell Fosbrooke, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Helmet. 1606.

TO THE READER.
IF your choice chance to be good, change it not, if your conceit chance to
choose amiss, allow it not: If it carry a good color, and the cloth be
naught, esteem it not: but if it be good and you conceit it not, change your
humor, but keep your choice: In brief, here are conceits of diverse colors,
some in grain and none but will bide the weather: but if you be in love, here
is a lesson for your learning, where you may find passion put to her patience,
wit to his whirligigge, the fool to his part, and the better conceit to his
best corner: many wild Geese fly in their own feathers, and a tame duck is a
pretty foul: In some, there is nothing so good but may be mended, nor so ill
but may be well taken: kind fellows and honest wenches I know will not be
angry, and if any man be out of his wits, God send him well into them again:
and so hoping that good conceits, will choose the best and leave the worst, I
will change kind thanks for kind acceptance, and so rest, as I find cause.

Insert these words into the beginning of the eight leaf before the end of the
Book: I could be glad of your fau. etc.

A Dialogue, after a friendly greeting, upon a sudden meeting, between
Arnofilo and Tidero: as they travailed upon the way, betwixt Mount Ierkin, and
the great City at the foot of the wood, in the long valley.
Ar. TIDERO, Well met, of all the men in the world, I would never have thought
to have seen you in these parts: why? how many thousand years since I saw you
last.


Tidero: Not many thousand: what? am I become a spirit that you wonder at me?
this is as good as a good year on you: how long have you been away, and how
have you done since yesternight: is a year or two such a time of absence, as
if one should come out of his grave to maze the world with miracles? I must
confess I have been abroad, and have seen more then I have eaten, and
drunk more then has done me good: but what of that? all is well that ends
well: and therefore hoping that you will leave your wondering, in honest
kindness tell me how you do? and have done ever since I saw you?


Ar. Sometime well, and sometime so so: meat whole, but:


Tid. But, where is now the old shrug at that wicked but? an old mezill will
have a misers trick: if you had bin where I have bin, and endured that I have
don, you would leave your shrinking of your shoulder, at the burden of ease.


Ar. Why, but tell me, have thou been a trauailer?


Tid. I have walked a little over the great water, some ten thousand of miles,
and yet have found the way home again.


Ar. And for ought I see, thou art welcome home, and no doubt but many of thy
friends will be glad to see thee: for my self, I am glad even with all my
heart, to see thee so well.


Tid. You are glad of your eiesight, and so I think are many more, that after
the common fashion carrye the name of friends, but:


Ar. Tush I pray thee, leave thy But: I doubt thou have met with some
unkind kindred, fained friend, hollow companion, cogging Rascal, or dogged
pesaunte, that has given you a dry salutation, bidden you to a hu^gry
breakfast, that you are not in full true charity with all the world: But put
away melancholy, let the Devil go hang himself, one honest man is worth a
hundred beggars: and for my poor state, thou know it: and such as it is,
take part with it: go home with me, and stay till I bid thee go. I
protest I shall be glad of thee: and for my little wealth, I had rather spend
it on such a companion, then leave it to a sight of Churles: for thou know I
have no store of Heirs, and therefore I pray thee, be let us be merry, and
let us live together.


Tid. Why how now? do you take me for a woman, that you come upon me with a
ballad, of Come live with me and be my Love; well, loss of time is but
ventered ware, and the gain of repentance, but the grief of understanding;
but, I will hope the best, that I have now found a man, whose breathe is not
poisoned.


Ar. Poisoned man, God forbid; but say, where with all do thou mean?


Tid. With deceit, lying, dissembling, in effect all one kind of poison; which
in these days is as common among men, as painting among women.


Ar. Fie upon it, talk not of it, for my wife she I am sure uses not the one,
and for my self God bless me from the other: But leave tricks to trickers, and
tell me I pray thee in a word, what have thou seen in thy travail?


Tid. In a word, variety: I can not in one word better express the sum of all:
for indeed I have seen much, and much variety in that I have seen.


Ar. As how I pray thee?


Tid. I have seen the great water called the Sea, to which compared, the
greatest River is but a little Channel, and the greatest flood, except that
which was in the time of Noah, is but as a dish of water: the taste of which
water is salt: and in this water live a whole world of strange fishes; of
which I have seen some very great, some not so great, and some far less: but,
as upon the Land, so in the Sea, I saw the great eat up the little: a Whale
would hunt a whole skull of Herings, and swallow down a number of them: The
Porpoise would hunt the Samon and the Shad, the Seal would feed upon the
Whiting, but the Whale would take order with a world of small fishes: and so
you see upon the land, among the fowls of the air: the Eagle upon the Phesant
or the Poulte: the Faulcon upon the Mallard, or the Partridge, the Hobby upon
the Lark, and so still the great feed upon the small ones: so in beasts the
Wolf upon the sheep, the dog upon the hare, the Fox upon the Lamb, the
greater ever makes his pray upon the less: and yet as in birds and beasts, so
in fishes have I observed, that the sword fish, and the Dolphin will be the
death of a Whale: a little Jack of a Marlin, will be on the neck of a
Partridge, and a little dog will put down a great Bear.


Ar. Yea, but they can never do it, but when they have them at advantage.


Tid. That is understood, but they do so: how ever they catch them at it.


Ar. Yea they do indeed, but how they do it, that would be known.


Tid. It is not for me to look after, for I will neither fly into the Air to
ask the birds, nor diue into the sea, to ask the fishes: nor be a beast on
the land, to learn a note of their nature; and yet there comes much good by
them.


Ar. As how I pray thee?


Tid. Why when a Whale is wounded, he will run to the shore, and then the
fishermen make much money of his oil, when a Marlin kills a Partridge, the
faulconer fares the better, and when the dog pulls down the Bear, it makes
sport for the master of the game.


Ar. Thou say true, but let them alone with their sports, and tell me what
else saw thou at the sea?


Tid. I saw how wooden horses went with the wind, which carried men and
Merchandise, over the water from one land to another: but sometimes, with a
sudden tempest man and horse ouerthrown upon a Rock, and the goods all flote
or drowned, sometime man, horse and ware through a leake, sink all into the sea:
sometime swallowed in a sand, and sometime upon a sudden one fall upon another,
and by fire and sword, one or both fall to destruction: these horses were
called Ships, Pinnaces, Hoyes and such like: and let me tell you, as David
the Prophet said: he that passes the deep sees the wonders of the Lord: for
if I should tell thee what dangers I have escaped both by sea and land, thou
would say, I were bound to praise God.


Ar. Thou say well, I have heard so much of the dangers of the sea, that I
care not, if I keep one foot of Land: but I pray thee tell me a little further
of thy travail.


Tid. I will tell you, at sea I saw none of those toys that I have heard
fools talk of, as Mermaides and Sirenes, for they are in deed but fictions:
but I saw in a clear day, a great depth under one ship upon a calm, in a still
water, the tops of steeples and old stone walls, which the Sea had swallowed
by some great breach over the banks of that country: and as I heard afterward
in my travail, in the drowning of those towns there perished a world of
people, and no small mass of wealth.


Arnofilo. A pitiful Spectacle, and yet we see, when wealth breeds pride,
GOD will send us a sore plague: but I pray thee proceed, and tell me of thy
further Travail.


Tid. I will: when I first arrived on shore with some other of the Ship,
wherein I made my passage, I beheld the Soil, which was as this is,
replenished with grass, herbs, flowers, and trees, and so forth: and for the
Fowls they did fly, the Beasts did feed, and men and women did walk and
talk as we do: only they did vary in their attire, and in their language
from us: the poor did for the most part drink water, and the rich wine; the
poor fed most upon herbs, roots, course bread, and little flesh: the rich
upon such Cates as the country will yield: their cities were fair to the eye,
but slight for the substance, their wealth great, but in few men's hands, their
laws stricte, and well observed; the Men, neither Pigmeies nor monsters; their
women some fair, some foul: but one thing I noted chiefly in the country, that
in every house the inhabitants had a private law in their own houses, and one
neighbor with an other, besides the common laws of the country.


Arnofilo. For those, in that they may be tedious to thee to recite, I will
defer them till another time: but, I pray thee tell me something of the
private laws among them.


Tid. Betwixt neighbors it was one Law, that every man should pay his
own house rent, and not to trust unto his neighbor. Another Law, that every
man should provide for his own household all things necessary, and not to
borrow of his neighbor: another Law, that no man should owe his neihbour any
thing but compliments: an other was that no man should be bold with his
neighbors wife, further then she would let him, howsoever the common Law would
direct him. No man should slander his neighbors wife, for fear of hurting
him, and doing her no good: No man should tell tales, though true, betwixt
party and party, that might move strife, for breaking of peace: No man
should deny a kindness promised unto his neighbor, or his wife, least he
should grow angry, and she take thought: No man might make horns at his
neighbor, though he knew him to be a cuckolde, for fear of breeding of
bate betwixt a Man and his wife: these with many other private Laws, were
very straightly and carefully observed, betwixt neighbor and neighbor:
besides, there is one other that I had forgotten, and that is this, that no man
might father his neighbors child, how soever he had talked with the mother
of it, for fear to breed the Fathers unkindness, and the Mothers undoing.


Ar. Pretty Laws, and well noted; I see there was some good fellowshippe among
them, and that they had a care of their business: it was well, for without
these laws, knaves and fools might have done much hurt: what was the
punishment to be laid upon the offenders in any of these items, or private
Laws?


Tid. No open matter of shame, but among themselves he that did offend,
according to the nature of his offense was censured* if he wanted wealth, held
a poor man, if he wanted wit, a fool: if honesty, a knave, if kindness, a
dog: and so though suffered to be a dweller, yet not esteemed as a neighbor.


Ar: Truly good, so it should be, as the world goes: neighbors should be kind
one to another, or else there were no neighborhood: but tell me I pray thee a
little of the private laws in each house.


Tid. If a man were married to a scold, let her work for her living, and pray
for patience:

If a woman were married to a fool, let him walk to wind yarne, or pick nuts.

If a man had a whore to his wife, to think of his own case, and so: to
conceal his sorrow, or to be rid of his mischief:

If a woman be married to an Eunuche, to do something to save his shame from
knowledge.

No man must go to market without money, nor to dinner without meat.

No man must go to bed till he be sleepy, nor rise till he be awake.

No man must look for money till he have earned it, nor pay money till he have
it.

Many other such laws, or Items there are agreed upon, among them, which were
but tedious to recite: some of which, I have forgotten, but these I can well
remember.


Ar. Pretty noted, I thank thee for them with all my heart: but what punishment
is there appointed for the offenders, in any of these agreements;


Tid. I will tell you, he that will live with a scoulde must be laughed at for
his labor:

She that is wife to a fool, lives in suspicion of God forbid:

He that will live with a whore must wear a great cap:

She that is married to an Eunuch must go to physic for the green sickness:

He that goes to market without money must come home without meat:

He that dines without meat, must feed upon fasting:

He that goes to bed til he be sleepy, must lie and tumble till he be weary:
and he that rises ere he be wake must be held for a mad man.

He that looks for money he knows not why, must have it he knows not when,
and he that will pay it ere he have it, must be wondered at of all the
world:


Ar. Gramercy good wagge, for thy good noates, pretty laws, and pretty
punishments, if tt were worse, it would not be so well: for Scolds and whores,
and fools and cuckolds would be cut of order for pride, if they were not taken
down with some trick: And to tell a truth, it is requisite that a man should
not be so lazy as to go to bed, ere he be sleepy, nor so mad as to rise
in a dream: so foolish to go to market without monye, or so peevish, as to
dine without meat, or so childish, as for to look for money without desert, and
to pay it before he have it, why it is a thing impossible: and therefore the
Agreements are good, I like them well: pity but they should be kept: But I
pray thee, tell me a little further of thy travel, in that country or any
other:


Tid. I will tell you: for the great men, I durst not look too greatly at
them: for fear their greatness would have too great an eye at my looking; only
I saw, they were well proportioned, strong limmed, manlike faces, wore good
clothes, rode on fat horses, pinched not their own bellies, nor were not
afraid of a cup of wine, kept their cuntries in peace, and lived in a league
of great love: this was all that I there noted, among the great ones: and
for the name of the Country, as I heard; it was called, Terra Straue.


Ar. I find it not in the map by that name, but it is no matter, on with thy
discourse.


Tid. For the meaner sort of people, yet not the basest, for those are
alikeeuery where: Roges will beg, beggars will not be bashful, fools will
cry, and dogs will bark, and therefore let them pass; but, for the better
sort, I found them good fellows, of what condition soever: Male, or female,
Learned, or unlearned, there would none be out, for his hand in a health,
howsoever they had fared: the Scholar would dispute upon none but the full
point, and the unlearned by Experience had a carouse, at the highest: Civil
carriage and fair conditioned, drink, and spend and pay, like right lads and
not quarrel, till the cup had made a conquest of all the company; and the^
ipse he qui the which leapte over the hedge, and fell in the ditch, A, B, C,
non habet P: how rousts the hen when the cock is a sleep: it is twelve a clock,
and god give you good night:


Ar. But is it possible, was there such good good fellowship? much good do their
hearts, and yet it is pity there was not more dancing and less drink: for then
their heels might have held up their heads, and their ways might have been
fit for a better work: but so long, as they went all one way, I like the
better of their travel.


Tid. Oh sir: a little nap makes them as fresh as if they had never been
salted: and dance and sing, and if need be a better thing: tushe they are a
gallant people, the men were good musicians, and there wenches would sing
excellently: but for that I had no long time to tarry there, I could not observe
much more then I have told you: and therefore if the time will give us leave, I
will tell you what I saw in an other country, which I next fell upon.


Ar. I pray thee do, thou can not please me better.


Tid. I will tell you: crossing but a little river, and it was over a short
narrow stone bridge, I fell into a Country that had another name, which might
well be: for in many things me thought it differed in nature.


Ar. As how? I pray thee tell me.


Tid. First for the soil it was more full of sand, and Dust, and not so fair
and fat, as the neighbor country, yet had it no lack of wood, nor Corn nor
fruit: For the country people, I mean the meanest sort fed much of garden
commodities; which with help of a little oil, and scarce sweet butter, made
them dishes of meat fit for their stomachs: and their drink was most either
upon plain water of the brook, or upon Apple water, otherwise called Sider
which which was in a manner their wine: their villages large and their houses
strong, though nothing stately: the people most plain without welt or guarde,
or almost wit or understanding, more then to know their own, the way to the
Church and the field, and the Taphouse if there were any in the Town, the way
to the Market and home again; to plough, and plant, and sow, and reap, to
thrash and grind, to make hard bread and eat it with strong teeth, to make Love
illfauouredly and to get children to furnish the parish: these were the main
points of their conditions: for to talk of more then a Codshead, would trouble
a fisherman, the shephearde more then of a sheepshead, nor the ploweman further
then his tillage* nor the Butcher more then his Bullock: for if you did go any
further, you did but trouble their capacities: but for those matters you should
hear them talk so sauourly, that if you did want wit to consider how soon
those small Cunnings would be learned, you would have been buried in a
dungheape, ere you could get out of the clean: oh how the fisherman would
discourse of his angle, his line, his cork, his lead, his bait, his net, his
grinne, his leap, his weere, and I know not what; his observing of time day
and night, his patience to attend, his craft in drawing his bait along the
stream, his dressing of his bait to draw the fish to it, his playing with
the fish when he had him, his hoising of him out of the water, and then what
a mess or meat he could make of him, although perhaps it proved all but a
Gudgin: but if it were a Codshead, his lips would be worth the licking, and
in this was his Element, here was his study, and in these matters of little
moment, would he spen d the whole spirit of his understanding. With whom,
although it were no great hurt, for to loose a little time, yet it was some
pleasure for to hear him, and besides to noate his kind of pride in his poor
trade.

The Shepherd he would so talk of his Rams and his Weathers, of his Ewes
and his Lambs, his hogs and his sheerlings: the big h^^ne, and the fine wool,
the deep side, and the broad Ioines: the nature of their breed, and of their
feed, their washing, their shearing, their marking, their folding, their
diseases and their medicines: the Fly and the Scabbe, and how to trim them,
and pick them, and dress them, and then with a sigh to talk of the Rot, and
what a heavy thing it is among them: to be short, if you had time to attend the
end of his discourse, there is no Heraulde in searching out and delivering of a
coat of a very great Antiquity, could weary you more then he would your
patience, with a tale of the Petigree of some of his choice Cattle: for such a
Ram was of such an Ewe, that was bredde in such a ground, of such a Man's,
that had so many Rams from such a ground, and he that was the Master of such
a ground brought some twenty Rams from such a Country, and withal the owner
of those Sheep had them out of such a Shire, of the best strain that was in
all that Country, and they in that Country: came I know not from whence, but
and if I would have stayed for to have heard him out, I think that he would
never have left, till he had come to Jacob, or Laban, or Abell the first
Shephearde that ever was, to come to the Strain of his Sheep: but, I left at
a point enough for my learning: for I gathered out of all in brief, how soon
he that had money might learn to gain by sheep, though he would not lap
himself in a sheeps skin: but, if you should take him out of his element;
then he was gone, and you did his capacity much hurt: for, there was the sum
of his worlds paradise: of which he would speak with such a feeling
contentment, th^^ it were pity such a spirit should be drawn from his
pleasure: but, to be short by the sum of his speech I gathered in brief, with
money how to make a good shepherd in a little time: on a hard ground breed
small sheep; on a fat ground bigger boned: put not the Rams to the Ewes too
soon, for fear the Lamb be to forward: look to them for the Scab, and the
fly, least I loose my sheep, or my sheep loose her fleece: give them dry
layer, for fear of the rot; and in lamming time, to take heed of the Fox, the
wolf the Brock, and other vermin: to wash them in fair weather, not to
sheare them till they be dry, and take heed of clipping of their skins, for
fear of the fly: to put them in good pasture, and have an eye to them for
fear of the these: many other such kind of matters belong to the care of such
a course: but, because I rather desired the knowledge, then the profession of
it, I left him to his flock, which God bless to his holy pleasure, and so an
end. Then fell I in with the ploughman, who told me such a tale of the nature
of the earth, of the choice of his seed, of his first and second tilthe, of
his manuring, plowing, sowing, harrowing, reaping, binding, carting, pitching,
mowing, threshing, winowing, and fanning: and so putting up into the Garner for
store, or into the sacks for the mill, or the market, with hay Ree, and Who to
his horse; and hum and hah to me with such a garlic breath, as would have
poisoned a dog: I learned enough in a little time, to serve me for a great
while, for though I love to know any thing, yet God bless my brains, for my
limbs are not not now fit for labor: Age and travail, has given them too
great a weakness, besides the nature of my spirit, that though it has carried
my body on the earth yet, has it ever looked above the earth, for my comfort.


Ar: I thank thee for that yet, with all my heart: and I am not a little glad
to hear it: that all the world cannot make thee to forget heaven: for it is
no little happiness to see much, and know much, and make good use of all:
For, cannot a a man be a fisher, but he must gape like a cods head? nor be
master of a few sheep, but he must live and die in a sheep coat? or have
a barn full of corn, but he must be bound prentise to his flaile? the
miller and his mare may do well both to carry sackes, but the Master of them
both should not put his wits into a bag: believe me, it is not a little
grief to think how men beefoole themselves, or the devil bewitches men with
folly: why, is it not a myserie to think, how the breath of one villain,
poisons the hearts of an hundred: When he that travails a good subject, comes
home again a traitor, serves god at home, and the devil abroad, goes fourth
to gain honor, and comes home to be hanged? are not these pitiful
illusions? well, ha^py art thou that haste been infected with none of these
diseases: but tell me I pray thee, what did thou further note in the courts,
and cities of that country and other, where thou have been.


Tid. I will: the cities in that country were large, and well builded, for
strength more then beauty, for they were most of stone, and covered with a
kind of slate, but many of their towns were decayed, their castles, and chief
howses, ruinated, as it should seem, either by some civil wars, or some
uncivil Enemy: for the governors, they were men of further matter for their wit,
the^ their aspects, did make promise of: and yet they would knit the brows,
look under the Eyes, stroke down their beards, nod with their heads, shake up
poor men; whippe Roges, Rate Beggars, emprison offenders, hang up thieves and
in all they could, seek to maintain peace: that was one thing I cheefely
noted in their Cities: but for their courts I stayed so little a while in
them, that I cannot justly say any thing in their commendation; and yet in the
contrary I would say as little, for feere I should wrong them: But in their
towns, and cities, I saw many things and many pretty laws, and customs
among them, which in mine opinion were not unworthy the noting: The first law
was, that no man should marry a fair wench without money, except he were rich:
for fear of the horn for want of maintenance:

Item that no old woman that had wealth and children should marry a young
beggar, for fear of wasting her childies goods, and putting her self to her
patience:

No man aged should marry a wench too young, for fear of the curse of
contrarietyes.

No man should be a stranget to his own house, for fear his wife would procue
a gossip.

No woman should be master of her husband, for fear of the next neighbors
riding.

No man should bring his horse into a stable, but he should pay for his meat
ere he came out.

No man should take more then he had warrant for, lest he should answer it at
the gallows.

No vintner should mingle water with his wine, except he were allowed it by
his Company.

No Tailor should put more stuff in a garment, then was allowed him for his
mesure.

No shoemaker should make his shoos to strong, for fear they hold to long.

No Tradesman should sell his ware too good cheap, for fear of hinderance to
his Trade.

No Iester should be favored of the wise, for fear of being more knave then
fool.

No Constable should be suffered to be drunk, for fear the watchmen should
fall asleep.

No Fool should inherit too much land, for fear a knave should to soon alter
the property.

He that could get no children should not mary: and she that could not abide a
man, should be set to keep chickens.

No man might have two vviues, for fear of breeding unquietness.

No woman might have two husbands, for fear she should be in love with
neither.

Many other such idle things there were agreed upon among them; which for
tediousnes I let pass: for being no matters of great moment, it is no great
matter for their remembrance, only thus much I remember, that no man should be
found drunk in a house, but he should be laid in the street till he were
sober*


Ar. Pretty items, and good reason for the keeping of them: for as I said
before, lack of care among mad people, may be the spoil of a whole market; it
is not meet that men should be persuaded, that the moon is made of a green
cheese; it is a principle in Philosophy: Contraries can not be together: age
and youth can not be in one predicament: January and May never meet together,
but, if age long to be in his grave, youth will be a good staff to lead him to
it but I mean the crooked cripples, that are not able to look up so high as
the eye of Venus, with a golden shower will think to come in at the window of
her chamber: and therefore such an absurdum should not pass in the school of
Cupid: though that sometime, for breeding an old Stalian, may be better then a
young Colte.

Secondly, he that is a stranger to his wife, is worthy to find her a
straggler: and she that is master of her husband, must wear the breeches.

Again, hay is dear, prouender is costly, and horse meat must be paid for,
and therefore let trauailers look to their purses.

And for thieves, when they are hanged, honest men thrive the better.

For Vintners, Tailers, Shoomakers, and all Tradesmen, pity but they should
live by their trades.

And for a drunken Constable, why he may be the spoil of a watch; but for
fools and iesters the world is prettly well rid of them, and therefore I say no
more to them. But I pray thee go on with thy trauail, and tell me somewhat else
that thou have seen and noted.


Tid. I saw something that it grieved me to see, and no less to remember.

I saw in a City or borrough town, I know not well whether a pitiful sight,
An old old, and very very very aged old man, with a most exceeding illfauoured
and ougly face, and a much far and a great deal worse body, whose legs were
worse then wood, for they would have stood upright, which his could not; with a
pair of eyes worse then glass, for they were clear and his were not: and, with
such a breath, as except to the stink of a rotten toothe, I cannot compare it
to any ill savor in the world. Now this untimely, misbegotten and accursed
borne creature, was (alas that I should speak it) married for his money to a
most fair, sweet, young, dainty, strait, fine damsel that a man might see in a
whole city, oh fine love that could be betwixt them.


Ar. Fie upon it, what an oversight was that in the whole parish? why, the maids
or the young men, or some good body or other might have forbid the banes, or
have taken her away from him, by the way: was there never an Orlando that would
venture a lim for Issabell?


Tid. Yes that there was, for else I fear I should have spoild the Groom,
howsoever it would after have fallen out with the Bride; but, to tell you what
fell out, upon a sudden as this monster of a Man was coming homewards to his
own house, a little from the town, in a little Lane at the turning of a
hedge, were prepared for the purpose tenn gallant Caualieroes, well horsed, and
weaponed, and every way fully appointed for the purpose: put the peasaunte to
his palsy, and on a spare horse furnished for the purpose, took the Bride in
all her ritche Jewels and costly attire, and far from that country carried
her, from whence he could never fetch her: for grief whereof, I mean his
rich Chains of pearls, and jewels, wherewith he had adorned his worlds idol,
he took such a heaviness in his heart, as tumbled his head in his grave: and
she sweet Lady, lived a happy life with a more worthy beloved.


Ar. More say thou? why less worthy could none be, if he were as thou have
described him: oh cursed pelf, that makes such a Coblatiue couiunction: but
this is the fault of many fools, that, as Jews do Moors, sell their children
for money: but the end of thy tale, was better then the beginning, which I was
glad to hear: but tell me have thou such an other?


Tid. Yes that I have, and much of the same nature, In a country market town,
near unto this city dwelt a woman of great wealth, who being of the years of
scarce understanding, for she could hardly go, with out Leaning, a most
hollow eied, wrincled faced, dropping nosed, toothlesse mouthed, slauering
lipped, most ill countenanced, worie complexioned, and worse conditioned,
crooked, creeping and cripled old woman, fell in love with a most gallant, neat,
handsome, tall, straight and goodly gentleman, who for the only love of that
she had, cast himself away, upon this old Croane: but, though he had a little
troubled his conscience, with a little ceremony, the matter far from his heart,
finding her humor too much inclined, to the spanish grape, and for want of
natural heat, to drink much of spirits of wine* and hot waters plied her so
with such drinks, as drove her into such a heat, as put her into such a fever,
as carried her quickly to her long home, and left him possessor of all her
wealth:


Ar. A good bargain, but ill gotten for such a kindness, was but a kind of
poison: but yet, if he meante not her death, it was no great matter for her
sickness.


Tid. Oh no, I have heard him protest, not for all the world, for had she lived
she should have lacked no cherishing, but for lyeing with her, he would not
have come in bed with her, for hurting her; for she was so tender that she
was ready to fall in pieces.


Ar. It was done like an honest man, to have some pity on her that had so much
loved him, I thank him for it, every man would not be so kind: but on I
pray you, haste thou any more of these?


Tid. Not in this nature, but if it may not seem tedious, I could tell you a
merry tale, how I lost my self at a wedding.


Ar. I pray thee do.


Tid. It was my hap one day to hear of a great Bridail, or contry wedding, in
a pretty village near unto a market town, which solemnity was kept, at the
house of one sir Slapsawce, a slouenly knight, that by an unhappy chance came
by a title more then he was worthy of: for he had nothing in him of a
knighte, more then his title, except it were, that he wore spurs and a
sword: for he was used to ride very often to the faires, and to the Market,
and they were both guilte and dammasked for fear of wearing out too soon, A
satin Ierkin he wore, which was his great grandfathers, and it was his pride
to speak of it in honor of the Antiquity, beside a brooch in his hat, which
was the Bosse of some horse bridle, that having been some pawn to his
ancetors, was left to him for a legasie: which being set in his hat, would
make him shake the head with no small pride: but not to stand too long upon an
idle description,

Let it suffice that he was fat, both in belly and purse: dwelte in a fair
house, and kept good victuals for his friends which were not many, nor often:
but, at feasts, he would be lusty, brewe good bear, and down with a bullock:
and make no spare as long as it would last: So now at this time betwixt
Master Ienkin his eldest son, and mistress Parnel, his neighbors daughter
whose fathers purse made a match with his land, there I say at his house at
this bridale feast, was a great meeting of all the gallants of both genders in
the Country I omit to tell what charge he saved by the world, of Capons,
Chickins, Geese, Lambs, pigs, yea and some Bullocks, brought in by the
tennants, with malt and meal, beside Apples plummes and plumm cakes, that
there wa^ted nothing that might be had, so good cheap but all this is nothing
to the purpose of that I mean to speak of, for during this time of feasting
being in the Summer time, there wanted no variety of sports, as hunting, hawking
Music and dancing, courting, and kissing, and what not, that was necessary:
and yet for my self, being brought thither by a friend, I left my self I know
not how and not being out of a chamber was as it were in a wood, saw many
ways and knew not which to take: for when I had taken a superficial view of
them all old and young, fair and foul: men and women: I was in such a case,
that I knew not which way to turn me, for, first touching the men, one he
was so fine at kissing of his hand, as if he did wipe his mouth at every word,
an other would congey so low that his points had much ado to hold, so that
those were too full of compliments, for my conference, an other he was so
neat, fine, and all so fine, that for fear of tutching his ruffes, displacing
his sword point, or some such nice kind of Anoyance, I durst not come too
near him: An other, he was so rude and so buisie with every body, that I was
loath to be troubled with him: An other was so eloquent, that I knew not how to
talk with him: An other was so dull of understanding, that I had no edge to
deal with him, Another so bashful, that I was loath to make him blush: and
another so saucy* that I was glad to shun him, and other was so old that I
should have had a Chronicle, to answer him and an other so young, that it was
pity to trouble him: thus among men I could single out no mate: And for the
women, if one had a good wit, then was her face nothing answerable, so that I
could rather desire to hear her, then see her: and if an other were fair,
then her wit was out of the way, so that I might rather please mine eye then
trouble my tongue with her, another if she were rich, then was she so old that
she was out of date with me: an other was so young, that I was afraid to
venture on her: So that, in some, I knew not how to bestirre me: either to
stand like a spy, to here, and see, and say nothing, and to loose time, in
talking to idleness, but to tell you of the graces, and countenances of them
all, as well men as women* it were a pretty Jest to think on: if I could
remember them all in the right: for the men, one would stand snuffing and
spitting, as if he had bin new come from Tobacco: An other would sit shaking of
his legs, as though he were kicking of a dull horse: an other would stand with
his arms astrut, like a Scarcrow in a peas-garden, another would set out his
foot to look upon his new shoostrings: another would frown, as though he were
too good for the company, and another bite the lip, as though he had some pain
in his middle finger: one did look as if he would whine for an ill look of
his Mistrisse, another stand like a Godson that should be conning of his lesson
by heart, one like a fool that was ashamed of good company: and another like a
knave that was a Setter for fools: so that, afraid to touch one, come near
an other, trouble one, or be troubled with another, I left my old Masters to
their ha now ha, and the Madcapps to their heidegies, and for a while rather
stood to the blame of silence, then would fly the shame of folly: and so
leaving every one to his humor, fell to note the variety of countenances, among
the women: one would sit mumping, as though teeth would have much pleasured
her: Another nod the head, as though she hadd bin nurtering of youth; another
lere on either side, as a Cat at a mousehole; another swell with pride, as if
she were Mistress of the Harvest cart, another make so many faces, that she had
nere a good one among them; one would be stretching of her bodies, as if her
waste were too straight, another be putting off and on her gloves, to show the
rings on her fingers, another stand and sigh as if her heart would have burst
for love.


Ar. Yea marry, that was the wenche I looked for all this while: did not her
color come and go often, and did she not use little speech, and change the
copy of her countenance, and fiddle much with her fingers, and wag the
forepart of her soot and withdraw her self from much company?


Tid. She did all this and much more, as sometime laying her hand on her heart,
another while stretching her fingers to hear them crack, as if every ierke of
a joint were a husband, and by and by look in her hand, as though she had been
told of her fortune under her middle finger, and then a little shake the head,
as if it were not fully to her mind; and this we^ch did I fall aboard withal;
and for lack of better business, fell to court her with a few good words.


Ar. As how I pray thee:


Tid. In this manner: fair virgin, if it be no trouble to your patience to put
you out of your passion, let me entreat you to remove your melancholy, for it
is not agreeable to your complexion: sir quoth she, it may be you have made me
blush, to think what you would say to me, but if my mind be not in perfect
state, I can not take you for a Phisician: yet for your good counsel I thank
you, and that is all the fee you must look for.


Ar. The wench had some wit, I perceive by her answer.


Tid Wit, yes at will, for this was but the first blow, but see what followed:
Lady quoth I, your fee is too great, for such a small piece of Physic; but,
indeed if that I did but know the Nature of your disease, I would study for
your cure, and deserve a fee before I would take it: but the mind of
sickness is upon so many causes, that the grief is hard to guess, without
some light from the agrieued: but that known, he is either unlearned or unlucky
that can minister no comfort: you say well quoth she, but what if it be known
to be cureles, what then is any counsel without comfort?


Ar. Perilous Ape, I fear it will prove an Vrchin.


Tid. Oh no, it is a pretty creature, as you will confess when you hear more:
but let me tell you my reply. It may quoth I seem cureles, that may have
help, and therefore good words may do good in the nature of a good will: words
quoth she are good when they are well spoken; better when they are well meant,
and good when they are well taken, and better when they are well returned: but
for good will, it is a kind of riddle that simple wits understand not; for fine
wits can so equivocate, that plain meaning is much abused, where the misbeliefe
of good words makes the overthrow of a good mind.


Ar. Why how now man, was this a wenche?


Tid. It was a woman at least of woman kind, as fair a damsel as I think
lives in the world: but, let me tell you how I went about with my wits to
meet a little with her good will. Lady quoth I, good will grounded upon good
cause, may out of a good meaning bring forth good words, which working good
effect in agood mind, may upon a good consideration work a good conclusion;
Beauty is a good thing to the Eye, virtue to the mind these work a love in
desert, which is good in reason: Now love in reason having a great power in
nature, may make the riddle easy to be red, where knowledge will not dissemble
ignorance.


Ar. Well said wag, it was well put to.


Tid. No such matter, my fortune was yet too far from such a figure; for, let
me tell you her answer, and then give your judgment.


Ar. I pray thee do.


Tid. Why Sir quoth she I perceive you go from one Riddle to another;
knowledge to dissemble ignorance is for wisdoms to be hid in folly, which
is a strange construction for a weak capacity: if the cause of good will be
misconceiued, the good words may then be displaced, and so the matter mistaken
the time may be but misspent: Beauty is but a shadow that has no substance,
where reason may be blinded with illusion, and virtue is so far from nature,
that it is not seen but with the eye of grace; and for Love it is grown such a
lest, that it is rather laughed at then believed in the world: therefore where
you find beauty, do not flatter it with virtue, till you see it: and for virtue
do not amiss conceive it, least you wrong your self in it, but where in deed
you find it, I can not blame you to love it.


Ar. Oh unhappy the^fe, able to rob reason of his understanding: but I hope
thou would not leave her so.


Tid. I think not, for thus I fell upon a reply: to blame love were a blot in
kindness, and to yield to reason is a bond in wit* to find folly in wisdom is
the search of a deep wit, and to wey words in their true worth, is the proof
of good understanding: but to laugh at love is no proof of good will: If
therefore the virtue of your spirit in the beauty of your eyes has drawn my
heart to love, will you not be as good as your word, not to blame me for doing
well: for if reason fail not my conceipte, let me not move patience in
speaking truth, and let not truth seem flattery, where virtue has but her due
honor: so shall the riddle be soon read, whose substance is but your self,
and the passion best cured where my humble service may be graced: Sir quoth she
I hope you will pardon my weakness, to entertain your patience with idleness: for
to answer your Arguments, would require a better Scholar, then my learning:
you may judge amiss and mean well, Complexions and conditions may differ, and
I may believe, and be deceived, when words may want their weighte in good
will: Love is a dangerous spirit, and where he is snared by any subtilty, does
much hurt, where he is taken: If I were so well acquainted with him, as you
would seem to be, it may be, I should employe him as you would, but to
leave ridling, in reason let me tell you this: as I would not be vuthankfull
to a stranger: so would I not be strange to my self, as I can commend your
wit, I must have care of my will, and til I be able to be a friend, not to
admit the entertainme^t of a servant; and therefore, when you know my disease,
hoping you will be my Phisitia^, I will follow your counsel* to be as merry as I
may, and having no better fee, only I thank you for your kindness: Lady quoth
I, I am sorry, Time admits me not, with your favor, to deliver you further my
mind, Let it suffice you that I am youres more then I can say, though I can
say no more, then that I am yours: if occasion in your commandment may make
trial of my trust, I will attend my desert in the hope of your regard: and so
hoping, that love will be without danger, where words carry the true weight:
if affection may help a passion, let me entreat you to apply my faith to your
fancy, and I hope my physic will do you good: but since, neither time, nor
place does fit our further conference, I pray you let me entreat you thus
f^re to honor my fortune, as to wear this ring for my sake, a littie hoope of
gold, in which was ingraued, Sic fides, so is faith, pure, and without end:
which with a blushinge denial, upon such importunity, she took and gave me
for a favor to wear for her sake, a little Cupid of Bugle finely wroght, and
written over his eyes in black letters: Caecus sictus Amor; upon the mutual
receipte of these tokens, with some little short congey we parted, leaving
her to her old passion, that I knew not; or to this new passion that I had
moved, but yet, found not, or to smile at my folly, which I doubted not: and
so sequestring my self from the women to chewe the cud of this kindness, I
fell, or at lest was falen upon, by a young gallant in show, but indeed a
companion for a dog, rather then for any better condition: Yet to bleer the
eyes of fools he could play the knoue with setting on the face of an honest
man: this youth in a basket, with a face of Brass, upon a little acquaintance
(for a little would serve his turn) comes to me, with this salutation: by your
leave sir: It seems you are a stranger in these parts, but if you can away
with our country sports, will you make one at bowls for a rubber or two? we
will play no great game (and yet would he cheat for a shilling:) No good sir
quoth I, I thank you, I am not acquainted with your ground, and should but pull
down a side, and therefore I pray you now pardon me: will you then sir quoth
he have a rest at Primero, or a game or two at tables: it is the worst thing
in the world to stand idle: true sir quoth I, but it is as good be Idle, as ill
exercised, and to tell truth, I am no gamster: besides indeed, under the
shadow of jesting; I did not like he should jest away my money: Indeed Sir, to
say the truth you do the better, it is the worst spent money at play, that can
be: for recreation, among good company, a little money is not ill ventered: but
I pray you sir, what news abroad? hear you nothing from the Court? nor from
beyond the Seas? now I knowing his condition, and desirous to be rid of his
Company, told him, that I heard no late news from the court, but from beyond
the Seas I heard some letters read, in which I saw no matter of Import; but one
I pray you sir quoth he (Rowsing up his rascal humor) in hope to hear of
some matter for his purpose: let me be holding to hear it, for we in the
Country live so far off from al good places, that news com to us like fishes,
never till it be stale: and and yet there too, are we glad of it: why sir quoth
I, thus it is; I read, that there was a notable knave under the shadow of a
fool, used to great men's howses, where with a bold face railing upon one to
please an other, he would abuse both: and ever chiefly following the best
cheer, the deepest purses, and shallowest wits, thus sometime with a gull, and
otherwhile with a white pigeon, one while with a Gander, an other while with
his gray goose, it fell out, that there was diverse mischiefs wrought by his
villainy: The Chamber maid, was poisoned in her sleep, whereupon she fell into a
timpany: my young master lost much money at play, and tales went betwixt
friends to set neighbors together by the Ears: with these, and many other
such Tricks, this customer with all his confederates, being found one day
together, about some wicked consultation, were by a general consent, taken
suddenly together, whipte all out of the city, and banished the Country, upon
pain of death never to return. Is it possible quoth he strange news in
deed, I thank you for it: well Sir, you will not walk abroad, I will leave you
for a while, and com to you anon: but I heard no more of him for that time.


Ar. It is no matter if you never hear more of him, nor any of his condition:
for, if there he one honest man of them, he is out of the way from al his
company, but I pray thee tell me what became of the wench, did thou see her
no more nether?


Tid. Yes that I did, I saw her, I spoke with her, and with much ado obtained
favor at her hand: but if it might not be tedious* I will tell you a little of
the circumstance that passed betwixt us, ere we came to the chief point.


Ar. Which point was that? the buske point, or the gaskin point?


Tid. Tush a pin for those points, our thoughts were carried in a higher
course of contentment: I will tell you she was fair, which made me not
foolish, she was kind, which made not me careless, she was wise, which made
not me wilful, and she was virtuous, which made not me unhappy: but, while I
thus commend her, I say nothing of our conference, which was as I will tell
you: The next day being fair, and many Ladies, and gentlewomen willing to
take the air, hand in hand, every one singling out his mistress, leading them
along upon a fair green, conuersing as they thought convenient; my self not
willing to be left alone, and most willing to have so good a friend, took
out my Mistrisse by entreaty, to take a little patience with my trouble; with
whom, having trod a step or two, I fell aboard with in this manner. Sweet
mistress, though idle heads make a fiction of Cupid, yet better Judging hearts
know, that Love can never be blinded: for the eyes of Love looking into the
heart of virtue, swear the service of Reason, to the honor of Beautye:
Seruante quoth she, (since you will needs have it so) Let me tell you yet,
that there is no gold pure until it be refined, nor any ringe but it has
two ends, till they be both joined in one: so faith is not known, till it be
proved, nor endless, but in the knot of Love: But, as it is a great Art to
refine gold, and no less cunning to cast it into a Ring: so is it a great
proof of Wit, to find out the pureness of faith* and no less happiness to
make use of it in Love: but, as good minds will ever construe good things unto
the best, so for to doubt the worse, is not amiss in the best meaning: Lady
quoth I, a causeless suspicion breeds a needelesse jealousy, and where all
good is intended, why should any be misconstrued: the refining of gold is in
the fire, and the sitting of the Ring in the hand; so, is the trying of faith
in the care of affection, but the knitting of Love, is in the content of the
heart. Where if fear be a hinderaunce unto happiness, reason must want a
part of his perfection: In deed quoth she, hope is a pretty humor, but it is
not always followed with felicity: but for that I would neither hide the Sun
in a cloud, nor make day light of Mooneshine, I will leave to your own
discretion to consider, what is best to be conceived: and for that, all eyes
are not in one head, nor all thoughts in one heart, let me entreat you to
be wise for your self, and I shall be the gladder of your well doing: Lady
quoth I, I shall do well in nothing, but your gladness, neither shall I be
glad of any thing, but in that you shall well allow of: for, to be wise in
your will, shall stand the happiness of my wit, and to pass the course of
your contentment, shall be the imperfection of my discretion; and therefore
let eyes look how they list, and hearts think what they list, to your
virtue I auowe my love, and in your Love be the joy of my life. Servant quoth
she, I command you then whatsoever you see to have patience, and whatsoever
you hear to have silence, until the next time that we meet again, when you
shall hear that shall not grieve you, though not enjoy that may content you:
and so let us away, for our company is going in, and I have spoiled a Goose
that I must pluck a feather with: with these good words and such like, we
went something fast, until we ouertooke our company that were going before us,
and in we went into the parlor, where being all set, some fell to cards, some
to Tables, some to playing upon Instruments of Music, and some to singing, I
placing my self somewhat near unto my new Mistrisse, took a book in mine
hand, and fell to reading of it, which being of the spoil of Troy, scarce had
I read three lines of the first lease, but a strange humorde brain, that had
but a little wit in his head, falls in hand with my fair mistress: but, if I
should tell you how she handled him, it were a tale almost worth the telling.


Ar. I pray thee do for ten to one, if he were a cappe, she would fit him
with a coks comb:


Tid. And so she did, and a bell and a babble to it, or else I am deceived: for
let me tell you, first for his proportion, he was squared out of a timber
logge, which was crooked at both ends, and little better in the midst, his face
big enough, and wanted no nose, and for his lips they suited his slauer
well, his hair of the color of a roane horse, and as hard as the stumpe of a
Rubbing brush: and for a beard it was so thick, that it harbored a great
train of his retinue, his body much after the Barrel, and his legs with the
wrong end vpwardes, yet had this fellow a pair of boots on, and spurs,
that were too long for his heels: now for his apparel, had he been a
trauailer, I should have taken him for some strange fool, but being, as I
after heard, a neighbors child, I found he was a notable gull: Now this
fool falls to courting of my Mistress, and thus he comes to her: Mistress are
you here? I think I have fitted you now, am I not in your colors: why quoth
she, you have so many, that I cannot tell which is mine, if I were a great
Lady, folks would take you for my fool: but I see your tricks well enough;
because you have many mistresses, you would have colors for them all; why,
let me see, you have Ash color for one, Oh that is for her that has the
green sickness: and yealow for another, that is for her, that has the yealow
Iaunders, you know who I mean, that was sick for love of you: and white for an
other, that was lately recovered of an Ague, or a worse matter, you know the
cause of her sickness: and blewe for an other, because she is in a consu^ption
through your unkindness: and tawny for an other, you know who that was, that
painted her self, and her color was not right: and Carnation for another,
who you know, is daintilie painted, but for whom is your Crimson? truly for
you mistress: I thought so in earnest, quoth she; for I cannot choose but blush
when I see you, and so you wear crimson, for my color: well when I perceive I
am among your mistresses: but I pray you henceforth leave me out, for he that
is my seruante shall wear no other livery but mine: who? I mistress quoth he:
no, though I am not so rich as I would be, I wear no liueries, I can tell you:
No, yes said she, I hard you say not long since, that one of your mistresses
had put the fool upon you, but you would shake off her livery* why so I have
quoth the good goose, I have both shaken off her and her livery: but in truth
mistress, but that I have loved you well, I could not bear these floutes at your
hand: for I hope I am not beholding to you, but it is no matter, they say with
brawling and squabling beggars comme still together and so may we if you
will, why quoth she, so we are already methinkes, are we not met here
together: But harken unto me seruaunre, it seems by your glove, you now
have been a hawking, what? have you flushed a woodcock? I hear there was one
Just in your way, the last time I saw you: indeed quoth he it is true, and
a vengeance on it, For my Tassel made after it, and went so far; that I had
like to have lost him: But you are so full of quibibbles, that I fear you
mean knavery: But it is no matter when you have done your will, make an end: Oh
seruante quoth she, you forget your self, will you now be angry with your
mistrisse? but tell me I pray you, do you not sometime use to hawke at the
Iaie and the woodpicker? Yes quoth he that I do, yea but quoth she not in
those clothes: why mistrisse I pray you quoth he, do you think I am afraid
of my clothes? No I am able to buy new when these are done, I would you
should well know it: I know it well Servant quoth she, but I mean an
other matter that the Hawke mistaking her game should (seeing your colors)
Seize upon your self, insteede of a woodcock, a woodpicker I would have
said, well said mistress, quoth he, there is an other blow, but I will bear
it as well as I may: but it is no matter I will think of it as I have reason;
yea Servant quoth she will you take my pepper in your nose, and snuff at a
little mirth? Nay then I perceive your proverb will not hold, we shall never
come nearer together then we are: yes faith good Mistress quoth he, that I will
come a little nearer you, when Remoouing his stool he sits close by her, and
offers to take her by the hand, when she desired him to forbear her, for his
hands did so sweat that she could not endure them: speak quoth she your
mind, and I will hear you, but if you will not hold your fingers, I will
leave you: well then mistrisse quoth he, let me tell you, you know I love
you: if it be true quoth shoe, I am sorry for it, for I love not you, I like
you, I delighte not in you: but I am sure quoth he, you do not hate me: be
you assured quoth she, I will not hate my self: I hope qnoth he, you will
not make a fool of me; I pray you quoth she, do not make a fool of your
self: With this the gentleman began to grow Angry: when upon the sudden, a
gentlewoman of the company, full of witty conceits came to my mistrisse with
these words: come cosen, you and your servant never meet, but there is some
wars ere you part: but come on, let us leave this fiddle faddle, and now
fall to some pretty sport, or other: content quoth she withal my heart;
when making of a little round, sat there down under a great baye window in
the parlor some five coople of us, and no sewe mad laddes, and wenches at our
backs, to hear and note our pastimes: which was as I will tell you, neither
purposes, tales, nor Rideles, but a merry jest, that I never heard of before,
callen Decorums and Absurdums, every one must show his wit, till either
the brains were weary, or the dinner were ready: and thus they began. The
sharp witted wenche, whom I often spoke of before, was the first, who thus
fell to her business: To speak good words to a good understanding, is a
decorum in judgment: to which the next replied: To speak wisely to a fool is
an absurdum in Reason: then followed another with this speech; To answer love
with kindness is a decorum in Nature: to which the next replied, To bestow love
unworthily is an absurdum in wit: then follows another, To hope on desert, is
a decorum in reason: to whom the next replied, To be afraid of fortune is an
absurdum in judgment: then came it to my Mistress, who thus delivered her
opinion, To honor wisdom is a decorum in Love: and then it came to me, who
thus made my reply, and not to love virtue, were an absurdum in humanity: then
comes it to our fool, who thus brought out the treasure of his casket, To
gather wealth is a decorum in thrift: to which was suddenly replied, To dig in a
dunghill is an absurdum in honor, then comes it about again to the first, who
thus began again. To keep promise in kindness, is a decorum in love: to which
was replied, To perform an ill vow, is an absurdum in Grace: then followed the
next in this manner, To play the fool wisely is a decorum in conceit, to which
was replied: To play the wag unkindly is an absurdum in good manner: then comes
it again to my Mistress, who thus delivered her mind, To be constant in love
is a decorum in honor: to which I replied, To be false to honor is an absurdum
in Love: then comes it to the gull, who thus fell to plain English. To be kind
to her servant were a decorum in my Mistress: to which a mad wenche replied, A
servant to be too saucy with his Mistrisse, were an absurdum in duty: Now as it
was coming about again, comes in the service for dinner, whereupon we brake
off our talk for that time; but after we had dined, and passed away a little
time with idle prattle, we gat our selves together again, all saving the
Ass, who for fear of more coals then he could carry, gat himself out of
doors, where we never looked after him, but fell to a new sport, to answer
many words in one: one must propound, and an other answer.


Ar. As how? I pray thee tell me.


Tid. You shall hear, the first began thus: If a man labor all the days of
his life, and get nothing till his death, what shall he be thought?


Awn. Unhappy.


Pro. If a woman be kind but unconstant, what shall she be accounted?


Awn. Unwise.


Pro. If a man deserve well of his Mistrisse, and she requite him ill, what
shall she be thought?


Awn. Unkind.


Pro. If a virgin be faithful to her Lover, and he prove a Traitor to her
trust, what shall he be called?


Awn. Ungracious.


Pro. What is the fairest thing in the world?


Aw. Truth.


Pro. What is the sweetest thought in the mind?


A. Love


Pro. What is the most sure in the world?


Awn. Death.


Pro. What the greatest offense in the world?


A. Treason.


Pro. What is the noblest thing in the world?


Aw. Valor


Pro. What is most dangerous?


Awn. Trust.


Pro. What is most fearful?


Aw War.


Pro. What most joyful?


Aw. Peace.


Pro. What is most rare?


Aw. Honesty.


Pro. What most common?


Aw. Beggary.


Pro. What most subtle?


Aw. Wit.


Pro. What most kind?


Aw. Will, if it be pleased: oh you are out, quoth all the company, for talking
of pleasing: and so with a pleasing laughter the company brake off, and every
one with his Mistress, fell to walking abroad, when my Mistress making one, I had
no reason to stay behind; and therefore to be short, singling our selves from
the company, I fell thus into discourse with her: Mistress, is there any thing
more precious in the mind then the Love of the heart? I beseech you answer me
in a word: No quoth she I think nor; But quoth I, would you love that heart,
where you found that spirit? yea, I think I should: but would you believe that
tongue that did speak from such a heart? yes, I think I should quoth she; and
will you esteem of that love, that such a tongue speaks, out of such a heart?
yes, I have reason for it; then good Mistress, let your eyes in my heart, see
the truth of that love that can not live, but in your grace: well Servant
quoth she, I see you would speak well if you could hit on it, oh Mistrisse
quoth I, I had rather hit well then speak of it: well quoth she, I perceive you
have learned to turn the point upon a quarrel: oh but quoth I, I had rather
join hands upon a friendship: but when joining of hands may cause the breaking
of hearts, the conceit quoth she is ill carried: yea but quoth I, when the want
of hands breeds the woe of hearts, content is much hindered: oh, but patience
(quoth she) is an excellent trial of truth: yea but quoth I delay is the death
of delight: yea but quoth she love is ever constant, so long quoth I as kindness
is comfortable: oh servant quoth she, love sees in absence, nothing quoth. I but
sorrow: oh sir, who will not watch his hauk shall never reclaim her: but quoth I
if she be flying she is better on the fist then on the mew: well, he that will
not pluck for a card, is not worthy of a prime, but quoth. I, he that can be
flush, may better carry the rest: well servant, I will consider of your
discretion, and where honor may be kind, reason will not be ungrateful: you are
a stranger in this country, and yet I hear well of your estate, but give me
leave to be my self, and as I find you wise, continu my good opinion, which
being more then I will speak of, I will leave to you to think: and so once
more let me entreat your silent patience to put off one suitor more: who speaks
so by rule that I can hardly answer him by roat: Mistress, let he carriage of my
discretion so continue your good opinion, that the hope of my fortune be in the
honor of your favor, in which let me be wholly yours, or else not be mine own:
with this we brake off our talk for that time, and going in, my Mistress was
saluted by a spruse companion that loookt like a letter in print: who with a
smoothe Anus cou^tena^ce, as if he had bin a prologue to a play, with a wink
and simper thus begins. Fair Lady, many fair days to the looks of your fair
eyes: and sir, as many quiet nights to your troubled brains, to bring your
wits in te^per. I read quoth. he, in the rule of affection, beauty is loves
object, love beauties subject: but quoth. she where simplicity vndersta^ds not the
project, the subtilty may be an abject. quoth. he where reason caries affection it
favors discretion: but quoth. she where wit wa^ts judgment, will goes to repe^ta^ce
for understanding: I but quoth. he where wits wilful reason wa^ts in judgment: and
quoth. she, reason without discresion leads wit out course: why Mistrisse quoth
he, can reason be without discretion? I have heard so quoth she, of a scholar
in Philosophy, where in searching the secrets of Nature, may be the overthrow
of reason, which only proceeds from want of discretion: oh but Mistrisse,
extreamities exceed the rule of reason, and therefore he is a simple Scholar,
that will loose himself in finding nothing: and yet quoth she, he that seeks
too far may loose himself ere he be aware: yea but quoth she, he that gains
more then himself, in loosing but himself, may think well of his profit,
what ever be his pains: yea but quoth she, if desire be fed with vain hope,
when the gain is but loss, what is the issue of such a profit? Sorrow quoth
he to Reason, but patience to discretion: alas quoth she, all one sense set
down in two words, where the grief of patience is the sorrow of reason: why
but Mistrisse quoth he, what is the help? I know not quoth she better then
this, I think you were better keep silver in your purse, then spend it in
making of gold. Indeed quoth he you say well, there be so many All-missers,
that Alcumistry is out of credit, and yet it is so pleasing a study, as sets
many good wits a work; yea, but then quoth she, if wise men will be mad, who
can help their disease? indeed you say true; and I think that Love and
Alcumistrie are alike, for when reason affecte^h beauty, and wit honoreth
virtue, yet shall fortune give a blow, that shall break the neck of both
their trauailers. He then quoth she that is wise will shunn it, and a cowarde
naturallye will fear it: but I hope you have wit enough to avoid it: well
Mistrisse quoth he, though I scare not the worst, yet since I can not hope the
best, you shall see I will not grow mad in the study of feminine Philosophy:
howsoever I follow the masculine rules of reason. You do well qnoth she, for
if in the study of the feminine Philosophy, the rules of reason mistake^ make
the masculinewit prove folly, it will prove a very pitiful piece of learning:
but since you are com to your Grammar rules, and I an ill Sholer in an
Accidens, I pray you pardon my simplicity if my parts of speech be imperfect:
with that the quick witted wench that stood by, and gave audience to their
eloquence, as the Scholar was about to frame his answer, brake it off with
these words; com on Cosen, let us go to cards, and leave your Pro and Contra:
Master Scholar, you must have a wife from school, if you will win her by
learning: Indeed forsooth quoth he, Panpudding is a good dish for a gross
stomach: O sir quoth she, I hope it will do well for a scholars commo^s: how
now Cosen quoth my Mistress, you are ever crossing my friends, in truth I love
learning with my heart, though not to read in a book that I like not: truly
Mistress quoth he, I would I had a book to your liking: in deed quoth she so
would not I, for I had rather be beholding to you for nothing, then be indebted
for a trifle: but quoth she if you pleas, let us go to some other sports, for it
may be, we have wearied some of the company with too much idle talk; I hope
not, but what shall please you and them, I shall be contented with; and if I
may be admitted, I will be ready to make one, com on quoth mistress Madcap, let
us go to griefs and ioies, let us sit round; which soon agreed upon, we sat
round, and thus fell to our business. First began my quick wit with these
words, what a grief it is, for a good wit to want money? the next followed,
what a joy is, it to be content with a little: then the next* what a grief it
is, to be wronged and cannot help it, the fourth: what a joy it is to see the
ruin of oppression? an other what grief does grow by the death of a frind* an
other what joy does come by the death of an Enemy? then comes it to the
Scholar, what grief does grow by the pride of beauty? then to my mistress what
joy does grow in the preventing of folly: then to me, what grief to reason?
not to deserve grace: then again to Madcap, and what joy has love in the
secret of favor? then an other: what grief to unkindness: the^ the next, what
joy to comfort: what grief to ingratitude? what joy to kindness: what grief to
falsehood? what joy to faith? Oh quoth Madcappe then bring in health and
sickness, and I know not what, tush we will give over this and to some other
sports, but look supper is comingin, and therefore we must give over, so for
that time we brake off, but what followed after I will tell you.


A. I pray thee do, and heartily thank thee for this I have hard.


Tid. After Supper we had some table talk, of diverse idle things, among
other, there was some speech of the natures of despights: whereof one was this:
what a spite it is, for a fair sweet wench, to marry a filthy ougly fellow,
another was, what a spite it was to see a horse of service draw in a
doung-carte, an other a Hawke to be killed by an owl, another a milk-cowe to
be stung by a hedgehog, an other to see a hound coupled with a mastiffe, an
other to see a nightingale killed by a cat. another what a spite it is to see
good meat, and have no stomach, and an other, to have a stomach and want
meat, and an other, to want teeth, and for a woman to want her tongue: at last,
one merry fellow comes out with his ierke: what a spite it is for a poor man
to be made cuckoulde, by a filthy fellow? yea quoth Madcap, but it is a great
comfort to a thief, to see his fellows hang with him for company: indeed,
quoth an other to live alone is too much solitarynes, yea quoth an other, and
some time a fool mars a play: it is true quoth maddecap it is a spighte a gald
lade should come among good horses: with that the Knight, the master of the
house rises, and calls a hall hoh, Gentlewoemen, and my good frinds, what shall
the minstrels stand Idle? and so forgetting the name of musicians, bid call in
the fiddlers, and my masters, every one to his wench, oh when I was a young man
I could have been nimble at this gear: Son take your Bride and call in your
frinds, and about the house, bestirre your stumpes a little, come on: when The
wags and the wenches, with the groom and his bride, fell to take hands, and
scarce had begun a step or two in four square, I would have said a quadrant
pauen, but in comes a post for puddings, a messenger from a mask, that
delivered such a speech of the aduenturs of an ass upon the but of a rams
horn, and the dangerous passage oner a puddle of water, that but for the honor
of that knight, and trouble of his house, they would not undertake for a bushel
of wheat, with a deal of trash as was not worth remembrance: somewhat absurdly
ere the tale was told, with a dru^ and bagpipe came such a morice dau^ce, a
mask I would say there; but they made fools merry, and themselves sport, I
could say little in their Commendation, but that for their cost and their
carriage, bred and cheese, and a cup of ale, had been a sufficient banquet for
such a company: who having daunced, which they did very ilfauouredly, fell to
dicing being both Maskers and mummers, when after the rate of nine shillings
among eighteen* of them, they fell to play, and having gotten some ten
groates, struck up the drumm with no little mirth: for, though they cared not
for their money, yet their gains would pay for their vizards: and for their
clothes, they were but borrowed of their neighbors: but thus, after they had
masked and mummed, away they went, and left it by this time, about the hour
of sleep, when every one taking leave o^ the other, my mistress gave me a kind
good night, which made me sleep never the worse.


Ar. I believe thee, but I pray thee, tell me what followed the next morning.


T. I will tell you; after some kind of vision fancy or dream I know not
whether, troubled with I know not what remembering a lesson that a Lady of
worth once gave me, that I should not observe dreams, for that they are but
illusions, forbidden in the word of the most wise, I did what I could, to put
them out of my mind, and getting up something early went abroad into the
garden, wishing rather in the day to behold the living Substance of my love,
then in the night to be illuded, with the shadow of my delight, whereafter a
divine exercise, in the humble co^templation of my spirit, I met (with wide
heaven) the joy of my heart, in a word my mistress, who whether, according to
the custom of her good houswifery, in rising early, or whether she used the
prime of the morning for the time of her devotion, or that she chose that time
for the preicruation of her health, I know not, but there I met her at the
corner of a walk with her waiting gentlewoman, who knowing her duty, and loath
to displease, fell a little behind her: now my Mistrisse had a book in her
hand, which shutting up with a modest smile, she did thus salute me.
Seruante good morrow, what abroad so early? I had thought no body had been
so early a stirrer as my self: but I see I am deceived: mistress quoth I,
shall the setuant be in bed after his Mis? that were to much sluggardise: but
for your good morrow, many thousand requite you; A fair morning* a fair
garden, and a fair Lady, fair befall these fair meetings: why how now servant,
quoth she, A fair mind, fair thoughts, and fair words; you should do well
to go to the fair with such fair wakes: So I do mistress quoth he, you are
the fair that have boughte me and mine: yea Servant, have I all? what then
have you leaft for your self? enough quoth I, Grace, and duty, the one to
serve, and the other to please: and what quoth she? mistress quoth I, in love
and honor* and how quoth she? in obedience and patience: As how quoth she? I
answered, to do your will, and attend your will: is it possible servant, quoth
she, that I have such a power over you? why mistress quoth I is it so strange,
that you should have power over your own? Ales quoth she, I pity thy fortune
in thy affecting of unworthiness and quoth I, I joy in my happiness to have
savor in so much honor: oh but my good servant, if your estate want mean to
answer the nobleness of your mind, a grievous joy will make a miserable
passion: yea but Mistrisse, if the content of the mind be a kingdom in
conceit, patience that knows no pride, makes love the happiness of life: but
how is reason satisfied, where necessity is not supplied? patience in hope
finds the comfort of grace: but where time is grievous, how is love
comfortable? why though the winter be cold, is not the spring pleasing* yes:
but a thin harvest makes a poor farmer: oh Mistress, lives not the Shepherd
sometime merier then the Master of the sheep: and the wench with the milk
paile, then the lady of much riches? Indeed quoth. she I have heard much of the
shepheardes and their loves, but whether they be fictions or figures I know
not; but give me leave, shall I leave Lady for Mistress, wealth for want, a
court for a cottage, and command for obedience, and all for the hope of love?
no Mistress, love makes a cottage a court, where content is a kingdom, and what
greater wealth then in the riches of the mind? for obedience in kindness it is
the work of Love, and to be a worthy mistress, is better then an unworthy Lady:
and therefore let hope be an assurance in the persuasion of love: but who is
the worthy Mistress? she that has power over her self: and who the most worthy
servant? he whom such a Mistress has entertained: good servant hurt not thy
self, in doing me good; good Mistress do me good in not wishing my hurt: If I
should love, and not live with you, where is the content of your conceit* if I
can live without your love, let no conceit content me: if I should favor you and
overthrow my fortune, what shall be the reward of my folly? If your virtue grace
my love, how much should my service honor you? If the world frown on me,
who will help me? If the Heavens bless you, who can hurt you? now fie upon
thee servant, I know not what to say to thee: and for that there are company
coming, let this in brief suffice thee: so far as I may, I do affect thee,
in honor I will grace thee, have patience for a time, and it shall be happy for
thee: sor though my estate be not much, yet it is in mine own disposing, and
my parents in the Earth, I am at the heavens direction, for my resolution: and
therefore, fear not the fruit of thy faith in the hope of my favor, for, I
am thine, but I pray thee give me a little leave, to shake off one suter more:
walk by and hear us, and when he is gone, let him go for ever* Mistress quoth
I, your command is a law, take your pleasure in any thing, make me only
happy in being what you will I shall be; and with this word, taking of her
a sober smiling leave, I stepped a little aside, and seeing company coming, left
her to entertain a young gallant, who a little stepping forwards from his
company, saluted my mistress in this manner. Fair Lady what al a Nimphale?
Blessed be those* Siluane creatures that can enjoy the presence of such a
goddess. Peace quoth she, I will run away rather then make you an idolater,
speak not so profanely, there is no goddess on earth* and for your Nymphs,
they are but poets fictions: pardon me Lady quoth he, if I speak improbably
and Let me say what I think: how much is this sweet ground sweetened by so
sweet a creature? nothing at all quoth she, it is your sweet gloves, whose
perfume puts down all the sent of the flowers: Oh how much quoth he, does your
Beauty give a luster to the fairest flower when in the Roses of your cheeks
maid Flora blushes to see the pure crimson of her best color* O Sir quoth she,
you mean the roses of your shooestrings; indeed they are of a good Ribbin,
and well died I think they are in grain: and so is all about you, cloth and
silk, I see you ever have the best; I would be loath quoth he to wear the
worst, but Lady.


Ar. Tush, I pray thee let him go with his foolery; I see it was some noddy,
that I doubt not was quickly shaken off. Let me here what followed betwixt
you, and your saire mistress.


Tid. I will; this gallant with a few flouts pretily put off, After the
company had walked about the garden, we were called in to breakefast, where a
bride-cake and a mess of cream, with the help of a cold pie, staiied our
stomachs well, till dinner: but breakefast done, Madcappe, that was ever busy
with inventions to set our brains about something calls us together, and
down we must sit in a ring: and fall to yea and no: one must propound,
another answer, and the third give the reason, and propound the next: As thus
Madcap began: If you see a fair wenche, would you not have her if you could
come by her* The second answers, No; the third makes the reason: because she
may be more costly then comfortable: now he begins; If you were married to
a foul slut, will ye keep her? second yea: third because there is no remedy.
If you love a wenche, and cannot have her; will you fret: 2, no, 3 for love is
full of patience: If you love your mistress and can enjoy her; will you not be
glad of it? 2, yea, 3 or else he were mad: If your wise make you Cuckold, will
you put her away? 2 No, third, for she may be profitable: If your mistress
command you any thing, will you disobey it? 2 yea. 3, for she may commau^d
him not to love her, which he cannot. If your friend abuse you, will you not
hate him? a no. 3 for he may do it unwillingly, and then is to be pardoned: If
you come where a fair wench is will you hide your eyes, because you would not
see her? 2. yea: 3 because she may blind the wit, which is, worse then the eye
sight. If your friends get your wife with child, and you cannot, will you be
angry with any of them? 2 no, 3 for it hides an imperfection. If your mistress
have a fine wit, and your wife, but a plain understanding, will you love her
better then your wife? 2, no. 3 for that wit that will rule a wife will not
please a Mistress If your mis. be kind and your wife dogged: will you love your
mis. better then your wife? 2 yea. third for, there is co^sort in kindness, but
there is none in doggednes. If your husband be a fool, and your friend be wise,
will you love your frind best: 2 yea. 3. for a fool is butthe trouble of wit:
but, quoth mad cappe, let me ask you one thing, what is most likest a half
moon? 2 a Romain C. 3, because it is sharp at both ends; well quoth an other
but what is like to love? second nothing, third because quoth Maddecappe, there
is no such thing there is bargaining and selling; looking and telling, lust
and folly, commanding and obeying, marying and getting of Children, the sous
money must marry the daughter, and the widows purse, marry her younger son: this
must be done, and that must be done, friends must talk, and folks must meet,
the Banes must be asked, the Church must be paid, the guests must be bidden,
the dinner must be eaten, the minstrels must play, the youth must dance, and
the Bride must blush, and the Groom must make a leg, and gloves must be worn,
and the cakes must be set up, and the night grows late, and you must get you to
bed, and here is a stir: but for love, alas, where is he all this while* god
knows and not I: for old folks cannot, younger folks do not, wise folks will
not, and as for fools, let them whistle, I will not com to them: but quoth she,
now we are out of our yeas and noes, and therefore let us all to some other
sport, when suddenly comes in sir Swadd the old knight in stead of a gentleman,
an he no nay must have a dance: fie for shame, come come, to morrow is the
last day I tell you, and therefore be lively and nimble, and have about with
these guirles: when to satisfy the old huddle we called for the music, and
passed the time in dancing till dinner; which done,


Ar. Yea that I would learn? what follow d after dinner;


Tid. After dinner we fell to such table talk, as was thought best fitting to
the company; one descrying of a parasite by soothing of errors, another girding
at a pandar by his brazen face, and his intelligence of leave: another
commending beautye to be a foil unto virtue, another the honor of wit in the
guiding of love, another what difference was betwixt valor and fury, an other
of the plague of love in the solly of jealousy, another out of his epicurious
humor, made a kind of oration in the praise of a goose pie, and one of Bacchus
sworn men, could talk of nothing but of a cup of wine, the scholar commended
learning, because it was the Mistress of Art: and another experience, for that
it was the labor of reason: Madcap commended a fool, because he could take no
thought, but my Mistrisse a wise man for consideration of all natures, and I my
Mistress for her wisdom in judgment.


Ar. I thought where I should have you, but what proceeded?


Tid. I will tell you, as we were going on with our opinions upon such points,
as we were to talk of, came in certain strangers, for the entertainment of
whom, we rose from the table, and after a little ordinary courtesy, leaving
every one to his friend or his Mistrisse, I with my mistress took a turn in
the garden, where in very much kindness, we fell to this conference: Servant
quoth my Mistress, to feed you with vain hopes might argue much indiscretion in
my carriage, and so breed some tuch in my reputation, and not to regard your
worthiness, might be a disgrace to mine understanding: and therefore if you can
conceive me right, you shall do your self no wrong: mistress quoth. I far be it from
my good, to wish your hurt: do with me what you will, for I am but as you will:
your direction shall be my course in the due care of your commademe^t: my hopes
cannot be vain that feed on the honor of your virtue, and in your regard of my
unworthiness, shall be the height of my worlds happiness: well servant, I will
now altar your Title, for you have made a conquest of your Mistress, and
therefore must now be called my master: and therefore now master, since your
servant has no doubt of your honorable emploiment, let me see to what good
office you will prefer the care of my service: oh Mistress quoth I, I can not
so soon forget my duty, but yet to satisfy your will, I will thus far take
your favor: that since you will be at my command, I command you the office
of a most kind and true friend; that you will in your love command my life, in
your wisdom advise my will, and so frame my affection to your discretion,
that my heart being in your hands, you may work it to your pleasure: and
therefore since the effecting of my felicity rests only in your favor; in
the title of a friend, carry all things to your contentment: well servant quoth
she, in your humblenes I see such noblenes, that were I a Princess, you should
be no beggar: but as I am, let this suffice for thy comfort: That I have often
seen thee, desired to know thee* heard well of thee, and now have seen that in
thee: that wherein I can honor thee, be sure I will not fail thee: and in
token of that truth that shall never deceive thee, with the love of my heart,
my hand here I give thee: but to bleare the eyes of adversaries to our
fortunes, if discontentments should be taken, let us go in as friends, and
remain lovers, it shall not be long before you shall hear of me to your
comfort: with this speech being ravished, as one founding in delight, as a
full heart could speak, I made her this answer: to your hand I give my heart,
with a more happy then worthy hand, your sight of me was my bliss, your
speech to me my comfort, your regard of me my honor, and your favor my
felicity: but for your love, what a joy it is to my life, I shall leave it to
your better judgment then my speech: and therefore if I pass a point of your
direction, let me lose the dial of my comfort. With which words we went in, and
seeming more strange then before: after many pleasing passages among the
merry company, the next day b^^ing the breaking up of the feast, till the
next time of our meeting, we took a kind of strange leave each one of other.


Ar. But tell me, what followed? now she was Lady of thy heart, how came thou
to be Lord of her house? or what was the issue of thy fortune?


Tid. Good I assure you, but yet came news of, as you shall hear: within few
days after my coming home to my lodging where I lay in a City, not far
distante from her habitation, which I had before acquainted her with: sodenlie
in a morning comes a letter unto me by a footman brought me from my Mistrisse,
the superscription whereof was this. To my assured loving friend Tidero, with
speed: The contents whereof were in brief as follows.

As a friend I request you, as a Servant I command you, and as a Master I
entreat you, without answer of excuse, presently to make your appeara^ce at my
house, there to understand what shall happen, much is conceived by a little, in
which I rest.

Yours as you know, Lamina.


I thanked the messenger, and with as much speed as I could, returned him with
this answer.

To my best and only beloved friend, the Lady Lamina.
FAir Mistrisse, kind servant, and dear friend, excuse shall be abuse, where
there is possibility of performance: If I could fly, I would use wings for
words: in the assurance, of my happiness, joyful of what shall happen: so til I
come, coming I rest, in the love a servant, your kind master, and ever
bounden friend:

Tidero.


This letter was no sooner sealed up and sent away, but I hasted all I could
to be at the heels of it, ere it came at home, but it was received, perused,
and tricks Invented, and put in practice, and all er^l could come there: where
with such attendants as I thought fit. I was entertained at the gate, with a
young damsel, very beautiful, ritchlie attired, and Eloquently spoken, who
after the passage of ordinary courteous demeanor, leading me along a base
Court into a Gardame, and so a gallary, fell by the way to court me with these
words. Sir: my cosen the Lady of this house, has this day performed a kind
part with me: I pray you pardon me, if in the passion of Love, I pass the
care of modesty: She has but supplied my place, and for me has pleaded in
your affection: she has told me of your worthynes, and I hope has made you
hers, whom before you knew her was wholly yours: I know you wise and
honorable, and therefore hope you will no less conceal my disgrace, then
devise my comfort: She is gone from hence, and left me here for that purpose:
what you see, house, land, or wealth, whatsoever, is at my will, and in your
will at my command, be pleased therefore I beseech you with my suite, and work
not my ruin in your denial: for in the one you may have both a servant, and
a friend, in the other, a stranger and an Enemy: Lady quoth I, if I could be
false to favor, but faith fears no fortune, my resolution being settled in
the fixing of affection, I will rather have patience with the unkindness of a
friend, then deserve the rage of an enemy: It is nether house, la^d, nor wealth
that can corrupt me, beauty nor words that can bewich me, nor the threats of
fortune that can affright me: Lamia is the day light of my love, let the
stars give their light where they list: to her have I auowed my service, and
in her love will I run the course of my life: this one honor for her sake I
will do you, bury your words in oblivion, and take leave to return to my
discomforte: no quoth the Lady that must not be, here is nothing intended you
but pleasure: and therefore fear nothing may befall you, your horses are
stabled, your servants shall be merry, and their Master not malcontent: return
you must not, till you hear from your Mistrisse, for such was her command,
and therefore I pray you have patience: my mistrisse apparelled like a young
man but with a Periwigge, and a false Bearde, comes upon the soddaine as we
were entering into the great Chamber, and presents me with a Letter from my
Mistrisse, the superscription in this manner:

To my trusty servant, my loving Master, and approved friend Tidero with
speed: pardon me to persuade you to that may perhaps displease you, to
lack my presence for your better benefit: for I leave you a heart that
dearly loves you, and a hand of honor, I say, that in her favor may
grace you, she is another, and not my self, believe her, trust her, and Love
her, and I will thank you for her, for her servant is my friend, consider of
these contents, and in her command make my contentment; so till I see you,
which shall be I know not when, in hope of your kindness to my friend, I will
rest ever.

Your very loving friend, Lamia.


This Letter when I had read, and knew it to be her hand, what trick soever
was in her head, I presently took a pen and ink and returned the messenger
with this answer.

To my gracious Mistress, my loving servant and faithful friend the Lady Lamia
with speed.
LAdy, is it the part of a friend to persuade falsehood in Love? your presence
is the Sun of my daylight, and your absence the darkness of delight. I seek no
benefit but your love, nor can love other then your only self; disgrace be
all worlds grace but in your eyes, nor will I honor a heart but in your hands;
your self without an other I serve, and you only and no other can I love: and
therefore howsoever you account of a friend, I will never be false to my
affection, and so till I see you, which if it be never, yet while you live
will I love you ever; and so rest.

Your faithful friend Tidero.


This letter sealed and delivered, away goes the messenger, whispering with
the young Lady a word or two, to entertain me with a little talk, till she
were gotten in, and new attired, which was not long a doing: for by the time
that we had heard a little music of a pretty lad that did play upon a base
violl and sing to it: the song was scarce ended, but in comes my love, my
Mistrisse attired like a horse woman, that had bin new dismounted, and with a
pretty smile after she had saluted many, at last comes to me, with what?
Friend, in truth you are welcome: did you not receive a letter from me? yes good
friend quoth I a couple: In deed friend quoth she you are beholding to me, for
had it not bin discurtesie to bid a friend to dinner, and not give him
entertainment, I had not come again so soon: but if I had not com, you should
have had no great cause to mislike of your company: but I hope it is well, in
truth you are welcome, you shall stay with me to night, to morrow go as soon as
you will; good friend quoth I, I thank you, you shall command a greater matter
in my service: So after a few complime^ts we sat down to dinner, where there
wanted no part of comfort that might be found in Table kindness; as welcome,
caruing and drinking, and so forth. But after dinner was done,


Ar. Yea now you com to the matter that I long to hear of.


Tid. I will tell you; after the cloth was taken away, my Mistress began to
entertain the company with these words. In general hoh, you are all
vvelcome; you that come from a feast can better bear with a less pitta^ce
but what lacks in meat, let us fill out in mirth; and first quoth she to her
Page: Sir take your viole and play, and sing the song that was taught you of
Love, which commanded, was soon obeyed, and thus performed: the Boy taking his
instrument, fell to play and sing this ditty, which I will recite unto you: for
I got it out of his book.

Of all Conceits which is the best? Love.
Yet what is that is thought a jest? Love.
What thought is that gives smallest rest? Love.
Yet in the end makes reason blessed? Love.
What wound is that is hardly healed? Love.
What deed is that is surest sealed? Love.
What thought is sweetest best concealed? Love.
What comfort kindest best revealed? Love.
What word is sweetest to be heard? Love.
What soundly made can not be mard? Love.
What service merits most reward? Love.
What grace is worthy most regard? Love.
What Love most constant in a friend?
Where Love is lovely without end?
Well said Boie quoth she, now go your ways to dinner: Let us alone, and now
my masters quoth she, do but imagine ye are at a Bridal, and let us be as
merry as we were there, let us fall to some sport or other* play may be
costly, music we shall have enough anon, and therefore let us spend a little
time in some pleasing exercise: I will begin to you: whereto every one giving a
willing consent, she began thus: we have been at yeas and noes, griefs and
ioies; let us now go to Buts, one propound, another answer, the Third give the
reason: Beauty is a blessed hue: 2 But: 3 it works many cursed actions: then
another, money is a good thing: 2 But, 3* it brings many to misery: Again
virtue is honorable, 2 But, 3 sometime she wants money: Again Love is precious,
2 But; 3 if it be right: Again, kindness is the joy of love: 2 But, 3 in
constancy: then quoth. I love is the joy of life: 2 But quoth the second: in a
true friend quoth my Mistress: Again patience is a virtue: 2 But, 3 a poor one:
another, hope is comfortable, 2 But* 3 when it is happy: Content is a kingdom,
2 But, 3 in conceit. As we were going on with our Buts, comes in a gallant
youth well accompanied and attended, who as it afterward fell out, was a Suter
to the young Lady, that to try my constancy came about me with a trick of
love, or rather wit indeed, to find out the truth or falsehood of a lover:
whereupon the company rose, and after al obseruances of due compliments, he with
his young Lady, and I with my Mistress fell to such parlee, as we thought best
for our purpose: he in the Parlour, and we in the garden, where what followed
you shall hear.


Ar. Good I doubt not.


Tid. Good indeed, and better to: for after that we had walked a turn or two,
she revealing of her devise, to try the constancy of my affection, took all
things so well, and requited them so kindly, as honor could desire, that Love
might enjoy: but by the way among other talk, I pray thee friend quoth
She, do me this kindness for to lend me your little Table book in your
poeket: for I did a little ouerlooke you the other day and I am much mistaken,
but I saw you writing of verses: In deed Mistrisse quoth I it is true, upon
some certain idle notes that I took out of my observation of certain
Creatures, I wrote a few idle odd lines, which I will commit unto your
kindness in secret to make use of: which no sooner hadd she taken, and read
it over, but a hearty laughter, and much thanks she took of me: and told me
she would read them at night in her bed; but the book put up in her
pocket, with contented minds in we go together, passed away the day
pleasantly, and after supper the young gallant a neighbor hard by took his
leave of his mistress, and away leaving us to fall to such fortunes as fell
out.


Ar. Oh, but I pray thee kind wagge, tell me some of thy verses.


Tid. I will, upon a finicall Ass I wrote a kind of Epigramicall sonnet in
this manner.

A dapper fellow that is fine and neat,
His hose well gartered, and his Ruffes well set
Without his picktoothe can not eat his meat,
Nor sit at Table where the clothe is wet.
Can talk of nothing but of dainty fare,
And think of nothing but of fashion;
Troubles his conscience but with little cares
And yet will show some idle passions:
Can smile and simper, congey, kiss the hand,
And cast a sheeps eye at a fie for shame
And on the tiptoes of his honor stand,
When God he knows it never knew his name.
What will this Gallant leave upon his grave?
He lived a Rascal, and he died a knave.

Ar. Good in truth, more I pray thee, what was the next?


Tid. The next was on a fool, on a swaggering ruff.

He that was gotten in a drunken fit,
Bred up in brabbles, and by shifting lives,
His Dad a Tinker, and his Dam a Tit,
His portion nothing but what Fortune gives:
Studies no art, but how to cheat and cosen,
To pack a Card, or cleanly strike a Die,
Swears by the Elle, anddrinketh by the douzen,
Talks what he list, and every word a lie:
Bragges of his state, ard ietts like Jack an Apes,
Wears no good cloths, but of an others cost:
Gets some odd booties, by unhappy scapes,
Spends on the score, and never paies his Host.
What will be said of him another day?
God has done well to take a knave away.

Ar. Another honest wagge, if thou love me.


Tid. I will, and another and another to, and as many as I can remember, if you
like them so well.


Ar. The more the better, I pray thee out with them.


Tid. I will: upon a shamfast clovvn in gaie clothes.

He that makes curtsie at a Ladies door,
And blusheth at a clappe upon the Cheek,
And says good morrow Mistrisse and no more,
And wears his silken clothes but once a week.
Stoupes and goes backward, when he makes a leg
And says forsooth at every word is spoken:
And only keeps his Maidenhead for Megge
And in his hat will wear her true loves token:
Can not endure to taste a Cup of wine,
And loves the Brown loaf better then the white:
Will at the spending of a penny whine,
And always goes to bed at Candlelight.
VVwat will be written on his worshippes Tomb?
Woe to the Bride that meets with such a Groom.
Upon a churl that was a great usurer.

A chuffe that scarce has teeth to chew his meat,
Hears with deaf ears, and sees with glassy eyes,
Unto his grave his path does daily beat,
Or like a logg upon his pallet lies:
Has not a thought of God, nor of his grace,
Speaks not a word but what intends to gain,
Can have no pity on the poor Man's case,
But will the heart strings of the needy strain:
Cries not till death, and then but gives a groan,
To leave his silver, and his golden bags,
Then gaspes and dies, and with a little moan
Is lapped up in a few rotten rags:
What will this Clunchfist leave upon his grave?
Here lies the Carcass of a wretched knave.

Ar. Rightly hit, more I pray thee.


Tid. Upon a cheating Companion.

He that was borne out of a Bastard race,
Betwixt a beggar and a Gentleman,
A filthy Carcass and an ougly face,
And plays the fool before Maid Marian:
Can seem as sober as a Millers Mare,
And can not blush at any villainy:
In every Market shifteth for a share,
And sits himself for every company:
Has all the Cards upon his fingers ends,
And keeps a knave in store for many a trick.
Will be a traitor to his truest friends,
And lives not by the dead, but by the quick.
Upon his Tomb what memory will pass?
Here lies the damnedst Rogue that ever was.

Ar. Oh filthy rascal, it is pity that he should come among good company, but
on I pray thee with some more.


Tid. The next was upon a Gull, that for a little wealth was made a Gentleman
of the first head, which was thus:

He that is well conceited of his wit,
Because a knave or fool does flatter him,
And knows not how to stand, nor go nor sit,
When in his garments he is gaie and trim:
Rides like the trey of Clubs betwixt two Clownes,
Ayealow doublet, and a tawny hose,
Has half ayeard of Land, in two country towns,
And like a Hog does gruntle as he goes:
Wears a course stocking, and a Holland Ruff,
A Brooche and picktoothe, in an old silk hat,
Looks big at Beggars, takes a jest in snuff,
And in an alchonse spends he cares not what:
Of this great Gull what memory will pass?
He lived a Cockscombe, and he died an ass.
Another upon a Pander.

He that is hatched out of a Cucker brood,
Betwixt a Kistrell, and a Bagige kite,
Feeds all on offall and such filthy food,
Is neither fit for feather, nor for flight:
But in his teeth can closely keep a ring.
And make a motion for a filthy match,
Can bear the Bob, while other play and sing,
And has the craft to cloak and connicatche:
Can like a dog lie sneaking at a door,
And creep and curtsie, couche and bow the knee,
And be a carier to a common store,
What will be said of such a swad as he:
Here lies a tronke of natures treachery*
A slave that only lived by lechery.

Ar. Some more I pray thee, what was the next?


Tid. Upon a loving fool, as you shall hear.

A fool that knows not how to use his eyes,
But takes a picture for an Angels face,
And in his thoughts strange wonders will devise,
To bring his wits into a pitteous case:
Matcheth the light with darkness, heaven with hell,
Wisdom with folly, Ignorance with wit:
And to himself will such fond fancies tell,
As neither are for wit, nor reason fit.
But like a Madman mumbleth to himself,
His dainty Parnell has no paragon,
But like an Ape sits sidling with an Elfe,
Till Lands and goods and life, and all are gone.
What will some write that did his folly prove?
Here lies the fool that lived and died for love.
The next was upon a prodigal Cockescomb, that troubled all good company.

He that will strew his money in the streets,
Follows the dice, and always throws at all,
Offers disgrace to every Man he meets,
Snuffes up the Nose, and swaggers for the wall:
Cares for no law, and knows not how to love,
Makes sleep and eating his souls paradise,
Will not put up that may his patience move,
Treads on a worm, and braues a flight of flies:
Looks a to side, and swears at every word,
Knits up the Brows, and sets his arms a strut,
Takes all men's tables, laics his knife aboard,
And plays the slouen with a filthy slut?
After his death what will befall his due?
Here lies the Captain of the damned crew.

Ar. Good waggeries, but had thou none of the feminine gender*


Tid Yes some one or two, but no more.


Ar. I pray thee tell me them.


Tid. I will: the first was this, upon a foul idle slut.

She that is neither fair nor rich, nor wise,
And yet as proud as any Peacocks tail,
Mumpes with her lips, and winketh with her eyes,
And thinks the world of fools will never fail.
Stands on her pantofles for lack of shoos,
And idly talks for want of better wit,
Will have her will, what ever so she loose,
And say her mind, although she die for it:
Is Cosen germane to a jack an Apes,
And sister to her Mothers speckled sow,
Kin to a Codshead, when he kindly gapes,
Aunt to an Ass, and Cosen to a Cow.
What will be said of her so fit for no man?
Oh fie upon her, it was a filthy woman.

The next was upon a cunning Tit, as thus

She that looks fifteen thousand ways at once,
Makes twenty faces ere she dress her head,
Studies for words to serve her for the nonce,
With idle tricks to bring a fool to bed:
Turns up the white of an ill-favored eye,
Treads on her toes, because her heels are sore,
Splaies out her foot* and holds her head awry,
And be ares her placket far enough before:
Speaks all in print, and reads with a strange grace,
Writes like a scriuener, like a Fiddler sing,
Sits fourteen howrs a painting of her face,
And tries the use of many a secret thing:
Of such a Minkes what memory will pass?
A cunning Ape, will Cosen many an ass.
Ar. Pretily put on, but I pray thee did thou write none in commendation of
some worthy Creature?


Tid. Yes, some two or three which you shall hear. The first upon a true
soldier.

He that was well begot, and truly bredde,
Wrought all with true stitche, and both sides alike,
Has not his fancy on vain humors fed,
Eut finds the bliss, that baseness can not seek.
Starts not to hear a Demiculucrin,
Nor fears to charge upon a stand of pikes,
Fights like a fury, when his hand is in,
Shrinkes not the shoulder where the Coward strikes:
But love: a Trompet better then a pipe,
Prefers a March before a Moris dance,
Reares a dead wound but as a little stripe:
And a coat armor for his cognisaunce:
Gets yet this good, that when his bones be rotten,
His worthy fame will never be forgotten.
The next was of an honest man that took great pains for small profit, and yet
held up the head: As thus.

Who beats his brains to write for no reward,
May break his Pen and lay his paper by:
Who serves for Grace, and lives without regard,
May sigh and sob, and grieve and mourn and die:
And yet again since Heaven will have it so,
Some shall have wealth, and other some have woes:
Patience does many passions ouergoe,
That are intemperate spirits overthrow:
Let him that can not live then learn to die,
What shall be, shall be, spite of death and hell,
They are but babies that will howl and cry,
Cowards that faint to bid the world farewell:
No, fill the hearts with sorrow to the brinke,
A true bred spirit has no power to sink.
The next was upon a merry honest fellow that was out of tune for his purse.

He that was gotten in a Christmasse night,
After a deal of mirth and merry cheer,
When Tom, and Tib, were in their true delight,
And he loved her, and she held him full dear
Brought upon plainness truth and honesty,
Can not away to hear of Knavery,
Lives with his Neighbors in true amity,
And cares not for this worldly bravery:
Goes through the world, with yea and nay and so,
And meddles with no matters of import,
When to his grave this honest man shall go,
What will the world of all his worth report?
Here lies a man, like hiues that have no honey,
An honest Creature but he had no money.
The last I wrote of my self, which was this.

He that is molded of a noble mind,
Purified metal, steel unto the back,
Flies not with feathers of a Buzzards kind,
Cries not with fear, to hear a thunder crack.
Sups up his sighs, and swallows down his grief,
Begs but of God, or of his great vicegerents,
Can not endure to name the word relief,
And serves but honor, or her loves adherents:
Knows his desert, and yet can not importune,
Bites on bare need, and yet laments no lack,
Hates to be called, or thought the child of fortune,
Stoupes not to death until the heart do crack:
Lives like himself, and at his latest breath,
Dies like himself, ye though he starve to death.

Ar, Starve say thou? no it is pity that such a spirit should have such a
fortune: howsoever it stand with thee, be thus far bold with me: live with me
and share with my fortunes, I protest I will want of my mind, ere thou shall
want that thou need but with many thanks for thy kind verses, and
discourses, I pray thee tell me, what followed of thy fortunes with thy Mistress*


Tid. I will tell you: after she had taken my Table book and perused such
trifles as she found, well Seruante quoth she, I see you are a wagge; but it
is no matter, I must tell you in plain terms, I know some of them deserved as
much as you have written, but letting al these toies pass, let me tell thee,
the love I bear thee, with the truth I have found in thee, have made me so much
thine, that I am no more my own: and in token hereof, receive from me this
diamond, and for that I know not how thou art furnished for money, take here
this purse of gold, to defray such charges as may fall upon you for your good:
besides here is a pair of bracelets, which you shall wear for my sake: in the
morning be stirring early, for I mean to be at the Church hereby joining to my
house, there to make fast that knot that shall never be undone: and so, let us
go in and pass away the time as friends, but no further in the eye of the
world: for it shall be best to my content, that the care be privately carried,
till our comfort be not to be crossed: with these words, as it were ouercom
with joy, with willing consent I obeyed her commandment: all which evening and
night we passed in such exercises, that all parties pleased, we went every one
to his lodging, but how little sleep I took, I leave to the wachme^ in the
work of love: in the morning the Lady not long after me at the Church door,
seeing me at my prayers, kindly saluted me, and the Churchman ready with a few
witnesses of her providing and my only servant having sent another home upon
necessary occasions: scarce was the book opened, a few words read, and our
hearts joining hands, but by a villanus plot of a damnable Jew, that in the
shape of a man carried the spirit of a devil, came into the Church with some
dozen of Mascarados with ougly vizards on their faces, with swords and daggars
drawn, cried out Tidero: with the afrighte whereof the Lady fell down, and
after many soundings lay as dead: the Captain of these accursed caitifes, was
one Sulferino a gallant there in the country, who having wasted his estate,
thought likewise to be the overthrow of this Ladies, who in the pretense of
love to her, practiced this villainy to me: well, upon sudden how was I here
distressed? my Love lying as it were dead before me, my enemies ready to
dispatch me: but upon the sudden holding my life at as high a rate as I
could, determining to sell it dear, among them I went, and with a Pistol that
my Man gave me, and such weapons as we had, we laid the chief villain on the
earth, and those that could, got away* but my self sore wounded, and my
servant no less, looking upon my Mistress, I saw her come to life again, when
her eyes alifted up, she sighed out, on friend art thou alive? thou may say
thou have had an enemy and not a friend, but good friend lead me home: which
I did with some few that were with us: but no sooner come into the chamber, but
sending for her Cosen the fair Lady, after she had delivered the whole
discourse, in mine arms took her leave of the world: beseching her (even a
little before her last gasp) for her sake, to do me all the honor she could:
to tell you my case in the passion, that then took me, it is more then I can
express: but the Lady her Cosen privately keeping me till I was healed of my
wound, within a few days after finding the sharp revenge intended me by a
brother of my late dead enemy, conveyed me away with my servants to Sea,
furnishing me with all things necessary for my voyage, but as one mischief
follows another, so was it with me; for being near unto the coast of this
country; came a sudden tempest, in which our ship driven on a rock, took a
wrack, by means whereof, goods none at all, and men few, were saved, yet my
self by means of a piece of a Maste that floated on the waves, was driven on
land, and with a few crowns in my pocket, and these bracelets on my arms,
that had like to have spoiled my swimming gat to shore, and am come away as you
see, not yet three days since, and your self the first of my friends that I
have met with.


Ar. Thou have told me of such a Merry go sorry, as I have not often heard of:
I am sorry for thy ill fortune, but am glad to see thee alive: sorrow not for
her that is gone, for that is helpless, nor for thy self too much, for that is
needless, thy fortunes may be better at home, then they have bin abroad; take
no thought, be merry, we are now hard at the Town, we will dine together, and
soon we will home together: I have a neighbor within a mile, may hap live to
do thee good: Let us go.


Tid. Arnofilo I thank you, and think my self happy to have met with you;
when we come home we will talk further of the world, in the advancement of
my fortune, you shall but bind a friend: now what his fortune was, and what
courses he ran in it, if I hear you like well of this, you shall hear of the
rest, ere it be long.


FINIS.

