SIONS ELEGIES.

Wept By JEREMY the Prophet, And PERIPHRAS'D By FRA. QVARLES.

LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for Thomas Dew, and are to be sold at his
shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1625.

SIONS ELEGIES.

Wept BY JEREMIE THE PROPHET: And Periphras'd by FRA. QVARLES.

THOU SHALL LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTY



LONDON. Printed by W. Stansby for Thomas Dew, and are to be sold at his shop
in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1624.

TO THE GREAT EXAMPLE OF HONOR, WORTH, AND PIETY, WILLIAM, Earl of Pembroke.
WHen Time had brought this Embrion to the light,
It wept, it cryde, and often it deeply sight;
I asked my Muse the cause; She made no other
Reply, then this, She Is like the Muse, her mother;
I asked her name; She said, Melpomine,
I asked a Patron, and she named Thee.
To Thee, the Darling of my childbed Muse,
I here prefer those long devoted dues,
I owe to Honor; with a truer heart
None e're presented, though with greater Art:
My Muse, persuades me, though her Infant cry,
You Will pardon't, when you read the reason, why.
TO THE READER.
IF the ruins of Troy, Rome, Thebes, or Carthage have been thought a subject,
worthy the employment of more serious Pens, to entayle the remembrance
thereof to Posterity, how much more worthy the pains of a liuelyer Pen then
mine, is this ancient, most true, and never enough to be lamented desolation,
and captivity of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the holy City of God, Jerusalem, the
type of the Catholic Church?

After eighteen months siege in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the ninth day
of the fourth month, (which was the eighteenth year of Nebucadonozor over
Babylon) the Princes of Babylon surprised and took this brave City of
Jerusalem: presently after which, Nebuzaradan the General of the Babylonian
Army commanded by Nebucadonozor) spoiled the Temple, carried away the Vessels
of gold and silver, that were consecrated to Gods service, and the great Lauar
given by King Solomon, and burned the Temple, the first day of the next month,
which was one and twenty days after the surprizall: 470. years six months,
and ten days after the foundation thereof; 1062. years, six months, ten
days after the departure Read Josephus de Antiq. Iud. lib. 10. cap. 10.
of the people out of Egypt; 1950. years, six months, ten days after the
Deluge; and 3513. years, six months, ten days after the Creation of Adam.
Thus, and then, was this City of Jerusalem taken, and for seventy years,
remained the Jews in this Captivity: And this, in brief, is the general
occasion why, and the time when these Lamentations were composed. Reader, I
tender to thy consideration, two things; First, the Penman: secondly, the Art
and Method of this Threnodia. As for the first, It was penned by Jeremy the
Prophet, the son of Hilkiah a Priest; and undoubtedly endighted by the Spirit
of God; some think it was written, when the Prophe: was in prison; others,
when he was with Godoliah at Maspath: but whither at the one place or at the
other, it is not much material to discourse.

Secondly, as touching the Art and Method, it is short and concise, as being
most natural to so lamentable a subject: Cicero says, Lamentationes debent
esse concisae, and breues, quia cito lachryma exarescit, and difficile est,
auditores autlectores, in illo affectu summae commiserationis, diu tenere. The
Method is truly elegious, not bound to any ordinary set form, but wildly
depending upon the sudden subject, that new griefs present; and indeed the
deepest sorrows can not be, but distracted from all rules of method, the
neglect of which, is venial in such ejulations as these, as which, in all the
Scriptures, there is none so copious, none so ardent, concerning which Gregory
Nazianzene confesses, Threnos Ieremiae nunquam a se siccis oculis lectos esse.
Yet some think there is a method kept, but too fine and intricate, for our
gross apprehensions; touching this point, Saint Ambrose lib. 8. Epist. ad
Just. says, Demus, cas secundum artem non scripsisse, at certe secundum
gratiam scripsisse fatendum est, quae omn em artem long supera^, and with this
I rest.

You shall observe, that the four first Chapters of these Lamentations carry a
strict order, in the Original, for every Verse throughout every Chapter begins
with a several letter of the Hebrew Alphabet, except the third Chapter,
wherein the first and every third Verse only is tied to a Letter, and
continues the Alphabet through, which form the Prophet used, partly for
Eloquence, partly for Memory sake, meaning either literally thus, that it
ought to be perfect as the Alphabet, in Memory, or Hieroglyphically thus, that
as the Alphabet is the Radix of all words, so the miseries of the Jews, were
the combination of all miseries.

For the same Causes, I likewise here in my Periphrase, have observed the same
form, and continue the Alphabet, in English, as the Prophet did in Hebrew,
desirous to be his shadow, as much as I can.

It appears by the strictness of the order, that these Lamentations were
Originally writ in Verse, and as some think, in Sapphicks, but many of our
learned Neotericks deny, that any writings of the Jews carry, now, any
direct, or certain Laws of Poesy, though (they confess) some ruinous
Accents, here and there discovered, makes them imagine, they writ some things in
verse, but now, it seems that God in dispersing them, has likewise dissolved,
and struck dumb their music.

Farewell.
ELEG. 2.
BEhold! her eyes, those glorious eyes, that were
Like two fair Suns, in one celestial Sphaere,
Whose radiant beams did, once, reflect so bright,
Are now eclipsed, and have lost their light,
And seem like Islands, about which, appears
A troubled Ocean, with a Tide of tears;
Her servant Cities, that were once, at hand,
And bowed their servile necks, to her command,
Stand all aloof, as strangers to her moan,
And give her leave, to spend her tears alone;
Her Neighbors flatter, with a false relief,
And with a kiss, betray her, to her grief.
ELEG. 3.
COmpast around, with Seas of briny tears,
Judah laments, distraught with double fears;
Even as the fearful Partridge, to excuse her
From the fierce Gos-hawke, that too close pursues her,
Falls in a Covert, and her self does cover,
From her unequal Foe, that sits above her,
Meanewhile, the treason of the quick Retriuers,
Discouers novel dangers, and delivers
Her to a second fear, whose double fright
Finds safety, nor in staying, nor in flight;
Even so, is Judah vexed, with change of woes,
Betwixt her homebred, and her foreign Foes.
ELEG. 4.
DId not these sacred Cawsies, that are leading
To Sion, late, seem pau'd, with often treading?
Now secret Dens, for lurking Thieves to meet,
Vnprest, unless with sacrilegious feet;
Sion, the Temple of the highest GOD,
Stands desolate, her holy steps vntrod;
Her Altars are defaced, her Virgin fires
Surcease, and with a stink, her snuff expires;
Her Priests have changed their Hymns to sighs and cries,
Her Virgins weep forth Rivers from their eyes:
O Sion, thou that were the Child of mirth,
Art now the scorn, and Byword of the Earth.
ELEG 5.
Increased in power, and high Cheuisaunce
Of arms, thy Tyrant foemen do advance
Their crafty crests; He, he that was thy father,
And crowned thee, once, with blessings, now does gather
His troops to work thy end; Him, who advanced thee
To be Earths Queen, thy sins have bent against thee:
Strange spectacle of Grief! Thy tender fry,
Whom childhood taught no language, but their cry,
To Express their infant grief, these, wretched these,
By force of childish tears, could not appease
The ruthlesse Sword, which, deaf to all their cries,
Did drive them Captives, from their mothers eyes.
ELEG. 6.
Fair Virgin Sion, where (ah) where are those
Pure cheeks, wherein, the Lilly, and the Rose,
So much contended, lately, for the place,
Till both compounded, in thy glorious face?
How have thou blear'd, those sun-bright eyes, of thine,
Those beams, the royal Magazens of divine
And sacred Majesty, from whose pure light,
The purblind worldlings, did receive their sight,
Thy fearful Princes, leave their fencelesse Towers,
And fly like Hearts, before their swift pursuers,
Like light-foot Hearts they fly, not knowing, where,
Pricked on with Famine, and distracted Fear.
ELEG: 7.
Galled with her grief, Jerusalem recalls
To mind, her lost delights, her Festiualls,
Her peaceful freedom, and full joys, in vain
Wishing, what Earth cannot restore again;
Succor she sought, and begged, but none was there,
To give the Alms, of one poor trickling tear,
The scornful lips, of her amazed Foes,
Deride the grief, of her disastrous woes;
They laugh, and lay more ample torments on her,
Disdain to look, and yet they gaze upon her,
Abuse her Altars, hate her Offerings,
Profane her Sabbaths, and her holy Things
ELEG. 8.
Had thou (Jerusalem) o, had thy heart
Been loyal to his love, whose once thou were,
O, had the beams of thy unvailed eye,
Continued pure; had thou been nice, to try
New pleasures, thus thy Glory never had wasted,
Thy Walls, till now, like thy Reproach, had lasted.
Thy Lovers, whose false beauties did entice thee,
Have seen thee naked, and do now despise thee,
Drunk with thy wanton pleasures, they are fled,
And scorn the bounty, of thy loathed bed;
Left to thy guilt (the servant of thy sin)
Thou sham'st to show, what once, thou gloriedst in.
ELEG. 9.
Jerusalem is all infected over
With leprosy, whose filth, no shade can cover,
Puffed up with pride, unmindful of her end,
See, how she lies, deuoid of help, or friend.
Great Lord of Lords (whose Mercy far transcends
Thy sacred Justice) whose full Hand attends
The cries of emptle Ravens, bow down thine ears,
To wretched Sion, Sion drowned in tears;
Thy Hand did plant her (Lord) she is thy Vine,
Confound her Foes, they are her foes, and thine:
Show wonted favor, to thy holy Hill,
Rebuild her walls, and love thy Sion still.
ELEG. 10.
KNees, falsely bent to Dagon, now defile
Her wasted Temple, rudely they dispoile
The Abused Altars, and no hand releeues;
Her House of prayer is turned a Den of thieves,
Her costly Robes, her sacred treasure stands,
A willing prey to sacrilegious hands,
Her Priests are slain, and in a lukewarm flood,
Through every Channel runs the Leuits blood;
The hallowed Temple of the highest GOD,
Whose purer Footsteps, were not to be trod
With unprepared feet, before her eye
Is turned a Grove, for base Idolatry.
ELEG. 11
Lingering with Death and Famine, Judah groans,
And to the Air, breathes forth her ayrie moanes,
Her fainting Eyes wax dim, her Cheeks grow pale,
Her wandering steps despair to speed, and fail,
She faints, and through her trembling lips (half dead)
She whispers often the holy name of Bread:
Great GOD, let thy offended wrath surcease,
Behold thy servants, send thy servants peace,
Behold thy vassalls, groueling on the dust;
Be merciful (dear GOD) as well as just;
It Is thou, it is thou alone, that sent this grief,
It Is thou, it is thou alone, can send relief.
ELEG. 12.
MY tongu's in labor with her painful birth,
That finds no passage; Lord, how strange a dearth
Of words, concomitates a world of woes!
I neither can conceal, nor yet disclose:
You weary Pilgrims, you, whom change of Clymes
Have taught the change of Fortunes, and of Times,
Stay, stay your feeble steps, and cast your Eyes
On me, the Abstract of all miseries.
Say (Pilgrims) say, if e're your eyes beheld
More truer Iliades; more unparalleled,
And matelesse Evils, which my offended GOD
Reulcerates, with his enraged Rod.
ELEG. 13.
NO humane power could, no envious Art
Of mortal man, could thus subject my heart,
My glowing heart, to these imperious fires:
No earthly sorrow, but at length expires;
But these my Tyrant-torments do extend
To Infinites, nor having ease, nor end;
Lo, I the Prisoner of the highest GOD,
Inthralled to the vengeance of his Rod,
Lie bound in fetters, that I cannot fly,
Nor yet endure his deadly strokes, nor die:
My joys are turned to sorrows, backed with fears,
And I (poor I) lie pickled up in tears.
ELEG. 14.
O! How insufferable is the weight
Of sin! How miserable is their state,
The silence of whose secret sin conceales
The smart, till Justice to Revenge appeals!
How ponderous are my Crimes, whose ample scroule,
Weighs down the pillars of my broken Soul!
Their sower, masqu'd with sweetness, ouerswai'd me,
And with their smiling kisses, they betrayed me,
Betrayed me to my Foes, and what is worse,
Betrayed me to my self, and heavens curse,
Betrayed my soul, to an eternal grief,
Deuoid of hope, for e're to find relief.
ELEG.. 15.
Perplexed with change of woes, where e're I turn
My fainting eyes, they find fresh cause, to mourn;
My griefs move like the Planets, which appear
Changed from their places, constant to their Sphaere;
Behold, the Earth-confounding arm of heaven,
Has cowed my valiant Captains, and has driven
Their scattered forces up and down the street,
Like worried sheep, afraid of all they meet;
My younger men, the seed of propagation,
Exile has driven from my divided Nation;
My tender Virgins have not seap'd their rage,
Which neither had respect to youth, nor age.
ELEG. 16.
QVick change of Torments! equal to those crimes,
Which past vnthought-of, in my prosperous times;
From hence proceed my griefs, (ah me) from hence,
My spring-tyde sorrows have their influence;
For these, my soul dissolues, my eyes lament,
Spending those tears, whose store will never be spent;
For these, my fainting spirits droope, and melt
In anguish, such as never Mortal felt;
Within the selfsame flames, I freeze, and fry,
I roar for help, and yet no help is nigh;
My sons are lost, whose fortunes should relieve me,
And only such triumph, that hourly grieve me.
ELEG. 17.
REnt from the glory of her lost renown,
Sion laments; Her lips (her lips o'reflowne
With floods of tears) she prompteth how to break
New languages, instructs her tongue to speak
Elegious Dialects; She lowly bends
Her dustie knees upon the earth, extends
Her brawnelesse arms to them, whose ruthlesse eyes
Are red, with laughing at her miseries;
Naked she lies, deformed, and circumvented
With troops of fears, unpitied, unlamented,
A loathsome draine for filth, despised forlorn;
The scorn of Nations, and the Child of scorn.
ELEG. 18.
Sour wages issue from the sweets of sin.
Heavens hand is just, this treacherous heart has bin
The author of my woes: It Is I alone;
My sorrows reap, what my foul sins have sown;
Often they cried to Heaven, e're Heaven replyde,
And Vengeance never had come, had they never cryde;
All you that pass, vouchsafe your gracious ears,
To hear these cries, your eyes, to view these tears;
They are no heat-drops of an angry heart,
Or childish passions of an idle smart,
But they are Rivers, springing from an Eye,
Whose streams, no joy can stop, no grief draw dry.
ELEG. 19.
TVrne where I list, new cause of woe, presents
My poor distracted soul with new laments;
Where shall I turn? Shall I implore my friends?
Ah! summer friendship, with the summer ends;
In vain to them my groans, in vain my tears,
For harvest friends, can find no winter ears;
Or shall I call my sacred Priests for aid;
Alas! my pined Priests are all betrayed
To Death, and Famine; in the streits they cryde
For bread, and whilst they sought for bread, they did:
Vengeance could never strike so hard a blow,
As when she sends an unlamented woe.
ELEG. 20.
VOuchsafe (great GOD) to turn thy tender eyes
On me, poor wretch: o, let my midnight cries,
(That never cease, if never stopped with tears)
Procure audience from thy gracious ears;
Behold thy creature, made by change of grief
The barest wretch, that ever begged relief;
See, see, my soul is tortured on thy rack,
My bowels tremble, and my heart strings crack;
Abroad, the sword with open ruin frights me;
At home, the secret hand of Famine smights me;
Strange fires of grief! How is my soul oppressed,
That finds abroad, no peace; at home, no rest!
ELEG. 21.
WHere, where art thou, o sacred Lamb of peace,
That promised to the heavy laden, ease?
Thee, thee alone, my often bended knee
Inuokes, that have no other help, but Thee;
My foes (amazed at my hoarse complaining)
Scoff at my often repeated cries, disdayning
To lend their prosperous hand, they hiss and smile,
Taking a pleasure to behold my spoil;
Their hands delight to bruze my broken reeds,
And still persist, to prick that heart, that bleeds;
But there is a Day (if Prophets can divine)
Shall scourge their sins, as they have scourged mine.
ELEG. 22.
YOu noisome Weeds, that lift your Crests so high,
When better Plants, for want of moisture, die,
Think you to flourish ever? and (vnspide)
To shoot the flowers of your fruitless pride?
If Plants be lopt, because their fruits are small,
Think you to thrive, that bear no fruit at all?
Look down (great GOD) and from their places, tear
These weeds, that suck the juice, should make us bear;
Vndew'd with showers, let them see no Sun,
But feel those frosts, that thy poor Plants have done.
O, cleanse thy Garden, that the World may know,
We are the Seeds, that thy right Hand did sow.
SIONS ELEGIES.
Threnodia II.
ELEG. 1.
ALas! my torments, my distracted fears,
Have no commerce with reasonable tears;
How has heavens absence darkened the renown
Of Sions glory! with one angry frown,
How has The Almighty clouded those bright beams,
And changed her beauties streamers, into streams!
Sion, the glory of whose refulgent Fame,
Gave Earnest of an everlasting name,
Is now become an indigested Mass,
And ruin is, where that brave glory was;
How has Heaven struck her earth-admired name,
From th'height of honor, to the depth of shame!
ELEG. 2.
Beauty, nor strength of building, could entice,
Or force Revenge from her just enterprise;
Mercy has stopped her ears, and Justice has
Powered out full vialls, of her kindled wrath;
Impatient of delay, she has struck down
The pride of Sion, kicked off Iuda's Crown,
Her streets unpeopled, and disperc'd her powers,
And with the ground has leuell'd her high towers,
Her Priests are slain, her captived Princes are
Vnransom'd prisoners; Slaves, her men of war;
Nothing remaynes of all her wonted glory,
But sad Memorialls of her tragic story.
ELEG. 3.
COnfused horror, and confounded shame,
Has blurred the beauty, and renowned name
Of righteous Israel; Isreal's fruitful Land,
Entailed by Heaven, with the usurping hand
Of uncontrolled Gentiles, is laid waste,
And with the spoil of ruin is defaced;
The angry mouth of Justice blows the fires
Of hasty Vengeance, whose quick flame aspires,
With fury, to that place, which Heaven did sever,
For Jacob, and his holy Seed, for ever;
No part, no secret Angle of the Land,
Which bears no mark of Heavens enraged hand.
ELEG. 4.
DArts, thrilled from heaven, transfixe my bleeding heart,
And fill my soul with everlasting smart,
Whose festring wound, no fortune can recure;
The Almighty strikes but seldom, but strikes sure;
His sinowy arm has drawn his steely bow,
And sent his forked shafts, to overthrow
My pined Princes, and to ruinate
The weakened Pillars, of my wounded state;
His hand has scourged my dear delights, acquitted
My soul, of all, where in my soul delighted;
I am the Mirror of vnmasqued sin,
To see her (dearly purchased) pleasures in.
ELEG. 5.
EVen as the Pilot, whose sharp Keele diuides
The encountering waves, of the Cicilian Tides,
Tossed on the lists of Death, striving to escape
The danger of deep mouthed Carybdis rape,
Rebutts on Scylla, with a forced careere,
And wrecks upon a less suspected fear;
Even so poor I, contriuing to withstand
My Foemans, fall into the Almighties hand;
So I, the Child of ruin, to avoid
Less dangers, by a greater am destroyed:
How necessary, Ah! How sharp's his end,
That neither has his GOD, nor Man, to friend!
ELEG. 6.
FOrgotten Sion hangs her drooping head,
Upon her fainting breast; Her soul is fed
With endless grief, whose torments had deprived her
Long since, of life, had not new pains reviu'd her;
Sion is like a Garden, whose defense
Being broke, is left to the rude violence
Of wastefull Swine, full of neglected waste,
Nor having flower for smell; nor herb for taste;
Heaven takes no pleasure in her holy Feasts,
Her idle sabbaths, or burnt fat of beasts;
Both State, and Temple are despoiled and fleec't
Of all their beauty; without Prince, or Priest.
ELEG: 7.
Glory, that once did Heavens bright Temple fill,
Is now departed from that sacred Hill;
See, how the empty Altar stands disguised,
Abused by Gentiles, and by Heaven despiz'd;
That place, wherein the holy One has taken
So sweet delight, lies loathed, and forsaken;
That sacred place, wherein the precious Name
Of great Jehovah was preserved, the same
Is turned a Den for Thieves; an open stage,
For Vice, to act on; a defiled Cage
Of unclean birds; a house of privilege
For sin, and uncontrolled sacrilege.
ELEG. 8.
Heaven has decreed; his angry breast does boil,
His time's expired, and he is armed to spoil;
His secret Will adjourned the righteous doom
Of threatened Sion, and her time is come;
His hand is armed with thunder, from his eyes,
A flame more quick, then sulphrous Aetna, flies;
Sion must fall; That hand, which has begun,
Can never rest, till the full work be dun;
Her walls are sunk, her Towers are overthrown,
Heaven will not leave a stone upon a stone;
Hence, hence the floods of roaring Judah rise,
Hence Sion fills the Cisterns of her eyes.
ELEG. 9.
Joy is departed from the holy Gates
Of dear Jerusalem, and peace retraits
From wasted Sion; her high walls, that were
An armed proof, against the brunt of fear,
Are shrunk, for shame, if not withdrawn, for pity,
To see the ruins, of so brave a City;
Her Kings, and out-lawed Princes live constrained,
Howrely to hear the name of Heaven profaned;
Manners and Laws, the life of government,
Are sent into eternal banishment;
Her Prophets cease to dream; they vow, unheard;
They howl to Heaven, but Heaven gives no regard.
ELEG. 10.
KIng, Priest, and People, all alike are clad,
In weeds of Sackcloth, taken from the sad
Wardrobe of sorrow; prostrate on the earth,
They close their lips, their lips estranged to mirth;
Silent they sit, for dearth of speech, affords
A sharper Accent, for true grief, then words;
The Father wants a Son; the Son, a Mother;
The Bride, her Groom; the Brother wants his Brother;
Some, Famine; Exile, some; and some, the Sword
Has slain; All want, when Sion wants her Lord:
How art thou All in all! There Is nothing scant
(Great GOD) with thee; without thee, all things want.
ELEG. 11.
LAunch forth, my soul, into a Sea of tears,
Whose ballac'd bulk, no other Pilot steares,
Then raging sorrow, whose uncertain hand,
Wanting her Compass, strikes on every sand;
Driven with a storm of sighs, she seeks the Haven
Of rest, but like to Noah's wandering Raven,
She scowres the Main, and, as a Sea-lost Rouer,
She roames, but can no land of peace, discover:
Mine eyes are faint with tears; Tears have no end;
The more are spent, the more remain to spend:
What Marble (ah) what Adamantine eye,
Can look on Sions ruin, and not cry?
ELEG. 12.
MY tongue? The tongues of Angels, are too faint,
To Express the causes of my just complaint;
See, how the pale-faced sucklings roar for food,
And from their milklesse mothers breasts, draw blood,
Children surcease their serious toys, and plead
With trickling tears, Ah mothers, give us bread;
Such goodly Barnes, and not one grain of corn,
Why did the Sword escape's? why were we borne
To be devoured, and pined with famine? save us
With quick relief, or take the lives, you gave us;
They cryde for bread, that scarce had breath to cry;
And wanting means to live, found means to dye.
ELEG. 13.
Never, ah! never yet, did vengeance brand
A State, with deeper ruin, then thy Land,
Dear Sion; How could mischief been more keen,
Or struck thy glory, with a sharper spleen?
Whereto (Jerusalem) to what shall I
Compare this thy vnequall'd misery?
Turn back to ages past; Search deep Records:
Theirs are, thine cannot be expressed, in words;
Would, would to GOD, my lives cheap price might be
Esteemed of value, but to ransom thee;
Would I could cure thy grief; but who is able,
To heal that wound, that is immedicable?
ELEG. 14.
OSion, had thy prosperous soul endured
Thy Prophets scourge, thy joys had been secured;
But thou (ah thou) have lent thine itching ear,
To such as clawed, and only such, would hear;
Thy Prophets, 'nointed with vnhallow'd oil,
Rubbed, where they should have launcht, and did beguile
Thy abused faith, their fawning lips did cry
Peace, peace, alas, when there was no peace nigh;
They quilted silken curtains for thy crimes,
Belyde thy GOD, and only pleased the Times;
Dear Sion, oh; had thou, but had the skill,
To stop thine ears, thou had been Sion still.
ELEG. 15.
PEople, that travel through thy wasted Land,
Gaze on thy ruins, and amazed stand,
They shake their spleenfull heads, disdain, deride
The sudden downfull, of so fair a pride;
They clap their joyful hands, and fill their tongs
With hisses, ballads, and with Lyrick songs;
Her torments give their empty lips new matter,
And, with their scornful fingers, point they at her;
Is this (say they) that place, whose wonted fame,
Made troubled Earth, to tremble at her name?
Is this that State? are these, those goodly Stations?
Is this that Mistress, and that Queen of Nations?
ELEG. 16.
Qvencht are the dying Embers of Compassion,
For empty sorrow, finds no Lamentation;
When as thy Harvest flourisht with full ears,
Thy slightest grief, brought in a Tide of tears;
But now, alas! thy Crop consumed, and gone,
Thou art but food, for beasts to trample on;
Thy servants glory in thy ruin, those
That were thy private friends, are public foes;
Thus, thus (say they) we spit our rancrous spleen,
And gnash our teeth, upon the worlds fair Queen;
Thrice welcome this (this long expected) day,
That crowns our conquest, with so sweeta pray.
ELEG. 17.
REbellious Judah! Could thy flattring Crimes
Secure thee, from the danger of these times?
Or did thy summer Prophets e're foresay
These evils, or warn thee of a winters day?
Did not those sweet-lipt Oracles begude
Thy wanton ears, with news of Wine, and Oil?
But Heaven is just; what his deep Counsel willed,
His Prophets told, and Justice has fulfilled;
He has destroyed; no secret place, so void,
No Fort so sure, that Heaven has not destroyed;
Thou Land of Judah! How Is thy sacred Throne,
Become a Stage, for Heath'n, to trample on!
ELEG. 18.
SEe, see, th'accursed Gentiles do inherit
The Land of promise; where heavens sacred Spirit
Built Temples for his everlasting Name;
There, there, th'vsurping Pagans do proclaim
Their idle Idols, unto whom they gave
That stolen honor, which heavens Lord should have:
Wink Sion; o, let not those eyes be stained.
With heavens dishonor, see not heaven profan;d;
Close, close thine eyes, or if they needs must be
Open, like floodgates to let water flee,
Yet let the violence of their flowing streams
Obscure thine open eyes, and mask their beams.
ELEG. 19.
TRust not thine eyelids, least a flattering sleep,
Bribe them to rest, and they forget to weep;
Power out thy heart, thy heart dissolved in tears,
Weep forth thy plaints, in the Almighties ears;
Oh, let thy cries, thy cries, to heaven addressed,
Disturb the silence of thy midnight rest;
Prefer the sad Petitions of thy soul
To Heaven, never close thy lips, till Heaven condole
Confounded Sion, and her wounded weal;
That GOD that smit, oh, move that GOD to heal;
Oh, let thy tongue never cease to call, thine eye,
To weep, thy pensive heart, never cease to cry.
ELEG. 20.
VOuchsafe, oh thou eternal Lord of pity,
To look on Sion, and thy dearest City,
Confused Jerusalem, for thy DAVID'S sake,
And for that Promise, which thy self did make
To halting Is'rel; Lo, thy hand has forced Genesis 35. 12.

Mothers (whom lawless Famine, has diuorc'd
From dear affection) to devour the bloomes,
And buds, that burgeond from their painful wombes;
Thy sacred Priests, and Prophets that whilere,
Did howrely whisper, in thy neighboring ear,
Are fallen before the sacrilegious sword,
Even where, even whilst they did unfold thy Word.
ELEG. 21.
WOunded, and wasted, by the eternal Hand
Of Heaven, I grouell on the ground; my Land
Is turned a Golgotha, before mine eye,
Vnsepulchred my murthred people lie;
My deadlye rudely scattred on the stones,
My Cawsies all are pau'd with dead men's bones;
The fierce Destroyer does alike forbear
The Maidens trembling, and the Matrons tear,
Th'impartiall sword spares neither Fool, nor Wise,
The Old man's pleading; nor the Infants cries;
Vengeance is deaf, and blind; and she respects
Nor Young, nor Old, nor Wise, nor Fool, nor Sex.
ELEG. 22.
Years, heavy laden with their months, retire;
Months, gone their date of numbered days, expire;
The Days, full howerd, to their period tend;
And Hours, chased with light foot minutes, end;
Yet my vndated Evils, no time will minish,
Though Years, and Months, though Days and Hours, finish:
Fears flock about me, as invited Guests,
Before the Portalls, at proclaimed feasts;
Where Heaven has breathed, that man, that state must fall;
Heaven wants no Thunderbolts, to strike withal;
I am the Subject, of that angry Breath,
My Sons are slain, and I am marked for death.
SIONS ELEGIES.
Threnodia III.
ELEG. 1.
ALl you, whose unprepared lips did taste
The tedious Cup of sharp affliction, cast
Your wondings eyes on me, that have drunk up
Those dregs, whereof you only kissed the Cup:
I am the Man, against whom The Eternal has
Discharged the louder volley of his wrath;
I am the man, on whom the brow of night
Has scowl'd, unworthy to behold the light;
I am the Man, in whom The Almighty shows
The dire example of vnpattern'd woes;
I am that Prisoner, ransom cannot free;
I am that Man; and I am only He.
ELEG. 2.
BOndage has forced my servile neck to fail
Beneath her load; Afflictions nimble Flaile
Has thrasht my soul upon a floor of stones,
And quasht the marrow of my broken bones;
Th'assembled powers of Heaven enraged, are eager
To root me out; Heavens soldiers do beleager
My worried soul, my soul unapt for fleeing,
That yields, o'reburthen'd with her tedious being;
The Almighty's hand has clouded all my light,
And clad my soul with a perpetual night,
A night of torments, and eternal sorrow,
Like that of Death, that never finds a morrow.
ELEG. 3.
Chained to the brazen pillars of my woes,
I strive in vain; No mortal hand can loose
What Heaven has bound; My soul is walled about,
That Hope can nor get in, nor Fear get out;
When e're my wavering hopes to Heaven address
The feeble voice of my extreme distress,
He stops his tired ears; without regard
Of suit, or Suitor, leaves my prayers unheard.
Before my faint and stumbling feet, he lays
Blocks to disturb my best advised ways;
I seek my peace, but seek my peace in vain.
For every way's a Trap; each path's a Train.
ELEG. 4.
DIsturbed Lions are appeased with blood,
And ravenous Bears are mild, not wanting food,
But heaven (ah heaven!) will not implored be:
Lions, and Bears are not so fierce as He:
His direful vengeance (which no mean confines)
Has crossed the thriuing of my best designs;
His hand has spoiled me, that erewhile advanced me,
Brought in my Foes, possessed my Friends against me;
His Bow is bent, his forked Rouers fly,
Like darted hail stones from the darkened sky;
Shot from a hand that cannot err, they be
Transfixed in no other mark, but me.
ELEG. 5.
Exiled from Heaven, I wander to and fro,
And seek for streams, as Stags new stricken do,
And, like a wandering Heart I flee the Hounds,
With Arrows deeply fixed in my wounds;
My deadly Hunters with a winged pace,
Prick forwards, and pursue their weary chase,
They whoope, they hallow me, deride, and flout me,
That flee from death, yet carry death about me:
Excess of torments has my soul deceived
Of all her joys, of all her powers bereiu'd.
Ocurious grief, that have my soul brim-fill'd
With thousand deaths, and yet my soul not killed!
ELEG. 6.
Followed with troops of fears, I fly in vain,
For change of places, breeds new change of pain;
The base condition of my low estate,
My'exalted Foes disdain, and wonder at;
Turn where I list (these) these my wretched eyes,
They find no objects, but new miseries;
My soul, accustomed to so long increase
Of pains, forgets that she had ever peace;
Thus, thus perplexed, thus with my griefs distracted,
What shall I do? Heavens powers are compacted,
To work my'eternall ruin; To what friend
Shall I make moan, when Heaven conspires my end?
ELEG. 7.
GReat GOD! what help (ah me) what hope is left
To him, that of thy presence is bereft?
Absented from thy favor, what remains,
But sense, and sad remembrance of my pains?
Yet has affliction opened my dull ear,
And taught me, what in weal I never could hear;
Her scourge has tutored me with sharp corrections,
And swag'd the swelling of my proud affections;
Till now I slumbred in a prosperous dream,
From whence awaked, my griefs are more extreme;
Hopes, newly quickened, have my soul assured,
That griefs discour'd, are one half recur'd.
ELEG. 8.
HAd not the milder Hand of mercy broke
The furious violence, of that fatal stroke,
Offended Justice struck, we had been quite
Lost in the shadows of eternal night;
Thy mercy, Lord, is like the morning Sun,
Whose beams undo, what sable night has don;
Or like a stream, the Current of whose course,
Restrained awhile, runs with a swifter force;
Oh, let me swelter in those sacred beams,
And after, bathe me in these silver streams;
To thee alone, my sorrows shall appeal;
Has Earth a wound, too hard for Heaven to heal?
ELEG. 9.
IN thee (dear Lord) my pensive soul respires,
Thou art the fullness of my choice desires;
Thou art that sacred Spring, whose waters burst
In streams to him, that seeks with holy thurst;
Thrice happy man, thrice happy thirst, to bring
The fainting soul to so, so sweet a Spring;
Thrice happy he, whose well resolved breast
Expects no other aid, no other rest;
Thrice happy he, whose downie age has bin
Reclaimed by scourges, from the prime of sin,
And early seasoned with the taste of Truth,
Remembers his Creator in his youth.
ELEG. 10.
KNowledge concomitates Heavens painful rod,
Teaches the soul to know her self, her GOD,
Vnseiles the eye of Faith, presents a morrow
Of joy, within the sablest night of sorrow;
The Afflicted soul abounds in barest need,
Sucks purest honey from the foulest weed,
Detests that good, which pampered reason likes,
Welcomes the stroke, kisses the hand that strikes
In roughest Tides his well-prepared breast,
Untouched with danger, finds a Haven of rest;
Has all in all, when most of all bereauen;
In Earth, a Hell; in Hell, he finds a Heaven.
ELEG. 11.
Labor perfected, with the evening ends,
The lamp of heaven (his course fulfilled) descends;
Can works of Nature seek, and find a rest;
And shall the torments of a troubled breast,
Imposed by Natures all-commanding GOD,
Never know an end, never find a period?
Dear soul, despair not, whet thy dull belief
With hope; Heavens mercy will overcome thy grief;
From thee, not him, proceeds thy punishment,
He Is slow to wrath, and speedy to relent;
Thou burn'st like gold, consumest not like fuel;
O, wrong not Heaven, to think that Heaven is cruel.
ELEG. 12.
Mountains shall move, the Sun his circling course
Shall stop; Tridented Neptune shall divorce
Th'embracing floods, from their beloved Isles,
Ere Heaven forgets his servant, and recoiles
From his eternal vow: Those, those that bruise
His broken reeds, or secretly abuse
The doubtful Title of a rightful Cause,
Or with false bribes adulterate the Laws,
That should be chaste; these, these The Almighty has
Branded for subjects of a future wrath;
Oh, may the just man know, The Eternal hastens
His plagues for trialls; loves the Child he chastens.
ELEG. 13.
NO mortal power, nor supernall might,
Not Lucifer, nor no infernal spright,
Nor all together, joined in one commission,
Can think or act, without divine permission;
Man wills, Heaven breathes success, or not, upon it;
What good, what evil befalls, but heaven has done it?
Upon his right hand, Health and Honors stand,
And flaming Scourges on the other hand:
Since then the states of good or evil depend
Upon his Will, (fond mortal) thou, attend
Upon his Wisdom; Why should living Dust
Complain on Heaven because that Heaven is just?
ELEG. 14.
O Let the balance of our euen-pois'd hearts,
Weigh our afflictions with our just deserts,
And ease our heavy scale; Double the grains
We take from sin, Heaven takes from our pains;
Oh, let thy lowly-bended eyes not fear
The Almighties frowns, nor husband one poor tear;
Be prodigal in sighs, and let thy tongue,
Thy tongue, estranged to Heaven, cry all night long:
My soul, thou leau'st, what thy Creator did
Will thee to do, have done what he forbid;
This, this, has made so great a strangeness be,
(If not divorce) betwixt thy GOD, and thee.
ELEG. 15.
Prepared to vengeance, and resolved to spoil,
Thy hand (just GOD) has taken in thy toil
Our wounded souls; That Arm, which has forgot
His wonted mercy, kills and spares not;
Our Crimes have let a Bar, betwixt thy Grace
And Us; thou have eclipst thy glorious Face,
Have stopped thy gracious Ear, lest prayers enforce
Thy tender Heart to pity and remorse:
See, see, great GOD, what thy dear Hand has done;
We lie like dross, when all the gold is gone,
Contemned despised, and like to Atoms, fly
Before the Sun, the scorn of every eye.
ELEG. 16.
QVotidian fevers of reproach, and shame,
Have chilled our Honor, and renowned Name;
We are become the Byword, and the scorn
Of Heaven and Earth; of Heaven and Earth, forlorn;
Our captived souls are compast round about,
Within, with troops of Fears; of Foes, without;
Without, within distressed; and in conclusion,
We are the hapless children of Confusion;
Oh, how mine eyes, the rivers of mine eyes,
Overflow these barren lips, that can devise
No Dialect, that can express or borrow
Sufficient Metaphores, to show my sorrow!
ELEG. 17.
Rivers of marish tears have ouer-flowne
My blubberd cheeks; my tongue can find no Tone,
So sharp, as silence, to bewail that woe,
Whose flowing Tides, an Ebb could never know:
Weep on (mine Eyes) mine eyes shall never cease:
Speak on (my Tongue) forget to hold thy peace;
Cease not thy tears; close not thy lips, so long,
Till Heaven shall wipe thine eyes, and hear thy tongue;
Whatheart of brass, what Adamantine breast
Can know the torments of my soul, and rest?
What stupid brain, (ah me!) what marble eye
Can see these, these my Ruins, and not cry?
ELEG. 22.
YEt sleeps thy Vengeance? Can thy Justice be
So slow to them, and yet so sharp to me?
Dismount (just Judge) from thy Tribunal Throne,
And pay thy Foemen, the deserved lone
Of their unjust designs; Make fierce thy hand,
And scourge thou them, as they have scourged my land;
Break thou their Adamantine hearts, and pound them
To dust, and with thy final curse confound them;
Let horror seize their souls; o may they be
The scorn of Nations, that have scorned Thee;
O, may they live distressed, and die bereauen
Of earths delights, and of the joys of Heaven.
SIONS ELEGIES.
Threnodia IIII.
ELEG. 1.
ALas! what alterations! Ah, how strange
Amazement flows from such an uncouth change!
Ambitious Ruin! Could thy razing hand
Find never a subject, but the Holy Land?
Thou sacrilegious Ruin, to attempt
The House of GOD! Was not heavens house exempt
From thy accursed Rape? Ah me! Behold,
Sion, whose pauement of refulgent gold,
So lately did reflect, so bright, so pure,
How dim, how droffie now, (ah!) how obscure!
Her sacred stones lie scattered in the street,
For stumbling blocks before the Levites feet.
ELEG. 6.
Foul Sodom, and incestuous Gomorrow
Had my destruction, but never my sorrow;
Vengeance had mercy there; Her hand did send
A sharp beginning, but a sudden end;
Justice was mild, and with her hasty flashes
They fell, and sweetly slept in peaceful Ashes;
They felt no rage of an insulting Foe,
Nor Famine pinching fury, as I do;
They had no sacred Temple to defile;
Or if they had, they would have helped to spoil;
They did but once, but I, poor wretched I,
Die many deaths, and yet have more to die.
ELEG: 7.
GOld, from the mint; Milk, from the vberous Cow,
Was never so pure in substance, nor in show,
As were my Nazarites, whose inward graces
Adorned the outward luster of their faces;
Their faces robbed the Lilly, and the Rose,
Of red and white; more fair, more sweet then those;
Their bodies were the Magazens of perfection,
Their skins unblemished, were of pure complexion,
Through which, their Saphire-colour'd veins descride
The Azure beauty of their naked pride;
The flaming Carbuncle was not so bright,
Nor yet the rare discolored Chrisolite.
ELEG. 8.
HOw are my sacred Nazarites (that were
The blazing Planets of my glorious Sphaere)
Obscured, and darkened in Afflictions clowd?
Astonished at their own disguize, they shroud
Their foul transformed shapes, in the dull shade
Of sullen darkness; of themselves afraid;
See, how the brother gazes on the brother,
And both afrighted, start, and fly each other;
Black, as their Fates, they cross the streets, unkind;
The Sire, his son; The friend disclaimes his friend;
They, they that were the flowers of my Land,
Like withered Weeds, and blasted Hemlock stand.
ELEG. 9.
IMpetuous Famine, sister to the Sword,
Left hand of Death, Child of the infernal Lord,
Thou Tort'rer of mankind, that with one stroke,
Subjects the world to thy imperious yoke:
What pleasure take thou in the tedious breath
Of pined mortals? or their lingering death?
The Sword, thy generous brother's not so cruel,
He kills but once, fights in a noble Duel,
But thou (malicious Fury) do extend
Thy spleen to all, whose death can find no end;
Alas! my hapless wear can want no woe,
That feels the rage of Sword, and Famine too.
ELEG. 10.
Kind is that Death, whose weapons do but kill,
But we are often slain, yet dying still;
Our torments are too gentle, yet too rough,
They gripe too hard, because not hard enough;
My people tear their trembling flesh, for food,
And from their ragged wounds, they suck forth blood;
The Father dies, and leaves his pined Course,
Tinrich his Heir, with meat; The hungry Nurse
Broiles her starved suckling on the hasty coals,
Deuours one half, and hides the rest in holes:
O Tyrant Famine! that compell'st the Mother,
To kill one hungry Child, to feed an other!
ELEG. II.
LAment, o sad Jerusalem, lament;
O weep, if all thy tears be yet unspent;
Weep (wasted Judah) let no drop be kept
Vnshed, let not one tear be left, vnwept;
For angry Heaven has nothing left undone,
To bring thy ruins to perfection:
No curse, no plague the fierce Almighty has
Kept back, to sum the total of his wrath;
Thy Citic burns; thy Sion is despoiled;
Thy Wives are ravished, and thy Maids defiled;
Famine, at home; the Sword abroad destroys thee;
Thou cry'st to heaven, and heaven his caredenyes thee.
ELEG. 12.
MAy thy dull senses (o unhappy Nation,
Possessed with nothing, now, but desolation)
Collect their scattered forces, and behold
Thy novel fortunes, balanced with the old;
Could thou, o could thy prosperous heart conceive,
That mortal power, or art of State could reiue
Thy'illustrious Empire, of her sacred glory;
And make her ruins, the Threnodian story
Of these sad times, and ages, yet to be?
Envy could pine, but never hope to see
Thy buildings crushed, and all that glory ended,
Which Man so fortifyde, and Heaven defended.
ELEG: 13.
Never had the splendour of thy bright renown
Been thus extinguished (Judah;) Thy fast Crown,
Had never been spurned from thy Imperial brow,
Plenty had nursed thy soul, thy peaceful plough
Had filled thy fruitful Quarters with increase,
Had thou but known thy self, and loved peace;
But thou have broke that sacred Truce, concluded
Betwixt thy God, and thee; vainly deluded
Thy self with thine own strength; With deadly feud
Thy furious Priests, and Prophets have pursude
The mourning Saints of Sion, and did slay
All such, as were more just, more pure, then they.
ELEG. 14.
O How the Priests of Sion, whose pure light
Should shine to such, as grope in Errors night,
And blaze like Lamps, before the darkened eye
Of Ignorance, to raise up those that lie
In dull despair, and guide those feet that strey,
Ay me! How blind, how dark, how dull are they!
Fierce rage, and fury drives them through the street,
And, like to madmen, stabbe at all they meet;
They wear the purple Liuerie of Death,
And live themselves, by drawing others breath;
Say (wasted Sion) could Revenge behold
So foul an acted Scene as this, and hold?
ELEG. 15.
PRophets, and sacred Priests, whose tongues whilere,
Did often whisper in the Eternals ear,
Disclosed his Oracles, found ready passage
Twixt God, and Man, to carry heavens Embassage,
Are now the subjects of deserved scorn,
Of GOD forsaken, and of Man forlorn;
Accursed Gentiles are ashamed to know,
What Sions Priests are not ashamed to do;
They see, and blush, and blushing flee away,
Fearing to touch things so defiled as they;
They hate the filth of their abomination,
And chase them forth, from their new co^quer'd nation.
ELEG. 16.
QVite banished from the joys of earth, and smiles
Of heaven, and deeply buried in her spoils,
Poor Judah lies; unpitied, dis-respected;
Exiled the World; of GOD, of Man rejected;
Like blasted ears among the fruitful wheat,
She roames disperc'd, and has no certain seat;
Her servile neck's subjected to the yoke
Of bondage, open to the impartial stroke
Of conquering Gentiles, whose afflicting hand
Smites every nooke of her disguized Land;
Of Youth respectlesse, nor regarding years,
Nor Sex, nor Tribe; like scourging Prince, and Peers.
ELEG. 17.
REnt, and deposed from Imperial state,
By heavens high Hand, on heaven we must awaite;
To him that struck, our sorrows must appeal;
Where Heaven has smit, no hand of man can heal;
In vain, our wounds expected man's relief,
For disappointed Hopes renew a Grief;
Egypt oppressed us in our fathers loins,
What hope's in Egypt? Nay, if Egypt ioynes
Her force with Judah, our united powers,
Could never prevail against such a Foe, as our's;
Egypt, that once did feel heavens scourge, for grieuing
His Flock, would now refinde it, for relieuing.
ELEG. 18.
SO, the quick-sented Beagles, in a view,
Over hill, and dale, the fleeing Chase pursue,
As swift-foot Death, and Ruin follow me,
That flees, afraid, yet knows not where to flee:
Flee to the fields? There, with the Sword, I meet,
And, like a Watch, Death stands in every street;
No Covert hides from Death; no Shade, no Cells
So dark, wherein not Death, and Horror dwells;
Our Days are numbered, and our Number's don,
The empty Houre-glasse of our glorie's run;
Our sins are summed, and so extreame's the score,
That Heaven could not do less, nor Hell do more.
ELEG. 19.
TO what a downfall are our fortunes come,
Subjected to the suffrance of a Doom,
Whose lingering torments, Hell could not conspire
More sharp! Then which, Hell needs no other fire:
How nimble are our Foemen, to betray
Our souls? Eagles are not so swift as they:
Where shall we flee? Or where shall sorrow find
A place for harbor? Ah, what prosperous wind,
Will lend a Gale, whose bounty never shall cease,
Till we be landed on the I Will of peace?
My foes, more fierce, then empty Lions, are,
For hungry Lions, woed with tears, will spare.
ELEG. 20.
Usurping Gentiles rudely have engrost
Into their hands, those fortunes we have lost,
Devour the fruits, that purer hands did plant,
Are plump and pamp'red; with that bread we want,
And (what is worse then death) a Tyrant treades
Upon our Throne; Pagans adorn their heads,
With our lost Crowns; Their powers have disioynted
The Members of our State, and heavens Anointed,
Their hands have crushed, and ravished from his Throne,
And made a Slave, for Slaves to tread upon;
Needs must that flock be scattered, and accursed,
Where Wolfes have dared to seize the Shepherd, first.
ELEG. 21.
VVAxefat with laughing (Edom;) with glad eyes,
Behold the fullness of our miseries;
Triumph (thou Type of Antichrist) and feed
Thy soul with joy, to see thy brothers seed
Ruined, and rent, and rooted from the earth;
Make haste, and solace thee with early mirth;
But there is a time, shall teach thee how to weep,
As many tears, as I; thy lips, as deep
Shall drink in sorrows Cup, as mine have don,
Till then, cheer up thy spirits, and laugh on:
Offended Justice often strikes by turns;
Edom, beware, for thy next neighbor burns.
ELEG. 22.
Ye drooping sons of Sion, o, arise,
And shut the Floodgates of your flowing eyes,
Surcease your sorrows, and your joys attend,
For Heaven has spoke it, and your griefs shall end;
Believe it Sion; seek no curious sign,
And wait heavens pleasure, as heaven waited thine;
And thou triumphing Edom, that do lie
In beds of Roses; thou, whose prosperous eye
Did smile, to see the Gates of Sion fall,
Shall be subjected to the selfsame thrall;
Sion, that weeps, shall smile; and Edom's eye,
That smiles so fast, as fast shall shortly cry.
The Prophet JEREMY his Prayer for the distressed people of JERUSALEM, and
SION.
GReat God, before whose all-discerning eye,
The secret corners of man's heart, do lie
As open as his Actions, which no Cloud
Of secrecy can shade; no shade can shrowde,
Behold the Tears, o, harken to the Cries
Of thy poor Sion; Wipe her weeping eyes,
Bind up her bleeding wounds, o thou, that art
The best Surgeon, for a broken heart:
See, how the barbarous Gentiles have intruded
Into the Land of Promise, and excluded
Those rightful Owners, from their just possessions,
That wander now, full laden with oppressions;
Our Fathers (ab) their savage hands have slain,
Whose deaths, our widdow-mothers weep in vain;
Our Springs, whose Crystal plenty, once disburst
Their bounteous favors, to quench every thurst;
Our lib'rall Woods, whose palsie-shaken tops,
To every stranger, bowed their yielding lops,
Are sold to us, that have no price to pay,
But sweat, and toil, the sorrows of the day;
Oppressors trample on our servile necks,
We never cease to groan, nor they, to vex;
Famine, and Dearth have taught our hands t'extend
To Ashur, and our feeble knees, to bend
To churlish Pharoe; Want of bread compells
Thy sernants to beg Alms of Infidells;
Our wretched Fathers sinned, and yet they sleep
In peace, and have left us, their sons, to weep;
We, we extracted from their sinful loins,
Are guilty of their sins; Their Ossa ioynes,
To our high Pelion; Aye! their crimes do stand,
More firmly entayled to us, then our Land:
We are the slaves of servants, and the scorn
Of slaves; of all forsaken, and forlorn;
Hunger has forced us, to acquire our food,
With deepest danger, of our dearest blood;
Our skins are wrinckled, and the fruitless ploughs
Of want, have fallow'd up our barren brows;
Within that Sion, which thy hands did build,
Our Wives were ravished, and our Maids defiled;
Our savage Fee, extends his barbarous rage
To all, nor sparing Sex, nor Youth, nor Age;
They hang our Princes, on the shameful Trees
Of Death; respect no Persons, no Degrees;
Our Elders are despised, whose gray hairs,
Are but the Index of their doting years;
Our flowring youth are forced to fulfill
Their painful taskes, in the laborious Mill;
Our Children faint, beneath their loades, and cry,
Oppressed with burdens, under which they lie;
Sages are banished from Iuditiall Courts,
And Youth takes no delight in youthful sports;
Our joys are gone, and promise no returning,
Our pleasure's turned to pain; our mirth, to mourning;
Our Hand has lost her Sword; our Head, his Crown;
Our Church, her Glory; our Weal, her high Renown;
Lord, we have sinned, and these our sins have brought
This world of grief; (O purchase dearly bought!)
From hence our sorrows, and from hence our Fears
Proceed; for this, our eyes are blind with Tears;
But that (aye that) which my poor heart does count
Her sharpest torture, is; Thy sacred Mount,
Sacred Mount Sion; Sion, that divine
Seat of thy glorie's razed; her tender Vine,
Laden with swelling Clusters, is destroyed,
And Foxes now, what once thy Lambs, enjoyed.
But thou (O thou Eternal God) whose Throne
Is permanent, whose glorie's ever One,
Unapt for Change, abiding still the same,
Though Earth consume, and Heaven dissolve her frame,
Why do thou (ah!) why do thou thus absent
Thy glorious Face? Oh, wherefore have thou rent
Thy Mercy from us? O! when will thou be
Attond to them, that have no trust, but Thee.
Restore us (Lord) and let our souls possess
Our wonted peace; O, let thy Hand redress,
Our wasted fortunes; Let thine Eye behold
Thy scattered Flock, and drive them to their Fold;
Can thou reject that People, which thy Hand
Has chose, and planted in the promised Land?
O thou (the Spring of mercy) will thou send
No ease to our Afflictions, no end?
FINIS.

