Certain Meditations, and things to be had in remebraunce, and well considered
by every Christian, before he receive ye Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ.

Compiled by T. Broke.

Anno. M.D.xl.viii. The.xvii. of August*

FIrst it is to be noted, that all Sacraments as well of the old law as also
of the new law: were instituted and ordained of God to put us in remembrance
of his most loving benefits and most merciful kyndnes showed and done unto
us. Which benefits, these sacraments thorough gods word do offer unto our
minds and not to our senses and we receive the said benefits by faith, into
our souls, and not with our senses into our bodies. Sacraments be of such
conditions and nature, that they have in them two things to be considered, the
one is an outward visible thing which perteyneth unto the bodyly senses and is
also-receiued thereby. The other thing is not perceived nor received with any
bodily senses, but as a pure and mere spiritual thing, a benefit done by God
unto man, perteinyng only unto the soul, which spiritual benefit is given
and done by god unto man: because it should be had and retained in continual
memory of the christian man. These outward and sensible things, were
instituted and ordained to sygnifie and represent the same, having in nature a
property and condition somewhat co^firmable and like to expres, and represent
the thing which they declare and singnifie. As bread has a natural properti to
feed, comfort, and sustain the natural bodi: so Christ's bodi betrayed and his
blood shed for the remission of our sins: feadeth, comforts, and
susteyneth, the soul of the christian man, borught into great fear and
sorrow, with the sight of the multitude and greuosnes of his sins. Which
hungreth and earnestly thristeth for the justice of God, and remission of his
said sins. And if these things be well noted and pondered, it will cause to
cease contencion moved about the manner of receyuyng of the sacrament for all
christean me^ must condescend and agree, that every faithful Christian,
(thorough Gods word in ye sacrament, duly to him exhibited and ministered) does
eat and receive by faith in Gods promise, Christ's flesh and dryncketh his
blood. So that ye thing is not in contencion. Whether we eat Christ's flesh,
or drink his blood or no in ye Sacrament but the form and manner of eating
Christ's flesh and drynkyng his blood is in co^te^cio^. For some of the
clergy strive stowtly, and teach ungodly that we should eat and receive
Christ's naturalle-bodye with our teth, drink and swallowe his blood with
our mouth and throat affirming very grossly Christ's natural body so to be
naturally reallye, and bodeli present, in the sacrament thereof, and that every
man which receives the sacrament, receives also the natural body of Christ:
be he never so wicked and unfaithful. An other sort of teachers, preach, ye
receiving of the sacrament, with our mouth and chewing it with our teth: we
eat not nor receive Christ's natural bodi: and drinking and receiving the wine
with our lips and throt, we drink not Christ's blood, except we faithfully
and constantly believe Christ's body to be betrayed for us: and his blood to
be shed for ye remission of our sins, For the mouth (say they) receives
not nor tastes, any other thing then bread and wine. But Christ's body
slain and his blood shed for the remission of our sins (which is the
spiritual gyfe and grace of God given to us in the sacrament) the soul eats
and receives by faith to his great spiritual comfort, commodity, and profit:
and the mouth: cannot receive, nor taste it. For co^firmacion whereof, they say
that man consists and is made of a body and of a soul, the bodi is a
natural and a material substance, which is fed with natural and corporal
sustenaunce, and noryshement. And the soul of man, (which we call the spirit
and mind) is a spiritual substance which cannot eat nor receive any bodelie
meat and sustinau^ce. For the soul being a spiritual substance, has no teth
mouth nor stomach, to receive or degest any such bodelie sustinau^ce, Math.
xv.
for that which enters into the mouth defiles not the soul (which is in the
inward man) says Christ. So in likewise, that which enters into the mouth
profits not the soul (being the inward man) which cannot receive it So that
the sacrament, which ye ungodly sai) by virtue of gods word spoken by the
priest, is turned into the natural, real, and corporal body of Christ's
natural substance, leauyng ye nature of bread, is yet such a natural
substance that cannot enter into the spiritual soul, by bodelie eating and
receyuynge therefore with ye mouth. For our soul is norished fed, and lives
by the spirit of Christ and not by the bodeli eating of his body with our
teeth. For in ye manner of eatinge with the teeth, Christ's flesh profits not
(says Christ) It is his holy spirit that quickens and makes us alive, for
spirit lives not but by the spirit of Christ. For whosoever has the spirit of
Christ, ye same is Christ's says Paul And as touching this bodeli eating of
Christ's body, with the teeth of men, it differs not from the fond and
ungodly opinion of the Caperna^^es rehearsed in the.vi. of Ihon. Which hearing
Christ say: I am ye bread of life and the bread which I will give you is my
flesh. And further he said, except you eat my slesh, and drink my blood you
shall not have life in you. They said, this word and sayng is very hard Who can
hear him? how can he give us his flesh to eat? For they thought that he
would have given unto the^, perceles, and gobbettes of his tural, and bodily
flesh to eat with their teeth, and to have let out part of his natural blood
for them to drink. Eue^ like as some of our clergy grossly (and no less
fondly) imagyne and without any fear of God, or worldly shame preach, the
same And although Christ louyngly, myndyng and wyllyng to teach them, the
profitable and spiritual eating and drinkyng of his flesh and blood, said:
do these my words offend you? what and if you shall see the son of man
asce^de where he was before? The spirit quickneth, the flesh profits not.
Yet this his answer, did nothing teach them the godly and spiritual eating
and drinking of his natural flesh and blood because as Christ said there
were some of them which did not believe So that without true belefe no man can
eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood, John. vi.
and then he eats and drynketh it spirituallie to his godli profit. Also if
the sacrament be turned into Christ's tural and real body (as the most part of
our clergy untruly do preach, and teach.) then it wear also reason, that
the same natural-and real body should also be received and perceived with our
se^ses. For Christ's natural body al though it be now glrified and immortal,
yet it is not so spiritual that it is invisible, and that proved Christ, when
after his resurrection he appeared unto his disciples, Luke. xxiiii.
saying. Feel and se a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you seem have.
Wherefore doubtless if his real, and natural body, were corporally present in the
sacrament it should be both felt, and seen. Because selynge, and feinge, be
two natural properties, declared by-Christ, whereby a natural body is
perceived and known to be visible and to occupy place. For as saint Augustine
says to Dardanum. That doubtless Christ's natural body is in heaven. For says
he, take from bodies the room and space of places: and they shall be no where,
and if they be no where, the^ they shall not be. Wherefore, if his natural
body were in the sacrament: it must needs occupy room and place in the
sacrament, Hebru. iiii.
even as well as it does in heaven or as well as any other natural substance
occupies place. And the^ Christ's body, being and occupiyng place in heaven:
cannot also in one time, occupy place in the sacrament. For his natural body
cannot occupy two places both at one time. For Christ is like unto us his
reasonable creaturs in all things (except only in syne) But our bodies after
our resurrection shall be visible: wherefore doubtless Christ's body shall also be
visible, whersoeuer it be present. Or elese he has no natural body But a
shadow, or fantastical bodi which is Marcians-heresye. John. xvi
Christ also says, you shall have pore folks alweis with you but me you shall
not have alwais with you. Also Jesus knowing that his hour was come, that he
should go to his father. How shall he go to his father (except in his
humanity) which ever was present with his father in his Godhead? Act. iii.
Also S. Peter in the Acts says, repent and turn you, that your sins may
be done away. That when the time of rest shall come from the sight of the
lord, and he shall send him which is preached unto you Jesus Christ, who^ the
heavens must receive, until all things which were spoken by the mouth of the
prophets be fulfilled. Also Paul says, as often as we shall eat of the
bread ^. Cor.xi.
and drink of the cup, ^. Cor. xi.
we shall show the death of the Lord until he come, which words (until he
come,) declare to be spoken of one that is absente, and not of one that is
present. Wherefore, doubtless Christ's natural body is absente, in heaven, and
not present in a corporal presence in the Sacrament of the aultare: which is
no dyscomeforte, nor hurie to us, that his naturalle body is present in
heaven. For as the sone in summer when he is most highest and distant from us
workethe in the earth most effectuousli, and yeldeth his virtue most
feruentlye and aboundantlye upon all earthelie things: so in likewise Christ's
natural body although he be in heaven most distaunt from us, yet not with
standing he workethe in his people most effectuouslie and geuethe his grace
most abundauntli to us as he himself wyttenesseth to his apostles saying, it
is expedient and necessary that I go from you to my father. Ihon. xvi
For if I should not goo to my father, the hollye ghost should not be sent
to you. Therefore seeing that so many holy scriptures wytnes that Christ's
natural body is in heaven and also that it is no dysco^modie nor hurt to us
yt it so be I trust every good christian man, will hold him content and
satisfied. And on ye other party if we should grant christ's natural body
wear so present in the sacrament that the bread were changed into his
natural body and the wine into his natural blood leaving ye nature of
bread: then both the godly and wicked, the faithful and also the unfaithful
should eat Christ's natural body and drink his natural blood which is
against all the aunciente writers, Augustine upon the.xx* vi. treatise of John.
that make a diversity betwyxt, the eating of the sacrament, and the receiving
of the thing represe^ted by the sacrament. The godly and ye ungodly
receyuethe sacrament say they, but the thing represented in and by the
sacrament, which is Christ's body broken and his blood shed out for the
remission of our sins: no man ca^ eat except the faytheful by faith. Also
Christ says that he is the bread of life which came from heaven, if a man
eat of that bread he shall live euerlastynglie. John. vi.
And he that eatethe my flesh and drynkethe my blood, has eternalle life.
Which words cannot be verified nor truly spoken of the eating of the
sacrament. For many eat that to their eternal da^nacion. by Christ's words
of his promises made unto us, they could not do, if the bread were changed
into Christ's natural body. Also if the bread and wine be not changed into
Christ's natural body and blood, by the word (as in ded they be not but the
substaunces remain in their nature) yet, if we hearing ye promise of GOD
declared unto us, that his body was betrayed for us, and his blood shed for
the remission of our sins, believe the same, and receive ye sacrament: we then
eat Christ's natural body and blood in spirit and faith to our everlasting
life, although, we believe not any manner of transubstancion of the bread into
Christ's natural bodi and the wine into Christ's natural blood. But by such
transubstancion the receyuer of the sacrament should also receive Christ's body
and blood. If the bread and wine were changed into Christ's natural bodi and
blood, And the^ as I have said, the most wicked Infidels might, (eating the
Sacrament) eat also Christ's flesh and drink his blood which is not only
against the saiynge of the blessed martyrs. Ciprian, Hilarious, and saint
Augustine: but also against the saieynge of Christ, which says, he that
eatethe my flesh, and drinks my blood, he dwells in me, and I in him,
which no unfaithful can do. For as Christ says the servant dwells not
in the house for ever.

Therefore the faithful beleuer in Christ is sure to eat Christ's flesh and
drink his blood, to his eternal health, although he never believe any such
gross tra^substanciacion: And the unfaithful, can never eat his flesh (as
Saint Augustine says) he which eats my flesh, Augustine xxv* treatese upon
John*
and drinkeeth my blood, he dwells in me and I in him. This is therefore to
eat that bread, and drink yt drink, to dwell in Christ, and to have
Christ dwelling in him. And therefore he which dwells not in Christ: and in
whom Christ dwells not, doubtless eats not Christ's flesh nor drinks his
blood although to his judgment, he eat the sacrament of so great a thing. Also
ye same doctor saint Augusttine again says, truly this bread, requires the
hongre of ye inward man. Augustine. xx* vi. treatise upon John*
For blessed be they which hungr and thyrste for righteousness, verily to believe
in him, that is to eat the living bread: he which believes in him, eats
inuisibli and is filled because he is inuisibly borne again.

Wherefore doubtless, the spiritual eating of Christ's body, (which is to
believe in him) is only ye godli eating of Christ's, flesh and drinkyng his
blood, and not this outward bodilye eating with their teeth, feign they never
so craftelie. This false transubstantiacion which repugneth against all the
ancient writers, and also against the holy scriptures which be declared by
the mouth of Paul, ^. Cor. ^.
saying, I will not brethren yt ye be ignorant, that all our fathers were
under a cloud, and all passed the sea, and all were baptized in Moses, and in
the cloud, and in the sea, and all did eat one spirituall-meate, and all
drank one spiritual drink, they drancke of the spiritual rock, which
folowede them, the rock truly was Christ And if our fathers before Chri,stes
incarnacion, and we that be leave now: do eat one spiritual meat and drink
one spiritual drink (but our Fathers did not eat Christ's natural, and real
body, nor drink his real blood, which, two thousand years after was not
incarnated, nor had any natural body) therefore we do not now eat his real
body in his bodelie presence, in the sacrament, as these by there
tra^substantiacion pretend. For we eat the same that our fathers did eat
which eating was by faith. Ergo even so must we eat by faith Christ's
fleashe and drink his blood in the sacrament, and not with our teeth reallie,
if we wylbee saved by the eating of Christ's flesh and drynkyng his blood as
they were.

All the ancient writers writ and teach that we eat Christ's body and drink
his blood in the sacrament, in a mystery, that is in a similitude, which
cannot be esteemed reallye, for they be contraies For to eat a real thing is
with the mouth to eat naturally the substance, but al mysteries be received
and eaten with the mind and not by any bodelie means And therefore the
sacrament is called of most ancient writers, Panis misticus, A mystical
bread which was ordained to feade and comfort the souls, and not for ye
body.

Chrysostom says that Christ gave us no sensible things but rather
insensible things, Upon the.vi* John the xlvi. homely*
and those things which were insensible or spiritual things,

Saint Ambros upon the.xi. chapter of the first to the Corinthians, speaking
to them which should receive the sacrament, says that they should, judge
with them selves that it is the Lord whose blood they drynk in a mystery,
which blood is a witness of the benefits of god. Also in his book of the
sacraments, he says because we be delivered by ye death of the lord we
remembering the same, in eating and drinking do syngnyfie the death of ye lord

Also Eusebius says because he would take away his bodi out of our syghte,
and carry it above the stars, it was necessary that in this tune, he should
consecrate for us the sacrament of his body and blood, that it might be
worshipped in a misteri, The xi. (...) upon the.v. Matthew.
which was offered for our price.

Also Chrissostome says if it be so perelous to occupy the hallowed vessels
unto a private use in whom christ's very true bodi is not, but the mystery of
his body is conteynede: how much more ought we not to give the vessels of
our bodies to the Devil that he may do in the^ what he will. Psalm. lxxxx*
iii.


Also Saint augustine says you shall not eat this body which you see, nor
drink ye blood yt they shall shede which will crucifi me, I have commended unto
you a sacrament spirituallye understood which shall quicken you and
although it be necessary to be celebrated, and done visiblye yet it must be
spirituallie understood, wherefore doubtless there is no such fond
transubstanciacion, as our clergy (which can not understand and perceive ye
godly and spiritual eateing of christ's flesh) have grosli imagined. But ye
godly and profitable eating is by faith as I have declared, wherein there is
not required any transubstanciacion: But in this transubstanciacion, Satan
has brought his wicked will and purposse to pass which is that there was
never so godli a thing by god ordained for man which ye Devil has not other
obscured, or made darck the same by changing the right use thereof, into an
abuse, or Taking awey, the virtue comoditie and profet of ye thing, leaving the
name inestemation, or else peruertyng the thing which was ordained of God, to
be most godly and profitable to manne, that through the abuse thereof, it is be
come most wicked and damnable to man. As for a lamentable example in this
beggary and Anti christian transubstantiation, it is to manifest, wherein some
of our Clergy, have most wickedli and blindly taught the people of this
realm, that they should believe that in that they received the sacrament, that
they without any doubt did eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood,
because (by virtue of the word spoken by the priest) the bread is changed
into Christ's natural flesh and blood wherefore receiuinge and earyng the
bread they should eat Christ's flesh and blood which they did nothing
less. And so were led with a false and feigned faith to trust to have by
eating the sacrament eternal life, even for ye wor^ks sake, or because they
eat it with their teeth which only did not profit them but also was their utter
damnation because they received it without faith.

NOw Christen reader, I trust thou perceiuest, that in every sacrament. There be
two things to be considered, the one is the visyble substance, which is
offered, to the senses, and by and with the senses, we may receive and use the
commodity of it. The other is, the Invisible grace, and liberal gift of God,
which by the visible substance and the promise of god, unto ye same Ioyntely
pronounced, is represe^ted and given to al them yt faithfully, and constantely,
believe the same promise. This spiritual gift of god, is Christ's body broken
and his blood, shede, for the remyssion of our sins, which spiritual
gift, because it is given to us by gods liberal promise? It can not be
otherwise received, but of a spiritual heart, and that through, and by, faith
only, in ye same promise Such faythefull beleuers doubtless do eat Christ's
flesh and drink his blood in spirit and truth: That is to say receive
all the commodity and profet of all Christ's passion, death, resurrection* and
ascension, which is, remission of sins, and eternal life. In the receyuyng
of this sacrament we profess not only to be faithful warriars against the
deuel, the world, and the flesh, but also to be lively members, of Christ's
mystical body, whereof Christ is ^^ade: wherefore above all thing we must be
circumspecte and welware, yt we defile not our selves with any fylthy lusts
and sins whereby we should be become a^ylthy, crooked, and roten, member
whereof our head Jesus Christ should not rejoice, but rather be a shamed, and so
worthi to be cut of from the body. And then even as ye brau^ch of ye tree when
it is cut of from the tree, receives nor takes any more sap iuyse or
natural moyestnes of the tree, and therefore widdereth, dries and becomes
dead, apt only for the fire. In like manner if we through our obstynate
perseueraunce in sin, be divided from god, as ye prophets Esai and Hieremy
says and be no mystical member of Christ's church his mystical body:
Hieremy. v.
then can we receive, no more favor grace nor life, from Christ, but shall
widder, die, and be apt only for the Hell fire until it pleases god of mere
mercy and grace, Even as it were by his grace and infinyte power, and no less
by his miracles, contrary to our nature to graffe us newly into Christ's
mystical body, and endeue us with his, new and heavenly spirit. Of the other
part if we be faithful warriars of Christ, and strive constantly against the
deuel, ye world and the flesh, and believe faythefully that by and through
Christ we shall overcome the same, we shall doubteles be accepted and reputed
and taken before god as his natural me^bres, even flesh of his flesh and
bones of his bones Such as he ca^ not but love, cherishe, and favor, for who
did ever hate his own flesh, but did norishe and cherishe it? Ephesians. vi.
says Paul. Seeing than that we be his natural members even flesh of his
flesh and bones of his bones: as Sin hell and death could not prevail,
against Christ: So ca^ they not prevail against us, no wythholde us from
Christ, fowe be one with Christ, and we must needs be where he is, according
to the prayer of Christ in the xvii of John saying. John. xvii.
Holy father keep the^ in thy name whom thou have given me, that they may be
one, as we be, father whom thou have given to me I will, where I am that they
be with me, that is to be in heaven, and to have eternal life as Christ there
says, father the hour comes, claryfy thy son, that thy son may claryfi
the, as thou have given to him, power over all flesh that all, that thou have
give to him: he may give to them, eternal life. If we be one with our head
Christ, and in heaven with him to whom also he has given eternal life: How
can sin hell or death prevail against us, his lively members? Doubtless it
is Impossible, wherefore let our earnest study, prayer and labor, be above
all things, to keep us in his mystical body, that we may be, lively members
of the same, according as we profess us to be, by this holy co^munyon in this
blessed sacrament of his body and blood. Yea most diligently and
circumspectly beware what thou do look that thou dissemble not, nor lie to
the holy ghost, there can be no greatter shame nor offense for the, than to
profess before thy friends and the hole congregation, with thy mouth
countenance and behavior to be a faithful Christian, And utterly to deny the
same in thy heart, words, and deades, And although thou canste, thus
colourably dissemble, and falselye disceyue, the Christen congregation, yet
can you never deceive Christ, which knoeth ye inward and secret thoughts
and feigned imagynacio^s of thy heart. Therefore I counsel ye Christian reader,
that thou Justly truly, and diligently, examen thy life, and consider well
with thy self, whether thou be, a constant warry it against sin. Prove
whether thou purpose ernestli, and co^stantlie, so to continue unto the death,
and also whether thou have unite peace and herty vnfayued love, toward al ye
congregation which is most manyfestly expressed and signyfied by this sacrament
of Christ's body and blood. And the^ last, try thy self whether thou believe
fayethfully to have remission of thy sins and eternal life through Christ's
passion and death only, and not by any other merits of saints, prayers, or
holy works of thy own, or of any other creature lyueyng or dead. If thou be
fullye persuaded and determined in all these things before written, then
may thou boldly come to this holy table, and to confirm thy faith, receive
this holy sacrament of Christ's body and blood, for a erneste pledge of
eternal life. Which grant the that derely bought the to reign with him in
eternal glory*

FINIS
Imprinted* at London by John Day and Wyllyam Set^s, dwelling in Sepulchers
Parish at the sign of the Resurrection a little above Holbourne Conduite.

M.D. xlviii. the.v. of August

Cum gratia and priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


