THE First part of the Contention betwixt the two famous hou ses of York and
Lancaster, with the death of the good Duke Humphrey:

And the banishment and death of the Duke of Suffolk, and the Tragical end of
the proud Cardinal of Winchester, with the notable Rebellion of Jack Cade:

And the Duke of Yorkes first claim to the Crown.

LONDON

Printed by Valentine Simmes for Thomas Millington, and are to be sold at his
shop under S. Peter's church in Cornwall: 1600

The first part of the Contention of the two famous Houses of York and
Lancaster, with the death of the good Duke Humphrey.
Enter at one door, King Henry the sixth, and Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, the
Duke of Somerset, the Duke of Buckingham, Cardinal Bewford, and others. Enter
at the other door, the Duke of York, and the Marquess of Suffolk, and
Queen Margaret, and the Earl of Salisbury and Warwick. Suffolk. AS by your
high imperial Majesty's command,
I had in charge at my depart for France,
As Procurator for your excellence,
To marry Princes Margaret for your grace,
So in the ancient famous City Towers,
In presence of the Kings of France and Cyssile,
The Dukes of Orleance, Calaber, Britain, and Alonson.
Seven Earls, twelve Barons, and then the reverend Bishops,
I did perform my task and was espousde,
And now, most humbly on my bended knees,
In sight of England and her royal Peers,
Deliver up my title in the Queen,
Unto your gracious excellence, that are the substance
Of that great shadow I did represent:
The ha^^^^st gift that ever Marquess gave,
The fairest Queen that ever King possessed.

King. Suffolk arise.
Welcome Queen Margaret to English Henry's Court,
The greatest show of kindness yet we can bestow,
Is this kind kiss: O gracious God of heaven,
Lend me a heart repleate with thankfulness,
For in this beauteous face thou have bestowd
A world of pleasures to my perplexed soul.

Queen. Th'excessiue love I bear unto your grace,
Forbids me to be lavish of my tongue,
Lest I should speak more then beseemes a woman:
Let this suffice, my bliss is in your liking,
And nothing can make poor Margaret miserable,
Unless the frown of mighty Englands King.

King. Her looks did wound, but now speech does pierce,
Lovely Queen Margaret sit down by my side,
And uncle Gloucester, and you lordly Peers,
With one voice welcome my beloved Queen.

All. Long live Queen Margaret Englands happiness.


Queen. We thank you all.

Sound Trumpets.
Suffolk. My lord Protector, so it please your grace,
Here are the Articles confirmed of peace,
Between our sovereign and the French King Charles,
Till term of eighteen months be full expirde.

Humphrey. Inprimis, It is agreed between the French king Charles, and William
de la Poole, Marquess of Suffolk, ambassador for Henry king of England, that
the said Henry shall wed and espouse the lady Margaret, daughter to Raynard King
of Naples, Cyssels, and Jerusalem, and crown her Queen of England, ere the 30.
of the next month.


Item. It is further agreed between them, that the Duchess of Anioy and of
Maine, shall be released and delivered over to the King her sa.

Duke Humprey left it fall*
Ki. How now uncle, what is the matter that you stay so suddenly.


Hum. Pardon my Lord, a sudden qualm came over my heart,
Which dimmes mine eyes that I can see no more,
Uncle of Winchester I pray you read on.

Cardinal. Item, It is further agreed between them, that the Duchess of Anioy,
and of Maine, shall be released and delivered over to the King her father, and
she sent over of the King of Englands own proper cost and charges without
dowry.


King. They please us well, lord Marquess kneel down, we here create thee
first Duke of Suffolk, and girt thee with the sword. Cousin of York, we here
discharge your grace from being Regent in the parts of France, till term of 18
months be full expirde.

Thanks uncle Winchester, Gloucester, York, and Buckingham, Somerset, Salsbury,
and Warwick.

We thank you all for this great favor done,
In entertainment to my princely Queen,
Come let us in, and with all speed provide
To see her Coronation be performde.
Exit King, Queen, and Suffolk, and Duke Humphrey stays all the rest.
Humph. Brave Peers of England, Pillars of the state,
To you Duke Humphrey must unfold his grief,
What did my brother Henry toil himself,
And waste his subjects for to conquer France*
And did my brother Bedford spend his time
To keep in awe that stout unruly Realm?
And have not I and mine uncle Bewford here,
Done all we could to keep that land in peace?
And is all our labors then spent in vain,
For Suffolk hethe new made duke that rules the roast,
Has given away for our King Henry's Queen,
The Duchess of Anioy and* same unto her father.
Ah lords, fatal is this marriage canselling our states,
Reuersing Monuments of conquered France,
Undoing all, as none had nere been done.

Card. Why how now cousin Gloucester, what needs this?
As if our King were bound unto your will,
And might not do his will without your leave*
Proud Protector, envy in thine eyes I see,
The big swollen venom of thy hateful heart,
That dare presume against that thy sovereign likes.

Hum. Nay my Lord, it is not my words that troubles you,
But my presence, proud Prelate as thou art:
But i will be gone, and give thee leave to speak,
Farewell my Lords, and say when I am gone,
I prophesied France would be lost ere long.
Exit Duke Humphrey.
Card. There goes our protector in a rage,
My lords, you know he is my great enemy,
And though he be Protector of the land,
And thereby couers his deceitful thoughts,
For well you see, if he but walk the streets,
The common people swarm about him straight,
Crying, Jesus bless your royal excellence,
With, God preserve the good Duke Humphrey.
And many things besides that are not known,
Which time will bring to light in smooth Duke Humphrey,
But I will after him, and if I can,
I Will lay a plot to heave him from his seat.
Exit Cardinal.
Buck. But let us watch this haughty Cardinal,
Cosen of Somerset, be ruled by me,
We Will watch Duke Humphrey and the Cardinal too,
And put them from the mark they feign would hit.

Some. Thanks cousin Buckingham, join thou with me.
And both of us with the Duke of Suffolk,
We Will quickly heave Duke Humphrey from his seat.

Buck. Content, come let us about it straight,
For either thou or I will be P^^^^ctor.
Exit Buckingham and Somerset.
Salsb. Pride went before, Ambition follows after,
Whilst these do seek their own preferments thus,
My lords, let us seek for our countries good,
Often have I heard this haughty Cardinal
Swear, and forswear himself, and brave it out,
More like a Ruffin then a man of church.
Cosen York, the victories thou have won,
In Ireland, Normandy, and in France,
Has won thee immortal praise in England.
And thou brave Warwick, my thrice valiant son,
Thy simple plainness and thy housekeeping,
Has won thee credit amongst the couunon sort,
The reverence of mine age, and Neuels name,
Is of no little force if I command,
Then let us join all three in one for this,
That good Duke Humphrey may his state possess,
But wherefore weeps Warwick my noble son?

War. For grief that all is lost that Warwick won.
Sons. Anioy and Maine, both given away at once,
Why Warwick did win them, and must that then which we won with our swords, be
given away with words?


York. As I have read, our Kings of England were wont to have large dowries
with their wives, but our king Henry gives away his own.


Salsb. Come sons, away, and look unto the maine.


War. Unto the Maine, oh father, Maine is lost,
Which Warwick by maine force did win from France,
Maine chance father you meant, but I mean Maine,
Which I will win from France, or else be slain.
Exit Salsbury and Warwick.
York. Anioy and Maine, both given unto the French,
Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England.
A day will come when York shall claim his own,
And therefore I will take the Neuels parts,
And make a show of love to proud Duke Humphrey:
And when I spy advantage, claim the Crown,
For that's the golden mark I seek to hit:
Nor shall proud Lancaster vsurp my right,
Nor hold the scepter in his childish fist,
Nor wear the Diadem upon his head,
Whose church-like humors fits not for a Crown:
Then York be still a while till time do serve,
Watch thou, and wake when others be asleep,
To pry into the secrets of the state,
Till Henry surfeiting in joys of love,
With his new bride, and Englands dear bought Queen,
And Humphrey with the Peers be fallen at iarres,
Then will I raise aloft the milke-white Rose,
With whose sweet smell the air shall be perfumde,
And in my Standard bear the Arms of York,
To graffle with the house of Lancaster:
And force perforce, I Will make him yield the Crown,
Whose bookish rule has pulled fair England down.
Exit York. Enter Duke Humphrey, and Dame Ellanor Cobham his wife.
Elnor. Why droopes my Lord like over ripened corn,
Hanging the head at Cearies plenteous load?
Whatseest thou Duke Humphrey King Henry's Crown?
Reach at it, and if thine arm be too short,
Mine shall lengthen it. Art not thou a Prince,
Uncle to the King and his Protector?
Then what should thou lack that might content thy mind?

Humph. My lovely Nell, far be it from my heart,
To think of Treasons against my sovereign lord,
But I was troubled with a dream to night,
And God I pray, it do betide no ill.

Elnor. What drempt my lord? Good Humphrey tell it me,
And i will interpret it, and when that's done,
I Will tell thee then what I did dream to night.

Humph. This night when I was laid in bed, I dreampt that
This my staff mine Office badge in Court,
Was broke in two, and on the ends were placed,
(...) of the Cardinal of Winchester,
(...) ^^lliam de la Poole first Duke of Suffolk.

Elnor. Tush my Lord, this signifies naught but this,
That he that breaks a stick of Glosters grove,
Shall for the offense make forfeit of his head.
But now my lord, i will tell you what I dreampt,
Me thought I was in the Cathedral Church
At Westminster, and seated in the chair
Where the Kings and Queens are crownde, and at my feet
Henry and Margaret with a crown of gold,
Stood ready to set it on my princely head.

Humph. Fie Nell, ambitious woman as thou art,
Art thou not second woman in this land,
And the Protectors wife, beloved of him,
And will thou still be hammering treason thus?
Away I say, and let me hear no more.

Elnor. How now my Lord! what, angry with your Nell
For telling but her dream? the next I have
I Will keep to my self and not be rated thus.

Humph. Nay Nell, i will give no credit to a dream,
But I would have thee to think on no such things.
Enters a Messenger.
Messen. And it please your grace the King and Queen tomorrow morning will
ride a hawking to Saint Albones, and craves your company along with them.


Humph. With all my heart I will attend his grace:
Come Nell, thou will go with us I am sure.
exit Humphrey.
Elnor. I Will come after you, for I cannot go before,
But ere it be long i will go before them all,
Despite of all that seek to cross me thus,
Who is within there?
Enter sir John Hum. What sir John Hum, what news with you?


sir John. Jesus preserve your majesty.


Elnor. My majesty, why man I am but grace,


sir John Yea, but by the grace of God and Hums advise,
Your graces state shall be aduanst ere long.

Elnor. What have thou conferd with Margery Iordane, the cunning witch of Ely,
with Roger Bullinbrooke and the rest, and will they undertake to do me good?


sir John I have Madam, and they have promised me to raise a spirit from the
depth of under ground, that shall tell your grace all questions you demand.


Elnor. Thanks good sir John, some two days hence I guess
Will fit our time, then see that they be here:
For now the King is riding to Saint Albons,
And all the Dukes and Earls along with him:
When they be gone, then safely they may come,
And on the backside of my Orchard here,
There cast their spells in silence of the night,
And so resolve of the thing we wish,
Till when, drink that for my sa^^, and so farewell.
exit Elnor.
sir John Now sir John Hum, no words but mum,
Seal up your lips* for you must silent be,
These gifts ere long will make me mighty rich,
The Duchess she thinks now that all is well,
But I have gold comes from another place,
From one that hired me to set her on,
To plot these treasons against the King and Peers,
And that is the mighty duke of Suffolk,
For he it is, but I must not say so,
That by my means must work the Duchess fall,
Who now by coniurations thinks to raise:
But whist sir John, no more of that I trow,
For fear you lose your head before you go.
exit. Enter two Petitioners, and Peter the Armourer's man.
1 Peti. Come sirs, let us linger here abouts a while,
Until my Lord Protector come this way,
That we may show his grace our several causes.

2 Peti. I pray God save the good Humphries life,
For but for him, a many were undone,
That can get no su^^our in the Court,
But see where he comes with the Queen.
En^^r the Duke of Suffolk with the Queen, and they take him for Duke
Humphrey, and gives him their writings.
1 Peti. Oh we are undone, this is the Duke of Suffolk.


Queen Now good felows, whom w^^ld you speak withal?


2* Peti. If it please your majesty, with my Lord Protectors Grace.


Queen Are your suits to his grace? let us see them first,
Look on them my Lord of Suffolk.

Suffolk. A complaint ag^^^^^ the Cardinals man,
What has he done?

2 Peti. Mary my lord, he has stolen away my wife,
And they are gone together, and I know not where to find them,

Suffolk. Has he stolen thy wife, that's some injury indeed,
But what say you?

Peter Thump. Mary sir I come to tell you that my master said, that (...) Duke
of York was true heir unto the Crown, and that the King was an usurer.


Queen An usurper thou would say.


Peter Yea forsooth an usurper.


Queen Did thou say the King was an usurper?


Peter No forsooth, I said my master said so, the other day when we were
scowring the Duke of Yorkes armor in our garret.


Suff. Yea mary this is something like,
Who Is within there?
Enter one or two. Sir take this fellow and keep him close,
And send out a Purseuant for his master straight,
We Will hear more of this before the King.
Exit with the Armourers (...). Now sit what is yours? let me see it,
What Is here?
A complaint against the Duke of Suffolk for enclosing the commons of long
Melford.
How now sir knave?

1 Peti I beseech your grace to pardon me, I am but a messenger for the whole
towne-ship

He tears the papers.
Suffolk. So now show your pention to Duke Humphrey.
Villames get ye gone, and come not near the Court,
Dare these pesants write against me thus?
exeunt Petitioners.
Queen. My Lord of Suffolk you may see by this,
The Commons loves unto that haughty Duke,
That seeks to him more then to King Henry,
Whose eyes are always poring on his book,
And never regards the honor of his name,
But still must be protected like a child,
And governed by that ambitious Duke,
That scarce will move his cap nor speak to us,
And his proud wife, high minded Elanor,
That ruffles it with such a troop of ladies,
As strangers in the Court takes her for the Queen.
The other day she vaunted to her maids,
That the very train of her worst gown,
Was worth more wealth then all my fathers lands,
Can any grief of mind be like to this?
I tell thee Poole when thou did run at Tilt,
And stolst away our ladies hearts in France,
I thought King Henry had been like to thee,
Or else thou had not brought me out of France.

Suffolk. Madame, content your self a little while,
As I was cause of your coming to England,
So will I in England work your full content:
And as for proud Duke Humphrey and his wife,
I have set lime-twigs that will entangle them,
As that your grace ere long shall understand.
But stay madame, here comes the King.
Enter King Henry, and the Duke of York and the Duke of Somerset on both sides
of the King, whispering with him: and enter Duke Humphrey, Dame Elnor, the Duke
of Buckingham, the Earl of Salsbury, the Earl of Warwick, and the Cardinal
of Winchester.
King. My lords, I care not who be Regent in France, or York, or omerset,
alls one to me.


York. My lord, if York have ill demeande himself,
Let Somerset enjoy his place, and go to France.

Some. Then whom your grace think worthy, let him go,
And there be made the Regent over the French.

Warwick Whom soever you account worthy,
York is the worthiest.

Cardinal. Peace Warwick, give thy betters leave to speak.


War. The Cardinal's not my better in the field.


Buck. All in this place are thy betters far.


War. And Warwick may live to be the best of all.


Queen. My lord in mine opinion, it were best that Somerset were regent over
France.


Humph. Madame, our King is old enough himself,
To give his answer without your consent.

Queen. If he be bold enough, what needs your grace
To be protector over him so long?

Humph. Madame, I am but Protector over the land.
And when it please his grace, I will resign my charge.

Suffolk. Resign it then, for since that thou wast King,
As who is King but thee? the common state
Does (as we see,) all wholly go to wrack,
And millions of treasure has been spent,
And as for the Regent ship of France,
I say Somerset is more worthy than York.

York. I Will tell thee Suffolk why I am not worthy,
Because I cannot slatter as thou can.

War. And yet the worthy deeds that York has done,
Should make him worthy to be honored bare.

Suff. Peace headstrong Warwick.


War. Image of pride, wherefore should I peace?


Suff. Because here is a man accusde of Treason,
Pray God the Duke of York do clear himself.
Ho, bring hither the Armourer and his man.
Enter the Armourer and his man. If it please your grace, this fellow here,
has accused his master of high Treason, and his words were these.

That the duke of York was law full heir unto the crown, and that your grace
was an usurper.


York I beseech your grace let him have what punishment the law will afford,
for his villainy.


King. Come hither fellow, did thou speak these words?


Armor. Ant shall please your majesty, I never said any such matter, God is my
witness, I am falsely accused by this villain here.


Peter It Is no matter for that, you did say so.


York I beseech your grace let him have the law.


Armor. Alas my Lord, hang me if ever I speak these words, my accuser is my
prentise, and when I did correct him for his fault the other day, he did vow
upon his knees that he would be even with me, I have good witness of this, and
therefore I beseech your majesty do not cast away an honest man for a villains
accusation.


King Uncle Gloucester, what do you think of this?


Humph. The law my Lord is this by case, it rests suspicious,
That a day of combat be appointed,
And there to try each others right or wrong,
Which shall be on the thirtith of this month,
With Eben staves, and Standbags combating
In Smithfield before your Royal Majesty.
exit Humphrey.
Armor. And I accept the combat willingly.


Peter Alas my Lord, I am not able to fight.


Suff. You must either fight sir, or else be hangde:
Go take him hence again to prison*
exit with (...) The Queen lets fall her glove, and hits the Duchess of
Gloucester a box on the care.
Queen Give me my glove, why minion can you not see

She strikes her. I cry you mercy Madame, I did mistake,
I did not think it had been you.

Elnor. Did you not, proud French-woman,
Could I come near your dainty visage with my nails,
I Would set my ten commandments in your face.

King Be pacient gentle Aunt,
It was against her will.

Elnor Against her will good King* she will dandle thee,
If thou will always thus be ruled by her:
But let it rest, as sure as I do live,
She shall not strike dame Elnor vnreuengde.
exit Elnor.
King Believe me my love, thou were much too blame,
I would not for a thousand pounds of gold,
My noble uncle had been here in place.
Enter Duke Humphrey But see where he comes, I am glad he met her non
Uncle Gloucester, what answer makes your grace
Concerning our Regent for the Realm of France?
Whom thinks your grace is meetest for to send?

Humph. My gracious Lord, then this is my resolve,
For that these words the Armourer does speak,
Does breed suspicion on the part of York,
Let Somerset be Regent over the French,
Till trial's made, and York may clear himself.

King. Then be it so my Lord of Somerset,
We make your grace Regent over the French,
And to defend our rights against foreign foes,
And so do good unto the Realm of France,
Make haste my Lord, it is time that you were gone,
The time of truce I think is full expirde.

Somer. I humbly thank your royal majesty,
And take my leave to post with speed to France.
exit Somerset.
King Come uncle Gloucester, now lets have our horse,
For we will to Saint Albones presently,
Madame, your hawke, they say is swift of flight,
And we will try, how she will fly to day.
exeunt omnes. Enter Elnor, with sir John Hum, Roger Bullenbrooke a Coniurer,
and Margery Iourdaine a Witch.
Elnor. Here sir John take this scrole of paper here,
Wherein is writ the questions you shall ask,
And I will stand upon this Tower here,
And hear the spirit what it says to you,
And to my questions, write the answers down.
She goes up to the Tower.
sir John. Now sirs begin and cast your spells about*
And charm the fiends for to obey your wills,
And tell Dame Elnor of the thing she asks.

Witch. Then Roger Bullenbrooke, about thy task,
And frame a circle here upon the earth,
Whilst I thereon all prostrate on my face,
Do talk and whisper with the devils below,
And conjure them for to obey my will.
She lies down upon her face. Bullenbrooke makes a cir^le.
Bullen Dark night, dread night, the silence of the night,
Wherein the Furies mask in hellish troops,
Send up I charge you from Sosetus lake,
The spirit Askalon to come to me,
To pierce the bowels of this centricke earth,
And hither come in twinkling of an eye,
Askalon, Ascenda, Ascenda.
It thunders and lightens, and then the spirit rises up.
spirit. Now Bullenbrooke, what would thou have me do?


Bullen. First, of the King, what shall become of him?


spirit. The Duke yet lives that Henry shall depose,
Yet him out live, and die a violent death.

Bullen. What fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk*


spirit. By water he shall die, and take his end.


Bullen What shall betide the Duke of Somerset?


spirit. Let him shun castles, safer shall he be upon the sandy plains, where
castles mounted stand. Now question me no more, for I must hence again.

He sinkes down again.
Bullen. Then down I say, unto the damned poole,
Where Pluto in his fiery wagon sits,
Riding amidst the singde and parched smoakes,
The Rode of Dytas by the river Styx,
There howl and burn for ever in those flames,
Rise Iordane, rise, and stay thy charming spells:
Sons, we are betraide.
Enter the Duke of York, and the duke of Buckingham and others.
York Come sirs, lay hands on them, and bind them sure,
This time was well watched: what Madame, are you there?
This will be great credit for your husband,
That you are plotting treasons thus with Coniurers,
The King shall have a notice of this thing.
exit Elnor above.
Buck. See here my Lord what the devil has writ.


York Give it me my Lord, i will show it to the King:
Go sirs, see them fast locked in prison.
exit with them.
Buck. My Lord, I pray you let me go post unto the King,
Unto Saint Albones, to tell this news.

York Content* away then, about it straight.


Buck. Farewell my Lord.

exit Buckingham.
York Who Is within there?

Enter one.
One. My Lord.


York Sitra, go will the Earl of Salsbury and Warwick* to sup with me to
night.

exit York
One I will my lord.

exit. Enter the King and Queen with her hawke on her fifth, and Duke Humphrey
and Suffolk, and the Cardinal, as if they came from hawking.
Queen My lord, how did your grace like this last flight?
But as I cast her off the wind did rise,
And it was ten to one old Ione had not gone out.

King How wonderful the Lords works are on earth*
Even in these seely creatures of his hands!
Uncle Gloucester, how hie your hawke did soar,
And on a sudden sowst the partridge down.

Suff No marvel, if it please your majesty,
My lord Protectors hawke do tower so well,
He knows his master loves to be aloft.

Hum. Faith my Lord it is but a base mind,
That can soar no higher then a Faulcons pitch.

Card. I thought your grace would be above the clouds.


Hum. Yea my lord Cardinal, were it not good
Your grace could fly to heaven.

Card. Thy heaven is on earth, thy words and thoughts beat on a crown, proud
Protector, dangerous Peer, to smooth it thus with King and commonwealth.


Hum. How now my lord, why this is more then needs, churchmen so hot! good
uncle can you dote?


Suff. Why not? having so good a quarrel, and so bad a cause.


Hum. As how, my lord?


Suff. As you, my lord, and it like your Lordly lords Protectorship.


Hum. Why Suffolk, England knows thy insolence.


Queen And thy ambition Gloucester.


King. Cease gentle Queen, and whet not on these furious Lords to wrath, for
blessed are the peacemakers on earth.


Card. Let me be blessed for the peace I make,
Against this proud Protector with my sword.

Hum. Faith holy uncle, I would it were come to that.


Card. Even when thou dare.


Hum. Dare! I tell thee Priest, Plantagenets could never brook the dare


Card. I am Plantaganet as well as thou, and son to John of Gaunt.


Hum. In Bastardie.


Card. I scorn thy words.


Hum. Make up no factious* numbers, but even in thine own person meet me at
the East end of the grove.


Card. Here Is my hand, I will.


King Why how now Lords?


Card. Faith cousin Gloucester, had not your man cast off so soon, we had had more
sport to day, come with thy sword and buckler.


Hum. Faith priestile shave your crown.


Card. Protector, protect thy self well.


King The wind grows high, so does your color, lords.

Enter one crying, a miracle. How now! now sir, what miracle is it?


One And it please your grace, there is a man that came blind to saint Albons,
and has received his fignt at his shrine.


King Go fetch him hither, that we may glorify the Lord with him.

Enter the Mayor of saint Albons, and his brethren with music, bearing the
man that had been blind, between two in a chair.
King Thou happy man give God eternal praise,
For he it is that thus has helped thee.

Humphrey Where wast thou borne?


poor man At Barwicke sir, in the North.


Hum. At Barwicke and come thus far for help?


poor. Yea sir, it was told me in my sleep,
That sweet saint Albons, should give me my sight again.

Hum. What art thou lame too?


Poor man Yea indeed sir, God help me.


Humphrey How cam^st thou lame?


Poor man With falling off on a plum-tree.


Humphrey Wart thou blind, and would clime plum-trees?


Poor man Never but once sir in all my life,
My wife did long for plums.

Humphrey But tell me, wart thou borne blind?


Poor man Yea truly sir.


Woman. Yea indeed sir, he was borne blind.


Humphrey What art thou, his mother?


Woman His wife sir.


Humphrey Had thou been his mother,
Thou could have better told:
Why let me see I think thou can not see yet.

Poor man Yes truly master, as clear as day.


Humphrey Say thou so! what colour's his cloak?


Poor man Why red master, as red as blood.


Humphrey And his cloak?


Poor man Why that's green.


Humphrey And what colour's his hose?


Poor man Yellow master, yellow as gold.


Humphrey And what colors my gown?


Poor man Black sir, as black as ieat.


King Then belike he knows what color ieat is on.


Suffolk And I think ieat did he never see.


Humph. But cloakes and gowns ere this day many a one*
But tell me sir, what is my name?

Poor man Alas master I know not.


Humphrey What Is his name?


Poor man I know not.


Humphrey Nor his?


poor. No truly sir.


Hum. Nor his name?


poor. No indeed master.


Hum. What Is thine own name?


poor. Sander, and it please you master.


Hum. Then Sander sit there, the lyingest knave in Christendom. If thou had
been borne blind, thou might as well have known all our names, as thus to
name the several colors we do wear. Sight may distinguish of colors but
suddenly to nominate them all it is impossible. My lords, same Albons here has
done a miracle, and would you not think his cunning to be great, that could
restore this cripple to his legs again?


poor man Oh master I would you could.


Humphrey My masters of Saint Albons,
Have you not Beadles in your Town,
And things called whips?

Mayor Yes my lord, if it please your grace.


Hum. Then send for one presently


Mayor Sir go fetch the Beadle hither straight.

exit one.
Hum. Now fetch me a stool hither by and by.
Now sir, if you mean to save your self from whipping.
Leap me over this stool, and run away.
Enter Beadle.
poor. Alas master I am not able to stand alone,
You go about to torture me in vain.

Hum. Well sir, we must have you find your legs,
Sir Beadle, whip him til he leap over that same stool.

Beadle I will my Lord, come on sir, off with your doublet quickly.


poor. Alas master, what shall I do? I am not able to stand.

After the beadle has hit him one girke, he leapes over the stool and runs
away, and they run after him, crying, a miracle, a miracle.
Hum. A miracle, a miracle, let him be taken again, and whipped through every
market Town till he comes at Barwicke where he was borne.


Mayor It shall be done my Lord.

exit Mayor.
Suff. My lord Protector has done wonders to day,
He has made the blind to see and the halt to go.

Hum. Yea but you did greater wonders, when you made whole Dukedomes fly in a
day.

Witness France.


King Have done I say, and let me hear no more of that.

Enter the Duke of Buckingham. What news brings Duke Humphrey of Buckingham?


Buck* Ill news for some my lord, and this it is,
That proud dame Elnor our Protectors wife,
Has plotted Treasons against the King and Peers,
By witchcrafts, sorceries, and coniurings,
Who by such means did raise a spirit up,
To tell her what hap should betide the state,
But ere they had finished their devilish drift,
By York and my self they were all surprizde,
And here is the answer the devil did make to them.

King First of the King, what shall become of him?


Reads The Duke yet lives, that Henry shall depose,
Yet him out live, and die a violent death,
Gods will be done in all:
What fate awaits the Duke of Suffolk?
By water shall he die and take his end.

Suff. By water must the duke of Suffolk diet
It must be so, or else the devil does lie.

King Let Somerset shun castles,
For safer shall he be upon the sandy plains,
Then where castles mounted stand.

Car. Here Is good stuff: how now my lord protector?
This news I think has turnde your weapons point,
I am in doubt you will scarcely keep your promise.

Humph. Forbear ambitious prelate to urge my grief,
And pardon me my gracious sovereign,
For here I swear unto your majesty,
That I am guiltlesle of these heinous crimes,
Which my ambitious wife has falsely done:
And for she would betray her sovereign lord,
There renounce her from my bed and board,
And leave her open for the law to judge,
Unless she clear her self of this foul deed.

King Come my lords this night we will lodge in S. Albons,
And to morrow we will ride to London,
And try the utmost of these treasons forth,
Come uncle Gloucester along with us,
My mind does tell me thou art innocent.
exeunt omnes. Enter the Duke of York, and the Earls of Salsbury and
Warwick.
York My lords, our simple supper ended, thus
Let me reveal unto your honors here,
The right and title of the house of York,
To Englands Crown by lineall descent.

War. Then York begin, and if thy claim be good,
The Neuills are thy subjects to command.

York Then thus my lords.
Edward the third had seven sons,
The first was Edward the black Prince,
Prince of Wales.
The second was Edmund of Langley,
Duke of York.
The third was Lyonell Duke of Clarence.
The fourth was John of Gaunt,
The Duke of Lancaster.
The fifth was Roger Mortemer, Earl of March.
The sixth was sir Thomas of Woodstocke.
William of Winsore was the seventh and last.
Now, Edward the black prince he died before his father, and left behind him
Richard, that afterward was King, crowned by the name of Richard the second,
and he died without an heir. Edmund of Langly duke of York died, and left
behind him two daughters, Anne and Elinor.

Lyonel duke of Clarence died, and left behind, Alice, Anne, and Elinor, that
was after married to my father, and by her I claim the Crown, as the true
heir to Lyonell Duke of Clarence the third son to Edward the third. Now sir.
In the time of Richards reign, Henry of Bullenbrooke, son and heir to John
of Gaunt, the Duke of Lancaster, fourth son to Edward the third* he claimde the
crown, deposde the mirthful King, and as you both know, in Pomphret Castle
harmles Richard was shamefully murdered, and so by Richards death came the
house of Lancaster unto the Crown.


Sals. Saving your tale my lord, as I have heard, in the reign of Bullenbrook,
the Duke of York did claim the Crown, and but for Owen Glendor, had bin King.


York True, but so it fortuned then, by means of that monstrous rebel
Glendor, the noble Duke of York was done to death, and so ever since the
heirs of John of Gaunt have possessed the Crown. But if the issue of the
elder should succeed before the issue of the younger then am I lawful heir
unto the kingdom.


War. What plain proceedings can be more plain? he claims it from Lyonel
duke of Clarence, the third son to Edward the third, and Henry from John of
Gaunt the fourth son. So that til Lyonels issue fails, his should not reign.
It fails not yet, but flourishes in thee and in thy sons, brave slips of such
a stock. Then noble father, kneel we both together, and in this private place
be we the first to honor him with birthright to the Crown.


Both: Long live Richard Englands royal King.


York I thank you both: but lords, I am not your king, until this sword be
sheathed even in the heart blood of the house of Lancaster.


War. Then York advise thy self, and take thy time,
Claim thou the Crown, and set thy standard up,
And in the same advance the milke-white Rose,
And then to guard it* I will rouse the Bear,
Inuiron'd with ten thousand ragged-staues
To aid and help thee for to win thy right,
Maugre the proudest lords of Henry's blood,
That dares deny the right and claim of York,
For why, my mind presageth I shall live
To see the noble Duke of York to be a King.

York. Thanks noble Warwick, and York does hope to see The Earl of Warwick
live, to be the greatest man in England* but the King. Come lets go.

exeunt omnes. Enter King Henry and the Queen, Duke Humphrey, the Duke of
Suffolk* and the Duke of Buckingham, the Cardinal, and dame Elnor Cobham, led
with the Officers, and then enter to them the Duke of York, and the Earls of
Salsbury and Warwick.
King Stand forth dame Elnor Cobham duchess of Gloucester, and hear the sentence
pronounced against thee for these treasons, that thou have committed against us,
our States, and Peers. First; for thy heinous crimes, thou shall two days in
London do penance barefoot in the streets, with a white sheet about thy
body, and a wax taper burning in thy hand: that done, thou shaltbe banished
for ever into the I Will of Man, there to end thy wretched days, and this is our
sentence irreuocable. Away with her.

Elnor Even to my death, for I have lived too long. exeunt some with Elnor.
King Grieve not noble uncle, but be thou glad,
In that these treasons thus are come to light,
Lest God had pourde his vengeance on thy head,
For her offenses that thou heldst so dear.

Humph. Oh gracious Henry, give me leave awhile,
To leave your grace, and to depart away.
For sorrows tears has gripte my aged heart,
And makes the fountains of mine eyes to swell,
And therefore good my Lord let me depart.

King With all my heart good uncle, when you please,
Yet ere thou go, Humphrey resign thy staff,
For Henry will be no more protected,
The Lord shall be my guide, both for my land and me.

Humph. My staff, yea noble Henry, my life and all,
As erst thy noble father made it mine,
And even at willing at thy feet I leave it,
As others would ambitiously receive it,
And long hereafter when I am dead and gone,
May honorable peace attend thy throne.

King Uncle Gloucester, stand up and go in peace,
No less beloved of us, then when
Thou were Protector over my land.
exit Gloucester.
Queen Take up the staff, for here it ought to stand,
Where should it be but in King Henry's hand?

York Please it your majesty, this is the day
That was appointed for the combating,
Between the Armourer and his man, my Lord,
And they are ready when your grace does please.

King Then call them forth, that they may try their rights.

Enter at one door the Armourer and his neighbors, drinking to him so much
that he is drunken, and he enters with a drum before him, and his staff with a
sand-bagge fastened to is: and at the other door, his man with a drum and
sand-bag, and Prentises drinking to him.
1 Neighbor Here neighbor Horner, I drink to you in a cup of sack.
And fear not neighbor, you shall do well enough.

2 Neigh. And here neighbor, here is a cup of Charneco.


3 Neigh. Here Is a pot of good double beer, neighbor drink and be merry, and
fear not your man.


Armonrer Let it come, in faith I Will pledge you all,
And a fig for Peter.

1 Prentise Here Peter, I drink to thee, and be not affeard


2 Pren. Here Peter, here is a pint of Claret wine for thee*


3 Pren. And here is a quart for me, and be merry Peter,
And fear not thy master, fight for credit of the prentises.

Peter I thank you all, but I Will drink no more,
Here Robin, and if I die, here I give thee my hammer,
And Will, thou shall have my aperne, and here Tom,
Take all my money that I have.
O Lord bless me, I pray God, for I am never able to deal with my master, he
has learnd so much fence already.


Salsb. Come leave your drinking, and fall to blows:
Sir what is thy name?

Peter Peter forsooth.


Salsb. Peter, what more?


Peter. Thump.


Salsb. Thump, then see that thou thump thy master.


Arm. Here to thee neighbor, fill all the pots again, for before we fight, look
you, I will tell you my mind, for I am come hither, as it were of man's
instigation, to prove my self an honest man, and Peter a knave, and so have at
you Peter, with down right blows, as Beuis of Southampton fell upon Askapart.


Peter Law you now, I told you he is in his fence already.
Alarm: and Peter hits him on the head and fels him

Arm. Hold Peter, I confess, treason, treason.

he dies.
Peter O God I give thee praise.

he kneeles down.
Pren. Ho well done Peter: God save the King.


King Go take hence that triator from our sight,
For by his death we do perceive his guilt,
And God in justice has reueald to us,
The truth and innocence of this poor fellow,
Which he had thought to have murdered wrongfully:
Come fellow follow us for thy reward.
exeunt (...) Enter Duke Humphrey and his men, in mourning cloakes.
Humph. Sir, what is a clock?


serving. Almost ten my Lord.


Humph. Then is that woeful hour hard at hand,
That my poor lady should come by this way.
In shameful penance wandering in the streets,
Sweet Nell, ill can thy noble mind abrooke,
The abject people gazing on thy face,
With envious looks laughing at thy shame,
That erst did follow thy proud Chariot wheels,
When thou did ride in triumph through the streets.
Enter Dame Elnor Cobham barefoote, and a white sheet about her, with a wax
candle in her hand, and verses written on her back and pind on, and accompanied
with the Shiriffes of London, and sir John Standly, and officers, with bills
and holbards.
Serving. My gracious Lord, see where my lady comes,
Please it your grace, we will take her from the Shiriffes?

Humph. I charge you for your lines stir not a foot,
Nor offer once to draw a weapon here,
But let them do their office as they should.

Elnor Come you my Lord to see my open shame?
Ah Gloucester, now thou do penance too,
See how the giddie people look at thee,
Shaking their heads, and pointing at thee here,
Go get thee gone, and hide thee from their sights*
And in thy pent up study rue my shame,
And ban thine enemies: Ah mine and thine.

Hum. Ah Nell, sweet Nell, forget this extreme grief,
And bear it patiently to ease thy heart

Elnor Ah Gloucester, teach me to forget my self,
For whilst I think I am thy wedded wife,
Then thought of this, does kill my woeful heart,
The ruthlesse flints do cut my tender feet,
And when I start, the cruel people laugh,
And bids me be advised how I tread,
And thus with burning Tapor in my hand,
Malde up in shame with papers on my back,
Ah Gloucester, can I endure this and live?
Sometime I Will say I am Duke Humphreys wife,
And he a Prince, Protector of the land,
But so he ruled, and such a Prince he was,
As he stood by, whilst I his forlorn Duchess,
Was led with shame, and made a laughing stock,
To every idle rascal follower.

Hum. My lovely Nell, what would thou have me do*
Should I attempt to reseue thee from hence,
I should incur the danger of the law,
And thy disgrace would not be shadowed so.

Elnor Be thou mild, and stir not at my disgrace,
Until the axe of death hang oven thy head,
As shortly sure it will: For Suffolk he,
The new made Duke* that may do al in all
With her that loves him so, and hates us all,
And impious York and Beuiford that false priest,
Have all lymde bushes to betray thy wings,
And fly thou how thou can they will entangle thee.
Enter a Herald of Arms.
Herald. I summon your grace, unto his highness Parliament holden at saint
Edmunds bury, the first of the next month.


Humph. A Parliament and our consent never craude
Therein before. This is so deine.
Well, we will be there.
exit Herald. Master Shiriffe, I pray proceed no further against my lady,
then the course of law extends.
Shiriffe Please it your grace, my office here does end,
And I must deliver her to sir John Standly,
To be conducted into the I Will of Man.

Humph. Must you sir John conduct my lady?


Standly Yea my gracious lord, for so it is decreede,
And I am so commanded by the King.

Humph. I pray you sir John, use her nere the worse,
In that I entreat you to use her well,
The world may smile again, and I may live*
To do you favor if you do it her,
And so sir John farewell.

Elnor What? gone my lord, and bid not me farewell?


Hum. Witness my bleeding heart, I cannot stay to speak.

exit Humphrey and his men.
Elnor Then is he gone, is noble Gloucester gone,
And does duke Humphrey now forsake me too?
Then let me haste from out fair Englands bounds,
Com^ Standloy, come, and let us haste away.

Standly Madame, lets go unto some house here by.
Where you may shift yourselfe before we go.

Elnor Ah good sir John* my shame cannot be hid,
Nor put away, with casting off my sheet:
But come, let us go, master Shiriffe farewell,
Thou have but done thy office as thou should.
exeunt omnes Enter to the Parliament. Enter two Heralds before, then the Duke
of Buckingham, and the Duke of Suffolk, and then the Duke of York, and the
Cardinal of Winchester, and then the King and Queen and then the Earl of
Salisbury, and the Earl of Warwick.
King I wonder our uncle Gloucester stays so long.


Queen Can you not see, or will you not perceive,
How that ambitious duke does use himself?
The time has been, but now that time is past,
That none so humble as Duke Humphrey was:
But now let one meet him even in the mome,
When every one will give the time of day,
And he will neither move nor speak to us,
See you not the Commons follow him
In troops, crying, God save the good Duke Humphrey,
And with long life Jesus preserve his grace,
Honoring him as if he were a King:
Gloucester is no little man in England,
And if he list to stir commotions,
It Is likely that the people will follow him:
My lord, if you imagine, there is no such thing*
Then let it pass, and call it a woman's fear,
My lord of Suffolk, Buckingham, and York,
Disprove my allegations if you can,
And by your speeches, if you can reprove me,
I will subscribe and say, I wrong de the Duke.

Suffolk Well has your grace foreseen into that Duke,
And if I had been licenst first to speak,
I think I should have told your graces tale,
Smooth runs the brook whereas the stream is deepest*
No, no my sovereign* Gloucester is a man
Unsounded yet, and full of deep deceit.
Enter the Duke of Somerset.
King Welcome Lord Somerset, what news from France*


Somer. Cold news my lord, and this it is,
That all your holds and Towns within those Territories.
Is over come my Lord, and all is lost.

King Cold news indeed Lord Somerset,
But Gods will be done.

York Cold news for me, for I had hope of France,
Even as I have of fertile England.
Enter Duke Humphrey.
Humph. Pardon my liege, that I have staid so long.


Suffolk. Nay Gloucester, know, that thou art come too soon,
Unless thou prove more loyal then thou art,
We do arrest thee on high treason here.

Humph. Why Suffolkes duke thou shall not see me blush
Nor change my countenance for thine arrest,
Whereof am I guilty, who are my accusers?

York. It Is thought my lord, your grace took bribes from France,
And stopped the soldiers of their pay,
By which his majesty has lost all France.

Humph. Is it but thought so, and who are they that think so?
So God help me, as I have watched the night,
Ever intending good for England still,
That penny that ever I took from France,
Be brought against me at the judgment day,
I never robbed the soldiers of their pay,
Many a pound of mine own proper cost
Have I sent over for the soldiers wants,
Because I would not rack the needy Commons.

Car. In your Protectorship you did devise,
Strange torments for offenders, by which means
England has been defamde by tyranny.

Hum. Why it is well known that whilst I was protector,
Pity was all the fault that was in me:
A murderer, or foul felonious thief,
That robs and murders seely passengers,
I torturd above the rate of common law.

Suffolk. Tush my lord, these be things of no account*
But greater matters are laid unto your charge,
I do arrest thee on high treason here,
And commit thee to my good Lord Cardinal,
Until such time as thou can clear thy self.

King Good uncle obey to his arrest,
I have no doubt but thou shall clear thy self,
My conscience tells me thou are innocent.

Humph. Ah gracious Henry these days are dangerous,
And would my death might end these miseries,
And stay their moodes for good King Henry's sake,
But I am made the Prologue to their play,
And thousands more must follow after me,
That dreads not yet their lives destruction,
Suffolkes hateful tongue blabs his hearts malice.
Gewfords fiery eyes shows his envious mind,
Buckinghams proud looks bewraies his cruel thoughts,
And dogged York that leuells at the Moon.
Whose ouerweening arm I have held back:
All you have joined to betray me thus:
And you my gracious lady, and Sovereign mistress,
Causeless have laid complaints upon my head,
I shall not want false witnesses inow,
That so amongst you, you may have my life.
The proverb no doubt will be well performde,
A staff is quickly found to beat a dog.

Suffolk Does he not twit our Sovereign lady here,
As if that she with ignominious wrong,
Had subornd or hired some to swear against his life?

Queen Yea but I can give the loser leave to speak.


Humph. Far truer spoke then meant, I loose indeed,
Beshrew the winners hearts, they play me false.

Buck. Heel wrest the sense and keep us here al day,
My Lord of Winchester see him sent away.

Card. Who Is within there? take in Duke Humphrey,
And see him guarded sure within my house.

Humph. O! thus king Henry casts away his crouch,
Before his legs can bear his body up,
And puts his watchful shepherd from his side,
Whilst wolves stand snarring who shall bite him first.
Farewell my sovereign, long may thou enjoy,
Thy fathers happy days free from annoy.
Exit Humphrey, with the Cardinals men.
King My lords, what to your wisdoms shall seem best,
Do and undo, as if our self were here.

Queen What will your highness leave the Parliament?


King Yea Margaret, my heart is killed with grief,
Where I may sit and sigh in endless moan,
For who is a traitor? Gloucester he is none.
exit King, Salsbury, and Warwick.
Queen Then sit we down again my lord Cardinal,
Suffolk, Buckingham, York and Somerset,
Let us consult of proud duke Humphries fall,
In mine opinion it were good he did,
For safety of our King and common wealth.

Suffolk And so think I madame, for as you know.
If our King Henry had shook hands with death,
Duke Humphrey then would look to be our King,
And it may be, by policy he works,
To bring to pass the thing which now we doubt,
The fox barks not when he would steal the lamb,
But if we take him ere he do the deed,
We should not question, if that he should live,
No, let him die, in that he is a fox,
Lest that in living he offend us more.

Car. Then let him die before the Commons know,
For fear that they do rise in Arms for him.

York Then do it suddenly my Lords.


Suff. Let that be my lord Cardinals charge and mine.


Car. Agreed, for he is already kept within my house.

Enter a Messenger.
Queen How now sir, what news?


Messen. Madame, I bring you news from Ireland,
The wild Onele my lord, is up in Arms,
With troops of Irish Kernes that uncontrolled,
Do plant themselves within the English pale,
And burn and spoil the Country as they go.

Queen What redress shall we have for this my Lords?


York Twere very good, that my Lord of Somerset
That fortunate champion were sent over.
To keep in awe the stubborn Irishmen,
He did so much good when he was in France.

Somer. Had York been there with all his far fetched
Policies he might have lost as much as I.

York Yea, for York would have lost his life* before
That should have revolted from Englands rule.

Somer. Yea, so thou might, and yet have gouernd worse then I.


York What worse then naught, then a shame take all.


Somer. Shame on thy self, that wishes shame.


Queen Somerset for bear, good York be patient,
And do thou take in hand to cross the seas,
With troops of armed men to quell the pride,
Of those ambitious Irish that rebel.

York. Well Madame, since your grace is so content,
Let me have some bands of chosen soldiers,
And York shall try his fortune against those Kernes.

Queen York thou shall, my lord of Buckingham,
Let it be your charge to muster up such soldiers,
As shall suffice him in these needful wars.

Buck. Madame I will, and levy such a band
As soon shall overcome those Irish rebels:
But York, where shall those soldiers stay for thee?

York At Bristow, I will expect them ten days hence.


Buck. Then thither shall they come, and so farewell.

exit Buckingham.
York Adieu my Lord of Buckingham.


Queen Suffolk remember what you have to do,
And you Lord Cardinal concerning Duke Humphrey.
Twere good that you did see to it in time.
Come let us go, that it may be performde.
exeunt omnes, manet York.
York Now York bethink thy self and rouse thee up,
Take time whilst it is offered thee so fair,
Lest when thou would, thou can not it attain,
It Was men I lackt, and now they give them me,
And now whilst I am busy in Ireland,
I have seduede a head strong Kentish man,
John Cade of Ashford,
Under the title of sir John Mortimer,
To raise commotion, and by that means,
I shall perceive how the common people,
Do affect the claim and house of York,
Then if he have success in his affairs,
From Ireland then comes York again,
To reap the harvest which that coystril sowed,
Now if he should be taken and condemnd,
Heel nere confess that I did set him on,
And therefore ere I go, i will send him word,
To put in practice and to gather head,
That so soon as I am gone, he may begin
To rise in Arms with troops of country swains:
To help him to perform this enterprise,
And then Duke Humprhey, he well made away,
None then can stop the light to Englands crown,
But York can tame and headlong pull them down.
exit York.

Then the curtains being drawn, Duke Humphrey is discovered in his bed, and
two men lying on his breast and smothering him in his bed: and then enter the
Duke of Suffolk to them.


Suff. How now sirs, what have you dispatched him?


One. Yea my Lord, he is dead I warrant you.


Suff. Then see the clothes laid smooth about him still,
That when the King comes, he may perceive
No other, but that he did of his own accord.

2 All things is hansome now my Lord.


Suff. Then draw the curtains again, and get you gone,
And you shall have your firm reward anon
exeunt murderers.

Then enter the King and Queen, the Duke of Buckingham, and the Duke of
Somerset, and the Cardinal.


King My lord of Suffolk go call our uncle Gloucester,
Tell him, this day we will that he do clear himself.

Suff. I will my Lord.

exit Suffolk.
King. And good my lords, proceed no further against our uncle Gloucester,
Then by just proof you can affirm,
For as the sucking child or harmless lamb,
So is he innocent of treason to our state.
Enter Suffolk. How now Suffolk, where is our uncle?


Suff. Dead in his bed, my Lord, Gloucester is dead.

The King falls in a swoone.
Queen Ay me, the King is dead: help, help, my lords


Suff. Comfort my Lord, gracious Henry, comfort.


King What does my Lord of Suffolk bid me comfort?
Came he even now to sing a Ravens note,
And thinks he that the cherping of a Wren,
By crying comfort through a hollow voice,
Can satissie my griefs, or ease my heart?
Thou balefull messenger, out of my sight,
For even in thy eie-balls murder sits,
Yet do not go: come Basaliske
And kill the seely gazer with thy looks.

Queen Why do you rate my lord of Suffolk thus,
As if that he had causde Duke Humphreys death?
The Duke and I too, you know were enemies,
And you had best say that I did murder him.

King Ah woe is me, for wretched Glosters death.


Queen Be we for me, more wretched then he was,
What do thou turn away and hide thy face?
I am no loathsome leaper, look on me,
Was I for this nie wrackt upon the sea?
And thrice by awkward winds driven back from Englands bounds,
What might it bode but that well foretelling
Winds said, secke not a scorpions neast.
Enter the Earls of Warwick and Salsbury.
War. My lord, the Commons like an angry hiue ofbees,
Run up and down, caring not whom they sting,
For good Humphreys death, whom they report
To be murdered by Suffolk and the Cardinal here.

King That he is dead (good Warwick) is too true,
But how he died, God knows, not Henry.

War. Enter his privy chamber my lord, and view the body.
Good father stay you with the rude multitude til I return.

Salsb. I will son.

exit Salsbury. Warwick draws the curtains and shows Duke Humphrey in his
bed.
King Ah uncle Gloucester, heaven receive thy soul,
Farewell poor Henry's joy, now thou art gone.

War. Now by his soul, that took our shape upon him*
To free us from his fathers dreadful curse,
I am resolved that violent hands were laid,
Upon the life of this famous Duke.

Suff. A dreadful oath sworn with a solemn tongue,
What instance gives Lord Warwick for these words?

War. Often have I seen a timely parted ghost,
Of ashie semblance, pale and bloudlesse:
But lo, the blood is settled in the face,
More better colored, then when he liude,
His well proportioned beard made rough and stern,
His fingers spread abroad as one that graspt for life,
Yet was by strength surprisde, the least of these are probable,
It cannot choose but he was murdered.

Queen Suffolk and the Cardinal had him in charge.
And they I trust sir, are no murderers.

War. Yea, but it was well known they were not his friends,
And it is well seen he found some enemies.

Card. But have you no greater proofs then these?


War. Who sees a heifer dead and bleeding fresh,
And sees hard by a butcher with an axe,
But will suspect it was he that made the slaughter?
Who finds the partrige in the puttockes neast,
But will imagine how the bird came there,
Although the Kite soar with unbloody beak?
Even so suspicious is this Tragedy.

Queen Are you the Kite Bewford, where is your talants?
Is Suffolk the butcher, where is his Knife?

Suff. I wear no Knife to slaughter sleeping men,
But here is a vengefull sword rusted with case,
That shall be scoured in his (...) heart,
That slanders me with murders crimson badge,
Say if thou dare proud Lord of Warwickshire,
That I am guilty in Duke Humphreys death.
exit Cardinal.
War. What dares not Warwick, if false Suffolk dare him*


Queen He dares not calm his contumelious spirit,
Nor cease to be an arrogant controwler,
Though Suffolk dare him twenty hundredth times.

War. Madame be ye still, with reverence may I say it,
That every word you speak in his defense,
Is slander to your royal majesty.

Suff. Blunt witted lord, ignoble in thy words,
If ever Lady wronged her lord so much,
Thy mother took unto her blamefull bed,
Some stern vntutred churl, and noble stock,
Was graft with crab-tree slip, whose fruit thou art,
And never of the Neuils noble race.

War. But that the guilt of murder bucklers thee,
And I should rob the deaths man of his fee,
Quitting thee thereby of ten thousand shames,
And that my sovereigns presence makes me mute,
I would false murtherous coward on thy knees,
Make thee crave pardon for thy passed speech,
And say it was thy mother that thou meantst,
That thou thy self wast borne in bastardy,
And after all this fearful homage done,
Give thee thy hyre, and send thy soul to hell,
Pernicious bloud-sucker of sleeping men.

Suff. Thou should be waking whilst I shead thy blood,
If from this presence thou dare go with me.

War. Away even now, or I will drag thee hence.

Warwick pulls him out. Exit Warwick and Suffolk, and then all the Commons
within, cries, down with Suffolk, down with Suffolk. And then enter again
the duke of Suffolk and Warwick, with their weapons drawn.
King Why how now lords?


Suff. The traitorous Warwick with the men of Berry,
Set al upon me, mighty sovereign.
The commons again cries down with Suffolk, down with Suffolk. And enter
from them the Earl of Salisbury.
Salsb. My Lord, the Commons sends you word by me,
That unless false Suffolk here be done to death,
Or banished fair Englands territories,
That they will err from your highness person,
They say, by him the good Duke Humphrey died,
They say, by him they fear the ruin of the Realm:
And therefore, if you love your subjects weal,
They wish you to banish him from forth the land.

Suff. Indeed it is like the Commons rude unpolished hinds,
Would send such message to their sovereign,
But you my lord were glad to be imployd.
To try how quaint an Orator you were,
But all the honor Salsbury has got,
Is, that he was the Lord Ambassador,
Sent from a sort of tinkars to the King.
The Commons cries, an answer from the King, my Lord of Salsbury.
King Good Salsbury go back again to them.
Tell them we thank them for all their loving care,
And had not I been cited thus by their means,
My self had done it: therefore here I swear,
If Suffolk be found to breathe in any place,
Where I have rule, but three days more, he dies.
exit Salsbury.
Queen. Oh Henry, reuerse the doom of gentle Suffolkes banishment.


King Ungentle Queen, to call him gentle Suffolk,
Speak not for him, for in England he shall not rest,
If I say, I may relent, but if I swear it is irreuocable:
Come Warwick, and go thou in with me,
For I have great matters to impart to thee.
exit King and Warwick, manet Queen and Suffolk.
Queen Hell fire and vengeance go along with you,
There Is two of you, the devil make the third,
Fre womanish man, can thou not curse thy enemies?

Suff. A plague upon them: wherefore should I curse them?
Could curses kill as do the Mandrakes groans,
I would invent as many bitter terms,
Delivered strongly through my fixed teeth,
With twice so many signs of deadly hate,
As lean facde Envy in her loathsome cave,
My tongue should stumble in mine earnest words,
Mine etes should sparkle like the beaten slint,
My hair be fixed on end, as one distraught,
And every joint should seem to curse and ban,
And now me thinks my burdened heart would break.
Should I not curse them: poison be their drink,
Gall, worse then gall, the daintiest thing they taste,
Their sweetest shade, a grove of sypris trees,
Their softest touch, as smart as lyzards stings,
Their music frightfull, like the serpents hiss.
And boding scrike-owles make the consort full,
All the foul terrors in dark seated hell.

Queen. Enough sweet Suffolk, thou tormentst thy self.


Suffolk You bade me ban, and will you bid me ceased
Now by this ground that I am banished from,
Well could I curse away a winters night,
And standing naked on a mountain top,
Where biting cold would never let grass grow,
And think it but a minute spent in sport.

Queen No more, sweet Suffolk, hie thee hence to France,
Or live where thou will within this worlds globe,
I Will have an Irish that shall find thee out,
And long thou shall not stay, but i will have thee repeald,
Or venture to be banished my self,
Oh let this kisle be printed in thy hand.
That when thou see it, thou may think on me:
A way, I say, that I may feel my grief,
For it is nothing whilst thou stand here.

Suff. Thus is poor Suffolk ten times banished,
Once by the King, but three times thrice by thee.
Enter Uawse.
Queen How now, whither goes Vawse so fast*


Vawse. To signific unto his majesty,
That Cardinal Bewford is at point of death,
Sometimes he raues and cries as he were mad,
Sometimes he calls upon Duke Humphreys ghost,
And whispers to his pillow as to him,
And sometime he calls to speak unto the King,
And I am going to certify unto his grace,
That even now he called alowd for him.

Queen Go then good Vawse, and certify the King.

exit Uawse. Oh what is worldly pomp! all men must die.
And woe am I for Bewfords heavy end,
But why mourn I for him, whilst thou art here?
Sweet Suffolk hie thee hence to France,
For if the King do come, thou sure must die.

Suff. And if I go, I cannot live: but here to die,
What were it else, but like a pleasant slumber
In thy lap?
Here could I, could I, breeath my soul into the air,
As mild and gentle as the newborn babe,
That dies with mothers dug between his lips,
Where from thy sight I should be raging mad,
And call for thee to close mine eyes,
Or with thy lips to stop my dying soul,
That I might breath it so into thy body,
And then it liude in sweet Elyziam;
By thee to die, were but to die in jest,
From thee to die, were torment more then death,
O let me stay, befall what may befall.

Queen Oh might thou stay with safety of thy life,
Then should thou stay, but heavens deny it,
And therefore go, but hope ere long to be repeald.

Suff. I go.


Queen And take my heart with thee.

She kissesh him.
Suff. A jewel locked into the wofulst caske,
That ever yet containd a thing of worth;
Thus like a splitted bark so sunder we:
This way fall I to death.
exit Suffolk.
Queen This way for me.

exit Queen. Enter King and Salsbury, and then the curtains be drawn, and
the Cardinal is discovered in his bed, rauing and staring as if he were mad.
Car. O death, if thou will let me live but one whole year,
He give thee as much gold as will purchase such another Island.

King Oh see my lord of Salsbury how he is troubled,
Lord Cardinal, remember Christ must have thy soul.

Car. Why died he not in his bed?
What would you have me to do then?
Can I make men live whether they will or no?
Sir, go fetch me the strong poison which the Pothicary sont
Oh see where Duke Humphreys ghost does stand, (me:
And stares me in the face: look, look, comb down his hair,
So now he is gone again: Oh, oh, oh.

Sall. See how the pangs of death does gripe his heart,


King Lord Cardinal, if thou die assured of heavenly bliss,
Hold up thy hand, and make some sign to us.
The Cardinal dies. Oh see, he dies, and makes no sign at all,
Oh God forgive his soul.

Sals. So bad an end did never none behold,
But as his death, so was his life in all.

King Forbear to judge, good Salsbury forbear,
For God will judge us all:
Go take him hence, and see his funerals be performde.
exeunt omnes. Alarmes within, and the chambers be discharged, like as in were
a fight at sea. And then enter the captain of the ship and the Master, and
the Masters mate, and the duke of Suffolk disguised, and others with him, and
Walter Whickemore.
Cap. Bring forward these prisoners that scornd to yield,
Unlade their goods with speed, and sincke their ship,
Here master, this prisoner I give to you:
This other, the Masters Mate shall have,
And Walter Whickmore, thou shall have this man,
And let them pay their ransomes ere they pass.

Suff. Walter!

he starteth.
Walter How now, what do thou fear me?
Thou shall have better cause anon.

Suff. It is thy name affrights me, not thy self:
I do remember well, a cunning wisard told me,
That by Walter I should die:
Yet let not that make thee bloody minded,
Thy name being rightly sounded,
Is Gualter, not Walter.

Walter Gualter or Walter, all is on to me,
I am the man must bring thee to thy death.

Suff. I am a Gentleman look on my Ring,
Ransom me at what thou will, it shall be paid.

Walter I lost mine eye in boording of the ship,
And therefore ere I marchant-like sell blood for gold,
Then cast me headlong down into the sea.

2 Priso. But what shall our ransomes be?


Master A hundredth pounds a piece, either pay that, or die.


2 Priso. Then save our lives, it shall be paid.


Walter Come sir, thy life shall be the ransom
I will have.

Suff. Stay villain, thy prisoner is a prince,
The Duke of Suffolk, William de la Poole.

Cap. The Duke of Suffolk folded up in rags?


Suf. Yea sir, but these rags are no part of the duke,
Jove sometime went disguisde, and why not I?

Cap. Yea but Jove was never slain as thou shall be.


Suff. Base Iady groom, King Henry's blood,
The honorable blood of Lancaster,
Cannot be shead by such a lowly swain,
I am sent Ambassador for the Queen to France,
I charge thee waffe me cross the channel safe.

Cap. I Will waffe thee to thy death, go Walter take him hence
And on our long boats side, chop off his head.

Suff* Thou darste not for thine own.


Cap. Yes Poole.


Suff. Poole?


Cap. Yea, Poole, puddle, kennell, sincke and dirt,
I Will stop that yawning mouth of thine,
Those lips of thine that so often have kissed the Queen,
Shall sweep the ground, and thou that
Smildst at good duke Humphreys death,
Shall live no longer to infect the earth.

Suff. This villain being but Captain of a Pinnais,
Threatens more plagues then mighty Abradas,
The great Macedonian Pyrate,
Thy words adds fury and not remorse in me.

Cap. Yea but my deeds shall stay thy fury soon.


Suff. Have not thou waited at my trencher,
When we have feasted with Queen Margaret?
Have not thou kissed thine hand and held my stirrup?
And barehead plodded by my footcloth Mule,
And thought thee happy when I smild on thee?
This hand has writ in thy defense,
Then shall I charm thee, hold thy lavish tongue.

Cap* Away with him Walter, I say, and off with his head.


1 Pris. Good my lord, entreat him mildly for your life.


Suff. First let this neck stoop to the axes edge,
Before this knee do bow to any,
Save to the God of heaven, and to my King,
Suffolkes imperial tongue cannot plead
To such aiady groom.

Walter Come, come, why do we let him speak*
I long to have his head, for ransom of mine cie.

Suff. A sworder and band to slave,
Murdered sweet Tully:
Brutus bastard hand stabdo Julius Caesar,
And Suffolk dies by Pirates on the sees.
exit Suffolk, and Walter
Cap. Off with his head, and send it to the Queen,
And ransomelesse this prisoner shall go free,
To see it safe delivered unto her:
Come lets go.
exeunt omnes. Enter two of the Rebels with long staves.
George. Come away Nick, and put a long staff in thy pike, and provide thy
self, for I can tell thee, they have bin up this two days.


Nicke Then they had more need to go to bed now,
But sir George, what is the matter?

George Why sir, Jack Cade the Diar of Ashford here,
He means to turn this land, and set a new nap on it.

Nick Yea mary he had needso, for it is grown threedbare,
It Was never merry world with us, since these gentlemen came up

George I warrant thee, thou shall never see a lord wear a leather aperne, now
adays.


Nicke. But sir, who comes more beside Jack Cade?


George Why there is Dick the Butcher, and Robin the Sadler, and Will that came a
wooing to our Nan last sunday, and Harry and Tom, and Gregory that should have
your Pa^nil, and a great sort more is come from Rochester, and from Maidstone,
and Can terbury, and all the towns here abouts, and we must al be lords or
squires, as soon as Jack Cade is King.


Nicke Hark, hark, I hear the Drum, they coming.

Enter Jack Cade, Dicke Butcher, Robin, Will, Tom* Harry and the rest with
long staves.
Cade. Proclaim silence.


All. Silence.


Cade. I John Cade so named for my valiancio.


Dicke Or rather for stealing of a Cade of spra^^.


Cade. My father was a Mortimer.


Nicke He was an honest man, and a good Brick-laier.


Cade My mother came of the Brases.


Will. She was a Pedlers daughter indeed, and sold many laces.


Robin And now being not able to occupy her furd pack*
She washes buckes up and down the country.

Cade. Therefore I am honorable borne.


Harry Yea, for the field is honorable, for he was borne
Under a hedge, for his father had no house but the Cage.

Cade I am able to endure much.


George That's true, I know he can endure any thing,
For I have seen him whipped two market days together.

Cade I fear neither sword nor fire.


Will. He need not fear the sword, for his coat is of proof.


Dick But me thinks he should fear the fire, being so often burnt in the
hand* for stealing of sheep.


Cade Therefore be brave, for your captain is brave* and vows reformation: you
shall have seven halfpenny loaves for a penny, and the three hoopt pot, shall have
ten hoops, and it shall be felony to drink small beer, and if I be the King, as
King I will be.


All. God save your majesty.


Cade I thank you good people, you shall al eat and drink of my score, and go
al in my livery, and weel have no writing* but the score and the tally, and
there shall be no laws, but such as comes from my mouth.


Dicke We shall have sore laws then, for he was thrust into the mouth the other
day.


George Yea and stinking law too, for his breath stinkes so, that one cannot
abide it.

Enter Will with the clarke of Chattam.
Will Oh Captain, a pryze.


Cade Whose that, Will?


Will. The Clarke of Chattam, he can write and read and cast account, I took
him setting of boys copies, and he has a book in his pocket with red letters.


Cade Sounes, he is a coniurer, bring him hither,
Now sir, what is your name?

Clarke Emanuell sir, and it shall please you.


Dicke It will go hard with you, I can tell you,
For they use to write that o'th top of letters.

Cade And what do you use to write your name?
Or do you as ancient forefathers have done,
Use the score and the tally?

Clarke. Nay true sir, I praise God I have bin so well brought up, that I can
write mine own name.


Cade Oh he has confessed, go hang him with his penny inckhorne about his neck.

exit one with the clarke. Enter Tom.
Tom. Captain: news, news, sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother are coming
with the Kings power and me^ to kill us al.


Cade Let them come, he is but a Knight is he*


Tom No, no, he is but a Knight.


Cade Why then to equal him, i will make my self Knight
Kneel down John Mortimer,
Rise up sir John Mortimer.
Is there any more of them that be Knights*

Tom. Yea his brother.

He knights Dicke Butcher.
Cade Then kneel down Dicke Butcher,
Rise up sir Dicke Butcher.
Now sound up the drum. Enter sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother, with
drum and soldiers.
Cade As for these silken coated slaves, I pass not a pin,
It Is to you good people that I speak.

Staf. Why countrymen, what mean you thus in troops,
To follow this rebellious traitor Cade?
Why his father was but a Brick-laier.

Cade. Well, Adam was a Gardnar, what then?
But I come of the Mortimers.

Stafford. Yea, the Duke of York has taught you that.


Cade The Duke of York, nay, I learnt it my self.
For look you, Roger Mortimer the Earl of March,
Married the Duke of Clarence daughter.

Staff. Well, that's true* but what then?


Cade And by her he had two children at a birth.


Staff. That's false.


Cade Yea, but I say, it is true.


Ail. Why then it is true.


Cade. And one of them was stolen away by a beggarwoman,
And was my father, and I am his son,
Deny it and you can.

Nicke Nay look you, I know it was true,
For his father built a chimney in my fathers house,
And the brickes are alive at this day to testify.

Cade But do thou hear Stafford tell the King* that for his fathers sake, in
whose time boys played at spanne-counter with French crowns, I am content that
he shall be King as long as he lives: mary always provided, I Will be Protector
over him.


Staff. O monstrous simplicity!


Cade And tell him, we will have the Lord Says head, and the duke of Somersets,
for delivering up the dukedomes of Anioy and Main, and selling the towns in
France, by which means England has bin maimd ever since, and gone as it were
with a crouch, but that the puissance held it up. And besides, they can speak
French, and therefore they are traitors.


Staff. As how I prithee?


Cade Why the French men are our enemies, be they not? And then can he that
speaks with the tongue of an enemy be a good subject?

Answer me to that.


Staff. Well sir, will thou yield thy self unto the Kings mercy, and he will
pardon thee and these, their outrages and rebellious deeds?


Cade Nay, bid the King come to me and he will, and then i will pardon him, or
otherways i will have his crown tell him, ere it be long.


Staff. Go Herald, proclaim in all the Kings towns,
That those that will forsake the Rebel Cade,
Shall have free pardon from his majesty.
exit Stafford and his men.
Cade Come sirs, saint George for us and Kent.

exeunt omnes. Alarums to battle, and sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother
is slain. Then Jack Cade again, and the rest.
Cade Sir Dicke Butcher, thou have fought to day most valiantly, and knocked
them down as if thou had bin in thy slaughter house, and thus I will reward
thee: the Lent shall be as long again as it was: thou shall have license to kill
for four score and one a week: drum strike up, for now we will march to London,
for to morrow I mean to sit in the Kings seat at Westminster.

exeunt omnes. Enter the King reading of a Letter, and the Queen with the Duke
of Suffolkes head, and the Lord Say, with others.
King Sir Humphrey Stafford and his brother is slain,
And the rebels march amain to London,
Go back to them, and tell them thus from me,
I Will come and parley with their general.

Read. Yet stay, i will read the letter once again:
Lord Say, Jack Cade has solemnly vowed to have thy head*

Say. Yea, but I hope your highness shall have his.


King How now Madam, still lamenting and mourning for Suffolks death, I fear
my love, if I had bin dead, thou would not have mournd so much for me.


Queen No my love, I should not mourn, but die for thee*

Enter a messenger.
Messen. Oh fly my Lord, the rebels are entered
Southwarke, and have almost won the bridge,
Calling your grace an usurper,
And that monstrous rebel Cade, has sworn
To crown himself King in Westminster,
Therefore fly my Lord, and post to Killing worth.

King. Go old Buckingham and Clifford gather
An Army up, and meet with the rebels:
Come Madam let us haste to Killingworth,
Come on Lord Say, go thou along with us,
For fear the rebel Cade do find thee out.

Say My innocence my Lord shall plead for me:
And therefore with your-highnes leave, I Will stay behind.

King Even as thou will my Lord Say:
Come Madame, let us go.
exeunt omnes. Enter the Lord Scayles upon the Tower walls walking. Enter three
or four citizens below.
L. Scayles How now, is lack Cade slain?


1 Cutizen No my Lord, nor likely to be slain,
For they have won the ^ridge,
Killing all thos^ that withstand them,
The Lord Mayor craves ^^d of your honor from the Towes,
To defend the city from the rebels.

L. Scayles Such aid as I can spare, you shall command,
But I am troubled here with them my self,
The Rebels have attempted to win the Tower,
But get you to Smithfield and gather head,
And thither I will send you Matthew Goffe:
Fight for your King, your country, and your lives,
And so farewell* for I must hence again.
exeunt omnes. Enter Jack Cade and the rest, and strikes his sword upon London
stone.
Cade Now is Mortimer Lord of this city,
And now sitting upon London stone, we command,
That the first year of our reign,
The pissing conduit run nothing but red wine,
And now henceforth, it shall be treason
For my that calls me otherwise then
Lord Mortimer.
Enter a soldier.
sold. Jack Cade, Jack Cade.


Cade Zounes, knock him down.

they kill him.
Dicke My Lord, there is an Army gathered together
Into Smithfield.

Cade Come then, lets go fight with them,
But first go on and set London bridge on fire:
And if you can, burn down the Tower too,
Come lets away.
exeunt omnes. Alarmes, and then Matthew Goffe is slain, and all the rest with
hi^* then enter Jack Cade again, and his company.
Cade So sirs, now go some and pull down the Sanoy,
Others to the Innes of the court, down with them all.

Dicke I have a suit unto your Lordship.


Cade. Be it a lordship Dicke, and thou shall have it
For that word.

Dick That we may go burn all the Records,
And that all writing may be put down,
And nothing used but the score and the tally.

Cade Dick it shall be so, and henceforward al thing shall be in common, and in
Cheapside shall my palphrey go to grass. Why is it not a miserable thing, that
of the skin of an innocent lamb, should parchment be made, and then with a
little blotting over with ink, a man should undo himself?

Some says it is the bees that sting but I say, it is their wax, for I am sure I
never sealed to any thing but once, and I was never mine own man since.


Nicke But when shall we take up those commodities
Which you told us of?

Cade Mary he that will lustily stand to it,
Shall go with me and take up these commodities following:
Item, a gown, a kirtle, a peticote and a smock.
Enter George.
George My Lord, a prize, a prize, here is the Lord Say,
Which sold the towns in France.

Cade. Come hither thou Say, thou George, thou buckrum lord, What answer can
thou make unto my mightines, For delivering up the towns in France to Monsier
busse mine cue the Dolphin of France?

And more the^ so, thou have most traitorously erected a grammar school, to
infect the youth of the realm, and against the kings Crown and dignity, thou
hasl built up a paper-mil, nay it will be said to thy face, that thou keepst men
in thy house that daily reads of books with red letters, and talks of a
Nowne and a Verb, and such abominable words, as no christian care is able to
endure it: and besides all that, thou have appointed certain justices of peace
in every shire to hang honest men that steal for their living, and because they
could not read, thou have hung them up: only for which cause they were most
worthy to live: thou ridest on a foothcloth, do thou not?


Say. Yes, what of that?


Cade Mary I say thou ought not to let thy horse wear a cloak, when an
honester man then thy self goes in his hose and dublet.


Say. You men of Kent.


All Kent what of Kent?


Say Nothing but terra bona.


Cade Bonum terum, sounds what is that?


Dick He speaks French.


Will. No, it is Dutch.


Nick No, it is Outtalian, I know it well enough.


Say. Kent, in the Commentaries Caesar wrote,
Termd it the civil st place of all this land,
Then noble countrymen, hear me but speak,
I sold not France, I lost not Normandy.

Cade But wherefore do thou shake thy head so?


Say It is the palsy, and not fear that makes me.


Cade. Nay thou nodst thy head, as who say, thou will be even with me, if thou
getst away, but i will make thee sure enough, now I have thee: go take him to the
standard in Cheapside and chop off his head, and then go to Milend-green, to
sir James Cromer his son in law, and cut off his head too, and bring them to me
upon two poles presently.

Away with him. exit one or two with the Lord Say. There shall not a nobleman
wear a head on his shoulders,
But he shall pay me tribute for it:
Nor there shall not a maid be married, but he shall see to me for her:
Maiden head or else, i will have it my self,
Mary I will that married men shall hold of me in capite,
And that their wives shall be as free as heart can think, or tongue can tell.
Enter Robin.
Robin O captain! London bridge is a fire.


Cade Run to Billingsgate, and fetch pitch and flax and squench it.

Enter Dicke and a sergeant.
ser. Justice, justice, I pray you sir, let me have justice of this fellow here.


Cade Why, what has he done?


ser. Alas sir, he has ravished my wife.


Dick Why my lord he would have rested me,
And I went and entered my Action in his wives paper house.

Cade Dicke follow thy suit in her common place,
You horson villain, you are a sergeant, you will
Take any man by the throat for twelve pence,
And rest a man when he is at dinner,
And have him to prison ere the meat be out of his mouth:
Go Dicke, take him hence, cut out his tongue for cogging,
Hough him for running, and to conclude,
Brave him with his own mace.
exit with the sergeant. Enter two with the Lord Says head, ind sir James
Cromers, upon two poles. So, come carry them before me, and at cuery lanes end,
let them kiss together.

Enter the duke of Buckingham, and Lord Clifford, the Earl of Comberland.
Cliff. Why country men and warlike friends of Kent,
What means this mutinous rebellion,
That you in troops do muster thus your selves,
Under the conduct of this traitor Cade?
To rise against your sovereign lord and King,
Who mildly has his pardon sent to you,
If you forsake this monstrous rebel here?
If honor be the mark whereat you aim,
Then haste to France, that our forefathers won,
And win again that thing which now is lost,
And leave to seek your countries overthrow.

All. A Clifford, a Clifford.

They for sake Cade.
Cade Why how now, will you forsake your general,
And ancient freedom which you have possessed,
To bend your necks unto their servile yokes,
Who if you stir, will straightwaies hang you up?
But follow me, and you shall pull them down,
And make them yield their livings to your hands.

All. A Cade, a Cade.

They run to Cade again
Clif. Brave warlike friends hear me but speak a word,
Refuse not good, whilst it is offered you,
The King is merciful, then yield to him,
And I my self will go along with you,
To Winsore castle whereas the King abides,
And on mine honor you shall have no hurt.

All. A Clifford, a Clifford, God save the King.


Cade. How like a feather is this rascal company
Blown every way,
But that they may see there wants no valiancy in me,
My staff shall make way through the midst of you,
And so a pox take you all.
He runs thruoh them with his staff, and flies away.
Buck. Go some and make after him, and proclaim,
That those that can bring the head of Cade,
Shall have a thousand crowns for his labor.
Come march w^y.
Enter King Henry and the Queen, and Somerset.
King. Lord Somerset, what news hear you of the rebel Cade?


Some. This my gracious lord, that the lord Say is don to death,
And the city is almost sacked.

King. Gods will be done, for as he has decreed, so it must be:
And be it as he please, to stop the pride of those rebellious me^.

Queen Had the noble Duke of Suffolk bin alive,
The rebel Cade had bin suppressed ere this,
And all the rest that do take part with him.
Enter the Duke of Buckingham and Clifford, with the rebels with halters about
their necks.
Cliff. Long live King Henry, Englands lawful King,
Lo here my Lord, these rebels are subdude,
And offer their lives before your highness feet.

King But tell me Clifford, is their captain here*


Cliff. No, my gracious lord, he is fled away, but proclamations are sent
forth, that he that ca^ but bring his head, shall have a thousand crowns. But
may it please your majesty, to pardon these their faults, that by that traitors
means were thus misled.


King Stand up you simple men, and give God praise,
For you did take in hand you know not what,
And go in peace obedient to your King,
And live as subjects, and you shall not want,
Whilst Henry lives, and wears the English crown.

All God save the King, God save the King.


King Come let us haste to London now with speed,
That solemn processions may be sung,
In laud and honor of the God of heaven,
And triumphs of this happy victory.
exeunt omnes. Enter Jack Cade at one door, and at the other, master
Alexander Eyden and his men, and Jack Cade lies down picking of herbs and
eating them.
Eyden Good Lord how pleasant is this country life*
This little land my father left me here,
With my contented mind, serves me as well,
As all the pleasures in the court can yield,
Nor would I change this pleasure for the court.

Cade Sounes here is the Lord of the soil stand villain, thou will betray me to
the King, and get a thousand crowns for my head, but ere thou go, i will make
thee eat iron like an estridge, and swallow my sword like a great pin.


Eyden Why saucy companion* why should I betray thee?
Is It not enough that thou have broke my hedges,
And entered into the ground without the leave of me the owner,
But thou will brave me too?

Cade. Brave thee and beard thee too, by the best blood of the realm, look on
me well, I have eat no meat this five days, yet and I do not leave thee and
thy five men as dead as a door nail, I pray God I may never cate grass more.


Eyden. Nay, it never shall be said whilst the world does stand, that Alexander
Eiden an Esquire of Kent, took ods to combat with a famisht man, look on me, my
lims are equal unto thine, and every way as big, then hand to hand i will combat
thee. Sitra fetch me weapons, and stand you all aside.


Cade. Now sword, if thou hewst not this burly-boned churl into chines of
beef, I beseech God thou may fall into some smiths hand and be turned into
hobnailes.


Eyden Come on thy way.

They fight, and Cade falls down.
Cade Oh villain, thou have slain the flower of Kent for chiualry, but it is
famine and not thee that has done it, for come ten thousand devils, and give me
but the ten meals that I wanted this five days, and I Will fight with you all,
and so a pox rot thee, for Jack Cade must die.

he dies.
Eyd. Jack Cade, and was it that monstrous rebel which I have slain: oh sword
I honor thee for this, and in my chamber shall thou hang as a monument to after
age, for this great service thou have done to me, i will drag him hence, and with
my sword cut off his head and bear it with me.

exit Enier the Duke of York with drum and soldiers.
York In Arms from Ireland comes York amain,
Ring bells alowd, bonfires perfume the air,
To entertain fair Englands royal King:
Ah sancta Maiesta, who would not buy thee dear?
Enter the duke of Buckingham. But soft, who comes here? Buckingham, what news
with him*


Buck York, if thou mean well, I greet thee so.


York Humphrey of Buckingham, welcome I swear,
What come thou in love, or as a messenger?

Bu. I come as a messenger from our dread lord and soueraign
Henry, to know the reason of these Arms in peace?
Or that thou being a subject as I am,
Should thus approach so near with colors spread,
Whereas the person of the King does keep?

York A subject as he is!
O how I hate these spightfull abject terms,
But York, dissemble till thou meet thy sons,
Who now in Arms expect their fathers sight,
And far hence I know they cannot be:
Humphrey Duke of Buckingham, pardon me,
That I answered not at first, my mind was troubled,
I came to remove that monstrons rebel Cade,
And heave proud Somerset from out the Court,
That bafely yielded up the towns in France.

Buc. Why that was presumption on thy behalf,
But if it be no otherwise but so,
The King does pardon thee, and grants to thy request,
And Somerset is sent unto the Tower.

York Upon thine honor is it so?


Buc. York, he is upon mine honor.


York Then before thy face, I here dismiss my troops,
Sirs, meet me to morrow in saint Georges fields,
And there you shall receive your pay of me.
exeunt soldiers.
Buc. Come York, thou shall go speak unto the King,
But see, his grace is coming to meet with us.
enter King Henry.
King How now Buckingham, is York friends with us
That thus thou bringst him hand in hand with thee?

Buc. He is my lord, and has dischargde his troops
Which came with him, but as your Grace did say,
To heave the duke of Somerset from hence,
And to subdue the rebels that were up.

King Then welcome coosin York, give me thy hand,
And thanks for thy great service done to us,
Against those traitrous Irish that rebeld.
enter master Eyden with Jack Cades head.
Eyden Long live Henry in triumphant peace,
Lo here (my Lord) upon my bended knees,
I here present the traitorous head of Cade,
That hand to hand in single fight I slew.

King First, thanks to heaven, and next, to thee my friend,
That have subdude that wicked traitor thus,
Oh let me see that head that in his life
Did work me and my land such cruel spite*
A visage stern, cole black his curled locks,
Deep trenched furrows in his frowning brow,
Presageth warlike humors in his life.
Here take it hence, and thou for thy reward,
Shall be immediately created Knight:
Kneel down my friend, and tell me what is thy name.

Eyden Alexander Eyden, if it please your grace,
A poor Esquire of Kent.

King Then rise up sir Alexander Eyden Knight,
And for thy maintenance, I freely give
A thousand marks a year for to maintain thee,
Beside the firm reward that was proclaimde,
For those that could perform this worthy act,
And thou shall wait upon the person of the King.

Eyden I humbly thank your grace, and I no longer live.
Then I prove just and loyal unto my King.
exit. Enter the Queen with the Duke of Somerset.
King O Buckingham, see where Somerset comes*
Bid him go hide himself till York be gone.

Queen He shall not hide himself for fear of York,
But beard and brave him prowdly to his face.

York Who Is that? proud Somerset at liberty?
Base fearful Henry that thus dishonor'st me,
By heaven, thou shall not govern over me,
I cannot brook that traitors presence here,
Nor will I subject be to such a King,
That knows not how to govern, nor to rule,
Resign thy crown proud Lancaster to me,
That thou usurped have so long by force,
For now is York resolu'de to claim his own,
And rise aloft into fair Englands Throne.

Somer. Proud traitor, I arrest thee on high treason,
Against thy Sovereign Lord, yield thee false York.
For here I swear thou shall unto the Tower,
For these proud words which thou have given the King.

York Thou art deceived, my sons shall be my bail,
And send thee there in spite of him.
Ho, where are you boys?

Queen Call Clifford hither presently.

Enter the Duke of Yorkes sons, Edward the Earl of March, and crooke-backe
Richard, at the one door, with drum and soldiers, and at the other door,
enter Clifford and his son with drum and soldiers, and Clifford kneeles to
Henry, and speaks.
Cliff. Long live my noble Lord and sovereign King.


York We thank thee Clifford:
Nay, do not affright us with thy looks,
If thou did mistake, we pardon thee, kneel again.

Cliff. Why, I did no way mistake, this is my King:
What is he mad? to Bedlam with him.

King Yea, a bedlam frantike humor drives him thus,
To leauy Arms against his lawful King.

Cliff. Why do not your grace send him to the Tower*


Queen He is arrested, but will not obey,
His sons he says shall be his suertie.

York How say you boys, will you not?


Edward Yes noble father, if our words will serve


Richard And if our words will not, our swords shall.


York Call hither to the stake, my two rough bears.


King Call Buckingham, and bid him arm himself.


York Call Buckingham, and all the friends thou have,
Both thou and they shall curse this fatal hour.
Enter at one door the Earl of Salsbury and Warwick, with drum and
soldiers: and at the other, the duke of Buckingham, with drum and soldiers.
Cliff. Are these thy bears? weel bayte them soon,
Dispight of thee and all the friends thou have.

War. You had best go dream again,
To keep you from the tempest of the field.

Clif. I am resolved to bear a greater storm,
Then any thou can conjure up to day,
And that i will write upon thy Burgonet,
Might I but know thee by thy household badge.

War. Now by my fathers age old Neuells crest,
The Rampant bear chaind to the ragged staff,
This day i will wear aloft my burgonet,
As on a mountain top the Caedar shows,
That keeps his leaves in spite of any storm,
Even to affright thee with the view thereof.

Clif. And from thy burgonet will I rend the bear,
And tread him underfoot with all contempt,
Dispight the Beare-ward that protects him so.

Young Clif. And so renowned sovereign to arms,
To quel these traitors, and their complises.

Rich. Fie, charity for shame, speak it not in spite,
For you shall sup with Jesus Christ to night.

Young Clif. Foul Stigmatike, thou can not tell.


Rich. No, for if not in heaven, you le surely sup in hell.

exeunt omnes. Alarmes to the battle, and then enter the duke of Somerset and
Richard fighting, Richard kills him under the sign of the Castle in saint
Albons.
Rich. So, lie thou there* and breathe thy last.
What Is here, the sign of the Castle?
Then the prophecy is come to pass,
For Somerset was forewarned of Castles,
The which he always did observe,
And now behold, under a paltry alehouse sign,
The Castle in S. Albons,
Somerset has made the Wissard famous by his death.
exit. Alarm again, and then enter the Earl of Warwick alone.
War. Clifford of Comberland, it is warwick calls,
And if thou do not hide thee from the Bear,
Now whilst the angry Trumpets sound Alarmes,
And dead men's cries do fill the empty avret
Clifford I say, come forth and fight with me,
Proud Northern Lord, Clifford of Comberland,
Warwick is hoarse with calling thee to arms.
Clifford speaks within. Warwickestand still, and view the way that Clifford
hawes with his murdering curtelaxe, through the fainting troops to find thee
out.

Warwick stand still, and s^rre not till I come.

E^^^^ York.
War. How now my Lord, what a foot*
Who killed your horses

York The deadly hand of Clifford, noble lord,
Five horse this day, slain under me,
And yet brave Warwick I remain alive,
But I did kill his horse he lou' de so well,
The bouiest gray that ere was bred in North. Enter Clifford, and Warwick
offers to fight with him.
Hold War wicke, and seek thee out some other chase
My self will hunt this Dear to death.

War. Brave lord, it is for a crown thou fightst,
Clifford farewell, as I entend to prosper well to day*
It grieves my soul to leave thee vnassaild
exit Warwick.
York Now Clifford, since we are singled here alone,
Be this the day of Doom to one of us,
For now my heart has sworn immortal hate
To thee, and all the house of Eancaster.

Clif. And here I stand, and pitch my foot to thine,
Vowing never to stir, til thou or I be slain,
For never shall my heart be safe at rest,
Till I have spoild the hateful house of York.
Alarmes, and they fight, and York kills Clifford.
York Now Lancaster sit sure, thy sinews shrink,
Come fearful Henry groueling on thy face,
Yield up thy Crown unto the Prince of York.
exit York. Alarmes, then enter young Clifford alone.
young Clif. Father of Comberland,
Where may I seek my aged father forth?
O dismal sight! see where he breathless lies,
All smeard and weltred in his lukewarm blood,
Ah, aged pillar of all Comberlands true house,
Sweet father, (...) thy murdered Ghost I swear,
Immortal hate unto the house of York,
Nor never shall I sleep secure one night,
Till I have furiously reuengde thy death,
And left not one of them to breatheon earth.
He takes him up on his back. And thus as old Ankises son did bear
His aged father on his manly back,
And sought with him against the bloody Greeks:
Even so will I: but stay, here is one of them,
To whom my soul has sworn immortal hate.
Enter Richard, and then Clifford lays down his father fights with him, and
Richard flies away again. Out croorktbacke villain, get thee from my sight,
But I will after thee, and once again,
When I have borne my father to his tent,
I Will tue my fortune better with thee.
exit young Clifford with his father. Alarmes again, and then enter three or
four, bearing the duke of Buckingham wounded to his Tent. Alarmes still, and
then enter the King and Queen.
Queen Away my Lord, and sly to London straight,
Make haste, for vengeance comes along with them,
Come, stand not to expostulate, lets go.

King Come then fair Queen, to London let us haste,
And summon a parliament with speed,
To stop the fury of these dyre events.
exeunt King and Queen. Alarmes, and then a flourish, and enter the duke of
York and Richard.
York How now boys, fortunate this fight has been,
I hope to us and ours for Englands good,
And our great honor, that so (...) we lost,
Whilst faint-heart Henry, did usurp our rights:
But did you see old Salsbury since we
With bloody minds did buckle with the foe,
I would not for the loss of this right hand,
That ought but well betide that good old man.

Rich. My Lord, I saw him in the thickest throng,
Charging his lance with his old weary arms,
And thrice I saw him beaten from his horse,
And thrice this hand did set him up again,
And still he fought with courage against his foes,
The boldest sprited man that ere mine eyes beheld.
Enter Salsbury and Warwick.
Edw. See noble father where they both do come,
The only props unto the house of York.

Salsb. Well have thou fought this day, thou valiant Duke,
And thou brave bud of Yorkes increasing house,
The small remainder of my weary life,
I hold for thee, for with thy warlike arm,
Three times this day thou have preserude my life.

York What say you Lords, the King is fled to London*
There (as I hear) to hold a Parliament.
What says Lord Warwick, shall we after them?

War. After them, nay before them if we can:
Now by my Faith Lords it was a glorious day,
Saint Albons battle won by famous York,
Shall be eternizd in all age to come,
Sound Drums and Trumpets, and to London all,
And more such days as these to us befall.

exeunt. FINIS.

