THE REASONS which Compelled the States of BOHEMIA to reject the Archduke
FERDINAND etc. and enforced them to Elect a new KING.

Together, WITH THE PROPOsition which was made upon the first motion of the
choice of th'Elector Palatine to be King of BOHEMIA, by the States of that
Kingdom in their public Assembly on the Sixteenth of August, being the Birth
day of the same Elector Palatine.

Translated out of the French copies at. Dort. Printed by. George Waters.

VERY CONSIDERABLE REASONS WHY THE Archduke FERDINAND neither could, nor
indeed ought to be admitted to the government and possession of the Kingdom
of Bohemia, etc.
1.
HE was not chosen King of Bohemia according to the accustomed manner, and the
ancient observed privileges of that Kingdom; but rather was never chosen at
all; only would be admitted and Crowned, as shall be cleared in the
amplifying of this first, and the third Article.

2.
He attained to this coming in and Coronation (which was done in the life
time of the Emperor Mathias) by sinister means, and unlawful practices,
thorough the suggestion, and aid of some unfaithful, and disloyal Members of
that Kingdom; corrupted partly by guiftes and promises, and partly by
sharpenes of threatenings wherewith they were attempted by the States for the
time being, and for that purpose assembled. Which election (notwithstanding.)
was made upon this condition; that if he did not punctually observe his
promises, the States were neither by Oath, nor by any other way obliged unto
him.

3.
He did not only not observe the Conditions; but diverse ways directly, and
de facto contraried that Oath which he had made to the States, and those
Reuersall letters which he has given the Provinces, and (which is more) he
did not only intrude into the government of that Kingdom in the life time of
the Emperor Mathias; but after his death, as he has done while he lived, and
(indeed much more) declared himself an open Enemy there; and all this, to the
end, to root out the true Religion in those parts, and to deprive and
Frustrate the States of that Crown and the incorporated Countries; as of the
free Election of a King, so of their other Privileges; and (of purpose) to
bring them wholly under the Spanish yoke: whereby he Forfaicted all he could
there pretend unto, after the death of the Emperor Mathias; and so did
absolutely dissolve and loose the Oath of fidelity given him by that Kingdom,
and those Provinces; as shall hereafter in another more ample declaration, (not
yet published) be particulary demonstrated to the view of all the world; this
following exposition serving in the mean time, for a brief information on
every point.

For the first reason, it may be universally known, that the Bohemian Nation
has always, ever since the Country was inhabited, had the free Election of
their Prince; which from time to time, (Careful of holding their own due)
they have observed, as much as in them lay that were true to the State of their
Country, as will plainly appear both by Histories, and by their privileges,
and other rules proper unto them. And this Free Election (their ancient
Custom) has since also been yielded and confirmed unto them, authentically,
from Emperors, by their Golden Bulls, and increase of Privileges. For
example, there are yet to be seen the originals, of three Golden Bulls of
the Emperor Frederick, dated in the years of out Lord, 1212, 1216. and 1231.
by which he confirmed the Kings, chosen by the States; and said expressly: That
the States of that Kingdom, have power to choose a King of their own free
will; and that the Roman Emperors were to give their Regal right to him whom
they Elected. This acknowledgement and confirmation has been reiterated by
diverse other Golden Bulls, and Letters Patents of the Emperor Charles the 4.th
in the years 1248 and 1370. thereby is made a reassurance unto them of the
Priuledges granted by the Emperor, Frederick; wherein (besides) is a more
ample mention made, that the Bohemians have free power to elect a King, and it
is agreeably confirmed by the Golden Bull of the same Emperor (at that time
King of Bohemia,) which he granted to the whole Roman Empire. Where speaking
of the Seven Electors, what belongs to their office in particular, and what
Principalities might fall to the Empire; the seauerill Chapter has these
word. That if any of their principalities come to be (...), or thence to fall
to the Emperor it shall be in the power of the Emperor of the King then
Raignig to have the ordering of it, as of a thing lawfully fallen to him and
the Empire; Saving always the Privileges, Rights and Statutes of (...)
touching the free Election of a King; in case that Kingdom should come to be
void; and Saving those likewise of the Empire that have power and right to
choose a King of Bohemia, according to the tenor of their Privileges, and
those good and ancient Customs (besides) which they have obtained of the
Emperors and Kings of the Romans: which by this law and Imperial Edict we
have no meaning to deragate from, or to preindice in any kind whatsoever; but
most religiously to protect them, and to cause them to be observed, not only
for the present, but ever lastingly for the time to come; in every point and
Article agreeing with their true form and tenor, etc. as it is more largely
expressed in that Golden Bull given at Neurembergh 1356. and published.

Now howsouer Charles the 4.th. after he had confirmed the Bull of the Emperor
Frederick, did withal add some other clause to the confirmation (which
doubtless he did for the advantage of himself and his successors) that is to
say, The intent thereof ought to be thus understood; that in case the Issue
male or Female of the direct line Reyall should come to fail; that then the
Free Election of a King shallbee in the power of the States of Bohemia and the
Provinces belonging to that Kingdom. This exposition (notwithstanding) took
no place, nor was ever observed. First, because it was directly contrary to
ancient Statute and Custom; and against the meaning of that Bull of the
Emperor Frederick. Secondly, suppose it possible such a Law might have been
observed; it could yet extend no further then to the race of the Emperor
Charles, as descended from the House of Luxenburgh; that is to say, until the
death of his two Sons, Wencestans and Sigismund; who after they had been
Roman Emperors and Kings of Bohemia, dyed with out any lineall Heir; and left
none to succeed but their Sister Elizabeth, married to Albertus Archduke of
Austria; to whom she brought a Son called Vladislans. After the decease of
this Vladislaus, the States of Bohemia by virtue of their Freedoms and
Privileges, elected a King: who was neither to the House of Luxenburg, nor of
that of Austria: namely King George of Kustat; whom the House of Austria was
so far from not approving of, as on the contrary Frederick the 3. the first
of that Family, then Emperor of the Romans, did confirm and ratify the
Privileges of the Kingdom of Bohemia to the said K. George; as does amply
appear by the said confirmation, Dated, 1459. Thence it may easily be seen,
that the foresaid clause, and condition inserted in the Confirmation of
Charles the Fourth was utterly abolished; and by that means the Kingdom of
Bohemia is declared Free, and not tied to any particular race or Family.

And that Bohemia has a Freedom of Election, and is in not kind a Kingdom
hereditary; the following example will justify: for although King George left
Sons behind him, yet there was not one of them that ever came either to
govern, or to be Elected there. But after the Fathers departure, the
Bohemians Elected and Crowned Vladislaus; of the Family of the Princes of
Lituania, Son to Casimir King of Polonia, Anno 1471. On whom the Emperor
Frederick conferred the Tenures, and confirmed them unto him; as it is to be
seen at large in the Act for that purpose, 1480. Now where it will be objected
that this K. Vladislaus by his Letters patentes in the favor of his Daughter
Anne, (first acknowledging that the States of Bohemia merely of their own free
will had Crowned, and received his son Lewijs for their King) did then
ordain that his Son Lewijs coming to dye without Issue, the inheritance of
the Kingdom should remain with his Daughter Anne; to that objection, this
Answer. Since (as has already been said) the clause of restraint inserted by
Charles, is wholly annihilated; and that the States have had their Election
free; (as by examples there has sufficient testimony been given) that is to
say, That the house of Austria inherited not the succession of the Kingdom,
after the Election of K. George; nor even the Sons of the same George
preferred against the choice of Vladislaus King of Polonia; by the same
authority of reason (therefore) it was much less in the power and prerogative
of Vladislaus to ordain his Daughter heir to the Kingdom, against the
privileges of the Country; without both the convocation and the consent of the
States, so as (indeed) she could not inherit the Kingdom after her Father but
after her Brother: and was Queen then, but as being the Wife of another
elected King. That there was no convocation of the States, it is an
unquestionable truth, and it follows necessarily, they gave not their consent,
neither did they ever permither in any thing effectually to enjoy the
Government. But after King Lewijs was fallen in battle, and that the heroyick
Prince Ferdinand Archduke of Austria had married the Lady Anne, that sister of
King Lewijs; the States of Bohem (then) of their own Free will, and by virtue
of their Priuildges; Elected Archduke Ferdinand for their King, 1526. Indeed
the King according to custom being once crowned as Sovereign, the Lady Anne,
afterward, was Crowned as his companion, and no otherwise. And if even at
that time, the Freedom of the States Election will yet be quarelled withal,
let King Ferdinands Reuersall letters be enquired of, they will satisfy for
it. They were given at Vienna the Thirteenth of December, 1526. And for their
better strength the oath he gave the States will declare it self.

But there has very lately been discovered a strange fact-committed upon
those Reuersall Letters of Ferdinand the Emperor done without the knowledge,
much less the consent of the body of the States. The said Letters having been
copyed in Parchment out of the original, and inserted to the other Privileges
of the Country in a book expressly appointed for that purpose; (and that the
original it self was placed there with other privileges; and that the said
Reuersall Letters, themselves, (as it is said) were annexed to the Statutes and
Ordinances of the Country for the space of Nineteen years together, remain
yet to be seen:) It is now found out that after the expiration of those
nineteen years, that is to say in the year 1545. some person not yet come
into public knowledge, in the Register of the Countries customs, upon the
margin of those Reuersall Letters writ these words, following: The Letters
were rendered his Majesty by the States of Bohemia, in the general Assembly of
the States of the Country at the Castle of Prague, on Monday after the
Ascension of the most blessed Virgin Mary in the year 1545. and in place of
those, were other Letters given to the said States of the Kingdom in the
Bohemian tongue, which were likewise inserted into this book in the leaf etc.
Done at the Castle of Prague, the Wednesday after St. Aegidius day, 1545.

Now that this point was in this manner ever effected, or that the States in
their full Assembly did ever render those Reuersall Letters to the King and
received other Patentes in their place, it can no way be found: For in the
general Assembly held the same year at the Castle of Prague (which at this
day remains quoted in the Register of the Country) there is not any mention
made thereof; no not so much as in the proposition itself then opened on the
part of the King. Neither were the Letters Patents supposed to be given
instead of the first assurances, according to that, form addition written in
the said book; but afterward included in another. It may thence be easily
judged that the writer of those added words (whosoeur he was) did it out of a
private authority, to please some other persons. Thence likewise it may very
easily be perceived to what aim, the corruption was directed; namely by this
means to frustrate and deprive the States for the time to come to the Freedom
of their Election. As indeed those Patents do nothing agree with the first
Assurances, save only in this, That the States ought to look to themselves,
that the said election of King Ferdinand may not derogate nor be preiuidiciall
to their Privileges. But the said Reuersals have in them another sense
directly contrary to all the Privileges and Freedoms of the Country, both
old and new, and particularly in this, that there are again alleged the
insertions both of Charles the 4.th in his confirmation, and of Vladislaus for
the advancement of his disposition toward his Daughter; which as has been
said, is long ago made void, and was observed only in one case alone; the
States (notwithstanding) having always retained the free Election.

Now that this was not done to violate the Privileges rather then to confirm
them, we refer to the judgment of the whole world. The reason why, the
States have not received perfect knowledge of all these indirect passages
until now, is, that from time to time they have been concealed by the
principal Officers of the land, who were Roman Catholics. For the States in
the diverse pursuites of their cause, as well to the general Assemblies of the
Country, as otherways, could never get so much as a hearing of the
Privileges read; much less a possession of the writings or copyes of them.

Howsoever, it is evident that the Emperor Ferdinand himself, did very well
judge and consider that this Kingdom, and the Provinces incorporate, were not
Hereditary, and that those Letters Patents could take no place, nor be of
force with Posterity against the ancient Privileges and Statutes. It is
evident in this, that the same Emperor called a general Assembly of the
Country in the year 1549. where he desired of the States of Bohemia, that
Archduke Maximilian his eldest Son, might after his death be received for
their King. Which the States accorded unto, to the end that in the life time of
his Majesty, his Son might carry the name of King, upon condition
(nevertheless) that he should not be invested in the government during the
time of his Father. According to which Condition (and likewise by virtue of
certain interchanged Articles) the Coronation of King Maximilian and his wife
Queen Mary, succeeded not until the year 1562.

In like manner Maximilian coming to be Emperor presented his eldest Son
Rodolph, and desired he might be accepted of and Crowned King of Bohemia for
the future, which the States consented unto, accepted of him, and declared him
then upon certain present conditions, and afterward drew from him his Letters
of Assurance.

Furthermore, were the Kingdom and the Provinces incorporate Hereditary to the
House of Austria, it is to be believed, that it had been altogether
unnecessary to seek to the States by request for the Succession; since upon
the terms of Inheritance every eldest Son coming to furuiue the Father,
there must have descended a right unto his own person for his title to the
Crown, without any intercession: as the Archdukes of Austria themselves do
exemplify by their own claims to their Countries of inheritance. It may
hereunto be added that from the Acceptance, and declaration of those two
Kings Maximilian and Rodolphe there can no prejudice fall upon the Freedom of
Election, since both of them being the eldest Sons of Kings of Bohemia,
their success in all reason might happen to be the more easy; and yet it was
not done without both seeking and obtaining the willing consent of the States.
Thence therefore there can no argument be drawn that the States by that Act
have quitt the right of their free Election.

If yet there will be something inferred thence to the contrary; the
proceeding of Rodolphe himself will confess that inference an error. For
being unmarried, and without Children, it was the design of the Archduke
Mathias as the eldest Brother to his Imperial Majesty, to procure himself
first nominated King of Bohemia, the Emperor yet living; and by the
intercession of his Majesty, that afterward he might be Elected and Crowned
according to custom. And in this case where lineall heirs have failed, it
never sufficed the conferring of the succession upon another, to have these
words used only: Acceptance, Declaration, and Coronation; but there was
always regard had as well of the one part as the other, to the saving of the
Free Election, which the States have by virtue of their ancient Privileges
from Frederick the Emperor and others. As indeed the Emperor Rodolphe,
himself also did anew in all indifferent understandings, very authentically
confirm and ratify the same Privileges to the States in this point, that his
Majesty sought and interceded to them for his Brother the Archduke Mathias,
that by virtue of their Privileges and freedoms, and of their own bounty,
and free will, they would first design his Brother for King of Bohemia, and
afterward Elect him. Accordingly the Archduke Mathias observed the same sense,
and desired he might be Elected after the ordinary custom. It follows that
his Majesty the Emperor interceding, and the Archduke being so Elected, they
have both of them very manifestly acknowledged and confirmed that in such a
case howsoever, (if not otherwise where the right line is extinguished) the
States have a free Election. Which besides the authority it receives from
Privileges and Customs of ancient use, it has more then sufficiently been
ratified likewise, not only by a contract passed before Prague in the year
1608. between his Imperial Majesty, the Archduke and the Provinces; but also
by the proposition made on the part of the same Emperor in the general
Assembly of the States; and by the Letters of Assurance from both their
Majesty's Imperial and Royal.

Moreover the States of the Reformed Church of the Crown of Bohemia, (after
the persecutions they had sustained) were competently provided for by his
Majesty the Emperor Rodolphe their King with an Edict of Pacification upon the
cause of Religion, and the free exercise thereof, according to the agreement
with the general Assembly of the States, in the year 1608. and as it has
since been confirmed in 1610. at the request of the Electors of the Empire
solicited by the States. And their said Majesty's confirmed certain accords
passed between those of the Religion of the Gospel, and the Roman
Catholics, as also between those of the Religion of the Gospel themseues.
And all this for the conser^^tion, and advancement of mutual Amity and
agreement, in such a manner, that in whom soever the least opposition or
contradiction that can be imagined, should be found to be intended against
that Edict of Pacification, or the other accords, he should be proceeded
against as a disturber of the public quiet.

From these proceedings our people generally did promise themselves that thence
forth they should live in a peaceable condition together, both under his
Majesty and the succeeding Kings of Bohemia, and that every man might serve God
safely and obey the Magistrates. But incontinently upon it, and sine likewise,
these promises met with persons of turbulent and wicked dispositions, who, by
the suggestion of an evil spirit have labored to make the world understand,
that nothing could be more contrary, to their minds then the free election of
a King, and the free exercise of Religion. And out of that maleuolent nature
refused to sign the Edict of pacification, and the agreements passed with the
matter depending on them which his Imperial Majesty and other peaceable Roman
Catholic Estates had by example invited them unto, but bent themselves with
all their might partly by their secret Conspiracies, and Fraudulent practices,
and partly by abusing their offices, and by their impudent malice to overthrow
the whole work of Peace, and to dispose even his Majesty himself to the
consent of this ruin; not withstanding that presently upon it in a public
Assembly of the States they were protested against, that in case the States of
the Religion of the Gospel should come to be yet further molested, the
offense should be imputed to them alone, and they should be proceeded against,
as troublers and infringers of the public ^^iet. This caution wrought no
regard in them, but on the contrary, they were so far from it, as even in the
life time of the Emperor Mathias, it was the principal point of their study
to provide themselves for the time to come of such a Lord as their enterprises
might expect countenance, and assistance from. And indeed they did so
succesfully advance their affairs, that in the year 1617. they procured that
Archduke Ferdinand, of whose courses all Christendom have taken notice, that
he was no sooner entered the government of the Country then he persecuted
those of the Religion, in such a manner, as at last without making of any
difference between the condition of person and person, he chased them quite
away; and in the pursuit of his inhumanenes, he caused the bodies of the Dead
to be dug out of their Graves, and exercised such Cruelties upon them, as
might have tonuerted a very barbours education to a gentleness of Nature, by
beholding, or but by hearing only of the hatefulnes of the Persecuttan. This
Archduke Ferdinand was called to Prague, adopted by the Emperor Mathias for
his Son, and afterward by greatness of threatenings, and by promises, and
presents bestowed upon some disloyal, and treacherous members, and by their
Conspiracies with the enemies of the Religion of the Gospel, he was received,
declared, and Crowned for the King of Bohemia, to succeed, but not Elected. For
they would by no means give ear to the moving of an Election during the whole
time of the giving of voices.

Now touching the other things of passage in this admission, and Coronation;
it shall be spoken of in the second Article. This shall suffice to conclude with,
for the first point, that he was not chosen King of Bohemia according to the
accustomed order, nor the virtue of the ancient observation of the Privileges,
and Statutes of the Country.

For the second reason; that is to say, how the admission, and Coronation came
to pass, there has somewhat already been spoken, and in what fashion of
carriage the disloyal members were bravely employed, to reach the end of their
pernicious designs. To which this that follows likewise offers it self. At
the very time of the convocation of the Assembly of the States of the Country,
the States were by letters Patents forbidden to treat there of any other
thing, then the point touching a Successor to the Crown, which is a crime not
only contrary to the ancient observation, but opposed also the decree made in
a general Assembly of the Country, Anno 1610 where it is expressly, delivered,
that in all the Assemblies of the States, it shall be free and lawful for
them; (immediately after the deliberation of the proposition made on the part
of the King) to set before them the Articles of the public griefs which then
ought to be taken into mature advice and to be ordered, and applied remedy
unto, before the rising of the Assembly. This was the reason that many of the
States made difficulty to appear in an Assembly so exorbitant. And those which
were there, gave their testimonies by their voices against such proceeding, as
a thing infringing the franchises and privileges of the Kingdom, adding that
the Provinces incorporate were not called thither: with these (notwithstanding)
it was concluded in the holding of the last Assembly of the States; as
pretending to have right in the giving of their voices for the Election of a
King; having first resolved and accorded with the Provinces. These States (I
say) were threatened, as well by the unfaithful members, as by others, and in
such a manner, as it was professed that if any man would undertake to carry his
suffrage another way, he had need be furnished with two heads, and must look
to be dealt withal as strangely as some others had been not many years ago.
And seeing it was impossible to countermine their practices, and to withstand
the whole faction of the Romanist; who had fished up and down to call in such
as had little or nothing to loose in the Country, that those of the Religion
were ouerborne by the plurality of voices: It must the^ come to this
necessity, that whether they would or not, they were to give way to the
acceptance, and Coronation. Which (nevertheless) was not yielded unto,
without conditions. For the Archduke Ferdinand gave the States his Reuersall
Letters, among the Articles whereof these are some that follow.

1.

That he thanked the States, and would he careful to acknowledge them with
gratiousuesse, and Royal benevolence; in such a measure as they should receive
all contentment from his Majesty.

2.

That during the life of the Emperor Mathias he would not inuest himself in
the Government of the Kingdom; nor would he put himself upon it, without the
knowledge and consent, as well of his Majesty and the principal Officers and
Presidents of the Country; as of the Councillors of Estate, and of his
Majesty's Finances, and of the chief Lords of the Country; of two persons of
the commonalty of every Circuit; of six of the Town of Prague, and of other
Towns deputed in the Assembly of the States of the Land.

3.

That if during the life of the Emperor he shall undertake to enter the
Government; in that case the Estates shall no way be held, or bound to render
him any obedience or duty of Fidelity.

Now in what fashion K. Ferdinand has made good his Oath, and observed his
Reuersall Letters, it is notorious to the whole world; and shall briefly be
shown in the third Article following.

3.
Concerning then the third and last reason; namely why King Ferdinand is
rejected; and how he has deprived himself, and made himself incapable of
the Acceptance and Coronation; and in sum, of all else depending thereon,
which he might pretend unto:

It is a thing most noted and manifest, that the unfaithful members; together
with the pernicious sect of the Jesuits, after the Coronation became so
insolent, that they did instantly set a foot diverse persecutions, not only as
principally in the Kingdom of Bohemia, bus also in the principalities of the
upper and lower Silesia; and in many places against the States of the Religion
of the Gospel, and the free exercise thereof; and expressly against the
prohibition contained in the Edict of pacification; besides this, the Churches
of the Religion, some they caused to be blocked up, and some they pulled down
to the very ground, the persons they cast into Prison, and there held them long.
And at last cut off all access and audience between his Majesty the Emperor,
and the States of Bohemia, as also between him and the defendants ordained by
the consent of his Majesty, forbad their Assemblies, directly against the
meaning of the Law, and condemned them without either accusation or hearing.
The Jesuits with much passion of joy writ to Archduke Leopold the
advertisement of this Coronation, and put it in Print, confessing and reporting
that the Archduke Ferdinand, as well before, as at his entrance to the
Government of his hereditary Countries, was bound by Oath to affect rather the
loosing of blood, and life, then to agree in the least measure that could be
about matter of Religion in favor of the Heretics, meaning the true
believing Christians: as it may particularly and at large be understood in the
defenses and griefs of this Land which are published.

From these unlawful Oppressions it grew to this, by the conspiracies of those
false Statesmen, that for a long time they looked after no other subject then
war, and the effusion of blood; Insomuch, as the late Emperor was carried
away and suborned by them, to the inuading of this fair Kingdom and the
Inhabitants with an Army, which has destroyed a good part of it, by pillage,
fire and sword. Wherein King Ferdinand did not only give testimony that he
took contentment, but (which is more) became himself both a Counsailour, and
an executor against the Kingdom: and intruded into the Government thereof, to
be invested before his time, thereby raising his purpose to be a cause of
infinite insufferable oppressions and calamities: The truth whereof is as
clear as day. For the world can not be ignorant that he invested himself in
the Government while the Emperor Mathias was yet living; insomuch as against
the will of the Emperor he did both cast, and imprison Cardinal Klesel
President of the Privy Council, and one of whose employment his Majesty
received service in all his Counsels. Further, in that the said Ferdinand
did not only advise a War against this Kingdom, but also employed his own
Forces, which he had in Friaull, to invade the Land, commanding them to make
spoil of it and to put the Inhabitants to Fire and Sword.

Item for having himself in person held an Assembly in the Marquisat of
Marauia, against the Kingdom of Boheme, where he demanded, both to join the
Troops of Morauia to those of the Emperor, and their passage through the
said Marquisat; and then indeed, partly by fair words, partly by
threatenings he persuaded the States of Morauia to allow of the passage.

Item for having, after the decease of the Emperor, not only taken into his
pay and service all the Forces, and open enemies of that Kingdom; but also
caused all the leuies made before, to be advanced, and brought in many
thousand Spaniards, and other forces; by means whereof horrible Cruelties, and
Tyrannies were exercised, by Fire, and Sword, and Sackings: both in Bohemia,
and Morauia, and much greater then in the time of the Emperor Mathias,
Insomuch that they spared neither old nor young, men nor women, no not the
innocent Babes, whereof many of them were in there Mothers bellyes: and which
is more, in worse then a Barberous fashion dug their bodies out of their
Graves, stripped them; and binding their hands and feet together, laid them
stark naked in a horrible manner upon the Altars, and set them at the doors
of Churches.

And though it be well known to the world that he never entered into
possession of this Kingdom; yet not withstanding, he has not forborne by his
letters to make choice of, and to admit for his Lieutenants the aforesaid
treacherous Patriots who are the source, and original cause of all this evil:
some of which he has yet by his person; who for being perfidious to this
Kingdom and for other great considerations were banished, of whom
(notwithstanuing) he does serve himself both in his Counsels and
Embassages, manifesting thereby that he does approve of all the mischief they
have done even until this present for the abolishing, and cassation of the
franchises, and Privileges of the Country, and that he makes more account of
such men, then of the whole Kingdom: by which every one may easily judge, what
the Provinces may expect or hope for so such a Lord.

Especially if we consider withal the Contracts and treaties which have
passed between the King of Spain and King Ferdinand, not only for so much as
concerns the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the incorporated Provinces thereof, but
chiefly also concerning the free Kingdom of Hungary, and that this was done
even then, when he was neither yet received, nor Crowned in any of the two
Kingdoms; which Treaties as then were kept secret and concealed from the
Provinces, but discovered afterward and brought to light by a singular, and
divine providence.

In those treaties the Free Election and the Privileges (which the said two
Kingdoms have by virtue of that Election) are entirely cut off, and
appropriated Hereditarily to the King of Spain and his Successors; in such
sort as the King of Spain does now quit and yield his Hereditary right unto
King Ferdinand; but with this restriction, that upon default of Heirs males of
the race of King Ferdinand, the said two Kingdoms, with the depending
Provinces, shall fall by right of Succession to the King of Spain, his Heirs
and Successors: As indeed the said Archduke Ferdinand, ever since the said
contracts were passed, has changed the old style, wherewith the precedent
Emperors and Kings of Boheme always contented themselves; for that the
Emperors Ferdinand, Maximilian, rnd Rodolphe did ordinarily write: Our
Kingdoms and Provinces Hereditarie; but the Archduke Ferdinand does write now
in this fashion: Our Kingdoms Hereditarie and Provinces. By this we may
again easily judge, what was the drift of King Ferdinand, and why he would
not be chosen, but only acknowledged in Bohemia; namely to suppress the Free
Election, and accordingly to be Lieutenant of the King of Spain in these
Countries, until such time as he had in the end entirely reduced them to the
Spanish yoke and servitude. But if the States had then had any knowledge of
the said contracts, doubtless they had sufficient cause, both to contradict,
and oppose them selves against it. For all men know, that the Kings of those
Kingdoms which are not Hereditary, but subsist by a Free Election, (as has
been formerly proved touching the Kingdom of Bohemia) cannot make any
contract with a stranger Prince without the approbation and consent of the
States, and all such treaties are in themselves void and of none effect. Such
and the like treaties might prove exceeding dangerous to the Empire; for by
this means the King of Spain would thrust in a foot to the Empire, as King
of Bohemia, from whence would necessarily follow that he must be Elector of the
Empire, by virtue of the Golden Bull of the Emperor Charles the 4.th, and so
hereafter would affect and pretend also to be King of the Romans, at which all
the Spanish practices do level and aim, which would be expressly contrary to
the Golden Bull, and the Oath of the other Electors; as also against the
Ordinances and constitutions of the Empire, and by this means the Imperial
Crown would be quite taken away from the Germane Nation, and be made entirely
Hereditary as they have endeavored, and practiced to make the Crown of
Bohemia. All which, together with that has been written by the States of
Bohemia to the College of Electors lately held at Franckford: as also how they
protested against the Election of the person of King Ferdinand to the Crown of
the Kings of the Romans; will plainly appear by their writings.

Since then in regard hereof the Provinces have acknowledged, and plainly
seen, that it was most dangerous, and indeed impossible to enter into any
treaty with such a Lord, who is not of himself, who speaks and writes
peaceably, but harbors war and bloodshed in his heart; much less for the
reasons aforesaid receive him into the Government, whereof he has many ways
deprived himself: let us consider the pernicious consequence that this would
have brought with it.

1 First, hereby the said treaties with Spain would have been confirmed.

2 Secondly, the States could not expect of such a Lord any certainty or
assurance in point of Religion or State.

3 And thirdly, without doubt the States must have paid, not only their own
but their enemies Forces, which have exercised so many Cruelties against them,
and their good Friends, and have been constrained to join with their enemies,
and March against their own Friends, which profess their own Religion.

4 Fourthly, it would give occasion to our enemies to blaspheme the name of
God, and to say, alas where is now our God?

5 And fifthly it came to that, that other Potentates, and Princes, of the
Religion had never given any assistance to the said States, if they had found
but the least inclination in them to enter into treaty with the Archduke
Ferdinand and other enemies.

And therefore seeing that for the reasons aforesaid, it has been
sufficiently proved, that the Archduke Ferdinand was never Elected King of
Bohemia by the ordinary course, and that he himself, has deprived himself,
and has forfeited both the Acceptance and the Coronation, which was
conditionally conferred upon him (as before) by not observing either his
Letters of Assurance, or Oath: As also seeing he has exercised manifest
tyrannies in the Kingdom, and passed contracts with the House of Spain
without the consent or knowledge of the States: For these reasons, they
understand, and find themselves to be free from him, and not any way tied
unto him in what kind soever.

And for the same reasons, agreeable both to divine and humane right, (with the
aid of the Almighty) they have taken the Freedom to Elect another King, as
shall be more fully declared to the world in a Manifestation hereafter to be
published.

A PROPOSITION made by the States of Bohemia, in their Assembly at PRAGVE upon
the Election of a King; the 16. of August, 1619. being the Birthday of the
Prince Elector Palatine.
ALbeit the Nomination of a King of BOHEMIA, requires a mature counsel and
deliberation; which ought to precede the nomination; in this point
(nevertheless) there is not so much difficulty, as in the rejecting of a
King; which gave a beginning to this, and stands in need both of a good
Justification, and of a great Power, where the nomination has no need of
those aids, but but of itself follows, after the rejection.

Now therefore since the Rejection (as the thing more importing us) is already
done; the Nomination will be much the more easy, provided we stand not upon
such a perfection in the choice, as the whole world cannot yield us. It
behooues us to set apart all particular passions, and to have regard (only) to
those reasons which are Fundamental. For there are points requisite, so
necessary to be considered in the Election of a King; as it is not for any
good Patriot to give his advice for the receiving of one in whom those things
required are not to be found. But we may with very good assurance conclude for
him, in whom they meet, more than in any other man.

1 As in the first place, it is needful that in such a person, there be none
of these matters to be feared for which King FERDINAND was rejected. That is to
say, that he ought not either to persequute, or advance any for the respect of
Religion, nor to exceed in the dependence of his own Counselors, or of
strangers; but to join himself with the States. He ought not to be
opinionatiue* nor given to do things of his own head, but to accomodate the
Customs of his House, and his, to the ordinances and liberties of this Crown.

2 In the second place, it is required, that he affect the Estates with an
acknowledgement of reputation.

3 Thirdly, that in time both of Peace and war, he govern his Kingdom by
his own presence; worthily and profitably.

4 Fourthly, that the Confederates may receive no cause of fear from him,
either of danger, or damage.

Since then there are Five who are inferred into the treaty of this Election;
that is to say, the King of DENMARRKE, the Elector PALATINE, the Elector of
SAXONY, the Duke of SAVOY, and the Prince of TRANSYLVANIA, it will be
therefore to purpose to consider, that although there be not any one of any
one of these Princes in his own particular, but is of merit both to be
Praised and recommended; there is among them (notwithstanding) a certain
diversity which every one by himself may prudently weigh. And forasmuch as it
is not permitted us to judge liberally of great Princes; in this place
(therefore) it shall suffice, without offense to any, briefly to deduce the
reasons for which the Elector Palatine ought to be esteemed very capable of
the Crown of BOHEMIA, and fit to maintain the present estate of the Kingdom.

For although he be not yet above twenty three; he is a Prince (nevertheless)
endued with a great judgment, bred up from his Cradle in goodness and virtue:
holds continually about him persons of great quality, as well for the Field,
as the State: accustomed to Courtesy; in himself of very plentiful Hopes:
and at this Age he will better form himself to the Customs of the Kingdom,
than if he were more increased in years. And God bestows not wisdom always
according to the Age of a man but upon him that calls to God for it in his
fear.

He is a Prince, moderate, virtuous and resolute in his Actions; quick and
sharp in his Discourse, true courteous toward all men; well Languaged; holds
a fair Court, of Earls, Barons, and Gentlemen; Loves and cherishes the
Nobility: imployes even men of mean condition in his Service, when he finds
desert in them for it; and will let no worthy service pass him without his
acknowledgement, his Subjects and Country (in part the Frontiers of this
Kingdom) he gouernes with Prudence; gives estimation to men of Honor; holds
a well-ordered Council, frequents the Council Table in his own Person; takes
exact heed to the opinions, and propositions of his Councillors; gives good
cause to have his own Judgment approved, and commended in things of
importance; inclines willingly to the informations of other men; loves the
Common good, and therein takes pains, with zeal, and without fear: bears
Compassion to the afflicted; shows himself laborious and resolved; is beloved
of his Subjects; carries himself Peaceably with his neighbors, of what
Religion soever they be; and for that winnes respect even of those of different
beliefes. For his own Religion, he is well affected; yet there is not any in
his Countries though of another Profession, that finds himself disquieted for
matter of Conscience or in the exercise of his Religion; so as every man may
with freedom live under him, provided his conversation be honest, and good.

There is none that can accuse him either of precipitation, or opinionatiuenes;
a thing very remarkable.

He is in good correspondence with those of the Houses PALATINE and of
BAVIERS; and yet for that reason forsakes nothing either of those rightes, or
of those Duties belonging to the general State of the Country.

And howsoever he is a Prince but young, and shows himself courteous, and
sweet toward his people; for all that there is neither lightness, dissolutenes,
nor voluptuousnes seen in him; nor any disorder, or excess at all in his
Diet; nor any Avarice, Prodigality, or other thing whatsoever, vnagreeable, or
contrary to the reputation of a Prince.

For the assistance the Crown of BOHEMIA may expect from him; it is clear to
every man's understanding, that he is not only not in debt; and that of his
Revenue he can lay something up, but also that the King of Great BRITAIN is
his Father in Law; the King of DENMARK his near Ally, and likewise the
Elector of BRANDENBVRGH: the Prince of ORANGE his Uncle; the Duke of BVILLON
his Ally; the States of the United Provinces of the Low-Countryes his
Confederates: the King of SWEDEN, and the Hanse Towns his Friends; and for his
Correspondents, the Duke of SAVOY, VENICE, and SWISSERLAND. He is in good
credit with all the Princes Electors, and other Princes, and States of the
Empire, more particularly with those of the Union. He has confederacies, and
ancient Alliances with FRANCE. The Prince of TRANSYLVANIA and High HVNGARIE
bears him affection. SAXONY and BAVIER, are in good terms with him. MENTZ,
and the neighbour-Countryes do look upon him with Honor and respect.
Insomuch as the Crown of Bohemia by his only means may get the Amity of all
those, which we do now seek with so much labor, and travail; and by the
same means we may be conserved, and Fortified against our Enemies; which
from any other treated of in the Election can neither be expected, nor hoped
for.

And since it is a certainty that this Prince would not accept of the Election
for ambitions sake, but only for the Common good; we may therefore promise
our selves that he will ever continue in the good affection he has already
shown toward this Crown, by the profitable Councels and assistances, which
as well in his own person, as by other ways (according to the occasion) he
has made to appear: when some others, for their particular considerations,
have greatly prejudized both the States of the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the
Countries, and Provinces confederate.

Those Provinces confederate, who are already in good understanding with this
Prince, have to consider, that they cannot ground the like confidence upon
others: (who are too much tied in respect of the House of Austria) for the
receiving of a succor in time of their need. And in this case the
confederacy might bring them rather prejudice, than benefit; a thing
exceedingly importing this Crown, as may be seen by experience.

Since then those qualities required, are found all to meet in the person of
the Prince-Elector-Palatine; and that in those of the other Princes spoken of
in this Election (the Prince of Transiluania excepted: who has his eye upon
another mark) though in themselves of great worth and merit: in regard
(notwithstanding) of the constitution of our State, there are many abilities
wanting, (as may be easily shown:) it will be to purpose therefore no longer
to defer the Election. And so much the rather, because the Crown of Bohemia,
with the Countries confederate (now after the rejection) will be more
disquieted than ever, and remaining without a Head, we shall find no man
that will duly undertake our protection or Defense.

FINIS.
To the Reader.
The Reader may not expect hereof at this time so exact an impression as the
subject requires: by reason the Copy (out of which it was Printed) was
written over in have, and by a stranger: and Printed likewise in have, the
Compositors also strangers. By reason whereof some escapes may have passed in
the Orthographie, the which being but Literal, may the more easily be
pardoned, both to the Printer, and the Ouer-seer no ordinary Corrector, Vale.

John Harrison.


