CHRISTIAN Liberty Described in a SERMON PREACHED IN the Collegiate Church at
Westminster, by a Minister of Suffolk.

Non legem vereor nocens, sed fortunam innocens.

A. C.

LONDON. Printed. by I. VV. for Matthew Law. 16^6.

(...) will prove unsavory: for corrupt stomachs turn good meat into
loathsome parbreakes. Their judgment is little worth, who like of nothing, but
what they do themselves. When this Sermon was preached, applause ensued: the
printing (I trust) will not diminish the preachers praise.

De absentibus bona.
GAL. 5.13. For Brethren ye have been called unto liberty, only use not your
Liberty as an occasion to the flesh.


IT is not misery so much as strangenes, if as some of our antie^t Religious
judged, it be man's best to live a kind of prisoner; or, if, as devout S.
Bernard wished, to be always sickly; or, if obedience (which includes
subjection and restraint) be, as Plato writes, man's not only choice, but
alone virtue; as if his weakness were such, that he could not live but by
rules and directions, or his frowardnes of will so unruly, that he cannot have
any liberty, but he will abuse it. It must be true, that without law there
cannot be offense, and yet it is better and less offense, to suffer the laws
transgressio^, then to be without the law; Praestat illic esse vbi nihil
licet, quam vbi omnia. It is better to be there where nothing is lawful, then
where all things; where there is no liberty then nothing but liberty; where a
man may do evil, then where he can neither do good nor evil. Reason of this
can there none be given, but a misdoubting fear, that man left free to the
liberty of a bou^dles and infinite will, would act somewhat more at length,
then man can define or say what; the practice of an endless, mad, and
inconsiderate will, being far beyond the conceit of man's limited invention.
Man is impatient and cannot bear restraint (a note, not of his natures;
generousnes and worth but untamed wildnes, and insolent hautinesse) and yet he
is not at all to be borne, if not restrained (a note again not of his
infinitenes and power, but co^ntrary, of his imperfection and corruption) from
the first, not able to do that is good; from this second, willing to do nothing
but that is evil. Is not the frowardness of man strange, that he should, In
vetitum ruere and negata cupere more desire an evil thing being forbidden,
and not the more also affect a good thing, for being inhibited (which nothing
else in the world does, but man, restraint of it self, having equal effect in
both; and yet the state so, that the evil upon necessity must be forbidden to
man, or else it will be worse.) Upon these difficulties, is it not very odd?
that a like course of the Roman law-giuers must be practiced, who, to avoid
sacrilege, held it their only means, to command that nothing should be given
unto the Church. And that of Lycurgus, December Tab. opes amoue^to.
who to take away ielousy, held it his only way, to make adultery to be no
sin; courses I cannot resolve whether in these particulars, good for a common
wealth or no, but in a Christian Church intolerable, and yet wisdom natural
cannot tell, how to give a better remedy. The good and wise God of nature,
foreknowing the unruliness of Liberty has so contrived the whole frame and
composure of man, that there is not a power in him, that has not (as it were)
a propper limiter and confiner to it. The natural unsatiate appetite of the
bodies norishme^t, it is bou^ded with the straight compasses of the bodies
instruments, with sense of pain from oppression, with delight from
sufficiency; the minds passions and affections, some of them bounded by shame,
some by fear, all by reason; Reason it self, by innated conclusions; the will
and desire, by understanding; the understanding, by the will and desire, vt
voluntas oculis, sic intellectus fertur carere pedibus; the will wants eyes,
and sees nothing, but by the understanding; so the understanding wants
feet, and can follow nothing, but by the will; will and understanding limited
by memories and imaginatio^s imperfect prese^tme^ts; imagination, by outward
senses imbecillities and scarcity of object; senses and all the soul power and
substance, bou^ led by the bodies terrene grosnes; the body it self, co^fined
by a short and sle^der skin and superficies; and that also by a proper place
inferior here below, upon the basest eleme^t. And thus as man; God bou^ded
man. And yet behold thus inchained (as it were) and imprisoned in him self,
man, he will be free, nay he will be wild, and this his scanted liberty
will break out loose, into an infinity of vncontrouls and freedoms of
disorders. His natural appetite, for that it has liberty to desire, will
never but desire and will not be satisfied with sufficie^cy, his affections,
will deny obedience unto Reason, and plead it their King: but at pleasure and
by election, oftener is reason deposed by rebellious affections, then affections
held obedient subjects by Reason; His desire, swells infinite and will have more
then is, more then inue^tio^ can form, and fancy and understanding, show his
understanding will dream and prate, and tell of more then it can conceive and
approve, from similitudes of sense; sense, scorneth almost natures playnes, and
will have Arts more curious objects and repineth t^ be tied to the bodies
organs. The base body disdaines to dwell below, and will build a Tower, tha^
it may climb unto the heaven. Thus man, confined from vice (his whole compose
and make being nothing (as it were) but a mystery of linkes, and chains of
inhibition, one unto another) and scanted, almost, of all free liberty, yet
see how, the small he has, he does abuse, as if he were alone to be compeld
and governed. The God of wisdom, well discerning this manner of man's
corruption, suited agreeably a course unto him, and gave him at length new laws
Exodus 20. austere and strict, binding him to perfourmance under severe
penalties, restraints that would give but a shorted liberty, and burdens that
he could not with ease disport him under. And thus God dealt with man. Is it
not strange, it should be censured and found the better, for man to live under
Law then Liberty? that man (the worthiest and noblest of Gods creatures, by
creation both good and wise) should rather do that he should, from the
compulsion of a command, then liberty, and direction of his own abilities?
that the writing of laws in tables, should more avail with him, then
ingrauing them in his heart? Or is not the temper of man strangely miswrought,
by corruption, that it should be easier for God (as I may so speak) to write
his laws in stones, in hard tables of stone, then firmly enough to engraue
them in his heart? Reverence of virtue is humanities religion; ciuility is the
goodness; and credit all the holiness and pietye: and then shall man so far
degenerate, as rather to practice that, which is made but good, by the force of
a command, then reverence virtue his own proper object, and from it self
good and excellent? Shame is the property of man, from which a true ingenuous
spirit will more avoyde disgrace then danger, and fear it more to take
discredit, then a wound; and then, shall fear (that common quality with
beasts) restrain man more from vice, and hold him better in obedience? shall
he endure better to serve, then to obey, and to obey then to command? whose
privilege and prerogatives were Liberty and rule, and to be subject unto
neither of the two? yea thus disordered is corruption, which being, not a thing
that was created and made, is not a subject to be discoursed of, thus, with
Natures and Reasons grounds and principles. Man thus endured long, a servant to
laws, commands both inferior and strict, they were burdens insupportable;
names, the one of slavery, the other misery: the law it yoked man, a restraint
both hard and base; it was a schoolmaister, that taught with whips and rods,
and nothing but severity, man's chief incourageme^t in performance was fear and
tenor; his uttermost diligence not toil enough; his desert, punishment; his
reward future and but hopes of promise; his reuerentest office of priesthood,
but birthes gift (which is deserts prejudice) his worthiest duty, but in
sacrificing beasts; for all his noblenes and honor, his chief performance was
in types and figures; and for all his abilities and worth, his practice and
action was but in inferior ceremonies. The God of love and mercy (the fulness of
his time now come, and the praefixed period of his decree expired) came down
from heaven, and left both the right hand and bosom of his father (places, the
one of glory the other of love) and vouchsafed to descend (amoris and
humilitatis progressus est descensus) nay to the inferiority and condition of a
cre^ture (a thing especially against the nature of a God and a creator) and
being here amongst us, did not conqueror and triumpher-like, abrogate and
disanull our former laws, to impose more strict and harder of his own, from
glory and policies severity; but first (and that for our sake) he fulfilled
them, that his obedience might be righteousness to many; Romans 5.19.
he freed us from the curse of the law, by being made himself a curse for us,
Gal. 3.13.
Non authoritate Regis sed obedientia filii, not by the absolute authority of a
King, but by the obedience of a son; not by ca^celling the bond, but by paying
the debt, not alone by giving mercy, but by satisfying justice; not by being
graced by favor; but by suffering punishment: He took those heavy burdens from
our sholders, and eased us of them (at least, Romans 6.
much lightened them ^he took us from under the law, and placed us under grace,
and called us, as my text does speak to liberty. And this is, as I take it, the
truest inference of my text. The method I will observe in handling, shall be
this. First, after a short Apology and reason for my Texts choice, I will
premise somewhat of Christian liberty in general: Secondly, I will give the
seueralles and particulars, wherein this liberty which Christ has called us
unto, consists, Thirdly, present upon every particular of our Liberty, I will
add the peculiar and proper fleshly abuses of them. This text, it is so
difficult, that Origin, even Origin himself (quem Christiani Prophetam,
Philosophi magistrum dixerunt) says Vincentius Lirinensis, In comment. in
(...) locum^ (a)
did judge it to be obscure; And S. Hierom, so abstruse, that he thought it his
best to follow Origin, notwithstanding Origin had formerly judged it to be
obscure, as if his judgment of it were this, that he gave the best judgment,
whose judgment was not absolute. If this obscurity deterreth not the natural
forwardness and boldness of youth, from meddling with it (as why should
endeavors of difficulty be rather exempted from it; then adventures of dangers)
yet may it unhappily breed the censure of arrogance, or of an indecorum and
indiscretion, which all, but scholars, do more avoid then arrogance. Nay
rather why should not the hardness of it, excuse me if I do it not well, then
terrefy me from atte^pting of it, for fear of doing it ill; and Origens
censure of obscurity, be my just Apology? Calvin is censured to have been
learned in Divinity by teaching others, not by being first taught himself: or,
fullier to excuse my self; as S. Hierom (in his 1. proeme upon this epistle)
to Paula and Eustochiu^ writes, S. Paul did in this epistle to the Gallat. So
will I; I do not purpose so much to teach as to reprehend, Non tam docere, quam
reprehendere and increpare: And though it seems not so to you, Minus quiddam
est increpare, quam docere, to teach requires maturity of judgment; to find
fault with abuses, only a good intention is sufficient to do it truly, and a
little common understanding to do it perfectly. And why should not Elder Paul
exhort young Timothy to rebuke with freedom, except it be now feared, that
then young Timothy would rebuke old Paul. But if from this my freedom, which I
purpose, in reproving our Church abuses you shall misconceiue my conscience by
judging it inclinable to some other foreign Romish, and Papisticall
superstition, you shall not more against Charity then reason it self offend
and iniure me. I have read an ancient father desining Adultery, to be nothing
else, but a Curiosity of an other man's pleasure; in which sense, I religiously
promise for my Consciences Chastity, that she plaieth not the adulteress in
Curiosity of another pleasure, nor the faith and Opinion of any other Church,
then this of ours which I am truly wedded unto. Nay should a man be touched,
either by loves fear, or enmities suspicion, with such an odiousness as the
Papacy amongst us; I would not wish him make that vulgar form of Apology, by
running presently into an immoderate commendation of his Churches goodness
(Speciem illud haberet and similitudinem adulationis, that would have the show
and resemblance of flattery) nor would I wish him to conceal her faults;
silence of faults, is a kind of baser flattery, not wiser; and for mine own
part, I had rather be naught my self, then flatter them that be so. Nor
would I wish him run into an eager detestation and dispraise of the imposed
scandal, for that would presently be censured, either falsehood, and
dissimulation, or malignitie, from the brain or spleen, not from the heart:
but I should rather advise him, freely of himself to speak the uttermost,
that wiser Auditors might discover the fallacies, that gave occasions of the
unjust suspicion. And this premised, I come nearer to the matter. For the
doctrine of Christian Liberty in general, Calvin (whom especially I purpose
to follow.) In the 19. Chapter of his 3. book of Instit. urges the
explication of this Christian Liberty, as a thing not to be omitted, by him,
who will comprise in short, the sum of the whole Gospel; as if he meant it
an Epitome of Christianity: and places it not only amongst things
commendable, but commends it in the degree of necessity; that without it the
consciences of Christians, can attempt nothing, without doubting wavering,
varying, trembling, despairing, nor ever attain the doctrine of Justification:
as if Christian Liberty were the rule, for consciences, to square their
actions by. This I deny not; the doctrine of this Liberty is good and
necessary, but take heed you abuse it not as an occasion to the flesh.
Christian Liberty, it is more necessary to be known, then commended or urged:
who desires it not, if he do but know it; who uses it not, if he do not know
it? I am afraid, men should make it their asylum, refuge, and comfort, in their
looseness and disorders. This doubt is not mine; Calvin himself foresaw this
easines of abuse and therefore presently upon his commendation preuenteth thus.
Simulatque iniecta est aliqua mentio Christianae libertatis, ibi aut ser ue^t
libidines, aut insani motus surgunt, nisi mature obuiam eatur lasciuis ingeniis
istis: partim e^^m huius libertatis praetextu omne^ Dei obedientia^ excutiunt,
and in effraenata^ licentiam se proripiunt, partim indignantur putantes omne^
moderatione^ ordine^, rerumque delectu^ tolli. If the particulars be well
marked, had Calu^n been the author of our disorders, he could not better have
described our times Calvin, in his wisdom forelawe these effects, before they
came; Sic Sapientia, diuinatio est (says Pomponius Atticus) So wisdom is a
divination; though contrary, with other Politicians, Diuinatio sapientia suit,
Divination has been their wisdom, by foretelling of accidents which they
intended to effect, though by divining, in the nature of giving warning, they
so purchased the opinion of integrity and good meaning. The doctrine of
Christian liberty it was more necessary when Paul did preach; when none of the
Gentiles or Jews received Christ; when a Church was to be established, then
now in a full settled Christian Church, where no man doubts of it. Iudaisme and
Christian liberty be properly opposite in some respects; and therefore where
Atheism is more feared then Iudaisme there Christian liberty must be warely
preached. This made antiquity rather clog the Church with superstition, and too
much then too little, as the Philosopher advises in his Ethyckes, to bend
mostly to one side, when nature is more propense unto the other. To urge
liberty unto the multitude and the^ suppose an exhortation will restrain
excess, is, as if one should put a strong bit and bridle, upon a fierce
coursers head, but then turn him out loose into the champaine, and suppose he
will be guided well enough. The misunderstanding, nay misteaching, this
Liberty amongst some foreign Disciplinarians have taken those effects, that
one may almost say of them as Plutarch (amongst his Lacon. Apothe.) reports
one to have said of Athens: One (says he) travayling to Athens, and seeing
the Athenians to revel and wanton it, in all lascivious and licentious delights
nihilque in honestum ducere, and nothing to account dishonest, returning home
again and asked how matters went at Athens, he answered that omnia pulchra,
all there was well, all there good, per iocum innuens, omnia illic pulchra
putari, turpe nihil; Ironically insinuating, that all things there were
accounted good and nothing dishonest. In somewhat such like sort returning
trauailers from those licentious Reformers, may almost report as truly that
Omnia illic pulchra, all things there be fair, all things there christian:
that which once was vice is now with them no vice, that which once was virtue,
is now none, as if vices and virtues had held their essences but by lease;
which now expired, they cease to be that which they were before vices and
virtues. So^what like to that which was wrote of Petronius Arbiter (pardon the
resemblance whatsoever Petronius was) may be said of these men. Illi dies per
somnum, nox oblectamentis vitae transigebatur, vtque alios industria, ita hunc
ignauia ad famam protulerat; he spent the day in sleep, and the night in the
pleasures of the life; and as Industry made famous other men, so did sloth him:
habebaturque non ganeo and profligator, sed erudito luxu. So these, in the day
and sight of men, as a sleep, they do no more but breath; but in the night
and secret, then they play their prankes And as strictness and austerity of
life, made famous and renowned our ancestors; so looseness and liberty these;
and yet they must not be said to be Libertines, but of a learned and Zealous
Luxury (freedom I shuold have said) and christian liberty. Thus slippery and
easy, yea, almost necessary is the lapse unto these abuses; when Liberty is
immoderately, inconsiderately and indiscretly taught and commended. Men in
their actions of pleasure, will not distinguish liberty and license, in which,
devotion also having a part, which never thinks it goes far enough, will
never judge they have used liberty aright, till they be at the furthest of
licentiousness. Strange it is how far men will run possessed with belief
that upon Conscience and Gods law^, they ought to take a liberty. I will
bestow but one note more upon this point: Allegation of oppression, is a note
of faction in the common wealth; and pleading for liberty is always to be
suspected and many times it is a mark of schism, in the Church. It is an odd
observance which Pamelius makes upon that of Tertullian, in his prescriptions
of Apelles the heretic, seduced by Philumena. That there was never yet
Heretic who pleaded not for his liberty. Qui suas non habuerit Philumenas,
that has not had his Philumena speaking in that particular Liberty for all. I
therefore, in short will conclude this part with the advice of Galba to Piso
adopting him Emperor (for that which he spoke of the Romans is true of us) That
in teaching this doctrine we Tacit. lib. 1^
ought to be very wary, and to consider, that we are to deal with men, qui
nec totam seruitutem pati possunt, nec totam libertatem, who can neither bear
only servitude, nor only Liberty. I come now to the particulars wherein
Christian Liberty consists.

Calvin (my guide in the forenamed place) thinks it to consist in three
things; Instit. 19. c.
Primae vt fidelium conscientiae dum fiducia suae Coram Deo instificationis
etc. first that the Consciences of the faithful, whilst they seek a
confidence of their justification before God, may lift themselves above the Law
totamque legis institiam obliuiscantur, and forget all the justice of the law
for since the law leaves no man just, either we are excluded from all hope of
justification, aut ab illa nos solui oportet or we must be freede from it; Ac
sic quidem, vt nulla prorsus operum ratio habeatur, and so freed that no
regard that all be had of works Nam qui vel tantillum operum se afferre
debere ad obtinendam iustitiam cogitat, for he that thinks he ought to
bring never so little of works to obtain justice, he makes himself the
debtor of the whole law; sublata igitur legis mentione and omni operum
cogitatione seposita the very me^tioning therefore of the law being taken away,
and al cogitation of works, he must in the matter of Justification, only
embrace the mercy of Christ. So Luther to this purpose is very much, in his
books de liberate Christiana, and his Comment. upon the Epistle to the Gal.
where, Vt Bellar. de Iustif. li. 4. cap. 1.
upon the 2. Chapter thus, Sola fides necessaria est, vt iusti simus, caetera
omnia liberrima, neque praecepta amplius neque prohibita. Again, Si
conscientia dicat, peccasti; Responde, peccaui: ergo Deus puniet and damnabit;
Non: at lex hoc dicit; sed nihil mihi cum lege: quare? quia habeo libertatem.
Let all this be true, but take heed you abuse it not as an occasion to the
flesh. The great Cardinal controuersor of our days, Bellarmine, upon this or
such like speeches passes thus his censure; Ista, quomodocunque excusentur,
certe magnam vim habent, ad persuadendum simplici populo, and ad malum
propenso, non esse facienda opera bona: These how soever they may be excused,
verily they have great force to persuade the people, being simple, and propense
to evil, that good works are not to be done. May I say, without a kind of
sin against this place, that there is moderation in this censure? yes, for an
adversaries. Nay then think of it well, and tell me; do you your selves judge
it easy, for ignorance and corruption, the one to conceive, the other to
believe, such hard doctrines and seeming repugnances as these be? namely, that
we are freed from the moral Law, and yet to our power to perform it; that we
have nothing to do with the Law (but with faith in Christ) and yet the
Decalogue not to be neglected; that good works, are not so much as to be
thought on for salvation, and yet to be performed? will not corruption (think
you) be unwilling, and ignorance unable to distinguish these, and so betwixt
them both let good works alone? whatsoever the sense be of them, what may be;
nay the sound alone will be enough for unwillingness to omit them, and
guiltiness to apology for them having omitted them already. I would to God I
were not here constrained, to run into complaints (that unfitting subject
for a young man's toonge) no man loving better then my self to speak that may
please, though no man hating it more then to speak to please. All Stories have
complained of their times, I know it well, and know not any, that have not
cried out o tempora, o mores; but yet some have complained more then others,
and every one (if well observed) of some particular vice or other: but none in
general have complained more then this our age (the sense and sight of the
present does not deceive me) and none so much of uncharitableness, since
Christ himself had not where to lay his head; it is our p^cul^^r and times
proper vice. Will ye in this particular, see the true distinction betwixt our
ancestors and us; Illi vitiis laborabant, nos remediis; they labored with
vices, we with remedies; they were sick with diseases, we with Physic: the
first is always pitied, this second (in smaller matters) is usually laughed
at. Or if you will, thus. The Christian world is sick of a disordered Ague;
the whole fit from unnatural and distempered heat; that now is past, and of
it we have no fear, having had so strong purgations. And now the cold
shiuering fit of indeuotion and uncharitableness is sore upon it. Had all
things in the world decaide so much as charity, the Christian world, before
this time, had been as small as a moate. Do I slander and scandalize our
time? Why tell me then, come not good laws from evil manners? were not our
forefathers constrained by Statutes, in one kind, to moderate devotions
charity: and are not our Parliaments enforced to strengthen Laws, and enact
new, for relief of poverty? and yet will not our new Laws, supply the place
of old devotions charity. Wisdom in Salomons time, cried in the high
streets, and amongst the press at the entering of the gates, and none would
hear her; now wisdom (God be thanked) is heard resonablie well, but poverty
lies crying, not amongst the press at the entrings of the gates, but in the
porches of the Temples of the Lord, creeping so near his house and altars as
they can, the more to move compassion, but every one passes by, and scarcely
look upon the wounded man; Nay, the Leuite (the Priest himself) comes
through the porch, and passes up into his pulpit, and there speaks so for
Christian Liberty, that he little commends Christian Charity, or any whit
helps the poor wounded man. Of this uncharitableness, may it be
vn-offensiue to seek the cause? was it a religious hate of an old abuse, and
a flight from that opinion of meriting by works, to the extreme opposite? No,
that course is judged to be erroneous, and by the wisdom of our better
writers, to have mislead, Hooker.
and done some harm, in many particulars of Reformation. And the very Poet
tells us, Horat.
that In vitium ducit culpae fuga, si earet art, the flying of a vice leads
to a vice, if it wants Art; and let us be ashamed to allege it, we shall be
accused of folly, Si in contraria curramus; Nay let us fear to allege it,
Tertullian makes it a prescription against worse then folly, to run rather
from an opinion then to one; Opus hoc est habere non de proprio aedificio sed
alterius destructione, suffodene non aedificare: As if our Religion should be,
as Tacitus writes, of the nature of Galba, to be rather extra vitia quam intra
virtutes. What then is the cause? I dare not presume to give the cause of any
thing, and less of evils, then benefits, but if I may conjecture it to be
that which others of understanding, have plainly judged it to be; I then
suppose it verily, that our abuses in neglect of charity, have come from those
former named positions, not that they be erroneous doctrine, but erroneously
understood and abused. And so in this sense, I will say with an adversary
himself, who lays it an imputation upon us, that uncharitableness and evil
life, be not only from our corrupt natures, but also from our doctrine; not
that these doctrines, be properly causes of them, but rather occasions taken
from these and such like positions, our adversaries do take advantage to abuse
us, by persuading their ignorants, that we do teach licentiousness: So Bellar.
himself does from those (as he says) of the rigid Lutherians In Colloquio
Altenburgensi, ad satanam spectare Christianos cum operibus bonis. Vbi supra.
Adeo non esse necessaria opera bona, vt etiam ad salutem incommodent, suntque
perniciosa. Precari oportere vt in fide sine omnibus operibus bonis, vsque in
finem perseveremus; with diverse like, which I confess in their sense may be
true, but yet had need to meet with better interpreters, then adversaries or
ignorants. And your understandings know; that if an adversary can take
advantage, to abuse us from them, we our selves will take occasion, to abuse
them to our own advantage of liberty: love of liberty in our selves, will work
as strongly, as malice can in others. What should I recount particulars. From
this part of christian liberty, I will not say, but inconsiderate urging of it,
and misconceiuing, have come a multitude, if not schismatic Paradoxes, yet
of schismatic practices and manners; Equidem viri fratres, Mores nostri sunt
scismatici, verily brethren, many of our manners, they be schismatic: there
is no greater heresy of life, then is uncharitableness. Hence, first, there
is a secret covert for Hypocrisy, which in the inuisibilitie of sole faith
(from hence misunderstood) may freely cosen and dissemble; hence stupid
security, which under the opinion of certaintye and sufficiency of belief
alone, lays sound and dead a sleep, (a sleep on both ears) reason and
conscience. Laboriosa quondam res fuit esse christianum, nunc ingeniosa, It was
once a matter of labor to be a Christian, now of dispute and talking; once of
practice, now of doctrine only. Hence next what if I should observe to have come,
that very Paradox of the Anabaptists. That al things must be common: For,
Church revenues taken away houses of maintenance suppressed, and charity (upon
this doctrine) buried in their ruins, necessitye invented this Paradox, to
have it self maintained, a subtle policy of the Devil, under a false show of
greater Charity to take away all charity, by induc ng a community. Hence also
comes injurious scandalizing and traducing, the religious lives and courses
of once renowned saints; to the prejudice of future charity, and injury of
former. And hence vngracefull reprochings of Charities liberality, and old
devotions goodly monumentes: which, as their abuses gave some cause, so the
inconsiderate teaching this doctrine, gave occasion to lawful authority for to
suppress. I cannot name them but I must speak a word or two. Fair portions
of the Lord they were, which to bestow upon him, devotion disinherited her
own dear children, fair Paradises (the fathers call them so) where innocence
might best have kept it self entire, but subtle serpenty, intising to a taste
of forbidden fruit, both she and hers were straight disparadised; since when,
in sweat and sorrow, have we their successors eat our bread, and the earth it
bringes forth many thorns and thistles for ou^ portions. I think the
suppression of those monuments (of that nature) that it was a punishment but
just and first deserved. Pi^ty is not limited to a good cause, but in case of
misery is common to al^: you may bewail the death of him that dies justly,
and therefore need not fear to lament their overthrow. ^ood it was for Caesar
that Pompey should not live; yet when the head of worthy Pompey was showed unto
Caesar, the story says, he wept most bitterly: so, if we any where behold, the
remaining relics of those goodly walls digd up with the bones of them that
founded them; though so well done, me think we should not choose but weep
most bitterly. I will say but a word more of them, The pulling of those
buildings down, was of the nature of those things quae defendipossu^t, sed
and defleri. O use not then thus your liberty as an occasion to the flesh No,
no, this christian liberty, it is not an immunity from mercies co^passions and
charities good works, but it is a ser^itude unto them, as the words next unto
my Text do speak, exhorting, that by love we serve one an other. Religion is
not a brest-work, there is no such freedom from the law; it is not enough for
charity to hold her hand on her bosom and feel how her heart works, but from
her heart she must stretch it forth to help the distressed. A christian, as he
has a Creed to believe so has he x comma^deme^ts to observe: Christ came not
to dissolve the law, but to fulfill it. In the Gospel, belonging to the Gospel,
there be not only Consolations, but threats and Comminations. Mat 7.
The t^e^ that brings not forth good fruits shall be cut down and thrown
into the fire. The Gospel preached as it should, will make Christians cry out,
Men and Brethren what shall ^e do? Act. 2. James. 5.
and not only, I will go in peace, my faith has saved me. James preached
Gospel, when he bad the rich men hold. The Euangelium, it is a joyful and
good message; who does deny it; for that it tells of our savior and
reconciler; but it has other offices; The promises of it, be free, liberal,
and merciful; but many of them be conditional, Fac hoc and viues. Mat. 19. Si
vis ad vitam ingredi, serua mandata: And obedience to the Law moral, is as
well taught in the Gospel as in the Law: Christ he was a Lawgiver, as well
as a Redeemer from the Law. The yoke of Christ it is sweet but yet a yoke; and
his burden is light, but yet a burden. Why, but how then (will you say) are
we freed from the Law? As I even now told you out of Calvin, for I do not
contradict him, but you, that abuse his doctrine; yet if you will, in a word I
will tell you whatsome others write, we are freed, says the Papist, from the
burdens of the judicial and Ceremonial law; of which spoke Peter Act. 15.
Quid tentatis imponere iugum super Ceruices Discipuloru^, quod nec nos nec
patres nostri portare potuimus; what but only so? are we not freed from the
moral law? yes, thus some write we are, a Dominio legis moralis; It rules not
over us as slaves, but children, it is made more supportable and light unto us,
for that the law came alone, but the Gospel with grace. They which received
the Law in Mount Sinai by Moses, received only doctrine, that, instructed by
the law, they might discern betwixt vices and virtues: but they which
received the Gospel by Christ, received also grace with it; not only to
distinguish good and evil, but to love goodness and hate iniquity. Before,
it was the Law of servitude and fear, for that without grace, which Moses
could not give; it placed men guilty and subject to the punishment; but now by
Christ it is the Law of Liberty and Love, for that he gives with it his
Spirit, making us more able and willing to perform it, and adds, by his
performance, to our want and imperfection in it. It is Saint Augustines Simily
in Lib. de perfect. iustitiae. That the Law now, it is like unto the wings of
a bird, which do not so much depresse as lighten up; the wings of themselves
be heavy, but having given them a power to move, they be no burdens to the
body, but an ease and lightening. In a word, Christ has freede us from the
Law, non adimendo tegi vim obligandi, sed addendo hominibus charitatem illam
libenter implendi. Or thus, if you will, with Saint Augustine. That we are, in
lege, non sub lege. In 1. Psalm.
In the Law, not under the Law. He is said to be under the law, Qui a lege
agitur tanquam seruus, who is driven and compelled by the law as a servant; he
is in the law, Qui secundum legem agit vt liber, who works according to the
law as a freeman. In a word, vbi Spiritus Domini, ibi libertas. 2. Cor. 3. And
thus much for this first part of Christian Liberty. 2. Pars libertatis.
The second follows, which depends (as Calvin speaks) of the former; and
it is this: Vt conscientiae, non quasi legis necessitate coactae, legi
obsequantur; sed legis ipsius iugo liberae, voluntati Dei vltro obediant: That
our consciences should obey the Law, not as compelled by the necessity of the
Law, but free from the yoke of the Law, should of their own accord obey the
will of God; Thus Calvin in his former cited place. His meaning, as I conceive,
from that which follows, it is this; man's greatest perf^ction is
imperfection, his holiness is wickedness his will unwillingness, his
endeavors vain, his pains unprofitable, and all his well-done works but
well-dooing evil, if examined by the rigor and strictness of the Law: and
therefore now we are freed from that exactness which the law requires, our
actions are not to be judged by the letter and tenor of that; but we may like
children, offer up our imperfect, Dimidiata opera, aliquid etiam vitij
habentia. Our half works (says he) yea having some fault or vice in them,
trusting that our obedience and endeavor will be accepted by our merciful
Father. And that such we ought now to be, who must assuredly believe, Obsequia
patri probatum iri quantulacunque sint, and quantumuis rudia and imperfecta;
that our performances will be allowed of our Father, whatsoever they be, and
how rude and imperfect soever. Let this be true, but take heed you abuse not
this liberty as an occasion to the flesh. If as Symonides in Plutarch,
Rudiores dixit esse Thessalos, quam qui ab ipso decipi possunt; So the vulgar
they be too simple to misconceiue from the former doctrine, and make
collection, that good works (upon this Christian liberty) are not at all to
be practiced (for it is an unhappiness of wit to be caught with Paradoxes)
yet here is a doctrine more fit to be abused by all conceits and
conditions. As this position is true and religious, so is it wise and
politic, giving and referring our actions and all of them to the glory
alone, the will, mercy, love, savor and acceptance of God, and together
assuming liberty unto our selves secret and inclusiuely (if not warily
understood) extending Gods will, favor, mercy and acceptaunce to the quality
of our actions. Though to do nothing seems not to any sufficient, yet to do
ones endeavor and uttermost, seems to all to be very reasonable, though ones
endeavor be also of it self nothing. The doctrine of this latter (of doing
ones endeavor) is better than the other (of doing nothing) and yet the effect
of them both in practice all one, namely nothing. Hypocrisy may freely deceive
others; and negligence, it self; when the sufficiency of men's actions, is
referred to the censure of the secret will of God, and not the sentence of an
outward written law. And therefore, as religion must teach the first words of
my Text, of our calling to liberty; so must wisdom the latter that we abuse
it not as an occasion to the flesh; you must not conceive (which is the usual
abuse this doctrine works) that you have Liberty, freely to square your
actions, not to a law but to the merciful accepta^ce of Gods will; and then Gods
will by your own insufficie^cies endeavors; and then your endeavors sufficiency by
your own reasons judgment, and your judgment by your desires; and your
desires by your fancies, and your fancies by your pleasures, and your pleasures
by your self. No, this is the same which the Apostle here dehorteth from, and
yet it is the circle (vtitur Demo^ circulis non rectis lineis) wherewith the
Devil deceives the weak eye of ignorance and corruption. But for that this
second part of Christian Liberty depends (as Calvin speaks) of the former,
of which I have spoken more liberally, I thus leave it, with this light touch I
have given it, and come to the third and last part of this Liberty.

Tertia pars.
The third part of Christian Liberty (says mine author Calvin lib. 3 instit:
Cap: 19.7.) is this: Vt nulla rerum externaru^ (quae per se sunt (...))
religione coram Deo teneamur, quin eas nunc vsurpare nunc omittere
indifferenter liceat, That we are not bound with any Religion before God, to
the observance of outward things, which in themselves are indifferent, but
that we may use them or omit them, indifferently, at our pleasures. And here
be comprised (says he) all free ceremonies, to the observance of which, our
consciences be tied with no necessity. Let this be true to faction or
devotion, but take heed you abuse it not as an occasion to the flesh; Gladius
hic ille est, this is the sword first killed our enemies, but now has wounded
our own selves, with many festring cuts and gashes, upon the heart dangerously,
upon the body pitifully, upon the face most deformedly. This got reformation
the victory, and made it abuse it when it had it. Hannibals triumphs in Italy,
and brauing of the walls of Rome, was the overthrow of Carthage; God grant it
be not so with our Church victories in this particular. Can an argument be
good against the validity of the laws of Rome, as laws, and not be as good
against the laws of England in this kind. I will speak of this doctrine as
Tacitus does of the dealinges of Tyberius, Quanto maiore libertatis imagine
teguntur, tanto cruptura ad infensius seruitium, with how much the more
flattering color of Liberty they be covered, so much the more evil they
appear at length, to lead to a more troublesome and slavish servitude. It is
but a first thought for any man to imagine, Peace a necessary cause of
controversies and divisions, especially in matter of discipline, where
authority is monarchical and absolute, that may then the better suppres them.
And cannot any man name countries in christendom quiet and at rest, that are
not thus troubled with dissentions, nor accused of such liberty in disorders?
No, the cause of our differences, schisms, Church factions, and half our
ungodliness, has come from the abuse of Christian liberty in general, and from
this part of it especially in particular which indeed is no true part of it.
As in the two former parts I only showed the abuses of them, so in this, it
was my purpose (upon the first choice of this Text) to have showed it, it self
to be an abuse, and no true part of Christian liberty but the necessity of the
former parts carrying me thus far, I will only add a word or two of the
abuses of the doctrine. Lentae aduersum imperia aures, every man's care is soft
for impression, and open and stretched out a length, against government. It
was the conclusion of the Rebel Arminius his oration unto his faction; that
they should rather follow him Gloriae and libertatis ducem, a Captain of glory
and Liberty, then Segestes, flagitiosae seruitutis ducem, a Captain of wicked
servitude. But why and when wicked servitude? Non cum impiis Dominis seruiatur,
Sed quod seruire impium; not when wicked masters be served and obeyed, but
that it is a wicked thing to serve, say our Arminii. This doctrine was a speedy
means to free us from that insupportable burden of laws the Church had laid
upon us; but was it the best? has it more got us a freedom from them, then
a freedom and license to act what we list? In which it is ignorance to look
for moderation, man not being contented (upon this liberty) to have it
granted him, that he may do whatsoever he is able, but what he list and is
willing unto. The necessity and yoke of obedience (upon conscience) once cast
off, what creature like to man, in vntamednes and disorder? There is not that
looseness, that ryotte that luxurye, that profuseness of life that fancy,
that conceit that invention, that contradiction of opinion and behavior and
manners, that he will not run into and maintain. Do I slander corruption?
Do I scandalize the perverseness of our nature, and pervert this doctrine? will
we not, or have we not gone so far? Nay I will then turn this censure
presently: It is Caluins own judgment and experiment (not my reproach) in the
19. of the 3. of his Instit: After he had given us this point of Christian
Liberty, he presently in the section, speaks against two kind of abuses of
it. Some there be says he, who interpret it a license for their sensualities,
appetites, and libidinous affections, freely without check, to use at pleasure,
the gifts and aboundances of Gods bounty: Others who think this license not
used as it should be, except the disorders be practiced, in the sight and
conspect of men. And in the first kind, says Calvin, Maiorem in modum hoc
saeculo peccatur. There is an exceeding offending in this our age. In those
days when this doctrine was but new, Calvin saw the speedy effects of it, and
that there were abuses of it most exorbitant, til it came to be marked for the
ages blemish. There is scarce a man (says Calvin) who is but able to effect
it, whom a luxurious spender in the garnish of his table; the glutting of his
belly; the decking of his body; the building of his houses; does not delight;
and who does not in all kind of delicacies endeavor to exceed all others. But
what of this, will you say to me? what makes this against this Christian
liberty? Why, mark the sequel of his words, and you shall know: where after
Calvin had recounted, the infinite novelties of his times disorders, he adds
this conclusion to his liberties a commendatio^, and haec omnia (says he) sub
Christianae libertatis praetextu defenduntur, and al these things be not
practiced, but defended under the pretext of Christian liberty; alleging that
they be res indifferentes, things indifferent and so to be used. O God! shall
we lease reason and religion in one thing both together? what means this
patronizing of the cause with Calvin, and condemning the effects? or shall we
say that things indifferent, commanded or inhibited by authority, may be
omitted or practiced freely, shall we aver it falsely, and then find fault when
men do so use them, unreasonably? I am not able to conceive the mystery of this
teaching, and therefore am compelled to say with Tertullian, Nusqua^ facilius
proficitur quam in castris rebellium, Chap. 41. Pres.
vbi ipsum esse illic, promereri est; So will I speak of this teaching; there
is no better succesfull arguing then in this rebellious doctrine, in which to
speak alone, is to prove, and to prove to overcome; nor can it be excused out
of the forenamed father that de papauere fici gratissime and suauissime ventosa
and vana capriscus exurgit; Chap. 56.
that it is but as a naughty ground, makes a good seed a cause of bad fruit
no, the practice of the second kind of men, which Calvin mentioned, as abusers
of this doctrine, will convince it clearly, that this falsely given Christian
liberty, is the natural and genuine cause of these offenses, and that the
disorders be not abuses, but effects of this liberty. Errant in hoc plerique,
many err in this, says he, that as if their liberty could not be safe and
sound except they have witness of the practice of it do use it foolishly and
promiscuously: Nay (says he) videas hodie quosdam, quibus sua libertas non
videtur consistere nisi per esum carnium die veneris, iu eius possessionem
peruenerint. you may see some at this day, who think their liberty not to
consist, nor to be, but by the eating of flesh on Frydayes; they think their
liberty has no consistence or essence but in these disorders, nor can they
come into possession of it, but by committing of them, and so it inforceth them
to do them and therefore must needs be the true and proper causer of them. To
this see what Calvin opposes, quod edu^t non reprehe^do etc. that they eat
flesh on Frydaies, I reprehe^d it not quod edu^t non reprehe^do. O God, is it
not enough for man to offend in conceit, but he must be impudent in defense of
his opinion? must sin have a witness of it, or is it not sin? and is it not
enough for men to offend, but they must be co^me^ded for it; at least, told
that they shall not be reprehended? O Liberty, thou art the cause of all, and we
are all the worse for thee. This opinion seems to be strictly religious in
maintaining, not a denial, but a scorn of obedience upon conscience, to any
but to God immediate; when as (in deed) it is intolerable pride and arrogance
for that they do it not, so much, to give obedience to God only as for that
they cannot be so humble, as to give any respect and reverence to man. Should
the particulars of schisms be recounted, (consequents, all upon this
doctrine) I know not whether you would more wonder at them, or detest them.
First, from hence all obedience to magistracy, it is at one blow taken away
and that very Paradox of the Anabaptists (as Eckius sets it down) plainly
established, Nulli potestati obediend^m: For, if the magistrate, commanding
things indifferent, be not upon conscience, to be obeyed, then can he
command nothing, nor is he to be obeyed in any thing; all things being
either commanded by God, and so the obedience to him; or inhibited by God, and
so not to be commanded by man; or left indifferent by God, to be inioyed or
prohibited by man. Next from hence comes confusion and dissentio^, which God
is never author of, by the freedom of this choice in every thing: and yet I
know, these men will much commend their unity, but I must say with Tertul:
Praes. 43.
Confusio reuera sieve schismata apud huiusmodi fere non sunt, quia cu^ sint non
apparent schismata, est enim vnitas ipsa, confusion and schisms be never with
such, for when they be they make no rentes and schisms, for it is their very
unity it self. Lib. 1
Their very form and order is to have no order nor form. As Tacitus speaks
in his Annals of a Tumult and conspiracy of the legions, so will I of these,
Nil paucorum instinctu, pariter ardescunt pariter silent, there is not a
dissension of one or two, they altogether ryotte it, but though altogether, yet
they ryotte it, they altogether are unruled but though altogether, yet unruled,
with such an universal concord in discord, tanta aequalitate and constantia
vt regi crederes, with such an equality and constancy, that you would think
they were governed and had a discipline. And this you see Tacitus makes a note
of faction in the common wealth, and Tertullian of schism or heresy in the
Church. Barbaris quo quis audacior, says Tacitus, tanto magis fidus, and rebus
commotis potier. So will I say of these men, quo quis seditiosior tanto
fidelior and rebus commotis potior; the more seditious and discomformable, the
more faithful and sound and in disagreement, of the more esteem and
reckoning. I know their answer to be usual; that their confused dissension
(if any of them can be brought to acknowledge any) is but in outward rites
and toies Et differentia rituum, commendat doctrinae vnitatem; Alas, a simple
commendation. Nay, but rather, though the censure be subject to censure, let me
adventure to say with Tertullian, Pres. 43.
That Doctrinae index disciplina, the loosenes of their discipline, is a
bewrayer of what sort their doctrine is, Et quod de genere conuersationis,
qualitas fidei aestimari potest, and that from the kind of their conversation,
the quality of their faith may be judged. Hence further, from this impeachment
and minution of authority, and establishment of every particular man's liberty
of obedience, follows with an easy and slippery pace that Paradox which
Eckius (but falsely, as I hope) accuses Luther of Lib: de seculari potestate;
quod inter christianos, nulla debet aut potest esse superioritas sed
vnusquisque alteri aequaliter subiectus est, an opinion against the laws of
God, man, reason, sense, and nature. Hence next, a particle of this general,
and an experiment and practice, first, in the state ecclisiasticall, by holding
no superiority; no praelacy, no Hierarchy but equality in the ministry. A baser
kind of pride, not that, which contemns inferiors (from a conceit of
selfe-excellency) but that, which endures not and maligneth a superior (from
fear of punishment and priuety of self insufficiency) a Paradox perchance
well pleasing to the laity; unadvisedly not marking, that beginning in the
Clergy it would at length, Many other observations of further abuses were here
cut off by the time.
come creeping amongst themselves.

I will now only bestow one further observation upon our own home-vrgers of
this Christian liberty and so conclude. When Julius Agricola in his second
expedition, had overcome a great part of this I Will of Britain, very cunningly
with a pleasing Liberty and Licenciousnesse of life, intised the ruder
inhabitants, to a liking and imitation of their customs; the Britains
presently taken, fell in love with all their practices, their actions, their
habits, and their sports; paulatimque discessu^ ad delineamenta vitioru^, and
at length they fell also to the imitating of their vices, their bathinges their
banquettings, and all their luxuries, Idque tandem (says the story) apud
imperitos, humanitas vocabatur, cum pars seruitutis esset and that at length
with the unskillful vulgar, was called humanity, which as a part of their
servitude, and a badge of their overthrow, and he was accounted the most
civil and ingenuous man, who imitated the Romans best, when as indeed he was
the most slave, by imitating his politic subduing adversary. In some not
unlike sort, we now entised by the fair show of Liberty and Christian
freedom, do fall in great love and liking with it, paulatimque discedimus ad
delineamenta vitiorum, and at length we come also to the imitating and
practicing of the fair abuses and vices of it; and that is called with us
Christianity, Christian Liberty, as that other was with them Humanity, cum pars
seruitutis sit, when as it is a part of servitude, and we slaves in it (if
duly considered) to the invention of some one or two particular men, and to
the practice of some beginning Church; and he would be accounted with us the
best reformed Christian who does imitate it best, when as he is indeed the
most slave, by imitating his politic subduing adversary. To which purpose well
observed a late writer, that the worthiness of one (he names Calvin) had
wrought too much upon other men's weakness. To conclude I will say but that
only of these precise schismatiques, Hist. lib. 1.
which Tacitus does of Astrologia^s, Genus hominum potentibus infidum,
sperantibus fa^lax, they be a kind of people, treacherous and disloyal to
great men deceitful and false to them that hope in them; and I pray God, I may
not justly add that which follows, Genus etiam hominum quod apud nos
vetabitur semper and retinebitur; they be a kind of men, which always shall
be forbidden, and yet always retained. No, let them go, in their remoual
pernitiosior quies quam temeritas, rest is more pernicious then rashness.

The God of might and mercy, give us all ^he spirit of his holy Catholic
Church, that is of Liberty, not licentiousness; of freedom not loosenes, of
obedience, not faction; of unity, not division; of wisdom and judgment, not
fancy and singularity; that all combined in the one and single divine
inspiration of it, we may understand our liberty rightly; practice it
vnabusiuely; in religious liberality to the poor charitably; in perfourmance
of the commandementes (to our power) laboriously; in obedience to the
Magistrate and his laws, most dutifully; In reverence to the Church-canons,
Rites and Ceremonies most conscionably; and thus in love serving all one
another most christianly. This grant, God the father, the son and the holy
ghost; to whom be ascribed al power, might, majesty, and dominion now and for
ever

Amen.

